Imprimatur.

Ex Aed. Sab. 11 Sept. 1662. Geo. Stradling S. Th. P. Rev. in Xto Pat. Gilb.
Episc. Land. a Sac. Domestic.

CHOREA GIGANTUM, OR, The most Famous Antiquity of GREAT-BRITAN, Vulgarly
called STONE-HENG, Standing on Salisbury Plain, Restored to the DANES;

By Walter Charleton, Dr in Physic, and Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Quae per constructionem lapidum, and marmoreas moles, aut terrenos tumulos in
magnam eductos altitudinem, constant; non propagabunt longam diem: quippe and
ipsa intereunt.

Seneca, de Consolat. ad Polyb. LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the
Sign of the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1663.

To the KING 's Most Excellent MAJESTY.
YOUR Majesty's Curiosity to survey the Subject of this Discourse, the so much
admired Antiquity of STONE-HENG, has sometime been so great and urgent, as to
find a room in Your Royal Breast, amid'st Your weightiest Cares; and to carry
You many miles out of Your way toward Safety, even at such a time, when any
Heart, but your Fearless and Invincible one, would have been wholly filled with
apprehensions of Danger. For, as I have had the Honor to hear from that Oracle
of Truth and Wisdom, Your Majesty's own Mouth; You were pleased to visit that
Monument, and, for many hours together, entertain Your self with the delightful
view thereof, when after the defeat of Your Loyal Army, at Worcester, Almighty
God, in Infinite Mercy to Your three Kingdoms, miraculously delivered You out
of the bloody Jaws of those Monsters of Sin and Cruelty, who taking Counsel
only from the Heinousness of their Crimes, sought Impunity in the highest
Aggravation of them; desperately hoping to secure Rebellion by Regicide, and by
destroying their Sovereign, to continue their Tyranny over their
Fellow Subjects.

This, as at first it animated Me, to make strict Enquiry into the Origin, and
Occasion of the Wonder (so the Vulgar call it) so far as the gloomy darkness of
Oblivion would admit; so has it now emboldned me, to lay at Your Majesty's
Feet the following Account of my Success in that Enquiry: in all possible
Humility and Reverence, beseeching You to Honor, with Your Gracious
Acceptance, the RESTORATION of that Gigantick Pile, whose dead Remains You so
highly Ennobled by Your Presence. Once You made it Your Divertisement, to look
upon it sleeping in deep Forgetfulness, and well-nigh disanimated by the
Lethargy of Time (which often brings the River Lethe to flow as well above
ground, as below): Disdain not, therefore, now to cast an Eye upon it, when it
appears to lift up its massive Head again, and offers, in plain Language, to
tell You the Story of its Life, from whence it was derived, by whom it was
formed, for what noble Use it was intended, and how it has since been
sacrilegiously violated. Which Story, though grounded only on Conjecture; is
nevertheless neither Unpleasant, nor Unprofitable.

Having diligently compared STONE-HENG with other. Antiquities of the same
Kind, at this day, standing in Denmark; and finding a perfect Resemblance in
most, if not in all Particulars observable, on both sides; and acquainting my
self moreover with the Uses of those rudely-magnificent Structures, for many
hundreds of years together: I now at length conceive it to have been Erected by
the DANES, when They had this Nation in subjection; and principally, if not
wholly Designed to be a Court Royal, or place for the Election and Inauguration
of their Kings; according to a certain strange Custom, yet of eldest Date,
most sacred Esteem, and but late Discontinuance among that Martial People.

Whether, or no, my Authorities and Reasonings for this New Opinion of mine, be
such, as may be allowed sufficient to render it highly Probable (for, further I
pretend not): as becomes me, I most humbly, most freely submit to Your
Majesty's most Excellent Judgment, in which You are no less Supreme, than in
Your Power; and than which, none can be either more Discerning, or more
Equitable. So that if it prove so fortunate, as to receive Your Approbation, I
need not fear the Censure of any Understanding Reader: if not, I shall however
gain this advantage, to have my Mistake rectified by a King, whose Reasons are
Demonstrations, whose Enquiries are the best Directions unto Truth, whose
Assent always is a sign of Truth, and to whose other Regal Prerogatives an
admirable Wisdom has superadded this, that He is less subject to be imposed
upon, than any other Man!

In the meantime, and ever, according to my Duty, I shall earnestly pray to
Almighty God, that He would be pleased to enrich Your Sacred Majesty, with all
Blessings answerable to the Largeness of Your Mind, to the Sublimity of Your
Condition, to the Weight of Your Charge, to the Multitude of Your Virtues, and
to the Hopes and Wishes of all Your Good Subjects.

April the 27th 1662. Your Majesty's most Loyal, most Obedient, most Humble,
Subject and Servant, WALTER CHARLETON.

To my worthy Friend, Dr Charleton, on his clear Discovery of STONE-HENG to
have been a DANISH Court-Royal, for the Election of Kings, and not a Roman
Temple, as supposed by Mr Inigo Jones.
HOw much obliging is Your learned Care!
Still busy to preserve, or to repair;
Which unto Men not only life can give,
But makes their Monuments themselves to live.
Health comes to them by Your immortal aim:
And to their Actions Truth, the health of Fame.
The sickly World seems thus Restored by Thee;
Whilst thy large Soul, like its Eternity,
On wasting Time atchievs new Victories,
Which buried now in its own ruins lies.
Nor were Thou to engage with Time alone;
But that which kept the Wonder more unknown,
Men's Errors; which are still the greatest crime,
And more destroy the truth of things, than Time.
For, if unskilful hands too rashly take
In antique rubbish, every bold mistake
Hides what they seek, and loses it far more,
By the new ruin, than the old before.
Nor is Thy STONE-HENG a less Wonder grown,
Though once a Temple thought, now proved a Throne:
Since we, who are so blessed with Monarchy,
Must gladly learn, from Thy Discovery,
That great Respects not only have been found
Where Gods were worshipped, but where Kings were Crowned.
Rob. Howard.

To my Honored Friend, Dr Charleton, on his learned and useful works; and more
particularly this of STONE-HENG, by him Restored to the true Founders.
THe longest Tyranny that ever swayed,
Was that wherein our Ancestors betrayed
Their freeborn Reason to the Stagirite,
And made his Torch their universal Light.
So Truth, while only one supplied the State,
Grew scarce, and dear, and yet sophisticate.
Until'twas bought, like Emp'rique Wares, or Charms,
Hard words sealed up with Aristotle's Arms.
Columbus was the first that shook his Throne;
And found a Temperate in a Torrid Zone:
The fevrish air fanned by a cooling breez,
The fruitful Vales set round with shady Trees;
And guiltless Men, that danced away their time,
Fresh as their Groves, and Happy as their Clime.
Had we still paid that homage to a Name,
Which only God and Nature justly claim;
The western Seas had been our utmost bound,
Where Poets still might dream the Sun was drowned:
And all the Stars, that shine in Southern Skies,
Had been admired by none but Salvage Eyes.
Among the Assertors of free Reason's claim,
The English are not least in Worth, or Fame.
The World to Bacon does not only owe
Its present Knowledge, but its future too.
Gilbert shall live, till Load-stones cease to draw,
Or British Fleets the boundless Ocean awe.
And noble Boil, not less in Nature seen,
Than his great Brother read in States and Men.
The Circling streams, once thought but pools, of blood
(Whether Life'sfewel, or the Body's food)
From dark Oblivion Harvey's name shall save;
While Ent keeps all the honor that he gave.
Nor are You, Learned Friend, the least renowned;
Whose Fame, not circumscribed with English ground,
Flies like the nimble journeys of the Light;
And is, like that, unspent too in its flight.
What ever Truths have been, by Art, or Chance,
Redeemed from Error, or from Ignorance,
Thin in their Authors, (like rich veins in Ore)
Your Works unite, and still discover more.
Such is the healing virtue of Your Pen,
To perfect Cures on Books, as well as Men.
Nor is This Work the least: You well may give
To Men new vigor, who make Stones to live.
Through You, the DANES (their short Dominion lost)
A longer Conquest than the Saxons boast.
STONE-HENG, once thought a Temple, You have found
A Throne, where Kings, our Earthly Gods, were Crowned.
Where by their wondering Subjects They were seen,
Chose by their Stature, and their Princely mien.
Our Sovereign here above the rest might stand;
And here be chose again to sway the Land.
These Ruins sheltred once His Sacred Head,
Then when from Wor'sters fatal Field He fled;
Watched by the Genius of this Kingly place,
And mighty Visions of the Danish Race.
His Refuge then was for a Temple shown:
But, He Restored, it is now become a Throne.
John Driden.

STONE-HENG RESTORED TO THE DANES.
OF all MONUMENTS built by Mankind since the beginning of the World, there seem
to be only two General Causes.

The FIRST Natural, namely a certain desire of Immortality, inherent in, and as
it were Essential to the Human Soul. Which being an Immaterial Essence,
participant of Divinity both in its Creation, and Hopes, perpetually carries
about it this impress or character of that Eternal Being, from whence it was
derived; that it abhors Oblivion, and as not contented with that perpetuity
in posterity, which Nature has ordained by propagation of the Species, (an
institution common also to Brute Animals) it aims at another kind of Eternity,
by seeking to deliver the Remembrance of some notable actions to all succeeding
Generations. So strong are the incitements of this our congenial Ambition, that
the Dullest Souls are not altogether insensible of them, and Heroique ones feel
a sort of felicity in suffering themselves to be transported by them: Yea, many
have preferred the Imaginary life of Glory, to that Real one of Nature; and
through most horrid dangers and pains exposed themselves to death, merely out
of an obscure hope of being soon revived by Fame, and obtaining a better
subsistence in the immortality of their Names. With such sentiments as these
Old Ennius doubtless was touched, when he rejoiced in the perpetuity of
reputation, that he fancied to himself from the merits of his Verses, and
exultingly exclames

-- Volito vivn' per or a virum. And Ovid, when he towers himself with

Ore legar populi, perque omnia saecula fama,

Si quid habent very vatum praesagia, vivam.

Nay, the grave Roman Orator himself was not exempted from the secret
titillations of the same proleptical persuasion, when (Pro Mare.) he brake
forth into this pathetic expression: Non haec vita dicenda est, quae corpore
and spiritu continetur; illa, inquam, illa vita est, quae viget memoria
saeculorum omnium, quam posterit as alit, quam ipsa aeternitas semper intuetur.
This is not to be accounted life, which consists in the conjunction of Body
and Soul: that, I say, that is life indeed, which flourishes in the memory of
all ages, which Posterity nourishes, which Eternity it self ever looks
upon.And into another of the like height (Philip. 12.) in these words: Brevis
vita data est, memoria been redditae vitae sempiterna; quae si non esset
longior, quam haec vita, quis esset tam amens, qui maximis laboribus and
periculis ad summam laudem, gloriamque contenderet? Now, albeit this Affection
of the Mind, in some persons meeting with the humor of Vain Glory, becomes an
ignis fatuus, and misguides them to a false Eternity (for, the last cold we
catch in our graves, makes us deaf to even the loudest praises of men: and if
it did not, yet would the pleasure of those praises be as short and transitory,
as the breath that gives them being:) yet cannot it be easily denied to be a
considerable argument of the Souls Immortality; forasmuch as the most rigid of
Philosophers find it to be Natural (Aristotle 2. de Anima, terms it (...), most
Natural) and confess, that Nature has implanted in us no Appetite in vain, or
which is not capable of satisfaction, if rightly addressed to its proper
objects. However, thus much may modestly be affirmed, that there is no man but
thinks himself somewhat concerned in times that shall come after him; and that
the most excellent works of men had their first beginnings from this Appetite
of posthume Fame. For, whence came the foundations of Empires, the institutions
of Republiques, Sects, Societies, and Laws to govern them? Whence the building
of Cities, the erection of Pyramids, Mausoleas, Obelisks, Temples,
Amphitheatres, Statues, Palaces, and the like costly Monuments? Whence, those
many Volumes of History, Annals, Philosophy, Arts and Sciences, and all other
kind of Knowledge? Whence all the brave performances and achievements in War?
Whence the liberality of Testaments, the adoption of Heirs, the affiancing of
great Families, the desire of Islue? Whence, I say, can we derive all these,
and in truth all other the principal designs and actions of Mankind, if not
from that which Cicero (1. Tuscul) calls saeculorum quoddam augurium futurorum,
a certain implanted Ambition of men to extend the prospect of their hopes
beyond the dark vale of Death, and have their names survive their Funerals? so
that though some Sceptiques may perhaps dispute, whether this Ambition be
purely Natural, or merely Opinionative: yet, I presume, none will contradict
this manifest truth, That all Nations are beholding to it for their chiefest
Ornaments and Memorials; especially if due consideration be had of the near
affinity betwixt this their First Cause, and

The OTHER, which is Politic; namely an incitement of men to hazardous
undertakings, and enterprises of difficulty, by setting before their eyes the
glorious Examples of such among their Predecessors, who by actions of eminent
fortitude, prudence, justice, knowledge, piety to their Country, or other the
like Virtues, have highly obliged mankind. For, since Glory and Renown is one
of the sharpest spurrs to Heroical spirits; and that glory is always greatest,
that is most permanent: it was a high point of Wisdom and Policy in our
Forefathers to erect public memorials of great and worthy men, such as being
looked upon by their Successors, might inspire them with a generous Emulation to
atchieve the like meritorious actions, that so they may attain to the like
honor and esteem, with those that shall come after them. Virtue, though a
sufficient reward to it self, would yet have but few followers, unless attended
on by Fame. Whereupon Cicero (in 1. Tusculan.) discoursing of gallant men,
says positively, Eorum nemo unquam, sine magna spe immortalitatis, se pro
patria offerret ad mortem; no man, however magnanimous and brave, would for the
good of his Country offer himself to death, without great hope of immortality;
and Euripides (in Ajace) not indecently cries out (...).

Among the most durable Memorials of worthy Men and Actions, by which generous
spirits are animated to tread in the rough and craggy ways of Virtue, upon
expectation the Gratitude of posterity will endeavor to vindicate their names
and deserts from the devouring jaws of Oblivion; the first place belongs to
those, which the Grecians call (...), the Romans Monumenta, and we in imitation
of them Monuments: because they serve to instruct the present and future ages,
in things done in ages past; and remain to succeeding generations, as certain
Memorials of the famous performances of their Ancestors. The word Monumentum
deriving it self from Moneo; and that again holding from Memoria; as Varro (de
lingua Latin. lib. 8.) monere est a memoria dictum, quod is, qui monet, perinde
sit ac memoria. So that a Monument, in propriety of signification, is an
Admonition by putting in remembrance. In which sense Cicero speaking to Caesar,
says, sed Ego, quae monumenti ratio sit, nomine ipso admoneor, ad memoriam
magis spectare debere posteritatis, quam ad praesentis temporis gratiam. And in
a Manuscript Registre of the Gray Friars in London, kept in Sir Robert Cottons
Library, there is this agreeable definition of a Monument; Monimentum est quasi
monens mentem, and sic solet a doctioribus Etymologiari: monet namque bifariam
humanam mentem, cum aut mortis memoriam incutit, visis praecedentium
sepulchris; aut eisdem conspectis, alii ad virtutis iter strenue calcandum
incitantur and animantur.

Hence it comes, that notwithstanding the things invented to give notice to
posterity of the laudable achievements of their Progenitors, be almost
infinitely various in their natures, materials, forms, etc. yet still has the
word Monument been used, as a general name, to denote them: which Festus long
since observed in this saying; Monumentum est, quod mortui causa aedificatum
est, and quicquid in memoriam alicujus factum est, ut fana, porticus, scripta,
and carmina, etc.

To enumerate the several Kinds, or Differences of these inanimate
Remembrancers; and deduce each of those differences from its proper Causes and
occasions, is neither necessary to, nor consistent with my present design,
which is confined within the circle of one single monument. Let it suffice,
therefore, if I in the general advertise, that their Variety is owing not only
to the diversity of Peoples and Nations, that founded, erected, composed them
of different Materials, after sundry manners, and with various artifices, each
according to their proper Genius, Belief, Customs, Commodities, and the like:
but also to the circumstances of Time, Place, Fortune, and Occasion. So that no
wonder, if these (as all other the works of Man) are vastly different among
themselves, in Matter, Form, Magnitude, Artifice, Cost, Magnificence,
Situation, and Design.

Nor is it more a wonder, that this great Difference sometimes turns to the
Confusion of ancient Monuments, and makes them no Monuments at all; by rendering
their particular significations so indistinct, that even the best Antiquaries
(those Masters of the Rolls of time) fall into contention not only concerning
the Authors by whom, and the Times wherein; but also about the Ends, or
Purposes for which they were at first set up. For, the Monuments of even one
and the same Nation, in one and the same Country, having been now and then
varied in fashion, magnificence, etc. according to the several vicissitudes of
Time, mutations of Religion, and other revolutions of Fate: it cannot but be
highly difficult for late posterity, who are left in ignorance of the
respective occasions and motives of those changes, to search into the
intentions of their Founders; especially, where History has been either
altogether silent, or (what is as bad) full of uncertainties concerning their
Originals. And where the darkness of Oblivion has been added to that of aged
Time; certainly, our Curiosity can hardly find the way to truth, nor is the
glimmering light of Reason likely to afford other discoveries, but what are
Conjectural. So true it is, that Monuments themselves are subject to
Forgetfulness, even while they remain: and that when neither the Writings of
men living in the same age, or not long after their erection, nor uncorrupted
Tradition has concurred to give them life; they usually stand rather as dead
objects of popular wonder, and occasions of Fables, than as certain records of
Antiquity.

Do you require an Instance, or Example of the truth of what I here say? Please
you to convert your eyes upon that most notable Antiquity, commonly called
STONE -- HENG, on Salisbury plain; you shall there find one most eminent, most
fit for your purpose, most worthy your contemplation. For, though this
Gigantique Remain be wonderful as well in respect of the strangeness of its
Form, as of the vastness of the stones, of which it is composed; and therefore
among all the Antiquities of this our Island, none seems better to have
deserved the commemoration of our ancient Writers: Yet such has been its Fate,
that it has outlived it self, and buried as well the Names, as Bones of those
Worthies to whose memory it was consecrated; nor can you meet with any story of
credit to inform you when, or by whom it was erected. Having raised horror and
astonishment in the Beholder; it leaves him to entertain himself with thoughts
as various, as the plain it stands upon is wide, and as confused, as Ruin has
made it stones: the prospect of it at a distance not more delighting the eye,
than the near survey does perplex the brain, or the date of it amuse the
understanding. What the vulgar idly feign of the stones of it, namely that
they are innumerable, not in respect of the greatness of their number, but of I
know not what magical enchantment supposed impressed upon the whole pile, that
deludes the attempts of Arithmetique; I find true of the Years of its
continuance, its Beginning being as obscure, as the Fable of Merlins
transportation of it out of Ireland, by witchcraft, is absurd and ridiculous;
yea so far has oblivion prevailed, that now we are in doubt, not only what
King, Prince, or General, but also what Nation it was, that bequeathed us this
Wonder for a Legacy.

The consideration of this, together with a certain deep resentment of the
misfortune of the Founders of this prodigious Fabrique, who in despite of its
greatness and durability, seem utterly lost and forgotten, as if they had been
entombed in the bowels of the deepest Ocean, or in the sandy deserts of Arabia:
as it has often raised in me a kind of indignation against the enviousness of
Time, (which hardly endures that Creatures subject to mortality in their
Nature, should be above it in their memory, and, in derision of man's greatest
works, sometimes brings the River Lethe to flow as well above ground, as
below;) so did it enkindle in me an ardent desire to contribute my mite toward
the researching, who or what those Worthies were, that entrusted their
remembrance to this forgetful Heap. And in compliance with this desire, having
from the necessary employments of my profession borrowed some hours, for the
reading of such Authors, as well ancient, as modern, who have either lightly
mentioned, or professedly treated of this venerable piece of Antiquity, or
others resembling it; and equitably examined the respective probability, or
improbability of their different opinions touching its Origin, by comparing
them with the agreeableness, or disagreeableness they hold to the parts and
proprieties of the building it self, and with the concurrence of History, Time,
Place and other circumstances: I at length believed, I was arrived, though not
at perfect satisfaction, yet at reasonable grounds for a Conjecture, that most
probably it was a Monument anciently erected by the Danes, at such time as that
warlike Nation usurped the sovereignty of this our fertile Island. After this,
being further animated by this meditation; that if it be, as doubtless it is, a
kind of Inhumanity and Sacrilege, to despoil the dead of the glory due to rhem,
by alienating the memorials they studiously left behind them, and transferring
the honor of their works upon strangers, who have no better title thereunto,
than what the mistake, or flattery of after ages gave them; on the contrary, it
must be a sort of Piety to endeavor to restore the true owners to the
possession of their Merits, by reviving the justice of their claim: I indulged
my self the liberty to conceive, the Candid and Ingenious would take it in good
part, if by publishing the Reasons that induced me to be of that Opinion, I
modestly made them also judges of its probability; contenting my self only with
the simplicity and innocence of my devoir, and submitting my collections to
their wiser examination. And thus you have the Occasion, Motives, Design, and
Equity of the following discourse. As for the Method, and Style of it; you will
soon perceive the One to be somewhat confused, the Other altogether rude and
unpolished: so that it cannot be denied, but I have in some sort observed a
decorum with the Monument I speak of; the parts thereof being now in great
disorder, and the stones always unhewn, as they come from the Quarrie. But
both being Natural and unaffected, I hope you will bear with their other
defects; especially when you shall consider, that in Arguments of this nature,
cleerness of proofs, and authority of testimonies, and faithfulness of
quotations are much to be preferred before exactness of Method, and Elegancy of
Phrase.

You, perhaps, have not yet beheld this Monument, or at least not taken a
survey of it in its stately ruins; and, therefore, it behooves me to prepare
you the better to judge of its Antiquity, and Design, by entertaining you in
the first place with the

Description of Stone-heng, by Mr. Camden. About six miles from Salisbury,
northward (says He) on Salisbury Plain, is to be seen a huge and monstrous
piece of work, such as Cicero terms insanam substructionem. For, within the
circuit of a ditch, there are erected, in manner of a Crown, in three ranks or
courses, one within another, certain mighty and unwrought stones; whereof some
are twenty eight foot high, and seven foot broad: upon the heads of which
others, like overthwart pieces, do bear and rest crosswise, with small tenants
and mortescies, so as the whole frame seems to hang; whereof we call it
STONE-HENG, like as our old Historians termed it, for the greatness, Chorea
Gigantum, the Giants Dance.

Then, to illustrate his description, He subjoyns this Draught, or Figure.

Place this Piece in Folio 8.



Where A. denotes the Perpendicular stones, called Corsestones, weighing
twelve Tunn, carrying in hight twenty four Foot, in breadth seven Foot, and in
compass sixteen: and

B. the Overthwart stones, called Cronets, of six or seven Tunn weight.

Here in all likelihood, You will a little wonder, both by what way Mr. Camden
could attain to the weight of these so ponderous masses, so as to be positive
in the assignment of it: and why, having first made the altitude of the Erected
stones, or Columns to be twenty eight foot, he immediately, in the explication
of his pourtraict, brings it down to only twenty four foot. Nor, indeed, can I
ease you of that wonder; otherwise than by referring the former to his mere
Conjecture, and the other to his Forgetfulness. But this transitory remarque is
of as small importance to our main scrutiny; as His description comes short of
that satisfaction, which is required to an exact survey of all parts of the
wonder. Let us pass, therefore, if your curiosity and leisure permit, to the
more ample

Description of Stone-heng, by Mr. Inigo Jones. Who being, and not unworthily,
called by Mr. Web (in his preface to Mr. Jones his Book, entitled Stone-heng
Restored) the English Vitruvius; and having, as Himself professes, in the 56.
page of the same Book, with no little pains, and charge, measured the whole
work, and diligently searched the Foundations of it: seems to promise us a more
full account in all particulars. This Antiquity (says He) because the
Architraves are set upon the heads of the upright stones, and hang as it were
in the air, is generally known by the name of Stone-heng. The whole work, in
general, being of a Circular form, is 110. foot diameter; double winged about,
without a roof; anciently environed with a deep trench, still appearing about
thirty foot broad. So that betwixt it, and the work it self, a large and void
space of ground being left; it had from the Plain three open Entrances, the
most conspicuous whereof lies North-east. At each of which was raised, on the
outside of the Trench aforesaid, two huge stones, Gate-wise; parallel
whereunto, on the inside, two others of less proportions. The Inner part of the
work, consisting of an Exagonal figure, was raised, by due symmetry, upon the
bases of four Equilateral Triangles, which formed the whole Structure. This
Inner part likewise was double, having within it also another Exagon raised;
and all that part within the Trench, sited upon a commanding ground, eminent,
and higher by much than any of the Plain lying without, and in the midst
thereof upon a foundation of hard Chalk, the work it self was placed. Insomuch,
that from what part soever they came unto it, they rose by an ascending hill.

In the inmost part is a Stone appearing not much above the surface of the
Earth, and lying toward the East, four foot broad, and sixteen in length.
Which, whether an Altar, or no, I leave to the judgment of others.

The Great stones, which made the Entrances from the outside of the Trench, are
seven foot broad, three thick, and twenty high.

Their Parallels, on the inside of the Trench, are four foot broad, and three
thick; but so broken, their proportions in hight cannot be exactly measured.

The stones, which make the Outward Circle, carry in breadth seven foot, in
thickness 3 and, and in hight 15 and: each stone having two Tenons mortaised
into the Architrave continuing upon them, throughout the whole circumference.
For, these Architraves being joynted directly in the middle of each of the
Perpendicular stones, that their weight might have an equal bearing; and upon
each side of the joint a Tenon wrought (as remains yet to be seen): it may
positively be concluded thereby, the Architrave continued round about this
Outward Circle.

The smaller stones of the Inner Circle are two foot and in breadth, 1. thick,
and 6. high. These had no Architrave upon them, but were raised perpendicular,
of a Pyramidal form.

The Stones of the Greater Hexagon, 7. foot and in breadth, three foot nine
inches in thickness, and twenty foot in hight; each having one Tenon in the
middle.

The stones of the Inner Hexagon, 2. foot 6. inches broad, 1. foot and thick,
and eight foot high; in form Pyramidal, like those of the Inner Circle.

The Architrave lying round about upon the Perpendicular stones of the Outward
Circle, is three foot and broad, two foot and high or thick.

The Architrave on the top of the great stones of the Outward Hexagon, 16. foot
long, 3. foot 9. inches broad, 3. foot 4 inches high. This Architrave
continuing only from stone to stone, left betwixt every two and two, a void
space, free to the air, uncovered.

After this Survey (and some other Designs, that he fancied correspondent
thereunto) He obliges his Readers with the whole work in Prospective, as it
now lies in its ruins, representing it self to the eye thus.

The Figure.

In which P. represents the manner of the Tenons, of a round form, mortaised
into the Architrave of the Outward Circle: and

Q. the Tenons of the like form, in the middle of the stones of the Greater
Hexagon.

Reflecting upon these two Descriptions, and comparing them together with due
care: You Will find them at open variance, and differing in so many, and so
considerable particulars, that 'twill be a hard task for you to keep them from
mutually discrediting each other. For

(1.) Mr. Camden expressly affirm's, He observed the Ranks, or Courses, in which
all the Stones were erected, to be only Three, one within another; and Mr.
Jones as confidently avouches, He found them to be Four.

(2.) The Former says all those three Courses are Circular: the Later says,
of his Four, two only are Circular, the other two Hexagonal.

(3.) This gives you a punctual account of Three open Entrances, marked with
two huge stones perpendicularly raised on the outside of the Trench, and other
two of lesser dimensions in like manner sited on the inside, in position
parallel: That is utterly silent concerning any such matter; yea implicitly
denies it, in that he delivered, that all the stones observed the
circumferences of their proper Circles.

(4.) In like manner, the One stumbles upon an Altar-stone (for such He
conceived, and such He would have us believe it to be, notwithstanding his
seeming to leave men to the liberty of their own judgment in that point:) over
which the Other leaped clearly, without so much as ever touching it.

(5.) Mr. Camden assigns to the Perpendicular stones of the largest size,
twenty four foot of Altitude: but Mr. Jones will not allow them to exceed
twenty foot.

Behold, here, a notable Example of the discrepancy of Men's judgments, even in
things easily determinable by the sense! and how hard it is to discern truth
with others eyes! What, then, shall we conclude on in the case? Upon whose
relation may we, with greatest security to our belief, depend? If we compare
the Reputations of these two Authors; we find them equally high and venerable:
the One being worthily esteemed one of the principal Antiquaries, and most
Learned men of his time; the Other as worthily reckoned among the most
excellent Architects this Nation ever bred, and a general Scholar. If we
balance their several Abilities respective to the matter in hand; no great
advantage of weight appears on either side: for if Mr. Jones were more
conversant in Vitruvius, and more exact in the Rules of Geometry; Mr. Camden
was not ignorant of the Art of Designing taught by the one, nor unacquainted
with the use of the Other, as is evident from many passages in his immortal
Writings. However, He was certainly skillful enough in the common ways of
measuring and surveying, not to be mistaken in the dimensions and platform of
Stone-heng. If we compute the Times, in which they severally took their
draughts of this Wonder; the difference will be so small, as not to solve the
variousness of them: for, they were Contemporaries, and not above forty years,
at most, seem to have intervened betwixt the Writing of one and the other,
concerning this Argument. A small space of time to wear off four foot of
hardest stone from the heads of the Perpendiculars or Columns; especially
considering not so much as an inch is diminished from their sides. And much too
short a time, for so many new stones to grow up in, as Mr. Jones discovered
more than the other perceived. Lastly, as for their Veracity; that is a thing
sacred, admitting of neither dispute, nor comparison; and 'twere breach of
Charity not to be confident of this; that both of them had so great devotion
and reverence toward the majesty of Truth, as neither would dare to offend her,
by willingly deluding the present and future ages, with counterfeit
Certificates, or by adding or diminishing, where they pretend to exactness and
fidelity. And yet notwithstanding, such is their misfortune, and our trouble,
we cannot give credit to both at once: that one has mistaken, is manifest;
that both were mistaken, and about the same particulars, is improbable; to
determine on which side the Error lies, is difficult, but by a new survey; and
to reconcile them in all points, seems impossible. Wherefore, though the clue
of my slender Observations upon the place, be not strong enough to conduct you
out of this Labyrinth: yet, I hope, my zeal to truth may excuse my plainness
and freedom, if I adventure to assure you, that having more than once or twice
delighted my self with viewing this admirable Antiquity, and with all possible
attentiveness of mind contemplated the form, order, and parts of it; I always
observed Mr. Camdens Draught to come much nearer in resemblance both to the
work it self, and to the idea thereof formed in my Imagination out of its
ruins, than that bequeathed to the world by Mr. Jones, though much more
elaborate and artificial. Nevertheless, the Model I have conceived of the
whole Fabrique in General, being not cast in the mould of Architectonical
Principles, nor adjusted by the maxims of Geometry; but rude and simple, such
as my Eyes delivered in to my brain: I think it not worth the labor of
Copying; but leave every man to the liberty of fancying as he pleases, when he
has sufficiently gazed upon the Original. In the mean time, let us proceed to
our Capital Enquiry, Who were the Authors of this stupendous Building, that
does so amaze and amuse its beholders.

What Scaliger wittily and truly said, in one of his Exercitations, concerning
the nature of Colors; viz. that objects most clear and manifest to the Sense,
are often most full of difficulty and obscurity when brought home to the
Understanding: holds true also of this Monument, which is not more conspicuous
to the Eye, for its greatness and eminency, than dark to the Mind, in respect
of its original and foundation, of which no certain remains are to be found. So
that we are not more beholding to Time, for suffering the Sceleton or Bones of
this Giant to stand so long; than injured by it, in that it so soon extinguished
the life, or story of it.

For, first, our most ancient, and most authentic Historians, who committed
to record the most memorable actions and traverses of Fortune among the
Britains; and who may with good reason be allowed to have been not much above
one age younger than Stone-heng it self: have passed it over in silence, as a
thing, either of whose Being they were utterly ignorant, or of whose Beginning
they were utterly uncertain. So that from their Writings, nothing can be
deduced toward our information.

And then, as for such others of our Countrymen, as well Historiographers, as
Antiquaries, who living at less or greater distance of time after the former,
have treated expressly of it; they deliver reports so various and inconsistent
among themselves, and severally so embroyled with improbabilities and
incongruities; that they appear to have taken up their respective opinions
either from obsolete and darksome traditions, or from slender and questionable
authorities, or at best from plausible conjectures. So that from these Authors
likewise, little is to be borrowed toward our determination. However, it being
my duty to presume, you are not unwilling to hear these Opinions, what and
whose they are; I shall not decline the labor of collecting and reciciting
them sincerely and faithfully: especially for as much as many things are well
worthy our Knowledge, that cannot yet deserve our Belief; and even Fictions
sometimes have accidentally given light to long obscured verities.

The Eldest and most vulgarly received Opinion, then, concerning the first
Foundation of Stone-heng, is, that it was erected by that so much renowned
Brittish-roman (for, a Roman He was, materna ex part, by the Mothers side)
Aurelius Ambrosius, in memory of those four hundred and sixty Noble Britains,
in peaceable manner invited to a treaty of accommodation, to be held in or near
the Town of Ambresbury, by that bloody invader and leader of the Saxons,
Hengist; and upon a watchword given, most treacherously murdered by him and
his equally inhuman confederates, upon the place in which they were assembled.
And the principal, if not the first Author of this report, was Geffery Monmouth
(in lib. 6. Histor. Britannic.) to whom I remit you for a more full narration
of the manner how this perfidious Massacre was designed and executed, and how
the Monument of Stone-heng was set up, as a perpetual Memorial of those many
Worthies, who there suffered a Civil Martyrdom, being sacrificed in honor of
their Country.

The Next (near of Kin to the first, as to Time; though e diametro contrary, in
all other respects) is, That the same Aurelius Ambrosius being deceased, his
sorrowful subjects, the Britans, to testify to succeeding Ages how high an
honor they had for the relics of Him, under whose valiant and prudent
conduct, and by whose couragein-spiring Example, they had so often repulsed and
defeated their savage Enemies, raised this Magnificent structure over the place
of his sepulture, as a most durable witness of his Heroical Virtues, and their
own grateful piety. And this conceit seems derived chiefly from Polydor
Virgil, who (in lib 3.) relating the passages of war, betwixt the Britans and
Saxons of those times, expressly affirms it as a memorable truth, in words of
this sense. In memory of his achievements for the liberty and good of his
Country, the Britans set up a magnificent Sepulcher for their General,
Ambrosius, made of great square stones, in form of a Crown (observe here, how
exactly Polydor's description of the general Aspect of Stone-heng agrees with
that of Mr. Camden formerly mentioned) in that very place, where He was slain
in fight; that the fortitude of so noble a Chiestain, might be neither
forgotten among themselves, nor left unremembred to posterity. Which Monument
is yet remaining in the Diocese of Salisbury, near to the Town called Amesbury.

A Third Conjecture we meet with, which though of much younger date, does yet
pretend to be grounded upon an Accident of War so ancient, that we have
scarcely any records of the actions betwixt the Britans and Romans in this
Island, of certainty above it; and it is, that Stone-heng was built by the old
Britains as a Sepulchral Monument for their Magnanimous, but unfortunate Queen,
Bunduca or Boadicia, Dowager of Prasutagus, King of the Iceni; who with all her
principal Nobility, and a numerous Army, was fatally overthrown in battle by
that handful of Romans, under the command of Suetonius Paulinus, then
Lieutenant in Britanny. The Father of this more partial, than probable fancy,
was the Translator of Lucius Florus (one Mr. Bolton, as I have been told by
several Stationers) and Author of that ingenious Book, entitled Nero Caesar,
published no longer ago, than in the year 1624. who out of a certain excess of
devotion to the Fame of that British Amazon (as each Historian must have his
particular Heroes, or Heroine, whose virtues he delights to magnify above all
others) willing to heighten her glories by all means possible; and taking
advantage of these words of Dion Cassius concerning her funeral rites, Britanni
humavernnt Eam magnifice, the Britans inhumed her with solemn and magnificent
pomp: rather than suffer her to want a Toomb proportionate to the grandeur of
her birth, sovereignty, and spirit, would needs be so courtly, as to bestow
that huge pile of stones upon her, to which the laws of History gave her no
right at all. But let us hear with what fervor of Zeal, and freedom of vote, He
conferreth this favor upon the Lady. The Story of Bunduca, says He, [Nero
Caesar p. 182, and 183.] than which neither our own noble Country, nor the
whole globe of Earth, has a rarer, was so little understood by Monmouth, as it
does not appear at all, that ever the bare sound thereof arrived within his
hearing. But had the precious volumes of the Cornelian Annals, and Dio Cassius,
and John Xiphiline (where her Heroic deeds are upon record to all posterity)
been within the sphere of his studies; not Aurelius Ambrosius, nor those four
hundred and threescore noblemen of Britain murdered in Vortigers Reign, should
perhaps have carried away with him the fame of this Material wonder, but Her
Magnanimous self. Higher than to Her no Books do reach, with any probability of
a Person more capable of such a Testimony, than she; and the profound oblivion
which covers the Author, and the first intention of rearing them, where now
they still defy the weather, does strongly fortify my suspicion, that the
stones were consecrated to the glory of Bunduca, and of her Captains slain in
her Quarrel, so long time since as Nero Caesar's days, much above fifteen
hundred years, etc.

Here, after the recital of these Three so different Suppositions, I should
immediately have proceeded to the Examination of them in order: but Mr. Inigo
Jones having, not many years past, with singular judgment, and great pains,
fully detected the particular weaknesses of each, and improbabilities of all;
and my Genius being always averie to the dull and unprofitable drudgery of
transcription; I think it sufficient, if I refer You to His elaborate discourse
upon the same abstruse Argument, while I apply my self to the serious
consideration of a Fourth opinion, to which His fruitful Imagination seems to
have given birth, and His ample skill in Architecture, credit.

Mr. Jones his Opinion, then, of the Founders, Antiquity and Design of
Stone-heng, is That it was a work of the ROMANS, built by them, when they
flourished here in greatest peace and prosperity, and happily betwixt the times
of Agricola's government, and the reign of Constantine the Great, about 1560
years ago; not as a Sepulchral Monument, but as a Temple, and particularly
consecrated to the imaginary Deity of Coelus, or Coelum, from whence their
superstitious belief derived the original of all things.

The Grounds whereon He advanced, and Reasons with which He endeavored to
support this so new and strange surmise; being brought into order, and few
words, are these that follow.

First, that the Romans were, and no other Nation could be Founders of
Stone-heng, He argues from (1.) the Magnisicence; (2.) the Order; (3.) the
Architectonical Scheme; (4.) the double Portico in the greater Circle of
Stones, and another Portico in the Cell, or Hexagon; (5.) the Manner and
Position of the Columns of the Building; and (6) from the Roman Relics
frequently found near the place.

Secondly, that it was a Temple, He would infer from (1.) the Intervall, or
spacious Court round about; (2.) the Cell, and its Porticoes; (3.) the Altar,
and its position Eastward; (4.) the Mixed, or Compound Order; (5.) the Aspect of
the whole Fabrique; and (6.) from the Skuls of Beasts dug up in the
circumjacent ground.

Thirdly, that this so plausibly imagined Temple was consecrated in particular
to the God, Coelus; He concludes from (1.) the Situation; (2.) the Aspect
Hypaethros; (3.) the Manner, or Form; (4.) the Order; (5.) the Decorum of the
structure; (6.) the Pyramidal Figure of the stones; and (7.) from the Kinds of
Beasts customarily offered in sacrifice to that Deity. And this is the Summary
of all those particulars, from whose concurrent hints He seems to have deduced
his Invention.

An Invention exceedingly fine and subtle, I confess; savouring of a pregnant
Wit, and no small Learning, especially in the mysteries of ancient Atchitecture
in use among the Romans; and therefore much applauded by some of more than
vulgar judgment: yet not so firmly founded, as to be impregnable; nor so
closely compacted in all its parts, as to keep out all weather of
Contradiction. Wherefore though it be far from my design to batter and demolish
it (for, in truth, it deserves to stand, though merely for the pleasantness:)
yet my devotion to truth, and the interest of my present disquisition concur to
excuse my boldness, if having brought you to it, I adventure to show you the
several Flaws, chinks, and defects discoverable therein; leaving it at last to
your own judgment, whether it be strong enough to secure any man's belief, that
shall set up his rest in it.

Let us, therefore, begin at the First Partition, viz. That Stone-heng was a
piece of Roman Architecture; and carefully view the strength of those Reasons
alleged to prove it so to be.

(First,) As for the Magnificence thereof; what Aristotle (4. Eth. cap. 2.)
terms (...), the Latins Magnificentia and Majestas, does not consist alone in
the Magnitude or Massiness of either the Materials of a Building, or the whole
Pile (for, then those huge stones lying one upon another, called Wringchees, in
Cornwall, would be a magnificent structure): but in an artificial Decorum, or
agreeable pulchritude conjoined with greatness of bulk. Which two Qualities
meeting together in any Fabrique, cause it to present it self to the eye with a
certain twofold gracefulness or majesty, that instantly raises a kind of
Respect, and where it is rare and excellent, a kind of delightful Wonder also
in the beholders. So that we use not to call Great things, Majestical, in
respect of their large dimensions alone: nor Little things, Magnificent,
notwithstanding their Elegancy. And this I conceive to be the adaequate notion
of Magnificence among all Architects. Now, according to this notion, though the
stones of Stone-heng be, indeed, extraordinarily big and ponderous; yet
forasmuch as they are rude, rough, craggy, and difform among themselves, and
destitute of any great Art or Elegancy in their general disposition and
construction; I perceive my self under no constraint or necessity of
apprehending it as a Magnificent building, at least in so high a degree, as Mr.
Jones would have us believe, when He affirms, that betwixt Rome and our Island,
there is no Monument, in which the Roman Magnificence is more conspicuous, than
in this. If by Magnificence He meant Magnum apparatum, the difficulty of the
Means, strength of Engines, multitude of hands, length of time, etc.
necessarily made use of in bringing together, and raising so many and so large
stones; then does his Inference fall to the ground: there being many antique
Monuments yet remaining, some in England, others in Scotland, others again in
Denmark and Norway; which consisting of the like materials, and those perhaps
further fetched too, could not but require like strength, labor, and art to
their erection, and yet the Romans had no hand in setting up either of them; as
shall be made appear, when the thread of my discourse has brought me to
mention them more opportunely. Furthermore, what judicious Eye, that has once
beheld the remains of Diocletian's Baths, Nero's Palace, Marcellus his Theater,
Vespasians Temple of Peace, the great Cirque, or other the monstrous buildings
of the Romans in Italy; can afterward fancy any such thing as Roman
Magnificence in this formless Uniform Heap of massy stones at Stone-heng? there
being as little of proportion or resemblance betwixt this and those, as betwixt
St. Pancrace Church, and St. Paul's; or as betwixt a Welsh montaineers cottage,
and the Royal Palace of Hampton Court. Nor am I alone of this judgment; for the
Author of the life of Nero Caesar, formerly cited, apprehended so little of
Magnificence in the thing, that from the very Rudeness thereof He concludes it
(though erroneously) to have been a work of the Britains.

(Secondly,) As for the Order, which Mr. Jones affirms to be the Tuscan; that
you may the more clearly discern, whether any such thing was observed by the
Builders of Stone-heng, in that work, or not, it i needful for me to put you
in mind at least, What that Tuscan Orde is, what Conditions it has that are
Common to the other orders also and what distinct Proprieties. The Ancient
Roman Architects generally divided their structures in parietes continuos, and
intermissos, into Entire or Continued walls, and Intermissions made by Columns
or Pillars. Of these Columns they had, partly from the Grecians, partly of
their own invention, Five different Kinds, or sorts; which reckoned according
to their respective dignity and perfection, are the Tuscan, Doric, Ionic,
Corinthian, and Compound, or (as it is commonly named) Italic. The Tuscan
(which alone relates to our present business) est plana, massiva, seu rustica
columna, similis robusto alicui and been artuato ruricolae, viliter amicto, is
a plain, massive, or rustical Column, carrying some resemblance to a strong and
well-limbed Countryman, meanly clad; as Vitruvius (lib. 4. cap. 1.) not
unfitly describes it. The Conditions common to this Pillar with the rest, are
principally Three, according to Sr. H. Wottons enumeration of them, in prima
part Elementorum Architecturae, for the Excellency thereof translated into
Latin by John de Laet. First, the Pillars of all the Orders are Rotundae
figurae, of a Round figure. For, though some conceive the Column Atticurges, of
which Vitruvius speaks (lib. 3. cap. 3.) was Square; yet was it looked upon as
irregular, and never admitted into the orders, but among other extravagant
inventions, condemned by Him. Secondly, Omnes diminuuntur and contrahuntur
insensibiliter, plus aut minus, secundum proportionem suae altitudinis, ab
tertiae part scapi sui sursum, All are Contracted or lessened insensibly, more
or less, according to the proportion of their altitude, from the third part of
their Escape, or lower part, upward. Which Guilielm. Philander, (one of the best
Interpreters of Vitruvius,) from the exact dimensions of sundry antique Remains
surveyed by himself, prescribes tanquam venustissimam diminutionem, as the most
comely and graceful diminution; and most resembling the Taper growth of
Pinetrees, from whose pattern the Figure of all Columns was first taken.
Thirdly, Omnes suos habent Stylobat as, altitudine tertiae partis totius
Columnae, comprehensa basi and capitulo; All have their Pedestals, of the hight
of the third part of the whole Column, from the base to the head. The
Proprieties of the Tuscan order (to omit others of less importance) consist
principally in two things, viz. the Proportion of the Longitude of the Pillar
it self, and the Intercolumnium, or distance betwixt Pillar and Pillar. The
Hight, or Length of the Pillar ought to be Sex diametrorum crassissimae partis
inferioris ipsius scapi, six Diameters of its thickness in the biggest part a
little above the bottom. For Vitruvius (lib. 3. cap. 1.) accounts the length
of a Man's foot to be the sixth part of his whole body, in ordinary dimension:
and Man, according to Protagoras, is (...); of all exact Symmetry the
Prototype, or first Exemplar. And the Intercolumnium, or Intervall betwixt the
Pillars, is required to be circiter quatuor illius diametrorum, of about four
Diameters. Now, these Qualifications of the Tuscan order being thus set down,
on one side of the parallel: let us turn our Eyes upon Stone-heng and see what
Analogy is to be found therein, to make up the other. (1.) At Stone-heng, very
few, or none at all of the Upright stones, or Columns are Round, no nor in any
degree related to that figure; but broad and flat, and mostly resembling
Parallelipipeds, rather than Cylinders; as the eye witnesses. So that here is
a manifest inconformity to the Figure required indifferently in all the five
orders. (2.) Their Contraction, or Lessening upward is not Uniform, but rudely
various, in some greater, in others less, in none insensible, in all irregular:
so as therein likewise they want the due proportion of Diminution common to all
genuinely figured Columns. (3.) They have no Pedestals at all, being set in the
ground; which is a third incongruity. (4.) The Perpendiculars of the Greater
Circle are, according to Mr. Jones his measure, in altitude 15. foot and, in
depth 3. foot, and in breadth seven foot. Where then is to be found the
proportion of Longitude to six Diameters of the thickest part of the Column?
(5.) Their Intervalls, or middle spaces seem to be about nine foot. For, Mr.
Jones himself computes the length of each Epistylium, or Architrave, continued
in round from Column to Column, to be precisely 16. foot; and there must be
half the breadth of the Column, at each end, allowed for the meeting of the two
Architraves in the middle, if not for the more firm bearing of their weight: so
that measuring the distance of the supporters, by the remaining part of the
Architrave, it will be nine foot. Which agrees not with the Intercolumnium of
Tuscan Pillars. To conclude this paragraph, therefore; either the Conditions of
the Tuscan Order here recited, are not according to the rules of Architecture
taught by Vitruvius, and his excellent Interpreter. Sr. H. Wotton: or Mr. Jones
was mistaken, when He conceived the Order of Stone-heng to be Tuscan.

(Thirdly,) As for the Architectonical Scheme, in use among the Romans,
consisting of four Equilateral Triangles inscribed within a Circle by which He
thought the whole work of Stone-heng designed and formed; it is much easier
imagined, than demonstrated to be really therein. For (1.) that Rule of
Vitruvius (lib. 5. cap. 6.) to which He referrs us for certification; if you
take it entire, and not the later half only, as He cunningly did, runs thus.
Ipsius autom Theatri conformatio sic est facienda, ut quam magna futura est
perimetros imi, centro medio collocato circumagatur linea rotundationis; in
eaque quatuor scribantur trigona paribus lateribus and intervallis, quae
extremam lineam circinationis tangant, quibus Astrologi, ex musica convenientia
astrorum, ratiocinantur. By the very first words whereof it is most manifest,
the Rule it self concerns the designation, not of a round Temple, but of a
Theater; and the Context of the whole Chapter following declares it to have
been invented for a threefold use, namely the most advantageous disposition of
the Proscenium, Scena, and Orchestra; the equal diffusion of the voices of the
Singers and Actors; and the convenient ordering of Seats for the Spectators.
But, what is this to Mr. Jones his conceit of a Temple; and such a one too, as
must bear the Aspect Hypaethros, sive sub divo, i. e. open at top? However,
conceiving this Text might serve his turn, and the great name of Vitruvius give
some authority to his Fancy, that otherwise would hardly pass among judicious
men; he industriously usurped the quotation of it, by perverting the genuine
sense to a wrong purpose; and to the end his Readers might be the longer in
finding out the fraud, artificially omitting the citation of the particular
Chapter, he leaves them to a tedious research through the whole Book; a labor
so great, the patience of most, though Learned, would not extend to the
enduring of it, upon so slender an occasion. (2.) The Question is, not whether
this kind of Architectonical Scheme were anciently used by the Romans, in some
of their public Aedifices; but whether Stone-heng was formed according to such
a Scheme, or not? Mr. Jones, indeed, has expressly affirmed it: but, how has
he made it appear? That he has drawn four Equilateral and Equidistant
Triangles within the circumference of the Greater Circle of stones, so as all
the Angles are terminated in the circular line, is not sufficient to prove it:
forasmuch as every Novice in Geometry understands how to inscribe not only 4.
but 400. and many more such Triangles, in the area of a Circle much less in
diameter, than that he describes. Nor is it sufficient, that he tell's us, the
intersection of the several Triangles fully demonstrateth after what manner the
Greater Hexagon, made open at Stone-heng, was raised from the solid wall
environing the Cell of the Peripheros: because our sense assures us, there are
no footsteps or remains of any such solid wall of a circular form, raised
where the intersections of the Triangles are supposed to be made; and because
we have no evidence, but his single word, that there is any Hexagon at all in
the work; whereas, neither Mr. Camden, nor the Author of Nero Caesar, nor My
self, nor any other (for ought I could ever learn, and yet I have enquired of
many Gentlemen who had carefully surveyed the Antiquity, and were well able to
discern a Hexagon from a Circle) could ever perceive any such matter. Again,
though he speaks of Three Entrances leading into the Temple of Stone-heng from
the Plain, and those likewise comparated by an Equilateral Triangle: yet is it
manifest even from his own Draughts of the work, and its Platform, that all the
Perpendiculars or Columns of the Outward Circle are equidistant each from
other; and if so, where are those Three Entrances? or how should we distinguish
them from the other intercolumniary, or void spaces? All which considered,
there remains (as I think) no tie upon any man's belief, that Stone-heng was a
Roman Structure, in respect of the Scheme, by which it was designed and
composed.

(Fourthly,) As for the Double Portico reported to be in the outward Circle,
and another within the Greater Hexagon, formed after the Roman fashion in
structures of great Magnificence: that you may be the better able to judge,
whether He were in the right, yea or no; give me leave to acquaint You, what a
Portico properly is, what the Roman Architects called a Double Portico, and
what Mr. Jones terms Porticoes in this place. Vitruvius (lib. 5. cap. 9)
setting down precepts for the construction of Porticoes belonging to a Theater,
begins his discourse thus. Post scenam Porticus sunt constituendae, uti cum
imbres repent ludos interpellaverint, habeat populus, quo se recipiat ex
theatro: Behind the Scene are to be made Porticoes, to the end the people may
have whither to withdraw themselves out of the Theater, when sudden showrs
disturb their sports. And Philander commenting upon these words, says thus;
Porticus additae sunt sacris aedibus, illustrium virorum domibus, and publicis
aedificiis, necessitatis, aut ornamenti, animive caussa; sub eis repentinas
pluvias vitabant, umbr as ac frigora captabant, variis sermontbus diem
consumebant, a meridie solemn hyeme, a septentrione aestivas umbras excipientes:
To sacred buildings, to the houses of great personages, and to public
aedifices are added Porches, for necessity, or ornament, or delight; under them
they sheltred themselves from sudden rains, they retired for shade and
coolness, and talked away the day; receiving Sunshine from the south in winter,
and in summer shadow from the north. From whence it is most clear, most
certain, that all Porticoes are additional structures, wherein men may be
protected from rain and sun; such as the memorable Porticoes of Apollo
Palatinus, of Augustus in campo Martio, of the Pantheon, of Antoninus Pius, of
the Capitol on the side of the Capitoline hill, in Rome. Of these Porticoes
some are made with parietibus continuis, solid walls on one side, and Pillars
on the other; as in all Peristylia, or paved walks enclosed with Columns, such
as the costly Palace of Urbin at Rome is adorned with, such as the Cloisters in
Monasteries, such as the walks under the Old Exchange, and those commonly
called the Piazzaes of Covent Garden. Others consist of solid walls on both
sides, with rows of Pillars set at distance from the walls; of which sort we
have a glorious example in the Portico at the west end of St. Paul's Church, in
designing and raising of which Mr. Jones himself was principal Architect. But
all are Tectae, Roofed or covered at top; otherwise how should they satisfy
the use or end for which they were intended, namely to shelter men from
excessive heat in summer, and from wet weather in all seasons of the year? As
for Double Porticoes, they are no ways different from single ones, except in
this only, that they have a double order or range of Columns. For, Philander
interpreting these words of Vitruvius (loco citato) circa theatra sunt Porticus
and ambulationes, quae videntur it a oportere collocari, uti duplices sint,
habeantque exteriores columnas Doricas, cum Epistyliis and ornamentis, ex
ratione modulationis Doricae perfect as; expressly says, Porticus Duplices
appellatae sunt a duplici columnarum ordine, Porches are termed Double, from
the double order of Pillars, of which they are composed. And these, doubtless,
are the adaequate notions of Porticoes, both simple, and double: and what every
man understands, when he hears them spoken of. But what Mr. Jones intends by
Porticoes in Stone-heng; is difficult to be conceived from his own discourse;
and more difficult to be found in the work it self: so that we are confined to
the liberty of conjecturing. By the double Portico, therefore, in the outward
Circle or wing of stones; He means either the double row of Pillars set in
round, of which the inner consists of smaller stones, such as he compares to
Pillasters: or the space between each two Columns, with an Architrave over
head. If the first; then it may be demanded, why the inner order of Columns are
not equal in altitude to the outward, as they ought to have been by Vitruvius
directions, and as they always were in Roman double Porticoes? and why is one
order covered with Architraves, the other not? If the other; it may be
objected, the Portico then can be but single, contrary to what it is supposed
to be. The same may be said likewise of the other Portico imagined in the
Greater Hexagon. But, whatever part of the Fabrique He fancied to be a Portico;
thus much is evident, that it will not afford defense against the injuries of
immoderate heat or rain; and therefore deserves not that Title, in strictness
of speech. And it seems, He that took the liberty so to call it, was put to a
hard shift to blanch over the singularity of his conceit: For, striving to
assert it, to be customary among the old Roman Architects, to form the like
Porticoes in their Temples, and more particularly in such Temples, as properly
belonged to the Aspect Hypaethros, or were Roofless; rather than want the
Patronage of Vitruvius in the case, he was forced to deprave the Text he
alleged toward his defense. The words there lying in this order, (lib. 3. cap.
1. sub finem) Reliqua omnia eadem habent quae Dypteros, sed interiore part
columnas in altitudine duplices, remotas a parietibus ad circuitionem (ut
porticus) Peristyliorum: not as He (page 70.) unfaithfully recites them, thus
(observe I pray) Hypaethros in interiore part habet columnas remotas a
parietibus, ad circuitionem (ut porticus) Peristyliorum; adding and omitting
what he thought fit. A course highly disingenious, and in the end as highly
scandalous. For, whosoever usurps the license of falsifying the Text of any Author,
much more of one so grave and oraculous, as Vitruvius, whatever advantage he
imagines may arise from thence to his private opinion, in case the imposture be
not detected: certainly it cannot countervail that shame and discredit that
inevitably follows, when the judicious and examining Reader shall come, by
having recourse to the Original, to find how grossly he might have been deluded,
had he trusted to the Quotation. And he that makes no scruple to impose an
error, by corrupting another's Doctrine, forfeits the credit he expects to his
own, and is almays to be suspected of partiality to his Tenants, especially
where he broacheth Novelties, and venteth them upon no other Reputation, but
that of his single testimony. It is but justice, therefore, if meeting with
nothing in our Antiquity, that answers to any form of Porticoes, which, as
Appendages to their Temples, were anciently erected by the Romans, and
described by Vitruvius; nor having any other obligation to grant the being of
any Portico there, besides Mr. Jones his bare conjecture, and that upon grounds
obscure and fallible: I say, it is but justice if we suspect, that He only
imagined them to be such.

(5) As for the Artifice, or Manner of Workmanship shown in Stone-heng, by
which you are to understand only the placing of the Upright Stones, answerable
to Columns; most true it is, indeed, the old Romans used to set the Columns of
public Fabriques, at so much the less distance one from another, by how much
greater the Columns were in Diameter, naming that particular kind of range,
Pycnostylos, i. e. Crebris Columnis, the close order, from the close or thick
standing of the Pillars. Nor is it less true, that in our Monument, the
Perpendiculars, though extraordinary great in compass, have their
intercolumnary spaces little in comparison; because of the weight of the
incumbent Architrave, which might otherwise break of it self. And yet
nevertheless I think it scarce warrantable thence to conclude, those
Perpendiculars were erected by a Roman Artist. For, if you consult Vitruvius
(lib. 3. cap. 2.) about the true proportions of the Close order; you may soon
be informed by him in these few words: Pycnostylos est, cujus intercolumnio
unius and dimidiatae columnae crassitudo interponi potest; The Pycnostyles is
that, where the Intercolumnium, or Intervall, is equal to the thickness, and
half the thickness of the Column it self. To whom Bernaldinus Baldus fully
assents, in his explanation of the word Pycnostylos, (Lexic. Vitruvian. page
96.) where he says; Inde species ista nomen adepta est, quod intercolumnium
sit moduli unius tantum cum dimidio: Then if you estimate the intervall from
Perpendicular to Perpendicular, in the great Round of Stone-heng, by the length
of the Architrave betwixt its two Supporters, according to my manner of
computation formerly given, you will find it to be about 9 foot, and so
inconform to the Rule of the Close order. After, perchance, you may give ear to
my conjecture, That the Builder had respect chiefly to the length of the
overthwart Stones, placing the Supporters accordingly, without any other
consideration or precept of Art, rather of Necessity, than Choice: and that if
he could have been furnished with Stones fit for Architraves, of larger
dimensions in length and depth, (otherwise they could not have born their own
gravity) in all likelihood he had proportionably enlarged the spaces of the
Columns; it being evident, he made use of the greatest Stones he could get, of
both sorts. But this is not material; it being sufficient, that the Rule of the
Pycnostylos was not exactly followed in the position of the Columns at
Stone-heng; and consequently, that the Manner is not Roman, as Mr. Jones would
persuade.

(6) As for the manner of fixing the Architraves upon the head of the
Perpendiculars by Tenons and Morteses; that likewise seems but an uncertain
sign of Roman Masonry. For, those Architraves being to be placed in
Aequilibrio, so as the point of Rest at each end ought to be there, where the
weight was found equal on each side: all the Workman had to do toward their
continuance in that posture, was, to contrive so to fasten them, as that no
force of wind or tempest, nor any other (unless extreme) violence, by
diminishing the gravity on one side, might incline or sway them to sink down on
the other; which could not otherwise be effected, but by corroborating the
Aequilibrium by Tenons made in the Supporters, and let into holes or Morteses
in the Architrave, no kind of Mortar or Cement being strong enough for that
purpose. And thus much common reason might teach the Masons, without any great
skill in Geometry, or having recourse to either the Rules or Patterns of Roman
Architecture. Which, perhaps, was the cause why Vitruvius spoke so little of
this way of confirming great stones in buildings, as taking it for granted, the
contrivement was so plain and obvious to men, even of but common understanding,
as that it was needless for him to insist upon any Precepts concerning it: For,
all I can meet with in his whole Volume, relating thereunto, is only a slight,
transitory, and obscure touch, (lib. 2. cap. 8.) which is this, Quod si quis
noluerit in id vitium incidere, medio cavo servato secundum Orthostratas
intrinsecus, ex rubro saxo quadrato, aut ex testa, aut silicibus ordinariis,
struat bipedales parietes, and cum ansis ferreis, and plumbo frontes vinctae
sint: it a enim non acervatim, sed ordine structum opus poterit esse sine vitio
sempiternum, quod cubilia and coagmenta eorum inter se sedentia, and juncturis
alligata non protrudent opus, neque Orthostratas inter se religatos labi
patientur. From whence nevertheless little can be collected, that is capable of
application to the manner of banding stones together in our Antiquity: all that
is, we must be beholding to the industry of Philander for, who, after his
interpretation of the word Orthostratae, which signifies upright Props, such as
the Italians term Speroni, Philastri contraforti, adds, Inciduntur in his
canales, in quos, veluti in foeminas, aliud quidpiam, ceu masculum, ineat
committaturque: cujusmodi sunt, quas nostri Mortesias, quasi Mordesias, a
mordendo, vocant; commissurae scilicet genus, cum perpetuo canali induntur,
inserunturve tabulae, aut quippiam simile. Besides, though Mr Jones alleged the
authority of Leo Baptista Albertus, the Florentine, to prove, that in mighty
Structures, where the stones were of extraordinary greatness, the Romans used
to lay them without any unctuous incorporating Matter between: yet he neither
has, nor could bring under the hand of any Author a Certificate, that no other
Nation did the like before, or until after the Romans had, by Conquest, or
Commerce, civilized them. And, therefore, it was somewhat boldly done of him,
to infer that Stone-heng was a Roman structure, because the Architraves were
compacted to their Supporters by Tenons and Morteses: when the Examples of the
like way of Holdfasts for huge stones, among other Nations, (some of which were
at that time barbarous) are infinite, and stand in the road-way of every man's
observation.

(7. And lastly) As for the frequency of Roman Relics in Wiltshire, such as
Camps, Fortresses, Trenches, and the like, some of which are even to this day
discernable, at least by their prints or footsteps, in places not far from
Stone-heng; I shall willingly allow thus much, that conjoined with History,
they may be good testimonies of the lodging of Roman Armies in those places,
and of their military traverses, during their War with the Britans; yet, seeing
they carry no face of similitude, nor show of relation to our Antiquity, the
Laws of Logic will justify my wariness and unbelief, if I doubt them to be so
much as probable Arguments of the Romans being Authors also of that Work.

Having thus* thread after thread, unravelled Mr Jones his long Web of Reasons,
which he thought so closely and artificially woven, as to be strong enough to
bind his Readers to a belief of his Opinion, that Stone-heng was a Roman
Structure: give me leave to add an Argument or two of mine own, of so much
weight, as would have alone been sufficient to break asunder his whole
contexture, had I not weakened it at all.

Mr. Camden, in the close of his Discourse concerning Stone-heng, makes report
of a certain Table, or plate of Metal, as it had been Tin and Lead commixt,
found in or by the Monument, in the time of King Henry the viij. whereon were
engraven many Letters, but in so strange a Character, that neither Sir Thomas
Eliot, nor Mr. Lilly Schoolmaster of St. Paul's, could tell what to make of it;
and so took no care to preserve it. Now certain it is, this Inscription was not
left by the Romans, who generally wrote all their Memorials in their own
Language, whose Character has long out-lasted their Empire, continuing the
same in all Ages; as appears even by their Coins of greatest Antiquity, and all
their Monumental Epigraphs, of which Camden has collected a great number, such
as have been found in England, and Gruterus a large volume of others, dispersed
not only through Italy, but all parts of the Earth, where ever the Roman Eagle
pearch'd. Nor does it appear to have been either Greek, or Hebrew, or British,
or Saxon; because all these Languages, and their several Characters, were well
known to Sir Thomas Eliot and Mr. Lilly, who were excellent Linguists, and good
Antiquaries, as the yet living Fame of one, and Writings of the other testify.
It remains, therefore, that these were Barbarous Characters: and if so, what
hinders, but that we may guess them to be Litterae Runicae, sive Gothicae, the
Runic or Gothic Characters, such as were constantly used by the Danes in all
their antique monumental Inscriptions, or Engravements? Especially since John
Speed, in his Description of Devonshire, writes, That near Exmore are certain
remains of an ancient Work, namely, mighty Stones, set some in form of a
Triangle, others in round, orderly disposed; and that upon one of them was an
Engravement in Danish Letters, which could not be read by men most learned. And
that grave and universally learned man, Olaus Wormius, (Physician to the
present King of Denmark, and not above four years past deceased, and who has
vouchsafed sometimes to honor me with his Epistles) in his first Book, cap. 9.
de Monumentis Danicis, takes special notice of this Inscription, and deploreth
the unfortunate loss of it, with Utinam bono publico communicatum fuisset;
sorsan de rebus praeclaris a nostratibus ibidem gestis testaretur. That the
Danes of old, affecting (as all other Nations of the world, however rude and
illiterate) to perpetuate the remembrance of their notable actions and
successes, delighted to raise Monuments of their Battles, Victories, and other
Atchievments, as also of their Kings, principal Commanders, and great Persons;
and leave short Records of the particular occasions of those Monuments,
engraven in Runic Letters; besides this, that they had none but the Gothic
Language in use among them, is manifest from the testimony of Saxo Grammaticus,
who (in Praefation. Histor. Danic.) recommends the observation thereof to his
Readers, as a thing necessarily conducing to their understanding many,
otherwise obscure passages in his History. Nec ignotum volo, says He, Danorum
antiquiores, conspicuis fortitudinis operibus editis, gloriae emulatione
suffusos, Romani styli imitatione, non solum rerum a se magnifice gestarum
titulos exquisito contextus genere, veluti Poetico quodam opere perstrinxisse;
verum etiam majorum acta patrii sermonis carminibus vulgata, linguae suae
literis saxis ac rupibus insculpenda curasse. And as for Precedents or Examples
of that kind, they are so numerous, that Olaus Wormius his two Volumes, De
Monum. Danic. and de Literis Runicis, mostly consist of such: otherwise perhaps
I should have exercised your patience in reading some of those more conspicuous
ones commemorated by Saxo Grammaticus, his Commentator, Stephanus Stephanius,
John Crantzius, and other Writers of Danish Antiquities; that so I might have
assisted the probability of my conjecture, that the Characters on the Plate
found by Stone-heng, were Runic or Gothic. However, you have seen upon what
fair grounds you may entertain a persuasion, that they were not Latin, and
therefore not left by the Romans.

Again, This our Monument consists wholly of Stones unwrought, rough, and
rude, as they lay in their beds of earth, (their Tenons and Morteses only
excepted) and of such various shapes, that the most curious eye can scarcely
find a perfect similitude in any two of them: and Mr. Jones ought to have
evinced, either by Testimonies authentic, or by Examples, that the Romans had
ever raised any public Structure of the like Materials; which being above his
power (as I conceive at least) he warily omitted to attempt it, as he did the
proof of many other particulars equally important toward the verification of
his grand Position. Whereas Olaus Wormius has been so liberal in his
Contributions toward the maintenance of my Supposition, as to furnish me with
not only verbal Descriptions, but lively Draughts or Pictures also of sundry
Antique Danish Monuments, as well in the Bulk and Rudeness of the Stones, as in
the Order and Manner of their position and situation, much resembling our
Stone-heng; and (as may be not obscurely collected from a Conference of Times,
Actions, Histories, Ruins, etc.) not much different as to Antiquity. And this
I think an Argument not unworthy your serious consideration; if not weighty
enough to counterpoise all the reasons urged by Mr. Jones, to enforce his
Dream, that the Romans were Authors of Stone-heng.

Having thus long entertained you, with examining the solidity of the First
Story of our Architect's fantastical Building; Time and Order jointly command
me to usher you up to the Second: wherein I shall no longer detain you, than
while I try the soundness of those Beams, upon which He imposed his so lofty
conceit, that Stone-heng wasa TEMPLE. Which he presumes

(1) From the spacious Court lying round about it, agreeing with those of Roman
Idolatrous Temples, wherein Beasts brought for Victims were slain, and into
which none but Priests might enter. To which it may be objected, first, That
the void space betwixt the utmost Circumvallation or Trench, in Stone-heng, and
the Building it self, does not exactly correspond with the Atria of Roman
Structures; and therefore cannot, without corrupting the severe Dialect of
Architects, be termed a Court. For, whosoever attentively peruseth Vitruvius his
Discourse De Atriis, (lib. 6. cap. 4.) will soon perceive, that He by the word
Atrium, constantly means primum aedificium, quod anteriori janua intrantibus
occurrit, the first Building that offers it self to the sight of those who
enter by the fore-gate: And Bernaldinus Baldus, in his Note upon the first line
of that Chapter, says, Arbitramur nos vetera Atria, nostrarum aedium parti
illi respondere, quam vulgo Anditum dicimus, Andatam, Caminatamve; quae quidem
prima post ingressum ostii introgredientibus occurrit; eaque non quidem
subdivalis, sed tecta and concamerata. To which may be annexed the agreeable
judgment of Claudius Salmasius (in Solinum, page 1218.) apparet Atrium, primo
non fuisse vestibulum; neque aream Hypaethram; sed partem aedis sub tecto,
atque adeo penetrale, and fortasse concameratam porticum. Seeing therefore,
that the Roman Atrium always was covered at the top, and most frequently arched
also; and that there is no such thing betwixt the outward Circle of Stones, and
the great Trench environing it: Where is the Analogy or Resemblance supposed?
Again, Indulging Him the liberty of our vulgar phrase, according to which the
Area, or plot of ground, betwixt a Building and its Boundaries, may rightly
enough be called a Court: yet, where is the necessity, yea, where the
probability, that that Court was originally designed and marck'd out for a
place for the slaughter of Victims? Must all Structures environed with such
Areae be Temples? or all Roman Temples be accommodated with the like out-lets?
If so, what will become of our Authors fancy, that those vast Stones standing
in a Circle near Long-Compton in Oxfordshire, called Roll-stones, were
anciently a Temple, and a Roman one too? For, these are destitute of all
outward circumvallation or entrenchment. But the force of this Argument
depends, perhaps, upon its conspiracy with its fellows; and therefore, if from
them all put together, it shall appear, that our Monument was intended for a
Temple; I shall no longer doubt, whether the void space of ground within the
Trench be the Court belonging to it.

(2) From a large Stone, 16 feet long and 4 broad, appearing not much above the
surface of the earth, in the Eastern part of the lesser Hexagon, which He takes
for an Altar. Whereunto I cannot assent, for two considerations. First, the
Humility of the Altar destroys the supposed Dedication of the Temple. For, the
Rule of Vitruvius, how Altars ought to be placed in Temples, so as to carry a
due Decorum, and visible Analogy to the nature and proprieties of that
particular Deity therein to be worshipped, is this, (lib. 4. cap. 8.)
Altitudines Ararum sic sunt explicandae, ut Jovi, omnibusque Coelestibus quam
excelsissimae constituantur; Vestae, Terrae, Marique humiles collocentur.
Altars consecrated to Jupiter, and all Celestial Powers are to be made
exceedingly tall or high; and those to Vesta, Tellus, and Neptune, humble or
low; as in some sort representing the dwelling and dominion of the respective
Deity. So that, this Stone was either no Altar at all, or not ordained for
Oblations to the god Coelus. If it be objected, that the Stone perhaps was set
upright; I answer, Then it was as much too narrow on the top, for the use
assigned, as now too low for the God to whom it is ascribed. Secondly, Mr
Jones, in his Description of the Monument (as you may remember) speaks of three
open Entrances leading from the Plain into the work it self, the most
conspicuous of which lay North-East: which is openly inconsistent with the
custom of the Romans, who always made the grand Entrance into the Temple,
whatever it were, e regione Altaris and Signi, in that part, which was directly
opposite to the place where the Altar and Statue stood erected; and the reason
was, Ut adoratum venientes Divinitatem suspicerent, That the people coming up
to make their adoration, might at their entrance have both Altar and Image in
front, so as to behold them at first elevation of their eyes. Would you have
Authority for this? Hear Vitruvius himself, Aedes autem sacrae Deorum
immortalium, ad regiones quas spectare debent, sic erunt constituendae, uti, si
nulla ratio impedierit, liberaque fuerit potestas aedis, Signum quod erit in
Cella collocatum, spectet ad vespertinam coeli regionem: uti qui adierint ad
aram immolantes, aut sacrificia facientes, spectent ad partem coeli orientis,
and simulachrum quod erit in aede; and it a vota suscipientes contueantur
aedem, and orientem coeli, ipsaque simulachra videantur exorientia contueri
supplicantes and sacrificantes; quodque Aras omnes Deorem necesse esse videatur
ad orientem spectare, (lib. 4. cap. 5.) Whence we may safely conclude, that if
the position of the Altar were right, yet that of the principal Entrance
leading up to it was wrong. But should we grant this to have been originally an
Altar-stone; yet does it not follow, that therefore the rest of the Building
was a Temple: because in Stories, as well Sacred, as not, we read of many
Altars standing alone, without Temples; and because it was one of the barbarous
customs of the Danes, even in the stony Sepulchers of their mighty men, to
erect Altars, and thereon to sacrifize to their Manes; witness Olaus Wormius,
(Monum. Danicor. lib. 1. cap. 6.) Diversi ab his cernuntur Tumuli, saxis
grandioribus undique cincti, ita ut utramque extremitatem mole vastiora
reliquis claudant. In medio utplurimum Ara extat. In hisce vulgus Gigantes
sepultos credit, quorum ossa etiam haud raro'e talibus effodiuntur. Sed ego
ejusmodi integris etiam familiis destinatos puto, unde and in his Arae, quae
communia sacrificia pro totius gentis incolumitate immolata excipiant. With
which if you compare Stone-heng, together with our vulgar tradition of Giants
there interred, and the skuls of Oxen or Bulls plowed up in the adjacent fields:
You will find as much reason to believe it a Sepulchral Monument set up by that
warlike and ambitious Nation, in the time of their tyranny here, with an Altar
in the middle, for their Pagan and impious Sacrifizes, as, with Mr Jones, to
conceive it a Roman Temple.

(Thirdly,) From the use of the ancient Romans to erect the like Round Temples,
that lay open without Walls, surrounded only with Pillars, and uncovered also
on the top, or Roofless. Which being his part to prove, and he finding it
impossible; he betook himself to multiplication of Fictions, confusion of
things clearly distinct, and other disingenious shifts; such as have indeed
amuzed and imposed upon vulgar heads, but can never convince the Learned and
judicious, who are not ignorant, how strictly constant the Roman Architects
were to their set Forms and Orders of Building, upon no occasion commixing or
confounding them in public structures, especially sacred ones, where the
passenger was to be instructed at first sight, what Deity was adored within, by
the peculiar form of the Temple apparent without; that so he might prepare and
address his devotion accordingly, without being mistaken either in the Object,
or ceremonies of it. But, let us not judge Him unheard. He allegeth, out of
Vitruvius (lib. 4. cap. 7.) that the Romans had round Temples of two diverse
Forms: whereof the one, named Monopteros, had neither continued walls about,
nor Cell within, but was encompassed only with a round of Columns; the there,
termed Peripteros, had a Cell enclosed with a continued wall, and Columns set
at convenient distance, so as to make a Portico round about on the outside. And
this I allow to be true: but what though? our Stone-heng resembles neither of
these Forms: not the Monopteros, because it has a Cell, as Himself supposes;
not the Peripteros, because it wants a continued wall to incompass that Cell,
as our eyes witness. Where then is the Similitude and Conformity? Why, rather
than fail, our Author shall adventure to make that like to both, which really
is like to neither. For stealing the outward Circle from the Monopteros, and
the Cell from the Peripteros, and then again surrounding that same Cell (not
with a Circle, as he ought, but) with a Hexagon of Pillars: of both Forms He
makes a Third, not being able to withhold from confessing (so much had the joy
of his (...), transported him) in the end, that it was a New Invention, which
yet he needed not to have told us. So here you find him guilty of a double
fault; confounding of two perfectly and irreconcileably distinct Forms of
sacred Edifices; and converting a Circle, the essential and proper figure of
all such Cells, as belonged to the Peripteros, into a Hexagon. Is this fair and
candid dealing, think you, in a man of Letters? Does it become one of the most
famous Architects of our age, thus to build Castles in the air, and fly to a
sanctuary made up of Fictions? But this is not all. From a strange and unheard
of confusion of several Forms, He proceeds to blend together also several
Orders of consecrated Buildings. For, He will have the Order, of which his
Temple of Stone-heng must consist, to be partly Tuscan, partly Corinthian:
affirming, that as the plainness and solidness of the Tuscan order, appears
eminently through the whole Work, so the narrowness of the spaces betwixt the
Stones, visibly discovers the delicacy and softness of the Corinthian. Where
(not to take notice of the manifest contradiction in the very terms) He incurrs
a grand Error, in commixing, in one Temple, two so different Orders; when, by
his own confession, (page 90.) the Romans had for each of their Deities a
certain particular Order of Temples, and observed that distinction of Orders so
strictly, that they seldom or never varied them. According to that of
Vitruvius, (lib. 4. cap. 7.) Non omnibus Diis iisdem rationibus aedes sunt
faciendae, quod alius alia varietate sacrarum Religionum habet effectus. And
had they not done so, How could the Roman Architects of old, have been able, at
first sight, to judge to what Divinity this or that Fane was peculiarly
devoted? or, How could the Modern Architects of Italy, at this Day, by seeing
only the ruins of them, give such probable conjectures, concerning their
antiquity and proper Dedication, as are very hardly to be contradicted? But,
why am I thus prodigal of my time and pains, in shaking an opinion, that has
no foundation of either Precept, or Precedent from ancient Architecture?
especially when the Founder Himself was forced to excuse the fragility and
weakness thereof, with this Plea; The learned in Antiquities very well know,
those things, which oblivion has so long removed out of mind, are hardly to be
discovered. (Page 77.)

(4 And lastly) From the Heads of Bulls, or Oxen, of Hearts, and other such
Beasts, dug up in or near this Antiquity; as if no man could imagine other,
but those were the Heads of such Beasts, as were anciently made Holocausts in
that place. Why, is it not equally probable, they might be the skulls of Cattle
slain for the sustenance of some one or other of those many Armies, that
encamped on the adjacent Plain, where the Lines of their Entrenchments and
Fortresses are yet visible? Was it not a common thing for Armies to carry along
with them whole Herds of Beasts for their Provision, and to bury the bones of
such as they killed, in places somewhat remote from their Camps? And, as for
Hearts; it is well known, both by tradition among the Inhabitants of the
neighboring Villages, and by other testimonies yet remaining, that all the
Plain from Stone-heng to Ambresbury, was, till within these 200 years, a
Forest full of great Trees: and therefore not improbable, but the Heads of Deer
might lie there, without any relation at all to Stone-heng. But grant them to
be the Offall or Resiques of Sacrifices; yet what reason, they should be Roman
Sacrifices, when the Danes also used the like, as may appear from what I lately
delivered out of Olaus Wormius, of the custom of that Nation to offer Beasts
in Sacrifice to the Ghosts of their deceased Commanders, upon their Sepulchral
Monuments? This Argument, therefore, being as invalid as the rest, and
altogether very unsatisfactory: it plainly appears; that Mr Jones his
Imagination had too powerful an Influence over his Reason, when He judged, upon
such slender Evidences, that our Antiquity was anciently a Roman Temple.

We should, in the next place, consider His Reasons for the entitling this
Structure to the God Coelus: but seeing it does not appear to have been a
Temple; 'twere in vain to be sollicitous about the Dedication of it. Omitting,
therefore, to take notice of sundry Defects and Incongruities, as well
Architectonical, as Historical, observable in that Later part of our Authors
conceit; as Errors that stand naked to every enquiring eye, and cannot hide
themselves from even the Emblem of Justice: I here take my final leave of his
so vulgarly admired Book; having, in memory that I perused it, first subscribed
this short Animadversion, at the end of it. Nunquam mihi placuit audaculorum
quorundam ratio, quibus nihil est tam obscurum, tamque abstrusum, and procul ab
hominum memoria positum, quod suarum conjecturarum sagacitate non fiat clarum,
apertum, and cognitum. Nimium credulis ingeniis, and discendi cupidioribus
rogati ultrove praestigiis and officiis imponunt, mentiuntur effossa marmora,
atque adeo inscript as uruas, quae nusquam fuerint, into quae nec per somnum
quidem viderint. Which, though spoken by the grave Philander, in reproof of
certain overweening and audacious Wits, that thinking themselves quick-sighted
enough to see through the darkness of oblivion, and make discoveries where Time
had long since interposed its sable curtain; had pretended to find a Temple of
the Sun, in the confused ruins of a Tower that stood upon the Mons Quirinalis
in Rome, to that purpose counterfeiting Marble Pillars, and Urns, with formal
Inscriptions: may yet be well accommodated to Others, who, ambitious to be
thought Argoses in the ruins of Antiquity, spare not to point at things
invisible, to descry in Monuments more than the Founders themselves ever
designed, to form to themselves Examples that never were, and in favor of
their own extravagant imaginations, to corrupt the testimonies of Authors most
venerable, and falsify the Records of ancient Customs.

What the Romans claim was, You have heard, at large: Hear now, in short, also

The Title of the DANES to Stone-heng;
Which is grounded chiefly upon Custom, and Presidents. For that they, more
than any other Nation whatsoever, were in old time, and even a good while after
the refinement of their barbarous Manners, and conversion to Christianity,
accustomed to erect Monuments of huge Stones, upon several memorable occasions;
and such Monuments, that compared to our (or their) Stone-heng, seem to agree
there with in most, if not in all points of resemblance; whereof many are at
this day extant in Denmark and Norwey: is not hard to prove, from the
undoubtable testimonies of their best Historians and Antiquaries.

Olaus Wormius (lib. 1mo Monum. Danic.) being to reduce into order that great
multitude of Stony Monuments in his Country, of which, as the most worthy to be
commemorated, He had proposed to himself to treat; first makes a general
division of them into Two Classes: namely, Literata, quae ex saxis constabant
literatura prisca, vulgo Runica, exteris Gothica, exaratis, Lettered Monuments,
such as consisted of large stones, with Inscriptions of Runic, or Gothic
Characters, speaking their occasions and intentions; and Illiterata, quae ex
rudibus quibusdam illiteratis, certo tamen ordine and serie dispositis,
Unlettered, which were composed of rude stones, without engravements, but so
disposed after a certain manner, as that the Beholder might from the order of
their position collect, upon what Accidents, and for what Ends or Uses they had
been set up. So that These, though destitute of the Elements of Language, were
not absolutely Dumb, but spoke their particular purposes in a more obscure
Dialect of Figures, and were read in the Alphabet of their proper Platforms.
Then he subdivides this later sort into Five distinct Ranks; namely, into
Sepulchra, Tombs containing the bones of eminent persons defunct: Fora, places
of Judicature, where Right and Justice were administered, according to the Laws
and Customs of the Country: Duellorum Strata, Cirques or places of Duells, or
Camp-fights: Trophea, Trophies, where Battles had been fought, and the Enemy
defeated: and Comitialia loca, places wherein Kings and Supreme Commanders were
elected by the general Suffrages of the People, and Inaugurated with great Pomp
and public Solemnity, such as the rudeness of that Nation, and the simplicity
of those times afforded. This Scheme being drawn, as the rule of his Method; He
thence-forward proceeds to Examples of each kind. And we are obliged therein to
follow Him step by step; that so we may the sooner, and without deviation,
arrive at a competent degree of satisfaction, whether any, and which of all
those different sorts of Antique Monuments has so near a resemblance of
Stone-heng, as that we may, from the apparent similitude of their Forms, infer
a probable affinity in their Origines and Designations; which is the period of
our travail.

As for the Literata, which carry their Age and Titles engraven on their
fronts; they lie not in our way, our Antiquity having no Inscription on any of
its Stones: and though that Plate of Metal with barbarous Characters, of which
we have formerly taken notice, might probably appertain unto it; yet is not
that sufficient to appropriate it to the order of Monuments, whose dignity and
value consist chiefly in their Epigraphs. Ranging it, therefore, among the
Illiterata; let us a while insist upon a particular survey of those: beginning
at the Antique Danish

Sepulchers.
Whereof I meet with some, in Olaus Wormius, that are in more than one point of
analogy correspondent to Stone-Heng.

One Stands in Seland, on a plain, near the highway leading to a certain small
Town, called Birck; formed according to this description of our Author. Ex
saxis rudioribus mediocribus, quadrata in longitudinem tendens, ductaest area;
huic tres colles seu Tumuli inclusi, undique circa radicem, ejusdem ferme
magnitudinis saxis cincti. Major meditullium occupans, in apice aram habet ex
saxis quatuor stupendae magnitudinis exstructum, it a ut tria quartum maximum
and planum sustineant. A plot of ground, of a square running out in length, is
empalled with rude stones, not of the largest scantlings: in which are included
three Mounts of Earth, circumscribed at their bases with stones of the like
bigness. The greatest Mount, standing in the middle, has on its top an Altar
made up of four stones of stupendous magnitude, so as three standing in
Triangle, support the fourth upon their heads, which is the greatest of all,
and plain or flat.

A Second, situate not far from the same place, and somewhat more eminent,
consists of a Tumulus, or mount of earth cast up, under which, the common
people have a Tradition, that a Giant, whose name was Langbeen Kiser, was
anciently buried; and encompassed with fifty six stones of prodigious bulks.
Moles haec saxo percussa, reboat, ut concameratum opus subesse colligere facile
quis possit, says our Author; this massive Structure being knocked hard with a
stone, yields a great sound like the Echoes of Vaults, so that it is easily to
be collected, that there is an arched or vaulted hollowness underneath.

Here let us make a stand for a minute or two, and reflect upon a few
particulars that offer themselves to our observation. First, these two
Sepulchral Monuments are situate in Campis patentibus, in open and spacious
fields; a clear evidence, the Danes (as many other Nations) anciently used to
bury in large and wide plains. Secondly, they threw up mounts of Earth over
their dead: and those of two sorts, according to the qualities of the persons
inhumed. For, of these Tumuli, such as were simple and naked, served to denote
the interrment of Common Soldiers, together with their inferior officers,
slain in battle upon the place: but those compassed about with great stones,
set in single, double, or treble order, were designed to conserve the memory of
great Captains or Generals. For, Wormius touching upon these Tumuli, left this
remark concerning their Distinction. Qui rudiores sunt, ex sola terra in
rotunditatem and conum congest a constant; ex iis, qui una vel multiplici
Saxorum serie circa basin cinguntur, exercituum Imperatoribus, aliisque
Magnatibus dicati creduntur; ut Simplices nullis ornati lapidibus, militibus
strenuis, and athlet is de patria been meritis. Howsoever, in those Martial
times, when no virtue could render any man noble or great, but Fortitude, and
Honor lay in the strength rather of the Arm, than of the Head; the Armies of
this Nation constantly preferred monuments of mighty stones, much above those
Tumuli, or (as we call them) Burrows; nor ever entrusted the fame of their
Worthies to such simple and homely conservatories, but only in places where
Rocks and Quarries were scarce. This we learn from a very remarkable text in
the Commentaries of Petrus Lindebergius. Sciendum autem, quod Dani, cum propter
defectum saxorum Pyramides ac Obeliscos extruere minime potuerint, olim in
memoriam Regum and Heroum suorum ex terra coacervata ingentem molem montis
instar eminentem statuerint. From whence it is very plain, that the old Danes
used not to inhume their Chieftains and highest Commanders under Tombs of
Earth, but in case of necessity, where neither the place of the battle, in
which they were slain (if they dyed in war) not the Country near it, afforded
them stones of dimensions fit for Pyramids and Obelisques. Otherwise they made
use of stones of the largest size they could possibly get: sparing no pains nor
cost to raise them up into the most magnificent Fabriques, their little skill
in Architecture could amount to. Hereupon Wormius; Aetatis progressu plus
operae in Magnatum tumulis positum videtur. Nam, non solum iis grandes cippos
patriis literis notatos imposuerunt, defuncti titulos exhibentes: sed etiam
tumulos ipsos tam in aepice, quam circa basin visendae magnitudinis cinxere
saxis, aream insuper quadratam adjicientes, quae totam molem grandioribus
includeret, etc. To which we may opportunely subjoyn a parallel record of
Christianus Cilicius (lib. 1. Belli Dithmarsici.) Erant, says He, Magnatum
Danicorum sepulturae in sylvis and agris, tumulosque aggestis lapidibus
vestientes muniebant; quod genus complures passim adhuc visuntur, qui Gigantum
Strata vocantur. Mark here the near affinity of the very Name; Stone-heng being
by all our Authors, who have mentioned it, called Chorea Gigantum, the Giants
Dance, and the most magnificent Stony Monuments of the Danish Princes, Strata
Gigantum, the Giants pavements or paths. The last observable is, that in many
of their Sepulchral piles they placed an Altar; eo fine, says Wormius, ut
ibidem in memoriam defuncti quotannis sacra peragantur; that they might yearly
offer sacrifices to the defunct, at least in memory of them, upon the place of
their inhumation. Of this we have a sufficient confirmation from a note of Ubbo
Emmius, (lib. 1. Histor. Fris. page 21.) Commemoratione dignum videtur, quod in
Regione hac ingentis molis saexa complura, quae nulla vectatione, nulla vi
hominum illac deportari potuisse, ob magnitudinem credas, congesta inveniantur,
quorum ea dispositio est, ut Aras refer videantur. Nam jacentibus nonnullis,
alia iis imposita sunt plana, relictumque foramen, per quod reptare homo
possit: it deserves commemoration, that in this Country are found multitudes of
Stones congested of so vast masses, that you would believe them impossible to
be removed by any Engines, by any the greatest strength of Men; and so
disposed, as to represent Altars. For upon the heads of some, others are
imposed, of a plain figure, and a hole or empty space left underneath, through
which a man may creep. Nor ought it to seem so singular and strange a piece of
Superstirion, for a phlegmatique and dull-headed Northern Nation, to set up
Altars in the midst of such ampse and massive Tombs: when Temples themselves
first grew up out of meaner Sepulchers, even among the Grecians. This perhaps,
you will smile at, as a paradox; and therefore it behooves me to produce some
credible Authority to assert it. Clemens Alexandrinus (in Protreptico) is the
man, who both expressly avoucheth it, and brings several Instances to prove it,
thus. Superstitio templa condere persuasit. Quae enim prins hominum sepulchra
fuerunt, magnificentius condita, Templorum appellatione vocata sunt. Nam apud
Lariscam civitatem in arce, in templo Palladis, Acrisii sepulchrum fuit, quod
nunc sacrarii loco celebratur: in arce quoque Atheniensi, ut est ab Antiocho in
nono Historiarum scriptum, Cereris sepulchrum fuit: in templo vero Palladis,
quem Poliada Graeci appellant, jacet Erichtonius, etc. But we have made too
long a Hault in this place, and it more imports us, to proceed to

A Third notable Example of Stony Sepulchers in Denmark. Which composed of a
Tumulus or Burrow cast up in the middle, and three orders of huge Stones set in
manner of Columns, at equal distance, the outmost making a large quadrangle of
fifty paces length in each side, the other two perfect Circles one within
another; presents it self to the admiration of passengers, on a plain, about a
mile from Roeschild, and near the high way that leads from thence to
Frederisksburgh. Of this Ol. Wormius has given a perfect Draught, (Monument
Danicor. page 35.)

For a Fourth, I have, among many others, chosen the notable Monument of King
Harald Hyldetand (whose courage, continency, and wisdom, together with his
happy successes in war, are highly celebrated by Saxo Grammaticus) which yet
remains near Lethra, or Leire, in Seland, anciently the seat of Kings, now a
decaid obscure village: saxis grandioribus stipatum, in meditullio immensa mole
quadrata, minoribus aliis innixa exornatum; compassed about with stones of
extraordinary greatness, and in the middle ennobled with one Square stone, or
rock, of an immense bulk, resting upon the heads of others of inferior
magnitude; whose picture, though in too small a module, is taken also by our
Author.

Now, from the various structure of these four grand Sepulchers, neither of
which does fully quadrate with other; it is manifest, the Founders were not
strict in observing any such set form of placing their stones, that might at
first view distinguish them from other Monuments; unless in this only, that
the Exterior Muniment or pale of great stones was commonly either exactly
square, or nearly approaching that regular figure. And yet sometimes they
varied from that also, as Wormius himself confesses. For, albeit in his
general description of the fashion of this sort of Sepulchers, he tells us,
they had aream quadratam, quae totam molem grandioribus saxis includeret: yet
afterward, in the same Chapter, he mentions some, that had not been formed
according to that rule. His words are, Diversi ab his quidam cernuntur tumuli,
figura oblongiori congerie depressiori, saxis grandioribus undique cincti, ita
ut utramque extremitatem mole vastiora reliquis claudant, etc. But of this
first Kind of Unlettered Danique Monuments, we have taken a sufficient survey.
Let us pass, therefore, to the Second, viz. Fora, or

Places of Judicature.
Where judgment was publicly given concerning Right, and litigious suits
determined betwixt subject and subject, according to the Known laws and
constitutions of the country; and that either immediately by the King himself,
where the parties concerned were Noble, or the matter in controversy
important; or otherwise by his deputed Judges, in cases of less moment. These
Courts were, like Justice her self, naked, and open; standing, not in Cities,
nor Towns, but in fields and spacious campanias; nor covered with roofs, but
with a kind of rude magnificence made only of a certain plot of ground, of a
Quadrangular, or Oval figure, set apart by an enclosure of the vastest stones,
that could possibly be had, placed like Columns, at equal distance; with one
great stone, for a judgment seat, in or near the middle: as appears from the
remains of Two (anciently very eminent) yet visible in Denmark.

The One in Seland, near the City Drething; whose manner of structure, and
capacity Ol. Wormius having with great diligence surveyed, he thus describes
it. Vidi illud quadraginta sex saxis stupendae magnitudinis cinctum fuisse,
eminente in ejus meditullio grandiusculo quodam; omnia vero in ovalem disposita
erant figuram, it a quidem, ut utrinque ad latera, circae medium porta quasi,
vel aditus pateret meridiem and septentrionem versus. Longitudo nonagint a
passus aequabat, latitudo viginti. This Forum, or Ting (in the Danique
language) was begirt about with forty six stones of wonderful magnitude, and
had one great stone standing in the middle: all the stones of the Enclosure
were disposed into an Oval figure, so that about the middle, on each side, was
left as it were a gate, or Entrance, one toward the South, the other toward the
North. The length of the oval was ninety paces, the breadth twenty.

The Other near Aasmuntory, undique cautibus septum, hemmed in on all sides
with stones equal to Rocks: which gave name to the place where it stands, that
being called Tinget, to this day. Many other of the same kind are to be seen in
other Provinces of Denmark; says our Author.

As these Courts of Justice were rude in their Fabrique, so for many Ages
together, were the ways of Trial practiced in them. For, from Frotho Magnus,
who swayed the Danish Scepter, about the most happy time of our Savior's
Nativity, down along until the Reign of Suenotto, in the year of our Lord 986.
all weighty and difficult controversies were decided per Monomachiam, by Duel;
the Defendant being obliged to combat the Plaintiff openly within the lists of
the Court, and prove the goodness of his cause by the sharpness of his weapons,
without other Advocate but his own courage. A very savage and unequal manner of
trial this! where always the Sword of Justice was put into the hand of the
Criminal, where many times Right had no Vindication but from Fortune, and the
most Innocent, if overcome, was either to die upon the place of his purgation,
or, what is more grievous, to become Slave to his unjust Accuser. Yet men were
hereto bound by a severe Law, made by the said Frotho, and recited by Saxo
Grammaticus, (Hist. Danic. lib. 5.). After, the Beams of the Christian Faith
shining on those northern Nations, and in some degree overcoming the gloominess
of their barbarous Manners and Customs; that Law was abrogated, and in the
place of Duels, the somewhat less cruel, but not much less uncertain way of
Trial per Ordelium, by Fire-Ordeal, succeeded; and was continued in the same
Courts, till about the year of Christ 1350. it was condemned by a decree of the
Lateran Council, and an Edict of King Woldemarus II. an Extract of which you
may find in Wormius, (Monum. Danic. lib. 1. cap. 11.) Then began all causes to
be determined by the judgment of twelve Jurors, as here with us in England; not
but this way was much more ancient, (for it is ascribed to Regnerus surnamed
Lodbrog, who ruled in Denmark about the year of Christ 820; and as some Danish
Writers boast, was derived from him to our Etheldred) but it seems not to have
been either by universal custom established, or by strict and penal Laws
enforced, so as totally to exclude the Ordeal in all cases, until the said
Woldemarus his days. And Harald the vijth, after the abolition of Duels,
introduced a new, but pernicious manner of determining contentions, by which
the Party accused might purge himself of whatever Crime charged upon him, Solo
juramenti sacramento, by only his own single Oath, idque contra omnem testium
fidem, and that against the clearest testimony of Witnesses: as Saxo Grammat.
has left upon record, (lib. ij.) But the unreasonableness hereof was so great,
and the evil consequences so many, that it could not continue long.
Notwithstanding the ways of Trial were thus various; yet the places were still
the same, namely, these open and rude Courts here described. From which we pass
to the Third sort of Danique unlettered Monuments, viz.

Places of Combats, or Fights.
These were, indeed, always designed by Great stones, but not constant to any
one Figure, so as to be thereby alone distinguishable, without the help of
Tradition. For, though Saxo Grammat. (lib. 1. cap. 29.) willing to give some
directions, how, from the several Ordinations of the Stones, Posterity might
guess aright at the several Occasions, upon which they were set up; delivers
this as a general Rule: Recto and longo ordine pugilum certamina; quadrato
turmas bellantium, and sphaerico familiarum designantia sepulturas; ac cuneato
equestrium acies ibidem, vel prope, fortunatius triumphasse: yet Wormius
professes, he much doubted whether this order were every where strictly
observed, or not; afterward alleging Examples of different Figures.

One he mentions out of the Author of Histor. Bremensis, (lib. 2. cap. 9.) that
consisting of one mighty Stone, was erected in memory of a Duel fought near a
place named Agrimeswedel, in which a famous Combatant, Biurguido, overcame and
slew a Champion of the Slavi, and acquired immortal honor.

Others he speaks of that were marked with many huge stones set equally distant
each from other, in a straight line; some that were truly Girques, and some
Quadrangular: all which, together with the Laws and Manner of such Camp-fights
betwixt the Champions of several Kings, You may see fully described by him,
(Monum. Danic. lib. 1. cap. 9.) In the mean time I hasten to the Danish

Trophies,
Or Monuments of great Battles fought, and Victories obtained. Which, though
agreeing among themselves, in their durable and massy Materials, are
nevertheless irreconcilably discrepant in their Forms. So that in these, as
well as in the other sorts hitherto surveyed, the Founders seem to have
entrusted the remembrance of their glorious Successes, as much to the voice of
Fame, and popular Tradition, as to the obscure signification of any one Figure
or Scheme observed in the Monuments themselves: or else varying the Platforms
of their Triumphal Piles, according to the various circumstances of their
Encounters, and fortunate Atchievments, and the commodities of the place; they
left Posterity, who could not arrive at certain knowledge of those
Circumstances, to grope after their particular Stories, in the darkness of
uncertain conjectures. This our Author, Ol. Wormius, was too ingenuous to
excuse, or conceal; and therefore though, in compliance with the former
persuasion of his Country, he tells us, Integri exercitus stragem lapidum
quadrata in plano dispositione indicasse, That the ancient Danes by stones
disposed into a Quadrangle, showed the overthrow of a whole Army of their
Enemies, upon or near that place: yet he immediately subjoyns, Verum non ubique
ab omnibus praecise observatnm fuisse hunc ordinem ac dispositionem saxorum,
plane mihi persuadeo; But I persuade my self fully, that this order or
disposition of the stones, was not precisely observed by all, in all places.
However, it imports us not to pretermit an Example, or two, of these huge
Triumphal Antiquities.

In the Diocese of Bergen, on a wide mountainous place, near a Village, called
Tysnes, you may, with a delightful wonder, behold six stones of an incredible
magnitude, resembling Pyramids, erected at equal distances, in two
semi-circles, one within another; each environed with two entire circles of
lesser stones of Oval figure; and in the middle of the intercolumnary spaces in
each semicircle, a great multitude of the like stones heaped one upon another,
till they amount toward a Cone: and all in a most elegant order, set up in
memory of a bloody Battle fought upon the place; as the people of the Country
report by hearsay from their forefathers, though their relations differ in
many circumstantial particulars. After this description, our Author adds,
Plura ejusdem generis and alibi in eadem Dioecesi videre and observare licet,
figura quidem diversae, sed eundem in usum fabrefacta.

But, what need we travel into Denmark, for Patterns of this kind of Monuments,
when we have two most notable ones here at home, one in Cornwall, another in
Oxfordshire? which, if you have not beheld with your own eyes, and dare give
credit to M^ Camdens, you may have them represented to you in these his
Descriptions.

Near St Neoths in Cornwall (says he) upon a plain adjacent to a wondrous pile
of Rocks heaped up together upon one stone of lesser size, fashioned naturally
in form of a Cheese, so as it seems to be pressed like a Cheese, whereupon it
is named, Wring-Cheese; are to be seen many great stones, in some sort
apiece, of which seven or eight are pitched upright, of equal distance
asunder. The neighbor Inhabitants term them Hurlers; as being by a devout and
godly error persuaded, they had been Men sometimes transformed into Stones, for
profaning the Lord's Day with hurling the Ball. Others would have it to be a
Trophy or Monument, in memorial of some Battle. And so doubtless this was, and
not improbably left by the Danes.

Not far from Burford, upon the very border of Oxfordshire, is an ancient
Monument, to wit, certain huge stones placed in a circle. The common people
call them Roll-rich stones, and dream they were sometimes Men, by a miraculous
Metamorphosis turned into hard stones. The Draught of them, such as it is,
pourtraied long since, here I represent unto your view. For, without all form,
and shape they be, unequal, and by long continuance of time much impaired. The
highest of them all, which without the Circle looks into the earth, they call
the King; because he should have been King of England (forsooth) if he had once
seen Long Compton, a little Town lying beneath, and which one may see, if he go
some few paces forward: other five, standing at the other side, touching as it
were one another, they imagine to have been Knights mounted on Horseback; and
the rest the Army. These would I verily think to have been the Monument of some
Victory, and happily erected by Rollo the Dane, who afterward conquered Normandy.
For, what time He with his Danes troubled England with depredations, we read,
that the Danes joined Battle with the English thereby, at Hoch Norton; a place
for no one thing more famous in old time, than for the woeful slaughter of the
English in that foughten field, under the Reign of King Edward the Elder.

To these may be annexed another eminent Trophy, known by the name of
Stipperstones, standing upon Huckstowe Forest in Shropshire, consisting of
great piles of stones, and others like Rocks perpendicularly erected thickly
together, and set up to perpetuate the renown of a fatal defeat given to the
Britans by Harald. Concerning which Giraldus Cambrensis has this clear
testimony. Harald in person being himself the last footman, with footmen, and,
light arms, and victuals answerable for such an Expedition in Wales, valiantly
went round about through all Wales, so as that he left few or none alive. And
for a perpetual memory of this Victory, you may find very many great stones in
that country erected after the antique manner upon hillocks, in those places
wherein He had been Conqueror, with these words engraven, Hic fuit Victor
Haraldus: Here was Harald Canqueror. Now these being sufficient instances of
Danique Triumphal Monuments, it remains only that we search after some of
their Loca Comitialia, or

Places designed for the Election and Inauguration of their Kings.
In which, not only their Noblemen and Grandees, but also the Commons being
upon summons assembled from all parts of the Nation; used to consult and vote
about matters of State of greatest importance, more especially upon the death
of the Prince; and in that case, to give their Suffrages for the next in blood,
or power, to succeed him. This business, as being of most concernment to the
Public, was performed with pomp and solemnity answerable; the manner and
Ceremonies whereof are concisely set down by Saxo Grammaticus; thus. Lecturi
Regem veteres affixis humo saxis insistere, suffragiaque promere consueverunt,
subjectorum lapidum firmitate facti constantiam ominaturi: Our Forefathers
being to elect their King, used to stand upon stones pitched upright in the
ground, and to give their suffrages; by the firmness of the stones upon which
they stood, tacitly declaring the firmness of their act, and as by a good Omen
foreshewing the durability of his government. And Ol. Wormius more fully
describing the manner, both of the open Senate House, and of the Election it
self, says, Reperiuntur in his oris loca quaedam, in quibus Reges olim solemni
creabantur pompa, quae cincta adhuc grandibus saxis, utplurimum duodecim,
conspiciuntur, in medio grandiore quodam prominente, cui omnium
suffragiis-electum Regem imponebant, magnoque applausu excipiebant. Hic and
comitia celebrabant, and de regni negotiis consultabant. Regem vero
designaturi, Electores saxis insistebant forum cingentibus, decreti
firmitudinem pronunciantes: in this Country are beheld certain Courts of
Parliament, in which heretofore Kings were elected with solemn state; which are
surrounded with mighty stones, for the most part twelve in number, and one
other stone exceeding the rest in eminency, set in the middle, upon which (as
upon a Regal Throne) they seated the new elected King, by the general suffrage
of the assembly, and inaugurated him with great applause and loud acclamations.
Here they held their great Councils, and consulted about affairs of the
Kingdom. But when they met together to nominate their King, the Electors stood
upright upon the stones environing the Court, and giving their voices, thereby
confirmed their choice.

This rudely-magnificent Custom of Electing the supreme Magistrate, in such
open circles of huge stones, and after such a manner; as it was of highest
Antiquity, so was it likewise of greatest Duration among the Danes. For,
Bernhardus Malincrot (in libr. de Archicancellariis, p. 158.) through a long,
series or descent of their Kings, brings it down to the time of the Emperor
Charles the fourth, who publishing that so renowned golden Bull de Electione
Imperatorum, gave occasion to the abrogation of it.

Yea, so sacred were these Courts, and in such high esteem and veneration were
they held, for many hundreds of years together; that even in time of public
peace and tranquillity, the Candidate King was de jure obliged there to receive
his solemn Inauguration, and assume the Ensigns of Royalty: as if the Place and
Ceremonies were essential parts of his right to sovereignty, and the votes of
his Electors much more valid and authentic, for being pronounced in that
Forum. And if it happened that the King fell in some foreign expedition, by the
hand of the Enemy, or by a less glorious death; there ensued an Inter-regnum,
till such time as his surviving Army had in some convenient plain brought
together a multitude of the largest stones they could possibly find, and set
them both for the interrment of his Corpse, and the election of his Successor:
and this as well because they reputed an Election in such a place, a good
addition of Title; as because many great and irreparable incommodities might
redound to the Republique during that pause or respite of Government, in case
the new election were deferred, until they had returned into their own Country,
and assembled the best part of the Nation in some one of their ancient
Kings-benches, as they may be properly enough termed, considering their dignity
and use. To authorize this, which otherwise might be thought somewhat
romantique, I am provided of a text out of a very grave and faithful writer of
that Nation, Suaningius; which is well worthy my recital, and your special
consideration; being that which gave me the first hint for my conjecture
touching the End or purpose, for which Stone-heng was built. The text is this;
Locum publicae Regiae electionis postquam incolis convenientem, ad quem, nulla
obstante itineris difficultate, omnes qui erant vocati, venire possent,
elegissent; saxa grandia singulari opera atque studio conquiri, atque in eundum
locum, quem electioni Regiae destinarant, comportari curarunt. Neque enim tum,
quemadmodum hodie, destinata electioni Regum certa erant loca, sed pro arbitrio
sententiaque eorum, qui autoritate and potentia alios antecellebant,
eligebantur. Huc comportata saxa conscendentes hi, quibus eligendi jus
commendatum erat, circumstante populo, suffragia ex iis ferebant: and may be
thus Englished. When for the public election of the King, they had made choice
of a place convenient, to which all that were summoned might, with the least
difficulty of travail, repair; they took care, that stones of extraordinary
greatness should be, with singular labor and diligence, sought forth, and
brought together in the same place, which they had appointed for the Royal
Election. For, there were not then, as now a days, certain appointed places
for that affair; but such were chosen, at the pleasure and judgment of those,
who excelled others in authority and power. Upon the stones brought hither,
those to whom the right of electing was delegated, mounting up, delivered their
suffrages, the people standing round about below. The same in every particular
is confirmed by the learned Stephanus Stephanius, in his Commentaries upon the
first Book of Saxo Grammaticus his History of Denmark; whither I remit the
unsatisfied.

As for Examples of this noblest and most magnificent sort of Monuments; Olaus
Wormius has furnished us with Three very conspicuous ones; one in Seland, near
Leire, called Kongstolon, or Kings throne; another in Schoneland, not far from
Lundie, in which homage was annually paid to King Olaus, and Christianus the
first was with royal solemnity inaugurated and invested with regal ornaments; a
third near Viburg, in the Cimbric territory, in which common tradition will
have Dane the first to have been likewise elected, and inhroned, as the name
Danerliung, which to this day it bears, seems to witness. And the reason he
gives, why there is one in each of these three Provinces, is, that anciently
they were distinct Principalities, and under the dominion of as many petty
Kings; though now reduced under the sovereignty of a Monarch, the present King
of Denmark.

Nor are we destitute of the like in England. For, in Cornwall, on a large
plain, called Biscaw Woun, near a village named St. Buriens, stand erected, in
a circle, nineteen huge stones, distant each from the other about twelve foot;
with one stone far higher and greater than the rest in the Center. Which though
Camden supposes to be some Trophy left by the Romans, under the later
Emperors; or else by Athelstane the Saxon, when he had subdued the Cornish men:
yet considering, on one side, that the Romans used not to eternize their
victories here, or else where, by any such Trophies; and, on the other, that
there was a time, when the Danes also had not only Cornwall, but all England
beside, under their barbarous subjection; and that this Monument does in all
particulars correspond with the Courts of Elections Royal in Denmark, of which
I am now speaking; considering this, I say, no reason appears to the contrary,
but I may assent to the opinion of Wormius, that it was, after a great defeat
of the English Saxons, by his Countrymen, erected for the Election of their
own King, and the investiture of him with the sovereignty of his newly acquired
Principality.

Here, perhaps, You Will be a little surpised, if I adventure to make our
Stone-heng it self bring up the rear of this last and most Gigantique division
of Danique Antiquities. But, it is my Conjecture; the ultimate scope of my so
laborious Enquiry; the point in which all the lines of this long discourse
concentre. Wherefore, having now at length brought you to a place, where You
may at once behold the strength of all those several Reasons, that conspired to
suggest that opinion to me: it is fit I should draw them together in as small a
compass, as I can, and so present them to your consideration, while what has
been delivered both of all the Danish Unlettered Monuments in general, and in
particular of their Courts for Election of Kings, is yet fresh in your memory.
And this, I conceive, may be most concisely, and most advantagiously effected,
by way of Parallel, or Comparison, in this plain and easy Method.

The Ancient Courts of Parliament in Denmark always STONE-HENG likewise I. I.
WEre situated in large and open Plains not far from some Town, of competent
reception, at least for people of the best Quality: and STands in a spacious
Plain, about two miles distant from Ambresbury, anciently a Town of great note:
and II. II. In, or near to the middle of the Kingdom; that such as were
summoned to convene, upon the Election of a King, or other affair of public
importance, might repair thither with equal convenience: and In a mediterranean
or mid-land Country; for so Camden calls Wiltshire: and III. III. Upon a gently
rising ground, for the advantage of prospect, and that the Common people
assembled to confirm the suffrages of the Electors, by their universal applause
and congratulatory acclamations; might see and witness the solemn manner of the
Election. Upon a plot of ground somewhat more eminent, than the circumjacent
Plain, which enlarges the prospect of the Pile, and which cannot be approached
but by an easy ascent, on all sides. IV. IV. Were open on the Top, and sides;
that so the King elect standing in the middle, might be beheld from all
quarters of the neighboring Plain; and the Votes of the Electors the better
heard by the multitude, standing round about, at a becoming distance. Is
uncovered above, or roofless, and environed not with continued walls, but
stones pitched upright; so that such as stand on any side without, may perceive
what is done within. V. V. Made only of huge stones, the largest that could
possibly be found any where in the Country; rude, unhewn, of no certain figure.
Made of stones of vast magnitude; and unhewn, as they came from the Quarry, of
no regular figure: and VI. VI. And these set upright, at equal distance each
from other, in a Circle; that so the Electors standing upon them might make a
round: These set in round, equally distant among themselves, and perpendicular;
VII. VII. With one stone taller and bigger than the rest, erected in the
Center, for the King to stand upon, and show himself to the people, at the time
of his Inauguration, and receive their joyful Acclamations, wishes of
felicity, and other testimonies of submission and fealty. With one Stone, in
the inmost circle (now lying along and broken, but at first set upright, and
then probably placed at the very center of the whole work) whose remaining
fragments put together make, according to Mr. Jones his account, sixteen feet
in length; Which is as likely to have been a Bongstolon (as the Danes call
theirs) or Kings throne, as an Altar. VIII. VIII. Without any Inscription, o
Letters engraven upon any one of the Stones: because the Fabrique was
sufficiently Known by its proper Form; and the Use in a peculiar manner
customary to the Danes. Having no Epigraph, cut, or trencht in any of the
Stones; as carrying a sufficient evidence of its Designment and use, in the
figure of its platform, and perfection in all essential parts; and speaking its
Founders, in the (in these days) well-understood language of its vastness, and
the similitude it bore to others erected by the same Nation in their own
Country.

Thus far, You see, the Parallel holds in all particulars, even to a high
degree of Resemblance; there being no one thing in the Antique Courts of
Parliament yet remaining in Denmark, which is not to be found also in our
Stone-heng. Somethings, I must acknowledge, are observed in This, more than in
those: and lest I might be thought over-favourable and partial to my own
Conceit; if I should omit to note them; I shall particularly observe what they
are.

The First apparent Difference, then, consists in this; that in Stone-heng the
number of stones is much greater. Which notwithstanding may without much
difficulty or straining be reconciled, by reflecting upon the Examples of the
Courts of Elections Royal in Denmark, newly alleged. For, though Ol. Wormius
says, that those consisted for the most part of twelve huge stones set
upright, after the manner of Pyramids, or Columns, in the circumference of a
Circle, and one, more eminent, in the Center: yet so far is he from confining
all of the same sort to that, or any other definite number, that he brings
several instances of some that came short of, and others that much exceeded it.
So that from thence we may safely collect, that in old time the Danes made
their Courts of this Kind, sometimes of fewer, sometimes of more Columns;
according to the scarcity, or abundance of fitting stones, in the Country, in
which they occasionally raised them; if not also according to the lesser or
greater number of Electors, who were to stand and vote upon them. Nor is it to
be unregarded, that at Stone-heng, the inmost Circle (if, at least, that may be
called a Circle, which really is a Polygon; such flat and broad Pillars, being,
in respect of their want of Convexity on their outsides, incapable to make a
perfect Circle) contains only twelve stones; which agrees exactly with the
most ancient patterns.

The Second is this, that Stone-heng has Three circular orders of Stones,
whereas the Others have no more than one. Which nevertheless may receive a
satisfactory Solution, as the former, either from the greater plenty of
convenient stones in Wiltshire, yea in sundry places not very remote from the
work it self, of which we shall shortly have occasion to take particular
notice: or from the greater number of Electors, who being of the Nobility, and
principal Officers of Armies, in process of time were multiplied to a more
numerous list, than in former ages, as may be observed in all other nations
also: or perhaps from hence also, that Stone-heng was designed both for a
Sepulchral Monument of one King, or General, there slain in battle; and for a
Court of Election for his immediate Successor. For, you may remember, I have
already acquainted You, how usual a thing it was amongst the Danes, to
celebrate the Funeral of one Prince, and solemnize the Inauguration of another,
at one and the same time, and in one and the same place; perpetuating the
memory of both, by circles of vast stones: and that I exemplified this in the
massive Tomb of King Harald Hyldetand, which was both a Sepulchral Monument for
Him, and a Court of Election for succeeding Kings, for many ages after. Nor
have I omitted, to supply you with descriptions of two famous Danique
Antiquities, that consist of a Threefold order of Stones, all of magnitude
equal to, if not much transcending those of Stone-heng.

The Third, and last point of Disparity is, that in Stone-heng, the outmost and
inmost rounds of Columns are furnished with Epistyles, or Architraves, resting
upon their heads; but none such are found upon the upright stones in any of the
Courts of Election in Denmark. But, this, as the two former, may be referred to
the great abundance of such stones in Wiltshire, more than in any province of
Denmark; where they were not to be had but rarely, as is intimated in that text
of Petrus Lindebergius formerly quoted, Dani cum, propter defectum Saxorum,
pyramides and obeliscos extruere minime potuerint, olim in memoriam Regum and
He o^um ex terra coacervata ingentem molem montis instar eminentem statuere;
The Danes when they could not, for want of stones, erect Pyramids and
Obelisces, heretofore they cast up a huge Mount of Earth, in memory of their
Kings and Heroes. Nor was it unusual to them, to raise up from the ground
stones of wonderful scantlings, and impose them, in manner of Architraves, upon
the tops of others; especially in their works of greatest Magnificence, and
where they intended to raise admiration in posterity, at the prodigious
strength, and extraordinary means required to advance such huge weights, to so
great a height: as I have formerly proved both by authentic Testimonies, and
agreeable Examples. Being, therefore, through the fortunate success of their
Arms, in possession of England, and assembling in Wiltshire, where they met
with store of materials fit for their purpose; and proposing to themselves to
erect a stately Monument, after the fashion of their own Country, with some
addition of vastness correspondent: it is not improbable, that they made choice
of this kind of Superstructure of Architraves, or plain long stones laid
overthwart upon the tops of the Columns; as that which might both hold some
analogy with other Monuments in their own Nation, and also be of considerable
use, in affording more convenient and firm footing for such persons of
honorable condition, who were principally to give their Votes at the Election
of the King, standing in round upon the stones; especially when their late
Victories had augmented the stock of their Nobility, and who, perhaps, were by
this time more than could stand upon the single Columns, and needed the
addition of Architraves to support them at the Solemnity.

And thus you see, how the points of Dissimilitude or Inconformity betwixt
Stone-heng, and its more antique Patterns in Dane-land, may be reasonably
solved. However, it cannot be denied, but they are, both in number, and weight,
much inferior to the particulars of the precedent Parallel or Resemblance: and
therefore ought not to be put in the Balance against them, nor to be thought of
such importance, as to detract from the verisimility of my Conjecture, that
Stone-heng was principally, if not wholly, designed and raised for a
Court-Royal.

But, this Discovery (at least, if it may deserve that name) is a work of
Supererogation, my undertaking from the first, having been only to make it
appear highly probable, that Stone-heng originally was a building of the Danes.
Which, if I mistake not, I have to a competent degree of satisfaction effected.

Nevertheless, I must not forget to observe one thing more, not unworthy
serious consideration: which is this, That among all our ancient Historians,
who wrote of the state of Britain as well before, as under the Romans and
Saxons, recording not only all the most memorable actions, passages, and
memorials whatever, but also inferior occurrents, and that even to
superfluity; no one has so much as mentioned Stone-heng, until a long time
after the Danes had conquered England, and were afterward forced to resign it
to the English again, upon the decease of Hardi Canute. For, the first Author,
in whom any word is found concerning it, was Geffery of Monmouth, who (together
with his fellow Historiographers, William of Malmesbury, Henry of Huntington,
and Simon of Durham) lived in the days of King Stephen. No contemptible
Argument, that in England no such Monument, as Stone-heng, was extant, until
the Danes had overrun and conquered this Nation: it being hard to conceive,
that those Writers, who committed to record matters of much smaller moment, and
(according to the Monkish humor of those darker times) so much delighted
themselves in relating wonderful accidents, and extraordinary adventures; would
have condemned to oblivion so eminent a thing as Stone-heng, and in a deep
silence have passed over the most admirable Antiquity of Great Britain.

And as for the vulgar conceit, that the great decay of the Structure shows it
to have been more antique, than the Danish Invasion and Conquest here; it may
be easily solved by answering, that the ruins evidence themselves to be the
effect, not of Time, (the stones themselves being of a temper so compact and
hard, that the iron teeth of that consuming Enemy cannot gnaw or corrode them;
nor any force of tempests impair them in the least) but of the sacrilegious
violence of Men, who have thrown down most of the Architraves, and removed many
of the more portable stones, converting them to private uses in Buildings,
Landmarks, etc. as appears by some yet to be seen in the neighboring Villages
and Fields.

And if the greatness of its ruins since cannot, certainly, much less ought
the Vastness and Stupendous Dimensions thereof, when it was entire and
complete, to be thought sufficient to dispossess the Danes of the honor of its
Extruction. For, of all Nations in the world, they appear to have taken the
most both of Delight and Pains, in searching after, and bringing together
mighty stones, whereof to make their Monuments: sparing nor time, nor cost, nor
labor, yea many times engaging the whole Nation almost, to contribute their
hands and purses together, toward the advancing such prodigious Piles. To
testify this, the History of Norwey assures us, in the life of Haraldus
Harfagre, that two petty Kings of that Country, consumed three whole years, and
a vast treasure, in casting up a Sepulchral Mount, and fencing it about with
stones of Gigantick magnitude. And Saxo Gnammaticus (lib. 10. Hist. Danic.)
writing the glorious actions of Harald, surnamed Blaatand, the son of Gormond
and Thyra, (daughter of K. Ethelred of England) among other his great exploits,
tells us, that He set his whole Army, and another of Oxen, on work, to remove,
from the Jutland shore, one immense Stone, or little Rock, and bring it to the
place, where the body of his Mother lay inhumed, that by erecting it over her
grave, he might at once eternize the memory of her virtues, and of his own
filial piety: being so far elevated with the glory of the attempt; that he
boastingly demanded of one of the Officers of his Navy,. who was present, An
tantam alias molem mortali manu tentatam conspexerit, If ever he had seen so
mountainous a Bulk undertaken to be transported by mortal hands. Upon occasion
of which very relation, Ol. Wormius (Mon. Danic. page 39.) concludes; Non
igitur in sumptibus parentalibus faciendis ulli genti cessisse videntur
Nostrates, and pluris hi Tumuli olim constiterunt, quam hodie a nobis
aestimantur; Our Countrymen, therefore, seem inferior to no Nation, in
sumptuous Funerals for their Ancestors and these Sepulchers heretofore cost
much more, than is in our days imagined. To confirm this assertion yet further,
give me leave to urge one most pertinent and pregnant testimony, out of the
Preface of the same Saxo Grammat. Danicam regionem Giganteo quondam cultu
exercitam, eximiae magnitudinis saxa veterum bustis ac specubus
affixatestantur. Quod si quis vi monstrosa patratum ambigat, quorundam montium
excelsa suspiciat, dicatque? si callet, quis eorum verticibus cautes tantae
granditatis invexerit. Inopinabile namque quivis miraculi hujus aestimator
advertet, ut molem super plano minime vel difficile mobilem, in tantam montanae
sublimitatis apicem simplex mortalitatis labor, aut usitatus humani roboris
conatus extulerit. Utrum vero talium rerum Authors post diluvialis
inundationis excursum Gigantes extiterint, an viri corporis viribus ante alios
praediti, parum notitiae traditum. That Daneland anciently was inhabited by
Giants, stones of wonderful magnitude, affixed to the Sepulchers and Caves of
our Ancestors, bear witness. Which if any doubt to have been effected by
monstrous strength, let him behold the tops of some Mountains, and tell, if he
be able, who brought thither Rocks of such immense greatness. For, every
competent Judge of this wonder will perceive it to exceed the imagination of
man, how the mere labor of Mortals, or usual effort of human strength could
advance to a point of such mountanous sublimity, a weight not at all, or not
without extreme difficulty, movable even on plain ground. But, whether the
Authors of these mighty works were Giants, living after the Deluge was fallen;
or Men endowed with extraordinary strength of body: is not to be known from
Story. Now, if any unprejudicate man, having heard these testimonies, shall
first enquire of our Historians, what mighty Armies, and numerous swarms of
people, were brought out of those Northern Countries to infest Britan, together
with their too prosperous successes in many fights; and then consider with
himself, what such vast numbers of men employed at once, and ambitiously
cooperating in such a work, might be able to perform, in a few years, yea
months, and that by mere natural strength, without any great skill in
Mechaniques, or the Art of removing great weights by Engines: certainly, he
will find no difficulty in admitting it to be as possible, and perhaps more
probable, for the Danes to have brought the great stones at Stone-heng to that
ground, and there erected them in the order described; as for the old Britans,
Romans, Saxons, or any other Nation.

Especially when it is most probable, that those stones were fetched no farther
off, than from Aibury or Rockly, about three or four miles distant from
Marleborow in the same County. For, in the Fields adjoining to those two
Villages, and principally the later (which as Camden observes, borrowed its
name from thence) there stand up great stones like Rocks, infinite in number;
all which perfectly resemble those at Stone-heng, in color, grain, hardness,
and branching of veins; and many of them also in figure and proportions:
brought thither, as is vulgarly, and perhaps not untruly, believed, by the
violence of the universal Deluge, and there left in Valleys, as the force of
the currents abated. These stones I my self have often seen, in journeys to
Bath from London; and comparing them with those at Stone-heng, found so great
an Analogy betwixt them; that ever since I have retained an opinion, the
Founders of that Monument furnished themselves with Materials from the
forenamed places; among so great a multitude selecting such, as in magnitude
and shape might best comport with their designs; and transporting them from
thence. But How? or by what means? That Is the greatest wonder of all!

Concerning this grand Difficulty, therefore, I say; That though the unlearned
Vulgar may be dispensed withal, to admire the transportation of such stones,
as an effect of more than Human Art and Strength; and accordingly to have
recourse to the ridiculous Fable of Merlin's bringing them out of Ireland by
Magique Diabolical, and the help of Spirits: Yet to Scholars and Travelers,
the matter will appear to come so short of the Miracle, as scarce to attain to
a Comparison with sundry other performances, not only of the Ancients, but of
the Moderns also, in the like kind.

For, among the Egyptian Monuments of extraordinary labor and magnificence,
we read in Herodotus (lib. 2. cap. 175.) of one huge Pyramid, built by King
Cleopes, in which was not one stone less than 30 foot long, and all of them
fetched from Arabia the Rocky: and how Amasis, another Egyptian Monarch, had a
house of pleasure for himself, cut out of one entire stone, 12 cubits long, 14
broad, and 8 high; and also made the Statue of a Sphinx, or Egyptian Cat, of
another single stone, which was in length 143 feet, in height 62, and in
compass of the Head 102. And Diodorus Siculus (Biblioth. lib. 1. sect. 2.)
reports of Sesostris, a third King of Egypt, that in a Temple of Vulcan at
Memphis, he erected two Statues, one for himself, another for his wife, each of
one solid Stone, and 30 cubits high.

Among the Jewish, we read in Josephus (de Bello Judaic. lib. 6. cap. 6.) of
three magnificent Towers built by Herod, in which every stone being of white
Marble, was 20 cubits long, 10 broad, and 5 high: and which was yet more
wonderful, the old wall it self was situated on a steep rising ground: so that
it is scarce imaginable by what puissant means so many stones of such prodigious
weight, should be taken whole out of the Quarrey, and conveyed to a place of
such eminent altitude.

Among the Grecian, we read in Pliny (lib. 36. cap. 14.) that in that so
famous Temple of Diana in Ephesus, were 127 Columns, each consisting of one
stone, 60 foot high; all taken out of the Quatries in Asia: not to insist upon
the mighty Rhodian Colossus, of which Fame has spoken with all her tongues.

Among the Roman, besides the prodigious brazen Colossus of Nero, described by
Suetonius, (in vit. Neron.) we read, in Pancirol. (de deperdit. titul. 31.) of
fundry Obelisks, made of so many whole stones; whereof some were 40, some 80,
others 90 cubits high; most of them brought from Egypt to Rome, and there set
up; with this Distich engraven upon one of them.

Si lapis est unus; dic, quafuit art levatus?
Sed si sunt plures; dic, ubi congeries?
If this be one stone; How 'twas raised, divine:
If more than one; show, where they do combine.
In Rome there stands also an Obelisk of one solid stone, a kind of Ophite, or
spotted Marble, anciently consecrated to the honor of the great Julius Caesar,
and erected on the left side of the Vatican Temple, in the Cirque of Nero; but,
in the year 1586, removed into a more eminent place, at the vast charge of Pope
Sixtus Quintus, and by the admirable skill of Dominicus Fontanus, an excellent
Architect. Which is in height 170 foot, above the base; in breadth, at the
bottom, 12 foot, and at the top 8; in weight 956148 pounds, besides the
heaviness of the Instruments or Engines used in raising it, that amounted to
1042824 pounds, according to the computation of Georgius Draudius, (in
adnotationib. ad Solini memorabilia, part. 1. fol. 131.) The removing of this
Obelisk was so rarea piece of Art, that besides the vast treasure he received
in reward, the Engineer got immortal renown thereby; no less than 56 learned
men expressly celebrating his praises; as Monantholius (in Comment. in Arist.
Mechanic. cap. 19.) remarketh. If so; what did those deserve, who first dug
the same out of the Marble Quarries of Egypt, and brought it entire to Rome?
Doubtless this was much the more glorious enterprise of the two.

Now, after these superlative Examples, what think you of our Stone-heng,
betwixt which and those, as to dimensions, is no more proportion, than betwixt
a Pygmie and a Giant? Can you allow it to have been so wonderful a task, for a
whole Army of Men, and multitudes of Oxen, to transport the stones thereof, in
a plain and champian Country; especially seeing the biggest of its stones
exceed not 12 Tun weight, and many of them not 2 Tun; and that the distance
from Rockley, and Aibury, from whence, it seems, they were fetched, to the
place where they were set up, is not above 20 miles at most? You Will object,
perchance; that those mighty works were performed by Nations, among which were
many excellent Mathematicians, and great Masters in the Art of Mechaniques, to
which all weights are easily moveable, and which contains Demonstrative Rules
how the strongest Oak may be torn up by the roots with a Horse-hair, as the
learned Author of Mathematical Magique has well observed, and clearly proved,
(book 1. chap. 14.): but this of Stone-heng by a rude and barbarous people,
utterly ignorant of such Machines and artificial helps. To this, therefore, I
answer; That it does not appear the Danes were so rude, as to have no
acquaintance at all with the use of Engines for the elevation of monstrous
weights: but rather the contrary, insomuch as their carrying even Rocks
themselves from the Seashore to the very heart of their Country, of which I
have formerly spoken, sufficiently intimates their being versed in the use of
the Leaver, Roller, Wheel, Pulley, Wedge, and Screw, which are fundamental
Faculties of Mechaniques, it being scarce conceivable, how otherwise they
should raise such portentous Monuments, as they did. But allowing them to have
been as Unskilful, as You please, in such Instruments; yet consider how
Numerous they were, and how strenuously great swarms of them used to join hands
together in such attempts; and you have not forgot the old Verse, Multorum
manibus grande levatur onus, Many hands make light work. What prodigious
matters may be effected by mere strength and hand-force of great Multitudes,
without Rules of Art, may be discerned from the savage Indians; who being
destitute of other Mathematiques, but what Nature dictated to them, and wanting
the advantage of Engines, did yet by their simple toil and indefatigable
diligence, remove stones of incredible greatness. For, Acosta (Histor. Indic.
lib. 6. cap. 14.) relates, that he measured one stone brought to Tiaguanaco,
which was 38 foot long, 18 broad, and 6 thick: and that in their stateliest
Edifices were many other of much vaster magnitude.

To conclude, therefore, with a short review of what has hithert been
delivered at large, and assist your Judgment, by relieving your Memory;
considering (1) that of all Nations in the world, none was so much addicted to
Monuments of huge and unhewn stones, as the Danes appear to have been, for many
hundred of years together; (2) that they used to set such up, not only in
their own Country, but in all other places also, wherever the fortune of war
had at any time made their adventures and atchievments memorable; and more
particularly in England and Scotland; (3) that in Denmark, at this day, there
stand many stupendous Piles of stones, in most particulars agreeing with that,
of which I have now discoursed; (4) that upon a strict and impartial inquest,
neither the ancient Britains, nor Romans, nor Saxons, are found to have any
justifiable title to the honor of founding that of Stone-heng; (5) that no one
of our old Historians made mention of any such work, until long after the Danes
had acquired the Sovereign Power in this Island, and left sundry memorials of
their victorious Aimies; (6) that the great impairment of the Fabric since
that time of the Danique conquest, does not evince it to be of greater
antiquity; (7) that neither the Magnificence of the same, at first; (8) nor the
vastness of strength, and skill in Engines, required to the transportation and
elevation of stones of such prodigious weight; are sufficient Arguments to the
contrary: considering these things, I say, why may I not conjecture, that the
Danes, and only the Danes were the Authors of Stone-heng? Sure I am of thus
much, that this Opinion of mine, if it be erroneous, is yet highly plausible:
having this advantage over the others concerning the same obscure subject, that
it is not so easily to be refuted. Nor is it arrogance in me, to affirm, that
if I have been deceived in entertaining this conceit in the place of Truth; it
was because I found it in the livery and colors of Truth. However, I expect
you should consider; it is no dishonor to even the best Marksman, not to hit
the white, when he is forced to shoot in the dark. Which consideration being
alone sufficient to secure my wel-intended endeavors, from too severe and
disingenious censure, in case it shall hereafter be discovered, that I have
been mistaken in the Main thing sought after, namely, the Authors of our
Antiquity: I doubt not, but your Candor will extend it also to the favorable
construction of my suppositions concerning the Circumstances.

In the strength of this confidence, therefore, I adventure to acquaint you
moreover with my conjecture concerning the TIME, when Stone-heng was first set
up: which I take to be in the beginning of the reign of that Excellent Prince,
Alfred, or Alured; who as he was the first anointed King of this Island, so
was he the first Learned King, and most munificent Patron to Scholars, that
ever swaied the Scepter of Britain. For, all our Chronicles agreeingly deliver,
that He was scarcely seated in his throne, when there came over greater swarms
of Danes, than ever before, to infest his dominions; and that after many
unfortunate battails with them, he was reduced to that extremity, that leaving
his large Monarchy to the rage and rapine of those insulting Pagans, he fled
for safety of his life into the Marshes of Sommersetshire, where for two years
he lay concealed in a poor disguise, susteining himself by fishing and fowling.
Among other adventures that befell this glorious person in this dark Eclipse,
it is not unworthy remembrance, that on a time as he was sitting in the chimney
corner in the cottage of a Cow-heard (who had entertained him into his service)
and busied in trimming his bow and arrows; a Cake of dough lying to be baked on
the hearth before him, chanced to be burned; which the goodwife imputing to his
neglect, in great fury cast away his bow and arrows, and sharply checking him,
said; Thoufellow, do thou see the bread burn before thy face, and wilt not
turn it? and yet thou art glad to eat it, be sore it be half baked. Shortly
after this, learning policy from adversity, and deriving courage from
necessity; he ventured, in the habit of a common Minstrel, to enter into the
Danes Camp (in Wiltshire, and probably not far from the place, where Stone-heng
stands) and having viewed the manner of their encamping, and observed their
security, he returned back to several of his Lords retreated into the Island
called Edlingsey, environed with two Rivers, Thane and Parret, in
Somersetshire, and acquainting them in how careless and open a posture he found
the Enemy; recollected the scattered remains of his forces, and with these
surprising the Danes, and putting them first into a panick terror, and then to
flight, gave them so considerable a defeat, that they immediately submitted to
a Treaty, and delivered Hostages for performance of conditions.

Now, considering the extreme low ebb of Fortune, to which this excellent King
was at that time brought; and the high flood of prosperity that in the mean
while had advanced the Danes over all parts of his Dominions, insomuch that
nothing seemed wanting to complete their conquest, but only to find out the few
Defendants who remained in obscurity; and withal reflecting upon the former
mentioned Custom of that: ambitious and martial Nation, to erect Courts Royal
of huge stones, according to the manner described, for the Election of their
Kings, in all Countries, where the happy success of their Arms had given them
a title to Sovereignty: I am apt to believe, that having then overrun the
whole Kingdom, except only Somersetshire, and encamping their main Army in
Wiltshire, for near upon two years together; and setting up their rest in a
confidence to perpetuate their newly acquired power; they employed themselves,
during that time of leisure and jollity, in erecting Stone-heng, as a place
wherein to elect and inaugurate their supreme Commander, King of England: the
weakness of the distressed Alfred affording them a fit opportunity, and that
country yielding them fit materials for so great and stupedious a work. Nor is
it improbable, that the great supinity and disorder, in which the Royal Spy
found them, when the magique of his Fiddle had charmed them into an
imperception of the majesty of his person, and procured him a free welcome into
their Camp; might be occasioned by the jubilee they celebrated, after they had
finished that laborious task, and therein newly crowned their King, after a
triumphal manner, such as at once corresponded with the fashion of their
Ancestors, and expressed the profuseness of their public joy. For many of our
Historians relate, that the Danish Army was at that time let loose to luxury
and revelling; and that the unknown Musician was brought to play before their
King, Gormund, in his tent, during a long and magnificent feast. But, perhaps,
I may be thought too bold, in daring, from such slender passages and
circumstantial hints, thus precisely to guess at the Age of this Antiquity;
concerning whose Original neither History, nor Tradition has left any glimpse
of light, whereby the inquisitive might be guided through the darksome vale of
Uncertainty, to the delightful mansion of Truth. Leaving every man, therefore,
to the liberty of his own thoughts, touching this particular, as also whatever
else has been said of the Monument it self, and its original Designation; I
here put a period to this Discourse, wherein though I have adventured to
contend with Oblivion; I had no design to usurp upon the Judgment of others.

(...)

