ARTICLES OF INQVIRY Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical: EXHIBITED To the
Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish within the Diocese of
LICHFIELD and COVENTRY; In the first EPISCOPAL VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend
Father in God JOHN By Divine Providence Lord Bishop of LICHFIELD and COVENTRY,
In the first year of his Consecration, An. Dom. 1662.

LONDON, Printed for John Place. 1662.

The Oath to be given unto the Churchwardens, and Sidemen, of every Parish.
YOu shall Swear to inquire with the best diligence that you may, and to make a
true Answer unto every Article of this Book now given you in Charge; Presenting
every Person of your Parish that has done any Offense, or omitted any Duty,
therein mentioned. And this you shall do, without any Favor or hatred, or fear
of Displeasure; So help you God, and the contents of his Holy Gospel.

ARTICLES OF INQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of LITCHFIELD and COVENTRY.
Inquiries about the Church and Churchyard.
I. IS your Parish Church and Chancel decently kept for Gods Honor? Are the
Roofs, Walls, Pavements, and Windows well repaired? are the Ten Commandments,
Lords Prayer, and the Creed, drawn out in fair Letters, in convenient places?
and are the Kings Arms set up?

II. HAVE you made Leavies for the reparation of the Church, and other holy
uses? And are there any that refuse to pay the proportion leavied upon them?

III. HAVE you a Font of Stone decently covered, standing toward the lower end
of the Church, for the Administration of Baptism? Have you a comely Table
placed conveniently in Church or Chancel for the use of the Lords Supper? Have
you a comely Carpet of Silk or good Stuff for that holy Table, with a fair
Linen Cloth to spread upon it in the time of Administration? And have you an
handsome Cup of silver for the Wine, and a Cover of silver to the same to put
the Bread on? And have you one or more Flaggons of Pewter or better metal for
that use?

IV. ARE your reading Desk and Pulpit conveniently set up, and placed, for the
use of public Prayer and Sermons? And has your Pulpit a Cushion, and comely
covering before it?

V. HAVE you in your Church the Common Prayer Book of the largest Volume, set
forth by Authority, with the Books of Divine Service for the fifth of November,
the thirtieth of January, and the nine and twentieth of May? And have you the
Bible in Folio, fairly bound, of King James's Translation? Have you also a
decent Surplice, (one or more) for your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, to
wear in the time of all public Ministrations?

VI. ARE the Tombs, Monuments, Gravestones of the Dead in your Church, or
Churchyard, preserved; and not suffered to be broken, taken down, or removed?

VII. HAVE you a Book of Parchment, wherein be Registered the Christnings,
Marriages, and Burials in your Parish? Have you a strong Chest, with three
Locks, wherein to preserve your Church Furniture? and a Box for Alms, placed in
a fit place for the Relief of the P^or?

VIII. IS the House and Outhouses of your Minister in good and sufficient
repair? Does he preserve the Gardens, Orchards, and Glebe belonging to him,
without embezeling, changing, or any way damnifying them?

IX. IS the Churchyard decently kept, and well fenced to keep out Beasts?

Inquiries about the Parson, Vicar, Curate, Lecturer.
I. HAVE the abovenamed received Episcopal Ordination, according to the Laws
of the Kingdom?

II. CAN you tell who did present your Parson, or Vicar, to his Benefice? Have
you heard, or known, that he came Simoniacally? Was he inducted into his
Benefice before sufficient witness? And did he read the nine and thirty
Articles before or at Morning or Evening Prayer? And did he give his consent to
them?

III. HAS he read the Book of Common Prayer as it is enjoined by the late Act
of Uniformity for public Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments, etc. on
some Sunday before the four and twentieth of August last past, and did, and
does he wear the Surplice while he performed that Office, and other Offices
mentioned in that Common Prayer Book?

IV. HAS he published his consent unto the said Book on some Sunday before the
24th. of August abovenamed, openly in time of Divine Service, and has he
subscribed to the Declaration as it is expressed in the 77. page of the
abovenamed Statute, and manifested it to the Congregation openly?

V. DOES he Preach a Sermon on every Sunday, or procure a Sermon then to be
Preached? Or else sometimes read one of the Homilies which the Church has
appointed? And does he often on Sundays and Holy Days before Divine Service,
instruct his Parishioners in the Catechism of the Church?

VI. DOES he read the Service appointed for the fifth of November, thirtieth of
January, twenty ninth of May? and does he keep the yearly Perambulation and
Rogation days before the Feast of our Lords Ascension?

VII. IF your Parson or Vicar keep a Curate, is he of godly Life and sufficient
Learning? Is he allowed by the Bishop, and can you tell whether the said Curate
have a competent allowance according to the value of the Living?

VIII. DOES your Parish maintain a Lecturer? Is he a Virtuous and Orthodox
Divine? Is he Licensed by the Bishop? Does he read the full Divine Service of
Common Prayer once a Month at the least, wearing a Surplice?

IX. DO you observe, to your best understanding, that your Parson, Vicar,
Lecturer, or Curate, do Preach the true Word of God? Or do they, to your
judgment, (having consulted with other grave Parishioners,) vent dangerous
Opinions, derogating to the Glory of God, and a pious Life? Do they teach
Sedition directly against his Majesty, his Laws, and Government, or do you
note, that indirectly they cast out Seditious glances against the Civil State,
or Government Ecclesiastical?

X. DOES your Minister celebrate the Lords Supper in the Church, according to
the Service of the Common Prayer Book, often every year? Does he repulse them
from it that are scandalous by the sentence of the Laws? Does he Baptize such
Infants of his Parish according to the Service of the Common Prayer, as, upon
warning given before, are brought on Sundays or Holy Days to the Church with
Godfathers and Godmothers, and upon lawful Summons does he Baptize Infants
at home in case of danger and necessity?

XI. DOES he visit the Sick at their Houses, when he is required, upon lawful
Summons? Does he Pray with them, Exhort them to faith and repentance, and
comfort them? Does he give them the Holy Communion, professing faith in Christ,
and sorrow for their sins, if they require it; and does he Exhort them to
Brotherly Love, and works of Charity, if they be able to bequeath a portion to
pious uses?

XII. DOES he prepare the young Men and Maidens of the Parish to be confirmed
by the Bishop? Does he Marry none clandestinely, but at due hours in the
Church, and that upon Banes thrice published on Sundays or Holy Days, or
License obtained from the Spiritual Court? And does he bury the Dead according
to the Book of Common Prayer?

XIII. IS your Minister, Lecturer, Curate, a man of sober, chaste, just,
unblameable Life? and spare not to present him, or them, that are not every way
examples of Godliness.

XIV. DOES your Minister with the Churchwardens take care duly every year, to
send in the names of all such in his Parish, as have been Baptized, Married,
Buried, Excommunicated, that they may be enrolled in the Bishops Registry?

XV. DOES your Minister maintain peace with his Neighbors? and study to keep
them in peace as much as in him lies? Does he take diligent care to reduce all
Sectaries, Separatists, and Refractory persons to the o^edience of the Doctrine
and Government of this Church? And does he offer himself being an able Learned
man, to confer with Popish Recusants to convert them, and to bring them into
the bosom of this Church?

Inquiries about the Parishioners.
I. DO all your Parishioners of due Age resort to the Divine Service and
Sermons in your Church on Sundays and Holy Days? and on Wednesday and Friday
mornings, if conveniently they can?

II. DO they or any of their servants occupy themselves in bodily Labors on
Sundays or Holy Days? do they open their Shops and sell Wares on those days?
or do Vintners, Victuallers, Innkeepers, or others, receive any into their
Houses to tipple and waste time idly on those days? except they be
Travelers that are upon a Journey in necessary occasions.

III. DO your Parishioners in the time of Divine Service, Sermon, or Homily,
behave themselves reverently? Men and Youths with their Hats of, both Sexes
giving due attention, none disturbing holy Duties, by talking, walking,
removing, going out, or using any other offense? and do they all kneel, stand
up, make answers in time of Divine Service, as you find it appointed in the
Rubricks of the Common Prayer Book?

IV. SUCH as may be discerned to be Papists, Heretics, Scismaticks,
Anabaptists, Separatists, Quakers and the like, are not only to be presented,
but twelve pence is to be Leavied on every such person, and so many of them for
every Sunday as absent themselves from the Church, and to be employed to the
maintenance of the Poor, whereof account is to be made to the Justices of the
Peace.

V. SUCH are to be presented as are known and much suspected to be Incestuous,
or to be Married in Incestuous or unlawful degrees of Blood; likewise you
ought to present known Adulterers, Fornicators, Blasphemers, common Swearers,
Drunkards, Sorcerers, or Resorters to Sorcerers.

VI. ARE there any above the Age of sixteen years in your Parish, and
especially that have been examined by your Minister in the Catechism before,
that do not come to the Lords Supper, to partake it reverently upon their knees
three times every year at the least, the Feast of Easter, or the time
thereabout, being one?

VII. ARE there any in your Parish that keep their Children unbaptized? enquire
diligently, and return the Parents or Governors names, and the list of those
Children by such names as you can learn.

VIII. DO all Women that have been safely delivered come to the Church in due
time to partake of the Office of Thanksgiving after the Orders of the
Common Prayer, and do such Women pay their accustomed Duties?

IX. DO your Parishioners bring their Dead to be decently Buried after the
Service of the Church in their own Parish grounds? or if they carry the Dead
away to be Buried in some other place, whether they be Lodgers, or other
Strangers, do they first obtain leave of the Minister of the Parish, and have
his Certificate?

X. DO any of your Parish usually frequent other Parish Churches, and absent
themselves from their own?

XI. ARE there any that keep private Conventicles in their Houses, or abroad,
which are resorted to, by those that are known or suspected for Sectaries, or
any way disaffected to the present Church of England?

XII. DO your Parishioners pay their Easter Offerings, and accustomed Duties,
called Vicarage Tithes, or by any other name, to their Minister?

XIII. ARE there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish, that
are not proved by a lawful Judge, or do you know or hear of any goods
administered without due grant from the Ordinary?

XIV. WHAT Legacies have been given to pious uses in your Parish, which are
utterly defrauded or not employed to the right use according to the Will of the
Doner?

XV. ARE your Seats and Pews in the Church decently kept? And are the
Parishioners placed in them without offense and contention?

Inquiries about Church Officers, and other Persons.
I. IF any Stranger come to Preach in your Parish Church or Chapel, on Sundays
and Holy Days, at Christnings, Funerals, Marriages, or any other occasion, do
the Churchwardens demand to see his Orders and License to Preach which he had
from the Bishop? and if he can show none, do you inhibit him from Preaching?

II. DO you suffer excommunicated Persons to be Buried in any part of your
Church, Chancel, or Churchyard?

III. DOES your Parish Clark, and Sexton, (if you have any such) do their
Duties obediently and diligently? Are they of honest Life and Conversation? Is
your Parish Clark duly chosen by the Minister? And is he allowed by the
Ordinary? Can he write and read? Does he make Responsions to the Hymns and
other Suffrages of the Liturgy?

IV. IS there a School public or private in your Parish? Is the Schoolmaster,
(and Usher if he have one) allowed by the Bishop or his Chancellor? Does he
breed his Scholars Religiously? and does he teach them the Church Catechism?

V. HAVE you any Physician, Surgeon, or Midwife in your Parish, that
practice without License?

VI. ARE your Churchwardens duly chosen in the week after Easter day, and
after the custom and manner of the Parish?

VII. HAVE the Churchwardens, who are to surrender their places upon the
Election of new ones, given up their accounts to the Parishioners? and are
their accounts allowed? or have they falsified their trust? wherein? and how
much?

VIII. ALSO have your Churchwardens been diligent to repair the Church, to
keep it decent and comely? Have they preserved the Font for Baptism fit and
handsome for that use, likewise have they looked carefully to the Communion
Table, to the Plate, and all Vtensills pertaining to it? And have they provided
such fine white Bread, and good Wine, as was fit for the Sacrament, according
to advice taken with the Minister?

LEt the Churchwardens and Sidemen inquire Diligently what answers they will
and can give to all these particulars upon Oath, setting the fear of God and
the good of his Church before their Eyes.

FINIS.

