The Kings Majesty's SPEECH On the 2. day of December, 1641. To the Honorable
House of PARLIAMENT.

Likewise a true Relation of all those cruel Rapes and Murders which have
lately been committed by the Papists in JRELAND.

With the Names of several Merchants that were taken transporting Ammunition
to Jreland, for the use of the Rebels.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

His Majesty's SPEECH the 2. of December.
I Am to speak a word unto you, since J have bin so long absent from you; It
is no way in answer to the Learned Speech of Mr. Speaker: But yet J shall touch
one point of it concerning Ireland; But first I must tell you, though J have
been absent longer then indeed J did expect, or could have bin expected by you,
yet J stayed no longer in Scotland then the necessity of those affairs would
absolutely permit, and indeed I have therein done so much good, that J will
boldly affirm unto you, that J have left the people a most contented and happy
Nation; That if J did misreckon a little in time J do not misreckon in the end.

Now though J have deceived you a little of your expectation in point of time,
J confess you have deceived my expectation in finding of business here; for J
had thought to have found things in quietness and settled both for Religion
and peace of this Kingdom, but I found distractions, such as J could not
expect, Jn so much, as the Parliament was thought fit to be guarded, this I
speak not any way to seek out a fault, or to have any distrust of the hearty
affections of my Subjects, but on the contrary when J came here (as you all
see) J found the affection of my people unto me, to my great comfort.

Now I assure you, J come with the same affection that you or any good people
of the world could wish, for I am so far from disliking any thing that J have
done hitherto, that if it were to do again (in the favor and good of my
people) that I protest J would do it again.

And whatsoever may be justly expected of me for the securing of Religion and
Liberty of my people, I shall not fail to do it, and therefore I shall
mention no particular at this time, but only that great particular of Jreland,
which Mr. Speaker did mention, of which I do not doubt, but you have had a
great care, yet me thinks, things go on slowly; and J mention this more
reasonably, because a couple of Noblemen are come out of Scotland according to
the Petition and Jnstructions, which it pleased both Houses to send unto me at
Barwicke, which I instantly dispatched to the Chancellor, who now have the
disposing of all things, J spoke to them this morning, and I decreed both
Houses to appoint a select Committee and make an end of that business with
them.

J have but this word more to say, that I assure you, I have no other end but
the happiness of my People, for their flourishing, is my greatest Glory, and
their affection, my greatest strength.


