An Humble REMONSTRANCE OF THE Commissioners of the General Assembly, met at
Edinburgh, the 13th of October 1647. And since concluded.

Concerning The KINGS Majesty's ANSWER to the PROPOSITIONS of both Kingdoms
for Peace.

ALSO About the ARMY in England, and touching some things in Relation to the
PARLIAMENT.

WITH Their Desires presented to the Right-Honourable the Committee of Estates
for the Kingdom of Scotland.

By the Appointment of the Commissioners of the General Assembly.

Signed, ALEXANDER KER.
November 1. 1647.
Imprimatur,

Gilbert Mabbott.





Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1647. And Reprinted at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, 1647.

TO THE RIGHT-HONOURABLE THE COMMITTEE of ESTATES: The humble Remonstrance of
the Commissioners of the General Assembly, met at Edinburgh the 13th. of
October. 1647.
AS there has been very lately a public and solemn Thanksgiving, for the
great mercies and deliverances, which God has wrought for this Nation, after
he had brought it very low, so the dangers which are interwoven with our
deliverances are very great, and still growing greater. This also comes forth
from the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in Council, and excellent in
working, that we may not be secure, or think that all our storms are
over-past, but may serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling, and be
the more stirred up to watchfulness, circumspection, and zeal, in all the
duties which the condition of this time calls for.

We therefore in the discharge of that great trust which is committed to us,
and according to the duty of watchmen set upon this Watchtower, can not be
silent in a time of so great danger, but hold it incombent to us, humbly and
faithfully to report, and Remonstrate to your Lordships that the dangers of the
true reformed Religion, and cause of God in this whole Island, whereby the late
general Assembly their Declaration, communicated to Your Lordships, discovered
to be in many respects so great, and so imminent, as might justly occasion to
your Lordships, in your wisdoms, to think of some more effectual means, and
remedies for preventing of removing of such dangers, although they could not
now be aggravated by any new emergents. Nevertheless we have too great cause
to conceive that the dangers of Religion are now grown greater, then they were
at the time of the General Assembly.

And even since the time of publishing your Lordships Act, concerning the
disbanding of the Army in this Kingdom, The wise and mavelous providence of
God is making answer and Proclamation aloud in both our ears, that the danger
is become greater, and more imminent, for the waters of the present deluge, are
grown many cubits higher since that time; for evidence whereof, the Kings
Majesty's late Answer to the Propositions of both Kingdoms, may be instead of
many Demonstrations. It is our great grief that we have cause to say so, but
we must speak to the matter as it is, and unless we would shut our eyes, we
cannot but behold in that Answer a threefold growing danger to Religion. For,

1. His Majesty professes, That as when the Propositions were offered to him
at New Castle, he could not agree to some of them without violation of his
Conscience and Honor; So neither can he agree to others of them now,
conceiving them more disproportionable to the present condition of Affairs
then when they were formerly presented to him; as being destructive to the
principal Interests of the Army: So that his Majesty's dis-agreeing being now
more enlarged, and of a greater latitude then before, if his Majesty's former
Answer to the Propositions was justly conceived to be unsatisfactory in point
of Religion, this last does much less satisfy; For although his Majesty did
not in his former Answer agree to the Covenant, and other material
Propositions, concerning Religion, yet there was in that Answer some part of
satisfaction, even to the Propositions concerning Religion: Whereas in the late
Answer, even that part of satisfaction is by the aforesaid expression
unsettled, instead of being adhered unto: We shall pass that clause in the
Answer which owneth the Interests of the Army, so far as to prejudice the
more public Interests of both Kingdoms in those Propositions agreed upon
after mature deliberation by both Parliaments.

2. His Majesty's waving the Propositions of both Kingdoms, and pressing the
Proposalls of the Army to be the subject of a Treaty, does yet further
increase the danger of Religion, seeing those Proposals, as they omit and
abandon the former desires of both Kingdoms, in point of Religion, so they
cannot avoid (as the words stand) the continuing of Prelacy, the Tolleration of
Heresies and Sects, and the taking away of the Ordinance injoyning the taking
of the Covenant, as is more fully expressed in the Declaration of the late
General Assembly.

3. His Majesty's Answer does also divide that joint and common Interest of
both Kingdoms in the Propositions, which was formerly the ground of a joint
Treaty of both with his Majesty: Hereby (whatever may be the prejudice
otherwise) surely Religion will suffer not a little, forasas the Propositions
concerning the Covenant of the three Kingdoms, and the uniformity between them
in Religion, and by this means in effect excluded from the Treaty; The joint
desires, and common cancernments of the Kingdoms in point of uniformity in
Religion, being no part of the subject of a Treaty, with either Kingdom
severally, but of a Treaty with both jointly.

Yet his Majesty's Answer to the Propositions, is not the only danger to be
now looked on in this business, for ever since that Answer was given, this
common cause and Covenant has been yet further weakened, and dangerously
wounded by the late strong indevours in England, to move the Parliament to
establish by their Authority, a tolleration of Sectaries, and to slight and lay
aside such of the Propositions of peace as concern the Covenant, and the joint
interest of the Kingdoms in Religion.

It adds grief to our sorrow, that we have cause to mention the new
persecutions raised there by mean^s of the sectaries, against diverse who have
been zealous and active for the good ^f Religion, King, and Kingdoms Yea,
they who plead so much for Liberty of Conscience to themselves, allow so
little of it to others who differ from them, that they can now make up a charge
either of constructive Treason, or of high crimes and misdemeanors against
them, for such particulars as do upon the matter a mount to no more but
zealous endeavors in opposing the way of the Sectaries.

Neither common sense, nor christian sympathy can suffer us to conceive that
the cause of Religion is in no greater danger then before, when persecution is
growing daily more and more hot against such as have most appeared against, or
endeavored to hinder the late unsufferable exhorbitances of the Sectaries.

While the danger of Religion is thus increased abroad, we cannot say that it
is grown any whit less at home, but rather greater: for besides the dangerous
influence which the growing power of the enemies of the Covenant in England is
like to have upon this Kingdom, the Malignant faction at home, has not so
much decreased in profession, as increased in design and practice against this
cause and Covenant; surely they who are disaffected in this Nation, being
many, are as malicious as before, when very shortly after the expedition into
England, perceiving no force within the Kingdom to resist them, they took
Arms, and disturbed the public peace: And if they were so ready to stir
when that Army was, but out of the Kingdom, how much more if it shall be
disbanded? Some enemies are still in the feilde, and in actual rebellion
within this Kingdom; And there is too great cause to fear that many others
who retain their former principles and continue in their former desig^es
against this cause, shall not be slow to take up Arms, if your Lordships lay
them down.

And so much the more may this be expected, because as their pride and
insolency is of late grown more intolerable upon hopes of disbanding the
Army, so there are many of them enraged as Bears robbed of their whelps or as
Wolves of the evening, being also desperate of mending their broken Estates,
except it be i^ public combustione; others of them are animated and employed
by the great favor and indulgence which has been showed toward them in
their delinquencies, in so much that they are thereby hardened from repenting
of their Rebellion, or compliance with Rebels, and even bless themselves for a
better lot, easier yoke, and lighter burd^n th^n those who have beer most
real and active for the Covenant.

These dangers of Religion we have insisted upon, as being most proper for us
to speak to, and not as we were insensible of the great danger of the Kings
person, and of Monarchical Government, for preserving of which according to our
Covenant, our prayers and best endeavors shall not be wanting.

And now the danger of Religion in all this being so great, and the grounds of
our fears and apprehensions being so pregnant, we earnestly beseech, and
humbly obtest your Lordships in the bowels of Jesus Christ, and by the vows of
God which are upon you, that as your Lordships desire God, and your own
consciences, and the posterity may not afterward charge upon you, the ruin of
Religion, King and Kingdoms, so your Lordships may be very tender and
conscionable, that no such design be entertained, or get place among you, as
tends to the dis-abling of this Church and Kingdom from an effectual
prossecuting, and promoting of the ends of the Covenant, or to the
strengthening and inabling the enemies thereof by affording them the
opportunity which they wait for, to disturb again the peace, and to destroy
the present Reformation.

These and no better effects can be looked for, if the Army in this Kingdom,
which has been so blessed of God, and so faithful to you, shall be
disbanded before this cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, the
Reformation and defense of Religion, the Peace and safety of the Kingdoms, the
Honor and happiness of the King, be settled upon a firm foundation.

In this our humble desire we are not biassed with any respect to any
particular party or interest, our witness is in Heaven, and within our breasts,
that we speak for the interest of Religion and of the cause of God; neither
does that we desire tend to a new Wane, but to the preventing of a new war,
nor to the increasing of burdens in the Kingdom, but to the preventing of
greater burthers: Nor is it ourdesire alone, but many others are equally
sensible with us of the great danger which may accrue to this cause from the
disbanding of that Army.

It is not un-observed that most of those who are active for the laying down
of Arms, are such as were against the taking up of Arms in this Cause: However
since there can be no assurance in human reason that the Kingdom shall reed no
Army, we humbly offer it to your Lordships most serious thoughts, bow far a
new state of the question, setting aside the Covenant (while some late debates,
both here and in England, give us cause to fear) and the raising or employing
another Army, (which we also apprehend and expect, if this Army was once
disbanded) may be prejudicial and even destructive to this Cause and
Covenant, for which this Nation has done and suffered so much.

Having thus discharged our Consciences we humbly leave all this to be well
weighed by your Lordships, and we pray the Lord himself to guide your
Lordships council that you may be like the wise men of Issachar having
understanding of the times, what Israel ought to do, and what they ought not
to do

ALEXANDER KER.

FINIS.

