A COPY Of certain LETTERS, Which Manifest the Design of the late discovered
PLOT.

FIRST, His MAJESTY'S Letter to the City of LONDON.

Secondly, The Lord DIGBIES Letter to Sir Bazill Brook.

Lastly, Other intercepted Letters touching the same Business.

Printed in the Year, 1643.

His Majesty's Letter.
TRusty and welbeloved, We greet you well.
When We remember the many Acts of Grace and favor We and Our Royal
Predecessors have conferred upon that Our City of London, and the many Examples
of eminent Duty and Loyalty, for which that City has been likewise famous,
We are willing to believe, notwithstanding the great defection We have found
in that place, that all men are not so far degenerated from their Affection
to Us and to the Peace of the Kingdom, as to desire a continuance of the
miseries they now feel; and therefore being informed, that there is a desire in
some principal Persons of that City to present a Petition to Us, which may
tend to the procuring a good understanding between Us and that Our City,
wheret the Peace of the whole Kingdom may be procured We have thought fit to
let you know, That We are ready to receive any such Petition, and the Persons
who shall be employed to present the same to Us, shall have a safe Conduct; And
you shall assure all Our good Subjects of that Our City, whose hearts are
touched with any sense of Duty to Us, or of Love to the Religion and Laws
established, in the quiet and peaceable Fruition whereof they and their
Ancestors have enjoyed so great Happiness, That We have neither past any Act,
nor made any Profession or Protestation for the maintenance and Defense of the
true Protestant Religion, and the Liberty of the Subject, which We will not
most strictly and religiously observe; and for the which, We will not be
always ready to give them any security can be devised. And of these Our
Gracious Letters, We expect a speedy Answer from you. And so We did You
farewell.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, 28. December. 1643. To Our trusty and welbeloved,
Our Lord Major* and Aldermen of Our City of London, and to all other Our
welaffected Subjects of that City.

There was another Letter from the King to the City, dated the 2. of January
instant, verbatim as this is, only the last was thus directed, To Our trusty
and welbeloved, Our Lord Major, the Aldermen, and Common Council of Our City
of London.

The Lord Digbies Letter to Sir Bazil Brook.
SIR,
THe King and Queen have both commanded me to give you thanks in their name,
for your care and diligence in their service; and His Majesty has so much
confidence in your discretion and wariness not to be deluded, that in hopes of
the good effects toward a happy peace, which you seem to promise your self
from this negotiation; His Majesty is pleased to descend very far in writing so
gracious a Letter to those, who may seem to have deserved so ill of him.

I send you herewithall a Copy of the Letter it self, which varies only in
the style, not in the matter, from that draught which was sent down hither;
which, (if you like, and continue confidence, that it might be effectual to so
blessed an end, as Peace and Union) you are to deliver to those parties,
seconded with assurances of His Majesty's most gracious and sincere
inclination, to give them full satisfaction in all their reasonable desires;
but if you shall find cause to lessen the belief you had of a powerful
effect by this Letter of His Majesty's, it is then recommended to your
discretion, to forbear the deliv^ry of it; since it would be a very unfit
thing, to impose (...) great a grace and condescending of His Majesty to
hazards of being made frustrate and contemned. God send you happy success in
this great undertaking: I profess it is that, wherein my belief and reason go
along more comfortably then with any thing that I have known in projection
since these troubles: but it is not fit to wade further into the business this
hazardous way; and therefore I shall add no more, but that I am,

your very affectionate servant,
December. 29. 1643.
SIR,
THis enclosed shall serve for you, as well as for him to whom it is directed:
lose no time, you were expected here every day this week: if you can bring
this business to a happy conclusion, besides the general good, it will be for
your own particular, the best that ever you did* If you come not with this
bearer, I pray you send me by him the furred Coat I wrote to you for: make all
the possible haste you can, that the Petitions may speedily be sent hither, and
assure your friends, that if they perform their parts of the six propositions,
I am confident, the K. will condescend to their desires.

December. 30 1643.
A Letter, entitled, to the man in the Moon.
SIR,
I wrote to you formerly, but never had any answer. I assure you faithfully, I
have not bin wanting to do what you desired (as you may perceive by the
effects) and if you have not your desire, blame your selves: But give me leave
to tell you, that if you neglect the opportunity now offered you, it may be,
you shall never have the like again; for I have made Her whom you (...) given
just occasion to be your worst friend, to be (...) b^st, and the only
instrument to procure what (...) sent you; and be confident she shall still be
so, provi^^^ you do your parts. Consider, I beseech you, what (...) gate is
opened by bringing in of the Scots, for the ^^^struction of this Kingdom: if
there be not a peace (whi^^ I pray God Almighty to send speedily) you must
^^^pect armies of strangers from several places, who a^^ now a preparing, who
certainly at their in-commi^^ will over-runne the whole Kingdom, and when it
is pa^^ remedy, you will se your own error: therefore ((...) prevent more
misery then I am able to express to th^^ deplorable Kingdom and the effusion
of the blood (...) millions of men, women, and children, which must i^fallibly
be this summer) apply your selves in an humb^^ and submissive way to His
Majesty, whom, I know, ye^ will find ready with arms outstretched to receive
(...) both to favor and mercy, and even grant you gra^^ beyond expectation:
Defer no time for Gods sake, and what you will do, do speedily, I say again
do it speedil^ and lose no time for reasons I may not write.

FINIS.

