In Effgiem and librum Drs Charlton
portrait Imago pulcra Est picta sculptoris manu



THE DARKNESS of ATHEISM Dispelled by the LIGHT of NATURE.

A PHYSICO-THEOLOGICALL TREATISE, Written by WALTER CHARLETON Dr. in Physic,
and Physician to the late KING.

Heu primae Scelerum caussae Mortalibus agris, Naturam nescire DEVM. --

Sil. Italic 4. p. 56. DEVS aliquis jussit and primum scribere, and
declarationem ejus, ille ipse novit, me scire.

Galen. 10. de usu part. LONDON, Printed by J. F. for William Lee, and are to
be sold at the sign of the Great Turks Head over against Fetter-Lane in
Fleetstreet. 1652.

Epistola Dedicatoria.
CLARISSIMO, QUIA ORNATISSIMO VIRO, Inclytissimi Medicorum Londinensium
Collegii Praesidi long dignissimo, FAUTORI SUO, Omni officiorum genere
aeternum Colendissimo, D. D.
FRANC. PRUJEAN, GUALT. CHARLETON S. P. D.

DEcretum fuisse olim, accepi, a Consultissimis aeque ac Amplissimis
celeberrimi nostri Collegii (quod omnes, quibus cum Literis ac Humanitate
aliquod commercium, summa, uti decet, veneratione colunt) Fundatoribus; quod
nullus, tantae familiae adscitus, Librum quemlibet in dias luminis oras
effundere audeat, quem Praeses, adplaudentibus fimul Censoribus, indignum prius
non judicaverit, qui diutius in Vestae penetralibus abditus lateret. Et
gravissimo sane consilio; tametsi enim paucorum admodum, nullorum rectius
dixerim, nomina vestris adscribi Tabulis solent, qui solennia and Eruditionis
and ingenii sui specimina, vel scriptis, vel consiliis medicis, vel
disputationibus, abstrusiora circa Physices Theoremata, in Comitiis public
habitis, prius non exhibuerint; ideoque sit sperandum, neminem ex iis aut
meditaturum, aut in publicum daturum aliquid, quod aut Philosophum recta
ratione utentem, aut pium at que Christianismo imbutum non deceat: veruntamen,
cum quisque ferme infatuantibus pessimae istius Sirenum, (...), blanditiis sit
nimium obnoxious, Scriptorumque plurimis innatum sit istiusmodi vitium, quod sui
cerebri Minervas flagrantius, quam modestia ferat, ament; quid magis videatur
consultum, quam ut uniuscujusque Collegarum scripta, quam praelo Typographico,
prius subjiciantur examini eorum, quibus id muneris sociorum suffragiis
demandatum; quo sit perspectum magis, an ex iis utilitatis aliquid Artium
scientiarumque latifundiis succrescat, and genti Hippocraticae honoris? Huic
proinde majorum Senatus-consulto, nedum Philosophiae, ejusve sobolis Medicinae,
ast etiam sacris Religionis Principiis quadantenus sartis tectisque
conservandis (saltem quoad vestrae Ditionis extensionem) utilissimo, liberrima
voluntatis meae (...) ipsemet obtemperans; En, in manus tuas, Apollineae Artis
insigne Deus ac Columen, hasce meas Philosophiae Primitias trado: eo duntaxat
nomine, quod si oculatiori tuo, quod mihi sit instar omnium, judicio lucis
hujus usura videantur dignae; and majori, adversus virulenta Semicriticorum
Zoilorum que (...), Auctoritate for as prodeant praemunitae, and Bonorum
favori, pleniori cum gratia, commendentur. Caeteroqui, si vel verbulum in eis
aut saniori Physiologiae, aut Fidei Christianae, aut bonis denique moribus
dissonum and incongruum reperiatur: vel Tineis Blattisque perrodendae mox
exponantur; vel fato illi subjaceant acerbissimo, quod exuscitatum impiis
Artibus ab Erichthone cadaver olim, ad rogum quam citissime reduxit, de quo
(...)* ille Poeta Lucanus,

Vadit defunctus ad ignes.

Non est vero, quamobrem tam infauste ominer. Omnes etenim, dum huncce Atheismi
Tumulum essem meditatus, ingenioli mei nervos, mediusfidius, eo semper
intendebam; ut recto, and suis genuinis filiis ab Matre Sancta Ecclesia in
Canonicis praescripto, Veritatis tramiti insisterem: ne ab opinione quavis
insana, splendidissinia tametsi verisimilitudinis specie larvata, aut Men's, aut
Calamus unquam ullibi deflecteretur, salebrosa versus Haereseos, Errorisve
diverticula; quae omnia (Cardiognosten humillime contestor) ab incunabulis
usque ex animo fastidivi.

Nec meo, ad lapsus, nimis prono, unice super hac re, confisus sum arbitrio:
sed and labili minus quorundam etiam Theologorum, ingenio supra vulgus
literatorum multum perspicaci, and queis nihil sit magis cordi quam ipsamet
veritas; quibus singulas hujusce Tractatus Physico-theologici schedulas, dum
atramento scriptorio adhuc diffluerent, tradidi, serio and severe examinandas,
imo ubicunque iis opus visum fuerit castigandas.

Horum itaque aequabili judicio si tuum etiam, Eruditorum Dictator, omni ex
part consenserit; Librum huncce, ter sacrosanctissimae Divini Numinis, ab
execranda Atheorum impietate (tremendum cogitatu) palam impetitae, Majestatis
vindicem, magno tuo Nomini a me inscribi consecrarique patiatur, Candorem tuum,
caeteras tuas virtutes undiquaque illustrantem, obnixe ac cum debita Dignitati
tuae observantia rogo. Fabrica est, cujus Fundamenta praeclarum istud Matheseos
lumen, CARTESIUM dico (cui* si Fata diuturniorem in terris indulsissent
incolatum; dubio procul, tam diu anxieque ab omnibus Sophiae cultoribus
exoptatum, Physiologiae sanioris compendium Resp. Literaria ab illo solo
expectasset, imo forsan excepisset) non ita pridem in Metaphysicis suis
Meditationibus posuisse; certe vix me deceret pluribus tibi insinuare: qui
omnia ejus and perlustrasti volumina, and, quod solertissimi pathognomonicon
est ingenii, perlucide jamdudum intellexisti Aenigmata. Fabrica est, cujus
stamina LUDOVICUS VIVES, PHILIPPUS MORNAEUS, MARINUS MERSENNUS, and PETRUS
GASSENDUS (Heroe*s publico Humanae gentis commodo, and nobiliorum Disciplinarum
incremento nati) ex densissimis consertissimisque suis sapientiae sylvis
profluenter nobis contulere. Fabrica, ut ^^ omnia absolvam, cujus
constructionem (...) micus ferme sceleratissimi hujus seculi Atheismus ab omni
Erudito efflagitasse videatur, omnes apud rectos rerum aestimatores: and quam
nulli, nisi sacrilegi Libertini nostri, quos apud Dei, and Religionis causa
Assertore prorsus indigna habetur, inutilem censebunt vel supervacaneam.

Memini, Vir Excellentissime, te esse illum, qui me, post praematuram
serenissimi mei quondam Domini, CAROLI, ferae hujus Britanniae nostrae
Monarchae, Apotheosin, non limis and invidiae viperco veneno turgentibus, ast
ipsiiusmet instar Charitatis benign ridentibus oculis aspexisti; in illustrem
Collegii vestri societatem invitasti saepius; tandemque, quum inaugurali meo
munere defunctus essem, candide exporrectaque (quod aiunt) front excepisti.
Deinceps vero, toties quoties Te, tanquam Aesculapium redivivum, aegrorum
levandorum ergo, adivi; me, circa stochasmum, prognosin, medendi methodum,
praesidiorumque materiam, sat prolixe, de more meo, disserentem patienter and
sine maligno isto medicastris innato Contradicendi cacoethe audivisti; and aut
meam, ubi rationi assentiret, comprobasti sententiam, aut rectiorem
commonstrasti. Memini etiam (and magnum Hippocratis nostri Genium semper habeam
mihi iratum, si tanti benesicii fuero unquam oblitus) quam paterno amore me,
epidemica superioris anni Dysenteria gravissime and tantum non lethaliter
infectum, visitasti; quanta industria saluti meae invigilasti; quam admiranda
tandem Art (favente Archiatro Coelesti) animam meam abusque Charontis cymbula
reduxisti: ita ut digne canam,

Auxiliis PRUIAN, anima haec moribunda revixit;

Ut vigil, infusa Pallade, flamma solet.

Haec omnia manent alta mente reposta, nec in Mortis etiam erit tyrannide, viva
insignis tuae me erga Humanitatis Charagmata, cordis mei meditullio
profundissime insculpta, penitus deradere. Quid vero retribuam tibi Fautor
Amplissime, pro tot tantisque favoribus, praeter Animum Gratitudinis and Amoris
plenissimum, ignoro prorsus: quem tibi (...) addictum, pro consueta tua
Benignitate agnoscere digneris, etiam atque etiam te obtestor. Caeterum ut
mundo etiam universo clarius innotescat haec mea (...); En, in ipsius
testimonium levidense hoc (...) tibi offero: tot inter volumina, quibus
instructissimos habes Bibliothecae tuae forulos, infima vero class reponendum.
Restant adhuc mihi complurima, in gratae mentis (...), insuper dicenda: sed
Amphora jam exiit, currente rota. DEUM OPT. MAX. tibi longos, and benefico
syderum aspectu prosperos indulgeat annos, in Morborum foecunda nimis sobole,
in Humani generis excidiun, quotidie nascentium exantlationem foelicem, simul
ac Artis nostrae compendium; ex animo precor.

(...) Praeses.

Ex musaeo meo Londini, Kal. August. anno (...), 1641..

A PREPARATORY Advertisement TO THE READER.
READER,
BEfore you set foot within the door of this our Physico-theologicall Labyrinth
(so the seemingly intricate and obscure method, wherein the Rows of our own
and others Cogitations are here set, may warrant you to call it) providence
enjoyn's, that we tender you a Praeparatory Advertisement of some things, whose
praecognition is requisite, as well to your calm, unpraejudiciall and
satisfactory Lecture, as to the Praemunition of this well-intended Enterprise
of our Pen, against both those implacable, though always foiled Enemies to
learned Industry, impertinent and parcel Contradiction, and malevolent Censure.

The Cardinal points, or Heads, under whose comprehension, All, whereof we
hope a praevious consideration, as your homely, but wholesome Entertainment,
during your short Detention in this Portall, does genuinely and regularly fall;
are only these Four: viz. (1.) The Occasion and Incitements to this Exercise,
(2.) The Necessity and Justification of Natural Theology, in general; and of
this in particular, and therein principally of the Demonstration of the
Existence of God, by beams universally deradiated from that Catholic
Criterion, the Light of Nature: (3.) The grateful commemoration of those
venerable Authors, from whose replenish't Treasuries, the richest Contributions
toward this Hospital for the cure of miserable Infidels, were derived: (4.)
Our due Confession of those Defects and Impediments, which rendered us
insufficient to the worthy Administration of a Province so difficult, so
sublime, so sacred, so diffusive.

As for the First Praeconsiderable, viz. the Occasion; it is a Truth, not more
deplorable, then manifest, that this our Island, which may justly contend with
most parts of the Earth, for the Priority of Conversion to Christianisme, and
might (Ah! that the righteous Anger, of Divinity has left us no other Tense to
speak in!) not many years since, have challenged the Garland from the whole,
for the orthodox, zealous, and sincere Profession thereof: has of late
produced, and does at this unhappy day foster more swarms of Atheistical
monsters (such at least, whose licentious Practices, and insolent Discourses in
Public, do equally declare their wild Ambition to be so accounted; as if the
only way to acquire the reputation of being Transcendent Wits, were to seem
able, with bold and specious Arguments, to impugn the greatest and most sacred
Verities; nay such, upon whose Admission, the Certitude of all other Notions
does individually depend) then any Age, then any Nation has been infested
withal. Nor, indeed, can this Assertion sound harsh in the ears of any
aequitable person, who shall but have observed, that Religion (the vital
spirits of all Commonweals, and the Sanction of all Human Laws) and the sacred
Authority of the Church (the only Brazen Wall of defense against those Legions
of Errors, and Illusions, which the common Adversary of mankind, by his subtle
workings upon the Deceptibility of our frail Nature, has advanced) are both so
shattered and undermined by our Fatal Civil War; that there yet remain many
and wide Breaches, at which whole Hosts of the most execrable Heresies,
blasphemous Enthusiasms, nay even profes't Atheism have entered upon us,
without any considerable Opposition from those, who are, by the duty of their
Place and Function, obliged to be the public Champions of all sacred Truths.
This when we had frequently, and not without due sorrow considered, and upon a
profound and reiterated Examen of all those bloody Sophisms, which are usually
urged by Atheists, to indubitate either the Existence of God, or those his Two
Cardinal Attributes, the Creation of the Universe, and the constant
Conservation and Moderation of the same, by his Providence; found them to be
derived from one of those two poisonous Fountains; either that Human Affections
are imagined to be in God, or that man does vainly arrogate so great Sagacity
and perfection of Prudence to his own Mind, as he thereupon praesumes to be
able to comprehend what God can, and determine what he ought to do: we
immediately discovered, that the direct way to a full and durable Solution of
them all, was only to advertise men in the general, that they ought to
speculate their own Minds, as Finite substances, and the Supreme Essence, as
an Infinite, and therefore Incomprehensible one. For, this immense
Disproportion being once abstractedly cogitated, and in the closest pressures
of Infidelity always reflected upon: all those Mountainous Difficulties, which
seem to eclipse the Light of Nature, when converted toward Divinity, will soon
lessen, and vanish, like rorid Clouds before the Orient Sun.

The way toward the facile Redargution of all, either downright, or oblique and
inferrible Atheistical Misapprehensions, appearing thus plain; the resentment
of our Duty, both to God, and our Fellows in Humanity; to God in the
vindication of his injured Majesty, to Man, in the Rectification of perverted
Judgments, according to the capacity of our Talent; engaged us to attempt a
short progress therein. And to the incitement of this forcible Motive we the
more readily conformed our Assent, because, having not long before proposed to
our selves to erect an entire Fabric of Physical Science upon Principles
which seem to our judgment to be the most solid and permanent, because most
Demonstrable, at least, most Verisimilous, as to the Solution of all Natures
Phenomenon; and firmly enabraced that Axiom of the Schoolmen, Nulla res,
qualiscunque est, intelligi potest, nisi Deus prius intelligatur, that no one
thing in Nature can be known, unless the Author of Nature be first known: we
conceived it not only no Apostasy from our First Resolutions, but a more
opportune and advantageous prosecution of them, to begin at the Demonstration
of the Existence of the only Perfect Ens, and so many of his Proprieties, or
Attributes, as relate to the Universe in general, and Humane nature in
special; and this, as a Foundation, that must not only support, but ennoble
and facilitate our future superstructions.

Nor could our often and pensive reflections upon the vast Distance betwixt the
utmost Extensibility of our Understanding, and the lowest part of this the most
sublime and excellent Subject, alter or refract this our Determination: for, to
counterpoyse that Discouragement, we remembered, that to offend of Zeal, is more
venial then to offend of Neglect.

Now, albeit this was the Series, or subalternate syntax of our Thoughts, to
which our Designation of this Work, as the lowest link, was connected; yet dare
we not say, that this Argument was wholly of our own Election: for we have long
inclined to that opinion of Socrates In Oration. ad Philip.
, Eam mentem Dii singulis dant, ut communes utilitates in medium afferant; That
every man's Province is imposed upon him by the tacit consignation of
Providence Divine, and that it is the soft and secret Touch of that Universal
Spirit, which maintains the common Harmony of the World, that Tunes the
thoughts of every Individual to this or that particular key: and therefore
apprehended it as criminal, to stifle or extinguish those sparks, which we
could not but perceive to be kindled, and glow within our breast.

Concerning the Second, viz. the Necessity of Natural Theology, we are not
singular in our persuasion, that these two Positions, That there is a God, and
that the Soul of man is a substance perfectly distinct from his body, and
endowed with Immortality, by the Charter of its Essence; are the Principal
among those Verities, which are to be demonstrated by Philosophers, rather then
Divines. For, though to us whose Minds are deeply imbued with the sacred
tincture of Christianisme, it suffices to assume upon the evidence of mere
Faith, that God is, and that the Human Soul, being constituted superior to
Corruptibility, does eternally survive the Funeral of the Body: yet, assuredly
can the mere Natural man, persisting in the state of Infidelity, never be
adduced to embrace either any Religion, or any Moral Virtue, unless both
those Propositions fundamental be first evicted to him, by Reasons
Apodictical, desumed from that infallible Criterion, the Light of Nature; from
whose Judicature there can be no appeal.

And, since in this life of Sensuality, the Encouragements and Invitations to
vice, are both more and stronger, then those to virtue: most certain it is,
that very few men would prefer the harsh dictates of Honesty and Right, to
those more complacent ones of Pleasure and Profit; if they neither feared the
just vindiction of an All-observant Deity, nor expected a future Subsistence
after Death. Now, however it be indubitable, that the Existence of God ought
firmly to be believed, because it is commonstrated in Sacred Writ; And, by
conversion, that Sacred Writ ought to be believed, because it is desumed from
God: for, since Faith is the Gift of God, he that gives Grace sufficient for
the stable Apprehension of other things contained therein, can also give Grace
sufficient to the admission of his Existence. yet cannot this kind of
Argumentation, with probable hopes of his Conviction, be proposed to an
Infidel; who looks upon Reason only, as the chief inducement of Belief:
because it is a manifest Circle, whose parts reciprocally depend upon each
other for probation, and therefore he may lawfully except against it.

Again, as it is indispensably Necessary, in respect of Insidels; so is it not
Unnecessary, in respect to Believers, to prove the Certitude of these two main
Pillars of all Religion, and Morality: since the Evidence of Reason,
superannexed to that of Faith, must of necessity if not augment, yet
Corroborate it: and that happy soul must, doubtless, have much a clearer
perception of the verity of supernatural Objects, who speculates them both by
the Light of Nature, and of Grace.

And therefore, though we should be so largely Charitable, as to grant, that
there are no Atheists to be found among Christians: which is more then the
observation of the good Justin Martyr would give him leave to allow, when he
said, dici quidem nonnullos Christianos, esse vero nullius Numinis cultores In
Dialog. cum T^yphon.
: and that the Principles of Religion are steadily believed by All, who make an
external Profession of them: yet notwithstanding would it not genuinely
follow, that therefore it is a Pleonasm, or Parergy to ratify those Principles
to Believers, by the concurrent Testimony of that Oracle, Reason, to whose
Dictates all Nations, all Ages, all Interests have unanimously submitted their
Assent. For, as it must conduce to the Information of Unbeleevers: So also,
proportionately, to the Confirmation of Believers.

Thirdly, as it has been the positive and settled judgment of most Divines,
both Ancient and Recent, not only that the Existence of God may be
demonstrated, or irresistibly enforced upon the most praevaricate
understanding, by the pressure of Reasons purely Natural; but also, that the
Cognition of the Non-principiate and Self-dependent Being, is far more easily
acquired, then the Cognition of any Created Nature whatsoever: insomuch as
every man brings into the world with him a certain Proleptical, or anticipated
Notion of the Deity, indelebly impressed upon the very substance of his mind;
but the Science of all other Entities does emerge from the Ideas of their
natures, Extradvenient or Adventitious to the Cognoscent Faculty, by the
mediation of the Senses: So also was it the express Assertion of the wisest of
men (Wisdom 13. v. 8, 9.) and of the greatest of Apostles (Romans 1. v. 20.) that
the Creator was so visibly represented in the mirror of the Creature, as no
excuse could remain to those unhappy Ethnicks, who making more then
superficial inspection into the one, did yet praetend an Indiscovery of the
other. Quid enim aliud conspicuum hujus mundi theatrum, quam (...)? As that not
long since Vital Library, Bishop Prideaux (whose memory, next that of our
Royal Master, is and shall ever be the most precious of all others, in our
esteem: not only in respect of his insatiable native Capacity, stupendous
Acquisitions, and inestimable Benefits to the Republic of Learning; but also
of his singular Favors to us in particular) has in a magnificent elegance
expressed, in concione ad Artium Baccalaureos, in die Cinerum, de scala
visibilium ad invisibilia. To which accomplished Paraphrase upon that freshly
quoted Text of St. Paul, we refer our Reader; in order to his own more ample
satisfaction, and our Justification, concerning the possibility, nay facility
of the minds mounting up to a graduable Intellection of the Supreme Ens, by
the roundles, or steps in the Scale of subordinate and Created Natures.

And Fourthly, lest this our charitable Design, to subvert the chief Citadel of
Atheism, by a Countermine of Arguments purely Physical (entrusting the
managery of that sacred Engine, the Testimony of Canonical Scripture, to the
more expert hands of those, whose Function entituleth them to the proper use
thereof) should want any one of the inducements of persuasion, requisite to the
accompletion of of its Defense; to the Reasons, and Praecedents now introduced,
we may superadd also the Authority of no less then the Lateran Council, held
under Pope Leo the tenth. Which, having with exceeding prudence decreed the
Anathematization of all such Atheists, who dare question either the Being of
God, or any of his Attributes (whether Absolute and Incommunicable; such as his
Eternity, Immensity, Simplicity, Immutability, Independence, etc. perfections
concentred in his most glorious Essence: or Respective, such as his
Omnipraesence, Omnipotence, Omniscience, Justice, Mercy, Goodness, Verity,
Liberality, etc. which by effusion relate to the Creature) or the other Basis
of Religion, the Immortality of the Humane soul: does, in the close of the
Canon, not only adhort, but expressly command all Christian Philosophers, that
they sharpen their Styles for the total Erasion of their circumventing
Sophismes, and the deep Engravement of those Magisteriall Truths.

To conclude therefore, insomuch as not only multiplied Reasons, but also
Authority both Divine and Human conjunctively, both warrant and enjoyne this
kind of Natural process for the conviction of Atheism: as we can perceive
no weight in their opinion, who think any Principle of Religion either
profanely disparaged and debased, or implicitly convelled and staggered, when
brought to the Test of Natural Reason, though only for Confirmation; so
neither have we any cause to fear, that the upper Form of Theologists will
contract their brows, and frown upon this our Benevolent and opportune, though
imperfect Treatise.

Concerning our Third Postulate, viz. the Nomination of those venerable
Writers, from whose large magazines of Knowledge, no small part of our
Ammunition for the Battery of the strongest hold of the Common Adversary to
Humanity, has been furnished; to this your self will acknowledge us adliged as
well by the bond of Gratitude, as Honor: the first advising us to return them
the due tribute of Commemoration, and an open profession of our beholdingness
to them; the other impelling us thereupon, in order to the praevention of being
reputed Plagiary. Be pleased, then, Candid Reader, to know from us, first that
the Demonstration of the Existence of God (being the argument of the second
Section in the 1. chap.) together with the ensuing Explanation of the sundry
Scholastic Terms, therein unavoidably used, and the Responses to the several
Objections (whereof some were made by the glorious Marinus Mersennus, and
others by our eminent, Mr. Hobbs) was wholly collected out of the incomparable
Metaphysics of that heroical Wit, Renatus De's Chartes. Whose Meditations on
that as necessary as excellent subject, having both frequently and with the
most abstracted attention of our mind, read over; and with all possible equity
of judgment put them into the scales against the Cogitations of Cornelius ab
Hogelande, the Arguments of Philippus Mornaeus du Plessis, Hugo Grotius, and
Petrus Gassendus, concerning the same Theorem: we found them, by vast excesses,
to overbalance all the others, in the points of comprehension, perspicuity,
profundity, conviction. (1.) Comprehension; because their importance is of so
great extent, as to take in the substance of whatever has, or can be said by
the whole world, on that particular. (Consule ipsum Cartesium, in Epist.
dedicat. ad Doct. Sorbon.) (2.) Perspicuity; because, though they are not
accommodated to junior or illiterate Capacities; as himself prudently
intimates (in praefat. ad medit. de prima philosoph.) yet to those Heads,
which study and contemplation have prepared for the entertainment of Notions
supernatural, must they appear as distinct, clear, and bright, as all the Light
of Nature could make them; not can he, who does not, after serious lecture,
apprehend their Extraction, mutual Connection, and genuine, nay indeclinable
Illation, justly pretend to any considerable reflections upon his own Nature.
(3.) Profundity; because they are their own Criterion, being desumed from the
very Essence of the mind, and proleptical Impresses, which are the radix, or
Foot of all Cognition. (4.) Conviction; because they are of the number, and
perhaps the principal of those Verities, which, like Geometrical
Demonstrations, storm the most obstinate judgments, enforce them to a plenary
assent, and having once gained possession of the mind, for ever after exclude
all Dubitation, and Apostasy. So that what Cicero (5. de Finibus.) said of the
Stoics Philosophy; mirabilis est apud Stoicos rerum contextus, respondent
extrema primis, media utrisque, omnia omnibus; quid sequatur, quid repugnet,
vident, and ut in Geometria, prima si dederis, danda sunt omnia: we may
worthily transfer upon the Metaphysicall meditations of Cartesius; nay more
worthily, for no one Principle of his, there proposed, is precarious, but
Necessary. This perpended, we perceived our selves not only encouraged, bu
straightly concerned, to transcribe and accommodate to our praesent scope, the
summary of his 3d. Meditation. And, Secondly, that many of our Apodictical
Reasons, alleged for the comprobation of Providence Divine, both General and
Special, were gleaned from those more fertile Fields of Lactantius (de opific.
Dei) Raymundus de Sabunde (Theologia Natural.) Aquinas (contra Gentes)
Ludovicus Vives (de verit. fidei Christianae) Bradwardinus (de causa Dei)
Valesius (de sacra Philosophia) and chiefly of Gassendus (in Animadvers. in
phys. Epicuri:) the leaves of whose most learned Works, we blush not to
confess our selves to have been so conversant in, that we have sullyed them by
often revolution.

Nor can we expect the Perversion of this our ingenuous Acknowledgement, by
any, but the Malevolent, or Illiterate, to a Diminution of the credit due to
this our industrious Spicilegium; while those Bookmen, whose vigilant nostrills
are acquainted with the odor of the Lamp, need not be informed, how many
anxious hours have been spent on the sedulous Extraction of this Vial of
precious Truths, from the choycest Flowers of so many excellent Gardens
(wherein only to have had some recreative and private Walks, to many has been
justly accounted no obscure Specimen of both Literature, and Ingenuity.)
especially when we are not destitute of grounds for our hopes, that they will
soon find those Flowers, not to have lost much of their native Fragrancy and
Virtue, by passing the Alembic of our Pen; as also, that it has been no small
part of our care, to Refuse, as well as Elect.

Besides, there are many Stars, and those of the greatest magnitude, now
shining with full splendour, in the sphere of Learned Authors, whose beams were
in great part derived from others, whom the revolution of Time had made less
vertical, and declined toward the West of Oblivion. Who can blast the verdant
Laurel on Virgils front, by saying, though truly, that He converted more then
1000* of Homers verses to his own use? Who lessen the sound of Homers Fame, by
exclaiming, that his Muse was a Drone, and lived upon the Honey she so largely
sucked from the elder Hives of Theocritus, Apollonius, and Hesiod? Who detract
from the full glory of Cicero, by objecting that most of his strong and limpid
streams of Eloquence flowed from those two noblest springs of Greece, Plato and
Demosthenes? Or, who will diminish one grain of incense, in his sacrifice to
the memory of that Alcides (for the conquest of monstrous Difficulties) the
mighty Stagirite; because Clearchus has a tradition, that he saw and
discoursed with that knowing Jew, from whose oraculous mouth all his
Philosophical Maxims were delivered to him? To come nearer home; who has
thought the less of Grotius his Tract of the verity of Christian Religion;
because it seems a Compendium of Mornaeus, of the same Subject and Inscription?
Or, who undervalued Mornaeus, in regard of the abundant Contributions he
received from Lactantius, Raymundus de Sabunde, Aquinas, and Ludovicus Vives?
And therefore, though we we are sufficiently conscious of the great disparity
betwixt those Giant Wits, and our Pygmie Acquisitions; and therefore gladly
place our selves more then one sphere below them: yet shall we conceive our
selves not a little injured, if any shall deny our Book a room in their
Libraries, only because it praesents, in Epitome, and entire, what many months
reading of the Schoolmen would have exhibited at large, and in fractures.
Aphranius, an eminent Poet, for answer to those Semi-Criticks, who accused him
of stealing many remarkable passages from Menander, returns thus; Fateor,
accepi non modo ab illo, sed ut quisque habuit quod conveniret mihi, and a
Latino quoque quodcunque me non posse facere melius credidi.

Moreover, every Brain is not constellated for new Discoveries; nor can every
Age boast the production of a Copernicus, Gilbert, Galilaeo, Mersennus,
Cartesius, or a Harvy: Providence introducing such, as Time does New Stars,
single and seldom..

And as concerning our last Requisite, viz. an aequitable consideration of our
Defects and Impediments; to this also are we constrained to court our Reader,
in order to our refraction of the Rigor of Censure. For though we need not
advertise, that the Nerves of our Intellect are too slender and feeble to
sustain so great a weight; and our Pencill too rude and gross, to express
such fine Metaphysical and Theosophical Notions, in draughts respondent to the
life of their Importance; in regard the frequent stooping of our Cogitations
below the dignity and due height of the subject, must soon discover the one,
and the Roughness of our Style through the whole Piece, as soon confess the
other: yet can it not be supervacaneous for us here to intimate, that we had
more then one Disadvantage to encounter.

First, the often Fermentations and Ebullitions of our Melancholy; to the
tyranny of which faeculent and Saturnine humor both our native Temperament, and
sedentary contemplative condition of life have aequally subjected us; could not
but as often obnubilate the region of our Mind, and darken the prospect of our
soul, by infecting the requisite purity and lucidity of our spirits, with thick
clouds of opac and fuliginous Exhalations.

Secondly, the course of our Profession, rendering us obnoxious to many more
Distractions, Interturbations, and Avocations, by the intrusion and importunity
of the Sick, then we could obtain minutes of retirement for Lecture and
Meditation; will, we hope, be confessed to have had more then a finger in the
causation of those Chasms, Inaequalities, Omissions, etc. Lapses, which occur
to the observation of the Austere and Curious.

And, Thirdly, it cannot but deserve some favor, to give notice; that the Clue
of our studies was broken off in the midst, by the rough hand of the late
Epidemick Dysentery, which arresting us even then, when the contexture of this
Web required the most confirmed vigor of body, and serenity of mind; confined
us to the dungeon of a sick bed so long and closely, that it has left sensible
impressions of its Malignity, not only upon our Constitution, but also upon
more then half of these our Lucrubrations.

To these Mitigatory Arguments, may rightly be added, the Narrowness of our
praesent Fortunes, the Thinness of our Library, our taedious attendance on
Commitees (all the sad effects of our late Intestine Wars) together with some
other private Remora's, the least whereof may serve to the Judicious and
Benign, as a sufficient incitement to look upon our Imperfections, through the
diminishing Telescope of Charity.

Now, this humble Apology we address only to the Erudite and Candid, experience
having confirmed, that none the strongest Charm of Reason, can bind the
virulent tongue of that livid Viper, Envy, the spirit of whose venom does
wholly consist in Detraction.

UPON DOCTOR CHARLTON'S NATURAL THEOLOGY.
So, our poor Cotswold Springs, that have no names,
Render their Tribute to your mighty Thames.
But your Book's perfect in it self. We do
Only acknowledge, not increase, what You
Have sent forth, streaming through the Land again,
Out of your Generous, purely-stowing Pen.
To give more Elogy, with my soft Quil,
To Yours from Eagle's wing, were even as ill,
As threaden lace on cloth of Gold to pin,
Or o'rlay Gold it self with baser Tin.
Yet may I venture thus: though not to praise:
To answer OB's, Envy perhaps will raise.
It Is fit that Censure wait on All that is done;
"Wits are made great by Emulation.
Some places are obscure. The Book's not Good,
By every vulgar Head is understood.
What you don't understand, read o'r again;
Compare, Conferr, and Meditate: It Is plain.
The English is Latin. Know, that the English Tongue
Has from each Language Consummation:
And He, that will our Learned Writers scan,
Must be both Latinist and Grecian.
The Stile's too High. Fear not the Critick's Rod:
"High Phrase is born of your High Thoughts of GOD.
Forward, Dear Brother: "GIFTS for use are lent:
"To do most good, brings in the most p. 120.
Content.
Your Physic has done Miracles: But sure,
THE ATHEIST CONVERTED's, your Divinest Cure.
ALIUD. IN EJUSDEM OPERA.
CHarltonus is, qui Helmontium pridem dedit,
Nuperque nobis reddidit Helmontium;
Hunc pulveris miranda sympathetici,
Hunc cruditis exprimentem paginis
Medentium, De Fluxibus, Lapsus graves;
Nuperrimeque Calculum, foetum Suum,
(O abdita praeclarior Gemnia Liber!)
Donasse luce publicum gaudet bonum;
Jam nunc ad altiora surgit. Numinis
Assertor est, Vindexque providentiae.
Fortuna, Fati vis, Voluntas Libera,
Summi docentur obsequi Dictis Dei.
Deo favente, Cuncta. Vocum Copiam
Lectissimarum mirer, an Rerum magis?
Utramque miror, pariter atque exosculor:
Utramque pronus veneror, and long sequor.
O Author annumerande Charltonis Tuis!
Gassende, Chartes, Magne Sennerte Angliae!
Et ipse vivas, and Libri vivant diu!
Et Artium, de Te, optimae certent diu!
Homines priori Opere devinctos habes;
Nunc Maximum Tibi obligavisti DEUM.
Clemens Barksdallus.

THE CONTENTS, SERIES, AND ORDER OF THE WHOLE BOOK.
CHAP. I. The Existence of God demonstrated. page 1. SECT. I. ARTIC. 1.
ARistotle, the most Knowing and curious Ethnic, did yet, by his silence in the
cardinal point of Theology, proclaim the impossibility of man's full
understanding the simple and perfect Essence of God. p. 1. 2. The Hebrews
intimated so much, in the immoderate Veneration enjoined toward his Name
Jehovah. p. 3. 3. The clearer sighted Christian also can perceive no more of
the Divine Nature, then what is shadowed in its Attributes. ibid. 4. And
therefore the Author restrains the Readers expectation only to a Demonstration
of the Existence of God, in this chap. subnecting a short scheme of his
praesent Design and Method. p. 4.
SECT. II. ARTIC. 1. THe Mind of man can have no cognition of the Nature of its
Objects, but by the mediation of their proper Ideas. p. 5. 2. Those Ideas are
(1) Innate (2) Adventitious (3) Imaginary. p. 6. 3. A strict enquiry, whether
the Ideas of objects existent without our selves, hold an exact simlitude to
their Natures. ibid. 4. A second Disquisition, whether any of those things,
whose Ideas are found in the mind of man, have any existence without it? p. 8.
5. A firm induction, that its impossible for any Idea to import or comprehend
more of perfection, then its prototype, or Cause. p. 10. 6. And therefore, if
any Idea contain more of perfection, then can be sound in our minds ^ certainly
our minds cannot be the Efficient of that Idea. ibid. 7. The diversity of
Ideas, respective to the diversity of Entities. ibid. 8. The possible originals
of each sort severely examined, and all sound desumable from our selves; the
Idea of God only excepted. p. 11. 9. The Idea of God, here described, cannot be
either formally, or materially false, but the most clear, distinct and true of
all others. p. 13. 10. A declarement of the impossibility of the divine Ideas
desumption either from our selves. p. 15. 11. Or from some other cause less
perfect then God. p. 18. 12. Or from our Parents. p. 19. 13. The concernment of
all; or a conclusion that the Idea of the divine nature is innate and congenial
to the mind of man. p. 20. 14. An abstract, or Anacephalaeosis of the whole
demonstration. p. 21.
SECT. III. ARTIC. 1. THe importance of the term, Cogitation. p. 21. 2. Of an
Idea. ibid. 3. Of the objective reality of an Idea. p. 22. 4. Of the ^o^mal,
and eminent being of Attributes in the objects of Ideas. ibid. ^. Of a
substance. ibid. 6. Of the word, Mind. ibid. 7. Of a Body. p. 23. 8. Of the
real distinction of two substances. ibid. 9. Of the substance supremely
perfect. ibid.
SECT. IV. ARTIC. 1. OBject. 1. That the mind of man, being sinite, cannot
extend to the clear and distinct intellection of an Infinite, quatenus an
Insinite: and the Solution thereof by three distinctions. p. 23. 2. Object. 2.
That the Idea of the divine nature, resident in the mind os man is a mere Ens
rationis: and the Solut: p. 27. 3. Object. 3. That an effect may have more os
reality, or pers^ction th^n its Cause: and the Solut: p. 27. 4. Object. 4. That
the existence of such an excellent Idea, as has been described of the Divine
Nature does not necessitate the existence of an Entity, in all points
respondent, or superior thereto: because of the possible composing such an
Idea, out of our collections from sensible objects: p. 29. And the ample Solut:
p. 31. 5. Object. 5. That the Idea conceived of God, is capable of Augmentation
and diminution: and the clear Solut: p. 32. 6. Many scruples, concerning the
finality, manner, and form of the Idea imprcst; as also concernining the
seeming Heterogeneity, or Alterily between the essence of the mind and that of
the Idea: particularly satisfied. p. 33.

CHAP. II. That God created the world ex nihilo, proved by Arguments
Apodictical. page 39. SECT. I. ARTIC. 1. THe ins^parability, or (rather)
identity of God, and Creator. b. 39. 2. The two respects, which inclined the
Author to amore a m^le comprob^tion of the first Article of our Christian
creed; together with a dielenchical explosion of that antiquatated delusion,
that the Universe was autocthenous in its original, or constructed merely by
Chance. ibid. 3. The summary of Empedocles, Leucippus, Epicurns, Democritus,
and c. doctrine^ of the worlds spontaneous result from a Chaos of Atoms. p. 40.
4. A Digression, winnowing the Chafe from the Wheat concealed in the former
theory of Epicurns, and by the Corollary of some castigations, restrictions and
additions, declaring the great advantages, that this Hypothesis of Atoms has
beyond any other concerning the Material Principle of all Bodies, as yet
excogitated. p. 43.
SECT II. ARTIC. 1. THe conceit of the Worlds fortuitous production, disparaged
by a praepollency even of Pagan Auctority, that profoundly asserted the
contrary, viz. of 2. Thales Milesius. p. 47, 48. 3. Anaxagoras. ibid. 4.
Pythagoras and Plato. ibid. 5. The Stoics. p. 49. 6. Aristotle. ibid.
SECT. III. ARTIC. 1. THe pretext of Fortune destroyed, by the constancy of
Nature in her act of specification, (i. e.) the restraint and determination of
the semnalties of Animals to the procreation of their like in specie: and the
Atheists objection, of fiequent Anomalous and Heteroplasmical, or monstrous
Productions, dissolved. p. 53. 2. The necessity of the Worlds Creation by an
Agent infinite in Science and Power, proclaimed by the constant Uniformity of
Nature, in her perpectuation of Vegetables. p. 56. 3. The Sun convincively
demonstrates the infinite wisdom of its Creator, by 3. Arguments: viz. 1. The
universal convenience of its situation in its proper orb. p. 57. 2. The
appointment of its continual Circ umgyration. p. 58. 3. The contrivement of its
oblique motion along the line Ecliptic. p. 59. 4. The impresses of an infinite
Intelligence, plainly legible in the fronts even of Subterraneous Inanimates.
p. 60. 5. The impossibility of the worlds Creation by any Agent but God,
illustrated both by the Magnitude, and Pulchritude thereof: and the Epicureans
dream, of a motive faculty eternally inherent in Atoms, derided. p. 61. 6. The
Epicureans grand Argument, of the possibility of the consiguration of the
Universe by a casual and spontaneous disposition of Atoms, from the frequent
actual production of an Iusect by the same means or principles; countermined
by an inversion or Argument a majori ad minus. p. 65. 7. An exception against
the seeming disparity betwixt their inserence and ours, prevented: and the
invalidity of theirs, though their own hypothesis were conceded in terminis,
declared by an adaequate similitude. p. 67. 8. The conclusion of this section;
or, the aequipondium of the praecedent reasons, if perpended in the mass and
conjunctively, to the most perfect demonstration. p. 68.
SECT. IV. ARTIC. 1. THat Antique absurd expostulation, who^ Instruments
Auxiliants, materials predisposed, God made use of, in his act of Fabrication
of the Universe, copiously satisfied: and the energie of the Divine Will
commonstrated superior to the indigence of either. p. 69. 2. A second immodest
interrogation, wherefore God so long deferred the creation, resolved: with a
detection of the unreasonableness of undecent curiosity. p. 73.

CHAP. III. Why God Created the World. Page 77. SECT. I. ARTIC. 1. THe
improbability of the worlds creation by God, insinuated, by the Atheists, from
his defect of any possible Motive, scope, or final cause. p. 71. 2. Their first
Argument, that the divine Nature is above the capacity of either emolument or
delectation, from the Universe. p 78. 3. The satisfactory resutation thereof;
and Gods glory manifested to have been his prime and principal end. p. 79.
SECT. II. ARTIC. 1. THeir second Argument; that God had no especial regard to
the benefit of Man: and the Fortification thereof by 8 reasons. p. 82. 2. The
total redargution thereof by a commonstrance that the benefit and felicity of
man, was Gods secondary end: and the impossibility of satisfaction to the first
end, by any creature but man, concluded, from his 1. Rationality. p. 86. 2.
Sermocination. p. 88. 3. Lucretius his 8. reasons subverted, particularly. p.
90.

CHAP. IV. The General Providence of God Demonstrated. page 94. SECT. I. ARTIC.
1. THe Authors reasons for his praesent adherence to the common discrimination
of Providence from Creation. p. 94. 2. The Definition and received Division of
divine Providence. p. 95. 3. A short list of the principal ethnic
Physiologists, who, in order to their propagation of Atheism, have attempted
the eradication of this magisterial verity of divine Providence: and a gentle
cure of S. Hieroms wound, caused by his venial lapse from the same. ibid. 4.
The Atheists first Argument against universal Providence, with the absurd and
malicious comment of Lucretius thereupon. p. 97. 5. Their second Argument: and
its convenient dissection into two parts, viz. 1. The irregularity of
contingencies: p. 99. 2. The unequal or unjust distribution of good and evil.
p. 101.
SECT. II. ARTIC. 1. That the Notion of General Providence is Proleptical;
inferred from the umversality of its recepeption. p. 102. 2. From the misplaced
devotion of Idolaters. ibid. 3. From the confession of most Philosophers of the
highest form; as of 1. Ecphantus. p. 103 2. Plato. ibid. 3. Aristotle. ibid.
4. The Stoics. p. 104. 5. The Academicks and Scepticks. ibid. 4. A review of
the induction: and the Argument found to be Apodictical on one side; and on the
other only persuasive. p. 105.
SECT. III. ARTIC. 1. GOds General Providence demonstrated by the Idea of his
Nature reflected on our thoughts. p. 107. 2. The same particularly supported by
that trinity of Attributes, viz. his 1. Infinite Wisdom. p. 109. 2. Infinite
Power. ibid. 3. Infinite Goodness. p. 110. 3. The necessity of the worlds
gubernation, by the indefinent influence of Gods general Providence,
demonstrated from the consideration of the absolute and total dependence of all
Second Causes upon the First. p. 111. 4. The vastity of the world: the infinite
variety of its parts: and the irreconcilable discord of many natures,
demonstrate as much. p. 113. 5. Under what restriction we are to understand
that tropology of some Hermetical Philosophers, Deum esse Animam Mundi. p. 114.
6. The Atheists subterfuges of Nature and Fortune praecluded. p. 116.
SECT. IV. ARTIC. 1. THe Atheists first Antiprovidential Argument refuted, by
the Perfection of the Divine Nature: and their absurdity, in commensurating the
excellencies of God, by the infinitely inferior Faculties of man, detected.
ibid. 2. Divinity demonstrated superior to the circumscription both of Time and
Place. p. 118. 3. That the procuration of all the infinitely various actions of
second causes, in the World, cannot be any interturbation of Gods serene
felicity, proved by an Argument a minori. p. 119. 4. The same illustrated by a
second comparison. p. 120. 5. That the administration of petty occurrences can
be no indignity or disparagement to the sacred Majesty of God; but, on the
Contrary, absolutely essential to him, firmly evicted, from the universality of
his Cognition and Presence. p. 121.
SECT. V. ARTIC. 1. THe first division of the Atheists second objection; viz.
that the apparent irregularity of events does justisie their
non-praedestination or mere Contingency; strongly convelled: and that to the
praeordination of Divinity nothing can be casual; clearly commonstrated. p.
124. 2. The Authors Antithesis, that all Natural Agents are under the strict
laws of their distinct species. p. 129. 3. A second Counterposition, that those
laws were instituted and sancited by an infinite wisdom. ibid. 4. A third,
that the legislator has reserved to himself a praerogative power to alter,
transcend, invert, or repeal the laws of Nature. ibid. 5. The verity of the
first and second Positions, amply demonstrated. p. 130. 6. The verity of the
third Position demonstrated. p. 136. 7. A farther confirmation of the same by
an Argument, from the miraculous operations of God in praeterito. p. 137. 8.
That there was an universal Deluge. p. 138. 9. The Cessation of Satan's Oracles,
after the advent of the Word of Truth, proved authentiquely. ibid. 10. That
there was a prodigious Eclips of the Sun, at the passion of our Savior. p.
140. 11. A Demonstration of the impossibility of the Catholic Deluges
proceeding from Causes Natural. p. 141. 12. That the Cessation of Pagan
Oracles, upon the incarnation of God, was an effect merely fupernatural;
comprobated uncontrollably. p. 146. 13. That the Eclips of the Sun, at the
death of Christ, was purely Metaphysical, irrefutably demonstrated. p. 149. 14.
The Adaequatien of all to the verification of the Authors third Position. p.
152.
SECT. VI. ARTIC. 1. LUcretius his blasphemy, that man's ignorance of the energy
of Natural Causes, is the sole basis of the opinion of an Universal Providence.
p. 152. 2. The redargution thereof. p. 153. 3. Magnanimity the proper effect of
Religion. p. 154. 4. The opinion, of a General Providence, consistent with
Physiology. p. 155. 5. Lucretius his scruples concerning the seemingly
temerarious effects of the Thunderbolt; singularly resolved. ibid.

CHAP. V. The especial Providence of God Demonstrated. page 157. SECT I. ARTIC.
1. THe introduction, intimating the near cognation betwixt this present, and
the precedent Theme: and the necessity of the Authors beginning at the Atheists
Objections. p. 157. 2. The first objection, desumed from the Apathie of the
Divine Nature. p. 158. 3. The same excogitated by Epicurus: and promoted by
Lucretius. ibid. 4. The second objection, extorted from man's being obnoxious to
the hostility of many other Natures. p. 159. 5. The last objection, of the
Adversity of the Pious and Prosperity of the Impious, in this life. p. 160. 6.
The sporadical diffusion thereof upon Ethnicks, Hebrews and Christians: and the
probability of their opinion, who hold the book of Job, to be a Treatise
concerning the same subject, insinuated. p. 16^.
SECT. II. ARTIC. 1. THat man is the sole object of Gods special Providence,
argued from hence; that he is the principal object of his (extrinsecal) love:
and that inferred from hence, (1) that God has impressed upon the mind of man
a greater knowledge of his Divinity, then upon any other Creature, Angels only
excluded: (2) that man is only qualified to speculate, admire, and laud the
pulchritude of Nature. p. 166. 2. That the soul of man contains a proleptical
notion of Gods special Providence. p. 170. 3. That this proleptical notion is
the basis of Religion. ibid. 4. That Man brings into the world with him, an
irresistible propension to Religion. p. 172. 5. An objection, that the Calaici
were absolute Atheists, refuted. p. 173. 6. A second objection, that the
Massagetae and Scythians were devoyd of all Religion, prevented. ibid. 7. That
it is not in the power of man, totally to cradicate this plant of Religion, or
notion of special Providence Divine, out of his mind; evinced from hence, that
the most contumatious Atheists have, at some time or other, acknowledged it:
as, p. 174. 8. Pharaoh. ibid. 9. Herod Agrippa. p. 175. 10. Antiochus
Epiphanes. ibid. 11. Maximinus. p. 176. 12. Julian Apostata. p. 177. 13. Tullus
Hostilius. ibid. 14. Bion Borysthenites. p. 178. 15. The possibility of the
obscuration of the impress of special Providence Divine, pro tempore, conceded:
and the impossibility of the total Deletion thereof, briefly proved. p. 179.
16. The reduction of all, to a concise and memorable demonstration; that the
occurrences of every man's life are the consignations of special Providence. p.
180.
SECT. III. ARTIC. 1. THe Atheists first objection, confuted: and the Divine
Nature demonstrated both irascible and placable, (anthropopathically.) p. 180.
2. The Atheists scruple, of Gods inaudition of the prayers of good men, or not
concession of their petitions; satisfied. p. 183. 3. The Atheists second
Argument against Special Providence divine, dissolved: and the necessity of
Objects hostile, and deleterious to the life of man, demonstrated. p. 184. 4.
The same illustrated, by a correspondent simile. p. 185. 5. The Atheists last
and grand objection, of the prosperity of the Vicious, and adversity of the
Virtuous, redargued: and the nature of the Goods of Fortune profounded. p. 186.
6. The Reason, wherefore Divine Providence confers Good things on Evil men. p.
189. 7. Those apparent Evils, which Providence Divine consignes to Virtuous
men, anatomized; and found to be real Goods intrinsecally. p. 190 8. The
Authors Sanctuary wherein he secured his mind from discontent, in all those
storms of Calamities, which our late Civil war showred upon him. p. 191. 9.
Virtue, a mere Chimera, without the occursion of those things, which Sensuality
calls Evil. p. 192. 10. The Sense, no competent Criterion of the Good or Evil
of the mind. ibid. 11. The Atheists objection, that God ought, in justice,
always to preserve Good men from suffering Evil; expunged. p. 195. 12. The
Summum bonum of this life, consistent in a full conformity of our wills to the
Divine will. p. 196. 13. An excellent meditation of Marcus Antoninus concerning
the Good and Evil occurrent to man in this life. ibid.

CHAP. VI. The Mobility of the Term of man's Life asserted. page 199. SECT. I.
ARTIC. 1. THe Assinity of this Theorem to the precedent, intimated: and the
necessary division thereof into a specifical and individual consideration. p.
199. 2. The reasons of the Authors concise tractation of the first part. p.
200. 3. The moderation of Death by Special Providence Divine, argued from the
impossibility of the moderation thereof by any other power. ibid. 4. The same
demonstrated, from the necessary dependence of all natural motion in its
beginning, continuation, and period, on the will of the First Mover. p. 202.
SECT. II. ARTIC. 1. A Transient discovery of the almost insuperable
Difficulties to be encountered in the worthy and satisfactory solution of this
problem, whether the Term of man's life be Moveable, or Fatal; premised by way
of Apology for the Authors unequal judgment: and his purpose of taking a
middle way between the absolute Fatality of the Soick, and the mere Fortune of
the Epicurean. p. 204. 2. Two praevious considerables, necessary to the right
understanding and consequent discussion of the question. p. 207. 3. The
necessary relation of all Causes both of life and death, to three General
heads, viz. Necessary, Fortuitous, Supernatural; supports the discrimination of
the Term of life into Supernatural, Natural and Accidentary: and the
impertinency of the consideration of the Supernatural Term, to the present
scope. p. 207. 4. The proper import of the Natural Term o^ man's life, and also
of the Accidental. p. 209. 5. The result of our acceptance of the Term of
life, in the first signification. ibid. 6. The consequence of our understanding
the Term of life, in the second signification. p. 210. 7. The Fixation of the
Term of life, acceptable in a double interest; viz. (1) in respect to some
Absolute Divine Decree, precedent even to Gods Prescience of all Secondary or
instrumental Causes: (2) to some Hypothetical Divine Decree, whose mutability
is suspended on the liberty of man's Will. And the indifferency of either branch
of the distinction to our instant design. p. 211. 8. Three different opinions
vulgarly extracted from the precedent Distinction. p. 212. 9. The convenient
reduction of them to two only. ibid. 10. The First opinion declared: and the
principal Abettors thereof mentioned. p. 213 11. The Stoical Fate; and the
Calvinists Predestination, fully defined. p. 215. 12. A full and clear
discrimination of the Stoical, from the Theological Fate. ibid. 13. A list of
the execrable Absurdities impendent on the opinion of Absolute Fatality; so
accepted as the Stoic proposes it. p. 217.
SECT. III. ARTIC. 1. THe Authors adhaesion to the Second opinion, justified by
two important reasons. p. 219. 2. The great obscurity, and small validity of
some Texts of holy writ, alleged by the Defendants of Fatality to warrant
their opinion, detected. p. 220. 3. The Natural Causes (proxime) of the
Longitude and Brevity of man's life: and the Authors private conjecture of the
cause of Longevity in the first age of the world. p. 221. 4. The injustice of
our Adversaries title of patronage from the forementioned text of Job, further
manifested. p. 222. 5. Seven testimonies, out of holy writ, supporting the
mobility of the Term of man's life, in individuo. p. 223. 6. A full vindication
of the Fourth Testimony, from the several Exceptions made against the
appropriation thereof to our scope, by the patrons of Fatality. p. 227 7. The
second Testimony vindicated from several Exceptions. p. 233. 8. The sixth
Testimony cleared, from 4. Exceptions. p. 237.
SECT. IV. ARTIC. 1. THe necessity of our enquiry into the mystery of
Praedestination, in order to the solution of the present difficulty: and the
Fatists grand Argument. p. 240. 2. The refutation thereof, by the conciliation
of the infallibility of Gods Praenotion, to the indetermination of man's free
will to the actual election of Good or Evil. p. 241. 3. The diametral Disparity
between that Divine Praenotion which is antecedent to Divine Praeordination;
and that which is subsequent; amply declared. p. 243. 4. A second illustration
of the same difference by a pertinent Instance, or exemplification. p. 244. 5.
A third illustration of the same Difference, by conceiving the Divine Decrees,
in the same subordinate series, which the Fatists have imagmed. p. 247. 6. The
first Absurdity impendent on the opinion of a Decretory Praescience of God, as
to the Actions of man. p. 249. 7. A Second Absurdity connected to the same. p.
251. 8. Two Subterfuges of the Fatist, praecluded. p. 252. 9. A third Absurdity
inseparable from the hypothesis of a Decretory Praescience Divine. p. 253. 10.
Tbe reduction of the whole dissertation to 4. Conclusions, genuinely extracted
from the Premises. p. 254.

CHA. VII. Of the Liberty Elective of Man's Will. page 257. SECT. I. ARTIC. 1.
THe Parity of Absurdities resulting from those two Antagonistical Hypotheses,
of Absolute Fatality, and mere Contingency, as to the Actions of man. p. 257.
2. Those 2 contrary streems found to have bin derived from one and the same
poisonous Fountain; viz. a subterfuge of man to evade Culpability. p. 258. 3.
The Authors Incitements, here to enquire profoundly into the Natures of
Free Will, Fortune, and Fate. p. 259. 4. What is intended properly by the
Liberty of man's Will. ibid. 5. The several subordinate Actions of the Mind,
exercised about its objects: and the respective scholastic Terms, by which
Philosophers have adaequately expressed them. p. 260.
SECT. II. ARTIC. 1. THe Essence of man's Liberty Elective, consistent primarily
in the Indifferency of the Intellect; and in the Will only dependently. p. 263.
2. An egregious Error of some Divines, that the Liberty of the Will does
consummately consist in its immovable Fixation on real Good. p. 264. 3. Their
inadvertency of the real Difference between a Spontaneous, and Arbitrary
action; the occasion of that Error. ibid. 4. That a Spontaneous action, and an
indeliberate Impulse of Nature, are homologous or identical. ibid. 5. The
Divines objection, that the Tendency of of the Will is Volent, and therefore
Free; praevented, by a distinction of Libency and Liberty. p. 265. 6. Their
Superstructure, that the Perfection of the Wills Liberty is its constant
Adhaesion to, and inseparability from real Good, dedemolished by two reasons:
(1) that this Perfection imagined is not of the Liberty, but the Will it self;
(2) that it belongs only to separated Souls, in the state of Glorification. p.
266. 7. What kind of Indifferency that is, wherein the Liberty Elective is
Essenced. p. 267. 8. That to every Judgment of the Intellect, is immediately
and necessarily conjoined an Appetition or Aversation of the Will; respective
to the Good, or Evil nunciated. p. 268. 9. The Instability of the Will, in its
Appetitions, necessarily caused by the Instability of the Intellect in its
Judgments. p. 269. 10. The Delusion of the Intellect in its Judgments,
necessitateth the Delusion of the Will in its dependent Appetitions. p. 270.
11. That the Indifferency of the Will is but the shadow, or representative of
that Indifferency in the Intellect; and the Determination of this necessitates
the Determination of that. ibid. 12. The Analogy betwixt the Intellect, and a
Balance. p. 271. 13. That the Intellect does naturally conform to the
attraction of the greater Verisimility: and the reason of its Fluctuation. p.
272. 14. That the Determination of the Intellect to one or two objects, is
caused either by the more ponderous Appearance of Verity therein, or the minds
greater Attention to the moments of reason apparent on that side, then to those
on the other. ibid. 15. That the Appearance of Truth is always the cause of the
Intellects inclination. p. 273. 16. Three considerable Inferences from the
praemises. ibid. 17. Cartesiu* his General Praeservative against the excesses
of Passions. p. 274. 18. General Rules praes^^ibed by the Author, how to
praevent the Delusion of the Understanding, and dependent seduction of the Will
by Evil disguised under the similitude of Good. p. 275.
SECT. III. ARTIC. 1. AN objection, that Ignorance is the mother of sin. p. 277
2. The same expeded, by a Distinction of Science into Habitual, and Actual.
ibid. 3. A reply, that the reluctance of every Delinquents Conscience, does
evidence the possibility of man's doing an Act repugnant to his Actual Science.
p. 278. 4. The Rejoinder, that the Ha^itual Science of every Delinquent, is
perturbed and obnub^lated by some Passion, excited in him: and that the Remors
of Conscience proceeds from the sense of the Loss of Good. p. 279 5. What kind
of Ignorance that is, which may, in some degree, excuse a Delinquent. p. 280.
6. Four weighty Reasons, convincing, that man has an Absolute Power in himself
to control the temptations of Evil. p. 282. 7. What those First Motions are,
which objects inevitably excite in the Mind: and that the Consequences of those
motions are praeventible. p. 283. 8. Necessity and Fear conceded to be, in some
measure, Excuses: and what are the objects of Excusing Fear. p. 286.

CHAP. VIII. Of Fortune. page 289. ARTIC. 1. THe Antiquity and Genealogy of
Fortune. p. 289. 2. Plato and Arist. their Descriptions of Fortune examined,
and illustrated: and 3. Conclusions inferred thereupon. p. 291. 3. Their
Anatomy of her Nature, deficient: and a more perfect one praesented. p. 293. 4.
Fortune, nothing but a mere Negation of all Praenotion i^ a Concourse of
Natural Causes, respective to a Fortuitous Event. p. 295. 5. Epicurus
commended, for illustrating the instability and uncertainty of Fortune. ibid.
6. Her Indivinity manifested: and how she came by her Deification. p. 296. 7.
All sober Philosophers vindicated from the guilt of ascribing Divinity to
Fortune. p. 297. 8. The Necessity and use of Allegorical, Symbolical, and
Emblematical Traditions, invented by the Ancients. p. 298. 9. Their
Descriptions of Fortune, only Emblematical. p. 299. 10. As also the Images of
Fortune framed by Painters, and Statuaries. p. 300. 11. The review, tolerating
the name of Fortune, in respect to man: but detesting it, in respect to God. p.
301.
CHAP. IX. Of Fate. page 302. SECT I. ARTIC. 1. THe conveni^nt redu^tion of all
opinions, concerning the Essence of Fate, to 2. General Heads. p. 302. 2. What
the Platonist and Stoic meant by Fate, considered ((...)) as a substance. p.
303. 3. And, what ((...)) as an Energy or Act: together with the etymological
reasons of those sundry Appellations, the Stoics have imposed upon it. p. 304.
SECT II. ARTIC. 1. THe second Classis of Philosophers, who understood Fate to
be a Constitution merely Natural subdivided into 2 distinct Sects: viz. (1)
those who assert the Immutability and Inevitability of Fate; (2) those who
d^fend the possibility of its Alteration and Evasion. p. 305. 2. The Leaders of
the First Sect, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Leucippus, Pa^menides, and chiefly
Democritus. p. 306. 3. Democritus justly changed with the patronage of
Inevitable Fate: and his doctrine conc^rning it concisely r^hearsed. ibid.
SECT. III. ARTIC. 1. THe Principal of the Second Sect, Aristotle and Epicurus.
p. 312. 2. The Grounds of the Authors in putting the opinion both of Fates
Identity with Nature, and the possibility of its Mutation and Declination, by
either Fortuitous or Arbitrary Antagonists, to Aristotle. ibid. 3. Epicurus
unanimo^s to Aristotle, in the point of Physical and Eluctable Necessity. p.
314. 4. The scope of Epicurus his Figment of the Declination of Atoms in the
human Soul: and his Accommodation thereof to the tuition of man's Liberty
epitomized. ibid. 5. An Exception, in the name of Democritus, against Epicurus
Inference. p. 316. 6. The justification thereof, by a Respons conform to the
Physiology of Epicurus p. 317. 7. The most weighty Rejoinder, (of the connection
of those Causes, which Avert the Mind from, so well as of those, which Attract
it to an object, to the eternal Series* of Fate) found too light to overbalance
Epicurus his defense of man's Liberty. p. 319.
SECT. IV. ARTIC. 1. MAthematical Fate briefly described p. 321. 2. The gross
Vanity thereof concealed from many Philosophers, only by the cloud of
Transcriptive Adhaesion to Antique Traditions. ibid. 3. The Absurdity of
Sydereal Necessity evicted (1) by an Argument desumed from the Hypothetical
Necessity of the Matter on which Celestial Impressions are to operate. 323 4.
(2) By the common Experiment of the unaequal Fortunes of Twins. p. 324. 5. (3)
By the double Impiety, inseparable from the belief thereof. p. 325.

CHAP. X. The Liberty of Man's Will, Fortune, and Fate conciliated to Providence
Divine. page 328. SECT. I. ARTIC. 1. THE intent of the chapter. p. 328. 2.
Democritus Fate, inconsistent both to the Fundamentals of Religion, and the
Liberty of man's Will: and therefore detested. ibid. 3. Aristotle and Epicurus
their Fate admitted, in that it is Identical to Nature: but abominated, in that
it clasheth with the Certitude of Divine Praescience. p. 329. 4. The Platonic
and Stoic Fate embraced, so far as it is conceded to be a Constitution of the
Divine Wisdom: but abandoned, in that it detracts from Divine Omnipotence.
ibid. 5. In what qualified sense Christianisme may tolerate the use of the
term, Fate. ibid.
SECT. II. ARTIC. 1. FAte and Fortune conciliated, in the point of Providence
Divine. p. 330. 2. Plutarchs ingenious Assimilation of Fate to the Civil Law:
and his design therein. p. 331.
SCET. III. ARTIC. 1. FAte concentrical to man's Elective Liberty, in the point
of Praedestination. p. 332. 2. The Concord betwixt Theology and Philosophy, in
their admission of 2. orders of Causes natural, viz. Necessary, and Free; the
ground of the Affinity both betwixt the Difficulties, and Solutions, on either
part: as to the Abolition of the seeming Repugnancy between Fate and man's
Free Will. p. 333. 3. The First capital Difficulty, desumed from Divine
Praescience; as stated by Divines. p. 334. 4. The same, as stated by
Philosophers. ibid. 5. The full solution of the same by virtue of the Divines
Discrimination of Necessity into Absolute and Hypothetical. p. 335. 6. The
Solution of the same by the Philosophers proving that the definite Praenotion
of future Contingents, is no Cause of their definite Contingency: but, e
contra, the definity of their Futurition, the cause of their definite
Praenotion. p. 338. 7. The Disparity betwixt Divine and Human Praenotion. p.
339. 8. The same exemplified. ibid.
SECT. IV. ARTIC. 1. THe Second Capital Difficulty, erected upon a sophism
called Ignava Ratio; as it respects both Theology, and Philosophy. p. 340. 2.
Two eminent Opinions of Divines touchant the Solution of this Difficulty,
recognized: and their judicious Modelly, in duly acknowledging the mystery of
Praedestination, to be Arcanum Divini imperii commended. p. 34^. 3. The First
opinion found totally incapable of Expedition from the Sophisme, Ignava Ratio.
343. 4. The Second Opinion, to a great part, extricated from the same
Labyrinth. p. 345. 5. The Fatists Subtersuge, of the Infallibility of Divine
Praenotion, praecluded. p. 346. 6. A second subtersuge of the Fatist, viz. that
the Subsequence of the Decree to Praenotion, does implicate the possibility of
its Elusion and Mutability; praevented. ibid. 7. A third Conclusion, viz. that
the posteriority of the Decree of Election to Gods praevision of man's future
good actions, does make man the Author of his own Discretion; detected and
redargued. p. 347. 8. Two Extracts from the praemises; (1) that the Cooperation
of man's Will to sufficient Grace, may be conceived a Cause of his Election: (2)
that to render a reason, why God did not constitute All men such as that All
should cooperate to sufficient Grace, and so be Elect; is an impossibility to
man's understanding; other then this, that such was his eternal will. p. 347. 9.
The former Sophisme, (ignava Ratio) in part dissolved, by Plutarchs
Distinction; that though All effects are comprehended in, yet all are not
caused by Fate. p. 348. 10. The insufficiency of that Distinction, to the total
solution of the Difficulty, duly acknowledged. p. 349. 11. The most promising
Responses of some Philosophers, concisely praesented: viz. of 1. Of Plato.
ibid. 2. Seneca. p. 350. 3. Chrysippus. p. 351. 4. Aquinas. p. 352. 12. These
acute Responses aequitably audited, and their import sound to be no more then
this; that man has a Freedom of Assent, but not of Dissent to the Will of
God. p. 352. 13. The Dehortation from immoderate Curiosity, in Divine
Mysteries: and concise Adhortation to conform unto, and calmly acquiesce in the
Revealed Will of God. 353.


THE EXISTENCE OF GOD DEMONSTRATED.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
ARistotle, though an Ethnic, poisoned Section 1. Article 1. Aristotle, the
most knowing and curious Ethnic, did yet by his silence in the cardinal point
of Theology, proclaim the impossibility of man's full understanding the simple
and perfect Essence of God.
with the Macedonian and Grecian Idolatry, nay so given over to that sottish
impiety, Polytheisme, that he could be content to make a Goddess of his Wench,
and offer solemn sacrifices to her as a Deity, whom his own obscene luxury had
degraded from the native dignity of Humanity, to devote his orisons to her for
good, whom his own temptations had frequently subdued to evil, as Gassendus
(Exercitat. 3.) out of Diogenes Laert. has accused him; had yet a strong and
noble sense of the supreme Being, as may, even by his adversaries, be collected
from hence, that he never durst adventure on a Desinition, nay not so much as a
Description of its Nature. For though he spun out his speculations of
Immateriall substances, (the only and proper theme of a Metaphysitian) into a
long (but knotty and unequal) thread of 14 Books: yet in the 13 first of all
those, he seems little better then wholly silent in all things that immediately
concern Theology; and in some few Chapters only of the last affords us a
sparing and timorous discourse of the Proprieties, or Attributes of the First
Mover. Now the pride and ambition of his wit would never have suffered his pen
to have skip't over that subject, which being the most abstruse, sublime, and
excellent, must by consequence, have adferred the most of glory and renown unto
his memory: had he not been fully convicted, from within, of the immense chasme
or gulf, that lay between the utmost extent of his own finite reason, and the
incomprehensibility of the Essence of God. This his evasion, or rather
supersession, some have been pleased to urge against his honor, as an argument
of his Ignorance in nations supernatural: but, in my construction, it is the
clearest demonstration of the Modesty and strength of his Judgment. For whoever
shall duly consider, how impossible it must be for humanity, dull, gross, and
narrow humanity, to behold Invisibility, derive Independency, calculate
Eternity, circumscribe Incircumscription, limit Omnipotence, understand
Omniscience, etc. and how dangerous a frenzy that brain must be disordered
withal, that attempts to describe what he does not, cannot know: will soon be
satisfied, that Amazement, and pious silence is the best Lecture man can read
on that immense subject, of which when we have said all we can, we have said
nothing, if we look forward upon that inexhaustible abyss of excellencies,
which must remain unspoken of, and indeed uncomptehended; that a professed
Nescience in this particular, is the complement, or zenith of all other
Science, which the mind of man is capable of in this life; and that Aristotle
may better pretend to the title of the divine Philosopher, for writing so
little of the Deity, then Plato for writing so much to no purpose, the latter
speaking little in much, the former all that can be thought in saying nothing.

And how far the ancient Hebrews (whose frequent visions Article 3. The Hebrews
Intimated so much, in the immoderate veneration enjoined toward his Name,
Jchovah.
of Gods reflexive glories, transmitted to them in the necessary allay of
sensible natures; as of the pillar of a Cloud, by day, the pillar of Fire, by
night, of Smoke, Thunder and Lightning on mount Sinai, at the promulgation of
the decalogue, etc. might have encouraged them to pretend a nearer acquaintance
with Divinity, then any other nation of the World) were from daring to conceive
any positive Adumbration of his Essence: sufficiently appears from that high
veneration their law enjoined toward his very Name, Jehovah. Which was never
to be pronounced by any, but the High Priest; in any place, but the Sanctum
Sanctorum; at any time, but on the Festival of annual expiation; and in any
case, but that of general benediction, when the Mercy and goodness of God were
to be derived down upon the people by the holy mediation of the anointed
successors of Aaron; under penalty of no less then death, and particularly
that cruel kind of death appointed for the punishment of Blasphemy: as stands
recorded in their Talmud, in the sad case of Teradions son.

Nor can the more illuminated Christian, though the superexcellence Article 3.
The clearer sighted Christian also can perceive no more of the Divine nature
then what is shadowed in its Attributes.
of his faith justly entitle him to this dignity, above all other darker
Religions; that he has the true knowledge of God, (i. e.) that he apprehends
him under that Idea, which he has been pleased to afford of himself, in the
sacred mysteries of the Gospel, as of a Trinity of Persons in an Unity of
Substance, etc. most judiciously and piously collected and knit together in
that admirable Anacephalaeosis or summary of the Christian doctrine, called the
Creed of Athanasius; raise the eye of his understanding so high, as to look
directly upon the Quiddity, or pure Essence of him whose dwelling is in light
inaccessible, and invisible: but must think it happiness great enough for the
entrancement of his soul, humbly and awefully to speculate him in the shadow of
his Attributes, and those only which mortality is qualified to understand.

This being duly perpended, our Reader needs no other advertisement, Article 4.
And therefore the Author restrains the readers expectation only to a
demonstration of the Existence of God, in this Chapter subnecting a short
scheme of his present design and Method.
that in this Demonstration of the existence of God, from the Idea of him
engraven by his own hand on the mind of man, he is not to expect any bold and
vain attempt of the description of the Formality or simple Quiddity of that
supreme Being, (which is the Fountain of all other Essences, and Soul of all
other Causes:) and it remains only on our part, that we tender him an account
both of our design, or scope, and of the method our pen observes in the
pursuance thereof.

Though we are fully persuaded, with Plato (Lib. 10. de l^gib. p. 871.) upon
the conviction of those innate dictates, which the reason of every man whispers
in the ^ares of his conscience (which proved the louder thunder of the two, and
spoke more terror to the miscreant Emperor) that time never produced such a
prodigy, as an Absolute Atheist, i. e. such a fool as durst indubitate the
existence of a Grandfather Principle, or first Intelligence, from whom, as
from the main spring in a Watch, or other Automatous Engine, all motion is
derived* and which constantly animates the great machine of the World: yet have
we too much ground to suspect, that the accursed sperme of the Giants is not
yet extinct, that every age can furnish us with a precedent of Theomachy, nor
need we look beyond our own Annals for a second to Caligula, or want a parallel
for Epiourus. Who, though they professed the necessity of a Deity, yet sottishly
ran into delusions equivalent to the downright denial thereof, and sinned as
high as blasphemy, in their endeavors to cut off those two cardinal and
inseparable Attributes of the supreme Essence, viz. Omnipotence, and
Omniscient-omnipresence, or Active-ubiquity; not allowing the Creation of the
World, out of nothing, to the one, nor the conservation, or Government of the
same to the other. And having made reflexious upon the unsuccesfull progress
many have made, in their enterprises of confuting this sort of implicit
Atheism, by the persuasion of Scripture only; we became of opinion that to
enter the lists with a Lucian, or Lucretius, and there contend with him
concerning the extent of Gods Providence even to every single and individual
nature, urging no other proof of the Affirmative but the bare authority of
Canonical Writ (though to us Christians of undoubted truth and more fiduciary
then demonstration) is the ready way to confirm him in his impiety, and stiffen
his infidelity, in regard a plain and just exception lies against the Circle.
Nor have we any probable way left to break his objections, but a sober
reception of them in the shield of reason, and a smart retort of arguments
desumed from the proper magazine of all temporal knowledge, the Light of
Nature. Hereupon, when we had determined with our selves to erect a building of
Physical science, upon those pillars, or principles, which to our judgment
appear most solid, firm and permanent, because most sensible in all the
operations or effects of Nature, that can any way occur to the disquisition
of Philosophy; as shall be amply commonstrated in the future application of
them to particulars: and submitted our assent to that excellent Rule of the
Schoolmen, Nulla res qualiscunque est, intelligi potest, nisi Deus
intelligatur prius, revived into an Axiom by the incomparable Des Carts, in
these words; Omnem omnis scientiae certitudinem and veritatem, ab una very Dei
cognitione pendere; adeo ut dum ignoramus Deu^ esse, and verum esse, nihil
omnino de ulla alia re perfect scire possimus: we conceived it necessary to
begin as high as the First Cause, God; and endeavor the demons^ration first of
his Existence, and consequently (for strict reason will never endure their
separation) of those two general operations of his Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness, viz. (1.) the Creation of the world ex nihilo, and and (2.) the
continual Conservation of the same, in its primitive harmony, by his
Providence; and this by Arguments so purely extracted from the chief
inducements of belief, that no Atheist, how acute, or refractary soever, can
justly except against them.

SECT. II.
It Is an Assertion, which bids defiance to a whole host of Scepticks; Article 1.
The mind of man can have no cognition of the nature of its objects, but by the
mediation of their proper Ideas.
that the Soul of man, while she animates this admirable engine, the Body, can
apprehend no more of the Forms of Entities, then what she reads in those
reflex. Characters, Images or Ideas, which she finds represented to her in the
mirror of Cogitation.

Now of those Ideas, or Representations exhibited to the understanding there
are three distinct orders 1. Some are Innate, Article 2. Those Ideas are 1
Innate. 2. Adventitious.
or Congenial; for that I may understand, what a Thing is, what Truth is, what
the act of Cogitation is: I need the assistance, or information of no other
nature, but my own. 2. Others are Adventitious, or emergent from external
objects; for that I actually hear sounds, see the light of the Sun, feel the
heat of fire and become sensible of all other qualities of bodies: I have ever
hitherto adjudged these acts of sensation to belong to my essence only at
second hand, as being derivative from other causes, foreign and alien to my
nature. 3. And finally others are Created, 3 Imaginary.
modelled, or coined in the mint of the Imagination; for the Fancy of the
most stupid Idiot is naturally empowerd to forge, or paint to it self, and
represent to the mind what images it please; as Chimaeras, Sirens, Harpies,
Goblins, etc.

As for those Ideas, on which I look as proceeding from things existent without
the circle of my self; I make this enquiry: whether Article 3. A strict
enquiry, whether the Ideas of objects existent without our selves, hold an
exact similitude to their natures.
there be any reason sufficient to persuade me to conceive, that such Ideas are
exactly like to those things; whether these Copies or transcripts are drawn to
the life, so as in all particulars to resemble their originals? And the
determination, wherewithal I satisfy my self, is this; that the Affirmative
is taught me by nature, as being hitherto instructed, that those Ideas have no
dependence at all on my Will: and so, by consequence, proceed not from my self,
but are obtruded upon my cognition even against my Will. For instance, whether
I will, or nill, I am sensible of the heat of Fire: and therefore think this
perception or Idea of heat, to proceed from something distinct from my self,
viz. from the heat of that fire, by which I stand, and obvious it is, beyond
all hesitancy, that I may judge that this fire does immit into me rather the
similitude of it self, then any thing else. The stability of which reasons, I
shall now strictly examine. When I here say, I am thus instructed by Nature; I
intend only that I am rapt on, by a certain spontaneous violence, or native
propensity, to submit my assent thereunto: not that this declared unto me to be
a firm and uncontrollable truth, by the light of Nature. For I discover a vast
and irreconcilable disparity between the Dictates of these two Informers: and
the Difference may be stated thus. Whatever things are declared unto me, by the
light of Nature; as this, that I am, because I doubt, that 2 and 3 make 5, etc.
can never, on any pretense, be doubted of, in regard there can be no other
faculty, or Criterion, to whose judgment or decision, I can afford so ample
and firm credit, as to that of the light of Nature, which only can teach me,
whether those things are true or false. But as for those Inclinations, or
Propensions natural; I have long since found, by deplorable experience, that
by them I have been frequently hurried unto, and in a sort impelled upon this
evil, in my solitary disputes with my self concerning my judicature and
election of the Good: and therefore am not in any measure convinced, why I
should depend upon their information, pursue their conduct, or resign my
assent to their testimony, in other cases. Again, though these Extradvenient
Ideas depend not on my Will; yet is that no valid Argument, that therefore of
necessity they must proceed from things without my self: for as those strong
Propensities, though seated in me, and as it were annexed to my very being, do
yet seem clearly distinct from my Will; so also perchance there may be another
third Faculty within me, which I do not yet sufficiently understand, that
coyns those Ideas, as hitherto my conceptions have ever been, that in my dreams
such Ideas are created in my brain, without the assistance of any foreign
Objects invading my senses. And, lastly, should I grant those Counterfeits, or
Ideas, to be desumed from things distinct from my self; yet could it be no
justifiable inference, that therefore they must in all points resemble those
things, or prototypes, from which they were transmitted: yea, in many
particulars, I apprehend them to be disproportionate and dissimilar, toto
coelo, by inequalities never to be parallels. To instance; I find within my
self two diverse Ideas of the Sun, the one taken from my sense, (which I
therefore think fit to refer to that classis of Ideas, called Adventitious)
representing the Sun in a very small round, of less diameter then a Coach
wheel: the other from the reasons or maxims of Astronomy, i. e. extracted by
way of induction, from certain Notions implantate in me, or by any other way
whatever composed or modelled; which represents the Sun in a vast
circumference, much larger then the Terraqueous Globe. Now both these cannot
exactly respond in magnitude to their Original, the Sun, existent without me:
and reason offers me invincible evidence to assure that image to be the most
unlike, which seems to have most nearly streamed from the Sun it self. All
which considerations to ample satisfaction evince; that hitherto I have, not
upon any scientificall and authentic judgment, but only upon a certain
obscure and blind impulse from within, believed, that there are a sort of
Entities existent without the sphere of my nature, which, by subtle transfusion
through the organs of my senses, convey the Ideas, or Idols of themselves into
my mind.

But I have found out another certain way, for the more happy progress of my
enquiry, Whether any of those entities whose Article 4. A second disquisition,
whether any of those things whose Ideas are sound in the mind of man, have any
real existence without it?
Ideas sojurn within me, have any real existence without me; and this is it.
These Ideas, considered in this relation, that they are certain modi cogitandi,
or means which the soul makes use of, in order to her act of Cogitation; have
indeed no dissimilitude, Alogy, or inequality amongst themselves, and all seem
to slow from me, in one and the same chanel, after one and the same manner: but
considered in this interest, that one represents one thing, a second another, a
third another quite different from both; manifest it is, that they hugely
differ each from other, as to the degrees of more or less objective reality.
For doubtless, those Ideas, which represent substances, are more something, or
(to speak more intelligibly, though more scholastically) contain in them more
of objective reality; then those which represent only certain modifications of
substances, or mere Accidents: and again, that Idea, by which I speculate some
supreme Essence, or Deity eternal, omniscient, omnipotent, creator and
conservator of this great All, etc. seems in severe truth, to comprehend more
of objective Reality, or Formal Verity, then such poor Ideas that carry only
the shadows of some subordinate, dependent and finite substances. Now evident
it is, by the light of Nature, that there must be so much at least, (if not
more) in the Cause efficient and Total, as is in the effect of the same Cause.
For, I demand, from what can the effect derive its reality, but from the Cause?
and how can the Cause bequeath that to the effect, which it self is destitute
of? Out of which root spring two branches of ever flourishing truth. (1.) Nihil
a nihilo fieri, nothing can be made by nothing. (2.) Id quod magis perfectum
est, hoc est, quod plus realitatis in se continet, fieri non posse ab eo, quod
minus perfectum est, A more perfect something, i. e. which imports more of
objective reality, cannot be produced by a less perfect something. So that I
may safely infer, that this position has not its verity restrained to those
effects only, whose Reality is Actual, or Formal; but extended also to those
Ideas, in which is considered only their Reality objective. For example; a
stone, that never was before, cannot only not now begin to be, unless it be
produced by some other thing, which in it self has formally and eminently what
ever is included in the perfect or full nature of the stone; nor can heat be
introduced into any subject, that was not formerly hot, unless by something of
equal perfection, or at least equivalent to heat: but, besides all this, there
cannot be in me the Idea of a stone, unless that Idea be first inserted into me
by some cause, wherein there is so much, at least, of reality, as I conceive to
be in the stone, or in the heat. For though that Cause transfuse nothing of its
Actual, or Formal reality into my Idea; yet am not I therefore to apprehend my
Idea to be the less real, but that the nature of it is such, that it can
require no more reality formal ex se, then what it borrowes from my cogitation,
whose manner of apprehension it is. But that this my Idea, comprehends this or
that objective reality, rather then another: this must of necessity inevitable
arise unto it from some other Cause, wherein is so much at least of reality
Formal, as the Idea contains of objective. For if I grant any thing to be found
in the Idea, which was not in the Cause thereof* that something it must derive
from nothing: but how imperfect soever that Modus essendi, or manner of being,
whereby a thing is objectively in the Intellect, by an Idea, or representative,
be; yet is it not wholly nothing, and cannot therefore proceed from nothing. Nor
have I any cause to suspect, that since the reality, which I consider in my
Ideas, is only objective; that therefore the same reality cannot be formally
inherent in the causes of them: but that it is sufficient to their nature, that
it be in them only objectively. For as that Modus essendi objectivus belongs to
those Ideas, by the charter of their own peculiar nature; so does that Modus
essendi sormalis properly belong to their causes, (at least to the principal
and grand cause) by the law of their essence.

Further though I allow it possible for one Idea to produce Article 5. A firm
induction, that its impossible for any Idea to import or comprehend more of
perfection, then its prototype, or cause.
another; yet I can never here admit a possibility of a progress in infinitum,
of unravelling the pedigree to a length so immense, as never to go so high as
the Adam, or Grandfather Idea, but must at length arrive at the Ne ultra, or
first Idea, whose cause is the Archtype or Protoplast, wherein all that reality
is inherent Formally, which is in the Idea only objectively. So that by the
light of Nature, I read this unalterable Axiom; that those Ideas or Images of
other natures, or entities, which are in my understanding, are certain
Counter-parts, or resemblances, which, in truth, come short of the perfection
of those objects, from which they were desumed, and cannot be conceived to
contain any thing greater, or of more perfection then their Causes.

From hence my thoughts advance to this conclusion. If the Article 6. And
therefore, if any Idea contain more of perfection then can be found in our
minds: certainly our minds cannot ^e the efficient of that transcendent Idea.
reality objective of any Idea be so great and excellent, that I may be assured
the same cannot be in me, either Formaliter, or Eminenter; and therefore I
cannot be the Cause of that Idea: by direct and genuine inference I determine,
that I am not alone in the World, but that there is existent in the universe
some other Being, which is the father of this Idea. For if I find no such Idea
occur to my mind, in earnest I know no argument, that may make me confident of
the existence of any one thing distinct from my self.

Now among these Ideas (that I may range them into distinct Article 7. The
diversity of Ideas, respective to the diversity of Entities.
orders respective to the several Degrees of Entities from which they result,
or are derived) there is one which holds forth me to my self (concerning which
no difficulty can be started, as to the concernment of the present
Demonstration) another which represents God; others which pourtray things
merely Corporeal and Inanimate; others which describe Angels; others resemble
Animals; and finally others that show me other men like my self.

As for those Ideas, which represent Men, Animals, or Angels; I easily
understand, that such may be composed and made up Article 8. The possible
originals of each sort severely examined, and all found to be desumable from
our selves; the Idea of God only excepted.
of other Ideas, which I usually conceive of my self, and other corporeal
Entities, and of God: though there were neither Men, nor Animals, nor Angels,
in the whole World beside my self. And as for those of Corporeal Entities; in
them I meet with nothing so great, noble, or excellent, which seems not to have
its fountain or origin in my self. For when I make a deep and strict
inquisition into them, I discover, that of those things, which they comprehend,
there are only very few, which I clearly and distinctly understand; such are
Magnitude, or Quantity extended into its three dimensions of Longitude,
Latitude, Profundity; Figure arising from the termination of that extension;
Situation of parts, or that position, which parts variously figurated obtain
and hold among themselves; and Motion, or the change of situation in the whole,
or parts composing the whole: to which may be superadded Substance, Duration,
and Number. But as for other things, as Light, Sounds, Odors, Sapors, Heat,
Cold, and other tactile qualities; these fall not under the comprehension of my
thoughts, but darkly and with as much obscurity as confusion: insomuch that
when I have summed up all I know of them, it amounts to no more then this; that
I am even ignorant whether they be true or false, (i. e.) whether such Ideas,
as I conceive of them, be the Ideas of things really existent, or of
Non-entities. For though I have faithfully observed, that Falsity, properly and
most emphatically so called, or Formal falsity, can be no where found in the
world, but in our judgments, or determinations: yet is there another Material
falsity in our Ideas, when they represent a Nonentity for a real Entity, a
nothing in stead of a something. Thus, to exemplify, the representations which
I have of Heat and Cold appear so narrow, dim, and confused; that my most
intense and acute speculations cannot acquire from them any plenary and stable
satisfaction, Whether cold be only a privation of Heat, or Heat no more but the
privation of Cold; Whether both be real and positive qualities, or neither? and
since there can be no Ideas, but as of real entities; in regard it is a truth
apparent, that cold is nothing else but a privation of heat, that same Idea,
which exhibi^s cold as something real and positive, may justly be reputed
false: and so likewise may others of the same series. To such Ideas therefore
it is not necessary, that I assign any other original besides my self; for
since they may be materially false, (i. e.) represent nothing under the
disguise of something: it is declared unto me by the Light of Nature, that they
proceed from nothing, (i. e.) that no other reason can be given, why they are
in me, but only this; that something is wanting to my nature, which is
requisite to make it absolutely perfect and complete: and if they were true,
yet in respect they exhibit so little of reality, that I cannot, in the most
abstracted contemplation, clearly distinguish that little from nothing; I see no
reason, why they may not worthily be counted the Minervas of my own brain, or
the productions of my own thoughts. Now as concerning those things, which are
clear and distinct in the Ideas of Corporeal Natures; I have discovered, that
some of them also be derived from the Idea of my self: such are Substance,
Duration, Number, etc. of the same classis. For when I consider a stone to be a
substance, or an entity constituted in a capacity of subsisting per se; and at
the same time consider my self also to be a substance (although I conceive my
self to be Res cogitans, a thinking ens, and look not upon my self as Res
extensa, a quantative or extensive; but upon a stone, as Res extensa, and not
cogitans, and that therefore there must be a great dissimilitude between these
two conceptions: yet they seem to be reconciled and shake hands in termino
substantialitatis) and also when I consider, that I now am, and formerly have
been; and when I have various cogitations, whose number I comprehend: I then
acquire the Ideas of Duration and Number, which I can after transfer and apply
to what other things I please. But for the residue of particular things,
whereof the Ideas of Corporeal Natures are composed: as Extension, Figure,
Situation, and Motion: these have not their residence in me (since I am nothing
else, in propriety of essence, but Res cogitans) formaliter: and yet, in
relation that they are only certain Modi substantiae, modificated substance,
and I also am a substance; they seem to be comprehended in me eminenter, by way
of transcendency. And so there remains unexamined only the Idea of God; in
which I am to consider, whether it include any thing, which cannot be
derivative from my self.

By the name God, I understand a certain substance, infinite, Article 9. The
Idea of God, here described, cannot be either formally, or materially false,
but the most clear, distinct and true of all others.
independent, omnipotent, omniscient, from which as well my own, as all other
dependent natures were derived; by whose incomprehensible Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness, the universe was created, according to the admirable Idea formed in
his own eternal intellect; and is constantly conserved in the same perfect
order, and exquisite harmony, which in the beginning he was pleased to
institute.

Now so divine, excellent, and perfect are all these Attributes, that when with
deep, yet humble and reverentiall thoughts I contemplate them, either
conjunctively, or distinctly, I become fully informed, that they are too great
and noble, to be derived from so mean, frail, and imperfect a being as my self:
and upon this firm foundation I erect to my self this verity; That God does
exist. For though the Idea of a substance be included in me for this cause,
that I am a substance: yet it does not necessarily follow, that therefore I can
have the Idea of an infinite substance, since I am my self but finite, unless
that Idea first proceed from some substance really infinite. Nor am I obliged
to think, that I do not conceive an infinite, by a true Idea, ^ut, as most
schoolmen will have it, by the Negation of a finite, as I understand Rest and
Darkness by the negation of Motion and Light: for, on the contrary, I
perspicuously understand, that there is more of Reality in an infinite
substance, then in a finite; and by consequence that the perception of an
infinite essence, the Deity, is elder then, and so precedent unto the
perception of a finite essence, my self. For I demand of the whole world, by
what means possible I should come to understand, that I doubt, desire, etc. (i.
e.) that something is wanting to my nature, which I find requisite to make it
perfect; if there were in me no Idea of a more perfect being, by comparing
whose perfections to my own deficiencies, I am brought to an assured knowledge
of the imperfection, and so the subordination and dependence of my own being.

Nor can it be objected that the Idea which I conceive of God is materially
false, and therefore possible to be desumed from nothing, as those Ideas of
Heat and Cold formerly examined: for on the contrary, in this interest, that
it is transcendently clear and distinct, and comprehends more of objective
reality, then any other Idea, which the mind of man can either conceive, or
create; no one is more true per se, nor in which less suspicion of falsehood can
be detected. This Idea, I say, of the supreme Being, perfect and infinite, is
most true; for though it might be imagined possible, that there is no such
entity existent, as my Idea represents: yet cannot it be imagined, that the
Idea of this Ens summum can exhibit unto me nothing real, as may the Ideas of
Heat, Cold, etc. Moreover, I am confirmed, that this Idea of God, is of all
others the most clear and distinct; for whatever of reality, verity and
perfection, I clearly and distinctly perceive in all other Ideas, is radically
concentred in this one, as in the Archtype, or universal fountain. Nor can this
my belief be staggered by this weak objection, that I cannot comprehend an
infinite, or that, besides these Attributes mentioned in the description of
this superexcellent Idea, there are myriads of other Excellencies in God, which
are too resplendent and remote to be gazed upon by the weak and purblind eye of
man's understanding, and too numerous to fall under the short Arithmetic of
reason, much less to be epitomized or decyphered in the unequal landscape of my
cogitations: for I know full well, that it is of the nature of an Infinite, not
to be comprehended by me, that am finite; that it is sufficient for me to
understand only so much, and to judge all those things, which I perceive to
contain, or import any perfection, and perchance innumerable other dignities,
of which I am yet ignorant, to be in God either formally, or eminently. So the
Idea, which I conceive of him, is of all others, to which my intellect can
extend its power of apprehension, the most perspicuous and distinct.

Notwithstanding, that I may leave no doubt to eclipse the splendour of Article
10. A declarement of the impossibility of the divine Ideas desumption either
from our selves:
this assertion, I permit my thoughts to run into this expostulation. Perhaps I
have not the just dimensions of my own essence; that I am a far greater and
more perfect something, then hitherto I have perceived my self to be; and that
all those excellencies, which I speculate in the Idea of God, are in some
measure potentially in my nature, though hitherto they have lain dormant, in
Capacity only, and have not been deduced into act: for I already find my
Cognition much increased, nor can I discover any impediment, wherefore it may
not be every day more and more enlarged even to infinity; nor also, my
cognition being so advanced, why I may not at length, by the benefit and
advantage thereof, aspire and arise to all those perfections of God; nor,
finally, why this capacity of arriving at all those perfections, may not
suffice, upon the stock of its own single power, to the production of their
true and adequate Idea. And I am answered from my domestic oracle, the Light
of Nature; that not one of those illations can stand. For, first, though it be
true, that my knowledge may by degrees be very much multiplied; and that many
things are in potentia in me, which are not yet awaked into their proper
operations: yet not one of all those properly belong to the Idea of God, in
which there is nothing at all Potential; for this very condition, to be capable
of augmentation by degrees, is an undeniable argument of imperfection.
Secondly, though my cognition should be more and more augmented; nevertheless I
understand, that it could never be actually infinite, because it could never be
raised to such an (...), or zenith, as to be above all possibility of farther
access: but my Idea of the divine nature represents him actually infinite, so
that nothing is wanting, nothing can be added to the perfection of his nature.
And lastly, I perceive that the objective esse of an Idea cannot be produced by
a bare potential esse, which (to speak like a metaphysician, and properly) is a
mere nothing: but only by an Actual, or Formal.

Now albeit there is not one among all these notions, which to my retired and
circumspect consideration, does nor appear a most serene, noble, and
illustrious truth, demonstrable by the light of Nature: yet since, when with
more loose and unattentive thoughts I examine them, and when the grosser images
of corporeal and sensible natures benight the optics of my reason; I cannot so
easily make it out, why the Idea of a being more noble and perfect then my own,
must of necessity proceed from some such other being, which is really more
perfect; for this respect, I say, I lead on my mind to a further enquiry, viz.
Whether or no I, who have this Idea, could have an existence, if there were no
such Ens as my Idea adumbrates, really existent? To particular; from what
original should my being descend? either from my self, or my Parents, or some
other essences of perfection infinitely inferior to that of God; for no fancy
can be so wild, as to feign any thing more perfect then, nay not equally
perfect with him. Now had I received my being from my self, undoubtedly I
should not then have been subject to those frailties of Dubitation and
Desideration, nor would any thing have been wanting to my nature: for at the
same instant, when I gave to my self a being, assuredly I should have given
unto my self also all those perfections, whereof I have the Idea in my mind,
and so I my self should have been God. Nor am I bound to conceive, that those
excellencies, wanting to the accomplishment of my nature, can be more difficult
to acquire, then those graduall abilities, of which I am already master: for on
the contrary, it is manifest, that it must import infinitely more of difficulty
for me to have had a being, (i. e.) for a Cogitant something to be deduced from
nothing, then for me being once constituted in a Capacity, to attain to the
cognition of many things, whereof I am now actually ignorant, which can be
esteemed no more but the Accidents of that substance. And assuredly, had I
borrowed the greater, my substantiality, from my own stock of power; I should
not have denied unto my self the less, those Accumulations, or accidental
additions, nor any other of those divine accomplishments, which I understand to
be included in the Idea of God: why? because no one of those seem more
difficult to be acquired; and if any were more difficult for me to aspire unto,
it is more then probable I should understand that difficulty, if I had those
Faculties, of which my nature stands possessed, from my own donation, in
respect I should find my power to be terminated in them. Nor do I evade the
convictive rigor of these reasons, if I adventure on this supposition; that I
have been ever heretofore, as I now am: as if the induction of this hypothesis
would be, that therefore I am to trace the genealogy of my essence no higher
then my self, or seek out no other cause of my Existence; for in respect that
all time may be divided into innumerable parts, each whereof has no necessary
dependence on the rest, either precedent, or subsequent; from hence, that I
have formerly been, is no valid consequence that therefore I must now be,
unless some other cause be admitted, which dothfreshly create me in each of
those particles, or atoms of time, and particularly in this instant moment, (i.
e.) does constantly conserve me in being. For manifest it must be to any that
looks attentively into the nature of Duration; that to the Conservation of any
thing through all those several minutes, in which its existence endures, is
required no less then the same power and act, which is necessary to the
Creation of the same thing anew, if it were not already existent: and
consequently, that the act of Conservation does not at all, but in the cloudy
reason of man, differ from the act of Creation. These things thus stated, I am
concerned to propose to my self this interrogation; Whether there be any power
inherent in my nature, whereby I may be enabled to conserve my self the same in
the future that I am now in the present? for since I am nothing but a mere res
cogitans (for here I precisely regard only that part of my self, which is
properly and distinctly a Cogitant substance) if there were any such power
conservatory radicated in my essence, doubtless I should be conscious of it;
but I am convicted, there is none such, and therefore from this one evidence,
that I cannot maintain or perpetuate my own being, for the shortest moment
imaginable: I judge, that I am subordinate unto, and dependent upon some other
Entity distinct from my self. But (to tolerate any doubt in this my meditation,
in order to the exclusion of all doubts from the intended result or conclusion)
put the case, that this Entitie, to whose sufficiency I owe my Conservation
(pardon o! thou incomprehensible Essence, thou great and sole Preserver of men,
pardon this supposition, that modestly intends only the clearer demonstration
of thy Supremacy) is not God; and that I deduce my production from my Parents,
or some other cause less perfect then God. For determination; it is an Axiom, to
which every Sceptick will readily condescend, Tantundem ad minimum esse debere
in causa, quantum est in effectu, there must be so much at least in the cause,
as is found in the effect: and therefore since I am res cogitans, a substance
thinking, and having a certain Idea of God in me, what cause soever be at
length assigned for the principle or fountain of my being, that cause also must
be Ens cogitans, and must possess the Idea of all those perfections, which I
ascribe unto God. Now of that cause it may be again enquired, whether it were
derived from it self, or from some other Cause; for if from it self, then may
it be naturally collected, from what has preceded in this disquisition, that
such a Cause is God. For as it has the power (or act) of self-existence, or
self-conservation: so also, undoubtedly has it the ability of actually
possessing all such perfections, the Idea whereof it comprehends in it self,
(i. e.) all such accomplishments, as I conceive to be concentred in God.

But if from some other cause; then I repeat my question again Article 11. O^
from some other cause le^s perfect then God.
concerning this other cause, whether that had its being from it self, or from
another, until I arrive successively at the first Cause, or highest link in
the chain: which also will be God. For no melancholy can be so absurd, as to
dream of a progress in infinitum in the series of Causes; especially, since I
do not here intend that Cause only, which did in time past produce me, but
principally that, which does conserve me in the present. Nor can it be
imagined, that a plurality of Causes met, concurred, and conspired to the
making up of my nature, and that from one cause I inherited the Idea of one of
the perfections which I attribute to God; from a second the Idea of another;
from a third, the Idea of another, etc. so that all those perfections may*
indeed* be found severally in the distinct and scattered pieces of the
Universe, but no where conjoined and amassed together in one single Essence,
which might be God. For on the contrary, the Unity, Simplicity, Inseparability,
or Identity of all those excellencies in God, is one of the chiefest of those
perfections, which I understand to be in him: nor, assuredly, could the Idea of
the Unity of all those his Perfections be placed in me by any other cause, from
whom I could not acquire the Ideas of other perfections also; nor could he have
effected, that I should understand them conjoined and married together by an
indissoluble union: unless he had also effected, that I should know what they
are, in their distinction.

To expunge the last scruple, and so render this demonstration of the Existence
of God, fair and immaculate; have not my Article 12* Or from our Pa^ents.
Progenitors devolved a being to my Parents, and they devolved the like to me?
and may not this Idea of those perfections, which I attribute to God, be
implanted radically in this my being so derived down to me by propagation,
without the necessary insertion of it, by the immediate hand of any such
Supreme nature really existent, in which all those Attributes are Formally
inherent, and coessential? By no means. For though I may, in some latitude,
allow my Parents to be the causes of my generation; yet cannot I think them to
be the cause of my Conservation, since they cannot conserve themselves: nor
have they made me what I am, (i. e.) constituted me to be Res cogitans, an
Entitie whose nature is to think; but only as subordinate and instrumental
causes, have contributed certain requisite dispositions, or qualifications to
that matter, in which I understand my self, (i. e.) my mind or rational soul
(which in this discourse, I constantly take for the whole of my self) to be
enshrined. And upon the credit of this consideration, there can be no
difficulty taken up to countermand the certitude of my assertion; but I may
safely conclude: that from this position, I am existent, and my mind contains
a certain Idea of a most perfect being, (i. e.) of God; it is most genuinly and
most evidently demonstrated, that God is also Existent.

Having sufficiently assured my self, that this Idea, which I have of the
Supreme Being, or most and only perfect Ens, is too excellent Article 13. The
concernment of all; or a conclusion that the Idea of the divine nature is
innate and congenial to the mind of man.
to be desumed from my self, from my Parents, or from other Causes, which
import not so much of Reality Formal and Eminent, as the Idea imports of
objective: it remains only, that I explore how and when I received this Idea
from God. For I never drew it in through the windows of my senses; nor was it
ever obtruded upon me without either my expectation, or notice, as frequently
the Ideas of sensible objects are, when those objects offer themselves to the
external organs of the senses; nor was it ever modelled, or coined by me, in
the laboratory of my Imagination, since it is not in my power either to detract
any thing from, or superadd any thing unto it: Wherefore it must be primitively
implanted in, and congenial to my very Essence, no otherwise then as the Idea
of my self is implanted, or essentially impressed upon my self. And surely, to
a sober and well ordered consideration, it can seem no wonder, that God, when
he was pleased to create me, has imprinted this Idea of himself upon my Soul,
that it might remain as an indelible Mark or Signature; whereupon when I
reflect my cogitations, I should instantly know and acknowledge my self to be
the work of his almighty hand. Nor is it necessary, that this Mark or Impress
should be a thing plainly distinct from the work it self, from my Essence; but
upon this one ground, that God has created me; it is very credible; that he
created me, in some degree, or respect, after the Similitude and image of
himself, and that this Similitude, wherein the Idea of God is included, may be
understood by me, by the operation or information of the same Faculty, by which
I am empowered to understand my self: (i. e.) that when I convert the eye of my
Soul, my reason, inwards upon my self; I do not only clearly perceive my self
to be an Entity incomplete, dependent on some Superior principle, and
indefinitely aspiring ^o greater and better things: but at the same instant, I
understand also that Superior Principle, upon which I depend, to possess all
those greater accomplishments, not indefinitely and in potentia only, but even
infinitely and actually, and so to be God.

And so all the nerves of the Argument may be twisted together Article 14. An
abstract, or Anacephalaeosis of the whole demonstration.
into this short (though never-to-be-b^oken) Cord; that I cannot but
acknowledge it an absolute impossibility that I should exist, being of such a
nature as I am, (i. e.) having the Idea of God imprinted upon my mind, unless
God also did really exist: that very God, I mean, whose Idea is in me, (i. e.)
an infinite essence actually possessing all perfections, which though I cannot
comprehend, yet in some degree I can, with humility and veneration, speculate,
through the perspective of profound and abstracted Cogitation.

SECT. III.
NOw in consideration that many of those Metaphysical Terms, and singular
expressions, which I have been forced to make use of in the precedent
demonstration of the Existence of God, may be conceived either too difficult
for the unriper sort of heads, or at least ambiguous, and therefore subject to
perversion, as not being sufficiently adequate and restrained to those notions,
to which I have applied them; I have thought it requisite to subjoyn the
particular Explanation, or proper definition of each, that I could believe
subject to obscurity, or exception.

In the word Cogitation, I comprehend whatsoever is so contained in us, that we
are immediately conscious thereof. Thus all Article 1. The importance of the
term, Cogitation.
the operations of the Will, Intellect, Imagination, and Senses fall under this
one notion of Cogitations: and the particle immediately, I have annexed to
exclude all those things, that are consequent to these operations, as motion
voluntary has Cogitation for its original, but is it self plainly distinct
from cogitation.

^y an Idea, I understand that form of any Cogitation, by the immediate
perception whereof I come to be fully conscious Article 2. Of an Idea.
of that particular cogitation; so that I can express no one thing in words,
when I understand what I speak, but from thence it is made evident unto me,
that I have in me the particular Idea of that thing, which I signify by those
words. And so I do not call only those Images depicted or engraven on my
Pharisie, Ideas: yea, in this discourse, I do not allow them to be Ideas as
they are depicted in my Phansy corporeal, i. e. in any parcel of my brain; but
only as they serve, as certain characters, to inform my mind, when converted
upon that part of my brain, where my fancy is seated.

By the objective reality of an Idea, I intend the Entity of that thing
represented by that Idea. And according to the same intention, Article 3. Of
the objective reality of an Idea.
we may say, the Perfection objective, or Artisice objective, etc. For whatever
things we perceive as in the objects of Ideas, the same things in every
particular are objectively included in the Ideas of those objects.

The same things are said to be Formally in the objects of Ideas, Article 4. Of
the Formal, and eminent being of Attributes in the objects of of Ideas.
when they are truly such in them, as we perceive them to be, or when our Ideas
expressly respond to their nature: and Eminently, when they are not indeed
Talia, but Tanta, equivalent, insomuch that they may be their convenient
substitutes, or serve in their rooms.

A Substance signifies any thing wherein, as in subjecto, is immediately
Article 5. Of a substance.
inherent any Quality, or Attribute, whose Idea is in us; or upon which any
thing, that we perceive, immediately depends for its existence. For we can have
no other Idea of a substance, precisely so taken, more then this; that it is a
thing, wherein either Formally, or Eminently that something which we perceive,
or which is objectively in any of our Ideas, has its necessary existence: why?
because the light of Nature makes authentic that Axiom, Nullum esse nihili
reale attributum; or, as Aristotle, Non-ent is non sunt Accidentia.

By the term Men's, the Mind, I import a substance, whose prime Attribute is
Cogitation; for in this place I speak rather of Article 6. Of the word, Mind.
the Mind, then of the Soul, in regard the word Soul is equivocal, and
frequently used to express something corporeal.

By a Body is implied that Substance which is the immediate Article 7. Of a
Body.
subject of extension local, and other accidents, which presuppose extension,
as Figure, Situation, local Motion, etc.

Two substances are said to be really distinguished, when each Article 8. Of
the real distinction of two substances.
of them can realy subsist without the assistance of the other.

That substance, which we understand to be supremely perfect, and wherein we
perceive no defect, or limitation of perfection Article 9. Of the substance
supremly perfect.
to be involved, is that we call God.

SECT. IV.
THe Achilles, or most potent objection, which not only the Article 1. Object.
1. That the mind of man, being finite, cannot extend to the clear and distinct
intellection of an Infinite, quatenus an Infinite: and the
feirce Militia of the Pulpit; but even such more temperate heads, as have not
been refined to a height sufficient to admit the tincture of abstracted and
immaterial notions, may send to encounter my Assertion, That I have a clear,
distinct, and true Idea of God in my mind, is this: Infinitum, qua infinitum,
est ignotum, that God being infinite, and therefore incomprehensible, it is
impossible for man, while his intellect is muffled up in flesh, to have a clear
and distinct Idea of his Being. To instance in a thing, betwixt which and the
infinity of God is a vast disparity; let the most Geometrical wit in the World
think with the most serious, midnight and fixed attention, upon a Chiliagon, or
figure with a 1000 Angles: yet shall he acquire in his mind, but a dark and
confused representation or model thereof, and cannot distinctly either
adumbrate or conceive that chiliagonicall figure; because he does not
particularly and totally speculate each one of the 1000 sides, or lateral
lines, of which it does consist. And if so, well may it be doubted, how I can
conceive the Idea of an Infinite, distinctly and without confusion; when I
cannot exalt my thoughts to survey all those innumerable perfections, which
meet together to the constitution of its infinity.

This doubt I must welcome, and honor, as the laudable Solution thereof by
three distinctions.
effect of that due veneration, or noble zeal, which ought to be kindled in
every breast, upon the sense of that immense disproportion betwixt the
invisibility, infinity, and incomprehensibility of the Creator; and the narrow
extent, or, indeed, the comparative nothing of the Creature; nor can I think
the debasement of our own limited nature, other then a pious and worthy
cognizance of the majesty and incircumscription of his: yet to satisfy, that
none can have a more lively apprehension of his own frailties, infirmities and
defects, nor a greater esteem of the excellencies and accomplishments of God,
then my self; and that I more then once looked upon, and thoroughly examined the
weight of this scruple, long before I thought it safe to acquiesce in the
Affirmative, I thus answer.

An Infinite, quatenus an infinite, can, in troth, by no means 1.
be comprehended; and yet nevertheless it may be understood: insomuch as
clearly and distinctly to understand the nature of any thing to be such, as
that no limits, terminations, or circumscriptions can be found therein; is
clearly and distinctly to understand the same to be infinite. And here I
distinguish betwixt Indefinitum and Infinitum; calling, properly and precisely,
that an infinite, in which no limits, terms, or ends can be, on any part,
discovered; in which acceptance, God is only infinite: but such things,
wherein, under some latitude of reason only, I acknowledge no end or
termination; such are the extensions of the imaginary space without
Trismegistus his circle, or on the outside of the world; the multitude of
Numbers; the divisibility of the parts of quantity, etc. such I call
Indefinite, and not infinite, because on some part they must confess a
finality, or termination.

Again, I put a difference between the Formal Reason, or Insinity ^.
of an infinite; and the subject of that infinity, or thing which is infinite.
Now, as for the Infinity; though we understand that to be most Positive; yet we
cannot understand it but only by a kind of Negation, viz. from hence, that we
can discover no limitation in the thing: but as for the subject of this
infinity, or infinite thing, we understand it Positively, but not adequately
(i. e.) we do not comprehend all that is intelligible in that thing. Thus when
we cast our eyes upon the Sea, though our sight cannot extend to all and every
part thereof, nor measure every inch of its immense vastity; yet may we be
properly said to behold the sea. And if we look upon it at a great distance, so
that our eyes seem to take it in all at once, we do not see it but dimly and
confusedly, as it were in a thin, blew landscape; as also we do not imagine a
Chiliagon but obscurely and in fractures, when we comprehend all the lateral
lines thereof at once: yet if we approach the sea at a very vicine distance,
and earnestly fix our eyes upon any one part thereof, such a vision may be
clear and distinct, as also may the imagination of a Chiliagon, if our Fancy
extend to no more, then one or two of the sides thereof at once. By the same
reason, that God cannot be comprehended by the narrow mind of man, I willingly
grant with all the schoolmen; nor can he be distinctly understood by those,
who unadvisedly endeavor to comprehend him all at once, and as it were to gaze
upon him a far off; in which laudable sense, the most subtle Dr Thom. Aquin.
affirmed, Cognoscere Deum esse in aliquo communi, sub quadam confusione, in
quantum scilicet Deus est hominis beatitudo, id naturaliter nobis insertum est,
that the cognition of the Being of God, is implanted in our minds, under a
certain confusion, or cloudy representation* but whoever, with a praevious awe,
and becoming reverence, shall endeavor to single out his perfections,
contemplate each successively, not so much to comprehend them, as to be
comprehended by them, and employ all the nerves of their intellect (sequestered
from the contagion of sensibility and Corporeity) in the long and wary
speculation of them: such happy persons shall assuredly find in him more
satisfactory, ample, and easy matter of clear and distinct cognition, then in
all the world beside.

Thirdly, I discriminate an Intellection Adequate, from an Intellection
Gradual, or conform to the slender capacity of man. 3.
For the First, twere madness beyond the power of Hellebor for any man to
dream, that he could understand an Infinite, Conceptu adaequato, by a
comprehension fully as large, and exactly proportionate unto that Infinite; nay
it may be a very hard question, whether the arms of our understanding be long
enough to commensurate the full nature of any Finite object, though nere so
small, by an Idea exactly respondent, and equal in all points: for the other,
every sober man is able to find within himself, that the wings of his mind are
not so clipped, as that it cannot aspire to the Gradual cognition of an Infinite,
finita and ad modulum humani ingenii accommodata cognitione. If any shall
pervert this Distinction to so sinister a latitude, as to retort; that when I
confess my understanding too shallow and dark to comprehend an infinite,
Conceptu adaequato, I do at the same time implicitly concede, that I can know
no more then a part of an infinite, and indeed the least part which can be said
to carry the representation of an infinite no more then the effigies of one
single hair to represent the whole body of a man: I shall smoothly rejoyne,
that to affirm, that if we fully comprehend any thing, that thing must be
infinite, is a plain and obvious contradiction in terminis; since the Idea of
an infinite, if true, cannot be comprehended, Incomprehensibility being the
formal attribute of an infinite; and yet nevertheless it is evident, that the
Idea, which we have of an infinite, does resemble not only some one particular
part, but even really and truly the whole thereof, eo modo, quo repraesentari
debet per humanam ideam, though doubtless a far more accurate and distinct, (i.
e.) perfect Idea may be allowed to be in the more luminous and clear intellect
of God, of Angels, or other natures more intelligent then man. Thus we doubt
not, but a Clown, who never heard of Euclid, or learned one Axiom in Geometry,
may notwithstanding have in his mind the Idea of a whole Triangle, when he is
once instructed, that a Triangle is a Figure comprehended in three lines,
though he remain ignorant of many other things, which a learned Geometrician
knows intelligible in that Figure, and insatiately speculates in the Idea
thereof: for, as to understand a figure included in three lines, is sufficient
to acquire the Idea of a whole Triangle; so also to understand a thing not to
be comprehended or terminated by any limits or ends, is sufficient to the
acquisition of a true and entire Idea of the whole infinite.

This Idea you have of God, is no more then Ens rationis, a Article 2. Object.
2. That the Idea of the divine nature, resident in the mind of man, is a mere
Ens rationis: and the Solut.
mere figment, or Chimaera, that has no existence at all but in your
intellect; and therefore has no more of perfection, or reality objective then
your own mind that framed it.

Ens rationis has a double signification; (1.) it imports a mere abstracted
Notion, devoid of all reality, or a pure Nonentity; (2.) it signifies every
operation of the intellect, or, more plainly, Ens a ratione profectum: in which
acceptance, the whole World may be properly styled Ens rationis divinae, or an
entity created by a simple and pure act of the divine intellect. Now in this
last sense only can I allow that transcendent Idea of God to be Ens rationis, a
clear and distinct representation of the most perfect Being, engraven by his
own finger upon my understanding: and to that unprevaricate judgment, that
shall maturely perpend the contents, and logical connection of our precedent
meditation, it will plainly appear, that we intend such a Perfection, or
reality objective in this Idea, which (no less then that Artifice objective,
which is in the Idea of any engine most ingeniously fabricated) requires a
Cause, wherein all that is really and formally contained, which is included in
the Idea only objectively, and at second hand, or by reflection.

Though we grant your Thesis, that this Idea has more of Perfection, or
objective reality, then your Mind: yet cannot Article 3. Object. 3. That an
effect may have more of reality, or perfection then its Cause: and the
your Assumption stand, that therefore your Mind cannot be the Author of this
Idea; since an Effect may have a degree of Perfection, or reality, which
neither is, nor ever was in the Cause thereof. To instance, common observation
teaches, that Flies, Frogs, etc. insects, as also some Plants are generated by
the Sun, rain, and earth mutually cooperating by a kind of seminal
confermentation, or fertile putrefaction; and yet in neither of those causes
will any man allow so high a Perfection, as that of Vitality: Ergo, etc.

My Inference is founded on the rock of reason, and therefore Solut.
too impregnable to be demolished by so feeble a battery. For first, it is
indubitate, that there can be no Perfection in Animals devoyd of reason, which
is not also in bodies devoyd of Animation; or if there were, that Perfection
must be extradvenient, or derived unto them from some foreign principle: nor
are the Sun, rain, and earth the Adequate Causes of Insects, or Animals whose
produ^^ion is spontaneous and without other seminalitie, then that analogous
sperme of corruption; and it sounds discordant in the harmonious ears of logic
for any man, only because he is ignorant of any other Cause that may conduce to
the genera^ion of an insect, (i. e.) has so many degrees of perfection, as as
an Insect has, therefore to stagger the truth of an Axiom ratified by the
Light of Nature. For, Quod nihil sit in effectu, quod non vel simili, vel
eminentiori aliquo modo praeextiterit in causa, is a First notion, at which no
man can quarrel* but he must implicitly abjure his own reason: nor does the
ancient and vulgar maxim, a nihilo nihil sieri, differ from it, but only in
terminis; because if it be conceded, that any thing is found in the effect,
which cannot be found in its cause, it must also be conceded, that this
something was made by nothing; nor am I convinced why nothing may not be the
cause of something, but only from this evidence to the contrary, that in such a
cause there would not be the same, nor any thing equivalent unto that, which is
in the effect. Secondly, that my Mind cannot be the Efficient cause of this
transcendent Idea, needs neither declarement, nor support, other then this
canonical position; that whatsoever reality or perfection is only objectively
in our Ideas, must be either formally, or at least eminently in their
prototypes, or originals: and upon this one pin hangs all the certification, or
assurance, that any man can have of the real existence of any other thing in
the world (the supreme Being only excepted) besides himself; for from what hint
could we have suspected, that such or such things are existent, without the orb
of our own nature, but only from this: that their Idea, or representations have
been conveyed into our minds, by the organs of our senses? And that we have a
certain Idea, or umbrage of the most potent and most perfect Being; as also,
that the Reality objective of this Idea is so excellent, as that it cannot be
discovered to be in us either Formally, or Eminently: will be so clear, serene,
and orthodox a truth, as to be sworn to by any, who with thoughts sufficiently
constant and attentive (for it is a chief Postulate, or requisite condition on
the behalf of any man, that intends his own satisfact^on in this abstruse
particular, ut diu multumque in natura Ent is sum perfecti contemplanda
immoretur) shall be pleased to consort their meditations with mine upon this
excellent and most necessary subject. For it is not in the power of my pen to
obtrude that notion upon any man, the admission and retention whereof
immediately depend upon his own cogitation; I mean an assurance of the
certitude of this demonstration, when he is resolved not to be divorced from
that uncomely grandmother of Error, Prejudice; nor to open the ears of his
belief to the most prevalent charms of argument, or taste those limpid streams,
which slow from the fount of all our knowledge, the Light of Nature.

Whereas, upon a profound and calm consideration of all, and Article 4.
Object. 4. That the existence of such an excellent Idea, as has been d^scribed
of the Divine Nature, does not necessitate the existence of an Entity, in all
points respondent, or superior thereto: because of the possible composing such
an Idea, out of our collections from s^nsible objects: and the ample
each of those Attributes enumerated in your description of that excellent
Idea, which you pretend to have of God; as that he is a substance, infinite,
independent, superlatively both intelligent and potent by which your self and
all the world was created, etc. we find it not demonstratively necessary, that
the Idea of such an Ens, wherein all those perfections are concentred and
united, should be implanted in your mind immediately by that Ens: we conclude
that it may be framed and composed of your several Collections from other
external objects. To descend to particulars. (1.) When by the word God, you
understand a Substance; Reason, not any Idea, assures you, that God does exist:
Substance and Existence being twins, that cannot live but conjoined hand in
hand. (2.) From the notion Infinite, (i. e.) something that you cannot
comprehend nor imagine any limits, or extremes therein, so as that your
thoughts can ever arrive at a Ne ul^ra: there arises unto your mind an Idea
not of an Infinity divine; but of the termination or circumscription of your
finite nature. (3.) Independent sounds no more then this, that you cannot
conceive, or imagine any cause or original of God: from whence it is manifest,
that from the term Independent, you can collect no other Idea, but the memory
of your own Ideas, which had their several originations at such and such times,
and therefore are dependent* Wherefore, to say that God is independent, is
nothing more then that God is in the number of those things, of which you can
imagine no original, or Cause: as also, to say that God is infinite, is all
one, in the import, with this, that God is in the catalogue of those things,
wherein your thoughts can discover no end limitation, or circumscription. And
thus every Idea of God is excluded; for what Idea can there be, without either
original, or termination? (4.) Superlatively Intelligent; here we desire to be
informed, by what kind of Idea you understand the Intellection of God? (5.)
Most potent; here also we require by what Idea you can understand potency,
which imports things in futuro only, and therefore not existent? undoubtedly we
ascend to the cognition of power, by the steps of Memory, and reflection upon
former actions, progressing by the conduct of Ratiocination, thus; thus he has
done, ergo he had power thus to do, ergo being still the same, he has power
to do the like again in the future. Now all these are Ideas, which may be
extracted from external objects. (6.) Creator of all things; we can pourtray to
our selves a certain resemblance of a Creation, by drawing the reflections of
those things we have seen with our eyes; as when we imagine a man beginning and
growing as it were from a point to that figure and magnitude, which he has in
his full stature or virility: nor are we persuaded that any man can have other
Idea then this, at the word Creator; but yet that we can imagine the world to
be created, is no obliging argument to prove the creation. And therefore,
though it had been demonstrated by you, that something Infinite, Independent,
etc. does exist; yet could it be no genuine inference, that therefore a Creator
does exist; unless you shall adventure to undertake the justification of this
argument; something is existent, which we believe to have created all things
beside it self; ergo the world was once created by that something. In fine,
when you affirm that the Idea of God, as also of your own Soul, is implantate
in and congenial to your Essence, we desire to be instructed, whether the souls
of men, when they sleep most profoundly and without dreams, exercise their
faculty of Cogitation; or more plainly, whether they think? if no, then at such
times they have no Ideas: and therefore no Idea can be innate, or congenial,
for what ever is innate, is always present.

To the first part of this objection I answer in general; that no one of those
Attributes, which belong to my Idea of the supreme Solut.
Being, can possibly be desumed from External objects, as from an original, or
primitive exemplar: because in God we can find nothing which holds any analogy,
or similitude to those things that are in Corporeal Entities; but whatsoever we
contemplate in our Ideas that is dissimilar or disproportionate to corporeal
natures, that must proceed not from them but from the cause of that diversity
in our cogitation. And here I demand, how any man can deduce the Idea of the
Intellection of God from corporeal objects? but what kind of Idea I have
thereof, I fully explain, when I say, that by an Idea I intimate all that,
which is the form of any perception: and who is there, that does not perceive
(the Philosopher calls it a reflex act of the intellect) that he does
understand the nature of this or that object, upon which his cogitations is
acting; and by consequence, who has not an Idea of his own Intellection, which
by indefinite extending of it, he forms to an Idea of the divine Intellection,
and so of all other of his Attributes?

To the other part I return, in brief; that whereas I have made use of the Idea
of God, which is impressed upon the mind of man, as an invincible argument to
demonstrate the existence of God; and that in this Idea so immense a Potency is
included, that we may understand it to be repugnant to reason, if God does
exist, that any thing besides him in the world can exist unless it be created
by him, and dependent upon him: it cannot but appear a direct and just
induction, that the whole world, or all things else which are in being besides
God, were created by him. To untie the last knot concerning the eclipse of this
Idea of God, in our midnight sleeps, when all our Faculties disappear; it is
required only that I advertise the Reader, that when I affirm that there is a
certain Idea of God innate and congenial to us, I do not mean that this Idea
is always obversant, or constantly held forth to the eyes of our mind; for in
that sense no Idea can be innate: but only that we have within us a certain
Faculty or Power istam ideam eliciendi, of extracting it; or that by the
dignity of our Essence, we are empowered to speculate that Impress or Signature
of the Deity, when we convert our cogitations attentively upon it.

Though we should applaud your superstructure, that the Idea of God is not to
be desumed from any other cause but himself; Article 5. Object. 5. That the
Idea conceived of God, is capable of Augmentation and diminution: and the clear
yet can we not but suspect the stability of your Cornerstone, or capital
reason thereof, viz. that nothing can be superadded unto, nothing detracted
from that Idea. And toward the subversion of it, we need adferre no greater an
engine, then our friendly advice, that you would consider how small a
garden-plot of science, well manured, may in process of time be enlarged into a
spacious campania; that it is not impossible for you to be informed, either by
men more learned then your self, or by the extraordinary revelation of Angels,
or some other communication from other natures more intelligent then man, of
many more perfections or Attributes in God, then you have hitherto discovered:
that God himself may be pleased, by the irradiations of his sacred Spirit, so
to illuminate your intellect even in this life of ignorance, as to afford you a
brightet reflex of his glories, and so augment your knowledge of his
excellencies: that your Soul, when she shall have the dark curtain of flesh
withdrawn by the rough hand of death, and be advanced to the Beatifical vision;
shall know so much more of Divinity, then what you can apprehend now, that in
comparison thereof your present Idea of it, may well be accounted imperfect,
and therefore capable of addition: that in your infancy you perceived no such
Idea at all; at least it was not so accurate and perfect as at this day, when
it has received the accesses of your more learned speculations: in short, that
as you have not attained a full cognition of the perfections of inferior
essences, nor can ever hope for it, at once, but must ascend by the successive
gradations of new discoveries; so can you not acquire a full cognition of the
Perfections of the supreme Ens, at once, but may have your Idea of him made
more and more perfect every day, by new additions.

When you reprehend this tenent of mine, that the Idea of God engraven on the
mind of man, is incapable either of Addition, Solut.
or Substraction, you seem to have no regard to that Rule amongst Philosophers,
Essentias rerum esse indivisibiles. For an Idea represents the Essence of a
thing; to which, if ought be added, or from which, if ought be subtracted,
instantly it becomes the Idea of another thing. And by reason of their
ignorance of this truth, the Heathen, not conceiving aright of the true God,
fell into the woeful delusion of framing to themselves the Ideas of false ones,
and chiefly that of Pandora, (...), in whom all the endowments, or excellencies
of all other gods were concentred. But when once we have conceived the Idea of
the true God, however more and more perfections may be revealed unto us, which
were not formerly known to be in him, yet nevertheless is not the Idea of him
therefore Augmented, but only made more distinct and express: in regard all
those Accomplishments ought to be comprised in the same Idea first conceived,
insomuch as it is supposed to have been true from the very first conception.
Thus the Idea of a Triangle receives no enlargement, when several proprieties
are discovered to be therein, which were at first unknown. Nor is our Idea of
the Divine Nature formed by us in parcels, or by sensible additions, out of the
various perfections or endowments of the Creatures, amassed together, and
multiplied up to the rate of supernatural: but springs up to us in a moment,
perfect and entire, from this one root; that we understand him to be an
infinite Ens, so perfect as to be above all amplification, or access of more
perfection. Article 6. Many scruples, concerning the finality, manner, and form
of the Idea impressed; as also concerning the seeming He^erogencity, or Alterity
between the essence of the mind and that of the Idea: particularly satisfied.


Hitherto you have well calmed all those tumults of Doubts, which arose within
us upon the Lecture of your Demonstration of the Existence of God: but yet
there remain some few, though considerable scruples, the full and clear
solution whereof is required from you, before you can with reason expect to
bring us over to your side.

If the Idea of God be impressed upon you, as a mark or signature set by an
Artificer upon the work of his hands; what is the Modus of that impression?
What the Form of that mark? by what means can you discern it? if it be not a
thing distinct from the work it self, from your rational Soul, or Mind; is your
Soul then the Idea? is your Mind naught else, but Modus cogitandi, a certain
manner of thinking? can your mind be both the signature impressed, and the
subjectum impressionis, or matter upon which it is impre'st? Credible it is,
say you, that you are made after the similitude of God: True, by a religious
Faith elemented in us by the doctrine of Holy Writ; but how can you make it out
from Natural Reason, unless you adventure to make God Hominiforme, like to
man? And wherein can that similitude, or typical analogy consist? Dare you,
being a gross Corporeal Ens, poor despicable Dust and Ashes, presume to
resemble your self to that Eternal, Incorporeal, Immense, most Perfect, most
Glorious, and (what is of most weight in this particular) Invisible and
Incomprehensible Essence? Have you beheld him face to face? Nay, with Moses in
the cleft of the rock, have you seen so much as his back parts; so that you are
able to describe his aspect, and make good the Comparison? But you aver, that
it is credible for this reason, Quia creavit; now we retort upon you, that it is
therefore incredible: since there is no necessity that the Work should be like
its Maker, unless in the point of Generation, where the Production receives a
communication of the same nature, that is in the Productor: but you were not
Generated by God, nor because he was your Efficient, can you safely infer,
that therefore you are participant of his Nature; but you were only created,
fashioned by him, according to the exemplar or Idea, which was in the Divine
Intellect from all eternity. So it remains, that you have no more justifiable
pretense, to affirm that you are like him; then an Engine has to be thought to
bear the image of the Engineer, then a house has to be conceived like to the
Mason, or Carpenter that built it.

Further, (not to supersede a jot of your own sense, which may conduce to the
illustration of your Position) you subjoyn, that you plainly perceive the
similitude twixt God and Man, when you understand your self to be an Ens
incomplete, dependent upon some superior Principle, and indefinitely aspiring
to greater and better things: now in our judgment, this is an undeniable
argument of a vast disparity and Dissimilitude, since God, on the contrary is
most complete, most independent, most self-sufficient, as being Maximus and
Optimus. In very sooth, a Comparison 'twixt Light and Darkness, 'twixt Heaven
and Hell, 'twixt Good and Evil, 'twixt a Spirit and a Body, 'twixt Something
and Nothing, may be better endured; as importing infinitely less of Absurdity,
infinitely less of Impossibility. In fine, it cannot sound less then a
Miracle, that other men should not understand the same that you do; and
chiefly when there is no reason alleged, why we may not believe, that God
has impressed the Effigies of his Essence upon others, as well as upon you. We
profess, this one argument convinces us, that the Idea of God is not impressed
upon the mind of man, immediately by himself, as a signature, or Characterism
to confess our Creation; viz. that if it were, the Impress would be one and
the same in all men; that all men would then conceive God under the same Form
and Idea; would allow him the same Attributes; would have the same thoughts of
him in all points. But that all Nations, Ages, Religions, nay and Persons have
had various and distinct Ideas of the Divine Nature: is so manifest upon the
oath of Experience, that we may well here be silent, as to any other
attestation.

When you require me to prove, that the Idea of God is impressed upon the mind of
man, as a Mark or Signature set by the Maker upon the Work of his hands; and
what is the Manner of that Impression; or what the Form of that Mark: I appeal
to the decision of any sober Arbiter, whether it be not the same thing, as if,
when I had surveyed an excellent Picture, and deprehended so much rare art and
exquisite skill therein, that I could not judge it to be drawn by any hand but
that incomparable one of Apelles; I should affirm that this inimitable
Artifice, or perfection never to be paralleled, was a certain Mark, or note of
Distinction, set by Apelles to all his pieces, whereby they may be discerned
from the ruder draughts of other pencils: and you should notwithstanding press
me to tell you, what is the Form of that Mark, or Manner of that Signal?
Doubtless, such a Question deserves no other answer but a smile.

Again, to pursue the same adequate Simile, put the case, that I should aver,
that the singular Art, and unrivald skill, whereby as an infallible sign, the
Pictures of Apelles are distinct from the courser paintings of all others in
the World; is nothing really distinct from the Pictures themselves; and that
you should cavil at my assertion, and by irregular Logic infer, that
therefore those Pictures are naught else but the Artifice or Skill, in an
abstracted acception, and so are composed of no matter: Ergo they are only
Modi pingendi, certain manners of painting, etc. Would not your argument be
equally both as just and acute, as when you shall thus reason; If there be no
distinction between the Idea of God engraven on your Mind, and your mind the
subject, to recipient of this engravement; then is your Mind the Idea, and your
self nothing but Modus cogitandi, then are you both the Mark impressed, and the
subject of the Impression? I profess sincerely, after a due perpension, I
cannot determine, which of the two Inductions carries the greater weight in the
impartial balance of right reason: sure I am, that the Analogy stands fair and
even in all points.

Nor can your Contradiction of that vetust and almost Catholic Article,
Hominem esse Dei Charagma, that man is made after the Image of God, founded
upon a collection of those various particulars, whereby the Humane Nature is
discrepant from the Divine, be found more Dialecticall, or perswasory, then
this feeble, because preposterous Enunciation. If any Picture drawn by Apelles
did ever exactly resemble Alexander, then was Alexander in all parts exactly
like that Picture: but the Picture was made up of several different
ingredients or materials, as diverse Colors, oil, wood, vernish, etc. and
Alexander composed of skin, flesh, bones, hair, etc. Ergo, no picture was ever
like Alexander, the Disparity between his nature, and the nature of a Picture,
being so great, as never to be reconciled in a full analogy. For every
temperate brain knows full well, that it is not required to the Formality of an
Image, or Pourtracture, to be the same in all points with the Antitype, or
Original; but only that it resemble in some: and we all submit to this
Manifest, that that most perfect Faculty (so I speak as not being ignorant,
that all the Attributes of God are in him Actually; but wanting a word more
significant and convenient to this notion) of cogitation, which we understand
to be in God, is in some sort fitly represented by that imperfect one, which is
in Man. Further, I cannot but point obliquely at your imprudence, in chosing
rather to compare the Creation of Man by God, with the Mechanic operation of a
Mason, or Carpenter, then with the Generation of a Parent; since no pretext of
reason can justify that unmannerly Conserence. For though those three manners
of acting, Creation, Generation, Fabrefaction, stand a whole Genus wide of each
from other, and can never be brought nearer then the swords point: yet to argue
from a Production Natural to a Divine, is, by a whole climate, a nearer way,
then from an Artificial. Again, (to leave no point of a scruple unresolved)
though I have long since assented, that the resemblance betwixt God and Man, is
not so great as that betwixt a Parent and his issue; yet cannot I be brought to
hold it impossible, that an operation should ever be enriched with the Effigies
of the operator; since Experience whispers me, that I have seen a statuary
carve his own statue, out of white Marble, as well in the proportion and
symmetry, as lineaments of each part, so exquisitely resembling, that every
common-eye knew him as well by his Statue, as his statue by him. Nor is your
Memory more faithful, then your Judgment profound; for when you accuse me to
have said, that I evidently perceive the similitude betwixt God and Man, from
hence, that I understand my self to be an Ens incomplete, dependent, etc. You
make but a confused and perverse rehearsal of my words, which placed in their
proper order express the Antitheton, or quite contrary, viz. that from the
Imperfection, Subordination, and depending of my own nature, I deduced the
highest Perfection, Supremacy, and Indopedency of Gods; that whereas it was
essential to me uncessantly to aspire to greater and better things, and that
those greater and better things are actually inherent in God: therefore had I
in me something of Assinity to those greater and better things, by the
incitement whereof I become ambitious and aspiring to them. And truly, this I
inserted as an unquestionable remonstrance of the infinite Dissimilitude, which
I understood to be betwixt Divinity and Humanity; with design to prevent both
misapprehension and scandal, to both which, otherwise I had some reason to
conceive my self obnoxious. Finally, whereas you make it no less then a wonder,
why all men in general should not understand the same Attributes in God, that I
do; since if the Idea of his Divinity be impressed universally and equally, upon
the Minds of men, every one has as great a privilege, by the Charter of his
Essence, to speculate the same, as my self: in sober truth you may with equal
reason wonder, that since all men know the Idea of a Triangle, why all men do
not yet perceive as many Proprieties and Perfections in that figure, as learned
Geometricians do; and why some reason truly, others falsely upon that Idea.

CHAP. II.
That God created the world ex nihilo, proved by Arguments Apodictical.
SECT. I.
THe Existence of God being amply Demonstrated, it is a natural consequence,
that the whole World, Article 1. The inseparability, or (rather) identity of
God, and Creator.
and all things existent therein besides himself, were Created by him. For
those Attributes, Omnipotence, Omniscience, and Independence, which are
particularly, and in association required to that great Act of Creation, are
all (together with all other Perfections, that lie in the ken of man's
Cogitation) comprised under the Idea, which we hold of his Essence. Nor can any
man deny, that every single Entity in the vast ark of the Universe, was created
by, and holds its existence by dependence upon God; unless he shall have first
denied, that God does exist: which our precedent Demonstration has made appear
to be impossible. For at the same time he denies, that God does exist, he
unavoidably precipitates himself into an Absurdity, implicitly denying that
himself does exist: which his very act of denial contradicts; since, had he no
existence, he could not deny; all men embracing that Axiom, Non-entis non sunt
Actus. Article 2. The two respects, which inclined the Author to a more ample
comprobation of the first Art^cle of our Christian breed; together with a
d^elenchical explosion of that antiquated delusion, that the Universe was
autoctbonous in its original, or constructed merely by Chance.


Upon a serious perpension of the irresistible pressure or weight of this plain
and genuine Inference, I once resolved to supersede all other Arguments of the
Creation of the World out of nothing, by the sole and immediate Goodness,
Wisdom, and Power of the Supreme, because most perfect Being; especllialy when
I converted my thoughts upon the almost Catholic belief of this truth, every
man, at least, every Christian, receiving and retaining it as an Article of
Faith: but when my second and more advised meditations had whispered me, that
most heads are so indurate by the frost of ignorance, as not to feel the soft
touches of a Collateral and enthymematicall Demonstration; as also, that my
proper business was to evince by the testimony of mere Reason, what is commonly
embraced upon the single auctority of Moses pen: I could not but conceive it
necessary, in order to the plenary confutation of that as impious, as
ridiculous Error of some ancient Naturalists, that the World was made by
Chance, or Fortune; to endeavor the probation of the same, by other more direct
and express means of persuasion, deduced from the Magna Charta of all temporal
knowledge, the Light of Nature. Now that I may perform this, with that
exactness, and satisfaction, which is due to so excellent a subject; I am
necessitated to bespeak my Readers Patience to endure the recital, explanation,
and examen of those specious reasons, which deluded the uncircumspect and easy
judgments of those unhappy Pagans, who sitting in the Philosophers chair,
either founded, or supported, or repaired that detestable opinion, that Fortune
was the Author and Architect of this admirable fabric the Universe.

Epicurus (for him have I singled out, as the most notorious Article 3. The
summary of Empedocles, Leucippus, Epicurus, Democritus, etc. doctrine of the
worlds spontaneous result from a Chaos of Atoms.
Patron, though not the Father of this execrable delusion; since the moniments
of time assure the invention hereof upon his great Master, Leucippus) being
great with a monstrous design to expunge those Characters of Piety and
reverence toward the Deity, which the observation of prodigious Meteors, of
frequent Eclipses of the two great Lamps of heaven, of Thunder, and
Coruscations, of Earthquakes, of the regular and constant motions of the
Spears, etc. had impressed upon the minds of men; as also to eradicate all
conceit of the so-much talked of Compensation of good and evil actions after
death openly breaks forth into the insolent assertion of these three horrid
positions; (1) Quod mundus non sit a Deo constitutus, that the World was not
constituted by God; (2.) Quod mundus a Deo non gubernetur, that the World was
not governed by God; (3.) Quod animus noster non supersit a funere, that the
soul of man does not survive the funeral of his body. The First he essays to
declare thus; Existimare oportet mundos, uti and sinitam omnem concretionem in
immenso inani factam, quidpiam simile cum iis, quas passim observamus,
habentem, ortum ex infinita rerum universitate habuisse; and alios quidem
majores, alios minores, per proprios quosdam Atomorum quasi Vortices ((...))
seu convolutiones, seorsim procreatos, etc. (in Epist. ad Herodotum apud
Diogen. Laert. lib. 10.) The substance of all which, and much more to the same
intent, may be rendered more plainly thus. That the Celestial orbs, and all
their radiant Furniture the stars, are wheeld about, by a constant and even
circumgyration; that they veer perpetually toward that point of the World,
unto which they first inclined, and never change either the way, or tenor of
their Circumvolutions; that they observe the same distance each from other,
which they obtained at the instant of their Formation, nor sink down upon, and
so crowd or enterfeire each the other; that the Eclipses of the two great
Luminaries necessarily succeed upon the conjunction of the same Causes, in our
days, as in the infancy of Nature, and may therefore with so much facility, as
certainty, be prognosticated and predicted by the rules of Astronomy; in brief,
that such and such determinate effects arise from the Concurrence and
coefficiencies of such and such particular Causes, etc. all these we are not to
refer to any other Principle, or Efficient, but that Fortune, whereby they
were so and so disposed in the first Casual Emergency of the World; nor are
those constant and settled operations produced by any other necessity, then what
fell to their Efficients, at the primitive segregation, concourse, disposition,
coadunation of those Atoms, whereof their bodies are compacted. That before the
constitution of the Universe, there was an infinite Chaos of Atoms, of various
figures and magnitudes, in an infinite space, floating hither and thither,
hurried up and down, on all sides crowding, impelling, and justling each other,
by reason of the Tendency resulting from their own innate Gravity. That after a
long, long afflux, reflux, conflux, elevation, depression, coagmentation and
other various and successive agitations and molitions of these Atoms, when each
order had chanced to confront and meet with others most consimilar and
convenient; then at last they all conspired, acquiesced, and fixed in this
regular position and situation, which constitutes the Form of the Universe; as
Lucretius (who was deplorably infected with this accursed contagion of Epicurus)
has briesly expressed it;

Quae quia multa modis multis vexata per omne
Ex infinito vexantur percita plagis,
Omne genus motus, and coetus experiundo,
Tandem deveniunt iu tales disposituras,
Qualibus haec rebus consist it summa creata, etc.
The Worlds Materials having first been tossed,
An infinite Time, within an infinite Room,
From this to that uncircumscribed coast,
And made by their own Tendency to roame
In various Motions; did at last quiesce
In these Positions, which they now possess.
That upon the Diacrisis, or segregation of heterogeneal Atoms* succeeding upon
a circumvolution, gyration, or vertiginous eddy of them, in the confusion of
their eternal Chaos; the more gross and ponderous tended toward the Center, or
downwards, and in their descent expressed the more gracile and lighter, and
impelled them upwards, which convening all together in the circumference of the
immense vortex, wedged in each other into the form of an integument or cortex,
called Coelum or heaven; but the more gross and weighty, crowding to the
centrals, were there compacted and coagmentated into a solid mass the Earth:
and the remaining matter of a middle nature, upon the concurse of its insensible
particles assumed to it self the form of a Humid substance, and part thereof
being afterward circumagitated uncessantly, and so both tornated and
calefacted, was graduated into many orbs of Light, the Sun, Moon and Stars: the
residue being reserved for the compaction of other bodies; etc. And this, if my
memory has proved a faithful Steward of my readings, is the marrow of
Leucippus, Empedocles, Epicurus, and Democritus their doctrine concerning the
spontaneous configuration of the Universe.

It Is proverbial amongst Scholars, and long since applied by an Author of good
repute (Aneponymus, in lib. de substant. physic.) Article 4. A Digression,
winnowing the Chasse from the Wheat concealed in the former theory of Epicurus,
and by the corollary of some castigations, restrictions and additions,
declaring the great advantages, that this Hypothesis of Atoms has beyond any
other concerning the Material Principle of all Bodies, as yet excogitated.
to this particular Case; Nullam esse tam falsam opinionem, quae non habeat
aliquid very admistum; sed tamen illud admistione cujusdam falsi ^bscurari:
that no opinion has so much of falsehood, as not to contain some sprinkling of
truth; though that spark of truth be so obscured by the cloud of prejudice
arising from the discovery of the falsity admixt, that it may require the
subtle and decisive judgment of an Oedipus for its discernment and
sequestration. And in this heap of dross lies raked up so much pure and rich
metal, as* if by the chemistry of an industrious hand extracted, may more then
fully compensate the patient Lecture of a short Digression.

In this old Romance of the spontaneous result of the World from a Casual
segregation and disposition of that Abyss of Atoms, which rolled up and down,
to and fro, by an impetuous and continual inquietude, estuation, or civil war,
caused by their ingenite propensity to motion, in the range of the infinite
space; some things sound so harsh and discordant to mere Reason, as they are
justly to be abominated; others carry the smooth face of so much Verisimility,
as they deserve to be admitted, at least diligently and impartially examined.
The Positions we are to reject, are these; (1.) that the Chaos of Atoms was
non-principiate, or as ancient as Eternity: (2.) that they were not created ex
nihilo, ab aliqua beata simul ac immortali Causa, by God: (3.) that they were
not becalmd, separated, ranged, and disposed into their proper stations, in
that serene order and figure, which they are now of inevitable necessity bound
to observe, in every single concretion, or individual Entity, by the artifice
of any other Cause, but the blind Ordination, or improvident disposure of
Fortune. All which smells so strong of the Fable, and strikes the nosethrills
as well of the mere Natural man, as the Pious, with such infectious stench, that
nothing but the opportunity of confutation can excuse my coming so near it. And
yet notwithstanding, I have never yet found out any justifiable ground, why
Atoms may not be reputed Mundi materies, the Material Principle of the
Universe, provided that we allow, that God created that first Matter out of
Nothing; that his Wisdom modelled and cast them into that excellent composure
or figure, which the visible World now holds; and that ever since, by reason of
the impulsion of their native Tendency, or primitive impression, they strictly
conform to the laws of his beneplacuits, and punctually execute those several
functions, which his almighty Will then charged upon their determinate and
specifical Concretions. For, with the advantage of these restrictions, the
Atoms of Epicurus have more of probability, and hold rational through most of
those operations, which occurr to the curiosity of the Philosopher, with more
familiarity to our conceptions, and less variation or apostasy from the first
Hypothesis, then the impossible Materia Prima of Aristotle, then the
Substantial Principle of Plato, the Hyle of the Stoics, or, indeed, then any
other imaginable Praeexistent in the immense space. And after a mature
confronting, collation, and comparative perpension, of the most general
conveniences and congruities of all; we have found that, from the groundwork
of Atoms, we are able to make out what is Material, what Corporeal, what Great,
what Little, what Rare, Dense, etc. but from the others we could never deduce
the formal attributes of a body, or substance, while the original of all things
is determined absolutely devoyd both of Quantity and Quality Actual, and
amounts to no higher a degree of reality, then a mere Privation; which a
righteous enquiry will soon reduce to nothing.

Nor is that affrighting Dissiculty in the Theory of Atoms, which the eye of
every Pedantick Sophister first glances upon, at the very mention thereof, more
then this shadow of a scruple; viz. how so vast a mass, as this Giant the
Universe, could be made up of such minute particles, as Atoms, which every man
understands to be much below the perception of sense, and never to be fathomed
but by the subtle arms of the Intellect? For I dare entrust the solution of it
to any moderate judgment, that shall take the pleasure to conceive this
Analytick Scale, or degradation of Magnitude. Let us grant the globe of Earth,
which seems to contain most of corporeity, to be but one part of the Universe
composed of many such masses congested, and the law of consequence will compel
us to concede, that the globe of the earth may be coagmentated of many smaller
masses piled one upon another, or of mountains, as Atlas, Caucasus etc.
cemented together; that those Mountains may result from an aggregation of
rocks, those rocks from an accumulation of stones, those stones from a conflux,
and ferrumination of grains of sand, that sand from a lesser assembly of dust,
that dust from a minor collection of Atoms. This granted, let us have recourse
to that famous Demonstration of the glorious Archimed (in Aren.) whereby it is
evicted, that twenty five Ciphers, or Arithmetical notes set in successive
order, 100000 etc. do exhibit the full number of those Granules of sand, which
suffice to make up the vast bulk of the World, according to the vulgarly
received magnitude thereof, though each of those granules be determined so
exiguous, that one grain of Popie seed may contain ten thousand of them. I say,
according to the Magnitude vulgarly received; for if, with Aristarchus (whose
opinion Copernicus, in the last age, revived) you shall go higher, and enlarge
the extension of the world: yet according to the Algebra of Archimed, will no
more then sixty four Ciphers be required to calculate the number of grains of
sand, of the same dimensions with the former, which equal the almost incredible
vastity of the Universe. Now, if you please to go lower in the quantity of
those minute grains, and sink them down even to the tenuity of an Atom; imagine
that each of those small particles is composed of ten hundred thousand Atoms,
and advance this number by multiplying it into 64, and even then will the
number of those particles be expressed by no more then 70. Lower yet, if you
think your last division went not so far as insectility, dichotomize those
minute particles each into ten hundred millions; and then, upon a just
Multiplication made, the number provenient shall not exceed the reach of 76
Ciphers. Nay drive the matter so far, that your thoughts may even lose
themselves in the pursuit; and you shall still deprehend how easily you may be
supplied with Ciphers enough to fulfill the number of all those Atoms, which
are necessary to the amassment of a bulk* equal to this of the World.

There is yet a fourth incongruity in this doctrine of Epicurus, worthy our
explosion; viz. That Atoms had, from all eternity, a faculty of Motion, or
impetuous tendency, inherent in them, and received not the same from any
foreign principle, or impression extradvenient. But yet can I meet with no
impediment, that may hinder me from conceiving, that Atoms are perpetually
active and moveable, by the agitation of that internal tendency, or virtual
impression, which the Father of Nature conferred upon them, in the first moment
of their miraculous production ex nihilo. And truly, thus refined, the
Hypothesis of Atoms is less guilty of either inconvenience or incertitude, then
any other concerning the f^rst material principle; nay, it has thus much more
of congruity and satisfaction then all the rest, that it fitly declares the
radical Cause of all Motion, activity or energie in second Causes, or natures
once removed from the Primus Motor, God: which can by no means be commonstrated
from any other supposition, with the like constancy, correspondence, and
perspicuity; especially if we look upon that Form, which the Schools commonly
conclude on, as the main spring in all motion, or efficient of all activity.
For whatever of real Entity they allow to be therein, they desume from no other
origin, but the simple and naked Matter: and yet, by unpardonable
incircumspection, or forgetfulness, they make that Matter absolutely idle, and
devoid of all Motive or active virtue.

Nor did Plato himself miss this consideration, but seems to have held the lamp
to posterity, in this particular; for though he restrains not his notion to the
word, Atoms, yet from his description of an Exiguity, Quam intellectus, non
sensus capiat, and from the immediate subjunction of De multitudine illarum,
deque motionibus, alii*sque facultatibus, congruum prorsus erat Deum providere,
quatenus natura necessitati obediens ultro obsecundaret, etc. (in Timaeo) it is a
lawful conjecture, that he pointed directly upon the sense. These short
Animadversions premised, that we may as well supply the Defects, as correct the
depravities of this opinion of Epicurus; suppose we, in short, that God in the
first act of his Wisdom and Power, out of the Tohu, or nothing, created such a
proportionate congeries, or just mass of Atoms, as was necessary to the
constitution of the Universe: suppose we also, that all those Atoms, in the
instant of their creation received immediately from God a faculty of
self-motion, and consequently of concurring, crowding, justling, repelling,
resilition, exsilition, and reciprocal complectence, concatenation revinction,
etc. according to the respective preordination in the Divine Intellect: and
then will all the subsequent operations of nature remain so clear and easy,
that a mere Ethnic by the guidance of those two lamps, Sense and
Ratiocination, may progress to a physical theory of them, and thereby salve all
the Phaenomena's with less apostasy from first Principles proposed, then by
any other hypothesis yet excogitated. A mere Ethnic, I say; for we, who have
devolved unto us the inestimable blessing of Moses history of the Creation,
have far other thoughts of that method or order, wherein the World was founded,
and finished by God: but the pure Natural man, who wants the illumination of
sacred Writ, can follow no other conduct, but what, by the light of nature,
appears most consonant to truth. My Digression is now ended, and I return to
the discharge of my Assumption, the redargution of that blasphemous opinion,
which ascribes the honor of the Worlds composure to Fortune.

SECT. II.
ANd first I oppose to the Patron of this error, the more noble Article 1. The
conceit of the Worlds fortuitous production, disparaged by a prepollency even
of Pagan Auctority, that profoundly asserted the contrary, viz. of*
Auctority of many ancient and eminent Philosophers; who, though unhappily born
and educated in the midnight of Paganism, had yet their intellectuals, so
irradiated by the refulgent Light of Nature, which their Vigilance and
assiduous Contemplation always kept, like the Vestal tapours, shining and
uneclipsed by the Cimmerian foggs of Tradition and Prejudice, that they
discovered more then a glimps of Divinity in the original of the World. For

Thales Milesius, being introduced by Diogenes Laertius (in vita ejusdem) as
rendering a reason, Cur mundus sit pulcherrimus, Article 2. Thales Milesius.
of the extreme glory, comeliness, and decency of the World, and exact symmetry
observed in all and every part thereof; most wisely sets up his rest, and
silences all further dispute, in this full solution, (...), it is the Artifice of
God.

That Anaxagoras had found out the same truth, by his retrograde tracing of
nature up to her first head, or fountain; can be Article 3. Anaxagoras.
obscure to none, that shall do his meditations so much right, as to interpret
his (...), Men's, or supreme Intelligence, to be the same with that, which we
call God: for even our Schoolmen do as much, frequently using those
appellatives, Summa Intelligentia, and Deus, indifferently and as Synonomas.

Of Pythagoras and Plato we need no other record, then the single testimony of
Timaeus Locrus, who, being a famous Pythagorean, Article 4. Pythagoras and
Plato.
and therefore prudently deputed by Plato to deliver his own sense, in that
golden Dialogue concerning Nature, (which in the Commentary of Marsilius
Ficinus, signifies no more then Divinitatis instrumentum) in many passages of
the debate, or investigation, takes occasion to declare, Deum esse Parentem ac
opisicem mundi. Nor can it cost the study of many hours to collect from
Plato's other inquest into Divinity called Parmenides (who also was a disciple
of Pythagoras) or De uno omnium principio, and the now mentioned description of
Nature, Timaeus, conferred together; that both Pythagoras and Plato shook hands
in that opinion, that the world had its beginning, (...), not in Time, in
regard, as they conceived, it never had beginning, (...), but in Cogitation, i.
e. though it be Non-principiate, yet may our thoughts have the license to
assume that there was some praeexistent matter, out of which it was formed. For
they both apprehended so absolute a dependence of the world upon God; that God
being existent in the World, must of necessity be reputed the Efficient
thereof, insomuch as the World could have no other Cause of its Matter,
Distinction, Disposition, Beauty and ornament. And is not this the same, that
our Doctors now admit, while they defend, that the World might have been
created by God, had his Wisdom thought fit, from all Eternity; and if so, yet
notwithstanding he must still have been the Cause of it, in regard of that
necessary dependence of the World upon him, for if there were no God, there
could be no World: (...), by the same reason, as though we grant the Sun
together with its light, or a Seal together with its signature, to have been
from all Eternity; yet must we grant the Sun to be the Cause of his light, and
the Seal to be the Cause of its impression. For they condescend to this, that
an Effect may be coaevous to its Cause; and that, though the Cause be not prior
Tempore, it suffices that it be only prior Natura, or (...), which is the
very expression of Timaeus Locrus. However this may be disputed, yet sure I am,
that as well these two Patriarchs of Learning, as all their Sectators and
Interpreters were unanimous in this point, That God was Author of the Universe.

What the Stoics thoughts were, concerning this grand particular; Article 5.
The Stoics.
is public, and cannot escape the cognizance of any, who have looked into the
lives of the Scholiarchs, or Heads of that numerous Sect, amply registered by
the even pen of Diogen. Laert. or read Cicero's second Book, De natura Deorum,
where he elegantly personates Balbus smartly and profoundly disputing against
Velleius and Epicurus; whither I remit the unsatisfied Reader, in avoidance of
Prolixity.

For the grand signieur of the Schools, Aristotle; truth is, I Article 6.
Aristotle.
cannot conceal, that when he maintains (in 8. Physic. and prioribus de Coelo)
the Universe to be ingenitum, without origination, and contemns that
forementioned distinction of Priority, (...), (...), as excogitated by
Pythagoras, and continued by Plato, rather (...), for the convenience of
Doctrine, then the interest of Truth: he is positive, that he could not admit
the World to have had any Author at all; and therefore Simplicius (in 8.
Physic. digress. 3.) chiding Philoponus for daring to assert, that the World
had its origin and production from God, according to the testimony of Moses
Chronicle, cries out that his doctrine was repugnant to the Fundamentals of his
oracle, Arist. and in some sort highly derogatory to the majesty of the
assigned Productor; since it tacitly rendered him subject to that imperfection,
Mutability, which is incompatible with the constant simplicity of an Essence
sufficiently accomplished for so mighty an action, and implies that he was not
the same from all Eternity, and but lately became Parens, Conditorque mundi.
But yet have I ground enough to stand upon, that Arist. grew wiser, as he grew
elder, and that the flame of his reason shined brighter when that of his life
burned dim; for in the last exercise of his pen, his book De mundo, which most
Antiquaries conclude written in the close of his studies, (cap. 5. and 6.) he
sings a palinodia, and makes open profession, that the universal harmony,
consonance, and pulchritude of this great machine were (...), ab universorum
Conditore: Confirming the verity of that pious A dage confessed and pronounced by
all men, (...), All from God. That he hinted this from that oraculous Motto,
fathered upon Zoroaster, that King and Magus of the ancient Ba^trians, and
contemporany to Ninus and Semiramis, as Eusebius (lib. 10. de praep. Evangel.
cap. 3.) accounts; Factor, qui per se operans, fabrifecit mundum does not want
its share of probability, insomuch as the monuments of the Chaldean Learning
were ransackt by the Platonicks, and so came to the view of Aristotle, is
manifest as well from the circumstance of Time, his life falling not much below
the plunder of the Oriental Libraries, as from the Rhapsodies or Excerptions,
which the Pythagoreans had made out of the relicts of Zoroaster and
Trismegistus, and transmitted down to the hands of Plato and his Scholars, who
frequently inspersed them upon their own writings, a copious series of which
sentential transcriptions has been not long since bequeathed to posterity by
the bounty of Caesar Longinus. But however, I am inclined to believe rather,
that his second thoughts, and more advanced Contemplations on the excellency
and glory of the structure, lighted him to this recantation, and enforced him
to confess, that the fabric of the world was too full of Wisdom and
Providence, to have been performed by any thing below the Highest: for it is
warrantable for me to conjecture, that since he had his erudition, at least his
education, at the feet of Plato, and so could not be ignorant of any Tradition
of moment, which his Master knew; had his judgment been imbued with that
lesson in his greener years, he could not well have stifled it till immediately
before his death, especially when the knowledge of this great truth might have
preserved him from that swarm of Difficulties, which he endured in maintaining
his Thesis of the Non-production, or Eternity of the World. There are, I
confess, who stiffely question the propriety of legitimation of this book, De
Mundo, owning it upon some younger Composer; who ambitious to have the Minerva
of his own colder brain, long lived in estimation, gave it the glorious name of
Aristotle, and under the defense of that prosperous title, committed it to the
encounter of Censure. To the satisfaction of these, I shall allege a place or
two out of those pieces, which have ever escaped the imputation of spurious;
whereby the former sentence is so ratified, that Aristotle may appear to have
had great indignation against their incogitancy and stupidity, who could
believe the world to be once produced, and yet ascribe the production thereof
to Fortune. Dignum est, says he, (in 2. Physic. cap. 4.) admiratione asserert
istos, Animalia quidem and Plantas a Fortuna neque esse, neque fieri, sed aut
naturam aut quandam mentem, aut quampiam aliam Causam habere (viz. non ex
cujusvis semine quidvis nascitur, sed ex hoc quidem olea, ex illo vero homo)
coelum autem, and quae sunt sensibilium divinissima, sponte nata fuisse, nec
causam ullam, qualem animalia plantaeque sortiuntur, habuisse.

It Is well worthy our admiration, how these men can affirm, that Animals and
Plants neither proceed from, nor can be made by Fortune; but must have either
Nature, or some Intelligence or other efficient (for the seminalities of things
do not fly out into promiscuous and indifferent Generations, but every distinct
species has its seed restrained and determined to the procreation of its like:
nor can the fructifying principle of an Olive deviate into the production of a
Vine; or the sperm of man produce any thing but man) but as for the Heavens,
and other pieces of the world, which seem of far greater alliance to
Divinity: that these are spontaneous and casual in their originals, and have
not obtained any Efficient to their Formations, equal to that of Animals or
Plants. And (in 1. de Anim. Part. c. 1.) he speaks expressly to the same
purpose, though in other words; which, to prevent the further trouble of the
Reader, I shall faithfully transcribe. Quamobrem verisimilius dixerim coelum
and factum esse ab ejusmodi causa; si factum est; and magis esse ob eam causam,
quam Animalia caduca at que mortalia: ordo enim, certusque status-longe magis
in ipsis rebus coelestibus, quam in nobis patet; incerta enim, et inconstans,
fortuitaque conditio in genere mortali est potius. At illi genus Animalium
quodque natura constare, extitisseque censont; coelum autem ipsum Fortuna,
sponteque ejusmodi constitisse volunt; in quo tamen nihil Fortunoe ac
temeritatis deprehendi potest. Again, Caelius Rhodiginus (lib. 17. cap. 34.
page 814) reports of him, that, though during the greatest part of his life he
had ascribed all effects solely to secondary and inferior Causes, yet
immediately before his death, when his soul began to be weaned from
sensibility, and feel her wings, he most earnestly implored the compassion and
forgiveness of the First and Supreme Cause, Primae causae misericordiam
intentius implorabat, etc. To these I might have annexed a third text of
Aristotle, selected by the Master of Roman Eloquence, and adaequately engraffed
into his second discourse De Natura Deorum: but I conceived the two former to
be testimony sufficient to the stability of my assertion, that he abhorred the
absurd usurpation of Fortune.

Now if the mere Natural Explorator shall but perpend both the Number and
Dignity of these more venerable Professors of Science, wholly abating the
weight of their Reasons; I cannot doubt, but he will find them infinitely to
overbalance the single School of Epicurus, and of reputation great enough to
excuse the conformity of his judgment to theirs: if he look no higher then the
point of Auctority.

SECT. III.
It Is no easy wonder, how any man, whose Faculties are not in Article 1. The
pretext of Fortune destroyed, by the constancy of Nature in her act of
specification, (i. c.) the restraint and determination of the seminalties of
Animals to the procreation of their like in specie: and the Atheists objection,
of frequent Anomalous and Heteroplasmicil, or monstrous Productions, dissolved.
disorder, nor the Oeconomie of his head subverted into a Wildness beyond the
absurdities of Melancholy adust, can be infatuated into a conceit, that so
great, so unform, so durable, so magnificent, and therefore so glorious a work,
as this of the World, could be performed by the less then feeble, and ignorant
hands of Nothing, of Fortune. For however it may be allowed, that this
imaginary Deity, may produce some effects extraordinary or miraculous: yet how
petite and inconsiderable are those atcheivements of Chance, if put in the
scale against those more admirable performances of Reason and Wisdom? Suppose
we, that Prodigies may arise from the unequal concurrence of dissimilar and
disproportionate Actives and Passives; and Monsters be generated by the casual
confusion of distinct seminalities, as well amongst Animals, as Plants: yet how
incomparably more prodigious are those ordinary propagations in each Classis;
which by the certain and invariable law of their peculiar species, are
restrained to their determinate Forms, and whose Constancy excludes all
pretense of Fortune, or the accidental Efficiency of Chance? I leave to the
decision of every sober man, which has most of the Miracle; that the seed of
every Animal should be consined to the procreation of its like in specie, for
the most part; and that the Plastic Spirit thereof punctually observe the
model, or pattern of that Fabric of the body, from whence it came: or that,
upon a preposterous commixture of various and unequal seeds, once in an age;
there should succeed the production of some new Heteroclite, or unpatternd
Monster, whose Composition is only contingent, and difform to the Idea of
either its Active, or Passive Principle, in the simplicity of their divided
Figures. And are not the exquisite Delineations of every Embryon, woven out by
the subtle fingers of Archeus, or the Formative spirit; the multiplicity,
distinction, elaboration of organs both external, and internal; the several
Functions, and Offices assigned to those organs, and so artificially contrived,
that every one is distinct, yet none independent; every one single, yet all
conspiring to the same end, all operative, yet none (per se) locomotive: are
not these certain and praeordinate effects, with innumerable others, the
meanest whereof we cannot seriously think upon, without a rapture of amazement,
more worthy our admiration, then a single irregularity, a spontaneous Monster
of Nilus, a bipartite Centaure, a prodigious Insect, etc. whose generations are
accounted accidental, and their configurations not preordained, but the
inconsiderate and extemporary results of Fortune? Perhaps these stupid
Idolaters of Chance will refer these constant and settled operations to
Nature; but whatever they mean by Nature, how immense a stock of Wisdom must it
necessarily be endowed withal, which in all its works so cunningly contrives
so great variety of organs, observes such exact Symmetry in all parts, so
providently disposes every member, and fits them to the easy execution of
their predestinate functions? If they go farther, and affirm, that Nature is
nothing but the primitive Constitution of the World, which resulted from the
casual separation, conflux, and disposition of its material principle, Atoms;
and that it does constantly persist in the same Method, which it first obtained
from Fortune: the answer is easy, that though Nature be constant to that
order, in all her productions, which the World obtained in its first composure;
yet how ridiculously stupid must he be, who can admit a serious persuasion,
that the bodies of Animals, in the beginning could be so exquisitely
configurated by mere Chance, and without the direction and indeed the
designement of an infinite Wisdom; in whose eternal intellect the prototypes
of each species were first adumbrated? Let them object again, that every day
affords examples of the skill of Fortune, in the production of Froggs, Toads,
Flies, and other spontaneous Insects: and I shall soon return, that those
Insects or spontaneous Animals have their Causes certain, and by reason of that
energie once conferred upon their Efficients, must arise to animation in such
or such a Figure, according to the magnitude, number, situation, complexion,
quiet, motion, or, in a word, the Temperament of those particles, out of which
their bodies are amassed; and according to the activity of that domestic Heat,
which ferments and actuates the matter: Secondly, that our debate is about the
original of Nature it self, and of that precise Virtue radically implanted in
the seeds of things; or more emphatically, what hand inoculated that
procreative power in each seminality, and endowed it with a capacity requisite
to the conformation of bodies so admirable in their structure: if there were
not some principle in the nonage of the Universe, who infused that Prolifical
or fertile Tincture, ordained that scheme of members, and gave it rules to act
by; from which it never fwerves, but upon a disobedience and nonconformity of
matter. If we looked no farther then the Cortex or Exteriors of Animals; and
there speculated as well the amiable comeliness of their Figures in the whole
(for there is no real Deformity in Nature) as the geometrical Analogy, or
convenience betwixt the Members and their Actions, each being respectively
configurated to the performance of its peculiar office: 'twere more then
sufficient to discover to us the impossibility of their primitive institution
by Fortune. But when we dissect them, pry into their Entrals, and there survey
the almost infinite multitude of organs, principal and subordinate; the variety
of their uses, some being official to Nutrition, some to Vitality, some to
Generation, others to Sense, others to Locomotion, none impeding the activity
of another, but all unanimously conspiring to conserve the economy of that
Form, which, like the main spring in an Automaton, invigorates, and actuates
the whole fabric: either we must bid dehance to the chief inducement of
belief, and drown the loud clamors of our Conscience, or else fall down,
transported with an ecstasie of pious Wonder, and humbly confess, that these
are the Impresses of the infinite power and wisdom of an omniscient, and
omnipotent Creator; but not the Contingencies, or temerarious effects of
Chance. Thoughts like these had the prudent Gassendus, when, in his detestation
of the interest of that Pretendress, Fortune (cap. de exortu mundi.) his golden
pen dropped this rhetorical logic; Id quod stuporem generat, dispositio interna
est in corporibus Animalium. Nam si foret quidem duntaxat multitudo aliqua
partium, forte fortuna commistarum, tum ea posset Fortunae tribui: at in
multitudine illa pene innumerabili nullam esse partem, non tantam, non talem,
non ubi, non quomodo, non cum ea functione, qua congruum est, ut neque inutilis
sit, neque esse commodior valeat: rationem prorsus omnem sugit, ut ita fieri
non sapientia, sed Fortuna sit constitutum.

Nor do Animals alone, but Vegetables also, though of an inferior Classis,
amply and sensibly testify the Divinity of their Article 2. The necessity of
the Worlds Greation by an Agent infinite in Science and Power, proclaimed by
the constant Uniformity of Nature, in her perpetuation of Vegetables.
Founder, and confute the Apotheosis of Fortune. Thus, when the Aliment of a
Plant, being the aqueous irrigation of the earth insensibly prolected, ascends
from the lowest filament of the shaggy root up to the Trunck, and thence works
up to the extremities of every branch and twigge; can we imagine, that this
thin, insipid juice can be so inspissated, and so ingeniously molded into a
Bud; that bud discriminated and variegated into a larger parti-colored Blossom;
that Blossom gradually expanded into a determinate flower, which gratifies our
eyes with the beauty of its embroidery, and our nosthrils with the fragrancy of
its odor; that Flower lost in the richer emergencie of a Fruit, which has its
figure, color, magnitude, odor, sapour, maturity, duration, all certain and
constant; and the abridgement, or Epitome of this included in the seed of that
fruit, which being insperst upon the earth, is impregnate with a Faculty to
expand it self into a second Plant, in all things rival to the former, and
empowered to act all those several Metamorphoses over again, to a perpetual
rejuvenescence of that peculiar species: can we, I say, imagine, that all this
could arise from a spontaneous range of Atoms, or that Necessity which ensued
upon the casual disposition of the First matter; and not rather with devout
hymns proclaim the Efficiency of a Glorious and Eternal Cause, whose Essence
being incomprehensible, and Attributes infinite Intelligence, Goodness, Power,
Beatitude, Glory, etc. must therefore be the Ordainer, Creater, and Consecrator
of all things?

Let us sink our meditations yet one degree lower on the scale of Article 3.
The Sun convincively demonstrates the infinite wisdom of its Creator, by 3
Arguments: viz.
Creatures, and consider how convincively even Inanimates argue for the wisdom
of their Maker. Does not the Sun (to omit the speculation of its glorious
Light, and comfortable Influence; the former whereof is so excellent, the other
so necessary, that they challenge as due the Admiration of all, and have drawn
the Adoration of many ingenious nations) by three prevalent arguments. viz. the
Commodiousness of its situation, the Designment of its motion, and the Line or
tract of its revolution, sufficiently illustrate the forecast and artifice of
its Creator?

First by the universal Convenience of its situation. For had it been placed in
any other orb, either inferior, or superior to its 1. The universal convenience
of its situation in its proper orb.
own; such horrid incommodities, as are inconsistent with its use and
intention, and destructive to the two principal designs of Nature,
Conservation and Generation, must unavoidably have followed; nor had the whole
fabric of the Universe been more then one degree removed from the confusion of
its originary Chaos. To particular; had the Sun been settled in the lowest
sphere, and obtained that place, which the Moon now possesses: the year had
been no longer then a month; for in that account of time, it must have
fulfilled its course through every part of the Ecliptic, and so the intervalls
of seasons had suffered such a contraction, that must have been repugnant to
their institution, i. e. must have prevented the production of all things; For
the Antipraxis, or Counter-activity of contrary seasons, immaturely succeeding
one upon the neck of another, destroys the principles of Vegetation, and checks
the promotion of seminalities. Again, by this unsafe vicinity, or too near
approach to the globe of the earth, its intenser beams had verified the
Conflagration of Phaeton; at least proved so intolerable, as that all things
must have had the ycie and glutinous temper of the Salamander, or else been
torrified into cynders; and to have had no Sun at all, had been the easier
misery. For if there be (and some are positive there must be) an intention and
remission of heat, respective to the different points, or access and recess of
the Sun, in its proper orb; and that in its Apogaeum, or mountee to the highest
point in Cancer, the heat is not so scorching under that Tropic on this side
the Equator, as on the other side, in its Perigaeum or stoop to the lowest
point of its excentricity in Capricorn: we cannot with any pretext of reason
doubt, that, had the Sun been lodged in the bed of the Moon, it had long since
anticipated the general combustion of the last day, and calcined all things to
the exiguity of their primitive Atoms. And on the other extreme, had the Sun
been appointed to the eight or highest sphere; then must it have been, by
reason of the exceeding slow motion assigned to that sphere, so manythousand
years in the absolution of its course, as that it must have extended one year
to the compute of Platos Jubilee; nor could the world (if learned men guess
aright concerning its duration) have attained to the period of one revolution.
Besides that Hemisphear, which first faced the Sun in the beginning of its
tedious gyre, must have enjoyd the curse of a long long day, and consequently
have mist the fertile blessing of a vicissitude, or reciprocal succession of
distinct seasons; but the opposite Hemisphear must have, for many myriads of
ages, continued as cold, dark and barren as the grave, and so half of the earth
had been made to no purpose. And the like discommodities, though more moderate,
would have succeeded to the earth, had the Sun obtained a situation in any one
of the other six orbs, between the two former extremes.

Secondly, by the appointment of its Circumrotation. For had 2. The appointment
of its continual Circumgyration.
it remained fixed and not moved at all; then must the world have wanted that
necessary division of times and seasons, of Spring and Autumn, Summer and
Winter, day and night: and by consequence, the generation and conservation of
things dependent on those vicissitudes of Heat and Cold; it being necessary,
that the fixation of this Luminary must have caused a perpetual summer in one
hemisphear, and as lasting and disconsolate a Winter in the other; or driven
nature upon the exigent of making another Sun to irradiate and cherish the
opposite half of the earth, it being experimentally true (and therefore
advanced to the dignity of an Axiom by Galilaeo, Philolaus, Niceron,
Kircherus, and other junior Masters in the Optics) that no spherical luminous
body, of what diameter soever, can project its light upon the whole sphere of
another at once, or in a fixed position; though it illuminate more then the half
of a lesser placed at convenient distance.

Lastly, by the contrivement of its oblique motion along the line 3. The
contrivement of its oblique motion along the line Eclipitick.
Ecliptic. For had its revolution been assigned to any other circle;
discommodities no less fatal then the former had unavoidably ensued. First, had
it sailed along on either side the Equator, some parts of the earth could have
known no Sun at all, but should have groand under the oppression of perpetual
frigidity and opacity; while others had suffered the contrary extreme of an
everlasting noon, and been parched by the violence of its too constant and
perpendicular beams: and so the whole had been inhabitable; an Alternation of
Heat and Gold being indispensably requisite as well to the Conservation and
growth of all things in their Individuals, as to their Propagation in Specie.
Secondly, had it been confined to the conduct of the Equator; first unto a
parallel sphere, or such who have the Pole for their Zenith, its revolution
could have made neither perfect day, nor perfect night; for being in the
Equator, it would intersect their horizon, and be half above, and half below
it: and to those, who inhabit under the Equator, though it made a distinction
of day and night, yet would it not make any considerable distinction of
seasons; for the Sun being always vertical to them, in that situation, would
have introduced a constant Summer, and the perpendicularity of its unremitted
heat have exhausted the fructifying humidity of the earth, and so left the womb
of our common mother, squalid and barren as the desert Sarra in Africa. Lastly,
had it moved directly upon the Equator, unto what position soever; well might
it have described a day, but never measured out a year: for the progression of
it from West to East (by the compass of which motion the circle of the year is
constituted) had been wanting; in regard that it is impossible that on one and
the same circle, observing the same Poles, the Sun should have performed its
two contrary motions, one from East to West, which defines the day, the other
from West to East, which measures out the year, both at once* Now all these
palpable inconveniences (with many other first observed and enumerated to us by
a Spanish, and lately most elegantly explained by an English Physician; both
which selected this choice subject, as an impregnable argument of the Wisdom
of the Creator) were artisicially praevented by the device of the Suns motion
along the Ecliptic, and the obliquity of its annual progress upon the Poles of
the Zodiac, full 23 degrees, and an half from the Poles of the World.

Now this meditation naturally applies it self, and so clearly demonstrates the
forecast and artifice of an infinite Intelligence; that I have nothing left to
say, but this; that it is a wonder, which nothing but the delusion of the Father
of lies can make out to belief, how Epicurus, being a Philosopher, in many
abstrusities of nature acute enough, nay beyond most of his Tutors, as Diogenes
Laertius testifies of him; and one that pretended to so much insight in the
problems of Astronomy, as to be able to salve all the Phenomenon, or
Apparitions above the Terraqueous orb, (in Epist. ad Pythoelem) could yet be so
infatuated, as to ascribe the composure, and location of the Sun, and the
invention of its regular, and to all parts convenient motion, to the Temerity
and Incogitancy of Fortune. Nor could I have conceived it possible that so much
of the Scholar, and so much of the Fool could have at once met in one and the
same brain; had not I been persuaded thereto, by the agreeing testimonies of
many credible Authors, high both in Antiquity and Fame.

If these Arguments reach not, we may descend yet lower (if there be any thing
low in Nature) and from the entrals of our Article 4. The impresses of an
infinite Intelligence, plainly legible in the fronts even of Subterraneous
Inanlmates.
Grandmother fetch Stones and Mineral Concretions, to give in evidence against
the insolent arrogance of Fortune. For who dares contract the suspicion of
madness so meritoriously, as once to dream that the Magnet obtained its rich
endowments of Verticity and Attraction; the Adamant its radiant tralucency and
conical angularity; Alum its octohedrical or eight-faced Figure; Salt its
Sexangular; Nitre its stiriate or ycicle-resembling; Vitriol its multangular,
etc. from a mere accidental and undetermined conflux and coalition of their
minute and insensible particles: and not from the provident and artificial
disposition of them into such and such situations, as are requisite to the
causation of those particular qualities and Figures, by the discreet and
methodicall influence of an infinite wisdom? If any such there be (and I have
reason for more then my fears, that such there are, in these accursed days,
when all the Errors of the elder world are revived, desperate Haeresies belched
out even by those, who profess to be the Patriots of truth, and horrid
Blasphemies applauded as commendable strains of high devotion) who tremble not
to deny the Creation of all things by God: these I shall pity, and leave to
ponder that exclamation of Gassendus, (de exortu mundi) O quam hebetem esse
oportet, aut quam reclamantem habere conscientiam, si dum adista attenditur,
sola interim Fortuna laudatur! O how insensible must that man be either of the
advisoes of reason, or the convulsions of Conscience; who can consider these
things, and yet ascribe the honor of their (reation to Fortune!

And if the Characters of an Infinite Wisdom be so plainly Article 5. The
impossibility of the worlds Creation by any Agent but God, illustrated both by
the Magnitude, and Pulchrltude thereof: and the Epicureans dream, of a motive
faculty eternally inherent in Atoms, derided.
visible in the single and divided pieces of the Universe; how incomparably
more legible must they be in the Whole, wherein Amplitude holds an aemulous
contention with Pulchritude? True it is, the Epicureans were not staggered at
the consideration of so vast a mass, instantly addressing themselves for
refuge, to an infinite stock of Atoms congested in an infinite space. But this
Sanctuary is rotten, and cannot protect the credulity of any, unless it be
supported by this additional base; that there was some first Active principle,
which by its infinite power first created out of nothing, and then congested
this mass of Atoms into a Chaos, and after by its infinite wisdom digested the
same into that exquisite order which does now constitute the form of the world.
Is it possible for any thing that dares pretend to Humanity, to imagine, or by
any specious argument to hope to persuade, that so many minute bodies, or
Atoms, by the rash and undeterminate conduct of their own innate propensity to
motion, indifferently hurried up and down, hither and thither, and by reason of
the discord arising from their different quantities, and Figures, apt to
maintain an everlasting civil war and confusion; could notwithstanding by a
spontaneous direction meet and unite in that just number, which was sufficient
to make up the Globe of the Earth, requisite to compose the body of the Sun,
proportioned to the dimensions of the Moon, equal to the several orbs of those
radiant Sentinels of night, the Stars, whose multitude exceeds the figures of
Arithmetic, and their magnitude never yet rightly explored; in fine, exactly
accommodate to the great body of the World, whose bounds we know not, and whose
dimensions are immense? The conviction of this impossibility they have
endeavored (though by running into as great a one) thus to evade, As he (say
they) must have been deceived, who having observed the generation of nothing
greater then a Flea, could not therefore believe the generation of an Elephant,
as if there could not be found matter enough to arise to so gigantick a body:
so are we deceived, while regarding the generation of only small things we
believe that the great body of the universe could not be made up by the same
means, and after the same manner; as if so vast a proportion of matter could
not concur and unite into one Form; nay by so much the more are we deceived, by
how much the more proportion the matter of a Flea holds to that of an Elephant,
and the matter of an Elephant holds to that of the World; then the matter of
the World holds to that mass of Atoms, which is infinite in the infinite space.
But I may with good reason demand, how they can be assured, that in the
imaginary space, without the circumferrence of the world, there is such an
inexhaustible abyss of matter, as suffices to the generation not only of this
world, but of an infinite multitude of others, fully as large as this: so, well
as we are assured, that in this world is contained matter sufficient to the
composition of an Elephant, as well as of a Flea? Sure I am, no man ever saw
the outside of the world; and if so, is it not a mere Rhodomontado of fancy,
or (as Pliny calls it) a high madness, to imagine such an infinite abyss of
matter? Let us, however, deal with these, as wise Physicians with
Hypochondriacks, that they may the more easily cure them, allow them their
absurdities; and grant that from eternity there was such an infinity of Atoms,
confusedly hurried to and fro, in an infinite space: yet the difficulty will
always remain, how in so great a laxity and infinite liberty of range, so many
Atoms could so convene and combine together, as to terminate and setle each
other, by reciprocal coherence and mutual concatenation; how so orderly marshal
and dispose their several divisions into such elegant Figures: how adapt those
figures to such genuine and constant operations; and all this without the
counsel, disposition, and revinction of any other cause, but their own rude
and giddy propensity to motion, and the casual result of their cessation from
discord? That Animals have obtained such exquisite forms, respective to their
several destinations; this we can refer to the artifice of their peculiar
Seminalities, or the cunning of that Formative virtue, which lying ambuscadoed
in the spumous consistence of their genital emissions, and being once awakened
into Activity by the excitement of a convenient Matrix, or Receptarie,
immediately designs this or that parcel of matter for such or such a part,
another for another, and so spins it out into an uniform labyrinth of members,
at last weaving all those into an ingenious Figure, in all points resembling
the Protoplast or first genitor of that species; who received this Seminal
Tincture, or faculty prolifical from the immediate bounty of its Creator. But
that Atoms, as they are in their naked and incomplex nature, should be allowed
to have a Plastic or fabrefactive virtue equal to that conferred upon the
seeds of Animals; is a sigment as worthy our spleen, as that ridiculous branch
of the same root the Autocthonous, or spontaneous eruption of our first Parents
from the confermentation of Water and Earth, and the production of mankind
like that of Mushroms: which whimsey is also entitled to Epicurus, by no
meaner a tradition then that of Censorinus (de Di. Not. cap. 2.) whose words,
for the more clear and credible transmission of the Fable, I thought it not
altogether impertinent here to insert. Nec long secus Epicurus credidit, limo
calefactos uteros nescio quos, radicibus terrae cohaerenteis primum increvisse,
and infantibus ex se editis ingenitum lactis humorem, natura ministrante
praebuisse; quos ita educatos, and adultos genus hominum propagasse. To this we
may add (for a single testimony is not strong enough to oblige any man to
believe so unpardonable a dotage in a grave Philosopher) the concurrent
Auctorities of Lactantius (lib. 2. cap. 7.) Plutarch (5. Placit. 19.) Diogenes
Laertius (lib. 2. in vita Archelai Atheniens.) Diodorus Siculus (lib. 1.) and
Macrobius (3. Saturn. 6.) Though, for my part, I conceive this frenzy to have
possessed many heads, upon whose skulls corruption had planted growing
Perewikes of Moss, many hundreds of years before Epicurus his was warm; in
regard many ancient Nations, in particular the Egyptians and Phoenicians,
contending for the honor of seniority, have gloried in the title of
Autocthonae, and thought their Eschutcheons sufficiently noble, if charged
only with this impress, Terrae silii. But I return from this my Excursion.

If the World, indeed, were as Ovids Chaos, rudis indigestaque moles, a
deformed and promiscuous miscellanie, or mass of Heterogeneities, and the
several parts of it variously blended together without either discrimination or
order: then might the pretense of Fortune be more plausible. For should we take
a man, who had been born and bred up to maturity of years in some obscure
cavern of the earth, and never looked abroad upon the World, nor heard of more
then what immediately concerned his aliment and other natural necessities; on a
sudden educe him from his dungeon, and show him an Animal cut in pieces, and
all its dissimilar parts, as skin, muscles, fat, veins, arteries, nerves,
tendons, ligaments, cartilages, bones, marrow, etc. laid together in a
promiscuous heap: doubtless we could not quarrel at his incredulity, if he
would not be persuaded, that any thing but Chance had a hand in that confusion.
But should we instantly present him another Animal, feeding, walking, and
performing all the comely functions of vitality; instruct him in the several
uses and actions of all those parts, which he had formerly surveyed in the
disorder of an heap; then kill that Animal also, and for his farther
information, anatomzie its carcass; and exhibit to him the several parts, in
all things respondent to the former: it is conjectural that we should find, that
the rudeness of his education would not so totally have extinguished the Light
of Nature in him, as not to have left some spark, by the glimmering whereof he
might discover some more noble Principle then Fortune, to have been the
Efficient of that more then ingenious machine. Now we cannot but observe, that
in the great engine of the universe, nothing is with less order, decency,
beauty, uniformity, symmetry, constancy, in a word, with less wisdom, either
de^^gned, or finished; then in the smaller organ of an Animal, in the
perfection of its integrality. And if so, how near comes it to an absolute
contradiction, that we should acknowledge some noble and prudent Cause, that
molded and compacted all those different parts into one most elegant and
accomplished body, and exactly accommodated that body to the easy execution of
its predestinate operations: and yet not acknowledge the same, in the ordination
and construction of the more admirable, because more difficult fabric of the
Universe? I say, a Contradiction; for if the easier Artifice of an Animal be
conceded too hard; assuredly the more difficult machination of the innumerably
organ'd World must needs be granted impossible, to be wrought by the impotent
and ignorant fingers of Fortune. Quanto enim major operis moles, tanto erit ut
sapientiae, ita and potentiae majus argumentum; non quod aliunde elaboratio
minutorum corpusculorum non commendet artificem: sed quod in opere ingenti and
symmetriam servare industrium, and materiam regere operosum esse videatur.

Lastly, as the Votaries of Fortune have argued a minori ad Article 6. The
Epicureans grand Argument, of the possibility of the configuration of the
Universe by a casual and spontaneous disposition of Atoms, from the frequent
actual production of an Infect by the same means or principles; countermined
by an inversion or Argument a majoriad minus.
majus, thus; if the smaller machine of a Hand-worm, wherein the almost
invisible (without an engyscope, or magnifying glass) exiguity of the whole
frame, the multiplicity of organs, and the variety of respective functions
assigned thereunto, may worthily contend, concerning elegance of composure,
with the large captain of the watery regiments, the Whale, may be configured by
Chance, or the casual concourse of convenient particles of the First matter:
why may not the grosser movement of the Universe be also wrought by the like
contingent segregation of disagreeing, and convention of consimilar Atoms;
whose tumultuation and conslict growing from the antipathy of different
magnitude and Figure, made the Chaos; and their working themselves into
peculiar orders, by the accidental conflux and mutual coherence of
Homogeneities, made the form of the World. So we, by counter-demonstration,
may argue a majori ad minus, thus; if Fortune had the power and skill to make
the World, why can she not make the more rude and facile movement of a Watch?
If Atoms could spontaneously range and combine themselves into the immense
batlements of the World: why not also into the narrower structure of a Castle?
If they met into the mighty bulwarks of an Island: why not into the thinner and
more fragil rampires of a Fort? If they could dispose themselves into wide
campania's of Herbs and variegated Flowers: why not into a piece of Landscape
Tapestry? All which require, as infinitely less of Power, so also of Science.

Should they endeavor a subterfuge, by replying; that these are the Effects of
Art, and not of Nature: we may prevent their evasion by rejoyning, that since
they allow Chance to have an interest even in the operations of Art; why do
they not as well make her the Founderess of a City, as of the aedifice of a
spontaneous Animal, whose structure is more difficult? We are not backward to
confess, what we lately supposed concerning the dissected and disordered parts
of an Animal, that if the World were but a promiscuous heap of different
materials, such as stones* Timber, Sand, Lime, Clay, Nails, Tyles, etc.
confusedly congested: then could not our choler swell to so high a tide of
indignation against the arrogance of Fortune; nor should we be so well provided
of arms to fight in defense of a divine contrivement. But since the building of
the same is, by infinite transcendency, more durable, more distinct, more
symmetrical, and more gorgeous in all its parts, then the most elaborate and
magnificent Palace: since the Heart of a Pismire has more of magisterial
artifice, then the Eschurial; the proboscis or trunk of a Flea more industry in
its delicate and sinuous perforation, then all the costly Aquaeducts of Nero's
Rome, the Arsenal at Venice, or the two Spanish Engines, one for the traduction
and elevation of Water, at Toledo, the other for the automatous coining of
money, at Segovia, both admired by a Person for the most part above admiration,
Sr. Kenelme Digby; since the breast or laboratory of a Be contains more
anfractuous convolutions then the Labyrinth of Daedalus, and more Cellules then
the famous monastery of St. Lawrence, in Spain, for bravery and amplitude of
architecture reputed the eighth wonder of the World: and since the skull of a
Louse has more ventrieles or receptaries for the numerous swarms of Animal
spirits, then the spacious Amphitheatre of Rome had seats for the spectators:
in sine, since the meanest piece of Nature throws disparagement and contempt
upon the greatest masterpeice of Art; how can it be, that man, noble and
ingenious man, should fall so much lower then his incircumspect Father Adam, as
to confess the visible influence of Prudence in the easier, and yet, at the
same time, deny any cause, but Ignorance to have been exercised in the harder;
to admit the managery of an Architect, or knowing principle, in the structure
of a house, and yet determine the more magnificent Creation of the Universe
upon the blind disposal of Fortune?

To conclude this unworthy vindication of the injured wisdom Article 7. An
exception against the seeming disparity betwixt their inference and ours,
prevented: and the invalidity os theirs, though their own hypothesis were
conceded in terminis, declared, by an adequate similitude.
of our Maker, by leaving no possible objection unanswered, let us suppose that
our opponents should recurre to their old starting hole, or salley port, the
Spontaneous motion of Atoms, and urge, that if the materials of a house, or
other artificial structure, were endowed with an innate propensity to motion,
as the materials of the World were; then might they also, without the direction
of any external Agent, only by reciprocal convention, complication and
revinction, acquire settled and orderly situations, and so dispose themselves
into a regular Fabric: but since they are devoid of all domestic Activity,
the disparity betwixt the operations of chance, and those of Art, is so great,
that an argument drawn from the impossibility of a performance by one, is not
conclusive against the possibility of an atcheivement by the other. And when we
have supposed this retort, let us also suppose what they would have, viz. that
the materials of a house were radically impregnated with a perpetual tendency
to motion; and that by the drift of this internal activity, they should from
different quarters meet together in one heap, there crowd, compress, express,
impell, repel, detrude, elevate, circumgyrate, fix each other, and at last by
reciprocal combination acquiesce: yet can it never be supposed, by a sober
imagination, that the result of all this hurly burly betwixt those unequal
parts, and the peace ensuing upon the casual acquisition of situations proper
and convenient to each, would be a well ordered aedifice; nay any thing half so
near allied to architecture as a ruin.

I conceive the wit of Balbus wound up to a very happy strain, when disputing
against Velleius (one that blush't not to wear the infamous badge of Epicurus)
concerning this monstrous sigment of the worlds Projection from the dissolution
of the Chaos, and a fortuitous concursion of the universal matter; he invented
this apposite similitude: Hoc qui existimat fieri potuisse, non intelligo cur
idem non putet, si innumerabiles, unius and viginti formae literarum vel
aureae, vel quales-libet aliquo conjiciantur, posse ex his in terram excussis
Annals Ennij, ut deinceps legi possint ^ssici; quod nescio anne in uno quidem
versu possit tantum valere Fortuna. Upon which we may briefly thus descant; if
that congruous series of letters, which is necessary to the lecture of one
page, line, or word, can never result from a careless congestion of prints; but
must be the settled effect of great industry and diligence in the Compositor:
undoubtedly, with no less violence to reason, can any man opinion, that the
innumerable parts of the World, that observe a far more distinct and elegant
order then the characters of any Typographer disposed into words, lines, pages,
sheets, should attain to that admirable Form, which they now hold; by a mere
fortuitous assembly; and not by the certain and predestinate ordination of some
supremely-intelligent Cause.

These reasons, though not woven into that strict method, which Article 8. The
conclusion of this section; or, the aequipondium of the precede^t reasons, if
perpended in the mass and conjunctively, to the most perfect demonstration.
is required to fulfill the web of perfect demonstrations; do yet seem strong
enough in their single inferences undeniably to conclude the Creation of the
Universe out of no praeexistence, by the sole and immediate Fiat of the same
Essence, and if judiciously twisted together into one Syndrome, or complex
Argument, must oblige as firmly; since they clearly evince the first Article of
the Christians Creed, as an uncontrollable verity, which none, but such
degenerate miscreants, in whom the Light of Nature is wholly extinct, or such
as are desperately resolved to shut the eye of their mind against the splendour
of that infallible Criterion, can longer doubt of. And therefore, having
determined neither to scandal the intellectuals of my Reader, either by
indubitating his facile perception of the force of those proofs already urged,
or multiplying others in order to the illustration of that truth, to which he
has formerly submitted his plenary assent; nor unfruitfully to spend that time
and paper, which I have devoted to the explanation and ratification of other
necessary points, on a work of supererogation: I shall only fringe this
exercise with that pertinent and emphatical passage of Lactantius (De Opif. Dei
cap. 6.) Tanta ergo qui videat and talia, potest existimare nulla effecta esse
consilio, nulla providentia, nulla ratione divina; sed ex Atomis subtilibus,
exiguis concreta esse tanta miracula? nonne prodigio simile est, aut natum esse
hominem qui haec diceret, ut Leucippum; aut extitisse qui crederet, ut
Democritum, qui auditor ejus fuit; vel Epicurum, in quem vanitas omnis de
Leucippi sonte prostuxit? and so proceed to the satisfaction of two collateral
Scruples.

SECT. IV.
Scruple 1.
THe Curiosity of some, (whether more insolent or vain, is Article 1. That
Antique absurd expostulation, what Instruments Auxiliants, materials
predisposd, God made use of, in his act of Fabrication of the Universe,
cop^ously satisfied: and the energie of the divine Will commonstrated superior
to the indigence of either.
hard to determine,) has been so audacious, as to adventure upon this Quere;
If God made the world, pray what instruments, tools, mechanic engines, what
assistants did he make use of in the work?

The Satisfaction.

This is no green impiety (unless it has lately budded forth again amongst
those Human-devils, the Ranters; the report of whose prodigious blasphemies
has sometimes transported me to a hatred, at least a contempt of my self, for
being in the same rank of (reatures; and made me wish for a second deluge) but
almost half as old as Time, and may be traced as high as the Epoche of the
Grecian learning; witness those many secret convulsions of it by Plato (both in
his Parmenides and T^m^us) while he frequently affirms the divine Nature to be
Inorganical, and the immediate operations of the universal cause to be above
the necessity of Corporeal means: witness also Cicero (most of whose streams
came out of the Grecian fountain) who (in 1. De Not. Deor.) introducing the
Atheist, Vellejus disputing against Plato and the Stoics, who held the divine
essence to be the Author of the Universe; proposes the scruple at large, in
these Words: Quibus enim oculis intueri potuit vester Plato fabr^cam illam
tanti operis, qua construi a Deo at que aedificari mu^dum facit? quae molitio?
quae ferramenta? qui vectes? quae machinae? qui ministri tanti muneris fuerunt?
etc. That boldness is the daughter of ignorance, is herein plainly verified;
for had these unhappy Pagans understood any thing of the majestic essence of
divinity, or but apprehended the vast disparity between the efficiency of the
Highest, and that of all other Subordinate causes; it is more then probable, they
had not been so saucy with his imperial Attribute, Omnipotence, nor run into
that common mistake of flesh and blood, of measuring the ways of God by the
ways of man. True it is, that man has need of instruments to the performance of
any piece of Art, nor can the Geometrician draw his lines without a rule, or
describe a circle without the help of his compass; the Carpenter work without
his Axe, Saw, and other tools; the Smith without his fire, hammer, anvill, etc.
all which the wit of man, sharpened by necessity, has invented to compensate
the insufficiency of his naked hands, made by nature either too soft, too weak,
or too obtuse for those difficult uses: But yet what can impede our assurance
of the eternal existence of a more Noble Essicient; whose Will is infinite
Power, and that Power infinite Activity; whose single Let it be done, is both
Cause and Means; and whose simple act of Volition not only the Efficient, but
also the Instrument? Do not we observe (that I may extract an Argument from the
evidence of sense) how, in the twinkling of a lovers eye, that comely Arch of
colors, the Rainbow, is painted on the clouds; and yet without either hand,
compass, or pencill? do we not behold whole mountains of ponderous Clouds
piled one upon another; and yet neither vessels to lave up, nor engines to
sustain that sea of water? And cannot these familiar observations instruct us
with more knowledge, then to doubt the fabrication of the world without
corporeal organs? Why is our reason so immodest, as to inquire into the ability
of the First cause; when alas! it is not large enough to comprehend the
efficacy of the weakest Secondary? if the meanest and most ordinary effect of
Nature imports so much stupendous industry, as transcends the narrow capacity
of man; what audacious ignorance is it in him, to question the e^ergie of that
Principle, that made Nature her self, and prescribed her rules to act by: from
which she cannot vary, without a miraculous dispensation? We are willing
forsooth, to profess, that we cannot understand by what artifice the delicate
body of a Pismire is configurated* animated, and empowered for the noble
actions of sense and voluntary motion, nay (for ought we know to the contrary)
for that more noble and elaborate office of discourse also: and yet, when we
come to contemplate the more magnificent form of the Universe, shall we
degenerate into such impertinent Idiots, as to debate the Mathematick energie
of its Creator, and demand how he could operate without Engines to transport,
adfer, and wind up the materials, with scaffolds to advance the roof, or
servants to assist in several offices requisite? Assuredly, as the frame of
that slender Animal does confess a certain Faculty, by which it was modelled,
delineated, and compacted; though the reason and manner of its contexture
remain in the dark to us: so also does the huge machine of this visible World
proclaim a certain Energeticall principle, of infinitely more potency and
perfection, by which it was composed; though the manner and way of its
composure be too abstruse and sublime for the discernment of our weak-sighted
intellectuals. Now, whether you shall denominate that Energy, a Power divine,
or God; it is indifferent: but indispensably necessary, that you acknowledge it
to be so great, as by incomputable intervals to exceed the comprehension of the
mind of man; nor is it safe for us to attempt the commensuration of it by the
unequal module, or scale of particular finite Causes, since even from these our
reason stands so remote, as to be able at most only to conjecture their
dimensions. Upon this consideration, if a Pilot, while he only sits in the
steerage and hands the helm, does direct the ship in its course, by a far more
excellent industry, then all the rude officers inservient thereunto, that
stretch their tougher sinews to hoise and tack about her sayls, and toil
their tawny bodies in other inferior labors: if a Prince, who sits calmely in
his throne, does by a single nod of his scepter awe millions of his subjects to
obedience, and by the magic of a smile or frown conjure whole nations into joy
or terror; if he, I say, does govern his people, by a more mysterious and noble
influence, then all his subordinate ministers of state, with all their
tumultuous pains and travel, either in the transmission, or execution of his
mandates: if an Architect, or master builder, who in his closet only draws the
platform, and designs the figure of the structure; does by his mere
designation, operate more exquisitely, and by a more excellent artifice
contribute to the perfection of the work, then all the swarm of bus^ling
mechanics imployd in squaring, or placing the materials: why should we not
allow that mighty Pilot, Prince, and Architect of the World to be empowerd with
a certain kind of Efficacy so eminent, that whatever can be thought most
absolute and puissant in all other natures, must be infinitely inferior to it?
And therefore when we, who have learned our lesson outof the sacred leaves of
Moses, say that he made the universe solo nutu, at que simplici volitione, by
one simple and entire act of his Will, expressed in that word, Fiat; we speak all
that can be understood by us of that miracle.

As for the last part of the Atheists indecent expostulation; viz. What
coadyutors or ministers had God to attend him, and wha^ materials praeexistent
and prepared to conform to his disposure? that may be soon resolved, by
offering that supereminence, whereby he is, by infinite excesses, above all
other Efficients. For what were the Prerogative of Divinity, if it were subject
to the want of the same means, or cooperating Causes, with us despicable and
impotent men? To conclude, it will not only suppress all dangerous Curiosities
of this kind, but also highly commend our judgments; that we draw a large line
of distinction betwixt the Almightiness of the Creator, and the restrained
activity, or rather pure imbecility of the Creature; ascribe to him a
superlative and pancratical energie, or virtue paramont; and on our devout
knees proclaim him more able to create, then want either ministers, or matter,
whereby, whereon to accomplish his Will.

Scruple 2.
The other profane Scruple objected by the Atheist, is this; Cur Article 2? A
second immodest interrogation, wherefore God so long deferred the creation,
resolved: with a detection of the unreasonableness of undecent cur^osity.
Deus tamdiu a fabricatione mundi abstinuerit? If God were elder then Time, and
the world made in the beginning of time; why did he so long suspend the
Fabrication of it?

The Response.

This is also a poison spit from the accursed jaws of that black Viper,
Velleius, against the Stoics (apud Ciceron. 1. de not. Deor.) in this squallid
stream; isto igitur tam immenso spatio, quaero, cur Pronoea vestra (so
according to their own phrase he calls that Mind, or supreme Intelligence, to
whom that sober sect of Philosophers justly ascribed the origination of all
things except the material Principle, which they erroneously affirmed to have
been the Ashes, or cynders of a former World, whose production also they
conceived to have been, like that fabulous one of the Phoenix, out of the urne
of its predecessor) cessaverit? laboremne fugiebat? and not lately wiped clean
off, and its contagious venom cured by the generous antidote of E^sebius, who
(in 1. de praep. Evang. 1.) most expressly, amply, and judiciously opposed it.
However, lest this poison ferment afresh, and again exulcerate the impure
Libertines of this Age (not more for its extraordinary Calamities, then
unpattern'd Impieties, as well the wonder, as grief of our posterity) and since
it cannot but be thought most pertinent to my present scope: I shall endeavor
the total extinction of it, by applying a smart Alexiterion of reason.

From an Agent infinite in Wisdom, Power, and Liberty, such as we must allow
God to be, no account either of Motives, Means, or Time, ought to be required.
It was, according to their measure of time, about six thousand years from the
nativity of the Universe, when the unhappy disciples of Epicurus disseminated
this uncivil interrogation: but had it been created many myriads of myriads of
thousands sooner then it was, it is open to conjecture, that they would have
insisted on the same sawey demand; since eternity compared to more myriads of
years, then all the figures of Arithmetic can amount to the computation of,
must yet import a vast tract or slux of Time (for other idiome to express this
notion, I could not either recognize, or excogitate) below the foot of that
account; and that precedent space might have afforded room enough for the
intrusion of the same frivolous quaere. And therefore it becomes us, either not
to enquire, why the world was produced, rather then not produced; or allowing
its production, to esteem it all one, whether it were produced then, before, or
after, in this so great a latitude of Eternity. For the same question now
proposed, why God did not determine in himself to create the World, ten
millions of years sooner then he did; may also be revived hereafter, concerning
these times of ours, if another rand of ten millions more should be unravelled.
From whence this modest and truly humane lesson fairly infers it self; that it
is oraculous in the greatest wisdom to say, God Created the World in that
article of eternity (we may now call it Time) which seemed most opportune to
his Wisdom. For, that he had some important reasons so long to deferr the
creation, and then only to contrive and finish it, when he did; though those
reasons be cryptick and ignote to us: we may more then conjecture, from the
consideration of his inexhaustible and ever moving abyss of his Prudence, which
is the rule to all other his actions. And truly, if Princes ground many of
their designe^ upon profound reasons of State, the knowledge whereof is never
diffused among their subjects, but locked up in the cabinet of their own heart:
why may not God, who is all Counsel and Prudence, be afforded the prerogative
of having some weighty respects, that moved him to create the World, then when
he did, rather then either sooner or later? Which respects, for ought we can
explore, is Mercy in him to conceal from us: sure I am, it is a pride not much
beneath, if not equal to that of Lucifer, in us to dare to enquire. It Is a
confessed truth, that no man can know the thoughts of another, who is constant to
his resolve to reserve them sealed up within his own breast; and can any man be
so incurably overrun with the itch of vanity, when he despaires of pretending
certainly to divine the cogitations of his familiar friend, whose inclinations
he has so frequently read in the book of his conversation: yet to arrogate to
himself an ability of searching into the abscondite counsels of him, whom
neither Mind nor Sense can touch? Wherefore it is our duty to reclaim our wild
curiosities, to set bounds to our inquisitions, and gratefully sat our
boulimie of science with this wholesome morsel; that from hence, that the World
was once created, we may safely infer, that the Creator was pleased to
declare himself so Potent, that no impediment could intervene betwixt his
eternal decree, and the opportune execution thereof: so Free, as to be above
the impulsion or constraint of any necessity: so Wise, as to prevent all
temerity and collusion of Fortune: so Good, that the prescience of man's future
ingratitude, and so the infertility of his masterpeice, could not dehort him
from fulfilling his purpose of conferring that inestimable blessing of
Existence both upon him, and all things else for his sake.

As for the last clause of this foolish demand, An vigilarit tanto aeternitatis
spatio, an vero dormierit mundi opifex? Whether God continued vigilant, or
dormant from eternity, until he set about the fabric of this vast All? This
includes a manifest incongruity, and speaks a contradiction loud enough to
answer and refute it self. For those two terms, Sleep and Divinity, stand at
open defiance, and placed in one notion reciprocally deny each other; the one
importing an Affection of a Body, or the effect of the Concidence, or
Augustation of the ventricles of the brain, and slender conduits of the nerves
in an Animal, caused either by a deficiency, or quiet of the spirits inservient
to the Animal Faculties, and causing a temporary and periodical cessation from
the offices of sense and Arbitrary motion: the other expressing an Eternal
simple Essence, neither oppressed with corporeity, nor (therefore) subject to
defatigation upon any exolution or wast of spirits; and consequently not
capable of sleep. However, to manifest the extreme stupidity of their reply;
viz. that if he were perpetually awake, yet we must grant him to have been
constantly idle, before he began his work of Creation: I shall vouchsafe them
that judicious rejoinder of many Fathers (whose studies were also not rarely
infested with these vermin) that in all that precedent tract of eternity
(mortality will excuse the necessary solecisme) he was fully employed in the
most blissfull contemplation of himself. Which is an operation most easy, most
quiet, most pleasant; as all Philosophers, who ever have, by the steps of
abstracted meditation, advanced their minds so high as token that perfection of
beatitude, have observed.

CHAP. III. Why God Created the World.
SECT. I.
THat every Action presupposes an end, or scope; is Canonical: and hence is it
customary amongst Article 1. The improbability of the worlds creation by God,
insinuated, by the Atheists, from his defect of any possible Motive, scope or
final cause.
men, by so much the more hardly to believe that such or such a considerable
Action was done by such or such a Person; by how much the less either of
probable Pleasure, or Emolument may appear to have invited him to that
enterprise. Nor was Velleius a stranger to this rule; for fighting the unjust
quarrel of that usurpress, Fortune, and having at first invaded Providence
Divine with direct and downright blows, unsuccesfully: he at last contrives
to wound it with oblique thrusts, and attempts to stab the opinion of the
Worlds Creation by God, by striking at the End, or more plainly by cutting off
all possibility of either Pleasure or Profit to accrue to him thereby. And in
pursuance of this stratagem, he endeavors to prove (1.) Conditum non fuisse
mundum Dei causa; that the World was not created for Gods sake, (i. e.) that he
is no more concerned in the construction of it, then if it had never been
altered from its Chaos: (2) neque hominum gratia, nor for the behoof of man,
(i. e.) that man has no juster plea to the Royalty of the World, then the
meanest Animal; nor did Nature look with a more amorous and indulgent aspect
upon him, then upon any other of her productions.

The First position he essays to illustrate and infer by a Socratical Article
2. Their first Argument, that the divine Nature is above the capacity of either
emolument, or del^ctation, from the Universe.
way of argumentation, or by circumventing our judgments with a chain of
Interogatories, all whose links are dependent each upon other, though by a
connection so subtle, as to be imperceptible to the incircumspect; the Abstract
whereof, as taken by Cicero (1. De Nature. Deorum) lies in these words. Quid
autem erat, quod concupisceret Deus, mundum signis and luminibus, tanquam
Aedilis, ornare? Si ut Deus melius habitaret; antea, videlicet tempore
infinito, in tenebris, tanquam in gurgustio habitaverat? post autem; varietate
ne eum delectari putamus, qua Coelum and Terras exornatas videmus? quae ista
potest esse oblectatio Deo, quae si esset, non ea tamdiu carere potuisset? What
politic respect put God upon the servile office of an Aedile? What motive
prevailed with him to trim the Universe with gaudy Asterisms, and imbellish the
azure roof thereof with variety of refulgent studs? if to better his
habitation; it is a sign that forever before he was but ill accommodated with a
dark and narrow mansion: But afterward, can we conceive that he entertained
and solaced himself with that variety of beauteous forms, wherewith we observe
both stories of this great Palace to be adorned? What delight is that,
wherewith divinity can be affected? if any such there be, why would he so long
deny himself the fruition of it?

Nor did Velleius want a second to join with him in this bloody design for the
assassination of that sacred Truth, That God made the World chiefly for his own
Glory; for that witty villain Lucretius (and the finest wits, if not maturely
pruned and kept under by the severe hand of Prudence, are the rankest Plants
and most apt to run up to the highest impieties) has digested the challenge
into verse, thus:

Quidve novi potuit tanto post ante quietos
Inlicere, ut cuperent vitam mut are priorem?
Nam gaudere novis rebus debere videtur,
Quoi veteres obsunt; sed quoi nil accidit aegri,
Tempore in anteacto, cum pulchre degeret aevum,
Quid potuit novitatis amorem accendere tai?
An, credo, in tenebris vita, ac moerore jacebat,
Donec diluxit rerum genitalis origo? etc. in lib. 5.
After so long Content, what new delight
Could th'happy Gods to this great change invite?
To affect Innovation, does confess
The present state obnoxious to distress.
He only can to enjoy new things desire,
Whom the deficience of the old does tire.
What therefore could Divinity persuade,
To leave his ancient quiet, for a trade
Of Architecture? Can I think, till then
Him cloysterd in a dark and narrow Den? etc.
The Refutation.

It Is an Apophthegme fathered (and that not unjustly) upon Epicurus; Facere
sapientem omnia sui caussa, that a wiseman Article 3. The satisfactory
refutation thereof; and Gods glory manifested to have been his prime and
principal end.
in all his actions does principally regard himself. And could not this learn
his Scholars more discretion, then to doubt, whether or no God the Elixir of
wisdom, in this weighty operation had an eye upon himself, or reflected upon
his own concernment? The Word, God, to a metaphysical consideration, contains
reasons more then enough to decide this idle controversy, excited only by a
predominion of sensuality. For when there was nothing existent besides himself;
it is plain, that he could gratify nothing besides himself: and as he not only
derived the power of operating from himself alone, but also was the exemplar to
himself; so also must he be the principal End of his operation. The End I say,
non utilitatis; as if his Essence were capable of melioration, his Beatitude so
remiss, as to admit of Augmentation, his Condition so imperfect, as to be
improved by Alteration: sed gloriae, which as he could not want, so was there
no reason why he should want. Such was the Freedom of his Will, that no
necessity could constrain him to the production of any thing; such the Bounty,
that none could restrain him from the voluntary profusion of his goodness. When
it was indifferent to him, or to constitute a World, or to continue alone; he yet
was pleased to follow the propensity of his own infinity Benignity, and to
create: insomuch as he judged it better that there should be other natures
beside his own, to which he might impart the overflowings of his goodness; then
not. Better, I say, not for himself; for as the perpetual Emanation or
diffusion of his Goodness upon the creature, since time (the Image of eternity,
as Plato (in Timaeo) describes it) began, has not diminished: so could not the
Concentration, or Confinement of it to the orb of his own essence, have
lessened his Felicity; which has Plenitude and Constancy for its supporters,
and is therefore raised above the imperfections of Access or Change. And upon
this persuasion (I cannot forget to speak after the manner of men) he
vouchsafed to constitute all other natures that are besides his own; and more
especially Man: not that he might receive any emolument from them, since
himself is all goodness, and by consequence all glory; but that, conferring
respective endowments upon them, he might have convenient subjects, whereon to
exercise his immense liberality and make known his magnificence. That since the
creation he expects from man the retribution of Reverence, Adoration, and
Obedience; arises not ex indigentia, from any need he stands in of, or benefit
that redounds to him by the unfruitful homage of man: but* ne homines sint
erga ipsum ingrati, from his own free Love to prevent man's being hurried into
that misery of Ingratitude. I say, Misery of Ingratitude; for that forlorn hope
of hell having once taken possession of the mind of man, instantly brings in a
whole host of perturbations, subverts its government, destroys its
tranquillity, and so lays it open to the devastation of Infelicity.

And whereas they demand, Why God, if he take any delight in these experiments
of his wisdom, Power, and munificence, would so long endure the privation, or
rather defect of that delight? The solution is obvious, that this kind of
delectation is no more then Accidentary to him, and can adfer infinitely less
of addition to that fullness of Beatitude, formally radicated in his Essence;
then one small drop of water superaffused to the immensity of a million of
Oceans. For sibi sufficientissimus, All to himself, is his peculiar Motto;
since he has the source of all that is Amiable and Delectable, arising from,
and perpetually flowing round his own most perfect nature, nor can he be
affected with the unequal oblation of humane Doxologie, otherwise then by
reflecting upon his own Goodness, which freely ordained, formed, and disposed
man to that honorable and beatifical duty: and therefore that sentence of the
School Divine, Quicquid agit praeter scipsum, ad alterius commodum spectat,
deserves our grateful assent; for all his Extrinsecall or Emanative operations
look directly upon the benefit of that Creature, whom he has adopted to be the
object of his Love, which is Man; obliquely upon the convenience or
accommodation of all other Creatures, necessary or adjuvant to the well being
of that Favorite; and by reflection, upon his own munificence. And hence is it
manifest, that he adorned the Universe with asterisms, and beautified the
heavens with radiant lamps; not that he might better his own habitation, which
is impossible, he being a mansion to himself, and his eternal condition being
extreme felicity: but provide a more commodious place of residence for men, for
whose sake principally (after that of his own Glory) he intended the Creation,
He, doubtless, could want the illumination of neither Sun, nor Moon, whose
dwelling is in light inaccessible; nor be enriched by the faint splendour of the
Stars, whose glory is so refulgent, that we hyperbolize the luster of the
Meridian Sun, when we define it to be the shadow of its Creator; and since
those shining orbs are but pale tapours kindled at his more splendid abyss of
light, how infinitely more lucent must his essence be, who is described by some
to be Supersubstantialis Lux? (Athanas Kircher in metaphysic. Lucis and umbrae,
Epichiremate 5.) Nor can we say less of that admirable variety of forms,
wherewith we observe both stories of the World to be adorned; for if they
appear so full of Elegance and beauty; how incomparably more fair and amiable
must their Maker be, who is the Soul of Pulchritude, and by the Analogy which
they hold to the comely ideas in his intellect, all things are determined to
perfection? For that mighty Cause, which can give being to so many various
perfections, must of necessity possess all those perfections, modo eminentiori,
in a transcendent manner. Wherefore the excellencies of his own nature did,
before he was pleased to create others, so amply suffice to the Accompletion of
his beatitude; that they now at this day wholly suffice to the same; nor is he
capable of having his Felicity increased by the contributions of any thing
without himself. And since all things created, are naught but certain
Emissions, or as it were deradiations, which he pleased to diffuse from
himself; it is perspicuous, that before that Diffusion he comprehended all
natures in his own, as in their Fountain, and therefore could not have his
being meliorated by their production; as also, that he may at pleasure,
adnihilate all again, with no more detriment to his glory, then the Sun can
want those beams, which yesterday it emitted upon my hand.

SECT. II.
Neque Hominum gratia.
THis second Position he likewise insinuates, by the fame imposture of
ensnaring the mind in a complex series of Quaestions, Article 1. Their second
Argument; that God had no especial regard to the benefit of Man: and the
after this manner; If all things were constituted by God for the sake of Man
only, as you affirm, then either for the peculiar interest of Wise men or
Fools? if for the sole behoof of Wise men; then a far less provision might have
served the turn: for no age could ever glory in the production of many such at
once; and if all that ever were, or shall be, met together into one colonie, a
very small Island might be both large and rich enough to accommodate them with
necessaries: and so the greatest part of the creation must be confessed
supersluous, as to the principal destination thereof? But if for Fools only;
then you entangle your selves in a two fold Incongruity. First, you entrench
upon the Justice of the Creator, since thereby you implicitly confess, that he
was partial in conferring so great a benefit upon those, who must so ill
deserve, as not to know rightly how to use it: Secondly, you insringe his
Providence, by making him not to have had a foresight of the unfruitfulness of
his chief design, which must miscarry and be quite lost in a contrary event:
Fools being without any dispute, most miserable in that they are Fools; for
what can be reputed a more absolute misery, then Fatuity? And if for the
conjunctive interest, or promiscuous concernment of both; then do you offer
violence to the goodness of the Archietect; in regard, that during life there
unavoidably occur so many bitter discommodities, that wise men cannot sweeten
them with the compensation of Commodities: and Fools neither avoid them as they
approach, nor endure them when they come, etc.

Nor was Velleius singular in this error; for Lactantius (Lib. 7. cap. 5.) has
accused Epicurus also of words to the same effect; which according to the
record of his indictment run thus: Quid enim Deo cultus hominis confert beato,
and nulla re indigenti? vel si tantum honoris homini habuit, ut ipsius causa
mundum fabricaret, ut instrueret cum sapientia, ut dominum viventium faceret,
eumque diligeret tanquam filium; cur mortalem fragilemque constituit? cur
omnibus malis, quem diligebat, objecit? Cum oprteret and beatum esse hominem,
tanquam conjunctum and proximum Deo; and perpetuum, sicut est ipse, ad qu^m
colendum and contemplandum figuratus est. What advantage can the barren
veneration of man yield to God, who is perfectly happy, and knows no indigency?
or, if he deigned to bestow so high honor upon man, as to create the whole
world for his use, to endue him with wisdom, to inagurate him Lord royal of
all living creatures, and love him with as much affection and indulgence as a
Son; why did he yet make him mortal, and so fatally subject to fragility? why
expose him whom he adopted to a filial love, to the invasion of all kinds of
evil? when on the contrary, in all reason, man also ought to have been both
completely happy, as being allied to God, by a very near assinity; and immortal
as God himself, to the worship and contemplation of whom he was configurated.

Lucretius also would not be exempted from acting a part in this tragical
scene; but scorning to come behind the most adventurous Fortification thereof
by 8 reasons.
Bravo, that had bid defiance to Divinity, or be outdone by any in the fea^s of
Atheism: he not only sucks all the venom in the former Arguments, but adds
much of his own also, and distills it together through his quill into 8 reasons.

1. That God reaps no benefit by the fealty and doxologies of man: Quid enim
immortalibus at que beatis gratia nostra queat largirier emolumenti, ut nostra
quidquam causa gerere aggrederentur?

2. That in case man had never had existence, it could not have been unpleasant
not to have been at all. Qui nunqam blandum vitae gustavit amorem, nec fuit in
numero; quid obest non esse beatum? What never knew existence, can nere know
the want of bliss: Nothing can feel no woe.

3. That the greatest moity of the Earth is wholly barren and unprofitable to
man.

Principio, quantum Coeli tegit impetus ingens,
Inde avidam partem montes, sylvaeque ferarum
Possedere: tonent rupes, vastaeque paludes,
Et mare, quod late terrarum distinet oras;
Inde duas porro prope parts fervidus ardor,
Assiduusque geli casus mortalibus aufert, etc.
4. That even from those narrow cantons of the earth, which are inhabited, men
reap no other harvest, but what themselves have sown, with uncessant toil; nor
do they find any ground fruitful, but what they have manured with their own
industry, and enriched with the salt dew of their own laborious brows:

Quod superest arvi, tamen id natura sua vi
Sentibus obducat, ni vis humana resistat, etc.
5. That even those fruits of the earth, which they have so dearly earned, with
the profusion of so many showers of sweat, frequently miscarry, and become
abortive; the hopes of the husbandman being often frustrated by the unexpected
intervention of cross seasons, Ustilagos or Blites, Mildewes, Sulphurous
Met^ors, late Frosts, high Winds, etc.

6. That if neither the world, nor men, had ever been existent; their Ideas had
never fallen under the conception of the divine intellect.

7 That poor, weak, and fragil man is obnoxious to destruction by a thousand
diverse contingencies; the ravenous appetite of wild Beasts, the deleterious
punctures of Serpents, the conflagration of Lightning, the contusion of
Thunderbolts, the eruption of Earthquakes, the arsenical eructations of
Minerals, the epidemick contagion of Pes^ilential Diseases, kindled either by
Anomalous seasons, Tempests, or malignant impressions in the a^r; the invasion
of intestine infirmities, upon the civil war often breaking out between the
Heterogeneities of his blood, or a mutiny of his Elements; and though he escape
all these, yet does the Palsic hand of Time soon shake down his ounce of sand,
and then turn him over to be devoured by oblivion.

8.

Tum porro puer, ut saevis projectus ab undis
Navita, nudus humi jacet infans, indigus omni
Vitai auxilio, cum primum in luminis oras
Nixibus ex a^vo matris natura profudit,
Vagituque locum lugubri complet, ut aequum 'st,
Quoi tantum in vita restet transire malorum. etc.
That Nature seems more a stepmother to man, then any other Animal; having
cast him into the world naked, ^eeble, unarmed, unprovided for in all but want,
and by his early tears portending that deluge of calamities, which in case he
be so miserable to survive his birth, must drown all the comforts of his life,
and wash him into earth again after a short slight of time; in brief, she
exposes him, as a bastard, to be taken up and nursed by the charity of that
giddy headed gossip, Fortune: who has no sooner smiled him into strength
enough to suffer, but she contracts her brows, disinherits and abandons the
desolate wretch to all the hardship and afflictions, that the witty malice of
Fate (to whom our tortures are pleasures, and the hoarse groans of the rack
sound perfect melody) can either invent or inflict.

And thus have we heard, in Summary, the plea of those three eminent Levellers,
who endeavored to supplant man of his birthright, to take away the prerogative
of his nature, and reduce him to no greater a share in the favor of his Maker,
then the meanest of his fellow Animals. It comes now to our turn to examine,
whether their Arguments are strong enough to carry the Cause.

The Refutation.

That God, in his atcheivem of the Universe, had a principal regard to Man,
above all other the works of his hands; and Article 2. The total red^rgution
thereof by a com nonst^a^ce that the benefit and felicity of man, was Gods
secondary end: and the impossibility of satisfaction to the first end, by any
cre^ture but man, concluded, from his
considered him, tanquam sinem interjectum, as the Mediate or Secondary End,
his own Glory being the Immediate or Primary, or, more plainly, the end of that
end: is clearly deduceable even from this; that man only among that infinite
variety of natures listed in the inventory of the Creation, is constituted in a
capacity to satisfy that first end; his intellectuals, or cogitative essence
being, by a genial verticity, or spontaneous propension, qualified to admire,
in admiration to speculate, in speculation to acknowledge, in acknowledgement
to laud the Goodness, Wisdom, and Power of the Worlds Creator; while the
ignoble Faculties of all other Animals are terminated in the inferior offices
of sense, nor ever attain above the inconsiderate operations of their brutal
appetites. And this one reason, if duly perpended, will be found of weight
enough to counterpoize all those empty frothy sophisms 1. Rationality.
alleged to the contrary: nor can any aequitable consideration (if I rightly
understand its value) allow it to be much less then Apodictical. I say if duly
perpended: for we are not rashly to understand this peculiar Adaequation or
Praeeminence of man to consist in the bare Vprightness of his Figure, which
accommodates him Coelum intueri, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus. For,
according to the vulgar acceptance of Erectness, and as it is considered to be
a position opposite to Proneness, or the horizontal situation of the Spina
dorsi, or rack bones in Animals progredient with their bellies toward the
earth: man has no reason to boast a singularity therein. Since many other
Animals, as the Penguin, a kind of water foul frequent upon the straights of
Magellan; the devout insect of Province, or Prega Dio, the praying Grasshopper,
so called because for the most part found in an upright posture answerable to
that of man, when his hands are elevated at his devotions; the Bitour, which my
self has sometimes observed standing upright as an arrow fallen perpendicular,
and his eyes so advanced, as to shoot their visual beams point blank at the
zenith, or vertical point of heaven; all Plane Fishes, that have the apophyses
or processes of their spine carried laterally, or made like the teeth of a
Comb, as the Thornback, Plaice, Flounder, Soles, etc. and their eyes placed in
the upper side of their head, and so pointing directly upward; and diverse
others attaining an erectness beyond his, and by reason of the sublimimity of
their faces taking a far larger prospect of the firmament. For man cannot look
so high as the A^quinoctial circle, unless he either recline the spondils of
his neck and loins, or place himself in a supine position. And therefore
Lactantius, though he conceived his argument impregnable, when he said (Lib. 7.
cap. 5.) Quod planius argumentum proferri potest, and mundum hominis, and
hominem sua caussa Deum fecisse, quam quod ex omnibus Animantibus solus it a
formatus est, ut oculi ejus ad coelum directi, facies ad Deum spectans, vultus
cum suo parente communis sit? to him that shall literally interpret the same,
cannot appear to have stopped the mouth of contradiction: unless perhaps we shall
afford him so much favor, as to restrain the erectnes of man to that precise
definition of our Master Galen (De usu part. lib. 1.) which allows those
Animals only to have an erect figure whose spines and thigh bones are situate
in right lines. For in this strict signification, no Animal (for ought
Zoographers, or those that write the Natural Histories of living Creatures have
discovered, or our selves observed) can exactly fulfill that figure, but man;
all others having their thighs pitched at angles, either right, or obtuse, or
acute, to their spines. And for this respect was it, that having premised, that
Man only was constituted in a capacity to satisfy that prime end of the
Creation, the glory of God; I thought necessary to subjoyn, his intellectual or
Cogitative soul being naturally disposed to admire, etc. thereby importing,
that the basis of my Argument was fixed upon the very root of his Essence, or
better Nature, as Plato calls it, whose propriety is sursum aspicere, to look
up to his original, and speculate the excellencies of his Maker. And thus
understood, I prefer Plato's etymology of (...), and am persuaded that the
primitive Grecian so denominated man, quasi (...), Contemplantem quae videt:
nor can I conceive that Anaxagoras spoke other then tropologically, when being
asked, cur natus esset, he smartly and pathetically returned, ut videret coelum
and terras; by that figurative expression intending, that man was made not to
gape about or gaze upon the external beauties of heaven and earth, with the
dull eye of his body: but to have his thoughts sublime, and with the acies of
his mind to speculate the Wisdom, etc. of him that made them. Now by virtue of
this divine Prerogative is it, that man is of undoubted right entitled to the
especial care, and declared to be the Secondary end, or scope of the Creator.
But farther to expatiate upon this manifest truth; were to light a candle to
show the Sun in the Meridian.

Nor by the title of Cogitation only, does man lay claim to this dignity; but
he inherits a second endowment also more noble 2. Sermocination.
then any other Animal, whereby he is empowerd to fulfill the principal
destination of the World, the glory of God: and that is Sermocination or
Locution. For the tongue of man only can own that character, (...), inserviens
sermocinationi instrumentum, and can modulate the inspired aer into articulate
sounds, and so intelligibly proclaim the majesty of his Efficient. This
Lactantius wisely urged against Epicurus his objective expostulation, Quae
utilitas Deo in Homine, ut eum propter se faceret? appositely opposing,
scilicet ut esset, qui opera ejus intelligeret, qui providentiam disponendi,
rationem faciendi, virtutem consummandi and sonsu admirari, and voce proloqui
posset, etc. and (in lib. de Ira Dei cap. 13.) more plainly he says, Number and
mutorum caussa Deus laboravit? minime, quia sunt and rationis and loquelae
expertia: sed intelligimus and ipsa eodem modo ad usum hominis a Deo facta, etc.

As for that couchant Dilemma of Velleius, whether the World was intended for
the use of wise men, or Fools: it is soon extricated, by distinguishing the
purpose of the Creator into General and Particular: and so returning, that the
Goodness of God had a respect to the benefit of all, in general; but of wise
men in especial. Now, if by Wise men, he mean such, whose minds are imbued with
the maxims of Virtue, and their lives conform to the upright rules of morality
(who only, in the judgment of Philosophy, can challenge that Attribute) then is
it not easy to doubt, that the beneficence of God was lost to them, or
unadvisedly placed upon them: since their opportune, moderate, and grateful
husbandry of these blessings, though it cannot be extended so high as absolute
merit; may yet reach so far as to justify the prudence of their donation, and
manifest the provident collocation of them upon convenient subjects, i. e. upon
such as make it the constant business of their lives to learn how rightly to
use them, and practice that excellent lesson, of employing all things to the
temporal supportation, comfort, and improvement of themselves, and themselves
to magnify the bounty of that hand, that so freely bestowed them.

And on the other side, if by Fools he intend such as are degenerated from the
nobility of their nature, degraded below mere Humanity, that know no good
beyond the present blandishments of sensuality, and have sworn themselves
voluntary captives to their own luxurious Appetites, (and such was the wise
man's fool) then can neither the Justice of God be taxed for conferring such
rich favors upon those, that know only how to abuse them; nor his Praevision
disparaged, as not foreseeing the miscarriage or unfruitfulness of his charity:
since he left it in the arbitrary power of their Wills to make an election of
Good or Evil, to turn to the right hand, and pursue the real and true delights
of virtue, or deflect on the left, and be lost in the deviations of the only
apparent and false pleasures of vice: having set before them the means both of
Sapience and Resipiscence, and furnished them with advantages and opportunities
either to acquire more knowledge, or at least recant and disclaim their
ignorance. Or, if by Fools, he design such as our common Idiots, in whom the
light of Nature is totally eclipsed, by some native distemper, or
non-symmetrical configuration, or contingent concussion of the brain, or
Presence Chamber of the Intellect: then also is the case the same with divine
Prudence, siquidem ex ipsorum desipientia, caeterorum sapientia efflorescit and
collucet magis, since the stolidity of an ignorant has this use, that it
serves as a foyl to set off the ingenuity of the knowing, and by the
incompatible disparity which appears at the conference of those two contraries,
infinitely enhanceth the value of wisdom. The satisfactory force of this
solution maturely perpended, it can be reputed neither incogitancy nor
precipitation in me to omit the prolix appropriation of those pertinent
similitudes; that the wary husbandman does cultivate and prepare his field, as
well for the fertility of Pulse, as Wheat; that the most skillful Gardener
provides room in his nursery for the sprouting of wild, degenerous, and barren
plants, as well as for the geniculation of wholesome, generous and fruitful;
that Princes account Plebeians, as well as Nobles, members of their
Commonwealth; and that Apelles prepared his Tables as well to receive the
black of shadowing, as the finer touches of his Pencill, and the brighter
gradualities of Colors, in emulation of the life. And this, not only because I
conceive the objection already more then refuted, and therefore all that can be
superadded may sound as nothing to the purpose: but chiefly because I
understand, that the Logic of similes, or the way of probation by
Comparatives, is at best but Analogisme; and therefore inconsistent with my
assumption of declining all but Demonstrations, or Reasons equally convictive.

As for that demand, Why God did not endow his favorite with immortality, but
exposed him to the stroke of death; it is manifest that the soul of man is
constituted immortal, and shall enjoy a being to all eternity, by the Charter
of its Essence, and not ex gratia only, as Mr. Hobbs endeavors to assert (in
Leviathan) But the demonstration of this grand truth, being too large to be
circumscribed by a Parenthesis, or foisted in by way of digression; I have
reserved for a singular Chapter in the future.

For those remaining difficulties contained in the Arguments of Article 3.
Lucretius his 8 reasons subverted, particularly.
Lucretius; they are easily salved, by answering succinctly to the

First, that the motive which inclined the divine Will to create the World, was
not any possibility of emolument accruable to God from the veneration and
gratitude of man: but the voluntary 1.
distusion of his own communicative goodness, in chief; and the benefit of man,
as subservient thereto.

Second, that though that Axiom be undeniable, Non entis non sunt accidentia,
and therefore it could have been no trouble to 2.
us, not to have been at all; yet that invincible reluctance against
Adnihilation, radicated in every vital entity, is demonstration enough, that to
be, is far better then not to be, and we our selves experimentally find, that
it is one degree of happiness to have obtained existence; because to be nothing,
is a mere Privation; to be something, attains to the perfection of Reality.
Upon which ground many have erected a conjecture, the the devil himself would
not consent to his own Adnihilation, though he might evade his torments by the
bargain: with advantage preferring the miserable condition of something, to the
horrid opacity of nothing.

Third, that God made such abundant provision conductive to the utility of men,
that both from the Amplitude and Variety of 3.
his work, they might collect matter sufficient to incite them to the constant
contemplation of his Wisdom, and grateful acknowledgement of his Munificence:
as also, that having observed what of the Creatures were less commodious, they
might be directed in their election of the more commodious and beneficial, as
well for their Conservation as Delight.

Fourth, that the labors of Agriculture are superfluous, and voluntarily
undergon by man, more for the maintenance of his 4.
delicacy and inordinate luxury, then the provision of Necessaries to his
livelihood. Since the same liberal earth, which is Mother, Nurse, and Purveyer
to all other Animals, cannot be thought inhospitable to man only, nor so
cruelly penurious as to exclude her best guest from participating the
inexhaustible bou^ty of her table. And though we grant some moderate labor
necessary in order to the comfortable sustentation of our prodigal bodies,
always upon the expense; yet have we good cause to esteem that more a blessing
then a curse, since the sweat of industry is sweet. Not only because the active
genius of man is constellated for business, and therefore never more oppressed
then with the burden of idleness; but also because the sprightly hopes of a
wealthy harvest sweeten and compensate the labor of semination. Nor is the
contentment which grows from ingenious Husbandry much below any other solace
of the mind, in this life; if we may credit the experience of many Princes, who
having surfetted on the distractions of royalty, have voluntarily quitted the
magnified pleasures of the Court (magnified only by such ambitious Novices, who
never discovered the gall that lies at the bottom of those gilded sweets) and
with inestimable advantage exchanged the tumult of their palaces for the
privacy of Granges; have found it a greater delight to ^ultivate the obedient
and grateful earth, then rule that giddy beast, the multitude; a happier
entertainment of the mind, and more wholesome exercise of the body, to hold the
easy plough, then sway an unweildy Scepter, and revell in the infatuating pomp
of greatness.

Fifth, that those preposterous seasons, Blights, Mildews, Combustions, etc.
putrefactive accidents, that make the preguant earth 5.
suffer abortion, and so nip the forward hopes of the laborious swain; do
neither intervene so frequently, nor invade so generally, as to introduce an
universal famine, or so cut off all provision, as not to leave a sufficient
stock of Aliment for the sustentation of mankind.

Sixth, that the divine Intellect was the universal exemplar 6.
to it self, framing the types or ideas both of the world and of man* within it
self, and accordingly configurating them. This may be evinced by an argument a
minori; since even our selves have a power to design and model some artificial
engine, whose pattern or idea we never borrowed from any thing existent without
the circle of our selves, but coined in the solitary recesses of our mind.

Seventh, concerning man's being obnoxious to the injury of many Contingencies,
as the voracity of wild beasts, the venom of 7.
Serpents, the conflagration of Lightning, the contagion of the Pestilence, the
corruption of swarms of other diseases both epidemick and sporadick, etc. that
all these are the regular effects of Gods General Providence, and have their
causes, times, and finalities preordained, and inscribed in the diary of Fate,
to whose prescience nothing is contingent. But of this more satisfactorily in
our subsequent consideration of universal Providence; whither in strictness of
method, it refers it self.

Eight, that this complaint against the unkindness of Nature, 8.
for producing man, tender, naked, unarmed, etc. is grossly unjust. For the
imbecility of our Infancy is necessary to the perfection and maturity of those
noble organs, contrived for the administration of the mandates of that Empress,
the Cogitant Soul; and is amply compensated either by the vigor and acuteness
of the senses, or by diuturnity of life. It being observed by Naturalists, that
those Animals which live long, have a long gestation in the womb, a long
infancy, and attain but slowly to their maturity and standard of growth; the
four general motions of life, Inception, Augmentation, State, and Declination,
carrying set and proportional intervals each to other, as that truly noble
Philosopher, Scaliger has hinted, in his correction of that fabulous tradition
of the extreme lo^gaevity of Deer in these words: De ejus vitae longitudine
fabulantur, neque enim aut gestatio aut incrementum hinnulorum ejusmodi sunt,
ut praestent argumentum longaevi Animalis. As for his being born naked; it is no
disfavour, nor neglect in her, for that cumbersom wardrobe of rags, which man
has gotten upon his back, is become necessary only by the delicacy of his
education and custom, not so intended by nature in the primitive simplicity
and eucrasie of his constitution; when there needed nothing but the skin either
to warm, or adorn the body. Lastly, those Arms, which Nature has denied him;
either he wants not at all, or his own ingenious hands can provide at pleasure.

CHAP. IV. The General Providence of God, DEMONSTRATED.
S^CT. I.
THe Synopsis of my method, exhibited in the hem of the first Section of the
first Chapter, was designed Article 1. The Authors reasons for his present
adherence to the common discrimination of Providence from Creation.
as a clue to conduct the thoughts of my Reader along the series of those
Attributes of the supreme Ens, which (as being of most general concernment, and
such as may be clearly demonstrated by the Light of Nature, even to those, who
either never heard of, or except against the testimony of Holy Writ) I have
promised to illustrate, by the conviction of Arguments deduced from that
catholic Criterion, Reason; to whose Judicature all Nations and Ages have
readily submitted their assent: and therefore I am not necessitated here to
insert any farther explanation of the connection and dependence of this Theme
upon the precedent; but only, in avoydance of misconception, to advertise, that
when I say, the Creation of the World ex nihilo, and the constant Conservation
of the same in its primitive order and harmonious Coefficiency of causes
subordinate, are the general operations of the Wisdom and Power of the First
cause; I do not intend, that those are Acts really distinct each from other
(for in the demonstration of the Existence of God it is plainly, though
succinctly evinced, that the Conservation of the Universe is nothing but the
Act of Creation prolonged or continued) but only conform my theory to the
customary notions and terms of the Schools, and yield to the necessity of a
division in the gross capacity of man's understanding, in order to the more
gentle enforcement of a stable belief.

The Act of Conservation of all things in their originary stations, and the
perpetual obedience of all second Causes, in their several Article 2. The
Definition and received Division of divine Provldence.
motions, to the laws of his will, that elemented them; has ever been called
Providence divine: which derived high enough, seems to import, the constant
operation of an infinite Wisdom, and infinite Power, combined in the effusion
of an infinite Goodness. This Providence (for to that Appellation, as most
ancient, most common, and therefore most familiar, I shall adhere) most Clerks
have branched into General, whereby the government of the whole Universe is
administered: and Particular, or special, whereby God does take special care of
mankind, and regulate the affairs of his master-peice. Now according to this
necessary Division, must I range my forces into two Files, and draw up one to
defeat those Atheists, who have proclaimed open hostility against the First;
and the other to subdue those, that have declared against the Second.

The Colonel to that black regiment, that fought against the Article 3. A
short list of the principal ethnic Physiologists, who, in order to their
propagation of Atheism, have attempted the eradication of this magisterial
verity of divine Providence: and a gentle cure of S. Hieroms wound, caused by
his venial lapse from the same.
opinion of the government of the World by the Scepter of Divine Monarchy, is
generally accounted Epicurus; but in the authentic records of Stobaeus (Ecl.
Phys. 25.) we may find him to have been no more then Captain-lievtenant to
Leucippus, who of all the Grecian Philosophers, whose doctrines have escaped
the sponge of oblivion, was the first that appeared in the field against
universal Providence, and not long after surrendered the staff to Democritus
the elder, whose immediate successor was Heraclitus, as we are told by Nemesius
(De not. Homin. 13.) But whoever led up the van, was closely followed by many
both of the same and succeeding ages; the most eminent whereof were Dicaearchus
(Cicero 4. Academ.) Strato (Idem de Divinat. 2.) Ennius (Idem de Not. Deor. 3.)
Lucretius (Libro ejus 2.) Velleius (Cicero de Not. Deor. 1.) Lucian (in bis
Accus.) who like a facetious villain, personates Jupiter complaining of the
oppression of overmuch business; nay the devout Father S. Hieron. (in Comment.
in Abac.) seems to have espoused the quarrel, though doubtless upon another
interest. His words I shall faithfully transcribe for two important reasons.
First because I would not appear to have fixed a scandal upon so venerable a
Pillar of our Church, who otherwise has deserved so amply of the Christian
faith; that the consideration of the transcendent merits of his pious labors
had once almost persuaded me to believe the possibility of justification by
works. Secondly, to deliver his memory from the imputation of impiety; for it
may be naturally collected from the syntax and scope of his discourse, that it
was a noble esteem which he had of the majesty of the Divine Nature, whom he
thought too fully taken up with the blisfull contemplation of his own
perfections (in truth, the only Felicity God can be capable of) to be concerned
in ordering the trifling occurrences of the world; and not any conceit of the
insufficiency of omnipotence, that cast him upon this rock. Caeterum absurdum
est (says he) ad hoc Dei deducere majestatem ut sciat per momenta singula, quot
nascantur culices, quotve moriantur: quot cimicum and pulicum and muscarum sit
in terra multitudo: quanti pisces in aqua natent, and qui de minoribus major^m
praedae cedere debeant. Non simus tam fatui Adulatores Dei, ut dum potentiam
ejus ad ima detrahimus, in nosipsos injuriosi simus, eandem rationabilium, quam
irationabilium Providentiam esse dicentes.

So that his diminution of the universality of Providence, may seem the
pardonable effect of immoderate devotion, and but a high strained description
of the glory of that essence, which in strict truth, can be concerned in
nothing but it self; and must then appear to be undervalued, when most
magnified by the extension of its influence to petty and trivial mutations, and
conceived to act a part in the interludes of Flies, order the militia of
Pismires, and decree what, and how many Gnats shall be devoured by swallows in
a summers day. But as for Epicurus, and the rest of that miscreant crew; it is
more then probable, that a quite different interest inveigled them into this
dangerous error. For, first, their own writings bare record, that they made it
the grand scope of their studies to promote Atheism, by plotting how to
undermine the received belief of an omnipotent eternal Being, to murder the
immortality of the Soul (the basis of all religion) and deride the Compensation
of good and evil actions after death. In particular, Epicurus did not blush to
profess that the chief end at which his Physiology was collineated, was this;
ut men's ex perspectis causis conquiescat, neque aliam eamque divinam subesse
causam suspicando, felicitatem interturbet. And Secondly, the grounds upon
which they erected this detestable negation of universal Providence, may
sufficiently satisfy a heedfull enquirer; that not any intense honor or
veneration of the most perfect and happy nature, transported their minds to
this height of delusion: but rather a confi^med infidelity of the infinity of
his Wisdom and Power, which is affirmed by us, that maintain the diffusion of
Providence over all, and descry the finger of Divinity in the smallest actions
of inferior causes, though never so contemptible in the eyes of Humane reason.
But a more ample knowledge of this does offer it self to our thoughts, in the
particular examination of their Arguments: to which we therefore immediately
address.

The First Argument they drew from the apparent incompatibility of business and
happiness; or more plainly, from the vast Article 4. The Atheists first
Argument against universal Providence, with the absurd and malicious comment of
Lucretius thereupon.
disparity between the blisfull condition or contemplative quiet of the supreme
Nature, and the trouble, or disturbance (for so their ignorance unfitly
apprehended it) that must arise from the oversight and managery of such
infinite variety of Actions, as are every minute performed within the immense
Amphitheatre of the World. For Epicurus, indiscreetly attempting to take the
altitude of the Divine Intellect, by the unequal Jacobs-staffe of the Humane;
rashly inferred, that it could not be extended below the sphere of its own
mansion, and that no Intelligence could be so large, as not to be overwhelmed
by that Ocean of Cares, that must flow from the multitude and diversity of
continual emergencies here below. This he contracted into that sentence; Quod
est beatum and immortale, neque sibi habet, neque alteri exhibet negotium;
which so pleased him, that he reputed it a Cornerstone in the fabric of
science, and enacted it to stand in the front of those Sententiae ratae, which
he dared Scepticity withal.

Nor did his sedulous Commentator Lucretius, recede an inch from the same text;
but fondly commensurating the power of an Infinite wisdom, by the narrow
capacity of his own finite reason, preached to the world; that to ascribe the
government of sublunary affairs to the Gods, was impiety in the inference, and
must implicitly destroy the fundamentals of their Divinity, which is made up of
Beatitude and Immortality, neither of which can consist with the perpetual
disquiet, and impetuous anxiety of mind, which the Administration of so vast
and tumultuous a Commonwealth, as this of the World, must introduce. For when
he would impose, that the shoulders of Divinity, though a real Atlas, are too
weak to sustain so great a weight, as that of Rector General; under a pretext
of tender zeal (forsooth) he insimulates those of profanation, Qui summum
illud, quicquid est, tam tristi, atque multiplici ministerio polluunt, as Pliny
expresses it: and therefore exclaims.

Nam (proh! Sancta Deum tranquilla pectora pace,
Quae placidum degunt aevum, vitamque serenam)
Quis regere immensi summam? Quis habere profundi
Indu-manu validas potis est moderanter habenas?
Quis pariter Coelos omneis convertere? and omneis
Ignibus aethereis terras suffire feraceis?
Omnibus inque locis esse omni tempore praesto,
Nubibus ut faciat tenebras, coelique serena
Concutiat sonitu? tum fulmina mittat, and aedeis
Saepe suas disturbet? and in diversa recedens
Saeviat, exercens telum; quod saepe nocenteis
Praeterit, exanimatque indignos, inque merenteis? etc. lib. 2.
Ah! since the happy and immortal Powers
In c^lme content melt their eternal hours,
Feasting on self-enjoyment; who can keep
The rains of Nature? Who command the Deep?
To wind about the ponderous Spears, what arm
Has strength enough? what Influence can warm
The fruitful earth with Fires aetherial? who
Can fill all places, and all actions do?
To veil the face of Light with sable clouds,
And wrap the lucid sky in sulph'ry shrouds:
Whose Coruscations split the fluid aer,
Convell the feet of Rocks, and with despair
Affect poor Mortals into Quick silver: then turn,
And with Grenades his own Temples burn:
Then dart his flames at Innocence, and wound
Virtue, while guilty Vice continues sound?
Their other Argument is extracted from the conceived Uncertainty and
irregularity of Contingencies, and the unaequal Article 5. Their second
Argument: and its convenient dissection into two parts, viz.
dispensation of good and evil; all things seeming to fall out according to
the giddy lottery of Chance, and as confusedly as if there were no Providence
at all. This may be collected as well from that speech of Epicurus, charged
upon him by that heroic Champian of Divine Monarchy, Lactantius; Nulla
dispositio est, 1. The irregularity of contingencies: and
multa enim facta sunt aliter, quam fieri debuerunt: as from the context of his
Physiology, wherein having made it his Hypothesis, that all bodies both
celestial and sublunary were at first configurated by Fortune, i. e. arose to
such and such particular figures, by the casual segregation, convention and
complexion of the General matter, divided into several masses; and that, by the
inclination of their convenient Figures, they were adliged to such and such
peculiar Motions, and accommodated to the necessary causation of determinate
viciffitudes: he proceeds to reduce all succeeding events in the World to that
primitive series of Causes, which made their own spontaneous eruption out of
the Chaos, and attained to the certain rules of their future activity, at the
same time they attained to their distinctions and single essences; denominating
that chain of causalities, Nature, and holding her to be her own Directress,
and by the law of innate tendency obliged to a perpetual continuation of the
same motions begun in the first minute of the worlds composure; according to
that exclamation of Pontanus (Lib. 1. de Stellis.)

Quid vexare Deos frustr a juvat? ordine certo
Fert Natura vices; labuntur and ordine certo
Sydera; tam varios rerum patientia casus.
Illa suos peragunt motus, servant que tenorem
Sort datum, etc.
What boot's it man with fruitless prayers to fret
The Ears o'th Gods; when Natures Laws are set,
Beyond Repeal or Alteration?
The radiant Lamps of heaven still move on
In their old tracks: nor can the Planets stray,
In all their wanderings, from their native way;
Or change that Tenor, which at first they got
Consigned unto them, by their proper Lot.
The result of all which is, that Epicurus would persuade, that the Universe is
a Commonwealth, wherein every single member is, by the signature and necessity
of its particular constitution, instructed in, and impelled upon the praecise
performance of its peculiar office; so as not to want the direction of any
Superintendent, or to conform to the directions of a General Council: and seems
to allow this only difference between the universal Polity of the World, and
the particular Republique of mankind; that in this, men frequently make
deflexions from the general scope, by reason of the seductions of their
unstable and irregular judgments; but in that, all individuals punctually keep
to their primitive assignations, and so conspire to the satisfaction of the
common interest, by reason of the constancy of their natures, and unalterable
necessity of their forms. And this Abridgement of his doctrine, Plutarch (de
Fato) has prepared to our hands, when personating Epicurus, he thus argues;
Nulla est opus sapientia ordinis instruendi in exercitu, si militum quivis sua
sponte noverit locum, ordinem, stationem, quam accipere debet and tueri: neque
etiam opus olitoribus, Fabrisve murariis, si aqua illeic ultro afsluat
indigentibus irratione plantis; heic lateres, ligna, lapidesque eas, natura
duce, motiones at que inclinationes subeant, quibus in sua loca, inque
expetitam concinnitatem coeant, etc.

Now for the other part of the Argument, viz. the unequal 2. The unequal or
injust distribution of good and evil.
distribution of Good and Evil, and the ordinary intervention of many effects
inconsistent with the justice and righteous administration of Divinity: this is
clearly hinted by Lucretius, who makes it the main scope of his sixth Canto, to
alienate men's minds from the belief of an Universal moderator, by several
instances of events, that seem to hold too visible an affinity to Temerity and
Inconsideration, to have any relation at all to the judicious method requisite
to Providence; and particularly towers himself over that one example of the
Thunderbolt, as if his reason had slown to a pitch above all possibility of
contradiction, when yet the summary of all that bold discourse, abstracted by
an impartial hand, amounts to no more then this.

Since we observe the Thunderbolt (1.) To be, for the most part, discharged on
the heads of the Innocent, and not the Guilty: (2.) To batter Sancta Deum
delubra, the Temples of the Gods themselves, more frequently then common
buildings: (3.) To be idly spent at random, upon the sea and void Campanias;
and so seems not to have been the Artillery of Divine Vengeance, prepared for
the punishment of impious mortals: (4.) To be generated, like other meteors, by
natural Causes, being a fulphureous exhalation compacted in the clouds, and
thence darted ala volec, or at a venture, on whatever is situate in the level
of its projection: it appears an absurdity of timorous superstition to believe,
that every single occurrence is praeordained by Wisdom, or that all extemporary
Accidents have their praescripts in the book of Fate.

And these are the Goliath objections, or nerves of the Atheists Remonstrance
against Universal Providence; which though many of the Fathers, and
particularly S. Clement (in 5. Strom.) have decreed to be filed amongst those
impious questions, that deserve no answer but a whip, like the doubts of a
Mohammedan in point of faith: yet since promise has made it my duty, to
endeavor the demonstration of the Attributes of the divine nature (such at
least as occur to the contemplation of a mere Philosopher, who has wholly
referred himself to the Testimonies of the Light of Nature) by the conviction
of Reason alone; I am confident so clearly and fully to confute, that no man,
who has not stubbornly put out the eye of his soul, shall in the future remain
a Sceptick, as to this particular.

SECT. II. The Vindication.
FIrst I plead the general consent of all Nations and Ages in Article 1. That
the Notion of general Providence is Proleptical; inferred from the universality
of its reception.
the acknowledgement of Providence; for, according to the Logical Canons even
of Epicurus (apud Gassend. in Animadvers. in Canonic. Epicuri) any motion, that
is held in common, and by long prescription grown into (...), Anticipation,
ought not to be doubted of; as being its own Criterion, and from which there
lies no farther Appeal.

Now that all Nations have met in one Chorus to proclaim the Article 2. From
the misplaced devotion of Idolaters.
universal and absolute soveraign^y of Providence, cannot be obscure to any,
that have, but with half an eye, glanced on the Records of Ancient and Customs
of Present; or but considered, that even the Idolatry of the most stupid and
barbarous people that ever lived, does plainly commonstrate, that they paid
both their sacrifices and orizons, as homage to some Power, which held the
rains of second Causes, and could dispose them to the production of good or
evil events, according to his own beneplacets; and therefore not only in
public Calamities, as War, Pestilence, Famine, etc. but also in the private
distresses of each Family and Person, they immediately addressed themselves to
the Sanctuary of their devotions, hoping by that means to appease the anger of
that slexible hand, that had the arbitrary donation of happiness and misery.

That all Philosophers also (who being generally reputed wise Article 3. From
the confession of most Philosophers of the bighest form; as of
men, and all their very Tenets exemplary; could not but draw whole shoals of
under-heads into the stream of their opinions) gave in their votes on the side
of Providence; cannot cost much oil to illustrate: it being obvious, first,
that

Ecphantus, with most of that elder sect, who gave in their names 1. Ecphantus.
to the doctrine of Atoms, did yet establish the necessary concession of some
universal Moderator, and unanimously referred the ordination of all
contingents, as well frequent as rare, auspicious and inauspicious, popular and
domestique, to the arbitrary disposal of one common P^lot, who sat at the
helm of this great vessel, the Universe. (Leg. Stobaeum in Ecl. Phys.)

Secondly, that those also, who held the World to be Nonprincipiate, or to have
been so old, as never to have been young, 2. Plato.
did yet notwithstanding condemn the delirium of Fortune, and concluded the
gubernation of all upon the supreme Intelligence. For Plato seems so strongly
convicted, and his reason so violently ravished into the arms of Divine
Providence; that, though he inclined to the eternity of the World, he yet
conceded the production thereof in time, as a necessary Hypothesis, or
foundation, whereon he might the more firmly crect his superstructure of that
magisterial Truth, which otherwise would have been impossible to be made out,
viz. The universal Administration of Providence. And thus much he frequently
declared, in Lib. de Legibus: in Epinomide, and in Timaeo more expressly; out of
which meditation Plutarch (De procreat. Anim. ex Timaeo, and de Fato) collected
his tripartite distinction of Providence. Prima enim (says he) and suprema, est
Primi Dei intelligentia, sive mavis, voluntas benefica erga res omnes; qua
primum singulae divinae res omnino optime ac pulcherrimo ordinatae sunt:
secunda secundorum deorum per coelum incedentium qua res mortales ordinate
siunt, and singulorum generum constantia atque salus procuratur: Tertia non
inepte dieitur Providentia, and Procuratio Geniorum, qui circa terram
collocati, humanarum actionum custodes atque inspectores sunt.

And Aristotle, who was much more bold and plain in his assertion of the Worlds
eternity, though (in Metaphys. 12. 3. Aristotle.
cap. 9.) he pretends an unwillingness to have the majestic sanctity of the
supreme Nature disparaged, by being debased to the oversight of petit and
inconsiderable affairs transacted here below; and therefore limited his
jurisdiction to the celestial orbs: yet was he forced to confess the
impossibility of the worlds subsistence in the due harmony and requisite order
of all its motions, without the constant regulation thereof by Providence, as
Laertius, Theodoretus, Stobaeus, and other of his most judicious Expositors
have assured us. And upon this consideration was it, that the good Father,
Origin allowed him to have been one degree less impious then Epicurus. Nay
Cicero (2. de Nature. deorum) makes him upon second thoughts, to have professed
a recantation, by allowing the ubiquity of the divine Wisdom, and extending
the arm of Providence, which he had formerly shortened and terminated in the
lowest sphere, even to the meanest of sublunary passages, introducing him
disguised (doubtless to prevent the dishonor of unconstancy to his own
principles) under a third person telling a story of some, Qui post aevum
transactum in locis subterraneis, and repent emersi, intuitique hunc ordinem
rerum, ipsum sine numine esse non posse arbitrarentur.

Thirdly, that the Stoics, albeit upon that vulgar presumption that to assign
the procuration of all minute and trivial occurences, 4. The Stoics.
to that Nature, which is all Felicity and Quiet, was implicitly to infringe
the right hand of its divinity; they abridged its empire, and limited its
influence to the more weighty and popular actions of mankind only; were
howsoever zealous assertors of Providence; is manifest from that saying of
Cotta reproving Balbus, an eminent Stoic (apud Cicer. de nature. Deor. 3.) At
enim minora dii neque agellos singulorum, nec viticulas prosequuntur; nec si
uredo, aut grando quidpiam nocuit, id Iovi animadvertendum fuit; nec in regnis
quidem reges omnia minima curant: sic enim dicitis, etc.

And lastly, that the Academicks and Scepticks were of the 5. The Academicks
and Scepticks.
same persuasion; however being carried against the stream of all Affirmative
learning, by the contrary tide of their own Negative humor, and obliged to fall
foul upon all truths, in defense of their own affected Nescience; they have
been observed to have had some light skirmishes with the Champians of
Providence. Nor need we acquiesce in the bare affirmation hereof, while to any
man, that shall with equanimity and attention compare their tender arguments
against the opinion of general Providence, with those more sinewy and vehement
reasons of their professed neutrality in many other notions; there will offer it
self a fair ground for more then conjecture, that they purposely contrived them
soft, gentle, and dissoluble, that so they might seem neither to quit their
habit of contradiction, nor yet to dare the subversion of that catholic
position, to which all men (those few of the black guard of Hell, whom we
lately nominated, excepted) had subscribed, and which the dictates of their own
domestic oracle, Reason, had confirmed as sacred and uncontrollable. To which
we may annex the testimony of Gassendus, who (in Animadvers. in lib. 10.
Diogen. Laert. de Physiologia Epicuri page 731.) speaking conjunctively of both
those sects, says thus: ut argument atisunt adversus Providentiam, sic
opinioni de providentia suam probabilitatem fecerunt, neque saltem ea front
fuerunt, ut esse providentiam absolute inficiarentur.

Now to take the just dimensions of this Argument, let us allow it, like Janus,
to have two faces; and then survey the aspect Article 4. A review of the
induction: and the Argument found to be Apodictical on one side; and on the
other only persuasive.
of each a part. On one hand it looks Absolute and Apodictical: on the other
only Persuasive.

Apodictical; since the universality of any belief (such especially, as has
ever been attested even by those, who have made the profoundest search into its
fundamentals, and streyned every nerve in the whole body of reason to demolish
it,) is no obscure proof, that it must be one of those (...), or Implantate
Notions, which the same hand, that made our nature, has engraven on the table
of our minds, and lest it not in the power of our depraved Wills totally to
obliterate.

That there are some Implantate Notions, no man, who has but learned the
Alphabet of his own Nature, will dispute. Nor is it less certain, that all
Philosophers have decreed Anticipation (which Aristotle (in 1. Poster. 1.)
calls (...), praeexistentem cognitionem; and Cicero has interpreted (1 de Not.
Deor.) notionem menti insitam, and anteceptam quandam in animo informationem)
to be the Touchstone of verity: nay Empiricus himself forgot his custom of
Scepticisme, when he came to this point, and grew positive (advers. Gramm. and
advers*: Ethic.) (...), that no man could so much as enquire, or doubt of any
thing without Praenotion.

And that the Notion of the worlds regiment by universal Providence, is one of
those propositions, Quae sunt in nobis adeo antiquae, ut iis, ex quo esse and
sentire coepimus, evaserimus informati: which, like letters carved on the bark
of a young plant, are impressed upon our very Intellect, and grow up together
with us; is already proved collaterally and upon induction, in our
Demonstration of the Existence of God: for therein it is cleared, that the
excellent Idea, which we have of the Supreme Being, contains all Perfections
whatever, and among the rest, that noble Attribute, Creator; which to him that
shall attentively consider the nature of Duration, must sound one and the same
thing, with Conservator, or Governor.

Only persuasive; since humane Auctority, considered perse, is but an
inartificial Argument, and binds not, but when consorted with others more
rational, into one syndrome or multiplex demonstration: not is the
concentration of all men's minds in one and the same assertion, an infallible
Criterion of its verity. For the judgment of man in general lies open to the
encroachments of Error, and the common infirmity of humane nature is not only
discoverable in the gross and visible delusions of vulgar heads (whose business
is to believe, not examine) but has frequently broken out upon the soundest
brains, and confessed it self Epidemical in the absurd mistakes of the greatest
Critics of Truth, especially in the promotion and transmission of opinions
haereditary and traditional.

SECT. III.
LEt us not, therefore, entrust the supportation of so weighty a Truth to that
fragile reed of Auctority; but give our selves Article 1. Gods General
Providence demonstrated by the Idea of his Nature reflected on our thoughts.
liberty to imagine, that no man ever believed or asserted an universal
Providence: and having thus divested our minds of all Praesumption, or
Anticipation, expose them as tables newly derased to receive the pure
impressions or sincere documents of the Light of Nature; converting our
contemplations, First upon the Nature of God, and thence upon the most exact
order and confederacy of all secondary causes in the world.

First, I say, let us set our reason a work upon the nature of the First Cause,
or Eternal Being; and order our cogitations thus. The same demonstration,
whereby the mind of man is convicted of the Existence of God, does also at the
same time violently, but naturally, conclude his nature to be so accomplished in
all Perfections, as to be above all Access or Addition. For manifest it is,
that by the term, God, every man does understand something to which no
perfection is wanting: and should it be granted possible, that the mind of man
could conceive any perfection more then what is comprehended in the idea, which
it holds of the nature of God; yet still would that thing, to which it could
ascribe that perfection, be God. Since it is impossible to cogitate any
perfection, which is not the essential propriety of some Nature: and to think
any Nature more perfect then the Divine, plainly absurd; because we conceive
that to be most perfect, or else we do not conceive it to be God; God, and
Absolute Perfection being one and the same thing, and ordinarily conceived as
one notion. Now, to be so insinitely Wise, Potent, and Good, as to order all
things in the world to the best, to regulate and predetermine the operations of
all second Causes, to keep Nature her self sober and in tune* and so prevent
those discords, which otherwise would in a moment succeed to the reduction of
all to a greater confusion then that of the Chaos; in a word, to conserve all
things in existence: this no man will deny to be a Perfection, since we define
the perfection of man, by his abilities sor dominion (i. e.) in the judgment
of our reason, every man is esteemed by so much the more perfect, by how much
the more generous, august, liberal, prudent and benign mind he is endued
withal, and by inference, by how much the more digne he is to bear rule over
others. Therefore is this Perfection, Mundo providere, seu singulis rebus
consulere, to take care of the world, and provide for the subsistence of every
single entity; of necessity to be ascribed to God.

For though that obsolet fallacy, that business imports disquiet, and disquiet
contradicts s^licity, be retrived upon us; and our reason seem captived in the
snare of this conclusion; That this Perfection, as it stands in relation to
Divinity, must be an imperfection, as being point blanck repugnant to its
nature, which cannot at once be superlatively happy, and yet subject to
multiplicity of business: yet we may soon redeem it to the liberty of truth, by
conceiving some nature, wherein these two seeming contraries may be reconciled,
(i. e.) the Procuration of affairs may shake hands with extreme beatitude. Nor
do we conceive an impossibility herein; because even among men we daily find,
that those Negotiations, which are an oppression to a low, narrow and
unpractised Wit, are but the pleasant diversions and familiar recreations of a
sublime, capacious, and polypragmatical: and by consequence that Nature which
is able to sustain the administration of affairs infinite in number and
variety, without detriment to its complet happiness; must be conceded, by
incomputable degrees of transcendency more perfect, then that whose quiet must
suffer diminution by the distraction of cares. Wherefore let us not suffer our
cogitations to acquiesce in this imperfect, but vigorously advance to that most
perfect Nature, whose propriety it is to be at once both supremely Provident,
and supremely Beat. And since we conceive God to be such, it is of necessity
inevitable, that we grant Universal Providence to be his proper Attribute.

For Confirmation, or (more properly) requisite Explanation (for sure no man,
whose intellectuals are not suppressed by that intolerable tyrant, professed
Incredulity, can longer doubt) of this; let us reflect upon our Idea of the
Deity, and therein we shall discover, that it is impossible for the mind of man
to conceive the import of this word, God; and not in the same numerical notion
to understand him to be most Wise, most Potent, most Good, or in abstracto,
infinite Wisdom, infinite Power, infinite Goodness, assimilated, or rather
identified into one simple eternal essence. For undoubtedly our minds would
speculate the Idea of a poor inconsiderable and imperfect Divinity; if they
conceived it subject to circumscription, and apprehended his Intellection so
narrow as not actually to comprehend all things; his Power so restrained, as to
know Impossibility; his Goodness so scant and shallow, as to be exhausted in a
partial diffusion, or limited by the admixture of Envy, (i. e.) withdrawn from,
or denied unto any of the works of his hand, out of a design to delight, or
glory in their infelicity.

Now if God be infinitely wise, he must be Omniscient; and Article 2. The same
particularly supported by that trinity of Attributes, viz. his
consequently, must understand not only the simple and naked Forms of all
natures in the Universe, but hold also a full and clear theory of their
Essential proprieties, how and by what kind of activities they operate toward
the satisfaction of their praedestinate ends, and in what method they may be
most conveniently disposed to maintain the order and harmony of the whole; and
so 1. Infinite Wisdom.
must know and exercise the due administration of all things in this vast
Commonwealth. I say, must know and exercise; for if he understood the polity
or method of the worlds Gubernation, only Contemplatively: then would not his
Intellection be complet and absolute in all points, and we should have been
compelled to recurre to our former device of cogitating some other nature more
perfect, which might be actually possessed of both the Theorical and Practical
Intelligence. Again, since Sapience does consist in, and manifest it self
chiefly by Action, and the real administration of difficult and important
affairs; with what shadow of reason can we argue God to be most Sapient, if we
conceive him to be Idle, devoyd of all action, and taking care of nothing?

Secondly, if God be infinitely Potent, then must he be Omnipotent: and so to
his power there is no (...), or impossibility. 2. Infinite Power.
But how can we apprehend this aright, unless we first grant, that having
produced all things, and endowed them with faculties respectively inservient to
their conducement to the satisfaction of the general end; he does, through all
the independent subdivisions of time, (i. e.) constantly, moderate their
activities, in full conformity to the prudent rules of his own Will: and how
can this be done, unless we allow him to have a hand in all operations, and
that both Causes and effects do so fully and wholly depend upon him, that they
can have neither Existence, nor Motion, without the assent and coefficiency of
his Beneplacet. Again, Action is the Pathognomonick, or proper manifest of
Power; nay, in precise and orthodox logic, they are Correlatives, or twins
that are ^orn, live and dye together; and we are not now to learn, that Gods
prime scope in the Creation, was to have an opportunity for the manifestation
of his excellencies: if so, can Inactivity declare Supreme Power, or a
cessation from acting not induce a suspicion of Lassitude and imbecility?

Lastly, if God be infinitely good; it necessarily follows, Goodness being
Communicative, that all natures must be sensible 3. Infinite Goodness.
of, by participating that his inexhaustible goodness. And with what
unpardonable incogitancy can that be asserted, while we opinion that he does
concenter his goodness, and when he has created so many excellent natures,
take no care or make no provision for their welbeing, but abandon them to the
impendent misery of confusion? Might we not justly censure him of Malevolence
or Envy, if he should withhold the communication of his perpetual Providence
from the works of his own hands; which must unavoydably perish by the
Antipathies of their Constitutions, and relaps into their primitive nothing in
that moment, when he should intermit his act of Conservation? Nay, so essential
is the constant oversight and tuition of the Creator to the subsistence of the
Creature; that some contemplative heads have hereupon hinted a conjecture, that
nothing shall go to the dissolution of all, at the period of time, but the mere
Cessation of Providence, or the dereliction of Nature to the necessary discord
of her several pieces.

And thus has the clue of Gods chief Attributes (chief in his relation to the
World) in a direct line conducted our single reason to the demonstration of his
General Providence; which indeed, is the clearest mirror of his superexcellent
Nature, and to the optics of mortality does afford a lively reflection of his
infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness. It succeeds that we endeavor to look at
Providence through the Telescope or Perspective of the World.

Since God made the World, as has been already proved; it cannot but be absurd
to imagine, that he instantly deserted it, or Article 3. The necessity of the
worlds gubernation, by the indesinent influence of Gods general Providence,
demonstrated from the consideration of the absolute and total dependence of all
Second Causes upon the First.
having once impressed a virtue of motion upon the greater wheels of this vast
machin* immediately withdrew his hand from action, leaving them to be carried
on by their own rapt or swinge; and all the lesser and subordinate wheels of
particular natures to conform to the impulsion of those greater. For though he
made all things Perfect, (i. e.) omitted nothing requirable to the integral
accomplishment of each Creature, in suo genere: yet since himself is the
Universal Soul, that both Materiald and Informed each particle of this great
body; in stri^tness of consequence, nothing can have existence longer then he
shall please, in every minute of its duration, freshly to create it, or (to
speak the interest of Providence) to conserve it in being, by a continual
communication of it self; all the Actions of Divinity, being real Divinity at
second hand, or nothing but Dissusions, or Emanations of its own essence.

Again, who ever reared a magnificent structure a purpose to ruin it? and
since there is no Artificer so unnatural or stupid, as not to desire rather
that his Artifice should prosper and continue long by careful looking to, then
be exposed to ruin by neglect or violence: it is infinitely more improbable,
that the great Exemplar of all Mechanics (for no age ever produced a piece of
Art, whose pattern was not first in Nature) should so far grow out of love with
his own operation, and despise those perfections, which were but the extracts
of himself; as to disclaim it, commit it to the imminent disorder and
demolition of Fortune, and not make provision of all things conducible to its
preservation: especially, when no Intellect but his own could be large enough
to comprehend the Idea of the work, no Prudence but his own absolute enough to
project the convenient model of its due gubernation, no Power but his own
almighty enough to furnish him with requisites thereto.

Nor can it, with safety, or honor to our judgments, be imagined, that God
might, had he so pleased, have constituted the World in such absolute
perfection, as that from the minute of its complete existence it might have
continued independent, and to all eternity have subsisted by it self, and all
its appointed motions have constantly, without intermission, or variation,
succeeded by the direction of their bequeathed impressions, without the
assiduous moderation of his care, or the minutely supply of his providence,
since the Universe, according to the Grammar of sound Philosophy, is no Noune
Substantive, and enjoyes reality only by a distinction: i. e. is something by
dependence upon him, who was eternally contrary to nothing; and being, at that
instant, when Omniety informed Nullity into existence, educed out of nothing,
by the single Fiat of God, and thence forward continued to be something by the
continued Power of the Creator: must unavoidably revert to nothing again, if
the perseverance of that identical power be subtracted, from which it once
obtained to be something. And as Light cannot subsist, if separated from a
lucid body; but instantly vanishes into opacity: so cannot the World (which is
but a reflexive deradiation from that Light, which is invisible) continue, if
the perpetual sourse of that miraculous Virtue, which upholds its existence, be
withdrawn, but must immediately vanish into nothing. For the Analogy holds in
all points, and the dependence of the Creature upon the Creator, is as highly
absolute, as that of Light upon the Sun, or other lucid body. And though there
are some things, which being once assisted into determinate essences by their
causes, do afterward subsist without them, and keep possession of those Forms
by their own native force: yet are they such as were still something before
their specification to this or that nature by their causes; since all that
natural Causes can do, is to mould an old matter into a new figure, and so
dispose the faculties existent therein, that a new something may start out of
the ruins of an old something. But the World which was nothing before the
fruitful voice of Elohim called it into something, has nothing from it self
to subsist upon; but must therefore, in the twinkling of an eye, become
nothing again, unless its existence be supported and maintained by the constant
recruit of the same miraculous Power, which first created it. I say, the same
miraculous Power; for the Creation doubtless was the greatest miracle, that
ever was wrought: it being more difficult to turn Nothing into all things, by
the bare nutus or vote of the First Cause, then to produce an extraordinary
effect by inverting the usual method of Secondary Causes; a harder wonder to
make Nature herself, then to praeposter, or transcend her customary rules of
acting, to the causation of an effect either against, or above her self. Though
to speak rationally, and as men that understand something of Theosophy; nothing
can be a miracle to him, to whom all things are not only of equal possibility,
but of equal facility also. When therefore we say, that God is the Cause of the
world; we are to understand him to be so in the same relation, that the Sun is
the Cause of Light: and by consequence, as the Light disappears in the Aer,
when the Sun discontinues its Actinobolisme or deradiation in our hemisphear,
by visiting the lower; so also must the World disappear and be lost in
adnihilation, when God shall please to discontinue his influx of minutely
Creation, or (to speak more conform to our praesent scope, though it signify
the same thing in height of truth) to intermit his Providence.

Moreover, so immense are the bounds of this vast Empire, the Article 4. The
vastity of the world: the infinite variety of its parts: and the
irreconcilable discord of many natures: domonstrate as much.
World, so numerous and various its subdivisions, and those again dichotomized
into so many myriads of Cantons, or Provinces, and each of those peopled with
so many millions of different and discordant natures; that no reason can admit
it so much as probable, that a constant correspondence could be maintained, and
a general amity observed though all, without the conserving influence of a
Rector General, or Supervisor, whose Will receives laws from his Wisdom, and
gives them to all besides himself. And therefore their thoughts missed not much
of the white of truth, who conceived God to hold the same place in the world,
as a Pilot in a ship, a Charioter in his Chariot, a Chantor in a Chorus, a
Father in a family, a Monarch in a Kingdom, or a General in an Army. For, as
the first preserves from shipwreck, the second from deviation and subversion,
the third from discord, the fourth from poverty and desolation, the fifth from
divisions, and the last from confusion: so does the wise oversight of God
regulate the efficiencies of all Natural Agents, with such admirable polity,
that the whole is preserved in safety, in the direct road that leads to the
general end, in harmony, in prosperity, in union, in perfect order.

To draw a line yet more parallel; we every day observe in the sad experiments
of death, what a leaden and unweildly mass of clay the body becomes, so soon as
its sprightly Tenant, the Soul, has surrendered to corruption; and it needs not
much proof, that the Soul of this gigantik body, the Universe, is God:
therefore when this soul shall withdraw and cease its Animation, must that body
fall by its own weight, and suffer dissolution.

Not that therefore, in strictness of sense, or without the latitude of a
metaphor, God is a Soul, and the World his Body; but because the informing and
actuating Presence of God is as absolutely necessary to the vitality of the
World, and the moderation of all its parts in the due execution of their
distinct offices, as the Presence of a soul to the animation of a body, and the
regulation of all its members in the requisite administrations of their several
functions.

And upon this ground, our zeal ought not to distaste that Figurative Article 5.
U^d^r what restriction we are to understand that tropology of some Hermetical
Philosoph^rs, Deum esse Animam Mund^.
expression of those mystical and symbolical Philosoph^rs, who call God, the
Soul of the World; nor be captious at that rhetorique, which has comparatively
styled him, the Pilot, Emperor, and General of Nature: since it is the most
mannerly language mortality can invent, for the explanation of his Government;
nor is it probable, that those profound speculators, who first adopted those
modest metaphors, to shadow the unutterable infinity of his Wisdom and Power,
were ignorant that there ought still this difference to be allowed, that though
a Pilot is not ubiquitary in all parts of his ship, nor an Emperor actually
omnipresent in all places of his dominions, nor a General locally present in
all quarters and stations of his Army; yet God is intimately omnipresent in
every particle of the world. So that what is uncertainly said of the Soul, Tota
in toto, and tota in qualibet part: may be most certainly said of God, Totus
in toto, and totus in qualibet part.

In fine, as the inspection and consideration of the World, has formerly
replenished us with irrefutable Arguments of its Creation by God: so also may
it evince the constant Conservation of it, by the influence of his Providence.

For whoever (though a mere Pagan, whose brain never received the impression of
either of those two notions, Creator and Providence) shall speculate the world
in an Engyscope or magnifying Glass, i. e. shall look upon it in the distinction
of its several orders of natures observe the commodious disposition of parts so
vast in quantity, so infinite in diversity, so symmetrical in proportions, so
exquisite in pulchritude: shall contemplate the comeliness, splendour,
constancy, conversions, revolutions, vicissitudes, and harmony of celestial
bodies: shall thence descend to sublunary, and with sober admiration consider
the necessary difference of seasons, the certain-uncertain succession of
contrary tempests, the inexhaustible treasury of Jewels, Metals, and other
wealthy Minerals concreted in the fertile womb of the earth; the numerous,
useful and elegant stock of vegetables; the swarms of various Animals, and in
each of these, the multitude, symmetry, connection, and destination of organs: I
say, whoever shall with attentive thoughts perpend the excellencies of these
unimitable Artifices (for all things are Artificial, Nature being the Art of
God) cannot, unless he contradict the testimony of his own Conscience, and
invalidate the evidence of that authentic Criterion, the Light of Nature, but
be satisfied; that as nothing less then an infinite Power and Wisdom could
contrive and finish, so nothing less then the uncessant vigilance and
moderation of an infinite Providence can conserve and regulate them, in order
to the mutual benefit each of other, and all conspiring, though in their
contentions, to the promotion of the common interest.

If any shall yet stand out and object, that what I call Providence, Article 6.
The Atheists subterfuges of Nature and Fortune, praecluded.
is no other but Nature nicknamed, all those settled motions and regular effects
in the world being but the necessary products of its established laws, and
unalterable method: yet since they all declare an Infinite intelligence in that
Nature, which could decree those perfect constitutions, and so strictly oblige
all things to observe them in order to a general and particular good; he must
at last by compulsion discover Divinity disguised under the vizard of Nature,
by whose counsel and directions all things operate.

Nor can any man with more hopes of safety recurre to Fortune; or affirm, that
there is no Praeordination of contingencies, but that all events are the
inconsiderate and extemporary results of Chance: since we have lately beheld
the ruins of that Sanctuary, nor dare I be so uncharitable, as to presume that
the reason of any thing praetending to humanity, can be so infatuted with the
stupid idolatry of that Fairy Queen, as to expect a farther resutation of that
delirium.

SECT. IV.
HAving, with perspicuity equal to the highest expectation, demonstrated the
necessity of Universal Providence, from the nature both of the Agent and
Patient; God and the World; it remains only that we withdraw that curtain of
objections, wherewith the Impiety of its adversaries has darkened the prospect
of less ocular discerners, and terminated the vision of those whose optics
have not been strong enough to transfix it.

The first, we may remember, was that vanity of Epicurus, that the condition of
a blissful and immortal Nature (such was his Article 1. The Atheists first
Antiprovidential Argument refuted, by the Perfection of the Divine Nature: and
their absurdity, in commensurating the excellenties of God, by the infinitely
inferlor Faculties of man, detected.
character of Divinity) is inconsistent with the necessary perturbations and
perplexities of business.

But alas! how grossly must he delude himself, who fathoms the extent of an
Infinite, by the unequal geometry of a Finite, and limits incomprehensible
Omniety to the narrow circumscriptions of Humanity; which in comparison is but
one remove from Nullity? Had God, indeed, been, as he conceived him, of Humane
figure; it had been no error in the Court of Reason to have concluded him not
much superior in the capacity of his Intellect: but when the Divine Nature, as
himself acknowledged, must transcend all other in perfection and excellencies;
how palpable a contradiction did he fall upon, in commensurating the latitude
of its Power and Wisdom, by the span of an imperfect and caduce nature,
betwixt which and Omnipotent-omniscience are so many degrees of difference, as
all the figures and ciphers of Arithmetic cannot amount to their compute, nor
is mortality qualified to conceive. To paint a Sound, is a far easier task,
then to describe the impervestigable manner of Gods operations: and to deny the
possibility of that, whose reason we cannot explore, is to proclaim our
ignorance of any nature more perfect then our own; and that upon consequence,
is to make our nature more imperfect then really it is, by rendering it
incapable of the greatest Truth; nay, of that truth, upon whose certitude, the
assurance of all possible cognition does necessarily depend. This had the rash
Epicurus considered, doubtless he never had disparaged the nature of man, by
equalizing it to Gods. I say, disparaged; because to conceive a Finite essence,
as perfect as an Infinite, is openly to confess that nature, which can conceive
so horrid and sensible an Absurdity, to be far more frail and contemptible,
then all other of its actions declare it to be: not but, in direct verity, it is
the greatest disparagement, and no less then blasphemy to the infinitely sacred
majesty of God, to be put in the scales against vile, ignorant, and impotent
Man.

And while his thoughts flagged so many spears below the Empyreum of all
perfection, it was no wonder that he was staggered at Universal Providence; that
being a notion impossible to be instilled into any mind, that is not first
prepared with the belief of an Universal Intelligence.

Again, to draw into a sharper angle, and render the absurdity of this
Comparison more ridiculous; the Reasons why a man, though of the strongest
brain* and greatest abilities for business, must of necessity suffer disquiet,
distractions and wearisome solicitude from the multiplicity of cares, are (1.)
the narrowness of his Understanding, which cannot he expansed to take in all
the remote, proxime, and confederate Causes, events, dependencies, connexions,
circumstances, etc. of occurrences: (2.) the shortness of his Power, which
cannot stretch to furnish him with all things necessary as well to the
prevention and remove of all incident impediments, as to the molition,
promotion, and accompletion of his designs: and (3.) the restraint of his
Person to Time, Place and distance. But, on the other side, God is Omniscient,
Omnipotent, Omnipraesent; and therefore in the praeordination, direction and
compulsion of all things to the causation of those effects, which his Will has
decreed, he knows infinitely less of labor or disquiet, then the healthiest
man does in the motions of respiration, in his soundest sleep.

That God is not subject to the restraint of Time, is manifest Article 2.
Divinity demonstrated superior to the circumscription both of Time and Place.
from his Eternity; for that is indivisible, and knows no distinction of
tenses: and therefore what we (whose imperfect reason cannot compute the
duration of things, but by the successive instances, or concatenated moments of
time) call Praedestination, is really no praedetermination of what is to come,
in respect to God, but an act of his will already accomplished, and as soon
fulfilled as decreed; and so we may truly say, that in relation to himself,
there is no Foreknowledge in God, all things which to our inferior Capacities
seem either past, or to come, being actually praesent to him, whose whole
duration is altogether, or but one constant and permanent point, one (...),
entire in unity, and incapable of division into successive minutes, or articles.

That he is not subject to the restraint of Place, is evident from his Omniety,
his being all in all; Vbiquity being the proper and inseparable Attribute of
his nature. His being All in All. not only ratione Praesentiae, but ratione
Essentiae also; he being the chief Soul not only of all Bodies, but of all
Spirits also. And for this reason we cannot offend Theology, if we affirm,
that God is as fully Present in Hell among the accursed, as in Heaven among the
blessed natures though not so comfortably; and that the Devils would rejoice if
they could conceive it possible for him to be absent thence: since their
existence, and so their Torments would then cease, his presence being the
original and support of all existence.

Now if all this be amassed into one demonstration, and that duly perpended; I
demand as well of the most contumacious infidelity, as the rankest ignorance,
what can remain desirable, in order to the full information of our reason; that
if there were a million of Worlds, nay as many as there are individuals in
this, and in each a 1000000 times more business then in this: yet could the
oversight and gubernation of them all, and the regular managery of every the
smallest occurrence in them, put Divinity to no more trouble, disquiet, or
interruption of felicity, then the simple Act of Volition does induce upon the
soul of man.

However, for further illustration, I cannot think it unnecessary to superadd
this; that since Man himself does ordinarily perform Article 3. That the
procuration of all the infinitely various actions of second causes, in the
World, cannot be any interturbation of God^ serene felicity, proved by an
Argument a minori.
some actions, particularly those, which he is not only qualified and
empowered, but also inclined to do, by the native virtue, or congenial
propensity of his Essence, as to Cogitate, Desire, Love, Rejoice in the
manifestation of his good parts or endowments, etc. not only without labor and
inquietude, but even with superlative delight and content: it cannot but be
concordant to reason to assert, that God is so far from sustaining any
difficulty, molestation, or diminution of felicity, in the constant act of
Universal Providence; which is the natural effect of his Infinite Intelligence
and Indefatigable Activity, that it is rather a part of his Beatitude so to
exercise and manifest his Divinity. Not that the abyss of his Happiness was not
full before the World was; but because, being moved by his own immense Goodness
to create a convenient subject, whereon to actuate his Munificence, he is
pleased still to delight himself in the continued diffusion and communication
of his excellencies, by the conservation and regulation of the same, according
to the most prudent laws of his Will.

I have often consulted the most knowing and best ordered minds, with whom I
could attain the blessing of a free conversation (and such, doubtless, are the
only competent judges of delight) wherein lay the Philosophers stone of Content
in this life, and in what actions of their lives they discovered the highest
and most permanent pleasure: and they all concurred in this determination,
Aliis prodesse, and quam licet plurimis been facere. And this upon no slender
ground, since the Beatitude of Man does radically and totally consist in his
appropinquation to God, and we never come so near him, in this remote vale of
tears, as when we go out of our selves to relieve the necessities, lighten the
oppressions, and prevent or repair the ruins of others. For Charity is the
only excellence, wherein we may, in some sort, rival our maker: and were but
our Wills constantly fixed upon the practice of this virtue, and our Abilities
of doing good but half so infinite as our Wills (for the wings of our
Understanding are, indeed, but short; but those of our Will are long, and have
a liberty to sly at all, as shall be singularly proved in convenient place) we
might anticipate no small part of the joys of heaven, while we sojourne upon
earth, and should need no other Heraldry to testify our selves the offspring
of Divinity. Now if it be so intense a delight to the mind of man, which is but
a beam deradiated from that immense Sun of Charity, to do good: ought we to
think it a trouble to God, who is most intelligent, and so best knows the
necessities of all things; most beneficent, and so most ready to relieve them;
most rich, and so not obnoxious to impoverishment by the continual profusion of
his favors; to be a general benefactor by his Providence?

To conclude; if the visible and perishable Sun can with uncessant Article 4.
The same illustrated by a second comparison.
liberality, diffuse his consolatory and all-impregnating streams of light,
heat, and influence on all parts of the sensible or adspectable World; and so
concur to the generation, vitality, growth, perfection and conservation of
all sublunary Natures; and this without labor, lassation, or exhaustion: Why
should not the Invisible, Vnperishable, and Infinite Sun (of which the other is
but a dark and contracted shadow) be allowed to have his Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness (which Trinity of Attributes make the unity of Providence, as I have
formerly hinted) in all places, and at all times diffused, in their operations,
over all his Works, with the same facility.

And as it can be no Interturbation to the serene Felicity, so Article 5. That
the administration of petty occurrences can be no indignity or d^s^aragement to
the sacred Majesty of God; but, on the contrary absolutely essential to him,
firmly evicted, from the universality of his Cognition and Presence.
neither can it be a Dishonor or disparagement to the superexcellent Majesty
of God, to transmit the rays of his Providence to the most minute, and
seemingly most trivial and contemptible transactions on this great exchange of
the world. And therefore Pliny, who said, necesse est ut Deus tam tristi,
tamque multiplici ministerio poliuatur; might with less absurdity have
affirmed, that the Sun does an action much below the dignity of so glorious a
creature, and must have the purity of his light suffer diminution and
contamination, when it projects its radiant beams upon sordid and putrid
bodies; when it cooperates to the production of Toads, Serpents, worms and
other the like base vermin; and when it promotes the fertility of noxious and
deleterious weeds, as well as wholesome and medical plants. For those things
which appear vile, despicable and ugly to the queazy judgment of man; are not
so really to Nature: since she knows no deformity, and therefore all her
pieces must be amiable: not really so to the eyes of the Author of Nature,
since he has thought good to configurate them according to the most exact
ideas in his own wise intellect; and therefore Beauty is best defined by the
confirmity every thing holds to its primitive exemplar in the Intellect of its
Creator: not so to themselves, since they have obtained a perfection congruous
to their species, and enjoy an absolute pulchritude respective to their
distinct kind; and therefore no Animal is so insensible of the perfection of
its Form, as to desire either to lose, or exchange it.

Again, those Actions, which seem various, carry the face of multiplicity, and
fill up whole sheets, in the diary of man; stand but for an unit in the
Arithmetic of Nature and make but a monosyllable in the book of Fate: it being
the natural prerogative of Ubiquitary Omnipotence, to do all things at once.

Consider we, with what ease and quiet the pale and feeble Soul of a Tree can
at once provide for the Vegetation as well of each leaf and blossom, as of
the trunck and root, and cook the insipid juice of the earth into an Aliment
convenie^t to the conservation and growth of each single fiber and filament
both of the cortex or bark, and of the inte^ior and medullary substance: in a
word, transfuse a vital influence through each indivisible particle of that
great mass, of which it is composed.

Consider we, how easily the more luminous and energetical Soul of an Elephant
can at one and the same time, in one and the same blast, or deradiation of
virtue, administer its nourishing influx to each particle of that vast body;
and omitts not to take care of every single hair among so many myriads as
cloth the skin, in its common doale or distribution of Vitality.

And when we have thus gently informed our selves, that it is as easy to the
weak and evanid soul of a Plant (which the best Physiology defines to be
nothing, but a certain modification of matter volatilized, or a contexture of
smooth, globular equal and so of calefactive Atoms, woven by the seminal virtue
or plastic Faculty of that particular species, and soon dissolved again, upon
a variation of figure and situation of those insensible particles, of which it
is composed) to make provision for the livelihood and sustentation of all parts
in that mass, as for any one of them: that it is as genuine and familiar to the
Soul of an Animal (which is also a Corporeal substance, or the more spiritual
part of the blood subtiliated by vital heat, traduced from its genitor) to
animate and govern all parts of its body, as any one: we cannot but
acknowledge, that the Procuration and Administration of all the affairs of the
world, is as facil and natural to the Providence of God (who is the Soul of all
Souls, and the life of Spirits) as to take the care of any one individual
Nature.

If the oversight and regency of but half so many different operations, as that
immaterial Empress, which keeps her invisible Court somewhere within us, does
every minute, even when we are fast locked in the narcotick arms of Morpheus,
and all our thoughts keep holy day, order and effect, while she maintains the
economy of the body; were charged upon the hands of our understanding, but for
one hour: without question, the burden would prove insupportable, nor could
either the skill or strength of our limited reason, in any measure responsible,
suffice to the due administration of so large a Province. When, therefore, to
fathom the depth of that immense natural prudence, and sovereign virtue,
wherewith the soul of man is richly endowed, and which she constantly declares
in the prosperous exercise of her Monarchy, with the short line of our
intelligence; or to estimate her Providence according to the rate of our
cheaper faculties; is both ignorance and unjustice: how infinitely more stupid
and unwarrantable a course does that wretch take, who adventures to
commensurate the superexcellent knowledge and almighty virtue of God, whereby
he procures and moderates the affairs of the World?

That man is, for the most, incurious of small and trivial occurrences; is so
far from being a wonder, that contrariwise those, who could tripartite their
thoughts to the contriveme^t of but three different businesses, at once, as
Caesar, have been looked upon as Prodigies: and he that can lay the grounds of
but one popular design, so as to have it succeed without impediment, or the
intervention of cross accidents; is reputed a profound Politician, and his head
a whole sphere above the vulgar. This, I am not ignorant, the haughtiness of
his spirit has referred to the fixation of his thoughts upon objects either of
his pleasure or ambition; when in modest truth, this pretension of sublimity is
but a gloss, or specious vernish to conceal the imbecility and limitation of
his intelligence. For that being two narrow, to be extended to the forecast and
reguiation of many things at once; and his stomach too high to descend to a due
acknowledgment of the imperfection of his nature: he guilds over the poverty
with the pride of his mind, and endeavors to excuse his frailty, by
insimulating, that to attend the study of trisles, and in the interim supersed
the projection of matters of importance, is a disparagement to the nobility of
his Intellectuals. When if his reason were so capacious, as to admit the care
of petty affairs, without the confusion, or neglect of others of more
concernment; nothing, though nere so mean and ordinary, could seem below the
dignity of his Providence. But that God should be incurious of any action in
the world, is absolutely impossible; since contrapugnant to the Universality of
his Cognition and Praesence: for what is Omniscient and Vbiquitary, can be
ignorant of nothing; and consequently it can be no more either of Profanation
to the Sanctity, or dishonor to the glorious Majesty of the Deity, to extend
his Providence to the meanest contingents in nature, then it can be to the
Soul, to vegetate and inspire each single hair of that body she informs.

SECT. V.
TO their Second objection, that all events in the World are either the
non-praedestinate and extemporary results of Article 1. The first division of
the Atheists second objection; viz. that the apparent irregularity of events
does justify their non-praedestination or mere contingency; strongly
convelled: and that to the praeordination of divinity nothing can be casual;
clearly commonstrated.
Chan^e; or the necessary and settled effects of Nature, all Actives and
Passives being, by the unalterable laws of their primitive constitutions,
firmly adliged unto, and irresistibly impelled upon the causation of
determinate effects respective to the energy of their particular
consigurations: we as easily as uprightly answer,

First, that to the praedestination of that Almighty Cause, which can and does
dispose the motions of all things according to the praescripts of his own Will,
no event can be casual or unexpected; though indeed, if we have regard to the
praescience and forecast of man, to whose dim optics all things are invisible,
that stand in the dark of futurity, many events seem mere Accidents, and the
most mature determinations of Fate may pass for the rash and inconsiderate
hitts of Fortune.

And if so, how audacious a temerity is it in us, so to magnify our own
slender perspicacity, as when we cannot discern why this or that particular
concurse and encounter of natural causes should occur, rather then another, and
such or such an issue of their confederate activities succeed, rather then
another; instantly to conclude, that there can be no Superior Cause, or
superintendent power, which has thus or thus ordained and disposed those
certain means to those certain ends, and whose counsels we are not privy unto?
Look we no farther then the ordinary Providence of Princes, and in every
Republic our observation shall meet with a thousand events, which in the
judgments of their vulgar subjects, and such as stand aloof from the Council
table, are deemed mere Contingents, as never at all designed upon any secret
reasons of State; when yet to the Prince himself, and those to whom he has
communicated the mystery of his designations, they really are the intended
effects of his Prudence, which had so politickly ordered his affairs, and so
wisely prepared all Agents requisite to the bringing about of his purposes,
that they could not but hit and be accomplished accordingly. And is there then,
why we should not be confirmed, that in this immense Commonwealth, in whose
government the most inobservant cannot but take notice of innumerable passages
so admirable, both in respect of the weak Insturments that served to bring them
to pass, and of the obscurity or impervestigability of the Ends, at which they
were levelled; that nothing less then an infinite Wisdom could contrive,
nothing less then an infinite Power effect them: there must of necessity be a
Rector General or President Paramont, by whose sovereign dictates all
subordinate ministers are set on work, in order to the execution of his
pleasure, and in their operations vary not a hairs-bredth from the rules
prescribed by his Will; though neither the manner of their activities, nor the
Ends to which they are destined fall under the discovery of our pu^blinde
reason? For the Polity of God is inscrutable, and may well delight our Piety
with wonder, but must empuzle our insolent Curiosity: and the eye of our souls,
being in this life far dimmer then that of Moses body, cannot survey so much as
the back parts, or dark side of Divinity; much less pry into the maze of his
Counsels, and read the invisible decrees of that mystical S^nate, wherein
though there be a consult of three Persons, there is yet but one mind* which
votes without contradiction, and his Volition, deliberation and Election, make
but one simple act. For my part, that the ways of God in the World are past
finding out; that there is a Sanctum Sanctorum in the Ark of Providence, into
which blind mortality cannot look; and that the cryptick turnings, doublings,
and redoublings of that hand, which works all its rarities in the dark, and
sometimes inverts, now and then transcends, and anon infringes the Axloms of
Nature (to show, that as he made, so he can alter her, and tune all her strings
to a concord with his will) make a labyrinth to intricate and lose the
presumptious reason of man, that dares hope to explore and trace it: this, I
say, is demonstration enough to me, that there is one Universal Intelligence,
which both moves and directs all individual Agents to act, in order to the
accomplishment of some positive end, for the most part best, and many times
only known to himself.

Nor is it an illegal process of our reason, but the best logic, as to
supernaturals; to conclude not only the excellencies, but even the necessary
being of some things, merely from hence that we cannot fully comprehend them:
since their very being above our capacity, is argument both clear and strong
enough, that they are not only so as, but more perfect and far greater then we
understand them to be; as he that sees but a small part of the sea with a
Telescope at distance, may safely conclude that it is exceeding large; because
the circumferrence thereof is, by infinite degrees of magnitude, wider then to
be drawn into the aperture of his slender tube. Sure I am, at least, that the
Antisyllogisme, or Counter-argument; the understanding of man cannot discover
its abstruse and mysterious plots, resolve its multiplex aenigma's, nor analyze
its method, or series of Causes subordinate, and so by a retrograde chase hunt
out its first and chief intention: Ergo, there can be no Providence: is
intolerable, and deserves a greater dose of Ellebor, then that absurdity of the
blind man, who concluded there was not, nor could be any such thing as light,
or Colors, only because he could not see them. When therefore we shall have
run our eager contemplations to a stand, in the wilderness of Providence, and
lost our busy thoughts in the maze of Gods secret decrees; all the
satisfaction our bold curiosity can return home with, will be only this: that
all occurrences in the World are predetermined, have their Causes, Times, and
Ends punctually set down in the Ephemerides of Fate; and though in the
incompetent judgment of man, some of them may seem the Peradventures, or
temerarious Hits of Chance: yet are they the mature Designations of the supreme
Wisdom: though in the ears of man, they may sound discords to the music of
particular Natures, yet will they at last be found well composed Aers necessary
both to sweeten, and fill up the common Harmony of the Universe. To instance;
are there not many Monsters, Heteroclites, Equivocal and irregular births, on
the earth: many prodigious and new-faced Meteors in the upper, and uncertain
Anomalies or unseasonable Tempests in the lower division of the Aer: many new
Phenomenon among the fixed; various encounters, divi^ions, and conspiracies
among the erratick stars etc. and yet do not all these, as Chrotchets and
Quavers in a grave and solemn lesson on a Lute, conduce to the advancement of
the General Melody? Does not irregularity render order the more conspicuous and
amiable? and Deformity, like the Negro drawn at Cleopatra's elbow, serve as a
foil to set off Beauty? Are not the Moles on the cheeks of Nature, as those on
Venus skin, placed there to illustrate or whiten the snow, and sweeten the
feature of her face? Is it not exceeding graceful in a Comoedian, to temper
and endear the sage and weighty scenes of Princes, and Melancholy Statesmen,
with the light interludes of Pantalons, Clowns, and Anticks? Does not the
Painter then show the most of skill, when he refracts the glaring luster of his
lighter Colors, with a veil of Sables; and makes the beauty of his piece more
visible by clouding it with a becoming shadom? And without doubt, every man
will readily conjoyne his vote to ours, that he is best able to adorn and
imbellish a piece of Art, who first contrived and wrought it: and therefore the
Perfection and Condecoration of a work does properly and solely bolong to his
hand, that brought it to that height, as to want only ornament; nor is it his
part to prescribe what is necessary to the conciliation of gracefulness and
decorament to an engine, who is ignorant of the model, and holds not a perfect
Idea of the Artifice thereof. Now the importance of all these similes being put
together, who can be so ignorant in the Alphabet, or rudiments of
ratiocination, as not, at first sight, to spell them into this short lesson,
consisting only of two orthodox Positions.

First, that those subitaneous Accidents, which the ignorance or carelessness of
the vulgar does usually refer to the blind sortilegies of Chance; are truly
the mere hand of God, and the prudent designs of that Catholic Providence,
which has numbered the sands on the Sea shore, and weighed the dust of the
earth in a balance: which feeds the young Ravens, when they cry, and while the
old ones wander for meat: which thundereth marvellously with his voice; and
does great things, that we cannot comprehend: for he says to the snow, Be thou
on the earth; likewise to the small rain, and to the great rain of his strength:
by whose breath frost is given; and the breadth of the waters is straightned:
which turns the bright clouds round about by his Counsels, that they may do
what ever he commands them upon the earth: who made the ordinances of heaven,
and has set the dominions thereof in the earth: who can bind the sweet
insluences of the Pleiades, and lose the bands of Orion: can bring forth
Mazaroth in his season, and guide Arcturus with his sons, etc.

Secondly, that those Monstrosities, or extraordinary and prodigious effects,
which the nescience of the multitude calls Irregularities, Perversions, and
Deformities of Nature; to wiser considerations, prove themselves to be no
wanton excursions, or random shots of her hand, made without aim at any final
cause; but praeordained, and collineated by that sure one of Divine Providence,
point blanck at some certain end, private or public. The former being known
only to himself, a priori; and frequently mistaken by man, a* posteriori: the
later, indeed, we have a liberty to conjecture, to be either that he leaves the
straight, and chalks out this serpentine and crooked line, to satisfy the
World of his Prerogative, that himself is the Agent, and Nature but his
Instrument, and therefore to be turned, wrenched, altered, and perverted at his
pleasure; or else, that his wisdom thinks those spots requisite to enhance the
beauty of the whole, those private fewds and petty discords betwixt
Individuals, necessary not only to endear, but conserve the peace of the whole.

Both which durable Truths are, with so much piety, as judgment, contracted by
that Emperor of the Stoics as well as of the Romans, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus
(of whom the smooth Herodian (initio historiae) gives this glorious Character,
(...), (...): Solus imperatorum sapientiae studium non verbis aut decretorum
scientia, sed gravitate morum, vitaeque continentia usurpavit) into one short
meditation, in these words; (...): Quae ad Deos ut auctores referuntur, ea
Providentiae plena esse nemo dubitat. Quae Fortunae vulgo adscribuntur, ne illa
quidem extra Naturae leges, fatalemque illum contextum, complexumque rerum,
quae a providentia administrantur. Inde omnia sluunt: add quod necessarium
est, quicquid est, and toti universo (cujus tu pars es) conducibile. Porro
autem quod natura Vniversi fert, quodque ad eam facit conservandam, id bonum
est unicuivis Vniversi particulae. Conservant autem mundum, quemadmodum
elementorum, ita and ex iis concretarum rerum mutationes. Libri (...) primi
sect. ultima.

Secondly, that no Natural Agent has the rains in its own hands, or the
liberty to act in a loose and arbitrary way; but all Article 2. The Authors
Antithesis, that all Natural Agents are under the strict laws of their distinct
species.
things observe that immutable Tenor, or settled course, which they began to
operate in at their first inauguration to essence: provided that we understand
this assertion under a twofold restriction.

First, that this Tenor or established method, was not instituted Article 3. A
second Counterposition, that those laws were instituted and sancited by an
infinite wisdom.
by the improvidence of Fortune, as our Atheists would have it; but ordained,
enrolled and enacted by the counsel of an infinite Wisdom.

Secondly, that this supernatural Nature, which excogitated Article 4. A third,
that the legislator has reserved to himself a praerogative power to alter,
transcend, invert, or repeal the laws of Nature.
and decreed this convenient law, and endowed each single entity with a Power
or Faculty respective to its duty thereto, and observance or execution thereof;
has not thereby so tied up his own hands, or limited his Praerogative, as not
to have reserved to himself an absolute superiority, or capacity, at pleasure
to infringe, transcend, or pervert it, by giving special dispensation to any of
his Creatures, to vary the manner of their Activities, in order to the
Causation of any effect, which his own prudence shall think expedient.

For the First and Second of these Positions; viz. that as well Article 5. The
verity of the first and second Positions, amply demonstrated.
the general Law of Nature, as those particular and oeconomical rules, which
being engraven not only upon every distinct species, but also upon every single
or individual entity, stand both for warrant and directions to them in their
several operations; were made and established by the counsel of an infinite
Wisdom: may (if we may assume the liberty to aggravate what we have formerly
adferd toward the attestation of the same subject) be thus demonstrated.

In the whole Scale of Creatures, we find but five Gradations or roundles, by
which our contemplations may orderly ascend to the highest pinnacle, or summity
of Nature, and thence take a full survey of all her Provinces at large: and
those are Existence, Life, Sense, Locomotion voluntary, and Reason. To speak
yet more perspicuously.

First, there are some things, which have obtained a bare Existence, or mere
Being only, and remain devoid of all the other four; such are all simple
bodies, as the Heavens, and those four which common Physiology calls (...)
Elements; and all (...) inanimate Concretions, or Compositions, as Stones,
Metals, Minerals, etc.

Secondly, some have not only Existence, but also Vitality or Vegetability
allotted unto them, and yet want sense, and motion arbitrary, as all Vegetables.

A Third Classis is endowed with Being, Life, and Sense; and yet has not
attained so high as Animal or voluntary motion: to which belong all Conchylia,
as Oysters, Muscles, Cockles, etc. which Aristotle (3. De Gener. Animal. cap.
2.) for the same reason, facetiously calls Aquatiles Plantas, a kind of Water
Plants; as by an inversion, he calls earthly Plants, Ostrea Terrena, a kind of
Land Oysters: because they have not, as he opinioned, the power of translating
themselves de loco in locum (though our Democritus Londinensis, that
incomparable indagator of Natures Arcana, Dr. Harvey, has observed that
Oysters protrude, or belch out on the conical extreme of their shells, a
certain Filme or natural sail, by the help whereof they remove, veer, tack
about, and so, observing the Tides, conduct themselves to shoars, rocks, and
other places of advantage both for their feeding, and quiet) but are tumbled up
and down by the impulse of the Current.

Others of a fourth order are admitted to go higher, and to their Existence,
Vitality, and Sensibility, is also superadded Locomotion arbitrary, or the
Faculty of removing their stations at pleasure; but yet they are excluded from
the perfection of Rationality, and know nothing good or evil, but by the
discernment or discrimination of Sense: as all brute Animals, Quadrupeds,
Birds, Fishes, Amphibions, and Insects.

And Lastly, others there are, which being highest in the favor of their
maker, possess all these accumulated endowments together, and have Existence,
Life, Sense, Voluntary motion, and Ratiocination contorted together into one
excellent Nature, which seems in an epitomy or contraction to comprehend all
the others: and these are our selves. Some over pregnant Wits there have been,
I well remember, who have added one round more to this Ladder of Corporeal
Natures, making the Zoophytes or Plant-Animals an half-pace, or middle step
betwixt the 2 and 3 degrees: but until either an autoptical experiment, or the
observation of some, who are more curious of Truth, then exotique Rarities,
shall remove those scruples which I have in me, concerning the fidelity of
those large stories obtruded upon us by Travelers, of the Herba mimosa, or
mimick Plant, described by Christopher Acosta, first, afterward by Clusius,
and since grown traditional amongst all Botanicks; of the Boramez, or Vegetable
Lamb of Tartary (no sparing relation whereof was first communicated to the
world in the common language of Europe, by Sigismund Baron of Verbestein (in
rerum Moscoviarum Commentariis) then countenanced by the glorious Pen of Jul.
Caesar Scaliger (Exercit. 181. Sect. 29.) since made more passant by Fortunius
Licetus (Lib. 3. de spont. vivent. ortu, cap. 4.) and Libavius (part 2. singul.
exercitat. de Agno vegetabili Scythiae) and now taken for granted by all or
most Herbarists of our age; of the Sponge, etc. I shall beg leave to suspend my
belief, that there are any such Heteroclites* or middle Natures, half Vegetable,
half sensible; or, at least, that both Faculties are so conspicuous and eminent
in them, as that thence they should deserve really to be accounte a distinct
order of Creatures.

Now the Faculties, or essential proprieties of all things being thus
incommunicable downward, and each distinct classis so confined to its proper
orb of endowments, that it can never advanced upward, and usurp more
perfection then what it already stands possessed of by the Charter of its
particular specification; it follows, that we explore the reason or original of
this Limitation, and why those Natures of the first degree, are limited to mere
Existence, and cannot aspire to Vegetation: why those of the second are chained
down to Existence and Vegetation, without possibility of being ever promoted to
Sense; those of the third preferred to Sense, but denied the additional favor of
Locomotion voluntary; those of the fourth admitted to Arbitrary motion, but
excluded Reason; and those of the highest enriched with all. Either this
Necessity must be imposed upon them by Fortune; or by themselves; or by some
other principle, which has the free donation, and so the limitation of all
those privileges or Faculties.

First, not by Fortune; for that she could not institute these assignations,
draw this Helix, that still enlarges into a wider capacity, nor make this law
of Propriety inviolable: is amply manifest from the Perpetuity, or constant
observation of the same by all corporeal entities, every one having their
peculiar capacities so defined, circumscribed, and immured, that no one did
ever, since the first hour of Time, exceed the bounds of its own species, nor
climbeup to the state of its superior; for Constancy and Fortune are
Antagonists never to be reconciled, but, like Castor and Pollux, when one peeps
above, the other sculks below the horizon.

Secondly, not by Themselves; for there is in every thing a kind of native
Ambition to ennoble its nature, enlarge its power, nay (so much as in it lies)
to mount even to infinity, according to that Axiom of Scaliger (Exercit. 9.
page 52.) Vnicuique enti inest appetitio infinitatis. Thus simple Natures covet
to become compounds; Compounds spur on to arrive at Vegetables; those affect
the dignity of Sense; sensibles grow desirous of musculary Motion, etc. Can we
conceive, that a Plant would continue fixed and nailed down by its own roots to
the earth, and there live a cold, dull, unactive life; if it could give to its
self motion and abilities for nobler actions? That a Beast would be constant to
the gross and heavy operations of mere sense, submit to the burdens, and endure
the tyrannous oppressions of man; if it could endow it self with the
prerogative of Reason, and so become equal to his imperious Lord? Or that man
would sit down quiet, and remain subject to the infirmities, calamities, and
mortality of his nature; if he had any hopes to better it, to wind up himself
to heaven, and there take the wall of Cherubins, nay rival the calm felicity
and immortality of God? For so invincible a reluctance have we against the
necessity of our frailties, and so uncessant hormetick a desire to be above
them, by the melioration of our state; that we may truly accommodate to our
pride, what the eloquent Tertullian spoke to express that of some of the Roman
Emperors; si ipsi se Deos facere potuissent, certe quidem homines nunquam
fuissent, could they have made themselves Gods, doubtless they never would have
been men. Seeing therefore, that it is repugnant to that insatiable Appetite of
Melioration, even to infinity, radically inherent in every entity create,
though (I confess) scarce perceptible in bodies devoid of Animation; to deny to
it self any perfection, which is in its own power to give, or acquire: what
clearer evidence can be expected, to ensure our reason, that the Ampliation,
and Limitation of all Natural Faculties, or endowments, is not in the arbitrary
disposition, or elective power of Finite essences; and, by consequence, that
the Law of Propriety, or the restriction of every species to its own orb of
activity, was not made by compact among themselves, but imposed upon them by an
Infinite.

This considered, it remains indisputable, that the Distribution and
Assignation of those different Qualifications, being neither in the power of
Fortune, nor of the Things that enjoy them: it must properly and solely belong
to that supernatural Infinite, which is the fountain of Being, Life, Sense,
Locomotion and Reason, and therefore had the power freely to give them; being
induced to the Collocation of them by the mere invitement of his own Goodness,
and directed in the convenient Distribution of them by the Counsel of his own
Wisdom.

This Truth, all Ages have held sacred, and the wiser Ethnicks both of Greece
and Rome ever engraffed it into their Creed, preaching it to the world, though
blended under the Chaos of their symbolical or Hieroglyphical Idolatry. For
Homer, courting the propitious aspect of his best Deity, Jupiter, in a
panegyricall Hymn; ascribes to him, as a chief and peculiar Attribute, the
power of Circumscribing and Bounding of all things, thus bespeaking him.

(...)
(...), etc.
Jovem Deorum optimum canam, and maximum,
Latesonantem, validissimum, Terminos afferentem, etc.
And Aristotle likewise (de Mundo Tom. 2. page 1592.) calls his Infinitum
divinum, or God, (...), Quod ab eo omnia terminata sunt, ac nihil in rerum
natura sit infinitum, from his setting bounds to all things, and leaving
nothing undefined. Nor was this unacknowledged by the elder Romans; for they
had a set form of devotion, and a solemn sacrifice appointed particularly ad
Iovem terminalem, as Dionysius Halicarnass. (Antiquit. Roman. Lib. 2. p. 133.)
has transmitted to posterity. To this also seems the sweet tongued Ovid to
allude, when in his description of the Creation, he says, Limitibus discrevit
omnia certis.

Now the Faculties of all Natural Agents being immediately derived from, and
strictly limited by God, so that no one can ever transcend its own, nor usurp
upon another confines: the Light of Nature will infer, that all their
operations also are praescribed, and both the manner, and end of all their
activities precisely predetermined, nay the very time and place with all other
adjuncts and circumstances of their effects appointed by the Providence of his
Infinite Wisdom.

Hitherto have we confronted only Nature to Fortune; let us therefore now give
her one charge more with an Argument desumed a minori, from Art.

Did ever any man, that beheld the curious Mathematics of Archimedes his
Sphere; the automatous flight of Regiomontanus his Eagle; the artificial wings
of Architas Dove; or those inanimate Birds that the ingenious Mathematician,
whom the glorious Charles the fifth selected for his companion in his
retirement from Empire sent flying in at his window; or but observe the regular
motions in a trochiliack Horodix, or Watched conceive that the motions of those
engines were originally spontaneous, instituted by mere chance; or that each
wheel assumed to it self, by Lot, its particular figure, situation, axis,
number of teeth, and precise measure of circumrotation? Undoubtedly no; but on
the contrary, instantly concluded, that they were the appointed effects of
provident industry, and had their models grounded upon maxims of the highest
and most learned reason. And yet is our Atheist so effronted with impudence, as
to give check to his own Conscience, by daring to affirm; that the system of
the Celestial orbs, the Laws of natural motions, and the Architecture of those
admirable organs in the body of an Animal (which are engines, whose Artifice
does, by incomprehensible excesses, transcend our theory in the mathematics;
insomuch that some of the strongest skuls of our age have ventured crazing to
find out the Geometry of the Muscles, or the Mechanics of Voluntary motion:
and yet are forced, by an host of difficulties, to retire and suspend their
hopes of perfecting their design) were contrived by Fortune, and not by the
skill of an Artist infinite in Science and Power. How familiar is this Logic
to every man's understanding; the Figures of all things in the adspectable
World, are exactly Geometrical, their actions and uses respectively
accommodate, their motions constant and regular at all times, their effects
certain, and the laws of every distinct species immutable (as to themselves)
ergo those Figures, Actions, Uses, Motions, and Laws were delineated,
appointed, assigned, begun, and enacted, by an Omniscient and omnipotent
Providence? And this I conceive sufficient to demonstrate the truth of our
First assertion; viz. that that constant Tenor, or established method, according
to which all Natural causes operate, was instituted and is perpetuated by an
Infinite Wisdom.

For the support of our Third Thesis; that though the actions of all Second
causes are impulsive and necessary* yet those of the First Article 6. The
verity of the third Position demonstrated.
Cause are Elective and Arbitrary; though God has by the severe laws of
Nature, bound up the hands of his Creatures, limited their activities, and
punctually consigned them their several provinces: yet he has reserved his own
free, and as an absolute Monarch, can at pleasure alter, transcend, or pervert
those Statutes, and give a new Commission to his Ministers to work by a new
way, in order to the causation of any extraordinary effect, which his
providence has decreed, of universal, or particular benefit: we need erect no
other pillar of argument, but that one firm and immovable basis, the
importance of the word, Creator.

For since to be able to produce all things out of nothing, by the single
efficacy of his word, or the energetical blast of his will, to endow each
distinct species with faculties exactly proportionate and meridional to their
distinct destinations, and to entail upon them to the expiration of Times own
lease, that estate, in which he enfcoffed them at their creation: does
necessarily imply a greater perfection of power, then merely to vary or
innovate their efficiencies, according to the expedients, emergencies, or
occasional designs of his Providence: it remains indisputable upon
consequence, that to allow him the Greater, and yet deny him the less: to
believe him to be the Author of that mighty and difficult miracle, the
Creation, and yet doubt the supremacy of his Power, by conceiving that he
cannot turn Natural Agents out of their common road, and order their
digressions to the effecting of smaller and easier Rarities; must be a manifest
Contradiction, and an Absurdity that stabbs it self.

However, that we may not seem to entrust so noble and sacred a Article 7. A
farther confirmation of the same by an Argument, from the miraculous operations
of God in praeterito.
Truth, to the protection of one single Reason; it becomes our care to
superadd, for the more security, this defense also. If God has frequently
manifested his Supremacy, by working effects as well above, as against the
established and customary power of natural Agents, in times past; then,
doubtless, is not his arm shortened, nor the fountain of his energy dried up,
and he can do the like, in the future: but he frequently has; ergo, etc.

The Major, I am sure, no man will boggle at, who shall consider, that it is the
proper privilege of Divinity, to be still the same, that that virtue, which is
extreme, and so above all addition, must necessarily also be above all decay or
diminution: and therefore he that conceives God subject to Mutability,
A^^erity, or Deslux, blasphemes the Simplicity, Purity and Eternity of his
Essence, and holds but a false Idea of his Nature.

Nor can the Minor require more proof then its bare Prolation; unless the
unbeleif of any man shall be so inslexible, as not to bow at the Convulsion of
a truth, which the Records of all Nations, Times, and Religions, lie open to
attest; For that there have been observed Prodigious and miraculous accidents,
(such as the most obstinate Idolaters of Nature, and those who grew gray in the
study of her laws, customs, and secret magnalias, and kept a list of her
forces; were surprised with aftonishment at the consideration of: and after a
vain and tedious scrutiny into their abstruse Causalities, were forced to refer
to the immediate arm of a Supernatural efficient) the indisputable monuments
of faithful Antiquity bear witness. And he, who has not heard of those Three
grand Examples (to omit the enumeration of any other, that are not universally
believed by men of all interests and persuasions) of the superiority of Gods
power to that of his servant, Nature; viz. The Universal deluge, the Cessation
of Oracles, and the total Eclipse of the Sun at the passion of our Redeemer:
can give but weak testimony, that he is either Jew, Mohammedan, or Christian.

The First being reputed not only true, but sacred, and thereforeheld Article
8. That there was an universal Deluge.
as point of faith in common by all three Religions; nay countenanced even by
Pagan stories, and more, their settled account of time; they computing the
second space or intervall of Time (the First being little better to them then
Prolepticall, or as the Heathen called it, Adelon, immanifest and obscure, was
dated from the beginning of the World to Ogyges Flood, which was about 530
years after Noah's) from the Flood to the first Olympiad, which answers to the
year of the World 3174. and comes within about 20 years before the foundation
of Rome.

The Second being embraced, and made authentical by the general consent of
Christians, upon the forced acknowledgment of Article 9. The Cessation of
Satan's Oracles, after the advent of the Word of Truth, proved anthentiquely.
those, whose interest obliged them to invalidate it; and those not only Pagans
surrounded with the horrid darkness of idolatry, and expecting no daybreak
from the glorious Sun of Righteousness; but even of the Devil himself: who
though the Father of lies, and his honor so highly concerned in the
intercision of his impostures and delusions, could not yet dissemble this
verity; but at four several times, and in as many several places publicly
proclaimed it. First, when from his famous Oracle at Delphos he confessed himself
to be tongue-tied, his fallacious predictions countermanded, and his so
solemnly pretended Divinity expired; being able to return no other answer to
the great Augustus (whose errand was to have his fortune told him) but this: Me
Puer Hebraeus, Divos Deus ipse gubernans,
Cedere sede jubet, tristemque redire sub Orcum;
Aris ergo dehinc tacitus discedito nostris.
An Hebrew Child, that God, whose power's above
All other Gods, commands me to remove
Hence to the Court of sorrow; wherefore, go,
My Altars quit in silence, and nere more
Of Future things from me expect to know.
A second time, when Legion howled out the hideous dirge of their black Prince,
and the shoars were heard by Mariners far off at sea to echo their groans into
this dismal note; Great Pan is dead: as Plutarch has reported in his defect of
Oracles. A third, about the time of Constantine, so affectionately magnified by
Eusebius, in his sad complaint, that his lips were sealed up, his Prognostics
suppressed, and his sophistry fooled, by the Righteous upon earth: as the same
Eusebius has related in Vita Constantini. And again, in his excuse to the
Emperor Julian; who being superstitiously curious to foreknow the success of
his great expedition into Persia, and therefore addressing himself with
exceeding solemnity to the temple of Apollo Daphnes, to anticipate the knowledge
of his fortune, could notwithstanding worm out of him no other satisfaction but
this; that he should first remove the bodies about him, before he could have
the liberty to return him an answer: as Theodoret has registered, who also
tells us, that not long after that Temple was consumed by lightning.

But I must here arrest my Reader with a civil and short Advertisement, that by
the Cessation of Oracles, I may not intend a total and absolute expulsion of
that grand Impostor from all his Fanes, Tripods, and other shops wherein he
professed his delusions, at once; as if the Incarnation of Truth had struck him
dumb at one blow: but an extermination of him from his metropolitan Temple at
Delphos, and an Intercision, Diminution, or sensible Decay of his
Amphibologies, Predictions and other Collusions in all other places. For,
otherwise, I should not only steal a contradiction upon my self, that
unsatisfactory response, which he stammerd out to Julian, being full 363 years
after the nativity of him, that crush't the Serpents head; but also incur the
just censure either of being ignorant of, or undecently neglecting those solid
reasons, which Plutarch, Suetonius, and our modern learned Wits, Montacutius,
and D^. Brown have adduced to attest the continuation of his ceremonious
Legerdemain and solemn cheats practiced upon gross and credulous Pagans, in the
point of Vaticination, much beyond the rising, setting, and resurrection of the
Sun of righteousness, who came down to dispell those foggs of Hell, and
irradiate the poor benighted world with Light supernatural.

And the Last is sworn to by all. For (1) the Christian has it Article 10.
That there was a prodigious Eclips of the Sun, at the passion of our Savior.
ratified to him both by sacred and profane Auctority: (2) the Jews, that deny
Christ to have bin the true Messiah, do yet acknowledge the prodigious Eclipse
of the Sun, that renowned his passion: and (3) the Turks, who allow him to have
bin no more then a geat and holy Prophet, as their Alcoran frequently
intimates; are yet so zealous of the honor of their ancient records, that
they would confute him with a scimiter, who should dare to indubitate the
preterition of so remarkable a wonder, which certified the half of the earth of
its verity, by the sensible persuasion of a panick terror; insomuch that many
of the Jews who beheld it, were so shatterd with fear, that their hearts were
rent as well as the vail of the Temple, and themselves ready to sneak into the
graves of those Saints, that were newly risen, to evidence his conquest over
death, and give humanity a prelibation or taste of the benefit of his
sufferings. Nor was this, as other Eclipses, only Partial and Vertical to
Jerusalem; but the darkness was visible to the whole Hemisphear: else, how
could the Egyptian Astronomer take notice of it, and being amazed at the
unnatural Apparition, cry out, Aut Deus Naturae patitur, aut machina mundi
dissolvitur; as the reverend Father, his namesake, Dionysius has remembered in
his Epistle to Polycarpus, and Apollophanes? else, how could the ancient Greeks,
in their Annals, have filed up a monstrous Defection of the great Luminary, in
the 4th. year of 202. Olympiad; as Phlegon Trallianus noteth^? Now the 4th.
year of the 202. Olympiad jumps even with the 19th. of Tiberius, and the 33. of
the Nativity, which was the 4745. of the Julian period; and therefore that
exact synchronisme makes that monstrous Eclipse observed by the more
mathematical eyes of the Greeks, to be the same which happened at the death of
the Lord of life.

That the Catholic Deluge was purely Supernatural, and the destruction of all
Living Creatures upon the sublunary Glo^e Article 11. A Demonstration of the
impossibility of the Catholic Deluges proceeding from Causes Natural.
(those few that were shifted aboard the Ark, only preserved) by an Abyss of
Waters, immediately caused by the revenging Will of that same Fruitful Spirit,
that formerly brooding upon the same abyss of waters, had hatchtt hem into
being; though of some difficulty to him, that shall wave all testimonies
deduceable from the sacred relation adscribed to Moses: can yet be no
impossibility to prove, from Considerations merely Physical. For

First, the vast Quantity of Waters requisite to overflow the whole earth, and
prevail upon the high hills, nay exceed the heads of the most lofty mountains
by 15 cubits (for mountains there were before the flood; else how could the
waters by degrees increasing, ascend and cover them: and therefore those wanton
Wits, which affirm the Antediluvian earth to have had her face a mere Plane or
level, without those protuberancies and rugosities, undertake not only a
Paradox, but a manifest Absurdity, point blanck repugnant as well to the Text,
as to the natural Necessity of those Inaequalities) could not be powered out
from the Receptaries or storehouses of the Ocean; the Earth having as great (if
not a greater) share in the Terraqueous Globe, as the Waters, and the
perpendicular Altitude of the mountains, by more then two parts of three, at
least, transcending the profundity of the deepest Chanel of the Sea, that ever
the sounding line of any Mariner did profound, except of that Barathrum or
Vorago Aquarum, in mari dulci, between Roest and Leoffelt, described by Olaus
Magnus; which yet is but a kind of Sluice or sink, and therefore of no
considerable latitude. For that the Eminency of the highest Hills has scarcely
the same proportion to the Semidiametre of the Earth, that there is betwixt 1.
and 1000; has bin frequently demonstrated by many of our best Geographers: and
though we descend to Eratosthenes his commensuration, who has affirmed, that
by instruments Dioptrick, and an exact measure of the distances of Places, he
has certainly found the Altitude of the highest mountains not to exceed ten
stadia; we shall not however be provided of water enough in the bowels of the
Sea to advance our inundation, the depth of the profoundest ocean seldom
amounting to a 100 Fathom, as Scaliger (38 Exercit. contra Cardanum) has upon
justifiable grounds declared.

Nor can this immane Collection of Waters be derived, as some have
inconsiderately opinioned, from the Whole lower Region of the Aer condensed
into clouds, and those comprest into waters. For (to take no strict notice of
that large Tohu, Vacuum Coacervatum, or Nothing, which must then have bin
introduced, from the surface of the Waters up to the middle region; which Nature
could never endure, nor had God any necessity to enforce,) if Aer condensed
into Water shrinks into a space or Continent, 400. times less then what it
possessed before condensation (for since Water weighs 400. times heavier then
Aer, as the subtle Galilaeo (Dialog. 1. del moviment. page 81.) examining the
proportions of Gravity betwixt those two bodies, demonstratively discovered; it
must necessarily carry the same proportion also to Space, or Locality,) then
assuredly, when we shall have calculated the perpendicular height of the
Atmosphear, or lower region of the Aer, and reduced it to the 400th. part: we
shall soon be satisfied, that the Addition which the Aer Aquaefied could bring
to the waters of the Sea effused upon the bosom of the earth, cannot suffice
to swell the Deluge so high as the semialtitude of many lofty mountains, such
as Slotus in Norway (which Franc. Patricius, out of Fr. Bacon and Scaliger,
has accounted the highest on the earth,) Athos in Macedonia, Tenariff,
Caucasus, Atlas, etc. whose tops make large encroachments on the middle region,
and seem to invade the Firmament.

Again, to charge this immense Accumulation of Waters upon 40. days rain,
though we should conced that rain to be neither Sea evaporated, nor Aer
condensed; is not to undo, but entangle the miracle. For taking the Altitude of
the mountains according to the calculation of the most moderate Geometry; and
then soberly perpending what aggravation to the Waters of the Sea now converted
upon the earth, the most violent natural rain of 40. days and nights could
probably make, which the most hyperbolical conceit cannot advance higher then
40. fathom: we shall easily detect the difficulty.

And secondly, as Nature could not afford the Material Cause of this general
Inundation, the Waters; so neither the Mighty Essicient, or Impulsive, that
should with such prodigious impetuosity hoyse up so huge a mass of Sea,
contrary to the strong renitency, or depressure of its Gravity, drive it from
its native easy Currents in the declining veins and cavities of the earth, upon
an absolute (...) or Acclivity on the elevated surface thereof, and make it
fall in Cataracts up-hill. For (1) though the Waters desire to stand above the
mountains, as the Divine Hebrew Poet has pleased to phrase it (Psalm 104.
verse. 9.) yet they but desire it, and by their own inherent and essential
Tendency are renderd incapable to satisfy that elemental ambition; for water
permitted to its own propensity or inclination, immediaiely tends downward:
and therefore he that can conceive a river to desert its declive chanel, and
climb a precipice, without the violence of a Miracle; has a strong Phansy, but
a weak judgment: nor need any man despair to persuade his credulity, that
Helmonts ridiculous Romance of the Cause of Earthquaks (viz. that an Angel, or
minister of Divine revenge, descends into the Centrals of the Earth, and there
with a great Clapper or Sledge giving a mighty Thump against the feet of Rocks,
makes a hoarse or grave kind of Bom, which enlarging its sound, rends the
foundations thereof, and puts the percussed mass into a rigor, or shaking fit
of an Ague.) is a solid and philosophical Verity.

And thirdly, as the Waters could not elevate themselves, so neither could the
Attractive Virtue of those Celestial Magnets, the Sun, Moon and Stars, work
them out of their depths, by rarefying them into vapors, which mounted up to
the middle region of the Aer, and there encountered by intense Cold, should be
reduced to clouds, and those again dissolved in Cataracts. For should we grant,
what the Arabian Astrologers returned in answer to the Egyptian Caliph, who
had set them to unty this knot; viz. that there was a great Conjunction of and
not long before the flood, and the malignant influence of that confederacy much
aggravated by another fatal Convention of all the Planets, in the watery sign
of Pisces, immediately preceding it, as Sepher Juchasin (fol. 148.) has
delivered; which the learned Mirandula has sufficiently disproved, and smiled
at yet must the greatness of the Effect manifestly confute the possibility of
that for a Cause. First, because Nature has frequently showed to the world the
like Conjunctions, but never the like event: and again, because those
Luminaries are not commissioned with so unlimited a power, and in their
strongest conspiracies of insluence can at most but weakly incline or dispose,
not at all compel or necessitare; nor are their destinations to ruin, but
conserve the world.

If therefore Nature, uniting all her divisions of Waters below the Moon, into
one great heap, or Abyss, must yet fall very much short of that immane
proportion requisite to furnish out the Deluge; and though her stock had bin
large enough, yet could she not, without apparent destruction of her self, i.
e. infringing those fundamental Constitutions, or Elementary Laws, whose
constant Tenor only defines her to be Nature, assist to their eruption out of
their proper Receptaries, and their preposterous Ascension up hill: truly, I
am yet to learn, what can be conceived to remain, but this, that those Decumani
Fluctus, those immens Cataracts had both their supply and motion immediately
from that high hand, to which nothing that he wills can be difficult.

With this Problem, I confess, I have more then once impuzled my reason; yet
does the difficulty sometimes inflame my Curiosity to enquire out the
pervestigable part of the miracle: viz. Whence Omnipotence summoned this mighty
Syndrome, or Conflux of Waters to appear, at so short a warning, upon the face
of the Earth, or in what part of the Universe they were quartered before, and
by what ways and means they were drawn off again and voyded after the Flood?
That eminent Master of the Optics, and excellent Mathematician, Christoph.
Scheinerus (in Rosa Vrsina, page 693.) discoursing against those who have
asserted the Incorruptibility of the Heavens, and quoad parts, and totum,
introduces Ferdinand. Quirinus de Salazar. a Jesuit, in his Comment upon 27.
verse. of the 8. chap. of the Proverbs of Solomon, delivering his opinion
derived from others, together with reasons to support it; that there must be a
Tehom Rabba, or Abyss of Waters above the Firmament, or betwixt the 8th. sphere
and the Shecinah, or dwelling place of God. The Texts of Scripture, upon which
this opinion is supported, are (1) the 7. verse. of the 1. Chap. of Genes. where
the Author of that book describing the several piles or stories of this great
building, says thus; and God made the Firmament, and divided the Waters which
were under the Firmament, from the waters which were above the firmament, etc.
(2) that of David (Psalm 33. verse. 7.) he laid up the depth in storehouses. (3)
that of the Angel to Esdras (2. chapter 4. verse. 7.) proposing questions to puzle
weak but proud mortality; How many Springs are above the Firmament, or which
are the outgoings of Paradise? (4) that expression of the greatest Naturalist,
Solomon; and Wisdom saw him set his compass upon the face of the depth (which
the Septuagint, plus de sententia, quam de singulis vocibus soliciti, have
rendered, aderam cum secerneret sedem super ventos.) (5) that also of the
Psalmist (Psalm. 104. verse. 3.) who has laid the beams of his chambers in the
Waters.

Upon these and the like persuasions many of the most learned Rabbines, and
after them not a few of our modern Divines, have concluded; that at the Deluge
the Floudgates of this Tehom Rabba, were unlockt, and the waters being showred
down in Cataracts upon the earth, swelled the deluge above the mountains. This,
indeed, seemed smooth and plausible to my first apprehensions, and promised not
only to satisfy, but compensate my former anxious disquisition: but when I had
a little recovered my thoughts out of the pleasant surprise of the novelty, and
cast about, by what conveyances or Aquaeducts the tides of this Supercelestiall
Ocean might be transmitted through so many Orbs (which not a few great Clerks
have affirmed to be Solid) without dislocation of any one, at least without
interrupting or confounding their regular Circumvolutions; which happend not,
for the stars kept on their Courses, as the retrograde Calculations of their
several Periods will soon evince: as also, if they were transfused, what
became of them afterward, when the forty days were over? For either they must
be returned from whence they came, to replenish that monstrous Vacuity, their
absence had made betwixt the 8th. orb, and the Empyreum; or else continue here
below, and so perpetuate the Inundation, and so put God to the exigent of
making a new supply of Waters above the firmament. When, I say, I had abated
the edge of my Credulity with these occurring difficulties, I sadly relapsed
into my former incertitude. Not but that I am almost persuaded, from the
literal sense of those Texts, that betwixt the Shecinah or paradise of God and
his blessed retinue, and the 8th. orb, there is a Tehom Rabba; for I do not see
how those places can be otherwise, if rightly, interpreted: but that I cannot
yet drive my belief beyond those two objections, and find it more ready to
incline to this Conjecture (for it is yet gone no farther) of my own; That God
miraculously created a sussicient supply of Waters purposely for the Deluge,
and afterward adnihilated them again. This I am sure, was as easy to him, as
any other Course imaginable; less injurious to and inconsistent with the works
of the former Creation; and renders the wonder most familiar to our
Comprehension. If it be objected upon me, that God put a period to all Creation
after the first Hexameron or six days; I shall defend my self, with the barrel
of Meal, and cruise of Oil, that sustaind the Widow and her son in the famine
of Zarephath; wherein there was a fresh Creation of two several substances,
with all their specisical Accidents about them every day; or a transmutation of
Aer into Meal and Oil, which was equivalent. And as for the other harsh term
of Adnihilation, I say it is equally facil to him to reduce any thing to, as to
educe it from Nothing. But this might well have bin spared, it being my proper
business to prove that the Deluge was not Natural; not to digress into a
disquisition how or by what cryptick means it was supernatural.

That the Cessation, or (rather) Intercision of Oracles, was an Atcheivem too
difficult for the single arm of Nature; I conceive Article 12. That the
Cessation of Pagan Oracles, upon the incarnation of God, was an effect merely
supernatural; comprobated uncontrollably,
few will dispute, but such ridiculous Ignorants in the Metaphysics of
Spirits, or Scale of Creatures, as endeavor to indubitate the very Existence of
Evil, Angels, and refuse to be persuaded, that there is any such real Entity*
as a Devil, without a Demonstration from Sense, and the conviction of an
Apparition. But if any shall, the best advice my have can at this time afford
them, is this; that they would weave their long clue of thoughts into this
short and plain Dilemma.

We must grant, either that that black Prophet, Satan, made a voluntary or
spontaneous resignation of his usurped Divinity, at the nativity of the Prince
of Peace; and of his own accord grew silent, upon the Advent of the Word of
Life: or else, that by a Power infinitely more absolute and sovereign then his
own, he was compelled to confess the decay of his tyranny by an Exile from his
Altars, and himself stricken with an Aphonia, or Palsy in his double tongue, so
that all he could utter, was, that he could no longer speak; for one of these
two Propositions must be true.

The First cannot; since to make a Voluntary Confession of his Ignorance,
Impotency, and subjection, in the face of the World, and especially in those
places, where for so many Ages together he had solemnly pretended to
Omniscience, Omnipotence, and Supremacy; is wholly repugnant to Satan's Pride:
nor would that strong Ambition, which even in the purity of his nature spurred
him beyond the ken of his Angelical wisdom, up to an Attempt of the highest
impossibility, (viz. to make himself equal to that Essence, which made him what
he was) suffer him to proclaim himself to be less, then what he had made
himself appear to be in the esteem of his infatuated Votaries. For
notwithstanding the hand of Divino Vengeance had hurled him, (like a prodigious
Meteor that durst outface the brighter Sun, from which its splendour was
desumed) from the highest heaven into the lowest hell; and degraded him from
the most glorious order of Creatures to the most vile, accursed and despicable:
yet is his stomach as great, as when he aspired to the throne of Unity; nor
has the ignis rotae, or reverberated flames of hell ever since, bin able to
consume that humor of Competition in him. Witness his several impudent
invasions of the prerogative of God, by arrogating to himself the tribute of
Divine Adoration from his superior, man; nay even from the Son of God, when
yet he more then suspected his Divinity. Besides, as it seems a manifest
Contradiction, that the Author of Pride should freely detect his own shame: so
also, that the Father of lies should voluntarily broach a Truth, and such a one
as once received must openly impeach him of Delusion, and discover his
Indivinity; cannot but sound a very great improbability at least. For how
unlikely is it, that that sophistical Spirit, whose Tyranny was founded,
supported, and continued solely by his cunning promotion of Error, and his
subtle workings upon the deceptible Condition of man; should willingly depose
himself, dismantle his strongest holds, proclaim the impostures of his
Amphibologies, and divulge his ruin, by rectifying the seduced judgments of
his greatest Favorites, and declaring a Verity that must disprove all that
ever he said before? How dissimilar to Reason, that he who durst adventure upon
the highest falsehood in the world, to make himself God: should so far forget
the maxims of his black Art, as of his own accord to confess himself to be the
basest of Entities, a Devil? How remote from all the ways of persuasion, that
he who had boasted himself Vbiquitary, usurped by a counterfeit title the
Monarchy of the World, and given out, that the Prescience of Future Events was
not only the natural annex of his Omniscience, but the Preordination and
disposal of them the adjunct of his Providence: should, without the impulsion
of a superior, betray himself chained to utter darkness, to be but a Slave,
that there was a settled law of Fate above his comptroll, as in his excuse to
Croesus ruined by his Amphibologie, and that his Providence was at best but
Praesagition from the concurrent inclinations of second Causes, nor his
Predictions of things to come, other then artificial Conjectures? To conclude,
no man, I suppose, will be able to remember any other Instance of the Devils
Fidelity and Veracity (those Confessions of Christ's Divinity, and that in the
presence of Truth it self, that he came from compassing the earth in quest of
whom he might devour, mentioned in holy Writ, excepted;) or produce one
sentence of truth ever spoken by him to his own disadvantage, besides this one;
that he was commanded to shut up his Oracles, by a Power, which he could never
contradict: And therefore the Second Proposition must be true and evident: viz.
that his Oracles were silenced by the immediate hand of that Cause, whose
Activity is so far above the Power of either Satan or Nature, taken either
singly, or combined together, (for the Former is but a languid Agent, if you
deny him the auxiliatory concurrence of the Latter) as Infinitude is above
Limitation, Almightiness above Impotency, or Omniscience above Ignorance.

Now to me, this process of Argumentation seems so smooth, familiar and
customary, and the whole series of Inductions so obvious to a dialectical
consideration; that, when I reflect upon the facility of their occurence to our
thoughts, I cannot but extremely wonder, how so many profound and circumspect
Philosophers, and those whose threads of life were unraveld in the eager
pursuit of knowledge, could refer the cessation of Oracles to Natural
necessities, and acquiesce in a confidence of those weak, remote, inconsistent,
impertinent and so contemptible reasons, urged by Plutarch, etc. to salve the
difficulty of this accident, and serve as a specious Asylum for their puzzled
curiosities to retreat to.

Lastly, that that generally confessed Eclipse of the Sun, (and, indeed, the only
one this great Luminary did ever suffer; since Article 13. That the Eclips of
the Sun, at the death of Christ, was purely Metaphysical, irrefutably
demonstrated.
we may with more propriety call all others but Partial Interceptions of his
light, by the lesser body of the Moon interposed in a straight line to some
part of the Terrestrial Globe) which happened at the Death of Christ, was
above, nay against the fundamental constitutions of Nature; is manifest from
hence, that on the third of April, or Feria sexta, being the Passion day, in
the year Aerae Christi nati 33. (which is synchronical to the 78. of the Julian
account) the Sun and Moon were then in opposition diametrical, and the Moon her
self totally eclipsed in Libra to the Antipodes of Jerusalem: as may be
certified to any man that can read the Celestial Ephemerides backward, i. e.
recalculate the periodical Conjunctions and Oppositions of those two great
Lights of heaven, by the Tables of Astronomy. For those Characters of time
being punctually restrained to set and certain periods, the Astronomer may as
easily attain to the minute of any eclipse in praeterito, as to the prescience
of any in futuro; provided that his Hypothesis be sound, and his Schemes
erected with exactness correspondent: nay such is the certitude of this rule,
as to the strict decision of time, that though the Astronomer may chance to
learn of the Historian, that there has bin an eclipse; yet for the
determination of its precise time and place, history must go to school to
Astronomy, as Scaliger (de Emendat. tempor.) has observed to our hands. Thus
when Eusebius and Dio had recorded an Eclipse of the Sun to have fallen out a
little before the death of Augustus, and so to have been a kind of prodigy
portending the fall of so bright a Star; the Astronomers coming after to
examine the synchronisme, by their retrograde calculations, found the
Historians in a double error: that Eclipse being not of the Sun, but the Moon;
and not preceding, but succeeding his funerals.

To assure the miracle yet nearer, let us look back to the Elements of
Astronomy. The Eclipse of the Moon is caused by the Intervention (for so it is
according to the most probable Hypothesis of Copernicus) of the opac body of
the earth, between her and the original of her light, the Sun; and the Eclipse
of the Sun, by the interposition of the Moon betwixt him and the earth: and
therefore the Sun cannot be eclipsed, but when he is in Conjunction with the
Moon; nor the Moon, but when she is in opposition to the Sun. Yet
notwithstanding does not every monthly conjunction and opposition of these two
lights produce an eclipse to one of the two; but only that Conjunction and
Opposition which is Diametrical: i. e. when the Central point of the Sun faceth
the Central point of the Moon, and that again confronteth the center of the
earth, so directly, that an arrow shot in a straight line from the
circumference of the Sun through its Center, would also perpendicularly
transfix the Centers of the other two orbs. And this falls out only when the
Moons Eccentrick transecteth the Suns, in that line, which is for that reason
called the Ecliptic; nor this in more then two points, called by Ptolemy, the
Nodi, or knots, and by the Arabians, the Head and Tail of the Dragon.

Again, these Intersections are not constant to one certain point, or place,
but circumgyrated by a slow motion, make a circle of 18 years complete; and
therefore every 18th year the Moon must be eclipsed in the same degree of the
same sign in the Zodiac, infallibly to the end of the world: which is the
rule by which every common Almanac maker does calculate his predictions of
Lunar Eclipses.

Now this being excogitated, and the eclipses retrived back as high as the
(...), or foot of the Julian compute, by revolving the leaves of the Celestial
Volume; we discover that the Moon indeed, was naturally eclipsed on the self
same day, whereon the Sun prodigiously suffered together with its Author, in
the 2 degrees. of Libra, the opacity beginning to the horizon of Jerusalem some few
minutes before six in the evening: so that the Sun was no sooner set in the
West, but the Moon appeared in the East deprived of more then half her light;
the Calculation and sigure of which Lunar eclipse, are largely set down by
Sethus Calvisius, to the 3 of April, in the 33 year of the Nativity, under
Tiberius Caesar, and by Henricus Buntingius, in Chronologiae Catholic. fol.
337. And thereupon we may safely conclude, that the Defection of the Moon, on
the Passion day, being merely Natural; that of the Sun on the same day must be
Supernatural; it being impossible for the Moon to keep two different stations,
or to possess those two opposite points of heaven, which define the Conjunction
and Opposition, at one and the same time. This S. Aug. (3. de Civit. Dei cap.
15.) had respect unto, when he said; Quam solis obscurationem, non ex canonico
syderum cursu accidisse ostenditur, quod tunc erat Pascha Iudaeorum.

It Was a Dismal day that same, though the King of Terrors was then vanquished;
for Darkness was not only upon, but under the earth, the miraculous obscuration
of the Sun in our Hemisphere, of necessity causing a defection of the Moon in
the subterraneous one, and so making it more then midnight to the Antipodes:
and a second natural eclipse of the Moon succeeding within six hours after;
nay, more then all this, Saturn (the signifier of blackness) aggravated this
horrid opacity, for at the same time rising from the Horoscope, he beheld both
eclipfes in a square malignant aspect.

But though this eclipse was Unnatural to the Sun, per (...): yet it was purely
Natural per (...), it being requisite, nay necessary for a stream or reflex of
Light to suffer a defection, when the Fountain of Light was under a cloud;
proper for the Creature to sympathize with the Creator. And therefore, though
it was a miracle, yet it was no wonder. The wonder was in the reverse part of the
accident; that the most glorious Sun of Righteousness should suffer a dark and
unnatural eclipse, to expiate our deeds of darkness. Nor was that a wonder
neither, now I think ont; for it was the natural effect of his infinite love to
mankind.

And this, I presume, the most stubborn and prejudicate Atheist Article 14. The
Adequation of all to the verification of the Authors third Position.
will admit, as evidence both strong and clear enough, to evince the verity of
our Minor Proposition; viz. that God has, in times prelapsed, frequently
manifested his prerogative of causing effects not only superior, but also
contradictory to the ordinary and established Laws of Nature, his ordinary
instrument, when such effects seemed either necessary, or expedient to his
Providence: and therefore our Conclusion, viz. that his arm is not shortened,
and he can do the like in the future, upon any occasional emergency designed
by his secret counsel; comes not much short of perfectly Apodictical.

SECT. VI.
WE have now brought our selves to the last Objection urged Article 1.
Lucretius his blasphemy, that man's ignorance of the energy of Natural Causes,
is the sole basis of the opinion of an Universal Providence.
against Universal Providence; namely, the unequal distribution of good and
evil, or the frequent occurence of events which carry too much appearance of
Temerity, to be interpreted the mature designs of an infinite Wisdom; and
seem too oblique and deflecting toward Partiality, to stand in a right line
with the hand of divine Justice, which must be conceived to discriminate
betwixt the Pious and Impious in the Consignation of Happiness and Misery, and
accordingly to distribute its benefits in some proportion to the merits, at
least the worthy susceptibility of the receivers: this is a member belonging to
another head, and falls more properly under the contents of our next Chapter,
of the Special or Particular Providence of God; and therefore we shall thither
transfer the plenary refutation thereof, making it the subject of this last
section, to blow off those light and cobweb scruples, that were spun by that
Spider, Lucretius, when he composed these verses to alienate men's minds from
the fear of an Universal Moderator.

Caetera, quae fieri in terris, coeloque tuentur
Mortales, pavidis quom pendent mentibu'saepe,
Efficient animos humileis formidine divum,
Depressosque premunt ad terram; propterea quod
Ignorantia caussarum confer deorum
Cogit ad imperium res, and concedere regnum, and
Quorum operum causas nulla ratione videre
Possunt; haec sieri divino Numine rentur, etc. lib. 6^^.
Those bugbear Meteors, which the timorous eyes
Of pavid Mortals wonder at in the skies;
And those unfrequent Prodigies, that appear,
On earth (while their weak souls are fooled by Fear)
Are the sole charms, that emasculate,
And cheat men's minds to a belief of Fate,
And some vindictive Numen. For, because
Men understand not Natures cryptick Laws,
Nor her occult Efficiency; they fly,
(To salve their Ignorance) to Divinity:
And idly rest in this; what ere befall,
It Was caused by Providence, that disposes all.
The Redargution.

True it is, indeed, nor will any thing but ignorance deny that Article 2. The
redargut^on thereof.
Physiology, or the speculation of Natural Causes has a power to raise the
mind of man to a generous height, from whence it may securely, and without that
vertigo or giddiness, which usually turns the brains of the multitude, behold
the most prodigious meteors; and look in the threatening face of Lightning
without growing pale, while those that stand below become convulst with
needless horror, and are ready to be shook to dust with superstitious fear.

True it is also, as Lucretius would have it, that it is unworthy the constancy
and settled courage of a Philosopher, when he sees a bearded comet, hears a loud
crack of Thunder, or feels the earth unhinged (all which Natural events common
eyes gaze upon as horrid Portents, and dangerous agonies of Nature) instantly
to forget his Principles, and run to consult with the superstitious books of
the Hetrurians, and other pusillanimous Comments on those pageants, or
necessary Phaenomenas, whose Causalities are established, and their precise
contingencies presageable by the easy prognostics of meteorology.

But however, though this ought to prevent our fears: yet it cannot be extended
to the extinction of our devotion. Though it may commend our knowledge, to
smile when the heavens frown: yet it more commends it, if we look above them,
and through those visible operations of Nature discover that invisible cause,
that made, conserves, and regulates her. Though it demonstrate our skill in
Physics, to stand unmoved, when the ground trembles: yet will it detect our
ignorance in the Metaphysics, not to fall prostrate in an humble reverence to
that awful majesty, that stretched out the North over the empty place, and
hanged the earth upon nothing. And though it be an honor to our Reason, to
explore the Abstrusities of Nature, and readily refer her most admirable
effects to their proper efficients: yet, at the same time, not to confess that
omnipotent Agent, which is the soul of all energy; and the highest link in the
Chain of Causes; dishonours it even to the most odious shame of Atheism, which
is the greatest ignorance.

Nor is it Religion that makes men Cowards; for the best way Article 3.
Magnanimity the proper effect of Religion.
to harden the Spirit of man, is first to soften it with the Fear of God: and
the noblest Tincture of magnanimity is extracted out of an humble apprehension,
and fiduciary acknowledgement of an all observant Deity. This the wise Father
well understood, when refuting that impious error of the Poet, Primus in orb
Deos secit timor, he writ this golden Aphorism; Qui Deum non agnosci^, is non
Dominum excutit superbum, sed aversatur optimum Parentem; cujus respectu Animus
sit non formidine humilis; sed reverentia fiduci^e plenus.

Again, when we ascribe the Monarchy of the World to one supreme Cause, we do
not derogate a jot from the Power of second Article 4. The opinion of a General
Providence, consistent with Physiology.
Causes; but rather confirm and subscribe the Charter of their deputations:
since we thereby infer an assurance, that those Causes are really such as he
was pleased to constitute them, that their activities are but emauations of his
omnipotence; and their effects the appointments of his Wisdom. And upon this
meditation is it, that when we observe unfrequent wildfires in the Clouds,
shaggy Meteors in the acr, Trepidations in the earth, and other the like
admirable effects resulting from the concourse and conspiracy of potent Natural
agents; we do not instantly quench our wonder and check our curiosity, by
ascribing the production of them to God, so as if he were the sole and
immediate Author of them, and that no other Natural Cause intervened betwixt
his Volition and their Contingency: but by supposing him to be the First and
General Cause as well of that particular one, as of all others in the World; and
that besides the First there is required a Second Particular one, whose
indagation will fully compensate the sweat and oil of our study, and which we
must not deny, though we cannot discover, but acknowledge it to be ae Natural
one, however to obscure for the invention of our perspicacity.

To conclude, out of this one Fountain may be derived streams Article 5.
Lucretius his scruples concerning the seemingly temerarious effects of the
Thunderbolt; singularly resolved.
enough to rince away all those feculent Scruples, which the polluted wit of
Lucretius has scraped off the Thunderbolt, to obstruct the current of
Providence. For the Principles of that affrighting Meteor are comprehended
under that series of Natural Causes which God permits to act their appointed
parts, on the theater of this sublunary Globe; nor does he force them from the
ordinary road of their essential and proper Activities, upon any extra ordinary
or new way of violence: and therefore it is as natural an event if this Granado
of the clouds fall on the head of an Innocent, as if it fell on the head of the
most guilty person; as regular for it to strike the sacred batlements of a
Temple, as to light upon an unhallowed roof; and as consonant to the rules of
its projection or explosion, to be shot point blanck at any mark on land, as to
be discharged at random on the Sea.

But here some have, by way of objection, enquired; Why did not God, that he
might leave nothing to Chance, at his first institution of the Laws of Nature,
ordain such a series of Causes, both for the Generation and Explosion of the
Thunderbolt, and limit their operations to such a certainty of events, as that
it should never come to pass, that this Fireball should destroy the Good, and
miss the Impious?

This itch of ignorant, and therefore bold, curiosity may easily be mortified
by applying this euporiston or obvious solution; that the ends or designs of
Particular Providence, in these or the like occurrences, are full of Prudence,
as to the intention of God; though full of obscurity, as to the investigation
of our unequal Understandings: and therefore for us, when we cannot find out
these imperceptible ends, therefore to conclude that those Accidents, are mere
accidents, and have no ends at all; is not to palliate, but aggravate our
ignorance, since it is a rash and open delusion of the judgment of man, to
presume that he is acquainted with the secret Counsels of God; a madness beyond
the severity of Bethlem, for mortality to pretend ability to read those Arcana
Imperii, or mystical decrees of Fate, written in invisible Hieroglyphics,
which are to hard for the intuition of Angels.

CHAP. V. The especial Providence of God Demonstrated.
SECT. I.
HAving sailed over the immens Ocean of Gods General Article 1. The
introduction, intimating the near cognation betwixt this present, and the
precedent Theme: and the necessity of the Authors beginning at the Atheists
Objections.
Providence, by the direction of our own congenial Cynosure, the Light of
Nature; our next voyage ought to be up the channel of his Particular or
Special: which being the golden River, that constantly invirons the Microcosme,
or Isle of Man, and imports all the advantages and mutations of Happiness and
Misery, that occur to humanity during the trade of life; is that point we
have thus long coasted about to discover. But before we put into the mouth of
this Euphrates Ab (...), quod agrum laetum foecundumque reddat.
, we conceive it necessary first to sound, and send out our Pilot Reason, to
detect those Shelves and Rocks cast up by the common Adversary of mankind; upon
which many weak vessels have founderd, sprung dangerous leaks of Atheism, and
so sunk down right into that Barathrum of sorrow, which knows no exhaustion,
and admits of no regression.

The First of those, we find to be that contraprovidential Argument of that
Secretary of Hell, Epicurus; Quod beatum est, Article 2. The first objection,
desumed from the Apathie of the Divine Nature.
ac immortale, id neque ira, neque gratia tangi: that those Passions of Anger
and Love are inconsistent with the constant and immutable condition of that
Nature, whose simple essence is compounded of Immortality and Beatitude; and
therefore, as Business and Cares must destroy the Tranquillity, so the
affections of Indignation and Placability must subvert the Constancy, or
eternal Sameness of divinity; and upon inference, that neither our most servent
Impieties can accend, nor our penitential Tears extinguish the Wrath of God.

That this poisonous Grape grew upon that wild Vine, Epicurus Article 3. The
same excogitated by Epicurus: and promoted by Lucretius.
(that we may not seem to belie the Devil) is not only colligible from its
stinking odor, and assinity of taste, that it bears to that detestable design
of his (in Epist. ad Herodotum) to erase out of the mind of man all the
impressions of Religion, by the induction of a belief, that God does not
observe the good and evil actions of men, in this life, and by consequence
shall not compensate them with Felicity, or misery, after death: but manifest
upon the asseveration of three judicious and conscientious witnesses, Seneca,
Cicero, and Lactantius. For the First charge it upon him in these words; (4.
de Benefic. 4.) Deus, inquit Epicurus, nihil agit, nec magis illum beneficia,
quam injuriae tangunt: The Second in these; Dii, inquit Epicurus, neque
propitii cuiquam esse solent, neque irati, (3. de Not. Deor.) the Third, in
these; De schola Epicuri est, sicut iram in Deo non esse, it a nec gratiam
quidem; nam cum putat Epicurus, alienum esse a Deo malum facere, at que nocere,
quod ex affectu iracundiae plerumque nascitur, ademit ei etiam beneficentiam,
quoniam videbat consequens esse, ut si iram habeat Deus, habeat and gratiam.
Itaque ne vitium concederet, etiam virtutis fecit expert^m. Which argument his
disciple Lucretius (who, as Theseus, scorned to forsake his Master, though he
led him into hell) has contracted into this Tristich: Nam privata dolor omni,
privata periclis,
Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nihil indiga nostri,
Nec been promeritis capitur, neque tangitur ira.
The Immortal Nature, placed above the sense
Of sorrow, danger, and all indigence,
Rich in its own Perfections; neither can
Smile at the Good, nor frown at'h Ill of Man.
The import of all which amounts to no higher a sum of reason, then only this;
that the Supreme Nature, being wholly employed in a blisfull vacancy, and
entirely taken up with the superlatively-pleasant contemplation of its own
excellencies, has cast the rains upon our own necks, committed the managery of
all our affairs to our own providence, and hears neither the clamours of our
profane impieties, nor the sighs of our supplications, but stands as
unconcerned in, so unregardant of all our actions. Sic enim sese res habet, ut
ad prosperam, adversamve fort unam qualis sis, aut quemadmodum vixeris, nihil
intersit; as Cotta, personated by Cicero (3. de Not. Deor.) or as Caesar in
Lucan,

-- Nunquam se cur a Deorum
Sic premit, ut vestrae vitae, vestraeque saluti
Fata vacent --
The Gods are never subject to a Care;
Nor do the Fates look how you Mortals fare.
The Second, objected frequently against the Stoics, by the Academicks, as
that incomparable Atheomastix, Lactantius, Article 4. The second objection,
extorted from mant being obnoxious to the hostility of many other Nature.
has observed (de ira Dei, cap. 13.) is this; Cur, si Deus omnia hominum
caussa fecerit, etiam multa contraria, and inimica, and pestifera nobis
reperiantur, tam in mari, quam in terra? If man be the chief object of Gods
love, and his welfare the grand intention of his Providence; why then did he
create so many powerful and malicious enemies against him, in all elements,
and still expose him to encounter more dangers then his days, nay then his
hairs can number? If God be an indulgent Father, how dares Nature prove her
self so cruel a Stepmother to man? If his Creator intended him for a Favorite,
and made him the center in which all the lines of his blessings should convene
to make up a full and constant felicity; how comes it to pass, that the vilest
of Creatures insult over him, and make him the point at which all their darts
of hostility are levelled, so that his life is made a full and constant
infelicity?

The Last, and indeed the most dangerous rock, against which innumerable
numbers not only of unhappy Ethnicks, that wanted Article 5. The last
objection, of the Adversity of the Pious and Prosperity of the Imptous, in this
life.
the Compass of true Religion, and so were forced to steer by the imperfect
Chart of their own natural judgment; but also of Christians, who had the
inestimable advantage of the Scriptures (the only Loadstone that never deflects
from the point or unity of truth) have suffered shipwreck; is this: The
calamitous condition of the Virtuous, and the prosperous estate of the Vicious,
in this life.

The most full and accurate description of this Scylla we can meet with amongst
many of those venerable Fathers, who with as much profound learning, as
strenuous industry, have attempted the remove of it; is given us by Lactantius
(lib. 3. cap. 17.) in these words: Videbat Epicurus bonis adversa semper
accidere, paupertatem, labores, exilia, carorum amissiones: malos contra beatos
esse, augeri potentia, honoribus affici. Videbat innocentiam minus tutam,
scelera impune committi. Videbat sine delectu morum, sine ordine, ac discrimine
annorum, saevire mortem: sed alios ad senectutem pervenire, alios infantes
rapi, alios jam robustos interire, alios in primo adolescentiae flore immaturis
funeribus extingui. In bellis potius meliores and vinci, and perire, maxim
autem commovebat, homines imprimis religiosos malis affici; iis autem, qui aut
Deos omnino negligerent, aut minus pie colerent, vel minora incommoda evenire,
vel nulla. To the observation of Epicurus it appeared, that unjust Fortune, not
the discriminating hand of Divine Providence, had the dispensation of Happiness
and Misery: for Adversity is the common cognizance of Honesty, and poverty,
uncessant and unsuccesfull labors, banishment, loss of friends, and the like
doleful accidents are always in the lots of Good men: but on the contrary,
Prosperity is frequently the pathognomonick of Villainy, and increase of power,
accumulation of honors, and other blandishments of fortune are the portion of
Wicked men. That the ready way to danger, was to be innocent; and to be
extremely nefarious the only hopeful means to attain impunity. That death,
like an inconsiderate Tyrant, spares none upon the exceptions of age, sex,
dignities, or merits; but, raging in an arbitrary way of cruelty, suffers some
to unravell their clue of life to the last minute of old age, while he cuts off
the threads of others more hopeful in the first rundle of infancy. That he
extinguisheth the vital lamp of some, in their brightest and strongest luster;
of others before they are well and thoroughly kindled; and permits others to
shine till they have consumed their last drop of oil. That the sword of war
both conquers and cuts off the most noble and valiant heads: while the
degenerous and cowardly escape unwounded. And, what with the greatest violence
swayed him from the belief of Particular Providence, that the most religious
had, for the most part, the most afflictions; but those, who either contemned,
or neglected, or but coldly affected the worship of the Gods, had either less
and lighter misfortunes, or none at all.

Nor did the impiety of Epicurus rest here, but, as if this objection, though
fine enough to entangle the phansies of vulgar slies, were yet too loosly woven
to ensnare the judgments of more decisive and penetrating heads; proceeds to
reduce it to more closeness and strength, by superadding these sophistical
knots. Aut Deus vult tollere mala, and non potest; aut potest, and non vult;
aut neque vult, neque potest; aut and vult, and potest. Si vult, and non
potest, imbecillis est, ideoque non Deus; si potest, and non vult, invidus est,
quod aeque alienum a Deo; si neque vult, neque potest, and invidus and
imbecillis est, ideoque neque Deus; si vult and potest, quodsolum Deo convenit,
unde ergo mala? aut cur illa non tollit?

Either God is willing to amove those evils from good men, but cannot; or can,
and will not; or neither can, nor will; or both will and can. If he has a
will, but not a power, then is he impotent, and so no God. If he has a power,
but not a will, then is he malevolent and envious, and so no God: for malice
and weakness are equally incompetent to the divine Nature. If he want both will
and Power, then is he both malevolent and impotent; and by consequence no God.
If he want neither, as he must not if he be God: whence come those evils? or
why does he not amove them?

And too far did this design of his succeed; for the contagion Article 6. The
sporadical diffusion thereof upon Ethnicks, Hebrews and Christians: and the
probability of their opinion, who hold the book of Job, to be a Treatise
concerning the same subject, insinuated,
of this pestiferous error became so Epidemical, as that it diffused itself not
only upon his school, and there corrupted the brains of Philosophers; but
dilated even to the infection of the more remote and grosser minds of Women
and Poets (both which Imitation makes easily subject to any impression of
falsehood) that lived many ages after him. For Women, witness that relation,
assured by the records of Atheneus (lib. 13.) of one Danae, daughter to
Leontius of the Epicurean sect; who being on her way toward the place
appointed for her execution, in the bitterness of her spirit, ejaculated this
desperate blasphemy: Non injuria Deos a multis contemni; nam quodmeum maritum
servavi, hanc mihi gratiam rependunt Dii; Laodice autem, quod maritum suum
interfecerit, maximo in honor est. With very good reason are the Gods
contemned by many; for that I have faithfully preserved my husband from an
immature death, do the Gods thus ungratefully gratify me with this my own
unjust and violent one: but Laodice, because she has persidiously destroyed
hers, does now live, slourish, and has her guilty head incircled with a wreath
of the most refulgent honors. Whether the crime, for which she was sentenced,
might deserve so severe a doom, as death; I dare not determine, our Author
being not positive, nor open in that particular: but this I am sure of, that
she suffered justly; and therefore though I cannot acquit her Judges, I may her
Executioners. For Poets, witness that confession of Ovid.

Cum rapiant mala Fata bonos, ignoscite fasso,
Solicitor nullos esse putare Deos.
When I see Good men by ill Fates to fall,
(Forgive't) I think there are no Gods at all.
Nay the sober Claudian prosesseth, that the Felicity of the most impious and
unjust, and the smart Afflictions of the Pious and just persons, here on earth,
had often staggered his confidence of Divine Providence, and more then inclined
him to become an Apostate from all Religion, and declare himself on the side of
Epicurus. Saepe mihi dubiam traxit sententia mentem, Lib. 1. in Rufinum,
subinit.

Curarent superi terras; an nullus inesset
Rector, and incerto fluerent mortalia casu?
Sedcum res hominum tanta caligine volvi
Adspicerem, laetosque diu florere nocentes,
Vexarique pios: rursus labefacta cadebat
Religio, causaeque viam non sponte sequebar
Alterius vacuo quae currere semina motu
Adsirmat, magnumque novas per I nane figuras
Fortuna, non art regi, quae Numina sensu
Ambiguo vel nulla putat, vel nescia nostri.
Often has my dubious mind seemed well assured,
That Gods above the affairs on earth procured;
That one wise Rector all events did guide;
Nor Good, nor Ill from Fortunes wheel could slide.
But when I saw the Chaos of men's Fates,
The Guilty slourish long in smooth estates,
And Innocence afflicted; was the heart
Of my Religion stabbed, forced to take part
With the adverse opinion: which concludes
That an immense Vacuity includes
The Principles of all; in that vast range
Fortune, not Art, does their old Figures change;
Gods there are none, or such as do not know
What parts self-ruling Mortals act below.
Concerning this eminent Poet, Claudian, there has been old hacking and
slashing among Antiquaries, whether he lived in the owl light of Paganism, or
the illuminating day of Christianisme; St. Augustine, P. Orosius, and Paul the
Diacon (the two former whereof flourished not long after he was withered)
describing him to be a Christi nomine alienus, and paganus pervicacissimus; and
Franc. Petrarcha and Landinus having adopted him for a Proselyte, and affirming
himself to be not only Christianae pietati addictus, but also to have bin the
composer of this devout Epigram: Christ potens rerum, redeuntis conditor aevi,
Vox summi, sensusque Dei: quem fundit ab alta
Mente Pater, etc.
But if he were a Christian, yet could he not want the excuse of very holy
Precedents even of that profession, who had frequently stumbled at the same
stone. For the Royal Hebrew, whose Muse was the Holy Ghost, though a man after
Gods own heart, a Christian by the baptism of his prophetique faith, and one
who had frequently instructed his harp to echo forth Panegyricks of the
special Providence of the great preserver of men; had yet his confidence
sometimes damp't, and judgment eclipsed by the same fogg of error, exhaled
from his experience of the prosperity of Libertines. Nor was the shock of this
temptation easily withstood by so strong a Champion; for it made him reel
again, as he thus confesses: My feet were almost gone, my steps had welnigh
slipped. For I was envious at the prosperity of the wicked. They are not in
trouble, neither are they plagued like other men. Their eyes stand out with
fatness: they have more then their heart could wish. They are corrupt, and
speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak loftily. They set their mouth
against the heavens: and their tongue walks through the earth. Behold, these
are the ungodly, who prosper in the world: they increase in riches. Verily, I
have cleansed my heart in vain: and washed my hands in innocence. For all the
day long have I bin plagued, and chastened every morning, etc. (Psalm. 73.) To
which we may annex that blunt and emphatical lesson of Jesus ben Syrach
(Ecclesiastic. 2.) My son, if thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy soul for
temptation: the concernment of which every man understands to be this: The more
righteous, the more afflicted. Here also is a convenient place for their
opinion, who affirm the Book of Job to have bin intended as no history (though
they conced him to have bin no feigned person, from Ezekiel. 14. 14. and James 5.
2. but a real example of both Fortunes, in an exceeding measure) but a grave
Treatise concerning this subject, viz. the prosperity of the impious, and
constant adversity of the pious, comprehending the arguments of both the
Opponent and Defendant of Divine Providence. Which is grounded upon strong
probability, since, as St. Ierom has observed and attested, in the original
Hebrew, from the beginning of the book to the 3 verse of the 3 chapter, where
the complaint of Job begins, all is written in Prose, and thenceforward, during
the whole dispute, to the 6th. verse of the last chapter all in Hexameter
verse, where the composer again let loose his pen into prose, whereby it is
manifest that the Prose was destined for a Prologue and an Epilogue to the
contest in verse. Now every man knows the sorrows and sickness of Job to have
bin too intense and urgent, to endure the calm and leisure requiring humor of
Poetry either in himself or his friends: and therefore must the book be
composed by some Person not molested with either of those two impediments, but
of serene thoughts, and acquainted with the ancient custom of disposing their
Moral Philosophy into verse.

And there are instances enough to illustrate both the contumacy and large
diffusion of this objection. I might have said more then enough; the strongest
and most military Faith among us, though assisted by the most evident and firm
reason, being hardly able justly to boast an absolute conquest of, and constant
immunity from the sharp clandestine assaults of the same scruple: and so no
man needing other example to evince the frequent prevalency of it, but what his
retired meditations may find alleged in the inventory of his own frailties,
lapses, and temptations; (all which are punctually and orderly registered by
that recorder of his soul, which the Divine call's (...), or Conscience)
especially in these evil times, wherein Piety, Wisdom, Justice, Temperance,
Fortitude, Innocence, and all other Graces and Virtues are deposed, and only
their Contrarics advanced; in a word, wherein nothing can make a man temporally
miserable, but the severe profession of Goodness.

SECT. II.
THat God extends the right hand of his Providence upon the Article 1. That man
is the sole object of Gods special Providence, a^gued from hence; that he is
the principal object of his (^xtrins^cal) (...): and that inferred ^^om hence,
(1) that God has impressed upon the mind of man a greater knowledge of his
Divinity, then upon any other Creature, Angels only excluded: (2) that man is
only qualisied to speculate, admire, and laud the pulchritude of Nature.
head of man (the Heir of all his blessings, though the youngest of his
Creatures) ordering the occurrences of his life, nay the manner and moment of
his death, by a paternal and special care, more excellent then that whereby he
is pleased to regulate and dispose the operations of all other Entities in the
Republique of the World; is amply manifest from hence, Quod majorem sui
hominibus, quam caeteris rebus not itiam impressit, that he has impressed upon
the mind of man a knowledge of his Divinity more clear and distinct, then upon
any created natures beside, Angelical and intuitively intellectual spirits only
excepted.

For though all the works of God carry, in the front of their distinct Forms,
some certain Signatures or Characters, that undeniably attest their Creation by
an Efficient infinite in Power and Wisdom; and in that respect may be properly
enough said, to show forth the glory of their Maker: and though all Animals do,
by a kind of tacit homage, confess their origination from, and constant
dependence on one Eternal and Omnipotent Cause; yet are they induced, excited,
or rather impelled thereunto, instinctu solum quodam caeco, only by a blind and
confused instinct, of which themselves have no possible notion. But as for the
Favorite, man, he holds a clear and distinct idea of the Nature of God, as has
formerly bin demonstrated; and has therefore a Logical, assured, and express
cognition of his Creator and Conservator, and that so radically united, or
identified to his essence, that it can be no Paradox to averr, that this
science is part of his soul, though that be a simple, pure, homogeneal, and so
indivisible substance: nay some modern Enquirers into the nature of the soul,
have described it to be, Actus simplex Cognitionis omnium, quae cognosci
possint, a simple Act, or present Cognition of all things intelligible, i. e.
of God, and consequently, it is not in the power of the most desperate and
obdurate Atheist, to erase this idea out of his mind, no more then to change,
meliorate, or adnihilate his essence, or prevent the stroke of Death. Now, what
could be the Motive, that induced God to ennoble man by the prerogative of this
excellent Idea, or representation of himself, other then the reflex act of his
own infinite Goodness; which in the language of mortality, is Free Love, that
flowed in a fuller and richer stream upon man, then upon all the World beside?
And what can be the End of this implantate and coessential Knowledge in man,
other then this; that he should constantly contemplate, admire, and laud the
Perfections of the Donor thereof, and more particularly that concerned
Attribute, which moved him to the free Donation, namely his immense
Beneficence? This being conceded, it remains a plain and perpendicular
Inference; that since between God and man there is a greater relation, or
Communion (so the learned Gassendus calls it, in Animadvers. in lib. 10.
Diogen. Laert: de physiolog. Epicuri. page 744.) then betwixt God and any other
of his Creatures: therefore also must there be a greater measure of Providence
in God for man, then for any other; it being necessary that the Providence of
God should hold exact proportion, and be aequilibrated to his Love. This
necessity of a parity or aequipondium betwixt Love and Providence Divine, may
be conveniently exemplified in our selves; for by how much the more we love our
Friends, Wives or Children, by so much the more careful and provident are we
for their conservation and welfare.

Again, our own Experience is both argument and testimony sufficient, that the
perscrutation of the mysteries of Nature, and the contemplation of sublime and
celestial objects, is proper only to man; no other Animal being constituted in
a capacity to rival him in those noble operations. And if so, undoubtedly he
must violently stisle tho conviction of his experience in this particular, who
dares deny, that those heavenly beauties, and all the pieces of Nature beside
were created principally for the use of man, insomuch as man was created
principally to declare the Glory of the Creator. Ad quid enim tantus decor
universi, nisi esset homo, qui consideraret, ips^que perspecto hymnum Authori
caneret? It Is an Axiom of constant Verity, that Nature makes nothing in vain;
and this rule, doubtless, she learned from that Wisdom, which determines all
its actions to certain, adequate, and proper Ends: now we must grant, either
that God adorned the Universe with such exquisite pulchritude, and admirable
imbellishment of Art, to no purpose at all; and so was more vain and
improvident then his instrument, Nature: or else, that he conferred that
elegancy and amiable decorament upon it, to this end, that the curious
Cogitations of man might be entertained, exercised, and delighted in the
speculation and admiration thereof, and through that maze of pleasant wonder be
conducted to the true Elyzium, the contemplation of the Fountain of
Pulchritude, and entelechia of Excellencies, God. For there is no medium
between these two Contraries, nor any hope of evading the rigor of this
Dilemma, upon pretense of neutrality: since God had no other end, wherefore he
beautified the World, but his own Glory in chief, and the excitement of the
Admiration and Magnificat of man, as subservient thereunto; nor does the World
contain any other Nature, but Man, that is qualified with Faculties requisite
to the satisfaction of that end. Quis enim aliquam aliam unquam invenit
naturam, quae aedificium hoc tantum conspiciens, in Architecti sapientissimi
admirationem perinde rapiatur? We well know, that Relatives (secundum esse)
positively necessitate the existence each of other; and therefore to allow
(what cannot be disallowed, but by incurring a more dangerous absurdity) that
God made, and exhibited the Beauty of the World, tanquam admirandum
spectaculum, as a spectacle that cannot but excite Admiration in the
speculator; and yet to deny that he provided a fit and respective spectator,
such whose Sense should transmit the idea of that Pulchritude to the judicature
of a higher Faculty, and that again be thereby impregnated with Admiration
(which is nothing but our Reasons being at a stand at the novelty or excellence
of an object occurring to our sense; for what is either frequent, or manifest
to our cognition, we never admire: and that is the cause, why this Affection of
the mind as it is the first of Passions, so it is the only one that wants a
Contrary, as the unimitable Des Carts has discovered to us, in lib. de
passion. part. 1. articl. 54.) is not only an impious derogation to the wisdom
of God, but also a manifest Contradiction to our own reason, which from the
existence of the Relatum, a spectacle, immediately concludes the necessary
existence of the Correlatnm, a spectator. And that this Spectator can be no
other Animal, but man; is too bright a truth to need any other illustration,
but what is reflected from it self.

To which Argument, of the Creators adopting man to be his Darling and intimate
Favorite, the Logic of every man may superadd many others of equivalent
importance, drawn from the consideration of those Praeeminences and
Praerogatives, wherewith his Munificence has bin pleased to ennoble his
nature, and exalt him to a nearer Cognation or Affinity to his own glorious
Essence, then any other Creature in the Universe; as the excellent contexture
and majestique Figure of his Body; the semi-divine Faculties of his Soul; his
Monarchy, domination, or royalty over all other sublunary natures, Omnia enim
sibi submittit, dum omnia quae in mundo sunt, vel ad usus vitae necessarios
refert, vel ad varia genera voluptatum; and lastly that inestimable propriety,
the Immortality of his Soul.

Now to direct all this to the mark; since God has thus proclaimed Man to be,
next to his own Glory (which is the last of Ends, as his Will is the first of
Causes) the grand and principal scope of his mighty work of Creation; and that
he made all things, in order to his accommodation and well-being in this life,
and allurement, nay manuduction or conduct to immarcescible beatitude after
Death: and since his Act of Providence, or the constant Conservation of all
things, in the primitive perfection, distinction and order of their Natures, is
nothing but his act of Creation prolonged, or spun out through all the
independent Atoms, or successive particles of time, as has bin more then once
intimated; beyond all dispute, the Product must be the same with our Thesis,
viz. That Man is the object of Gods special Providence, and by consequence,
that all occurrences of his life are punctually predetermined, ordered, and
brought to pass by the same.

As every man brings into the World with him a certain Prolepticall, or
Anticipated Cognition of a Deity, or First Cause Article 2. That the soul of
man contains a proleptical notion of Gods special Providence.
of all things, deeply and indelebly stamped upon his mind; as has bin
formerly demonstrated: so also holds he, as an Adjunct, or rather a part
thereof, a coessentiall Prenotion, that this First Cause, or Supreme Nature, is
the Fountain from whence those two different streams of Happiness and Misery,
or Good and Evil, the former by Condonation, the other by Permission, are
constantly derived: and upon consequence, that all Occurrences of his life, are
the just and prudent Designations of its special Providence.

That every man, in whom the Light of Nature is not damp't by Fatuity, either
native and temperamental, or casually supervenient, has this (...), or impress
of an especial Providence, decreeing and disposing all events, that have, do,
or shall befall him; is manifest from hence, that no man, though educated in
the wildest ignorance, or highest barbarism imaginable, but was naturally, and
by the advisoes of his intestine Dictator, inclined either to conceive, or
embrace some kind of Religion, as an homage or fealty due from him to that
Supreme Power, in whose hands he apprehended the rains of Good and Evil to be
held, and whose favor and benign aspect he thought procurable, and anger
attoneable by the seasonable addresses of Invocation and Sacrifice.

And in truth, to him, whose meditations shall sink deep enough, it will soon
appear, that this Anticipation is the very root of Article 3. That this
proleptical notion is the basis of Religion.
Religion; for though man stood fully persuaded of the Existence of God, yet
would not that alone be argument sufficient to convince him into the necessity
of a devout Adoration of him, unless his mind were also possessed with a firm
belief of this proper Attribute of his Nature, which so nearly concerns his
felicity or infelicity, viz. his special Providence, which regulates all the
affairs, and appoints all the Contingencies of every individual man's life. For
it is the sense of our own Defects, Imperfections, and Dependency, that first
leads us to the knowledge of his All sufficiency, Perfections, and
Self-subsistence; the apprehension of our Necessities, is the school wherein we
first learned our Orizons, and the hope of obtaining Blessings from his immense
Bounty, is both the excitement and encouragement of our Devotion: and therefore
the Devil spoke profoundly and to the purpose, in his expostulation with God
concerning the cause of Jobs integrity, Does Job serve God for naught? This
being duly perpended, I hope I shall not offend Theology, if I affirm, that
since to love God aright, is to love him purely and solely because he is God,
i. e. all that is truly Good and Amiable; it is impossible for the soul of man,
in this life, to love God as she ought to do: because impossible for her,
before her refinement by Glorification, so to cast off all self-interest, as to
love him without reflections upon her self, i. e. without the hopes of being
made eternally happy by that love. If this reason bear not out my paradox, I
dare any man to the bar of Experience, and boldly appeal to the Conscience of
any the most mortified Christian, whether in his most pure, abstracted, and
holy raptures of Divine love, he did not always perceive a considerable
mixture, and weighty alloy of Ipseity or Selfness.

That the Concession of an Especial Providence in the Supreme Being, whereby he
constantly moderateth and disposes the operations and products of Second
Causes for the induction of Good on the heads of those, whose Virtuous
inclinations may, in some latitude of Worthyness, seem to prepare and qualify
them for the grateful Acceptance, and genuine use thereof; and of Evil on
those whose Vitiosities and habitual Depravities seem, by the importunity or
violence of demerit, to extort it from the Justice of his Indignation: that
this inbred persuasion, I say, is the spark, at which all the Tapors of
Religion were first kindled, the very Ethnicks themselves, while groping in the
Chaos of Idolatry, have long since discovered. Witness their Magnificent
Temples, costly Hecatombs, human Holocausts, and frequent solemn Invocations;
all which kinds of addresses they generally made use of, and obliged themselves
unto, as the only hopeful means as well to atone the displeasure, as
conciliate the favor of that Power, in whose hands they conceived the book of
Fate to be kept, and who had the Gardianship of Administration of the Fortunes
not only of Cities, nations, and families, but even of every individual Person.
Witness also, that Glorious Pagan, Cicero, who deriving the pedigree of
Religion, fathers it immediately upon the persuasion of an Especial Providence,
(1. de not. Deor.) in these words; Sunt Philosophi, and fuerunt, qui omnino
nullam habere censerent humanarum rerum procurationem Deos. Quorum si vera est
sententia, quae potest esse Pietas? quae Religio? Haec enim omnia pure ac cast
tribuenda Deorum numini it a sunt, si animadvertuntur ab his, and si est
aliquid a Diis immortalibus hominum generi tributum. Sin autem Dii neque
possunt, nec volunt nos juvare, ncc curant omnino, nec quid agamus
animadvertant, nec est quod ab his ad hominum vitam permanare possit: quid est,
quod ullos Diis immortalibus cultus, honores, preces adhibeamus? In specie
autem sictae simulationis, sicut reliquae virtutes, it a pietas inesse non
potest, cum qua simul and sanctitatem, and religionem rolli necesse est. Quibus
sublatis, perturbatio vitae sequitur, and magna confusio.

That no man ever entered upon the theater of the World, but Article 4. That Man
brings into the world with him, an irresistible propension to Religion.
he acted some one Religious part, bringing along with him an irresistible
propension to revere and adore that Nature, which he conceived superior to his
own, and all others; cannot be obscure to any, whom either Peregrinations, or
Books have acquainted with the religious Customs and practices of foreign
Nations, either Ancient or Modern. For read we the voluminous monuments of
Antiquity, erected by the noble industry of Herodotus, Diodorus, Strabo,
Ptolome, Mela, Pliny, Solinus, Iustine, and other senior Historiographers; read
we Munster's Cosmography, Ortelius his Theatrum Orbis, the Histories of
Brasile, written by the judicious pens of Guilelm. Piso, the Hollander and
Physician to the States Fleet, of Georg. Marcgravus the German, and Johan. de
Laet of Antwerp; and in our Mother tongue, Grimstones Estates and Empires,
Purchase his Pilgrimage (a work that speaks its venerable Compiler, to have bin
a man of many Languages, indefatigable study, vast readings, large rhapsodies,
and strong judgment,) Hackluit's Collection of English Voyages, the several
Descriptions of America, together with the manners of its various Inhabitants;
and other Works of the Neotericks (in all which we find not only the
Chorography and Topography, but also the faithful Morography of all the known
parts of the World) I say, read we all these, and we shall find them
unanimously positive in this point, That there is no Nation but has its
Religion. And therefore, with Arnobius (lib. 1. contr. Gent. page 476.) I am
bold to demand of the whole world; Quisquamne est hominum, qui non cum istius
Principis notione, diem primae nativitatis intraverit? Cui non sit ingenitum,
imo affixum, and pene in genitalibus matris non impressum, non insitum; esse
Regem ac Dominum cunctorum, quaecunque sunt, Moderatorem?

If any shall pull me by the ear, and here object out of Strabo (lib. 13. page
382.) that the Calaici, a rude and savage people Article 5. An objection, that
the Cala^ci were absolute Atheists, resuted.
of old Spain, were absolute Atheists, and worshipped no Gods at all; I answer,
that Strabo wrote this particular with no more authentical a quill, but what
he sound dropped from the wings of Fame, himself insinuating as much: for his
words are, Calai^is Deum nullum esse, quidam ajunt; there is a certain rumor,
or traditional report, raised, dispersed and authorized, where, when, upon what
grounds, or by whom, I know not, that the Calaici had no religion among them.
And if a quidam sic ajunt, be proof enough to ratify any historical position,
or assertion; then may Fame aspire to the throne of Truth, Fables become
Histories, and strangers may believe that we Christians are the most absolute
Atheists. For Caecilius has reported of us, that we do and templa despicere,
and Deos despuere: both despise the temples, and despite the Gods; as Arnobius
(lib. 8. cont. Gent. page 748.) has informed us. Article 6. A second
objection, that the Massagetae and Scytbions were devoyd of all Religion,
prevented*


Nor I have forgotten, that the two fierce Nations, the Massagetae and
Scythians, (whose rudeness and want of Civility, the indiscretion or severity
of some has aggravated into an Atheistical Barbarism, and want of all
Religion) have bin stigmatized with the same infamous brand; and therefore to
anticipate this exception, I refer the doubting Reader to the testimonies of
Herodotus and Lucian* the former (lib. 4. page 278. and 279.) at large
expunging that fabulous aspersion, and proving them strict, solemn, and
ceremonious Votaries to all the Gods of Greece: the latter (lib. de
sacrificiis. p. 57.) deriding them for their superstition, nay such immoderate
and frantique zeal, toward the honor of their principal Deity, Diana, as made
them embrace the slames, and offer themselves as holocausts unto her.

Moreover, as this inoppugnable propensity to Religion is a Article 7. That it
is not in the power of man, totally to ^^dicate this plant of Religion, or
notion of special Providence Divine, ^ut of his mind; evinced from hence, that
the most contumacious Atheists have, at some time or other, acknowledged it: as
Cyence of Gods own ingraffing on the mind of man; so also is it not in the
power of any man, though assisted by all the stratagems and legions of Hell,
totally to eradicate it thence.

This is a truth confirmed by the Experience of all Ages. For, notwithstanding
the insolent pretenses, and blasphemous Rhodomontadoes of many miscreants, who
have gloried in the most execrable cognomen of (...), and studied to advance
their names to the highest pinnacle of Fame, by being accounted men of such
absolute and fearless Spirits, as that they scorned to own any Being superior
to their own, to which they should be accountable for their actions: yet have
they bin compelled (so violent are the secret touches of that hand, which
converts all things into demostrations of his own Glory) either by the scourge
of some sharp calamity, or the rack of some excruciating disease, in their
lives, to recant; or at the near approach of that King of terrors, Death, to
confess this their horrid impiety.

Thus the proud and Adamant-hearted Pharaoh, who deriding Article 8. Pharaoh.
the Divine Embassy of Moses, in an imperious strain of Sc^rn, and
expostulatory bravado, demanded of him; Quis est Jehovah, cujus voci auscultem,
dimittendo Israelem? non novi Jehovam, etc. did yet, when the Violentum of
Divine Vengeance by heavy judgments had convinced him; when the true and real
Miracles of Moses had won the garland from those weak Delusions and prestigious
impostures of his Magicians, and he beheld their black Art fooled in their vain
attempts to imitate Moses in the visible transformation of Dust into Lice; when
the tangible darknes^ that benegroed the horizon of Egypt, and so made it more
then midnight to the eye of his body, had illuminated that of his Soul; and
when the frozen Grenades of the clouds had broke open the iron door of his
Conscience; then sends he post for those, whom he had barbarously exiled from
his presence, humbles himself before them, and howles out this Palinodia;
Peccavi hac vice: Jehovah justissimus, ego vero and populus meus sumus
improbissimi.

Thus Herod Agrippa, who, in the morn, to enhance the estimate of majesty, and
stroke that vertiginous and admiring Article 9. Herod Agrippa.
beast, the multitude, had arrayed him in his brightest ornaments of State,
thickly imbrodered with plates of Oriental Gold, and studded with Diamonds and
all other resplendent Gemms, so that the incident Sun beams seemed to have
acquired a greater luster by reflection from him, and who by the blast of
popular Euges had the wings of his Pride fanned up to so sublime a pitch, that
he lost sight of his own Humanity, and vainly conceived the adulatory Hyperbole
of his Auditors to be but their just acknowledgement of his Divinity: being
wounded by the invisible sword of a revenging Angel, before Sun set, by a fatal
experiment confuted both his own and his flatterers blasphemy, and with the
hoarse groans of a tortured wretch, cried out; En ille Ego, vestra appellatione
Deus, vitam relinquere jubeor; fatali necessitate mendacium vestrum coarguente:
and quem immortalem salutastis, ad mortem rapior. Sed ferenda est voluntas
coelestis Numinis. (Joseph. 19. Antiquit. p. 565.)

Thus that real Lycaon, Antiochus Epiphanes, who had not only denied, but being
enraged by a malicious Phrensy beyond Article 10. Antiochus Epiphanes.
that of Lucifer newly degraded, publicly despited and reviled the Almighty
Patron of the Jews, blasphemed his most sacred name, demolished his temples,
profaned his consecrated Utensils, violated his religious institutions, and
persecuted his worshipers with all the most bloody cruelties, that the wit of
an exalted malice could invent, or inflict: being put upon the rack of a sore
and mortal disease (which some have conjectured, and not without good warrant
from probability, to have bin a Cancer in his bowels, introduced mediately by
Divine Justice, immediately ^y a fixed melancholy generated by the uncessant
stings and convulsions of his guilty Conscience, as by its procatarctick*
Cause,) and despairing of any case or cure but from his injured enemy, God; he
sighs out his Confession. The sleep is gone from my eyes, and my heart fails
for very Care. And I thought with my self, into what tribulation am I come, and
how great a sloud of misery is it, wherein I now am? But now I remember the
evils that I did at Jerusalem, and that I took all the vessels of Gold and
Silver that were therein, and sent to destroy the inhabitants without a Cause.
I perceive therefore, that for this cause, these troubles are come upon me etc.
It is meet to be subject unto God, and that a man who is mortal, should not
think himself equal unto God through pride. (Maccab. 1. chap. 6. verse. 9, 10,
11.)

Thus the Giant Emperor, Maximinus, as insatiate a Article 11. Maximinus.
Blood-hound to the Christians, as Antiochus had bin to the Jews, novorum
suppliciorum inventione sese insolenter efferens, boasting the acuteness of his
wit by the invention of new ways of tortures for those patient martyrs, as
Eusebius (lib. 1. de vita Constant. cap. 51.) has described him; and advancing
the Roman Eagle in desiance of those who fought under the sanguine standard of
the Cross; nay so infatuated with the confidence of his own Greatness and
personal strength, that he entertained a conceit, that Death durst not
adventure to encounter him, for fear of having his javelin broke about his own
crazy skull, and all his skeleton of bones rattled to dust, as Capitolinus tell
us: notwithstanding when he felt himself invaded with a Verminous Ulcer, or
Fistula, in mediis corporis arcanis, which did letificum foetorem exhalare, ut
medicorum aliqui incredibilem foetorem far non valentes, occiderentur,
evaporate so contagious and pestilential a stench, that some of his Physicians,
not able to endure that mephitis or steam of intense corruption, fell down
dead; and understood the same to be supplicium Divinitus illatum, ajudgement
sent from God to retaliate upon him those tortures, which he had caused in the
bowels and secret parts of many innocents; then did his flinty heart melt
within him, and tandem sentire coepit, quae contra pios Dei cultores impie
gesserat, and haec se propter insaniam contra Christum praesumptam, merito and
ultionis vice, perpeti confessus est, and in the midst of these confessions of
his own Guilt, and Gods justice, breathed out his execrable soul from a
gangrenous and loathsome body. (Eusebius, lib. 8. Histor. Eccles. cap. 17.)

Thus also that notorious Apostate, Julian, who had not only renounced the
faith of Christ, but proclaimed open and implacable Article 12. Julian Apostata.
hostility against him, and to quench the thirst of his diabolical malice,
drank whole Tuns of the precious blood of his Members; being defeated and
mortally wounded in a battle fought against the Persians: he instantly
learned of his awaked Conscience, that the Cause of his present overthrow was
his former impiety, and rightly ascribing the Victory to the revenging finger
of that God, whose Divinity he had abjured, rather then to the arm of flesh,
he threw up his blood into the aer, and together with his black Soul, gasped
out this desperate ejaculation; Vicisti Galilaee, vicisti! Thou have overcome
me, oh! thou Jesus of Galile, thou have overcome me: simul confessus and
victoriam, and blasphemiam, at once confessing both Christ's conquest and his
own detestable blasphemy; as Theodoret (lib. 3. Histor. Eccles. cap. 20.) has
descanted upon those his last (but truest) words.

And thus also Tullus Hostilius (a Cognomen exactly accommodated Article 13.
Tullus Hostilius.
to his fierce nature,) immediate successor to Numa Pompilius in his throne,
though not in his mansuete and pious inclinations; being a man of so rough and
martial a temper, that he held Religion to be but a kind of Emollient
Cataplasme, prescribed by State Policy to soften and emasculate the minds of
men, as Plutarch (in vita Numae page 158.) has noted of him; and thereupon in
his prosperity neither acknowledging, nor sacrificing unto any Deity, but his
Ferreus Acinaces, or old sword: when cast upon the thorny bed of sickness, he
soon discovered, retracted, and renounced his Atheism. (which remarkable
mutation of his judgment, Livie (lib. 1. page 12.) has both amply and
elegantly described thus, Adeo fracti simul cum corpore sunt spiritus illi
seroces, ut qui nihil antea ratus esset minus regium, quam sacris dedere
animum; repent omnibus magnis parvisque superstitionibus obnoxious degeret,
religionibusque populum impleret. I said Mutation of his judgment, not
Rectification; nor can I properly allow him so much: since he that runs from
one extreme of Atheism to the other of Polytheisme, shall find himself in the
same point of Error, from whence he set forth. For to believe, that there are
more Gods then one, in strictness of truth is to believe there is none at all;
Unity being the essential and inseparable Attribute of the Deity. And therefore
we may allow him to have bin superstitious, but never truly religious. Nor did
the Judge of all hearts accept of this Change for a Conversion; for the records
both of Livy and Eutropius concur in this; Fulmine ictus, cum tota domo sua,
conflagravit: he, his house, and family were consumed by Lightning. A
punishment so proportionate to the rules of Divine Justice, that we may therein
give a fair conjecture of his guilt: and that which all Atheists have stood
convulst at.

Hi sunt, qui trepidant, and ad omnia fulgura pallent,
Cum tonat, exanimes, primo quoque murmr coeli. Iuvenal. Satyr. 13.

Such Villains quake at Thunder, and each flash
Of Lightning does their Souls with Terror quash.
A like example of the impossibility of extinguishing this spark of Religion,
which the Creator has kindled in the breast of Article 14. Bion Borysthenites.
every man, does Diogenes Laertius afford us (in vit. Bionis) in the
recantation of Bion of Borysthenes. Who continuing (or rather only pretending
to continue) in professed Atheism, till he was arrested by sickness, that rough
Sergeant of Death, and then affrighed into an acknowledgement of that truth, he
had so long stisled: inductus est poenitentiam agere super iis, quae peccarat
in Doum, was induced to become a penitentiary for those offenses he had
prepetrated against the sacred majesty of God.

To conclude therefore; as Lucilius said of Homer, Nemo qui culpat Homerum,
perpetuo culpat; so may we more truly say of God, Nemo qui Deum negat,
perpetuo negat, no man who denis God, does constantly deny him. For all men
have confuted, disavowed, or repented that impiety at or before their death,
which they seemed with so much impudence and pride, to cherish in their lives.
This the sweet-tongued Tertullian (Apolog. cap. 17.) profoundly observed, when
he distilled the quintessence or spirit of all we have said, concerning this
assertion, into this short sentence: Anima, licet carcere corporis pressa,
licet institutionibus pravis circumscripta, licet libidinibus and
concupiscentiis evigorata, licet falsis Diis exancillata, cum tamen resipiscit,
ut ex crapula, ut ex somno, ut ex aliqua valetudine, and sanitatem suam
patitur, Deum nominat.

I shall not gainsay, but that it is possible (I am sorry, I might Article 15.
The possibility of the obscuration of the impress of special Providence Divine,
pro tempore, conceded: and the impossibility of the total Deletion thereof,
briefly proved.
have said, too frequent) to have this ingravement of Divinity on the mind of
man, obscured, and buried under the dust raised in the summer of Prosperity;
for as Lactantius (lib. 2. cap. 1.) most solidly, tum maxim Deus ex hominum
memoria elabitur, cum benesiciis ejus fruentes honorem dare Divinae
indulgentiae deberent, men are then most prone to forget God, when being sated
with the accumulations of his immense bounty, they have the greatest reason to
remember him: yet I shall confidently affirm, that the least gust of
Affliction, in the winter of Adversity, soon blows that dust off again, and
renders the Characters fair and legible to the first reflexive or inward
glance of the soul. Si qua enim necessitas gravis presserit, tum demum
recordantur; si belli terror infremuerit, si alimenta frugibus longa siccitas
denegaverit, si saeva tempestas, si grando ingruerit: ad Deum protinus
confugiunt, a Deo petitur auxilium, Deus, ut subveniat, oratur; si quis in mari
vento saeviente jactatur, hunc invocat; si quis aliqua vi afflictatur, hunc
protinus implorat, etc. as the same Lactantius.

Now to abstract all this to a smaller bulk, such as may be no Article 16. The
reduction of all, to a concise and memorable demonstration; that the
occurrences of every man's life are the consignations of special Providence
burden to the weakest memory, and reduce our Argument into a sharper point,
so that it may, with the greater facility, sink into the thickest skull; If
Religion be a Plant radicated in the soul of man, so deeply and firmly, that
though the damp of a barbarous education may for a while retard, or the
rankness of those Weeds of Sensuality, the Honors and Delights of this World,
conceal the germination of it: yet will it, at some time or other, early or
late, and always in the Winter of Calamity, shoot up and bud forth into an
absolute Demonstration of the dependence of our Happiness and Misery on the
Will of the Supreme Being: and if the (...), or full Persuasion of an Especial
Providence, as a relative Attribute of the Supreme Being, whereby all the
various Occurrences of every individual man's life are predetermined and
disposed, be the Seed from whence this Plant of Religion has its root; both
which Propositions we conceive sufficiently proved: then do not I see, how the
subtilest Wit can evade the rigor of the Inference, or Conclusion, viz. That
all the affairs of man are regulated by the Special Providence of God.

SECT. III.
THus far have we Demostrated the Necessity of Gods Special Article 1. The
Atheists first objection, confuted: and the Divine Nature demonstrated both
Irascible and placable, (anthropo pathically.)
Providence; and our next business is to remove those Rocks cast up by the
Pioners of Satan, to obstruct the Current of man's clear and full belief
thereof.

As for the First, Deum neque ira, neque gratia tangi; this may without much
difficulty be dejected, by answering, that it can no way infringe the
Immutability or constant Sameness of the Divine Nature, to affirm it to be
capable of Anger and Placability: provided that we understand neither of these
as a Passion, but (as the Schoolmen precisely speak) in effectu exequutionem,
potius quam in Affectu perturbationem, rather an execution in Effect, then a
Perturbation in Affect. As for Anger; if a Wiseman can so conserve the
serenity and tranquillity of his mind, as to chastise or severely punish his
disobedient servant, without any passion or internal commotion at all: it is
very hard, if God, the Fountain of Wisdom, cannot be admitted to conserve the
constant and immutable peace or calm of his Beatitude, when he punishes the
improbous actions of men. For Justice is a virtue, which to speak strictly,
cannot frown, which abhor's the society of a Passion, and only actuates the
mind into a noble and commendable Zeal, not an illiberall or rough
Perturbation. And upon the consideration of this was it, that the first
Preservers of Equity, knowing it not to be impossible for the breast of a
Magistrate to be inflamed, beyond this moderate heat, into an excess of
Indignation against a Malefactor; therefore wisely provided, that the Judge
should square his Sentence by the direct and impartial rule of the Law; which
some Civilians have therefore wittily defined to be Ira sedata, Anger without
Choler, Indignation refracted, or the sword of Vengeance put in the hand of
Mercy. As for the Contrary to Anger, viz. Grace, or Placability; why this also
may not be adscribed to God, as fully consistent to the Eternal plenitude and
immu tability of the Divine Beatitude, I cannot understand: provided that we
accept it absque gestiente laetitia, and as an effect infinitely remote from
that kind of Passionate Joy, which tickles the heart of man into a sudden
paroxysme of delight, upon the apprehension of a grateful and pleasing Object,
either in the anticipation of Hope, or actual fruition. The Reason is the
immense Goodness of his Nature, which being in perpetual Effusion, without
possibility of exhaustion, or an Ocean that replenisheth all things with
Amability, yet suffers no diminution of its own fullness; does more then incline
him to be pleased with, or accept of as grateful, that in man, which is
originally but an Extract of his own Delightfulness, or himself gratefully
returned to himself by reflection from us. This the Schoolmen most judiciously
pondered, when they established as Canonical, Deum exercere gratiam, ea naturae
sinceritate, qua Bonus est. Nor are we to deny this Placency or Delight to God,
since it is so far from infringing this constant and equal tenor of his
essential Felicity, that in some sort it mainly conduces to the Conservation
thereof; insomuch as to be uncessantly exercised in a liberal Benefaction to
other Natures, is to do what is most consentaneous and genuine to the swindge
or Verticity of his own: and so to do, all men, doubtless, will allow to be the
highest and most permanent Delight in the World.

Nor is it a legal process in the common Pleas of Reason, to argue thus; God
has left us to act our own parts, in the world, therefore he takes no farther
care of us, and therefore all the Occurrences of our lives are either the
necessary subsequents, or collateral Adjuncts of our own either natural, or
moral Actions: for though it be most true, that he has endowed us with an
absolute Freedom of our Wills (an evidence of his exceeding Grace and
Benignity,) and that, indeed, which supports the necessity of our Rationality;
for if our Wills were subject to compulsion, undoubtedly we should have little
or no use at all of our Reason, since then our Objects would be both judged of
and elected to our hands) and so permitted us the enjoyment of our own entire
liberty: yet has he, out of a compassionate prenotion of the Deceptibility of
our judgment, prescribed us rules, whereby our Understanding may be directed
in the selection of Good, and devitation of evil.

To speak more expressly; he has set on our right hand real and true Good, on
our left only specious and apparent: the Election of either is dependent on our
Will, our Will is guided by our Judgment, and our Judgment is the
Determination or resolve of our Intellect (for, without dispute, though common
Physiology has founded this Liberty on the indifferency of the Will; yet is it
radicated in the indifferency of the Intellect, or Cognoscent Faculty,
primarily, and in the Will only secondarily, insomuch as that ever follows the
manuduction of the Intellect,) but yet that he might in a manner direct us in
our choice, he has annexed Happiness as a reward to invite us to the one, and
Misery as a punishment to deter us from the other: and therefore it is manifest,
that God wills the felicity of all men, more then themselves can desire it.

And hence comes it to be a truth, that on one side Fortune (respectu nostri)
frequently puts in for a share in the playing of our Cards; but yet still the
Special Providence of God supervises her hand, and manageth the whole game: and
on the other, that our own Prudence does many times conduce to our winning of
the stake; but yet still 'twas the Goodness of God that gave us that Prudence,
and takes great delight to see us use it, as we ought to do, to our own
advantage.

Does he so, says the Atheist, how comes it about then, that Article 2. The
Atheists scruple, of Gods inaudition of the prayers of good men, or not
concession of their petitions; satisfied.
he frequently turns a deaf ear to our most earnest Prayers, and but rarely
grants our Petitions? For how few barren wombs have bin cured of their
sterility, by the fumes of sacrifices? and how few Mariners preserved from
naufrage, by the appension of their Votive tables? or who has observed such
holy magic in the perishing Seamans pious sighs, as to have hushed the
dreadful scolding of the waves and winds? For answer let us return,

That the most indulgent Father does not always condescend to the importunate
desires of his child: that as well Pious, as Impious men may be included in the
same ship, that is banded up and down by the wanton Billows of the Sea; that the
Good may be lost, and the Bad escape the fury of the tempest: and all this
consist both with the Goodness and righteous Providence of God. The Reason in
brief (for the full solution of this Parallaxis of Justice does more properly
belong to our refutation of the last Objection, concerning the apparent
Prosperity of the Vicious, and the calamitous condition of the Virtuous, in
this life) is this; God in his Wisdom knows our real necessities, and
understands what is most convenient for us. This the acute Satyrist handsomely
expresses thus;

-- Si Consilium vis, Iuven. Sat. 10.

Permittes ipsis expendere Numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis rebusque sit utile nostris:
Nam pro jucundis aptissima quaeque dabunt Dii.
Carior est illis Homo, quam sibi. Nos animorum
Impulsu, and magna, caecaque cupidine ducti
Conjugium petimus, partumque Vxoris, at illi
Norunt qui Pueri, qualisque futura sit Vxor. etc.
Would be advised to choose the best? refer
That choice unto the Gods, who cannot err.
For better then our selves our wants they know:
And will true joys, for false delights, bestow.
Their love to us transcends our own By blind
Affections spurred, and fury of the mind,
We Wife and Sons desire; the Gods above
Know what that Wife, and how those Sons will prove.
As for the second Rock, Cur si Deus omnia hominum caussa Article 3. The
Atheists second Argument against Special Providence divine, dissolved: and the
necessity of Objects hostile, and deleterious to the life of man, demonstrated.
fecerit, etiam multa contraria, imo and pestisera nobis reperiantur, tam in
mari quam in terra? this also may easily be removed, by digesting our
meditations into this short reply.

The Creator, having formed the machine of man's body into a Figure fit to
receive the majestic charagme of Divinity, as the last act of his hand, and
the accompletion of his most exquisite Artifice, breathed into him a Wise,
intelligent, or cognoscent Soul; that by the transcendent operations thereof,
man might justly entitle himself to the Empire of the Creatures, subjugate them
to the dominion of his unconfined Will, and accommodate all things either to
the relief of his Necessities, or the promotion of his Delights. This done, he
set before him Good and Evil; and this upon the highest reason: because he had
endowed him with Sapience, whose basis is founded in the actual discernement of
those two Contraries For no man can make an election of the Better, and know
what is really Good, unless at the same time he know also what is really Evil,
and how to reject and avoid the Worse. Those two objects, though absolute
Contraries, are yet perfect Relatives; though irreconcilable Enemies, are yet
cosubsistent Twins, and live so connexed hand in hand, that the ablation of the
one necessitates the ablation of the other. Good and Evil therefore being thus
blended together, and in this miscellany proposed to man; then begins that
Criterion, Wisdom to exercise its Faculties, display its discretive energy,
and immediately exploring the difference, affects the Good sor Vtility, but
rejects the Evil for Safety. As therefore there are innumerable Goods offered
to the judgment of man, which he may with happiness enjoy; so also are there
as many Evils, which he may with caution abhor. For if there were nothing
evil, nothing dangerous, in short, nothing hurtful to man; pray, what stead
could his Reason stand him in? And hence is it manifest, that whoever strikes
at the necessity of Evil, at the same time cuts off the necessity of Wisdom,
and downright adnulls the use of the Intellect: since if God had created
nothing that might prove noxious to man, to what purpose would his Cogitation,
Intellect, Science and Reason have served? For then to what object soever he
had extended his hand, though at adventure; yet would that have bin by nature
fit and commodious for him.

To illustrate this by a familiar, yet in all points respondent Article 4. The
same illustrated, by a correspondent Simile.
Example; if any man make a feast for a company of Infants, and prepare a
liberal table of many both pleasant and wholesome meats for them; though they are
not wise enough to make their own choice, by rational judgment, but pursue the
inclination of their Sensual Appetite: yet can they not choose amiss, all
things good and grateful being praeelected to their hands. And if so, of what
disadvantage is their Ignorance, or of what advantage could their Intelligence,
were they arrived at so much maturity, be unto them? Truly, none at all; for
as they could know no want of the one, so could they receive no damage by the
continuation of the other. But if among those many pleasant and nutritive
dishes the master should mingle as many either bitter and distasteful, or
poisonous; then doubtless must the greedy Wretches be deceived through their
ignorance of Good and Evil, unless Wisdom step in to their protection, and
inform them what is safe, and what destructive, and so direct them in the
Delection of the one and Refusal of the other. Now clearly the Case is the
same, in all particulars, twixt God and Man, as to the point of Good and Evil:
and therefore we may conclude, with Lactantius; Propter mala opus nobis esse
sapientia, quae nisi fuissent proposita, rationale Animal non essemus: had
there bin no evil for man to avoid, he never had bin endowed with a rational
Soul.

The last, and greatest Rock, upon whose shelves Myriads Article 5. The
Atheists last and grand objection, of the prosperity of the Vicious, and
adversity of the Virtuous, red argued: and the nature of the Goods of Fortune
profounded.
have bin split and shipwrackt in their judgments, our memory tells us is
this; (...); Qua ratione, si curae Deo res humanae sunt, malis est been, and
bonis male?

This, I confess, to the first and supersicial survey of my meditations,
appeared montainous and flinty, and such as might require both a larger Current
of acuteness to dissolve it, then what runs in the shallow chanel of my
brains; and a greater strength of Argument to dislodge and crane it up piece
aster piece, then the lax and feeble nerves of my Reason could afford: but to
my second and penetrating thoughts, it discovered it self to be, like those
objects we look upon through the magnifying glass of Fear, great only at a
distance, and devoyd of all Solidity, nay in reality no more then a heap of mud
heaved up by the back of that subterraneous Mole, the Devil. For though
Experience assures us, that this field of the World has a strange and
preposterous soil, wherein Weeds most commonly prosper, and useful Plants
wither: yet a profound scrutiny into the business, shall soon detect, that
there is an admirable Providence in the distribution of Good and Evil, or
Prosperity and Adversity.

First therefore, let us seriously examine the inside of those Good things,
that are showred down on the laps of Evil men, and make their tides of Fortune
high and smooth; while the streams of Good men's lives seem to run low, sink
down to the lowest ebbs, and are constantly ruffled by the contrary gusts of
Afflictions. Certain it is, that nothing can be affirmed to be really Good, but
only Virtue, or at least that, which being contempered, impregnated and
qualifyed by Virtue, does positively conduce to our Well-being: and as certain
it is, that Evil men want this Universal Ferment, or Elixir, Virtue, which
only has a power to convert all things into Good; and therefore cannot they
either receive, or use those things called the Goods of Fortune, with that
temper and moderation of mind, which is requisite to the perfect assimilation
of them into their well-being; and upon consequence, those abused Goods
instantly alter their Property, and degenerate into Evils, Vice, like a
depraved stomach, having a power to corrupt the best things into the worst. And
this the reason is, why those Blessings, which the bounty of Providence has
ordained for our refreshment and consolation in this tedious pilgrimage on
earth, and furtherances or contributions toward our easier purchase of
immarcescible Felicity in heaven, when Death shall have evacuated our Faith;
such as Vigor, health, and beauty of Body, ingenuity of disposition, longevity,
multitude of Friends, equality in marriage, fertility of issue, education in
civility and learning, science, wealth, nobility of blood, absoluteness in
power and government, etc. when they come into the polluting hands of Vicious
men, they instantly suffer a total castration of their Goodness, a depravation
of their benignity, and putrify into perfect Curses: the possession of them
raising uncessant tempests and distracting storms of Passions in the
obnubilated region of their minds; nor permitting that comfortable sun of true
Content to shine clearly forth, and make one fair day, during their whole
lives.

For though the Mole-eyed multitude, whose sight is always terminated in the
gaudy outsight, admire even to envy the luster of splendid Vice, cry up the
happiness of wealth, and believe that the Rich man, though nere so unjust and
sinful, does every moment surfeit with variety of Delights: yet if his
Conscience were strictly examined, twould soon confess, that all his luxurious
Viands are but Pills of Coloqyntida nearly gilded, or Apples of Sodom, whose
Vermilian rind does emulate the blushes of Aurora, but are within nothing but
sulphurous dust; that his magnificent Buildings are but a more strong and
spacious Prison; his numerous Attendants, but so many plummets superadded to
that oppressing weight of cares, which keeps his mind in the perpetual motion
of inquietude; his troop of Adulators, but a swarm of hungry Fleas that molest
him by sucking, or a nest of Tarantula's, whose titillations prove venenate and
poison his sobriety into a phrensy of deadly jollity; that his bed of down
grows every night more full of thorns; that his baggs of treasure, like the
massy statue of Jupiter on the Asse's back, oppress and gall him; in short,
that he never tasted any one sincere and limpid drop of pleasure in his life.

And this one truth brancheth it self into the manifestation of two others;

First, that those golden showers which Providence raineth into the bosoms of
Vicious men, are no more then Bona fucata, real Evils couched under the
specious hatchment of apparent Goods; fruit whose Cortex is sweet and
beautiful, but Kernels full of amaritude and loathsome venom; and all the
magnified presents of Fortune, like Pandora's Box, have glorious outsides, but
contain millions of infections and pestilential Evils.

Secondly, that the Possessors of them, by reason of the exorbitances, and
habitual depravities of their minds, seem incapable and therefore, in the
judgment of the Supreme Wisdom, absolutely unworthy of more solid and
substantial Goods; Providence dealing with these, as a Wise General with
Cowards, who are assigned to the sordid offices of common Sutlers, and
Baggage-Carriers, while the generous and heroical are appointed to Arms,
difficulties, and encounters. Cum videris bonos acceptosque Diis viros,
laborare, sudare, per arduum ascendere; malos autem lascivientes and
voluptatibus fluere: Cogita, filiorum nos modestia delectari, Vernularum
licentia; illos disciplina tristiori cotineri, horum ali audaciam. Idem tibi de
Deo liqueat, bonuno virum in deliciis non habet; experitur, indurat, sibi illum
praeparat. Seneca (de Providentia.)

Nay, more then all this, should we grant that the Cornu Copia, or affluence of
the Goods of Fortune makes one step, or gradation in the ascent to the Palace
of Temporal Happiness: yet can we not infer, that Vicious men are therefore
nearer to the top, then those indigent and tatterd Lazarusse's, that ly
grovelling below, because they are mounted thereon; since, as Iamblicus (in
Protrept.) has most prudently observed, Malice ever drinks the greatest part
of her own poison; since the continually excruciating torture, resulting from
the sense of their own impiety, ten times more dejects them, toward the abyss
of misery, then the fruition of those goods can advance them; since that
sharpbeaked Vultur, an Evil Conscience, never cease day nor night to
dilacerate their hearts, but racks them into a most severe condemnation of
themselves, which doubtless is the keenest arrow in the quiver of Divine
Revenge, and that affliction which best defines the terrible essence of Hell.

To all which we may justly superadd this, that the brightest and longest days
of Fortune have ever closed in the blackest and most tragical nights of Sorrow;
that the Plays of Libertines have always proved Come-tragedies, and their
pompous Masks finished in dismal Catastrophes; nor can the records of the whole
world produce one Example of Sinful Greatness, that has not, either before,
or at his eternal Adieu, by woeful experiment manifested the truth of this
maxim; That none can ever arrive at the Elysium of true Felicity, who
constantly pursue it through the gardens of Sensuality: that the Rose of
happiness grows on the prickly stem of Virtue: and that the just discharge of
our duties to God and Man, in all things, to the utmost of our abilities, is
the only means of acquiring that Philosophers stone, Content, the only Summum
Bonum in nature.

Lastly, as to that seeming (...) that the hand of Gods Bounty is observed to
be extended early and long on the heads Article 6. The Reason, wherefore Divine
Providence consers Good things on Evil men.
of Impious men; but, on the contrary, that of Justice either late, or not at
all, in this life: though we grant the Question, yet shall we soon salve the
scruple, by considering, that his Providence observes this method, for two
important Reasons: First in respect of themselves, and Secondly in respect of
the Virtuous. (1.) Of themselves; God, in order to the manifestation of his
infinite Goodness, therefore conferr's a plentiful portion of his benefits
upon them, that by the blandishments of their sense he might allure them to a
desire of those delights, whose pleasantness consists in this, that they
infinitely transcend the apprehension of Sense; and that the fragrant odor of
his temporal Mercies might attract their minds to the affectation of Virtue,
and thence lead their thoughts on to a grateful and reverentiall Contemplation
of him, that both made them out of nothing, and bestowed them freely, upon no
motive of worthiness in the receivers: and in order to the manifestation of his
Longanimity, and Clemency, he therefore suspends their punishment, ut tempus
habeant, quo in se descendant, atque resipiscant, as the holy Father expresses
it, that they may have both time enough to discover, and opportunities to
repent and reform their heinous enormities. (2.) Of the Virtuous, in a
threefold respect; first, that he might become an Exemplar of mansuetude,
patience, and longsuffering to them; secondly, that the tyranny and oppression
of Ungodly men might serve to actuate and exercise those Virtues in them which
otherwise had wanted an opportunity to display their Sovereign and
all-conquering efficacy: and thirdly, that they might extract to themselves a
Cordial out of the poisonous Fate of others: i. e. when they shall observe
those, who daily bathed themselves in rivers of Voluptuousness, to be by Divine
revenge on a sudden precipitated into the black Sea of misery, they may
recruite their Confidence, that the same Justice will, in his own appointed
time, more then compensate their momentany objections, and convert their night
of obscurity and trouble into a glorious day of interminable Delectation.

Having thus precisely dissected the Apparent Good, which Divine Article 7.
Those apparent Evils, which Providence Divine consignes to Virtuous men,
anatomized; and found to be real Goods intrinsecally.
Providence allots to Evil men, as their portion to this life; and found it to
be, as painted fire, bright but comfortless, or such at best, whose Abuse
aggravates the Guilt, and upon consequence, the misery of the receivers: it
will no less conduce to the rectification of our distorted judgments, and so
to the cure of our depraved Affections, to anatomize also the other Ventricle
in the heart of the objection, viz. the Apparent Evil frequently assigned to
Good men.

If Felicity be the Daughter of Virtue, as the Philosopher most judiciously,
(...), perfectae virtutis actio est beatitudo (magn. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 4.)
and Virtue the daughter of Wisdom, as the same, (...) (...), Virtutes omnes,
in Animae part rationali sint, necesse est, (lib. ejusd. cap. 1.) and if the
Wisdom of God be infinitely more perfect then the Wisdom of man, as all
justly confess; then assuredly can they only be happy, who conform their Wills
to the Will of the Highest Wisdom: now Good men, in all conditions of their
lives, and all the changes of Fortune, still submit their desires and
affections to the Will of Divine Providence; therefore are they constantly
happy, and consequently those seeming Evils, which befall them, prove real
Goods, that implicit resignation of themselves, and that equanimity wherewith
they entertain those External Evils, instantly altering their malignity,
dulcifying their amaritude, and converting them unto Intrinsic Blessings.

This Argument (without ostentation, I profess it) was the ground Article 8.
The Authors Sanctuary wherein he secured his mind from discontent, in all those
storms of Calamities, which our late Civil war showred upon him.
upon which I erected me a Sanctuary to secure my judgment in, when the
multiplied storms of Adversity, raised by the impetuous winds of our Civil
Wars, had beaten me from all other probability of shelter. For taking this for
my Hypothesis, that man, in this life, wants only so much of Happiness, as he
does of Obedience, so much of Content, as he does of absolute Conformity to the
good will of Providence; I inferred, that no man can be truly miserable, but
he that makes himself so, nor any man really happy, but he that has pared off
the bias of Affection from his mind, and fitted it to run smooth and even in
the level of Indifferency, as to the Goods of Fortune, having no other mark,
but Fiat Voluntas Dei. And, having first humbly implored the assistance of
Divine Grace to enable me to reduce this excellent lesson into practice, I wore
it as a sacred charm or Pentacle on my breast, and thereby become Shot-free
from all the bullets of an angry Fortune: nor did I feel that to be a
considerable loss, which the conquest and rapine of an insulting Enemy called
my total ruin; but could with more constant and internal alacrity sing Paeans
to Heaven, for this victory over my Pusillanimity, then did the triumphant Foe,
for his, over my Royal Master and his loyal Armies.

Let us take away those things, which the delusion of Sensuality call's Evils,
and Virtue must then be, what the mistaken Article 9. V^^t^e, a mere c^^m^ra,
without the occu^ssion of those things, which S^nsuality calls (...).
Libertine will have it, a bare Notion, or empty Term, as near of kin to a
Chimera, as one of Plato's Ideas: For what would become of Magnanimity, if
there were no danger? what of Patience, if there were no sufferings, etc.
Marcet sine adversario virtus, and every man knows that the Insignia, or
Coat-arms of a gallant mind, is a Palm tree, that thrives by oppression, with
an orient Pyropus, or Carbuncle suspended on its trunk, which deradiates the
most refulgent splendour in the darkest night, as St Austin (lib. 2. de doctrina
Christiana, cap. 16.) out of ancient Lapidaries has affirmed, and Bernhard.
Caesius (de mineral. p. 556.) on the testimonies of many modern Mineralogists,
asserted. This the Orator glanced at, when in derision of their ignorant
Malice, who had attempted to blast the Laurel on Cato's front; he smiles out
this character of a well-ordered Mind: At etiam co negotio M. Catonis
splendorem maculare voluer unt, ignari quid gravitas, quid integritas, quid
magnitudo animi, quid denique Virtus valenet; quae in tempestate saevae quiet a
est, and lucet in tenebris, and pulsa loco manet tamen, at que haeret in
patria, splendet que per se semper, neque alienis unquam sordibus obsolescit.
(or at. pro P. Sextio.)

I said, those things which the delusion of Sensuality call's Article 10. The
Sense, no competent Criterion of the Good or Evil of the mind.
Evils; for it is no Kenodox or novelty of my own, that the palate of the body is
no competent judge of the sweets of the Soul; that the bitterest Potions, are
the most magisterial Julebs to extinguish the fevers of Lust; and the
abstinence of Poverty, the surest prophylactick to prevent the Tumors and
Instammations of the mind; that a wise man is sensible of more true delight* in
one Affliction, then Nero or Lucullus ever felt in all the pompous and studied
luxury of their lives; and that the tears of sorrow are not half so Salt, nor
corroding, as those expressed by immoderate Laughter. This those Heroes well
experimented, who even in the Calmes of their state, have voluntarily cast all
the Goods of Fortune over board; as unnecessary luggage, that might hazard
sinking of their vessels, in a storm, but could never pass for current
merchandise on the exchange of Happiness. What a voluminous Legend could a good
Collector make of those Princes, who have gladly resigned their imperial
Scepters, for a more portable and smoother Shepherds staff? of those
Potentates, who have with smiles quitted the noise and tumult of their
magnificent Palaces, for the soft murmurs of a Wilderness? of those Croesusses,
who have cut off the ponderous bunches of Wealth from their own wearied backs,
and reduced their spacious Treasuries to a scrip and bottle? of those holy
Prelates, who have relinquished their Episcopia, or ample Sees, and retired
themselves to some cool and silent Hermitage? How many victorious Generals
have thrown down their leading staves, in the heads of their mighty and
obedient Armies, and withdrawn into obscure Cottages, there to learn a nobler
militia of conquering their rebellious Passions? How many Noble Persons, as
high in Honor and Power, as Ambition it self could wish, have cheerfully torn
off their venerable Purple, and disguised themselves in contemptible rags;
changed their august and Dithyrambick Titles into a vulgar and easy
Monosyllable; and left their native soil for a contemplative recess in some
empty Island? in fine, of those Worthies, who in their spring of life, their
canicular days of pleasure, the Jubilee of unphysick't Health, the Zenith of
Riches and Honor; have contentedly shook hands with all this vexatious Vanity,
and fervently courted not only the loathsome solitude of Prison, but even that
affrighting Sceleton, Death: as those things which promised more real content,
then all their former enjoyments? And since they did all this upon no
necessity, but that compulsion of their own rectified Wills: what reason have
we to account Poverty, Exile, Sorrow, obscurity, sickness, Imprisonment, nay
Death it self, such absolute Evils of themselves, as never to be alienated from
their malignity, and converted into Goods, by the Chemistry of a Virtuous mind?
What reason have we to conceive, that those Generous Spirits would have
complained of the injustice of Gods Providence; if he had bin pleased to have
allotted them the same apparent Evils, and consigned them to the same
sufferings? The Wiseman considers, that if the rapine of his Enemies, the
oppression of Tyranny, the devouring jaws of Fire, or other sinister Accident
deprive him of his estate; yet notwithstanding he loses nothing, that was
properly his own: if he be tormented in his body; that his rags of Flesh are
torn off, his mud-walled Cottage shattered, but that impatible Tenant, his
Soul, remains whole and invulnerable. In a word, as the tall Olympus advances
his intemerated head above the clouds, and with a smooth front looks down upon
the pageantry of Thunder, and other vaporing Meteors of the Aer: so does the
head of a Virtuous Person stand above the Clouds of Misfortunes, and with a
magnanimous bravery bid defiance to Adversity, in all the Foggs of trouble
still conserving the serenity of his mind imperturbed. Nihil accidere bono viro
mali potest. Non miscentur Contraria. Quemadmodum tot amnes tantum superne
dejectorum imbrium, tanta medicatorum vis sontium, non mutant saporem maris,
nec remittunt quidem: ita adversarum rerum impetus viri fortis non vertit
animum, manet in statu, and quicquid evenit, in suum colorem trahit. Est enim
omnibus externis potentior. Nec hoc dico, non sentit illa, sed vincit, and
alioquin quietus placidusque contra incurrentia attollitur: Omnia adversa,
exercitationes put at, etc. says the grave Seneca (lib. de Providentia.) Who
having tuned his meditations to this heigh Key, falls not only into a profuse
Encomium of that saying of his admired Cynick, Demetrius; Nihil mihi videtur
infelicius co, cui (...). Bias.
nil unquam evenit adversi, nothing in my judgment can be more unhappy, then
he who never tasted of Adversity: but into this Parodox also, that the
condition of Regulus, in his nailed barrel, was as far from real Infelicity, as
that of the great Mecaenas solacing his pamperd limbs on a couch of down. For
weighing the constant and invincible Patience of the one, against the perpetual
Anxiety or civil war in the breast of the other, he concludes, quod dubium sit,
an electione Fati data, plures Reguli nasci, quam Mecaenates velint; that it
may be disputed whether or no, if men might elect their own Fates, the greater
number would not rather choose to be born under the angry stars of the former,
then the slattering constellation of the latter: so indifferent are those
things to a Wise man, which the judgment of the Sense has denominated Good
and Evil.

This magnanimous temper of a Virtuous Mind, those Idiots Article 11. The
A^heists objection, that God ought, in justice, always to preserve Good men
from suffering Evil; expunged.
never so much as heard of, who have objected; that it would have bin more
consistent with the justice of Divine Providence, rather constantly to have
preserved Good men from affliction, then to subject them to the malice and
oppression of Evil men, and afterward seem to vindicate their integrity, and
compensate their sufferings, by a late remuneration of happiness, and the
punishment of their Oppressors.

For even Good men themselves esteem those acute Afflictions, as a Diploma or
Testimonial of their genuine Education in the Academy of Virtue, and, like
Veteran Soldiers, produce the scars of their wounds, as so many indeleble
characters of Valor, and consequently of Honor. They look upon their smartest
stripes, as the fair impresses of Gods paternal Affection; and return him a
patient submission to his frequent chastisements, as the most grateful
sacrifice of Gratitude, their frail and indigent condition can afford. They
account their temporal Dejections, not only an undeniable symbol of his Special
Favor, in this military state; since they manifest them to be elected by him,
non ad mollitiem, sed ad tolerantiam, not to dull and inglorious effeminacy,
but honorable hardship, and masculine atchievments: but also as an (...), or
Earnest of their eternal advancement, in the Jubilee, when he shall distribute
his triumphant wreaths of Laurel, such whose Verdure shall know no decay, till
the impossible period of Eternity. Thus the Valiant, with noble emulation,
contend for priority in enterprises of the highest difficulty and most eminent
danger; and then think themselves in most grace and reputation with their
General, when he vouchsafes them the honor of the Forlorn Hope, and consignes
them to encounter a whole Host of Deaths. Thus the Lacedemonian yongsters
measured the affection of their Parents, and Tutors, not by their indulgence;
but the severity of their chastisements: and embraced their smartest
flagellations as welcome opportunities to experiment their Constancy. And thus
the Wives of Ruscia estimate their Husbands love, not by the frequency of their
Conjugall Embraces, but of their Castigations: and then bewail themselves as
more then half repudiated, when their matrimonial Lords neglect to afford them
the benevolence of the Lash. And yet for all this shall man, noble man, who is
the Soldier, Son, and spouse of Providence, so far forget his courage,
constancy, and duty, as to repine against those things as Evil; which are, by
the Supreme Wisdom, intended for his Good, nay which a mind, imbued with the
sovereign Tincture of Virtue, has a power, were they real Evils, to convert
into inestimable Benefits?

I do not only assent unto, but gratefully applaud their judgments, Article
12. The Summum bonum of this life, consistent in a full consormity of our wills
to the Divine will.
who have defined the essence of Good and Evil, in this life, by the Truth or
Falsehood of Opinion; experience informing me, that the Sensual Appetite of some
apprehends many things under the title of absolute and transcendent Goods,
which the Rational Appetites of others abhor, as positive and detestable Evils.

And therefore, when the soul sits in consult upon the Election of Good, she
ought first to wipe her eyes from all the dust of Sensual Prejudice, and
resolve that the Vote of Temporal interest shall go for nothing, but
disturbance and seduction; fixing her Cogitations only upon that
pathognomonick, or proper and inseparable, and therefore infallible sign, by
which the Wisdom of God has described what is really Good; and that is, an
indifferency to all objects but himself, or a free and total resignation of
our Wills to his, or more precisely, if he has appointed it.

This most excellent lesson, that Stoical Emperor, Marcus Article 13. An
excellent meditation of Marcus Antoninus, concerning the Good and Evil
occurrent to man in this life.
Antoninus had often read by the mere light of Nature, and endeavoring to
reduce it into practice, whispers this maxim to himself: (...); opinioni autem
mali aut boni adsentire men's non debet (lib. de seipso 5. numer. 18.) and in
one short meditation states the whole Controversy concerning the good and
evil occurrences to man; which for that reason, I here present to the Reader.
Dicit aliquis: infelicem me, cui hoc acciderit! quinimo, felicem me, qui hunc
casum sine dolor perferam, and nec praesentibus frangar, nec futura
extimescam! Nam unicuique tale quid potuit accidere: at non cujusvis erat, sine
dolor cum casum excipere. Cur igitur illud potius infortunio, quam hoc
felicitati adscribts? Aut cur id infelicitatem hominis appellas, in quo nihil
mali passa est hominis natura? An vero tibi humanae naturae damnum videri
potest id, quod non est contra propositum naturae ejus? Quod ergo naturae
propositum esse didicisti? Number casus iste efficere poterit, quo minus sis
justus, magnanimus, temperans, prudens, circumspectus, tutus ab errore,
verecundus, liber? aut adimere omnino quicquam eorum, quae hominis naturae sunt
propria? Proinde quoties inciderit quicquam quod ad dolorem te provocet;
recordare ^ujus praecepti: non illud quod accidit infortunium vere esse, sed
quod fortiter illud feras, id felicitati tribuendum esse. (lib. 4. numero 31.)

Some man [perchance] says, that I am unhappy, to whom this infortune has
happened! Nay, rather may he say, that I am happy, who can endure this misfortune
without grief; and am neither dejected with the present, nor afraid of future
Accidents. For the like might have befalne any other man: but 'twas not in the
power of every one to sustain that misfortune without grief. Why, therefore,
do you ascribe that rather to misfortune, then this to Felicity? or why
account that to be an infelicity of man, wherein the Nature of man has
suffered nothing of Evil? Can that seem to you to be an Injury to Humane
Nature, which is not contrary to the intention thereof? What, therefore, have
thou learned the Intention of Nature to be? Can this misfortune effect, that
thou may be less just, magnanimous, temperate, prudent, circumspect,
superior to error, modest, free? Or can it take from thee any of those things,
which are proper to the Nature of man? So often, therefore, as any Accident
shall occur, which may provoke thee to grief; remember this Precept: that what
happens, is not truly Misfortune; but that thou can bear it nobly, is a
Happiness.

More then this, I can not, need not say, in order to the refutation of this
Objection: and therefore I remit the unsatisfied to the more profound, elegant,
and ample discourse of the learned Mornaeus Du Plessis (lib. de veritate
Christianae Religionis, cap. 12.) on the same subject; and leave the satisfied
to the calm enjoyment of their persuasion.

CHAP. VI. The Mobility of the Term of Man's Life, asserted.
SECT. I.
HAving thus by Apodictical and uncontrollable Reasons made it manifest, that
all things in the Universe, Article 1. The Affinity of this Theorem to the
precedent, intimated: and the necessary division thereof into a specifical and
individual consideration.
as well Generals, as Particulars, Contingents as Necessaries, are in the
means, manner, opportunity and finality of their Operations, precisely
predetermined, disposed, and procured by the General Providence of God; that
all Occurrences of every individual man's life, are the prescripts and
consignations or allotments of his Special and Paternal Providence; and by the
mere Light of Nature dispelled all those clouds, which either ancient
Ethnicisme, or modern Atheism has exha^ed from the abyss of Hell, to obscure
the splendour of both those excellent truths: it remains only, that we deduce
the influence of Divine Providence down to the Catastrophe, or Exit of life, or
prove the extension of it to the point of Death; and endeavor a compendious and
plain decision of that tedious and enigmatical Controversy, An terminus Vitae
humanae sit immobilis? Whether the period of every individual man's life be so
immoveably fixed by the Special Providence of God, that it can be neither by any
negligence, immoderate and inordinate use of those things Physicians call the
Six Nonnaturals, or sudden Casualities, anticipated or abbreviated; nor by
prudence, temperance, convenient Medicaments, or caution, prolated or prolonged?

For the first; viz.

That God is the sole Moderator* though not the Author of Article 2. The
reasons of the Authors concise tractation of the first part.
Death (for reason will not endure that we conceive him to have created a
Privation;) or, more plainly, that the hand of his Providence guides the dart
of that inevitable and victorious Enemy to life; this is a position so
frequently and amply illustrated by the pens of many the most learned and
judicious men of all ages, religions, and professions; and so genuinely and
directly inferrible from the Context and importance of those Arguments formerly
introduced, in order to the Demonstration of the interest of Providence, even
in the smallest interludes of Nature, and most apparently fortuitous effects of
all subordinate Causes: that, should we run out into any profuse probation
thereof, in this place, the most patient and candid Reader could not but frown
at the attempt, and justly censure it, non only as unnecessary and
supercrogatory, but also as scandalous and derogatory to his own Dialectical
and Collective habilities. And therefore humbly referring him as well to his
own easy recognition of notions formerly collected from the lecture of other
more mature and nervous Discourses on the same Theorem; as his familiar
Inductions upon many propositions inspersed upon the leaves of this our cold
and dull Decembers Exercise: I shall, in avoydance of an undecent Chasme, or
Vacuity, insert only two concise and obvious Arguments, as Corollaries, or
annexes inservient to the same persuasion. Article 3. The moderation of Death
by Special Providence Divine, a^gued from the impossibility of the moderation
thereof by any other power.


Argument I.
The life, and consequently the Death of every man necessarily depends upon the
absolute Will of the Creator, and so upon the Decrees or resolves of his
Providence; or upon some other Principle extraneous, alien, and superior to the
nature of man; or upon man himself. Not upon any Third or Neutral Principle;
for that must be either the Epicureans Fortune; or the Stoics Anus Fatidica or
Fate; or Homers Lottery; or Pythagoras his (...), mentioned by Plutarch (de
placit. 1.) or the Jews Angelus mortis, or their terrible she Devil Zilith
described by our many-tongued Gregory (in tract. de Episcopo puerorum, out of
the Glossa Talmud, in Nidda, fol. 24) and erroneously conceived, by Gassarel
(Unheard of Curiosities, page 317.) to be the same with Lucina of the Romans,
for the one was thought propitious to parturient women, the other so hostile
and malignant, that the Hebrew Wives, so soon as they fell in travel, caused
this proscription to be written on the door of their bedchamber, Adim,
Chavah, chouts Lilith; Adam, Eve, keep out Lilith; or the Astrologers Helec and
Alcocoden, and the like (...) of the Planets called (...) or Fridariae, derided
by Archangelus a Burgo novo (in Comment. in dogmat. Cabalist.) and Scalger (in
Comment. in Manilium) or the Numbers, Ideas, or grand Revolution of Plato; or
the Malus Deus of the Manachees; or Helena, alias Selene, of Simon Magus; or
Hesiods Pandora; or the great Beldam Mylitta, alias Alytta, of the Ethnicks; or
the Turks Nassub, alias Ctusura, which signifies the Goddess Fortune; or
Paracelsus his Anima mundi Platonica, or rather the Macrocosmical Harmony of
the Universe, and the Microcosmical Concordance with the invisible signatures
of the Ascendent; or that Hermetico-magical Lamp of life and death, lately
invented and cried up by Ernestus Burchgravius, but most judiciously
extinguished by Sennertus (de Consensu Chymicorum cum Galen. cap. 18.) or that
Internal man of Paracelsus, named Ens syderium, Olympicum, Gabalim, etc. by
that vain admirer and promoter of Hermetical Follies, Oswaldus Crollius (in
Basil. Chym. praefat. admonit. p. 6. 4. and 65.) or the implacable Strix, or
Erinnys of the Gentiles; or, finally, some such fantastique Hobgoblin, that
has no more of reality, then what it borrows from the confused and obscure
idea of it self, conceived in the luxuriant womb of a perturbed or deluded
Imagination: but every sober man already knows, that all these are absolute
Chimaera's, hatched in the adled brains of mad men, Poets, and idolatrous
Pagans; and so below our laughter, much more our serious Confutation. Not upon
Man himself, or any domestic Conservatory essentially inherent to his Nature.
For that absurdity once conceded, entangles our reason in two the highest
Impossibilities imaginable* (1) it confounds the Relative Maxims of Nature,
breaks her chain of Dependence, and inferrs a second Self-existence beside
Divinity; for, dreaming that a Principiate Entity actually existent, gave to it
self existence; that a Future something derives its (...), or Futurition
immediately and solely from it self; and that nothing can, by its own power,
attain to be something, i. e. that which is neither Potentia, nor Actus, can
endow it self with the perfection of both Power and Act; we must be carried
upon this rock, that there is in the World a second something (...), Non
principiate, Causeless, and Self-sufficient, besides God; which is a falsehood
far beyond the two Principles of all things imagined by the Manichees, and more
ridiculous then the Devils promise to make our Savior Monarch of the World.
(2) It imports an absolute power in man to make himself immortal; a Delusion
that never found entertainment in the brain of the most desperate
Hypochondriack, nor durst the Father of lies ever suggest it to his most
credulous vassals. It follows therefore of pure necessity, that as God is the
Author of life; so also can he alone dispose of the issues of Death, and that
the end, as well as the beginning and mutations of all things are subject to
the moderation of his Providence. Article 4. The same demonstrated, from the
necessary dependence of all natural motion in its beginning, continuation, and
period, on the will of the First ^over.


Argument 2.
A confessed Verity it is, that all Natural Motion must proceed from one First
Motor, which can be no other but God, until we can find out something coequal
to him in Eternity; and a position never yet disputed, that the life of man is
a Natural Motion, to which the Apostle seems to allude in his sacred axiom,
(...), in God we live, move and have our being (Act. 17. ver. 28.) and of
parallel certainty it is, that every motion has its determinate beginning,
duration, and period, dependent on the Will of the First Mover: therefore must
the end as necessarily as the beginning and continuation of man's life, his
Death as well as his conception, nativity, and maturity be certainly
commensurated, desined, and limited by the Special Providence of God. Frequent
glimpses of this Argument have I perceived in the mounments of the most
Ethnical Philosophers; nor shall our thoughts want the patronage of great
probability, if we conjecture, that our Patriarch, Galen (in most other things,
but weakly armed against their censure, who have assaulted his memory with the
detestable Epithet, '(...), an Atheist of the highest Classis) had his mind
touched with the same Magnet, at that time, when he wheeled about from his old
position of a mere Naturalist, and pointed directly at the pole of Divine
Providence, in these words, (...) (2. de usu part.) God has done all things,
that he had formerly decreed to do.

SECT. II.
For the second;

MOre then sufficient reason had I, to call it a Tedious and Article 1. A
transient discovery of the almost insuperable Difficulties to be encountered in
the worthy and satisfactory solution of this problem, whether the Term of man's
life be Moveable, or Fatal; premised by way of Apology for the Authors unequal
judgeme^t: and his purpose of taking a middle way between the absolute Fatality
of the Stoic, and the mere Fortune of the ^picuream.
Aenigmatical Controversy. For, first, the obscurity of the Subject (being
such whose clear imperceptibility has worthily listed it among the (...), or
secrets of Gods Council, proposed rather to excite and entertain our
reverential Wonder, then exercise our saucy Curiosity) has unhinged the brains
of most, who have essayd to explain it, and lost their judgments in a
wilderness of various opinions, discrepant (...), as far as heaven and earth
each from other, and left future enquiry instructed rather what to avoid, then
what to sollow: insomuch that the learned and profound Job. Beverovicius, whose
slame of scrutiny had kindled the most erudite and heroical Wits, on this side
the line, into a desire and attempt to afford him satisfaction in this
particular; when he had received, perused and indifferently perpended their
several Epistolical responses, found himself still perplex't with his former
tremor of Scepticisme, and therefore confessed; super hac re nuper plures
consului, qui an sibi ipsis satisfecerint nescio, mihi certe penitus
satisfacere non potuerunt; in tanta it aque opinionum varietate equidem fere
dixerim cum Xenophonte apud Varronem, Hominis est hec opinari, Dei scire. And
again, whosoever deserves the Laurel at this Olympic exercise, by deciding the
quaestion on the side of Truth; must first reconcile those inveterate
Antipathies between absolute Fate and man's Freewill: must clearly distinguish
between the certain Prescience, and immutable Predestination, or
Predetermination, of the Divine Intellect and Will, (a task not to be
undertaken after dinner, nor performed upon one leg; as must soon appear to
him, who sufficiently excogitates, how hardly the blunt edge of man's
understanding can divide betwixt the Praevidence of God, and his positive
Decrees settled from all eternity: since Cognition, Election, Volition, and
Decretion make but one simple and entire act in his Intellect; nor can reason
make out, how God can Foresce mere Contingents, while they are yet in the
nothing of Futurity, unless because he has pre-ordained the means, place,
time, and other circumstantial requisites to their respective Contingencies)
must determine that troublesome Doubt of the Schoolmen, whether any of Gods
Decrees are Hypothetical or Conditionate, and so subject to mutation upon man's
observation, or non-observation of the Condition, or proviso on his part to be
performed? and, lastly, must solve that Scruple, An Scientia conditionata
certam ponit futurorum scientiam, or, An condition at a Dei volunt as ullum
faciat decretum de futurorum eventu? Whether the hypothetical or conditionate
Will of God (if any such there be) does import an absolute and immutable
Decree, concerning the event of things to come? Problems, about which not only
the gravest Philosophers have stretched the membranes of their brains, and with
great anxiety hack't and slash't for many ages together; but even the Church
her self has disputed so hotly, that she has rent her seamless coat of Faith
into such numerous and wide Schisms, that we her sons may sooner expect the
conversion of the Jews, then a full reconciliation and reunion of all her
Sects. Nor am I subject to so uncurable a Phrensy of Vanity, as not to know how
immense a disproportion lies between the utmost extent of my short judgment,
and the center of the necrest of these Abstrusities; but acknowledging the
decision of any one of them as far above my Presumption, as Capacity, I think
it both honor and satisfaction enough for me, to have collected so much light
from the beams of Mersennus, Episcopius and others, as may serve to conduct the
mind of the ingenious Reader into a middle way betwixt the Absolute Fatality of
the Stoics, on one extreme; and the absolute Fortune of the Epicureans, on the
other. The First whereof strains the cord of Predestination up to the height of
inevitable Necessity; and so leaves nothing in the power either of Man's
Free Will, or the conspiracies of Second Causes; nay chain's up the hands of
the First Cause in fetters of Adamant, according to that of the Poet.

Fatis agimur, cedite fatis.
Non sollicitae possunt curae
Mutare rati stamina fusi.
Quicquid patimur mortale genus,
Quicquid agimus, venit ex alto.
Non illa Deo vertisse licet
Quae nexa suis currunt Causis.
By Fate we are impelled; submit
To what the Destinies think fit.
That thread, by 'th Fatal Damsels spun,
By our Cares can nere b' undone.
What we act, what undergo,
From their fixed Decrees does slow.
Jove himself cannot control
What does from linked Causes roll.
As also that of Sencca (de providentia, where he had the reason to speak it:)
Quicquid est, quod nos sic vivere jussit, sic mori: eadem necessitate and Deos
alligat. irrevocabilis humana pariter ac divina cursus vehit, ille ipse omnium
Condiror ac Rector scripsit quidem Fata, sed sequitur. semper paret: semel
jussit. The Others cut it quite asunder, and so relaxing the ligaments of
Providence Divine, leave all Events to the loose and undetermined results or
hits of mere Chance: but both concurring in the most bloody Error of
Irreligion. But the concernement of our present Theme will lead us into a more
particular, express, and ample enquiry, how that long Civil war betwixt these
three different Notions of Fate, Fortune, and Free Will, I may be conciliated
and brought to a full Combination and Consistence with Divine Providence.

In the mean time, that we may, both with more decent Method, and perspicuity,
attain to some verisimilous (at least) Article 2. Two praevious considerable,
necessary to the ^ight understanding and cons^quent discussion of the question.
solution of our present Problem, viz. Whether the Term of man's life (in
individuo) be so immoveably prefixed by the Decrees of Divine Providence, as
that neither temperance or care on man's part can extend, nor the violence of
second Causes, situate without the o^b of his mo^eration, accelerate it?
Necessary it is, that we seriously examine and search into the marrow of two
things conductive to the right stating, and consequently the right
understanding of the Question: (1) What we are to understand by the Term of
Life: (2) In what sense we are to understand this Term to be sixth, or moveable.

What we are to understand by the Term of Life.
Concerning the First; obvious it is, that all things, or causes inservient
both to the Conservation of life and the adduction of Article 3. The necessary
relation of all Causes both of life and death, to three General heads, viz.
Necessary, Fortuitous, Supernatural; supports the discrimination of the Term of
life into Supernatural, Natural, and Accidentary: and the impertinency of the
consideration of the Supernatural Term, to the present scope.
its period, Death, fall under the contents of three General heads; for either
they must refer to those that are Necessary, or such as, by the ordinary course
of Nature, no man can subsist without, to which classis belong our Aliment,
Aer, sleep, etc. or (2) Non necessary or Fortuitous, which no way conduce to
the Fomentation or fuel of our Vital Flame, but point blank to the Extinction
of it; and therefore the instinct of nature persuades every man to avoid them;
such are Shipwracks, stabbs, shots, precipices, halters, etc. causes of
immature, sudden and violent deaths: or (3) Merely Supernatural, or the Will
of God, which as it is impossible (without Special Divine Revelation) for us to
foreknow, so also to alter, or prevent. Upon these three pillars was it, that
Laurentius Joubertus erected his triple Difference of the Term of man's life;
making one Supernatural, such as the Breath of our nostrils was pleased to
assign to most of the Antediluvian Patriarchs, or Seminaries of Humanity,
either in order to the more expedite multiplication of mankind, to the more
advantageous invention and propagation of Arts and Sciences, or for some other
considerable respect, at which our ignorance can only squint by conjecture:
which being long since cancelled, Art sits down in a contented despair to
renovate, nor can the records of the world afford us the story of any
impudence, that durst rant so high, as to promise it, except that of a certain
Mountebanck Greek, derided by Galen, and our late Nugipolyloquides, Paracelsus;
both which experimentally confuted their own unpardonable Arrogance, before
their sands had run out 50 years. Another Natural, which Physiologie defines by
that space of time, during which our radical Balsam, or the oleaginous Fuel of
our vital Lamp, maintains the inn^te Heat, or Flame of life, until the total
exhaustion of the one, causes a total privation of the other; or, more
plainly, that circle of time, which comprehends the seven Segments or Ages of
man; which, though prestitute and limited, by the Governor of Nature,
according to the compute of the Psalmist, to 80. years, of Plato to 81. of the
Egyptians to 100. (Caelius Rodiginus, 19. antiq. Lect. cap. 21. and Ioh.
Langius, lib. 1. Epist. Medicinal. 79.) of the best of the Sibylls to a 100. as
is expressed in those 2. verses corrected by the incomparable Salmasius
(Pliniarum observat. page 77.)

(...)
(...);
And of the ancient Jews, to 120. (Joseph. Antiq. Iudaic. lib. 1.) is yet left
to some considerable latitude, and has more or less of Duration, respective to
the more or less durability of the Principles of life, i. e. the Eucrasy, or
Dyscrasy of the body, in every individual; provided that neither the oil be
inquinated by crude, or putrid Supplies, nor prodigally depredated by
immoderate intension of its consumer, the Flame, nor that immaturely either
suffocated, or wasted by Diseases, or suddenly extinguished by violent
Accidents; which make the third Difference, or Accidentary Term of life.

But as for the first branch of this Ternary, the Metaphysical, or Supernatural
Term of man's life, dependent on the Divine Will immediately; since according to
the doctrine of Nicholaus Florentinus (in Sermon.) the Conciliator (in different.
Medicis) and Joubertus (in Errorib. popular.) it concerns only the first Age of
the World: this place may very conveniently want any farther consideration
thereof; nor can it much avail to the achievement of our design, to insist
upon more then the two last.

By the Term of life, therefore, we ought to understand either Article 4. The
proper import of the Natural Term of man's life: and also of the Accidental.
(1) that period of every individual man's days, which is caused by a sensible
decay, and total dissolution of the ligaments, which chain the Soul to the
Body; or, more expressly, by an extinction of his Vital Flame, naturally
succeeding upon a consumption of its Pabulum, or fuel, the Radical Moisture,
when both those Principles of life are permitted to their natural and proper
tenor, i. e. when no Preternatural Cause intervenes, and by Corruption
anticipates the dissolution of that Disposition or Temperament of the Elements
of the body, upon which the subsistence of life does necessarily depend: or (2)
the end of every man's life, in general, whenever, and by what means soever,
either Diseases, or violent and unexpected Accidents, introduced; without any
respect to the gradual and successive declination, and consequent cessation of
the Natural Temperament, in the marasmus of old age.

Now from the acceptance of the Term of Life, in the First signification,
there genuinly emerge Two Questions:

First, Whether this Term of life, which is circumscribed, per Article 5. The
result of our acceptance of the Term of life, in the first signification.
ipsius temperamenti defluxum and decursum, by the natural Deflux., or wearing
out of the requisite Temperament of the body, and which we may, without
impropriety, call a kind of mature, easy and spontaneous falling asunder of the
Ligaments of life; be absolutely and definitely fixed, so that God has
constituted to leave the nature of every Individual to its own moderation, nor
by any means to interrupt or alter its course prescribed: i. e. not by any
means to procure, that this Deflux of the Temperament should have more or less
duration, then what may naturally be expected from the more or less durability
thereof, dependent on the more or less perfect proportion, that the Passive and
Active Principles hold each to other; or, more plainly, that the Renitency or
Resistance of the Oil holds to the depredatory and consumptive Activity of the
Flame.

Secondly, if this Term of life be thus Fixed, and that God indeed has decreed
not to intend or prolong that Deflux of the Temperament, beyond the point of
its natural Durability; whether yet notwithstanding, without alteration of his
Decree of committing Nature to its own establish'^ course, he may not, being
thereunto moved by our repentance, prayers, and piety, cor^ect those
depravities, and repair those violent decays of that our temperamental
Constitution, occasioned by intemperance, diseases, extraneous Accidents, or
other means whatever; and so hinder the otherwise impendent immature
Collabascence, and precipitous Dissolution thereof? In a word; Whether, though
God has predetermined, that no man shall exceed that Term of life, to which
the Durability of his individual Temperament, or the strength of his particular
Constitution may, in probability, be extended; his Special Providence does not
yet suffer, that, by reason of putrefactive and destructive Preter-natural
Causes occurrent, the temperament may be vitiated, impaired, and ruined: and so
not hold out to that point of time, to which otherwise, in respect of its
primigenious and native condition, it might have lasted?

But if we understand the Term of life in the second signification; Article 6.
The consequence of our understanding the Term of life, in the second
signification.
then the Question must be: Whether the immature or preternatural Period of
every individual man's life, by what means soever, either disease, famine, war,
wounds, nausrage, decollation, suspension, suffocation, luxury, drunkeness,
solicitude, grief, etc. occasioned, be so precisely fixed by Destiny; that no
prudence or caution on his part can transpose, nor danger of fortuitous
Accidents invading, accelerate or prevert it? In short; Whether the Catastrophe
of every man's life be prescribed in the book of Fate.

In what sense we are to understand the Term of Man's Life to be Fixed or
Moveable.
As for the Second Preconsiderable; the Term of life may be Article 7. The
Fixation of the Term of life, acceptable in a double interest; viz. (1) in
respect to some Absolute Divine Decree, precedent even to Gods Prescience of al
Secondary or instrumental Causes: (2) to some Hypothetical Divine Decree, whose
mut^bility is suspended on the liberty of man's Will. And the indifferency of
either branch of the distinction to our instant design.
said to be Fixed in a twofold sense: (1) in respect to some positive Divine
Decree, antegredient or precedent not only to all conspiracies, but also the
Prescience of all Secondary or Instrumental Causes; whereby God has so
precisely fixed and limited a certain space, or time of life to every single
man, together with all relative Circumstances, as place, manner, or kind, and
cause of Death: that it is absolutely impossible to man, what means soever he
shall use to the contrary, in order to his preservation, or what dangers soever
he shall have formerly exposed himself unto, notwithstanding, either to prolong
his life beyond, or to fall before that Fatal Term. (2) In respect not to some
Absolute, but Hypothetical, or Conditionate Decree of God: i. e. such whose
mutation or accomplishment is suspended on the liberty, or Free Election of
man's Will, according as that, either being conducted by the manuduction of
Light Supernatural, or Divine Grace, shall pursue the real and true Good; or
being seduced by the delusion of its own sensual judgments, shall wander in
the devious tracts of Error, and so hunt after only apparent and false Good.
Now whether we understand this Conditionate Decree to be made and grounded upon
a certain and infallible prenotion of all concomitant things, circumstances,
manners, causes, and finally of man's election of and adherence unto Good, or
Evil objects, and his consequent Virtuous or vicious course of life: or whether
we understand it to be made without any such certain Prenotion, or Volition of
Prenotion at all; but yet with a deliberate and positive Sentence certainly to
be pronounced and executed in the fullness of time, or opportunity, when the
right use, or abuse of this Prerogative or Freedom of the Will, shall be in
actual determination, i. e. shall ripen the Suppositionality of the decree into
Absoluteness, and reduce the Possibility thereof into actual Necessity: the
distinction is not Material. For it can be of no considerable advantage to our
present attempt, whether of these two Notions we prefer; and that the reason
is, why we here omit to enquire, whether holds the nearest Cognation to truth.

From these premises has the judgment of man extracted three Article 8. Three
different opinions vulgarly extracted from the precedent Distinction.
different opinions.

The First, of those, who hold it as point of faith, that the Term of every
man's life, together with all means or Causes, immediate, mediate, remote,
circumstantial and corollary, or in any relation whatever pertinent thereto, is
absolutely immovable and Fatal; being precisely decreed by the immutable and
irresistible law of the Divine Will.

The Second, of those, who aver the absolute Fatality, or Fixation of every
individual man's Term of life, a Posteriori: but decline it a Priori, i. e. they
concede, that in truth the term of every man's life is appointed by the
irrevocable decree of Fate, in this respect, that it can never be extended or
spun out to the duration of one moment beyond that, to which the natural
condition of his particular Temperament promises him to attain: but not in this
respect, that it admits no possibility of Contraction or Abbreviation.

The Third, of those, who allow the Term of life to be Fatal indeed; yet upon
no higher a Necessity, then that of Gods mere Prenotion, or hypothetical
determination, respective to man's right use* or abuse of the Liberty of his
Will: and therefore not so fixed, but that it may be not only abbreviated but
also prolonged; non praesupposita ista aut praenotione, aut hypothesi citra
praenotionem.

And this is the most passant Division of men's dissenting opinions Article 9.
The convenient reduction of them to (...) only.
concerning this intricate Subject; but if we come with naked minds to examine
the state of the difference between the last and the second, we shall find them
concentral in the point of Mutability or Mobility: and therefore both
perspicuity and brevity persuade, that we gratefully adhere to that more
convenient reduction of all opinions concerning this Theorem, to two only,
offered by Joh. Beverovicius (Epist. ad Simon. Episcopium) in words of this
importance: Some maintain the Term of man's life to be fixed by the eternal and
immutable law of Destiny; and on the contrary, others contend that it is not so
fixed, but that it remains moveable as well forwards as backwards, not only
obnoxious to Decurtation or Anticipation, by depravities and exorbitances of
the Six Non-naturals, by Epidemical Diseases, or by a thousand unexpected
Knocks of unconstant Fortune; but also capable of Production or Postposition by
a temperate, anticachectical and cautious course of life.

Now as for the First of these Opinions; it is generally known Article 10. The
First opinion declared; and the principal Abettors thereof mentioned.
to have bin Canonical among the Stoics, who bound up the efficiency of all
things in the Universe, in the iron chains of Fate; beleiving all events
subject to so uncontrollable a necessity, that their prevention, suspension, or
alteration is not only above the hopes of man (whose virtuous endeavors,
piety, and prayers must therefore prove as fruitless and ineffectual toward
the Aversion; as vitiosities, impiety and profaneness toward the Attraction or
Acceleration of any misfortune predecreed) but even of God himself: whom though
they allow to have bin the Author of that sempiternal and irrepealable law of
Destiny, yet they deny him to have reserved to himself the prerogative of
exemption from the obligation thereof. This was the Creed of Philetas, when he
said* '(...),
(...)
(...).
-- Mortales superat quodcunque necesse est,
Vi solida; quia nec superos reveretur, in almis
Qui Coeli spatiis degunt sine luctibus aevum.
Of that old Poet, quoted by Cicero (de Fato) who said, quod fore paratum est,
id summum exuperat Jovem: and of that renowned Captain, Hector, when being
importuned by his wife not to hazard himself in a salley upon the Grecian
trenches, he conjured her fond fears into a resolved confidenco, that no sword
could reach his heart, but that of Fate, by this spell; Parce, precor, nimio
misera indulgere dolori;
Nam quis me, Fat is invitis, mittet ad Orcum?
Nullum equidem vitasse hominum dico ultima Fata.
Prithee, forbear thy needless grief; and know,
No hand can send me to the shades below,
Without the Fates assent. I hold it true,
What Fate has destined, no man can eschew.
As also of those Military men, mentioned by P. Gregorius Tholosanus (lib. 21.
de republ. cap. 8.) whose minds being seasoned with the same persuasion, that
the manner and moment of every man's Death is appointed by the immutable law of
Fate, and his lot inscribed in invisible Characters on his forehead; became of
so hard a temper, as to be wholly insensible of the threats of that terrible
Giant, Danger: nor did they account it other then a vanity, resulting from the
cowardice of Ignorance, to provide against the blows of War either by caution,
or defensive arms; urging the examples of many valiant Soldiers, who have bin
observed to have confronted whole showers of levelled bullets, shot from the
near engines of the advancing Foe, without a wound; and yet at last have fallen
by some petite and unexpected peble thrown from the sure sling of Destiny, even
then, when they seemed immured in the secure Citadel of Peace, and thought
their triumphant Laurels armor of proof even against thunder.

Occidis, Argivae quem non potuere phalanges
Sternere, nec Priami regnorum eversor Achilles.
Hic tibi mortis erant metae, etc. Virg. 12. Aeneid.
But, alas! it is not the Academy of the Stoics alone, that affords patronage
to this Error of Absolute Fatality; nor the Camp that only contends for the
propagation thereof; nor the politic institutions of that Secretary of Hell,
Mahomet, in his absurd Alcoran (cap. 6.) that only countenance the diffusion
thereof in these our days: for even the Schools of Christianity, in some parts,
have advanced the reputation thereof to so unreasonable and dangerous a height,
as to make it an Article of Faith, if not absolutely necessary, yet at least
collaterally conductive to Salvation; and this by Auctority of the Council of
Dort, which ratified the doctrine of their Apostle, Calvir, concerning Absolute
Predestination, and enjoined the public Assertion thereof to most of their
Divines of the last reformation.

I said, the Doctrine of Calvin concerning Absolute Predestination; Article 11.
The Stoical Fate; and the Calvinists Predestination, fully defined.
thereby, though tacitly, intimating my knowledge of the no small Disparity
between the Fate of the Stoics, and that propugned by many Christian Divines.
The one being, as Chrysippus has defined it, Sempiterna and indeclinabilis
series rerum, and catena, quae seipsam velvit, and perpetuo implicat, per
aeternos consequentiae ordines, ex quibus connexa est; A sempiternal and
indeclinable series, syntax, or chain of Causes, whose turnings, convolutions
and perpetual implications are dependent on it self, by those eternal orders of
consequence, of which it is made up and connected: the other, as the best of
School men has defined it, Pendens a Divino Consilio series, ordoque
caussarum; a series, or successive complexion and order of Causes, dependent on
the Will of God. From the just Collation of which two Definitions, our first
thoughts may collect, that the Difference between the Stoical and Theological
Fate, may be thus stated.

The Former, in some things, excludes Divinity from that Article 12. A full and
c^^ar discrimination of the Stoical, from the Theological Fate.
round or Circle of Causes, reserring all events, as well general, as
particular, to the mere subsequence of Natural Actives operating upon capable
Passives, subordinately connected unto, and so by successive influx necessarily
disposing each other to the production of those particular Effects, to the
Causation whereof their Natural Faculties were at first determinately
accommodated: and, in others, includes Divinity within it, i. e. confines his
Power and Will to that rigid and infringible Law of Necessity, excogitated by
his Wisdom from all eternity, and established by his Decrce, at the
inauguration of Nature to Existence. The Later makes the Will of God to be the
first link in the cha^n of Causes, and so superior to the restriction of
natural necessity dependent thereon. The Stoic, being a declared Enemy to the
Arbitrary Prerogative of God, adligeth the Energie of the First and Infinite
Cause to the capacity of Secondary and Finite; and, upon consequence, does
acknowledge neither the Liberty of his Will, nor the Absoluteness of his Power,
or Omnipotency. But, on the Contrary, the Christian look's up to heaven, as the
Councel-house, where the Instruments, opportunity, place and success of every
Action receive their Specification to this or that determinate purpose; to the
Arbitrary Resolve of God, as the Definite Sentence or Injunction; and on all
Second Causes, but as subordinate, and subalternally instrumental to the
punctual execution and accomplishment of the same: and, upon legal consequence,
concludes, that the Divine Will is absolutely Free, knowing no circumscription,
but that of the Divine Wisdom; that the mere Fiat of that Council, is the
Director, and Spring in the Engin^ of the World; and that the Author of Nature
has reserved to himself the Privilege of adding unto, detracting from,
intending, remitting, inverting, transcending, or adnulling the fundamental
Constitutions of Nature, and so breaking that Concatenation of Causalities, or
the Chain of Fate, at pleasure. The Heathen absurdly dreamed that all effects
are inevitably produced by the conspiracy and coefficiency of natural Causes,
respectively qualified; or that all Accidents spring up from the proper
tendency of their particular Efficients, without the influence, direction, or
moderation of any other Virtue, besides their own native and Congenial
Faculties. The more intelligent Christian proves, that all natural Causes do
not produce their respective Effects (...), ex inevitabili necessitate, by the
absolute and neverfailing power of their Essential Qualities, or inherent
endowments; but (...), quatenus fieri licuit, or according to the possibility
of their Concingency: and therefore, though he confesses that all Events are
foreknown and preordained in the eternal Council of God; yet he stands assured,
as well upon the ground of Reason, as Faith, that the precise and opportune
contingency of every individual Event proceeds from the insluence of this
Providence, which disposes and conjoyneth some certain convenient Causes to
the production of this or that determinate Effect, in some sort respecting the
last of Ends, his own Glory. To conclude, the Stoic has clip't the immense
and towering wings of man's Will, and allows it no wider range, then what the
line of Fate affords: while the sublimer Christian scorns to stoop to the Lure
of any Necessity, besides the special Decrees of the Divine Council; not
conceiving his will subject to the inclination, much less the compulsion, of
any force below that of him, who conferred that infinite liberty upon it. For
he, indeed, holds the rains of our Wills, and can bend them: yet non coactione
violenta, sed leni suavique influxu, not by violent Coaction, but gentle and
sweet Invitation, as the Schoolmen distinguish.

Now if we consider Fate in the notion of the Stoics; 'twill Article 13. A
list of the execrable Absurdities impendent on the opinion of Ablute Fatality;
so accepted, as the Stoic proposes it.
be no easy wonder, if any man, though his reason be never so much hoodwinckt
with the veil of Prejudice, shall not at first glance discover it to be an
opinion Blasphemous in respect to God; insomuch as it strikes at no less then
the cardinal and inseparable Attribute of his Nature, Omnipotence, by coercing
his infinite and arbitrary Activity with the definite laws of second Causes,
and denying him the prerogative of absolute superiority to his mechanique
Vicegerent, or (rather) Instrument, Nature: and, inrespect of man, intolerably
Absurd; since it subverts the Liberty of all humane actions, and leaves nothing
in the power of man's Will either to elect, or avoid. For whoever conced's that
the mind of man is subject to the compulsive regiment of Fatal Necessity, and
so that all the actions of our lives are but the accomplishments of so many
ineluctable, immovable, and inevitable Decrees, from the birth of time
enrolled in the Ephimerides of Destiny; must also concede, upon clear
inference, that our Creator endowed us with the Semi-divine Faculty of
Rationality, either to no purpose at all, or at best to facilitate our
betraying our selves into the snares of ruin and misery beyond possibility of
reparation or redemption; Must induce, that the Will being deposed from her
arbitrary throne, the judgment seat of Reason must fall to the ground; nor
can there be any room left for Consultation to sit and determine the debates of
the Soul concerning the good or Evil of her objects: since notwithstanding all
our most profound, serious, and prudent Deliberation, the success of our
actions, as well as the results of our councels, would then be no other, but
what has bin resolved on and predecreed by Fate; and then, to conceive our
selves obnoxious to punishment, for incurring those sins, which are imposed
upon our wills by a necessity beyond our control, is an open derogation to the
equity and Justice of the Divine Nature, and to ascribe our Evil to that, which
is by essence superlatively Good. That Prudence, is miserable Folly; the study
of Wisdom, laborious Vanity; and all our ancient Lawmakers, either ridiculous
Fools, or detestable Tyrants: since they prescribe and enjoyne those things,
which either we must have done, had not they enjoined them, or are restrained
from doing, in spite of our own conformable inclinations, by the contrary
impulsion or seduction of Destiny. And, finally, that all Divine and Human
Exhortation to Good, and Dehortation from evil, are unnecessary and
supersluous. Thus shall Virtue and Vice vanish into mere and empty notions; and
Religion become, what Libertines would have it, a mysterious and well contrived
invention to support temporal Greatness, and fright vulgar minds into a tame
submission to the arbitrary dictates of their imperious Lords: nor shall there
be a Heaven to compensate suffering Piety, or a Hell for the punition of
Villainy; because as the Good man could not but live honestly and religiously,
whether he would or no; so must it not be in the power of the Wicked man, to
abstain from doing Evil. Thus shall Love and Hatred, the two most useful
Affections of our Souls, be robbed of their proper Objects, Amiable and
Detestable: nor shall Justice find convenient subjects, whereon to place
Laudation and Vituperation; since Praise only belongs to those, who have chosen
to do Good, when 'twas in their power to have done Evil and Dispraise is the
due guerdon of those, who choose to do Evil, when it was in their power to have
done Good. And thus shall all our Prayers be fruitless, our vows hopeless, our
Sacrifices unprofitable, and all other acts of Devotion desperate Vanity. The
least of which and of a myriade of other equivalent Absurdities, Incongruities,
and oblique, or appendent and inferrible Blasphemies, shooting up from this one
poisonous root of Absolute Fatality; is more then enough inconsistent to the
fundamentals both of Reason and Religion, to deterr even Heathens from
approaching, much more embracing and defending it.

But as for Theological Fate, or Predestination; if accepted in the legitimate
sense of the Primitive Church, and not in that rigorous and inflexible notion
of the German Calvinist: I conceive it fully concordant not only to many Texts
of Sacred writ, but even conciliable to man's Free will, notwithstanding the
apparent repugnancy betwixt them; as I shall endeavor to prove singularly in an
ensuing chapter.

SECT. III.
AS for the Second Opinion, viz. that the Term of man's Life Article 1. The
Authors adhesion to the Second opinion, justified by two important reasons.
is not fixed beyond possibility of either Anticipation, or Postposition; this,
I profess, my judgment inclines me to prefer, as that which seems to be drawn
in the directest line from the point of Truth; and that for two mighty Reasons.

First, because there are very few places, or testimonies of Scripture, which
may be thought to advantage the doctrine 1.
of Absolute Fatality; but, on the contrary, very many allegable in defense of
this.

Secondly, because those Texts, which make for this, have 2.
their importance so perpendicular, that nothing but a violent perversion can
wrest, so perspicuous, that nothing but obscure interpretations can darken, so
soft and easy, that nothing but over nice and unnatural Exceptions can harden
it. And Justice will frown on that stupid partiality, that shall prefer paucity
to multitude, obscurity to clarity, and difficult to genuine and familiar
solutions.

To explain and justify this by Instance; the Hercules, or Article 2. The great
obscurity, and small validity of some Texts of holy writ, alleged by the
Defendants of Fatality to warrant their opinion, detected.
most* champion Text usually brought into the field to assert the opinion of
Absolute Fatality, in the precise manner and time of every man's Dissolution
into his first matter, is that of Job; Definiti sunt dies ejus, and numerus
mensium ejus tecum est; statuta ejus fecisti, and non praeteribit: His days are
determined, the number of his months are with thee; thou have appointed his
bounds, that he cannot pass. (chap. 14. verse. 5.)

Now this place has much of obscurity, and little of strength for the
supportation of their opinion, more then ours. (1) Much of obscurity; since,
though racked to the highest extension of its importance, no Logique can extort
any other Conclusion from it, but this, that the Term of man's Life is fixed by
God, so that impossible it is for man to remove it forwards to a greater
longitude; the concession whereof no way infringeth our assertion. For hence it
follows not, that it is impossible for man, by intempetance, by the temerarious
obtrusion of himself upon the jaws of danger, or other means whatever, to
Anticipate that Term, or remove it backwards to a greater Brevity. Again, I
have yet met with no substantial reason, that may countermand our construction
of these words, (...), or in the latitude of Generality; and therefore may
safely understand them, as an expression of the brevity of man's life, in
specie, not in individuo; their whole Mass weighing no more then this: that the
life of man, being included within a certain Circle, or round of days and
months, and circumscribed by a short succession of minutes flowing into a
stream of Time, cannot possibly be extended to a longer duration then what our
Creator has prefixed to all mankind: i. e. then that moment to which he has
determined and adapted the durability of man's specisical Temperament, or
Principles of Vitality. And thus interpreted, this place runs parallel to that
of Moses (Psalm. 90. verse. 10.) Dies nostrae vitae septuaginta anni, and si in
fortudinibus sit, octoginta anni, and fortitudo eorum molestia ac labor,
quoniam recedit cito and avolamus: as also that of David (Psalm. 39. verse. 5.)
Ecce, ut palmos posuisti dies meos, and aevum meum tanquam nihil coram te;
profecto universae Vanitas est omnis homo stans; Behold, thou have made my days
as a hands breadth, and mine age is nothing before thee: every man, verily, at
his best state is altogether Vanity.

True it is (nor have I heard many, besides Helmont, and a Article 3. The
Natural Causes (proxime) of the Longitude and Brevity of man's life: and the
Authors private conjectu^e of the cause of Longevity in the first age of the
world.
Fanatique Brother or two of the mystical Order of the Rosy Cross, impugn it)
that the Life of Man does consist in a Peaceful Discord maintained between the
4 First Qualities (I understand them, according to the Physiology of Epicurus,
and Cartesius, as certain Modifications of Matter, or Quantity) a rising from
the commixture of them in a proportionate Dose, or commensurate symmetry,
respective to the Activity of some and Patability of others; and proximly, in a
requisite harmony, of the Primigenious Heat and Radical Moisture: which harmony
being more or less durable according to the more or less exquisite temperament
of body assigned to each single person, by the free dispensation of the Divine
Will; it follows, unavoidably, that the Longitude or Brevity of every man's life
must naturally depend upon the perfection, or imperfection of his Idiosyncrasy,
or individual Constitution.

Nor does it carry less semblance of truth, that by the decrees of that
Council, which is all Wisdom, and can therefore will nothing but what is
superlatively Good, it was enacted, that the ordinary Duration of this Humane
Temperament should be circumscribed and limited to some certain general, though
not precisely adstrict, term or space of years, conceive of 70. 80. 90. or 100.
over or under: and that our ingenerated Protogenitors, even before the
depravation of their Vital Principles by their (...) or precipitous Fall, held
their lives by the same common lease; for manifest it is, that the Tree of Life
was planted in Paradise to this purpose, that the fruit thereof being
frequently eaten might instaurate the vital Balsam of man as fast as it
suffered exhaustion from the depredatory operation of his Implantate Spirit,
and by a continual refocillation of impaired nature keep her up fresh and
vigorous to longevity. To which I ask leave, with due submission to the
correction of maturer judgments, to tender my private conception; that the
like extraordinary means of making the sands of life run slowly and long in the
glass of Time, was by the special indulgence of the great Preserver of men,
permitted to Methusalem and other (...) of the worlds youth; whose registers
amounted to more Centuries of years, then ours usually to Decads, and who
outlived all the titles of Consanguinity.

(2) Little of strength for the supportation of their opinion, Article 4. The
Injustice of our Adversary, title of patronage from the forementioned text of
Job, further manifested.
more then of ours; for though we should concede, what these eager Patrons of
Fatality principally insist upon, viz. that the sense of these words of Job is
restrained only to that precise Term, or prestitute Date appointed by God to
the life of every individual man: yet notwithstanding can they not from this
concession extort more advantage to their plea, then what does naturally result
from thence toward the justification of ours. For Job does not so much as
tacitly insinuate, by what kind of Decree, manner of institution, or
computation that Definition or Circumscription of days and months was made by
God: nor is there ought to hinder us from affirming, that the tenor of his
words remains sincere and inviolate, when we understand that kind of statute,
concerning the circumscription of man's life to belong to that Classis of
Decrees, which God, either upon his own infallible Previdence of the future
demeanor of every man, or upon the Hypothesis of man's good or evil use of the
liberty of his will, has made, or may occasionally make. Besides all this our
equitable conference of many other Texts of Scripture, which we shall have
occasion, in the remaining dilucidation of this Theorem to allege, with this
of Job; will plainly, and almost unavoydably ascertain us, that his words are
to be interpreted in our sense, de specie, and not de individuo. But, in the
present, it is sufficient for us to have declared, that from that place of such
reputed validity amongst the Defendants of Destiny, no firm Argument can be
extracted to protect them, or impugn us.

And therefore I find my self at liberty to discharge my proper Article 5.
Seven testimonies, out of holy writ, supporting the mobility of the Term of
man's life, in individuo.
duty, viz. the Confession of those Reasons, which charmed my judgment to an
adherence to their persuasion, who contend for the Mobility of the Term of man's
Life.

The First of those is desumed from the Testimonies of the Oracle of Truth, the
Book of God; and in our list of those Testimonies, those deserve to stand in
the front, which in ample, elegant, and express terms warrant our Assertion,
that the life of man has bin, and may be, both Abbreviated and Prolonged.

The Coryphaeus, or leading Text is that of the Wise King (Proverb. 10. verse.
27.) Timor Domini apponit (aut prolongat) dies; anni vero impiorum
abbreviantur: the Fear of the Lord prolongeth days; but the years of the
wicked shall be shortened. Then which nothing can be more express, perspicuous,
and positive; and so nothing less subject to detorsion or altercation.

The Lieutenant, or second to that, is the gracious encouragement to filial
reverence and obedience annexed to the 5th. Precept in the Decalogue; Honora
Patrem tuum, and matrem tuam, ut prolongentur dies tui super terram quam Jehov
ah Deus tuus dat tibi: which the Apostle of the Gentiles (in Epist. ad Ephesians.
6. ver. 2.) call's the first (understand it of the second table) Commandment
with promise, viz. of a singular reward; or the first with a peculiar promise,
and such as has ever bin held distinct from the promise made in the second
Precept of the Decalogue, insomuch as that is common and universal,
comprehending all kinds of Blessings, but this only peculiar and determined to
that of diuturnous subsistence, or Longevity. In Exhod. 24. ver. 25. and many
other places, the Penman of God earnestly inculcates the benefit of the Fear
of God, by this forcible impulsive; that he would crown them with length,
health, and serenity of days, who should revere his most sacred name and
conscientiously observe his laws. Si colatis Deum vestrum, benedicet pani
vestro, and aquis vestris, auferetque infirmitatem e medio vestri, non crit
abortiens aut sterilis in terra vestra: numerum dierum in terra vestra
complebo. Which importune incitement to piety, those Commentators have no way
enlarged, who have extended it to this just height of intention; that to those
happy Sons of Israel, who subjugated their Wills to the written Will of God,
and cherished no desires so much, as those of cordial obedience to the rules of
his Law, demeaning themselves reverently toward their Maker, and righteously
toward their Neighbor; to these God would vouchsafe, not only that they should
accomplish that lease of life, which they held by the grant of Nature, or the
condition of each man's Idiosyncrasy; but even that their Temperament should be
meliorated, made more symmetrical, compact, tenacious and consequently more
durable, as well by the sovereign, balsamical, and restorative Faculties of
their Aliment, impregnated or enriched by the tincture of his continual
Benediction, as by the benign and salutiferous disposition of the Aer, and
propitious influences of the Host of Heaven, which otherwise are wont to induce
sensible Exorbitances and Anomalies upon the blood, spirits, and solid parts of
man's body, and from those seeds of morbosities produce various both Acute and
Chronique Diseases, which either consume, or corrupt the Vital Nectar, and
accelerate the execution of that Sentence, Pulvis es, and Pulvis eris. So that
of infirm, languid, and valetudinarious persons, they should be made robust,
athletical, and longevous; no less then the Barren should be made Fertile: the
one by the Conservatory, the other by the Prolifical virtue of Gods special
Grace. The same promise we read frequently repeated by God, in most of his
Embassies delivered by his Secretary, Moses, to his People; and more
particularly in Deuteron. 4. verse. 40. and chap. 30. verse. 20. And as he
proposes length of days for the desiderable reward of obedience: so, on the
contrary, he makes Immaturity of Death, the affrighting penalty of
Disobedience. For (Deuteron. 30. verse. 19. and 28. verse. 20.) contain a large
Catalogue of insirmities, diseases, and corporal calamities feircely comminated
to the immorigerous and disobedient: and in verse. 62. it is emphatically said of
Transgressors, ye shall be left few in number, whereas you were as the stars
of heaven for multitude; because thou would not obey the voice of the Lord,
thy God.

A Third egregious text, is that where God, gratefully resenting Salomons
Election of Wisdom before all other Accomplishments temporal set before him,
supererogates to his vote, by the additional concession of long life (2 Kings
3. 14.) And if thou will walk in my ways, to keep my Statutes and
commandments, as thy Father David did; then will I lengthen thy days.

A fourth, is that definitive sentence of David (Psalm. 55. verse. ult.) Bloody
and deceitful men shall not live out half their days.

A Fifth, that of the same Author (Psalm. 102. verse. 25.) O my God take me not
away in the midst of my days: and in like manner, (Psalm. 6. and 30. and 88.
and 111.) he with fervent importunity supplicates, that God would be pleased
not to cut off the thread of his life, while he was then in the spring and
vigor of his age, but restore him from that languor and marcid Consumption,
introduced by his grievous disease, to his pristine sanity, that he might
thereby be enabled to chant his praises in the Sanctuary, and do good to the
children of Sion.

A Sixth, that remarkable Precedent of the prolongation of life beyond the term
presixt, King Ezechias (Esai. 38. verse. 10.) who being infested with the most
mortiferous of diseases, the Plague, and convulst with the horror of death,
denounced by the thundering Prophet; in the intervalls betwixt the showers of
heavy tears, he sighs out this lamentation: in the cutting off my days I shall
go to the gates of death; I am deprived of the residue of my years. Mine age is
departed, and is removed from me as a shepards tent: I have cut off like a
weaver my life (vitam meam veluti textoris telam praecidi, as some read it) he
will cut me off with pining sickness. Which signifies as much as this, that he
was adjudged to dye before his time. But this night of sorrow was dispelled by
a comfortable morn, caused by the light of that Sun, which rises with healing
in his wings; for immediately after, his contrition, sincere resipiscence, and
earnest supplications obtaining a repreive from the merciful hands of him, who
desires not the death of a sinner, the execution of that fatal sentence was
suspended, and a paroll lease of 15. years supernumerary annexed to that old
one of his life, fully, to some few anxious minutes, expired. And can any
Prejudice be so inslexible, as not to stoop to the conversion of this pregnant
Example, which on one side, testifies the possibility of the Decurtation of the
Term of man's Life, by any mortal disease; and, on the other, manifests the
possibility of the Prolongation of the same, by the seasonable and right use of
the means conductive thereunto, viz. remorse of Conscience, repentance,
supplication, and medical remedies. For, prescribed it was by Isaiah, thus: Let
them take a Bunch of Figgs, and lay it for a plaster upon the boil (or
Carbuncle) and he shall recover.

And, to bring up the rear of these Sacred Arguments, militant on our side,
let us instance in the semblably pertinent story of the Ninivites; who, by the
counter-violence of those holy spells, Penitence, severe Humiliation as well of
the outward, as of the inward man, and Prayer distracted with naught but tears
and groans, seem to have abrogated the Decree of Destiny. For the Bowels of
Divinity yearning with paternal compassion toward so populous a City; wherein
though all were guilty, yet many millions must have bin blended in the chaos of
common ruin, who were yet too young to share in the actual Depravities;
smoothed the brow of his Justice, and prevailed with him to interpret their
universal mortification of Impiety, as an Allegorical accompletion of his
resolve concerning the general devastation and mortality denounced against
their Persons and Habitations; to accept the slames of their thick sacrifices
as Expiatory and preventive to the impendent Combustion of their City; and
heighten the wholesome virtue of their Abstinence, observed in the strict Fast,
to a generous Prophylactique or Preservative against the Pestilence now ready
to be kindled by the breath of his Indignation.

Nor are we destitute of Instances, in holy Chronicles, to teftify the Reverse
part of our assertion, viz. That the Term of man's life has bin Abbreviated.
For who can read the story of the General Deluge, and not observe, that the
whole stock of Humanity (except 8. beleivers, who committed themselves
prisoners to the Ark of Preservation) was immaturely extinguished, and by the
most proper and expedite way of corruption, resolved into its Hyle, or Watery
Principle? Who can rehearse Moses his relation of those many thousands of
incredulous and murmuring Israelites, buried in the wilderness, to whom God had
promised, nay sworn to give them possession of the land of Canaan; and not be
satisfied, that their Rebellion and Infidelity anticipated their funerals? and
who examine the fate of those Cowards, who being sent to explore the fertility
of the promised Land, and the forces of the Amalekites, returned a discouraging
answer to their brethren, and were therefore cut down by the revenging sword of
the Lord of Hosts, in the noon of their lives; and not be convicted, that the
Wages of Sin is Death, and may be paid as justly, though not so naturally, in
the morn, or noon, as evening of life?

Now so fiduciary are these Testimonies, that whoever shall justly compute
their Number, perpend their Gravity, and clearly discern their Perspicuity;
must confess it no less then open injustice to all the Inducements of belief,
to debase them so much as to a Competition for the priority of persuasion, with
those Few, Light, and Obscure Allegations, upon whose Credit the Factors of
Immovable Destiny have adventured to take up their opinion. However, that we
may add a brighter polish to this our Gold, by scouring off the rust of all
Exceptions made against it: it deserves our time, and sweat to dispossess our
Article 6. A full vindication of the Fourth Testimony, from the several
Exceptions made against the appropriation thereof to our scope, by the patrons
of Fatality.
Adversaries of all their pretended interest in the importance of Three the
chiefest of our Testimonies.

First they attempt to infirm our title to that definitive and emphatical
sentence of the Psalmist, The bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half
their days; and this under the pretext of several perverse Interpretations: as
(1) by understanding the place thus; Impii and sanguinarii non dimidiabunt
negotia sua, they shall not accomplish half their Designs, or, contrary to
their expectation they shall fall before they have brought their evil Purposes
to pass.

To this unlawful Construction we reply, that this subterfuge was contrived by
that professed Libertine of Christianity, Luther, to the end he might support his
doctrine of Absolute Fate, which with so much Ardor and Pertinacy he had once
maintained against that ornament not only of Germany, but of Europe also,
Erasmus. But the Connection of these with the former words, manifestly prohibit
any such Comment. Thou, O God (says David) shall bring them down into the pit
of destruction, i. e. thou shall irretiate or ensnare them, and suddenly
precipitate them into the same pit, which they have dug for me, thy servant;
or thou shall, according to the concernment of the Hebrew phrase, destroy them
subita praematura morte, by a sudden premature death; that from the experiment
of their unexpected ruin, the world may learn thy justice, and be satisfied of
thy favor and indulgence to the pious, and thy hatred and indignation to the
impious. For if we accommodate this text merely to the Natural expiration of
the term of life, which is appointed as well to the Righteous as to the
Reprobate, and generally to all men: pray, what Energy or Emphasis can remain
to that saying of David, Tu facies eos descendere in puteum foveae; for then we
shall reduce all the meaning only to this, illi morientur statuto suo tempore,
sicut mortales alii omnes, they shall dye in their appointed time, as all other
mortal men: and if so, who might not have justly made this retort upon David;
and te etiam tuo tempore, sive cum finis vitae tuae praestitutus aderit, Deus
faciet descendere in puteum foveae, and thee also, when thy appointed time
shall come, or when the temperamental lease of thy life shall be worn out,
shall God bring inro the pit of destruction.

Again, if we exchange Negotia for Dies; then must we renounce the
appropriation of the sense to the Wicked, and make it common also to the Godly.
For, who ever lived to accomplish all his purposes? But the expression
sufficiently illustrates the intention; for it exactly responds to many other
phrases used by the Holy Spirit to the same scope, as, They shall not fulfill
the number of their days, their days shall be abbreviated etc.

(2) By Translating the Text thus; Non dimidiabunt dies suos, (i. e.) peribunt
antequam sperent: they shall perish in the immaturity of their Hopes, not of
their Lives. For the sensual Affections of their earthly minds having
determined their judgments only to the expectation of enjoying blessings
inservient to the satisfaction of their domineering Concupiscence, make them
promise to themselves long subsistence in this their paradise; nay extend their
vain projects as far as the impossible period of Eternity: so though they
survive even life it self, by dwindling out their bedrid days, till the
marasmus of extreme old age has embalmed them beforehand, pined them into
perfect Skeletons, and so defrauded their hungry Creditors, the Worms; yet
since they drop away full of youthful and green hopes, their departure is
premature and inopine; and so they may be said, not to dimidiate their days.

We return that this illegitimate Desoant ought to be rejected for 4,
considerable Causes. (1) Because it cannot be justly charged upon the words, no
not in the greatest latitude of Construction. For it is not there said, the
Wicked shall dye sooner then they expect; but positively and expressly, they
shall not dimidiate their days: now every Idiot can tell, that it is one thing,
not to live out half their days, and another, not to believe they shall live
out half their days. (2) because it argues the sacred Psalmist of a manifest
Falsity. For when the ungodly expire, they do not only Dimidiate their days,
but Accomplish them, Death being at any time the December of life. (3) Because
it imports a double repugnancy to Truth. For first, now there are, and in all
ages, since the first experiment of death, have bin millions of Vicious men,
who even in the wildest paroxysme of their Vanity, and highest orgasme of their
Pride and Ambition, have still cooled themselves with E(...), (...), and felt a
dejecting horror from within, at the remembrance of that Motto, Statutum est
omnibus semel mori; so far is our Nature from entertaining any hopes of
Immortality, though but in a dream, or melancholy depravation of Phansy. And,
again, no Chronicle is barren in the stories of prosperous Libertines, who have
wanted nothing but some Cross to indeare the Felicity of their lives, have
unravelled their vital web in the highest blandishments of Sense, attained to
miraculous Longevity, and being sated with the profuse treatments of Fortune,
have outlived their own large stock of Hopes; so that a Poet might take the
Liberty to say of them, they dyed for grief, that they had nothing left to wish
for, which they had not already surfetted in the fruition of. (4) Because the
admission there of loses the Singularity or Determination of David's speech to
Sanguinary and Nefarious Persons. For, if to Dimidiate their days, import no
more then to dye by the same common kind of Death, and at the same period of
their Temperamental Lease, when, by the ineluctable laws of Destiny, it is
enacted that all men shall revert to Dust: certainly, there can remain no
reason why Impious men, so dying, should be thought more unhappy, because they
were Cruent and Unjust, then others. To conclude; of all those just Persons
mentioned in the old Testament, who were translated from this Vale of tears to
the Celestial Hills of permanent delight, by early and premature deaths (amongst
whom the Apostle (Heb. 11. verse. 38.) has accounted some so excellent above
the common rate of humanity, that the world was not worthy of them) of such, I
say, 'twas true, according to this erroneous paraphrase, that they did not
Dimidiate their days, because they dyed sooner then they expected. For they did
not only hope, but upon the faithful promise of God even assure themselves of
a longer continuation here below to do him further service. And confidently to
expect, nay by a lively hope to anticipate the fruition of a promised blessing;
is a privilege peculiar only to those, to whom the promise does properly and
solely belong: but the blessing of Longevity was only then promised to the
pious observers of the Divine laws; as is manifest from the places formerly
cited.

(3) By fixing the scope of the Text only upon that mature Term of life, to
which many ordinarily attain, viz. to 60. 70. 80. 90. years, more or less,
according to the respective Duration of every individual Constitution; and so
concluding the verity of David's speech only in this respect. For (say they) the
Annals of Impious men seldom arise to so large an account; because either the
sword of war, or justice, or some Accident occasioned by their Villainies takes
them off, before the completion of their natural Term of years.

But this sinister Detorsion of the Text ought also to be repudiated for two
Reasons.

(1) In regard it is manifestly heterodox, and dissimilar to the express sense of
the words; since they say not, Wicked men shall not live out half the days of
Others, but their own. Now the days of their lives amount not to so many years,
as are required to the commensuration of the natural space betwixt the
Animation and Disanimation of the posterity of Adam, prefixed by the decree of
him, who is the Breath of our nostrils: and therefore, when they fully and
wholly accomplish that common compute, with what semblance of truth can they be
said to Dimidiate their days? Moreover, if those Sanguinary Miscreants, against
whom David directly denounces this judgment of Premature Mortality, be said
not to dimidiate their days, only in this respect, that they seldom arrive at
that provect and silver-headed Age, wherein the Tapor of life, by the ordinary
deflux of Nature, burns dim and languid, and at last, for want of oil, winks
out into pepetual night: then with equal right may it be affirmed also of many
Holy and Just persons, that they do not dimidiate theirs; nay it is a question
not easily answered, whether the same may not be asserted of these, with more
justice then of those. For, how rarely do we observe the pulse of Pious men to
beat, till their Arteries grow hard from the Hectic distemper of old age? How
small a manual would the Legends of all those Saints, whose names and stories
yet survive, make, who have lived till the Almond tree has budded and
flourished: and how vast a volume would theirs make, who have bin gathered
green into the Granary of God, and never lived to see one revolution of Saturn
about the solary Orb? and how frequently have we occasion to comfort our
selves, after the transplantation of Junior Virtue, with that adage, (...)? Nor
has Piety always proved a Coat of maile against the danger of Malice; or the
Panoplie of a Christian* defense against the sword of war; or perfect Charity,
an Antidote to Poison; or Temperance, an Alexipharmacon against the Pestilence;
or religious Abstinence, a Preservative against Famine; or Innocence awarded
the stroke of the Executioner: in short, as to the time of Death, in this
concernement, there is one event to the Righteous, and to the Wicked, to the
clean, and to the unclean, to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices
not; as dies the Good, so dies the Sinner, and he that swears, as he that
fears an oath.

(2) In respect it disarmes the Text of all its Force and Purpose. For to what
end could David say, they should not dimidiate their days, if thereby he
intended no more then this, that they should not run over half their stage of
life, or subsist until gray hairs; unless the ground or reason thereof be
also subjoyned, viz. because of their impious and bloody Inclinations and
Practices: and so consequently our present opinion be admitted? For if he
believed it constituted by the immutable law of Fate, that such should then,
and at no other time be taken off; without any relation at all to the
contracting and anticipating merit of their Impiety: what makes it to the
principal scope, that he said, they shall not dimidiate their days? since,
according to this inconvenient interpretation, they do not only not Dimidiate
theirdays, but fully Accomplish them, as any the most mortified and
conscientious observers of Gods sacred laws: and so neither Piety shall retain
its attribute of having the power to prolong, nor its Contrary longer wear the
just imputation of having the power to abbreviate the Term of Life. To which we
may add, that David could not, without special Revelation from that omniscient
Light, that penetrates the darkness of Futurity, deliver this certain
Prognostic concerning the non-dimidiation of their days. For since he could
not but have observed that many the most accursed Vassals of Satan, (the
Providence of God so permitting, for considerations privy only to his Wisdom)
attained to extreme old age: whence could he acquire that prophetique
knowledge, that those particular Villains, whom he levelled at, should be
taken in their own snares, and perish immaturely in the nonage of their lives?
Undoubtedly, he could desume that prediction from no oracle less prescient,
then that Spirit, whose Essence is Truth, and to whose cognition all things are
actually present: but who can, though but with a specious or verisimilous
argument, prove that David received any such special Revelation? Wherefore
Reason advises that we acquiesce in the judgment of most of the Fathers, who
unanimously resolve, that David reslected his thoughts upon that positive
sentence in the Levitical Law, which ((...)) for the major part, comminates a
short and calamtous life, and a repentine and miserable death to the Ungodly;
but, on the contrary, promises longevous and peaceable days, to those, who
should revere the sacred Majesty, and observe the wholesome ordinances of
Jehovab: and upon the general infallibility of that Sentence, erected his
particular prediction; that those Sanguinary traitors who had with so much
detestable policy prepared stratagems to ensnare his feet walking in the ways
of innocence and charity, should be entangled in their own mischievous wiles,
and stumble into their graves in the middle of their race. To which we may
accommodate that of Juvenal,

Ad Generum Cereris, sine caede ac sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
Few Tyrants go late to the infernal slood;
But sink betimes in Cataracts of blood.
The second place they endeavor to betray out of our possession, is that
promission of Longevity, whereby the Father of all things Article 7. The second
Testimony vindicated from several Exceptions.
was pleased to invite Children to a due Veneration of their Parents: which
they corrupt with this dangerous gloss. This (say they) was spoken
Anthropopathically, or ad captum hominis, by the Holy Spirit, who frequently
has descended to discourse in the stammering and imperfect dialect of
mortality; so that the days of obsequious children are said to be prolonged,
then when they are blessed with diuturnity, tranquillity and sanity of life,
which as it immediately depends on the immutable decree of God, so cannot one
moment be superadded thereunto beyond the term prefixed, unless we infer a
manifest Inoonstancy upon that immutable Essence, (...), with whom is no
variableness nor shadow of turning. But that the Ancient of days had
determined, that such should live to wear the honorable badge of Antiquity,
who should constantly bear a venerable regard toward those, from whom, under
God, they had derived their being: yet so, that if any obedient Child should
chance to be snatched away by the tallons of that sarcophagous Vultur, Death,
before time had reduced his hairs to the same color with his skull; which is
no rarity; yet notwithstanding does God in no respect deflect from the point of
his general determination, but persevere in the accomplishment of his promise,
no less then a Prince, who bestows a million of crowns upon that servant, to
whom he had promised only a hundred. For this life is no Mansion, but a narrow
and incommodious Inn, standing in the way to a better, whose Term is Eternity:
and therefore, ter felix ille, cui ante lassitudinem peractum est iter, thrice
happy he, who arrives at his journies end, before he is weary of travel. And
our Grandfathers tell us, that old Age is but the magazine of sorrows, the
sour Dreggs of life, the Portal to the Nosocomie or Hospital of Diseases, and
indeed a kind of living-Death, wherein men only Breath and Doat; which though
all men wish for, yet no man delights in when it comes: optima cum expectatur,
cum advenit, onerosa sibi, aliis molesta; good only when expected, evil when
enjoyed, because burdensome to it self, and troublesome to others. So that
those Saturnine minds, which were most ambitious to wear the silver Crown of
old Age; when they had obtained it, found it to gall their feeble temples, and
enervate all their limbs: nor did they appear other then weatherbeaten and
mouldring statues of their former selves, Human-Grashoppers, or Ghosts walking
in Skeletons. In fine, that the whole concernment of this encouragement to
Filial Duty, does consist only in this; that Vivacity in this transitory World
is promised unto morigerous Children, only in this capacity, that it is a
Benediction of God: and a Benediction only in this respect, that it is a
Document of Divine Grace, or an Evidence of Gods singular love toward them;
which he does infinitely more testify unto them by a timous and early delivery
of them from this calamitous prison of Mortality into the glorious Liberty of
the Sons of God.

We reply, that this plea of Exception against our lawful right to the place,
is not only frivolous and dilute; but even derogatory as well to the Sanction,
as Excellence of the Promise. For, to transmute the serious and faithful
promise of him, whose words are yea and amen, into an Anthropopathical
Sophisme, or affected expression in the stammering Dialect of Humanity; is
frivolous, and not only to stagger, but subvert the Fidelity thereof, and so
demolish the comfortable hopes of Filial Piety, nay, what is a degree of
Blasphemy, to insimulate Truth it self of Imposture. For, to promise Longevity
to morigerous Children, when formerly and without any respect to their prevised
obedience, God has prefixed unto them an Intransible Term of life: what else can
it be, but to make him promise that, which cannot be promised Hypothetically,
or upon condition; unless that which was Absolutely decreed long before the
promise was made, be violently cancelled and altered. And so much the more
intolerable indignity to the sacred majesty of God, does this absurd Exception
infer; by how much the more both of Imprudence and Inconstancy it must import,
to play the uncircumspect Sophister with those, who (as our Adversaries
themselves affirm) stood possessed with a full persuasion, that the Term of
every man's life was absolutely, and without any respect to his future piety, or
Impiety, predetermined. I profess sincerely, I am yet to be persuaded, that any
Credulity can be so pedantique and slavish, as to entertain a belief; that even
Man (I forbear to say, God) can thus openly and detectibly dissimulate with any
the most stupid and indiscreet person alive; unless he be first resolved to
expose himself to the just scorn and derision of all men, and by this loose and
childish juggling forfeit that reputation, which he had acquired by his former
grave and oraculous treaties, and the just performance of all Articles, to
which he had subscribed. It Is one thing to admit, that the Holy Ghost does
sometimes descend to discourse in the stammering and amphibological Phrase of
man, when he is pleased to hint unto us those (...), or ineffable Mysteries,
which are too fine to be spun into words by the gross fingers of flesh, and are
notions reserved to entertain the Soul, when enfranchized from the bonds of
Corporeity; such are those glances, whereby he affords us a dark landscape of
the New Jerusalem, and allegorical description of the joys and glories of the
Eternal Life, an idea of the majesty of his incomprehensible Essence, and three
distinct Subsistences in one indivisible Existence, etc. and a far different,
nay contrary, to say, that he does speak Anthropopathically and conform to our
unequal capacities, when he promises those things, which do not only not
transcend our faculties of comprehension; but are familiar to our knowledge, nay
such as the nearest concernment of our nature requires us fully and
perspicuously to know. And such is the quality of those Blessings, which the
Bounty of Providence has by promise assured unto the Virtuous, in order to the
demulsion and dulcification of the sharp condition of this life; and
particularly that of longevous subsistence upon earth. To conclude; the Spirit
or Form of a Promise does consist in this, that they, to whom the promise is
made, do understand the good therein specified, to be really, bona fide, and in
specie, intended to be performed by him, who made the promise. Now, if there
arise any doubt, whether or no that promise be repugnant to a verity formerly
declared; then does the force and sanction, together with the Dignity thereof,
totally vanish and become void.

Our Adversaries have rejoyned, that God does therefore promise Longevity to
obsequious Children, because he has formerly decreed to qualify their
particular Constitutions with respective Durability.

But, alas! this subterfuge neither dissolves the Difficulty, nor prevents the
Doubt. For if his Decree, concerning their Longevity, be Absolute, devoyd of
all Suppositionality, and suspended upon no respect to his Prevision of their
obedience: no reason can discover what Force or Energy the promise can pretend
unto from the performance of the Condition required. Again, how can that
Promise (...) way of invitation or allurement, affect those, who are already
confirmed, that what the promise imports, is formerly, by the positive and
non-conditionate Will of God, made inevitable, and has the Possibility of its
Futurition determined to precise Necessity? In fine, the Postulation of that
Condition can neither consist with the Eternal Identity of God that promises;
nor effectually move those, to whom he makes the promise, to endeavor the
Consequution of that ample reward of filial obedience: for his Decree,
concerning the Term of their life, does and shall forever stand firm and
immote, whether the Condition be performed, or not.

The last Testimony they have essayed to extort from us, is the Article 8. The
sixth Testimony cleared from 4. Exceptions.
Instance of Ezekiah; and this by a Fourfold Cavillation.

(1) By this Excuse, Singular aliquod Exemplum non evertere regulam, that one
single denormous Example is not sufficient to evert the general obligation of a
law; or one swallow makes no summer.

This Exception, I confess, might have had some color, or slender pretext of
Validity; had not our Opponents themselves totally excluded it, by asserting
that the immutable law of Destiny was equally extended to all and every
individual person from Adam down to us. For most certain it is, that God never
limited his free Omnipotence, by any fixed law, or bound up his own hands with
the same settled Constitutions, whereby he circumscribed the definite activity
and duration of his Creatures: it being the Prerogative of his Nature, to know
no Impossibility, but to be able to act either above, or against the statutes
of his Deputy, whenever, and upon what subject, and to what end soever he
pleases. But I have no warrant to believe, that among the Propugnators of Fate,
any one has deviated inro so remote an Alogie, as to opinion, that the Lots of
all men are not delivered out of one and the same common urne; but that the
Decrees concerning the Destinies of some particular persons, are not so
definitive, precise, and immovable, as those of all others in general.

(2) By this Response, that under the seeming Absoluteness of the Prophets
Sentence, Morieris, Thou shall dye; there lay concealed a tacit Hypothesis,
which was this: Nisi seria poenitudine te ad Deum convertas, unless by serious
and profound repentance thou shall mortify the old man of sin, and apply thy
self wholly to the Mercies of God.

Against this mistaken plea our defense shall be, that it wants the principal
inducement to belief, and so can afford no satisfaction at all. For, (besides
this, that it quadrates neither to their First Exception, nor their Thesis
concerning the Immobility of Destiny) what Logic can tolerate the induction of
an Hypothetical upon a Categorical Proposition? or, more expressly, how can any
Condition be comprehended under that message, which by a definitive and
peremptory decree, and such as carried no respect to the performance, or
nonperformance of any condition whatever, tells the K. in down right terms,
that the date of his life was now expired, and that the severe Publican, Death,
stood ready at the door of his chamber, within some few hours to exact from him
the common tribute of Nature? Subordinata non pugnant, is an Axiom I well
know, and am ready to receive a challenge from any singularity, that dares
question the universality of its truth; but, that a condiiional Decree can be
subordinate to an Absolute, I am bold to deny, nor need I go far for an
Argument to prove the impossibility thereof; the very Antithesis of those
notions, Absolute and Conditional sufficiently declaring as much. To take the
just dimensions of this Cloud; every Condition is moveable upon the hinge of
Indefinity or Uncertainty, as being suspended upon an uncertain and mutable
Cause, viz. the Arbitrary Election of man's Free will: insomuch, that the Event
thereof cannot be known, nay not unto the Omniscience of God, who is the only
Cardiognostes, and sees beyond our very Essences, so long as it hangs in
suspense or indecision, by reason of the Indifferency, or non-determination of
its Cause, i. e. while it is not determined to either part by the Actual
Volition of man's will. But as for an Absolute decree; that cannot but be
Certain and Immutable; as being constitute without, and antecedent to any
Prevision of a Condition, that is to be, or has bin performed, or is not to
be, or has not bin performed.

(3) By insinuating, that God made use of this sharp Commination, in order to
the more Expedite and effectual reduction of the K. to Penitence.

But, alas! this also is a broken reed, and he shall fall into the ditch of
Error, who relies thereon. For who can be persuaded, that this Commination
could be serious and in earnest, that must not at the same time dissolve the
rigor and immutability of Gods decree concerning the fatal Term of the Ks.
life? or how could it be serious, if it were fully constituted from all
Eternity that the K. should not die, till full 15. years after the Sentence?
This is a pure (...), and something that no man can comprehend. For, to
comminate sudden death to him, whom our Adversaries acknowledge reserved by
the law of Destiny till the complete expiration of his prefixed Term of life: is
not to comminate in earnest, but in jest, and argue the God of Truth, of
Dissimulation. Again, what Efficacy or enforcing Virtue could that Commination
have over the Affections of Ezekiah, if he firmly believed, that he should not,
could not dye before the precise term of his life constituted and made
intransible from Eternity? Assuredly, if so; he had no just cause either to
complain of, or fear the abscission of his days.

(4) By recurring to this their last refuge, Deum hac ratione palam facere
voluisse, quam Regi ab aeterno designarat (...), that God was pleased to take
this course for the promulgation of that Longevity, which he had from eternity
designed to Ezekiah.

This is more impertinent, and less satisfactory then any of the precedent
Exceptions. For extremely ridiculous it is, to opinion, that God would by a
Commination suspended on a condition, or by a hypothetical decree, make that
known; which long before he had, by an Absolute Decree, without any condition,
or prevision of any condition, constituted firm and immovable. Unworthy and
disparaging thoughts both of the Wisdom and Justice of the Supreme Being does
that unhappy man entertain, who ascribes unto it the making of Decrees
subordinate, disparate, and irreconcilable. That Sacred, omniscient,
omnipotent Agent, as himself makes nothing in vain; so would he have us make
him our Exemplar, and do no action, but what points at some certain end, and
conduces both to our benefit, and the last of ends, his Glory. But in vain had
he promised, in vain threatened, had he either promised or threatened those
things, which his own irrevocable Decree had formerly made immutable, which
must of necessity, had they never bin promised or threatened, have come to pass
in their predetermined opportunity: or such, to whose Existence it was wholly
and absolutely necessary, that that very thing, under which the promise or
commination was made, should be effected by such a power, to which no other
power can resist.

And this (we hope at least) is sufficient to the ample justification of our
opinions right to those Three appropriate and Convincing Testimonies, of the
Mobility of the Term of man's life, desumed from holy Writ..

SECT. IV.
IT remains only that we endeavor to wind our reason out of Article 1. The
necessity of our enquiry into the mystery of Predestination, in order to the
solution of the present difficulty: and the Fatists grand Argument.
that profound abyss of Predestination (of which the Apostle, though he had the
advantage of all other men in this; that he had the eye of his Soul illuminated
by beams deradiated immediately from the Soul of Light: did yet excuse himself
for his non-comprehension, with (...), (...).) into which the solution of this
grand difficulty has unavoidably precipitated it: for the strongest hold,
which the Defendants of Absolute Fatality have left them to retreat unto, is
erected upon this Foundation.

It makes no material difference (say they) whether the Prescience of God be
conceived precedent to his Preordination of any future Event, and so
Predestination be founded upon Prevision; or, on the contrary, this
Praeordination precedent to his Praescience, and so Praedestination be the
basis of Paervision: for, from the concession of either, it follows of absolute
necessity that the Term of man's life (in individuo) must be fixed and
intransible.

We answer, Article 2. The refutation thereof, by the conciliation of the
infallibility of Gods Praenotion, to the indetermination of man's free will to
the actual election of Good or Evil.


That the Consequence, indeed, ought to be admitted as firm and impregnable.
For this Praescience, whether it praeced, or succed Divine Praedestination, is
and must be ever certain, praecise, and infallible; or so supposed to be, at
least: and therefore must the Term of man's life be constituted certain,
precise, and immutable, ex necessitate si non consequentis, saltem
consequentiae, by necessity if not of the Consequent, yet of the consequence;
i. e. if not from the Virtue or Efficiency, yet from the Hypothesis, or
Conditionality of that Praescience. For no Sceptick can disallow of this
Consequence; if God does infallibly foreknow, that this and no other shall be
the Term of my life: ergo this and no other shall be the Term of my life.

But this is not the point, at which our inquiry is levelled. Manifest it is,
as well from our precedent discourse, as from the Condition of the subject, that
these two Propositions are not repugnant each to other; viz. The Term of man's
life is fixed and immutable in respect to the infallibility of Gods Praescience:
and the Term of man's life is moveable in respect to our right use, or abuse of
the Liberty of our Will. Though, I confess, with the great Mersennus, that the
apparent discord betwixt the infallibility of Gods Prenotion, and the
indetermination of man's Free Will to the actual election of good or evil; has
bin the rock, against which many the greatest wits of all Ages and Religions
have bin shipwrackt, in their persuasions of the irresistible enforcement of
Destiny.

To extricate our judgments out of this maze, let us remember and adhaere unto
that excellent Axiom of the most and most learned of the Schoolmen;
Praevisionem Dei nihil influere i^ nostras actiones, that the Praevision of God
has no influence upon the actions of man, nor upon the operation of the
remedies applied by the Physician to the cure of diseases: but presupposes
both the one and the other. For, in truth, God cannot foreknow the future
actions of man, or the effects of remedies administered, otherwise then because
of their necessary Futurity. Since, if we take a way the Futurition of events,
we necessarily destroy the Prenotion of God.

Which Abstrusity that we may the better comprehend, let us beg the liberty,
to suppose some Momenta rationis, or successive minutes in Eternity (which,
though in reality impossible, Eternity being one permanent (...), or instance,
as incapable of division, as cessation; may yet serve, as an excellent
Perspective to our weak-sighted reason in its inspection of many sublime
Phenomenon in Theology,) and humbly conceive; that in the First Moment of
Eternity, God saw, and only saw, without any relation at all to his future
decrees, all things to come, as well '(...), or such whose futurity is
necessary from the condition of their Nature, or impuls of their proper Causes;
as (...), or Futura Contingentia, which hang suspended in aequilibrio upon the
Free Will of their Efficients; so that they may, or may not succeed, whether
they be Absolute, or Conditionate: in which First moment had God acquiesced,
and proceeded no farther, then only to foresee the Necessity and Possibility of
their Futurition; then nothing should have bin to come* That in the Second
Moment, God saw, and only saw, that this or that event was in Possibility of
Futurition, in the life of this or that particular man, if such or such things
were done, in this or that time, with this or that Temperament of body, and
other respective Circumstances: but yet did neither determine any thing to
absolute Necessity of Futurition, and therefore nothing could be said to depend
upon the Praeordination of God, though all things should come to pass in the
same manner, as he foresaw them, whenever the Fiat of his Will should bring
them into actual existence, or educe them extra suas causas; nor did he see,
that they would so and no otherwise come to pass, from hence that he would they
should so and no otherwise come to pass; since this Praevision anteceds all
Volition. That, therefore, in the Third Moment of Eternity, God decreed, that
he would make Future not all those Possible Effects, whether Absolute or
Conditionate, but only some particulars, as, for example, that he would make
Alexander, or Plato, of this or that individual temperament of body, in this or
that climate and country, of this or that particular course of life, with all
conspiring Circumstances; to whom all things should happen according to the
possibility of their Futurition, wherein God beheld them before the conception
or pronunciation of his Decree; so that by this influence of God's definitive
Will, those Events are no more then deduced into actual existence, which
formerly were only in (...), or in the womb of their Causes.

Now, upon this Hypothesis our understanding is advanced to this manifest
Conclusion, That the Prescience of God does nothing conduce adrem existentem,
nor to the Actions or Passions thereof; since it is not the cause of their
Inference: nor do his Decrees, that are subsequent unto, and in a manner
grounded upon his Prevision, work any the least mutation at all in the natures
of his Creatures, or by violence pervert their Virtues to the production of any
Effects, to which, by their primitive Constitution and individuation, they were
not precisely adapted and accommodated. Since, in so doing, he must take away
from his Creatures those peculiar Faculties, which he at their creation freely
conferred upon their several natures; and innovate the fundamental laws of
Nature.

Now this dark shadow of that darker mystery of Predestination, Article 3. The
diamet^al Disparlty between that Divine Praenotion which is antecedent to
Divine Praeordination; and that which is subsequent; amply declared.
how obscurely soever presented, does yet sufficiently commonstrate how vast
and diametral a disparity is between that Divine Prenotion, which is
Antecedent; and that which is subsequent to Divine Praeordination. For that
Praescience, which has for its object a thing to come, without any praevious
and praedeterminant Decree; supposes that particular thing to come, together
with the whole series or concatenation of its proper Causes, and method or
manner of its Futurition: the Modus Futuritionis being, as the Schoolmen well
define, Id quod futurum est, sive quod ad rei, quae futura praescitur,
futuritionem quolibet modo pertinet. This that Rabbin Isac bar Sesat, quoted by
Menasseth Ben Israel (de termino vitae. page 226.) seems well to have
understood, when he said; Deus ab aterno disposuit totius mundi negotia, and
divina sua sapientia, ac perspicacia, vidit omnes effectus, qui in tempore
futuri essent: qui licet pendeant (loquor enim de actionibus humanis) a libero
hominis arbitrio, ut fiant aut non siant; nihilominus tamen Deus certo and
infallibiliter eos praevidit, ac praescivit. Neque tamen ideoquicquam in
tempore facit homo, quia Deus ca facturum praescivit: sed e contra, quia homo
in tempore hoc vel illud facit, aut operatur, ideo Deus ab aeterno illud scivit.

But on the Contrary, that Praescience, which follows upon the
Praedetermination of the Divine Will, has, indeed, for its object a thing to
come, and also presupposes it as fully as the former; but so that it
comprehends the order and manner of its futurition as sixth and immutable, being
so constituted by virtue of the antecedent Praedestination.

For the further inculcation of this Distinction, let us make use of an Example
most familiar, and pertinent to the difficulty in hand.

That Divine Praescience, which has no dependence on a praedeterminant Article
4. A second illustration of the same difference by a pertinent Instance, or
ex^mplification.
decree, let us suppose it to be a Praescience of the life and death, of the
health and sickness, of the good or evil use of the Free will, of Peter, John,
and every individual man in the world: and is twofold.

First Conditionate; if Peter, or John, being born of a sound and durable
constitution, shall choose such a course of life, as that he shall observe the
wholesome Aphorisms of Temperance in his use of the Six nonnaturals, shall
opportunely, in all distempers introduced by the inclemency of the aer, the
malignant impressions of the Stars, epidemick contagions, or other undeclinable
Accidents, recur to the use of such convenient remedies, as both reason and
experience prescribe for the preservation or restoration of health; then I
foreknow that he shall live healthy and long: but if, on the contrary; then I
foreknow, that he shall be infested with frequent diseases, and die immaturely.

Second Absolute; I foreknow that Peter or John shall choose a prudent course
of life, convenient both to his Genius, and temperament; shall sedulously
endeavor the preservation of his health, by moderation in diet and other
nonnaturals, and the restoration of the same, when impaired by any distemper,
by rational and approved medicaments; and shall therefore enjoy health, and
attain to longaevity. On the Contrary, I foreknow, that he shall lead a
disorderly and luxurious course of life, accelerate the dissolution of his
temperament, by the immoderate, praemature, or unseasonable use of Wine,
Women, Passions etc. and when assaulted by any disease, chronique or acute,
shall either omit to consult learned, judicious and experienced Physicians, or
disobey their pharmaceutical or diaetetical praescripts, drink wine in a
Fever, cold water in a Critical sweat, salt, sharp, acid or corroding liquors
in a Dysentery, eat Astringents in obstructions, frigid, crude and dyspeptical
fruits in an imbecility of the stomach, etc. and shall therefore ruin his
health and drop into the grave before he is ripe.

Now take which Praescience you please, and either has for its object, the
praecise Term of Peter or John's life, as a thing to come; and fully and
punctually presupposes the same: but so, that together with that fixed Term it
comprehends also all the order and manner of its Futurition, or all the
antecedent and conspiring causes; amongst which the principal and most
energetical is the right use or abuse of his own Free will, in whose power it
was to move that Term either forwards or backwards, (i. e.) either to adduce,
or produce it.

So far, therefore, is this Praevision of God from excluding the necessity of
Medical Remedies, as the Defendants of Fate would impose, according to that of
Solon in Stobaeus -- Fato quaecunque manet sors;
Non hanc avertet victima, sed nec aves,
Nec qui Paeonias aegris mortalibus herbas
Saepe erraturam far laborat opem.
That it totally includes, nay presupposes it so necessarily, that if we take
away from man the Liberty of his Will, and the opportunity of using either
prophylactical, or therapeutical means, in order to the prolongation of his
life; we must also submove the Certainty of Gods Praescience: since that
determines nothing, but only praesupposeth all things; nor does God, by a
decree subsequent to that Prescience, praeordain that this or that individual
man shall recover of such or such a disease, unless by virtue of such or such
appropriate remedies, which the Physician shall in the opportunity praescribe.

Nor is it a more justifiable plea at the bar of reason, to argue thus; if the
Term of man's life be certainly and precisely foreknown to God, then must it,
together with the order and manner of its Futurition, be sixth and immutable:
then to argue thus; if God has a certain and precise cognition of any thing
already past, as of the Creation of the world; therefore could that thing have
come to pass no otherwise, nor at any other time, then it did; therefore was
the world created by God, non libere sed necessario, not by an Arbitrary, but
Necessary and restrained activity. For, as Science, having for its object a
thing Praeterite, does infer no necessity upon that thing praeterite, that it
should have bin so and no otherwise effected: so does Praescience, having for
its object a thing Future, infer no necessity upon its futurition; each being
an Immanent Action in God, and extra rem, or having no compulsive influence at
all upon that particular thing, or its Causes: and Futurum esse imports no
other thing, but an object of Praescience; nor Praeteritum esse, any thing but
an object of Science, or Memory. Science is the perfection of the Subject, or
thing knowing; not of the object, or thing known: much less the destruction of
the thing known. For necessary it is to perfect Science, that it agree in all
points with the nature of its object.

But wholly Antarctical to this, is that Praescience which is grounded upon
Divine Praedestination, whereby not only the Term of every individuals life,
together with the whole order and manner of its Futurition, is praefixt; but
also all those Causes, whose refractary or counter-activity might in any
respect hinder the precise accompletion of that prefixed Term, are praevented or
praedetermined to invalidity, lest the Praescience become uncertain or dubious:
whether that Praedetermination dispose per modum Causae Efficientis, by a
certain Physical and really effective action, or impression upon the will of
man, enforcing it to the election of such a course of life, as may conduce to
his punctual pervention to that praestitute Term; or per modum Causae
Desicientis by nonconcurrent, but only permissive influence (by some called
Permissio simplex, Simple Permission: by others, Permissio essicax, efficacious
permission,) since that rule amongst Philosophers Causa Desiciens in
necessariis reducitur ad Efficientem, does warrant the Indifferency. For this
Decretory Praescience, though it agree with the precedent simple Praescience in
this, that it has for its object rem futuram, includes in its circle the
whole order and manner of its Futurition, and presupposes both the end, and
respective means fully and absolutely; yet it clearly and irreconcilably
differs from it in this, that the precedent Prescience presupposes the liberty
of man's Will, and the use thereof not only incoacted, and without irrefragable
impuls, but absolutely free and arbitrary: but this wholly destroys the
arbitrary monarchy of the Will, by importing that the influence of the Decree
not only inclines by soft and gentle flexure or persuasion, but by an
irresistible violence forces it upon the election and pursuit of those means,
which in a direct and natural line lead to the accomplishment thereof; and this
lest the Certitude or Infallibility of the Divine Praescience be infirmed and
staggered.

To discriminate this Later from that Former Praescience yet Article 5. A third
illustration of the same Difference, by conceiving the Divine Decrees, in the
same subordinate scries, which the Fatists have imagined.
morefully: and so insinuate the result of the Distinction, by the most
intelligible and concise way of argumentation: it will be necessaty for us to
conceive the Decrees of God in the same method of subordination, wherein they,
who found the infallibility of his Praevision upon the necessity of his
Praedestination and Praedetermination, have bin, by the obscurity of the
Subject, compelled to range their thoughts, in the declarement of their opinion.

The first Decree of God runs thus; I will, that Peter live till the expiration
of the natural or temperamental lease of his life; conceive it to be till his
glass has run 50. 60. 70. or 80. year: but that John wither before he is ripe,
and fall in the June of his age; conceive it to be in the 20. 30. or 40. year
from his birth.

The Second thus; I will praeserve Peter from this or that sickness, defend him
from this or that knock of misfortune, conserve him in, or restore him from
this or that dangerous disease; lest he expire before the praestitute Term of
his life: but for John, he shall be invaded by such or such a mortal disease,
receive such or such a wound incurable, or perish by this or that fatal
Accident; so that he may verify my prognostic in dying at the hour appointed.

The Third thus; lest Peter laps into such or such a mortal disease, I will
that he be provided of an industrious and prudent Physician to prescribe unto
him rational, generous, and effectual prophylactical means; or, if surprised
therewith, that he use convenient and victorious therapeutical medicaments* in
order to the expulsion of the same; that so the number of his days be not
shortened: but, on the contrary, that John shall fall into such or such a
dangerous sickness, and want Physicians, medicaments, and all other
Conservatives whatever; lest he survive beyond the moment praefixt.

The Fourth thus; that Peter may not, by the abuse of his Arbitrary
prerogative, become insensible, incurious, or negligent of the means ordained
to conserve health, and run into the perpetration of such sins, as may be
injurious to the temperament of his body, as well as the peace of his mind; I
will, by the powerful influence of my Special Grace, so prepare and dispose
his Will, that he shall lead a temperate, circumspect and virtuous life, and so
subsist till the period of his days praefixt. On the contrary, that John may
not, by the right use of that Elective Liberty conferred upon his Will, and by
a desire of attaining to longaevity, endeavor the conservation of his health,
by diaetetical or pharmaceutical observations; I will, that he want that
ingenuity, that prudence, that advice, and those prescripts, conducible to the
prolongation of his life, and finally that assistance of Divine Grace, without
which it is not only probable, but necessary, that he should resign up the
rains of his Will to Sensuality, and so either by the prodigal effusion of his
Vital oil in the immodest and destructive rites of Venus, or the extinction of
his implantate heat by the frantique sacrifices of Bacchus, or other
exorbitances, decurtate the temperamental lease of his life; and so confess
Corruption in the moment prefixed.

Or, in a higher key of Fatality, thus; though Peter, by the abuse of his Will,
rashly expose himself to the fury of the most dangerous Enemies to life, and by
gluttony, ebriosity, vindictive anger, salacity, etc. render himself both
unfit, and unworthy longer to inspire the common aer; I will notwithstanding
all this again repair the breaches of his constitution, protect him from the
malice of danger, and conserve him till the moment predestined, nor shall he be
taken off by any other means, but what my Will has predetermined. Contrary;
though John, by the right use of the liberty of his will, shall constantly and
severely practice all the hard lessons of Virtue, subdue the impetuous and
forcible Temptations of Sensuality, lead a life more impassionate then the most
rigid of the Stoics ever professed, more chaste then aged Hermits, more
abstinent then Lessius, more peaceable then Charity her self, and so deserve to
become the greatest Example of Longevity: I will notwithstanding, that the
appointed Term of his life remain fixed and intransible beyond that point, which
my will has from all Eternity decreed to be the Ne Vltra of his subsistence.

On these, or the like Decrees, must the Certitude and infallibility of the
Divine Prescience be erected by any; who subordinate Gods Prescience to his
Predestination of the end, and predetermination of the means.

Now, to use all this; so many, so great, and so intolerable are the
Incongruities, and Inconveniences, which necessarily depend on this Decretory
Prescience; that we need no other argument to evince the weakness of their
judgments, who have labored in its defense* but only to select and consider
the chiefest Article 6. The first Absurdity impendent on the opinion of a
Decretory Prescience of God, as to the Actions of man.
and most obvious of them.

First, this opinion, that, all the actions of man, and their Events, are
Fatally predetermined by the Decretory Prescience of God; does not only
enervate and scandal, nay destroy the sincerity of those many Divine Precepts,
enjoining man to endeavor, to the utmost of his knowledge and power, the
conservation of his health, and the prolongation of his life, by temperance and
all other lawful means; of those many Promises made to encourage him to a
strict observance; of those many Comminations annexed, to deter him from the
neglect of those Precepts; but also, upon inference, dissolves the obligation
to all serious study and solicitude to explore, procure, prepare, and use all
convenient remedies, in order to the expulsion of diseases, and the revocation
of health, on the part of the Sickman; and on the part of the Physician, to be
industrious, careful, vigilant, and conscientious, in the exercise of his
Profession.

That the Patient is hereby disobliged from the duty of Self-conservation, may
be thus manifested. If it be, ex Decreto Divino, fixed and immutable, that such
a man shall lead a peaceable, healthful, and blisfull life, and do all things
that are either necessary or conductive to the procurement and continuation of
that happy estate; or on the Contrary, that such a man shall eat the bread of
sorrow, drink the bitter waters of Affliction, and unravell his tedious days in
poverty, contention, valentude, or craziness of body, anxiety of mind, etc. and
therefore take no care at all to do those actions, which might be necessary or
conductive to the amendment of his miserable condition, by reason he wants the
assistance, counsel, and manuduction of Divine Grace* then does it unavoidably
follow, that the labor and solicitude of the one is superfluous, and of the
other unsuccesfull, nay impossible. For whatever the one, or the other shall
do, and however live; yet still the success shall be no other, but what God
has predestined, and though the intention of either be levelled at an end
quite contrary to what is designed by the Volition of the Predestinant; yet
shall the Force of the Decree either pervert, or render it ineffectual: and if
we grant, that the Happy man did take care to conserve his health and life; we
must also grant, that he could not but take that care; and that the Miserable
man did take none to preserve either, because it was not in the power of his
Will to determine on that care. And thus, what either shall do, can be neither
Care, nor Negligence, strictly and properly so called: but a mere Necessity of
Caring, or not Caring.

On the part of the Physician, the Reason is the same; for, if this doctrine of
Fatality be true, well may he be excused, nay thought the wiser man, if he shut
up his books, forget his Aphorisms, deliver out his Prescripts per Sortilegium
(a course, as I have bin ascertained by the testimony of a judicious and
faithful observer thereof, not long since taken up and constantly practiced by
a Devout Impostor, whose counterfeit zeal to the Cause had advanced him to the
trust of a Physician in that Army, which gathered the first flowers of its
triumphant wreath in Nase by Field) and supinely give Coloquyntida, or Scammony
in a Dysentery, Antimony in the Iliaca Passio, Opium in a Crisis, Aqua Fortis
for a Julep etc. since no Art can supersede, nor Poison accelerate his
departure, whose time of transition to the invisible world Destiny has limited
to a moment; Et cum Fata volunt, bina Venena juvant. Nor can it be rightly
esteemed a Virtue in the Physician, to be studious and solicitous; or a Vice to
be debaucht, ignorant, and negligent of the safety of his Client: if it be only
the irresistible Impulse of Fate, which forces his Will to the election of
either, in order to the precise accomplishment of its Decree: or, more plainly,
if the Care or Negligence of the Physician be but the Medium, whereby Fate
brings about its end concerning the dissolution of the Patient. And if so, what
Moral obligation remains upon the conscience of the Physician? Assuredly none
at all. Which every moderate judgment will soon detect to import so manifest,
dangerous, and detestable an Absurdity; that of it self it is able not only to
discredit the opinion of Fatality, but also to accuse and convict the Abettors
thereof of unpardonable Inconsideration, Stupidity, and Irreligion.

The Second Inconvenience, or rather Absurdity, inseparably Article 7. A Second
Absurdity connected to the same.
conjoined to this opinion of a Decretory Prescience in God; is this: Whoever
shall grant, that all the means or remedies, and so the sedulity or negligence
as well of the Sick, as the Physician, are subordinately predetermined by the
Decree of Fate; must also, by the necessity of natural consequence, be
compelled to grant, that to allow the merit of Praise or Dispraise,
Commendation or Reprehension unto either, is open Injustice. For by what
pretext of Equity can a Sick man challenge to himself the honor of having done
a praiseworthy action, in endeavoring to preserve himself both by observing a
course of Diet contrary to his disease, and seasonable consulting with and
strictly conforming unto the advice of a learned and judicious Physician; or
the Physician for the full discharge of his duty in regulating the sick
according to the most profound and salutiferous maxims of his Art: if the
obedience of the one, and the care of the other be not Arbitrary, but coacted
or necessitated by the Force of the complex Decree of Fate, as instrumental to
the subsistence of the sick man till the predestined term of his life? Vbi mera
necessitas locum habet, ibi laudem exulare necesse est: where mere Necessity is
admitted, thence all Laudation is excluded. And with what justice can we
reprehend the sick man, for being incurious in the disquisition, or irregular
in, and averse from the use of the means prescribed for his restoration: if
that his supinity* irregularity, and aversion be imposed upon his Will by the
impuls of Destiny, and predetermined as a necessary Medium to accomplish the
Decree of his immature death? or the Physician either for his neglect, or
ignorant and inartificial tractation of his Client; if twere decreed he should
be so, to the end the client might expire according to the decree? Persuasum
est omnibus (says Menasseh Ben Israel, de Termino Vitae. page 205.) nec
laudandum, nec arguendum quemquam, nisi qui libero arbitrio and consulto been
agit, aut delinquit; adeo ut nullus suasioni, consiliis, redargutioni, praemio
aut poenae locus sit, si homo non est liber in actionibus suis.

Article 8. Two Subterfuges of the Fatists; Precluded.
From this distress our Opponents have promised themselves an easy evasion, by
replying; that both Patient and Physician are wholly ignorant of the Decree,
the Optics of Mortality being too weak and remote to read the lines in the
Book of Fate, without the perspicill of Divine Revelation.

But this way of Subterfuge may be blockt up, by rejoyning; that though the
Decree be known to neither, yet it is sufficiently manifest to both, from the
Hypothesis of this opinion, that not only their Actions, but also the Successes
thereof are the prescripts and consignations of Fate; and so can be no other
then what is included in, and necessitated by the Decree: and consequently that
there can remain no just Cause of reprehension on either side.

Should they insist yet further upon the same plea, and urge; that it is part of
the Decree, that either the Physician, or Patient, or both should be negligent,
and so become Culpable: we may soon exped this obstruction only by demanding,
what reason or equity can be found to justify such an accusation and respective
punition, where the Will of the delinquent is controlled, inflected, nay
impelled upon the commission of a crime, or omission of a duty, by a power
infinitely superior to his reluctance; and not only the act, but time, place,
instruments, means, etc. conspiring circumstances, precisely preordained by a
decree of that Will, which is Omnipotence? Reprehension imports not only an Act
of the Reprehendent, but also the Guilt or Culpability of the Reprehended:
otherwise it cannot be just. To the legality, therefore, of a reprehension it
is undeniably necessary, that the ground or cause thereof be a real and proper
Guilt in the person reprehended. Now Guilt can have no place, where that which
is impeached cannot be a Voluntary Agent, but a Medium, or Instrument ordained,
and actuated by an irresistible Power to the execution of an infallible Decree.

The Third and last Absurdity imports no less then the subversion Article 9. A
third Absuidity inseparable from the hypothesis of a Decretory Prescience
Divine.
of the very fundamental Principle, or basis of all Moral Virtues, and
Christian Graces; by inferring a denial of Justice in the reward of Good, and
punishment of Evil, either before, or after death. For, it is the Liberty of the
Will only that supports the Equity of Compensation: and therefore he, who does
a good action, when it was not in the election of his Will to have omitted that
good action, or to have done it otherwise then he did; has but a weak claim to
a reward; nor has he, who commits a sin, which is not in his power to leave
uncommitted, more reason to fear a punishment from the even hand of Divine
Justice.

To conclude, therefore; since these are the Absurdities, which every man's
Logic may perceive necessarily and immediately to slow from the doctrine of
Decretory Prescience, or such as is subsequent to Divine Predetermination; and
since the same, nor any others of equal danger to the Principles of our
Knowledge, and Articles of the Christian Faith, can ever be deduced from the
hypothesis of that Simple Prevision or unactive Prescience, which we have
allowed of as consistent to the justice of God, because consistent to the
Arbitrary freedom of man's Will: it is no hard task to determine, in which
opinion our judgments may with more safety and permanent satisfaction aquiesce.

Now, that we may relieve the Memory of our patient Reader, Article 10. The
reduction of the whole dissertation to 4 Conclusions, genuinely extracted from
the Premises.
from the oppression of our (not well to be avoided) precedent prolixity; we
conceive our selves in gratitude obliged, to tender him a Recapitulation, or
reducement of all this tedious discourse, concerning the Mobility of man's term
of life, in Four Conclusions, naturally resulting from the Premises.

The First Conclusion.
That God has circumscribed the duration of man's life, with a certain Circle
or round of time, conceive it to be of 70. 80. 90. or 100. years, more or less:
but yet has reserved to himself, as jus supremoe Majestatis, the prerogative
power of extending the term of any individual man's life beyond the limits of
that sphere, so far as it shall seem convenient to the Wisdom of his Will..

The Second Conclusion.
That God, who loves justice more then man, and man only for Justice sake; and
hates Injustice more then man, and man only for Injustice sake (for Sin,
unravelled to the botome, will be found to be nothing but Injustice) is
willing, in respect of the object of his Love, or in consideration of man's
justice, to prolong; or, on the contrary, in respect of the object of his Hate,
or in consideration of man's Injustice, to abbreviate the term of man's life,
included within that determinate Circle of time: reserving still to himself an
arbitrary power of acting the quite contrary; (i. e.) of abbreviating the life
of the just, and prolonging the life of the unjust, upon the persuasion of
reasons either manifest to us, or private to himself.

The Third Conclusion.
That God, when he is pleased to condescend to the prolongation of the life of
a Just person, does procure the same, either by means conform to the ordinary
and settled Constitutions, o, Canons of Nature; or by means Supernatural. The
Former^ when bearing a respect to the native Durability of his individua
Temperament, he assists to the duration thereof until the natural Period, or
last moment of this sphere of time; wherewith the life of man (in specie) is
circumscribed: and this either by conserving his Temperament in its decent
tenor, and requisite Vigor; or by prohibiting and preventing the invasion of
those known Enemies to longevity, which might any way conduce to the
denormation, and consequently the premature dissolution of its harmony. The
Later, when bearing no respect to the native durability of his individual
Temperament, he meliorateth, exalts, and by the secret immission of some
special Athanasia, or Antidote against early death, corroborateth the same, so
that it does last longer, then otherwise, pro vi sua nativa, it could possibly
have lasted, had it never bin impaired by any distemper. And this when God
does, then is he properly said, to prolong the life, or fulfill the number of
the years of the Just. But the Contrary effect he procures by contrary Causes;
(i. e.) he abbreviates the life of an unjust Person, either by an immature
turbation and dissolution of his temperament, by its native disposition
sufficiently tenacious and durable to extreme old age: or by not prohibiting,
(i. e.) permitting and so procuring the violent and preternatural dissolution
thereof by the destructive surprisall of any Accident whatever. And in this
case properly are the Unjust said, not to Dimidiate their days..

The Fourth Conclusion.
That a just Person, who, so much as in him lies, sixeth all the Affections of
his Soul upon the Fear of God, and the avoydance of Evil; if he chance, through
the frailty of his nature, or the force of temptation, to fall into some
Capital Sin, which according to the penalty annexed to its prohibition,
deserves to be punished by the Abbreviation of his life: may notwithstanding
sometimes, his remorse of Conscience, profound sorrow, fervent prayer,
religious fasting, and other duties requisite to true and perfect repentance,
effectually exciting the Mercies of God, obtain from him a full and absolute
remission not only of the sin, but also of the temporal punishment due
thereunto; and moreover a restoration of his Temperament to its native vigor,
from which it was alienated by former infirmities, or corrupted by the
dyscratical or distempering contagion of sin. And sometimes not; and this
chiefly, when it has seemed convenient to the most wise and just God to
pronounce the fatal and irrepealable sentence of Death upon him: for in such a
case, I believe the sin committed, to belong to that black order of Sins unto
Death; by contradistinction thereof from that Sin, which is not unto Death, or
upon which the irrevocable Sentence of Death is not yet pronounced; which no
man can certainly know without special revelation..

CHAP. VII. Of the Liberty Elective of Man's Will.
SECT. I.
IN our enumeration of the Venenate Absurdities, Article 1, The Parity of
Absurdities resulting from those two Antagonistical Hypotheses, of Absolute
Fatality, and mere Contingency; as to the Actions of man.
which naturaly grow upon that inflexible stock of Absolute Fatality, or, more
expressly, upon that execrable Hypothesis of the Stoics (that we may be
charitable in forgetting there are any Christians of that irreligious
persuasion) that all the Actions of every individual man are praedestined, and
the whole order and manner of their Futurition praecisely praeordained by the
invariable decrees of that Supreme Power, against which the coacted and limited
Will of man can make no effectual resistance; we well remember, we specified
the total sublation of all Virtue and Vice; the abnegation of Justice either
Divine or Human, in the compensation of Piety and Impiety; the adnihilation of
the use and efficacy of Laws to coerce from Evil, of Precepts and Adhortations
to elect and prosecute good, in a word, the subversion of all Religion and
Morality, and consequently the necessary resignation and rendition of the mind
of man to receive all the destructive Impressions of Hell. And no less, nor
fewer Absurdities may the reason of every man discover emergent from the
Antithesis or contrary Assertion, that all the Actions of man, and their
particular Events or Successes, are neither the praedeterminations of Fate, nor
the occasional designations of Providence Divine, nor fully the arbitrary
elections of man's will, but the mere unpraemeditate, and temerarious Hits of
Chance: since, in pure Justice, those actions only are Laudable, or
Vituperable, which are done D^libera^o and libere ratione Agentis, upon a
deliberation of the Intellect, and an arbitrary election of the Will subsequent
to that deliberation; and not those which are merely Fortuitous, and result
from the indeliberate or blind activity of Fortune.

When first I tasted the odious bitterness of these two streams, whereof most
of the ancient Greeks, many of the noblest Romans, Article 2. Those 2 contrary
streams found to have bin derived from one and the same poisonous Fountain;
viz. a subtersuge of man to evade Culpability.
and (I fear at least) not a few of the professors of Christianity have drank
too liberally, even to the infatuation of their reason; I must confess, I
conceived them to have bin derived from two different fountains, or interests
as irreconcilable as Light to Darkness: but when I had, by the continued
travail of my thoughts, traced them up to their original, I found them to be
effused from one and the same vein; viz. the propensity of Human nature
depraved, to attempt by all means imaginable the Excusation or Extenuation of
the Guilt of its defections from its proper object real good, by charging it
wholly, or in part, upon some external influence praevalent over man's Will. For
man, having from the Light of Nature learned this as an Axiom; that the
Justice of Reprehension and Punition is radically consistent in the entire
Freedom of the Delinquents Will; or, more plainly, in this, that the
Delinquent chose to do ill, when 'twas absolutely in his power to have done
well; not in this, that either his Will was enforced by a Necessity that admits
of no repugnancy, first to the Volition and after to the actual prosecution of
that ill; or that he was only a mere illiberal, incogitant, and fortuitous
Agent: 'twas obvious for him to conclude, that if he could incriminate either
upon an ineluctable Necessity, o^ simple and mere Chance, then he might with
aequal facility, discharge himself of the Culpability, or Guilt, and
consequently of the punishment due thereunto.

Now, though our pen has dropped, on the praecedent leaves, Article 3. The
Authors In^i^ments, here to enquire profoundly into the Natures of Free Will,
Fortune, and Fate
frequent and cursary Detections of the gross and ruinous Absurdities of both
these subterfuges, so that a rational consideration may, from those transient
glances or hints, collect Arguments more then enough for the total Demolition
of them: yet, since those notions of Fate, Fortune and Free Will are subject to
Aequivocation, some men understanding them as positive Causes, others as Modi
agendi Causarum, certain manners of Causes operating, and others as Vana
Nomina, mere Terms, which in Logical verity respond by way of adaequation to no
real Entities; and since the difficulty of the subject encouraged us to promise
a full Reconciliation of all their apparent Antipathies, or Inconsistencies,
and also a perfect Accommodation of them all to the Special Providence of God
(the only cause of their continuity and connection to the present clue of our
thoughts) we esteemed it not only a pardonable, but a laudable design to
attempt by a singular discourse the manifestation of their particular Natures,
or, more plainly, what we are to understand by Fate, what by Fortune, and what
by Free Will. Which that we may atchieve with the more familiarity to common
Apprehension, both method and perspicuity command us to consider the last in
the first place.

By the Liberty or Freedom of man's Will (that we may maturely praevent all
Logomachy or Sophistical contention Article 4. What is intended properly by the
Liberty of man's Will.
impendent from the ambiguous sense of that term) we intend not that Freedom,
which being called by the Grecian (...), defined by Cicero, Potestas vivendi
ut velit quilibet, and by the Civil Law (...), the Power of leading the life of
a Freeman, is the contrary to Servitude; since that concerns only the Civil
or Political state of Man; but that which by a proper elegancy the Grecian
defines (...), or (...), the Latins Id quod in nobis seu penes nos, nostrove
in arbitrio, potestateque situm est, and the Divines commonly name Liberum
Arbitrium an Absolute power of electing what objects we please, Good or Evil,
whereon to fix our Affections; since that concerns only the natural state of
man, and is that alone which can justify the Equity of the reward of Piety or
Virtue, and the punishment of Impiety or Vice, by God, or Man.

For morethen one respect did the Ancients select and fix on Article 5. The
several subordinate Actions of the Mind, exercised about its objects: and the
respective scholastic Terms, by which Philosophers have adaequately expressed
them.
this word Arbitrium; For, whether we would intimate that Action of the
Rational Faculty, whereby man gives judgment in any matter that seemed
dubious; as we use to say, that for the Decision of any case, whose obscure
aequity either our own imprudence, or interest makes us unfit to determine, we
ought to refer our selves to the Arbitration of some judicious and impartial
person, who is thence most accommodately called an Arbiter: or the Rational
Faculty it self existent within us, from which the action of Judication or
Arbitration it self does proceed, the word signifying the Action being
transferred upon the Agent; we can hardly be furnished with a more adaequate
and significant Appellation. But, to trace the thoughts of the first Imponents
up to the original, in respect the rational faculty, being the same with the
Mind or Intellect, is conversant and exercised about not only things that
belong merely to speculation, but also such as are reducible into Action or
Practice; therefore does the term Arbitrium seem to be appropriated to the
Faculty, chiefly in respect of things to be done, inasmuch as it is occupied in
the expension or dijudication of the consequent good of those actions, and sits
as it were an absolute Arbiter to determine, whether they shall be done, or no.

And hence is it that when the rational faculty having perpended the
convenience and inconvenience, or good and evil of its objects, and ended its
act of Deliberation, adhaeres unto, or fixes upon one as more convenient then
the others; this second act or Adhaesion may be in the general (i. e. in
respect of things both speculable and practical) called (...), an Assent or
Approbation; but in particular (i. e. in respect only to those things that fall
under action) (...), an Election or Choice: since it supposes the praelation
of that particular thing to be put in execution, to all others objected. And in
this distinct relation was it that Aristotle (Ethicor. 3. cap. 3. in fine)
styles the object elected, (...), id quod caeteris propositis, and postpositis,
amplectendum nobis proponimus, or, id quod sub delectum cadit. This the Latins
most frequently render. Consilium, as in those phrases, capere consilium, sequi
rationis consilium, nescire quid sit alicujus consilium, etc. and Propositum,
as in those, adhaerere, stare, manner in proposito, a proposito revocare,
propositi esse tenacem, etc. and we translate into Resolution, or Determination.

Again, so soon as the Mind, its act of Consultation or Deliberation being
finished, has praeferred one thing to all others, in the praesent, and
determined it for the greater good, or more convenient; then immediately
supervenoth the function of the Appetite, whereby the mind is carried on
toward the Amplectence, or fruition of the Good apparent therein: and this
third action the Greeks call (...), the Latins Voluntas and Volitio
indifferently, and the English the Will or Act of Volition. Which we glance at
per transennam, because vulgarly, by the word Voluntas, men understand rather
the Appetite (rational and proper only to Man) it self, then the Function or
operation thereof: for which consideration, we shall in all our subsequent
discourse conform to custom, in using the terms Will and Appetit
indiscriminatim, as Synonymas implying one and the same thing.

Moreover, in regard, that upon the Appetition of the Will, which is properly
the actual prosecution of the good apparent in the object, there immediately
succeeds the action of the Motive Faculty, therefore is the action consequent
to that appetition justly called Voluntary, as having bin deliberated and
undertaken ex consilio, upon consultation and election, and respondent to that
which the Grecian calls (...). For that is it, whose beginning Aristotle has
decreed to be Election, in his Aphorism, (...), which was the ground of
Ciceros Parados, non esse actionem in rebus inanimis, that there could be no
action in Inanimate things, since they are devoid of the power of Election,
Assent, or Approbation: and of Aristotle's also, when he contended that this
kind of (...) or action, could not rightly, and in distinct truth, be
attributed to Brute Animals, nay higher yet, not to children, for the same
reason, though he willingly conceded to both (...), spontaneous motion. Not but
that by (...), he sometimes signifies motionem appetitus spontaneam, the
spontaneous motion of the Appetite Rational, or the Will it self, as (in 3.
Ethic. cap. 4.) where he constitutes this difference betwixt Volition and
Election; that (...), or Voluntas, is chiefly the end, and (...) the Election
of the means conducing to that end, as in this instance, We will health, and
then elect the means which in probability may ossiciate either to the
conservation or restitution thereof. But when he draws his thoughts into a
sharper angle, and speaks more praecisely, he allows not every appetition, to
be the Will, but only that which follows a serious deliberation, approbation
and election, and is grounded upon reason, which therefore he most judiciously
defines to be (...), boni cum ratione appetitio, an Appetition of Good with
Reason.

Nor does he always restrain the word (...) to that Action which proceeds from
the Will, or election of the Rational Appetite: but many times lets it loose to
the expression of those inconsiderate actions, which result from the impulse of
the Sensual; as in these words (1. Rhetor. cap. 10.) Omnia quae homines agunt,
aut per se agunt, aut non per se^ ac per se quidem, aut consuetudine, aut
appetitione, and ipsa quidem aut rationali, quae sit Voluntas, aut irrationali,
quae sit Cupiditas and Ira; non vero per se trifariam, quatenus aut natura, aut
vi, aut ex necessitate agunt. And thus much by way of Introduction concerning
the several Terms, by which both ancient and modern Philosophers have most
properly denoted the several successive or subordinate actions of the Mind
exercised about its objects. We now convert our thoughts to explore the
Quiddity or Essence of that we call Liberum Arbitrium, and wherein it does
r^dically and principally consist.

SECT. II.
FAmiliar it is to the Apprehension of every one, that Man Article 1. The
Essence of man's Liberty Elective, consistent primarily in the Indifferency of
the Intellect; and in the Will only dependently.
is affirmed to possess a Free Will, for this reason; that amongst many diverse
objects occurring to, and falling under the deliberation of the Cognoscent
Faculty, or Intellect, he is not obliged to make his election of any one more
then the others, nor does he so elect any one, as that it does not still remain
in his power to refuse that again and elect the contrary. This Liberty of
election some men have founded only in the Will, and others in the Rational
Faculty; to whose opinion reason advises us to adhaere. For doubtless the
Will, considered per se is a blind and undiscerning Faculty, or Power, which
can make no progress, nor find the way toward convenient objects without the
manuduction of the Intellect, which as it were lights the torch unto, and as a
knowing guide conducts the Will: so that since it is the proper office of the
Intellect to inform and conduct the Will, and the proper office of the Will to
follow the direction and guidance of the Intellect; it is not only manifest,
that the Will cannot deflect from the right way, toward the amplectence and
fruition of Good, unless by the mistaking Intellect it be seduced into the
devious paths of Evil; but also, that the Liberty of election is consistent in
the Intellect primarily, and in the Will only at the second hand, or by way of
dependence. To speak yet more expressly, the nature of this Liberty Elective
seems radically to consist in that Indifferency, in respect whereof the Faculty
called free, may or may not be carried on toward any particular object, which
the Schoolmen call the Liberty of Contradiction; or be so carried on toward
one object, as that it may at pleasure renege that Election, and make a new one
of the quite contrary, which they call the Liberty of Contrariety. Assuredly,
since no man can understand how there can be a Liberty, without a Faculty of
Election; it is evident that the Election can be only there, where is the
Indifferency: in regard that either where one single object is proposed, or the
faculty restrained and determined to the election and prosecution of any one
single object: there can be no free election, since election praesupposeth a
variety of objects, and is nothing but the praeferring one to all the rest, or,
if there be but two, the choice of one and the refusal of the other.

Some there have bin, and those no mean Clerks, who have Article 2. An
egregious Error of some Divines, that the Liberty of the Will does consummate
ly consist in its immovable Fixation on real Good.
affirmed the Will to be then most free, when it is so determined to, and fixed
upon one object grant it to be the Summum bonum or chiefest Good, that it
cannot be deflected to its contrary Evil; and the reason they give is this;
that since the Dilection, prosecution and fruition of that Good is highly
Voluntary, it ought therefore to be accounted highly free.

But we have just ground to doubt, that the Authors of this Article 3. Their
inadvertency of the real Difference between a Spontaneous, and Arbitrary
action; the occasion of that Error.
Paradox did not either clearly understand, or at least sufficiently consider
tho real difference betwixt a Spontaneous and an Arbitrary action; while they
contended that because either may be said to be Voluntary, therefore they are
one and the same originally* For indeed a Spontaneous action, though when men
discourse at random and in the general, it may seem to comprehend an Arbitrary
one, yet in praecise and distinct reasoning, it sounds no more then a certain
blind impulse of nature grounded upon no praecedent ratiocination; when an
Arbitrary action properly so called, depends upon a praevious ratiocination,
examination, dijudication, and election.

That a Spontaneous action is no more then an indiscreet impulse Article 4.
That a Spontaneous action, and an indeliberate Impulse of Nature, are
homologous or identical.
of nature, devoid of all deliberation, is manifest from hence; that not only
Infants and Brutes (to neither of which a Philosopher will allow either use of
Reason, or Liberty of Will) may do many things spontaneously, but even
Inanimates have their Spontaneous motions, as Fire ascends spontaneously, and
all bodies endowed with gravity descend spontaneously: so that in truth, to act
by the impulse of nature, and to act spontaneously appear to be one and the
same thing diversely phrased. And this makes it the less wonder, if since every
appetite be ex sua natura by the tendency of its own nature, carried on toward
Good, it may be said to be carried on toward Good of its own accord or
spontaneously; and so indeed that as a stone because by natural tendency it
falls downward, cannot again change that tendency and ascend upward, so
likewise the Appetite because it is determined only to Good, wants an
Indifferency of tending toward Evil: and as a stone by reason of its want of
Indifferency to upward and downward, is said to be moved downward
Spontaneously, but not Arbitrarily, so the Appetite by reason of its defect of
Indifferency to Good and Evil may be said to tend toward Good in general
Spontaneously, but not Arbitrarily. And hence comes it, that if you please to
suppose the Will to be determined to any one particular Good, grant it to be
the Summum Bonum, so that it cannot relinquish that, and with aequal appetition
prosecute any other Good, real, or only apparent, then indeed you may justly
enough affirm the Will to tend toward that Summum Bonum spontaneously, since
it is most natural to the Will to prosecute that which is the chiefest of Goods
(for it would not prosecute the same above all others, if it were dimoved to
the prosecution of less Good) but not Arbitrarily, since it wants an
Indifferency of tending to another Good as well as that, or to speak more
plainly, since it is not in its power at pleasure to desert that chiefest Good,
and address it self to the pursuit of a less Good.

Nor can this truth be staggered by that objection, that this Article 5. The
Divines objection, that the Tendency of the Will is Volent, and therefore Free;
praevented, by a distinction of Libency and Liberty.
tendency of the Will is Volent, since that Volency (I ask leave to use that
word until I can find another more adaequate to my notion) imports not a
Liberty but a mere Libency, that is a Complacency, or Collubescence, and so an
exclusion of all coaction, violence, renitence, or imposition: and from hence
that the Dilection, Prosecution, and Fruition of such a Good may be properly
enough accounted Voluntary; no man can rightly infer that it is therefore
highly Arbitrary, but only that it is highly Libent or Complacent; for there may
be a Libency we confess, and yet no Liberty, because no Indifferency.

Again, whereas they have added, that the Perfection of the Liberty of the Will
does consist in this, so to adhaere to Good as not to be capable of dimotion or
diversion from it; we may not Article 6. Their S^perstructure, that the
Pe^fection of the Wills Liberty, is its constant Adhaesion to, and
inseparability from real Good demolished by two reasons: (1) that this
Perfection imagined is not of the Liberty, but the Will it self; (2) that it
belongs only to separated Souls, in the state of Glorification.
unjustly suspect them of inadvertency in that they did not discover this
Perfection which they so much magnify to be not of the Liberty it self, but of
the Will or Appetite, which being Imperfect only in this respect, that at
pleasure it may desert and abandon real and true Good, and convert to the
Affectation and prosecution of specious and counterfeit; must acquire its
perfection from hence, that quitting that native Indifferency or Liberty, it so
firmly and inseparably adhaere to real and true Good, that nothing can divorce
it from thence and alienate it to the prosecution of counterfeit. Besides, we
conceive such a perfection of the Will to be above the sober hopes of
mortality, as being reserved to make no small part of the Souls Beatitude in
her state of Glorification, when she shall have no other object but the real
Summum Bonum, and no other Appetite but a fixed dilection thereof. For, had
flesh and blood bin capable of so great and divine an Excellency, as the
devesting the Will of that Indifferency to Good and Evil, and the constant
determination of it only to real Good; doubtless St Paul, a man of the most
mortified affections to the specious Goods of this life, and of the most
fervent desires toward the substantial and eternal of the next, had never with
so many tears lamented his being subject to that inevitable and implacable
Psychomachy and civil war betwixt his Rational and Sensual Appetites, nor in
the height of despair to conquer those rebellious inclinations to evil, cried
out, (...); Miserable man that I am! who shall deliver me out of this body of
death?

But this mistake has proved of no small advantage to the Article 7. What kind
of Indifferency that is, wherein the Liberty Elective is e^^^nced.
investigation of the truth, for from this which they concede, viz. it is
impossible for the Will, which is once fixed upon the dilection and fruition of
the Chiefest Good, really and clearly so understood (which is the prerogative
only of those Sainted Minds, which the kindness of Death has made superior to
the seducements of Sense) ever to revolt from it, and deslect to the quest of a
less Good: we may receive some assistance to our meditations, and the more
easily understand what kind of Indifferency that is, wherein the nature of this
Liberty Elective does consist, during our souls obligations to corporeity. In
our praecedent lines we affirmed, that the Intellect is guide, and does hold
the torch, or give light to the Will; and manifest it is that this Light which
the Intellect holds forth to the Will, is no other but that Judgment, which
the Intellect delivers concerning the Good and evil of objects, i. e. that this
object is good, and that evil; or among several different goods, that this is
more, and that less good: so that when the Will is said to be averted from one
object and converted to another, that mutation proceeds from hence, that the
Judgment of the Intellect is now for one thing and anon for another, and the
inslexion of the Will is dependent on the inflexion of the Intellect. Since,
therefore, the Flexility of the Will is subsequent and conform to the Flexility
of the Intellect, which consists in the mutability of its Judgments: we are
upon that consideration to observe, that the Intellect makes use of certain
Notions, or as common Physiology calls them, Simple Apprehensions of things, in
order to its own information, and succeeding pronunciation of Judgment
concerning their natures. For necessary it is, that the Mind have a Praenotion
what the Sun is and what Light is, that so it may judge afterward that Light
is in the Sun, or that the Sun is a Lucid Body; as also what Honey and what
Sweetness is, that it may afterward pronounce Honey to be Sweet. But in respect
that in objects which fall under Speculation, the Intellect does acquiesce in
such a simple Judgment, nor can infer anything further by necessity of
consequence: therefore in objects reducible to action, it has a certain
compound Notion called a Proposition or Enunciation, which by reason of another
common Notion congenial and implantate in the mind of every Man from its first
existence, is immediately annexed to the former simple notion, and superadded
thereunto as a Conclusion, which is really that which we call Judicium
Practicum, Practical Judgment. For instance, the Intellect having judged that
the Sun is a Lucid Body, may therein acquiesce and proceed to no further
inference; but so soon as it judges honey to be sweet, because it holds as
implantate a second complex notion, that what is sweet is to be tasted,
therefore it instantly pronounces this conclusion, that Honey is to be tasted.
And because practicable objects are not Vniversals, but Singulars; and for
instance, the Intellect does not give judgment concerning Honey in general, but
of this objected Honey that it is sweet; therefore to this judgment, this Honey
is sweet, instantly coheres and is superadded that second judgment, this Honey
is to be tasted. Nor that only, but such is the nature of this judgment, that
without any delay, if nothing countermand, succeeds the Execution thereof, as
in this case the actual Degustation of Honey. And upon the consideration of the
immediate supervention of the Execution upon a practical judgment, was it that
Aristotle (de Animalium motu cap. 7.) would allow no distinction between an
Action and a Conclusion, for says he, (...), that Conclusion which follows
upon two propositions, is the very action it self: which he most conveniently
illustrateth by several Examples, the praesent omission whereof we hope either
the memory or lecture of our competent Reader will supply. And this Article 8.
That to every Judgment of the Intellect, is immediately and necessarily
conjoined an Appetition or Aversation of the Will; respective to the Good, or
Evil nunciated.
justifies their knowledge, who first denominated such a conclusion which is
the Action it self (or to which at least the Execution does individually
cohaere) a Practical Judgment.

We are moreover to observe, that since the action or Execution of a Judgment
cannot succeed, unless the function of the Appetite or Will intervene between
the Judgment and Execution; therefore must every Judgment or Notion of Good
have adjoined unto it an Appetition of that Good, as every Judgment of Evil
has adjoined unto it an Aversion from that Evil: so that the Intellect cannot
pronounce this judgment, that what is sweet is to be tasted, but instantly
rises up the Appetite and wills the tasting of the Sweet; nor (to descend to
singulars) enunciate this sweet is to be tasted, but immediately the Will is on
edge to taste this Sweet. And hence it comes, that no conclusion can be
extracted, nor Execution thereof succeed; but only because together with the
Judgment the function of the Appetite has praeceded. For the reason why the
Conclusion of a Practical Syllogism has always the Execution or action
coherent to it, but the Conclusion of a Speculative has not; is no other then
this, that the function of the Will or Appetite is always associated to the
praemises or judgments of the Intellect in one, and not in the other. And
therefore so often as the Intellect gives Judgment of Good; which is the
proper object of the Will; as often is the Will excited so necessarily, that
its function or desire of fruition follows upon the heels of the Judgment* as
closely as a shadow attends a body in Sunshine; so that if the Intellect judge
any thing to be good, the Will immediately desires that good; as on the
contrary, if the Intellect judge any thing to be evil, the Will immediately
abhors that evil.

This is an excellent Axiom, that one truth can never be clearly understood,
but it leads on to the discovery of another; Article 9. The Instability of the
Will, in its Appetitions; necessarily caused by the Instability of the
Intellect, in its Judgments.
and here we have experience of it: for from the praemises it results a
perspicuous verity, that because the Intellect is for the most part fickle and
inconstant in its judgments; therefore must the Will be as wavering and
unstable in its Appetitions: and when the Intellect to day judges any object to
be good, but to morrow judges it to be evil; then does this Paedantique faculty
the Will affect that object to day, and hate it again to morrow: and when the
Intellect to day declares that such an object is to be affected and prosecuted
because it is good, but to morrow faceth about to a second object, and
apprehending it to be better then the first, judges that to be prosecuted
rather of the two; then is the Will to day carried on to the first object, and
to morrow averted from it to the Second. In a word, the Prosecution and
Aversion of the Will is dependent on, and conform to those Notions and
Judgments which the Intellect delivers concerning the more or less good, or
good and evil of objects.

Further, in respect that amonst good objects, one is really and truly good,
another only apparent and counterfeit; and likewise Article 10. The Delusion of
the Intellect, in its Judgments; necessitateth the Delusion of the Will in its
dependent Appetitions.
among evil objects (for too frequently good is disguised under the uncomely
vizard of evil, and evil again gilded over with the specious and alluring
hatchment of Good, and then what is realy good seems either to be absolute
evil, or a less good comparatively, and what is really evil seems either to be
absolute good, or a less evil comparatively) hence comes it we say, that as the
Intellect is frequently deluded in its judgments, as being invited by the
Appearance of Good, it judges a gilded evil to be a real good, or offended at
the Appearance of evil, judges that disguised good to be a real evil; so must
the Will of necessity be deluded in its dependent Appetitions, and prosecuting
an apparent good, obtain a real evil, and avoiding a seeming evil, be
frustrated of a real good; or certainly as the Intellect enunciates a less good
to be a greater, or a less evil to be a greater; so must the Will, prosecuting
a greater good, obtain a less, and avoiding a less evil, fall upon a greater.

On the demonstration of this grandfather Truth, viz. that the Will is but the
Needle, and the Intellect the Magnet, by Article 11. That the Indifferency of
the Will, is but the shadow, or representative of that Indifferency in the
Intellect: and the Determination of this, necessitates the Determination of
that.
whose verticity it is impregnated with an affectation of lying parallel to the
point of good, real or apparent, (for evil as evil, i. e. presented naked and
without disguise, is not the proper object of either) or, more consimilar, that
the Will is the Mariner, and the Intellect the Compass by which he steeres;
depends also the discovery of another Abstrusity, viz. that the Indifferency
found in the Will is but the Counterfeit or Representative of that Indifferency
which is congenial to the Intellect, and consequently, that the determination
of that Indifferency in the Mistress causes the determination of the like
Indifferency in the Handmayd, to this or that particular object. Now the
Indifferency of the Intellect seems essentially to consist in this, that it is
not so adliged to adhaerence, to its own judgment concerning the good of any
thing objected, as that it may not alter its judgment, and if the appearance of
good seems greater in another object, apostate from the first, and as
vigorously, and confidently convert to the second. For the Intellect is not of
the Number of those faculties, which by these fundamental constitutions of
their Essence are determined only to one certain motion, as Gravity in bodies
devoid of animation, the Generative virtue in Animals, etc. but is by nature so
Flexile, that having truth or good for its object, it may one while judge this
and another while that, and perhaps the quite contrary of one and the same, and
now affect an object under the notion of true and good, and within an hour,
nay possibly in a moment, revoke that judgment, and again dislike it under the
notion of false or evil, or at least, of less true, or less good.

This constant Inconstancy of the Intellect, the most happy Wit of Cicero
descanting upon, most conveniently compares it Article 12. The Analogy betwixt
the Intellect, and a Balance.
to a Balance (4 Academic:) for, in troth, no simile in the world, at least,
that ever passed our observation, can be more quadrant, or hold a nearer
resemblance, in all points: since, as a Balance, if geometrically adjusted by
dimidiation, is of it self indifferent to be depressed at either extreme, and
is so forced from its aequipondium, or depressed at that end, on which the
greater weight is suspended; as that the contrary end may be immediately
depressed, if a greater weight then the former be suspended thereon: exactly so
is the Intellect of its self indifferent, as to inclinations, and is so
inflected to that object, whereto the greater appearance of truth or good (which
is the weight that sways it down to determination from Indifferency) is
adhaerent, that it can upon the appension of a greater appearance of good be
reflected to a second object.

For it is not much below Uncontrollable Necessity, that the Article 13. That
the Intellect does naturally conform to the attraction of the greater
Verisimility: and the reason of its Fluctuation.
Intellect should thither convert, and there fix, where is the greatest
semblance of good: and therefore its native Indifferency is not such, as that
abandoning an object, whose good is more perspicuous, it can affect another,
whose good is less perspicuous; or, rejecting a judgment which appears more
true, court and embrace another which appears less true: because, as the beam
of a balance, being depressed on one extreme by a greater weight imposed, is
never elevated by the imposition of a less weight on the contrary extreme, but
of a greater; so likewise can it not be, that that assent of the Intellect,
which is caused by the perspicuity of Experience, or some praevalent reason,
should be removed to another object, unless by the attraction of an Experience
of greater moment, or a reason whose validity and importance is more
perspicuous. And, for the eviction of this natural conformity of the Intellect
to the attraction of the more ponderous Verisimility of its objects, we need no
other argument but this; that many times we find our minds aequilibrated
betwixt two judgments, or wavering in suspense between two objects equally
attractive; which Fluctuation or Doubting arises of necessity from hence, that
the moments of verity, or weights of reason are equal on either side, and so
exactly counterpoise each other, that the mind can acquiesce in the election of
neither; Article 14. That the Determination of the Intellect to one or two
objects, is caused either by the more ponderous Appearance of Verity therein, or
the minds greater Attention to the moments of reason apparent on that side,
then to those on the other.
as a pair of scales charged with two equal weights cannot be swayd from an
aequilibrium.

Again, that it seems during this Fluctuation, one while to incline to the one
part, and instantly to be counter-inclined to the other, and then again to
revert to the former, and so to be agitated by the inquietude of suspense; has
no other reason but this, that one while it is more attentive to the perpension
of reason in the first object, and anon more Attentive to that in the second;
and so long does it remain inclined to the invitement of the one, as it
apprehends the good thereof more apparent then of the other, and no longer;
after the same manner as if when a pair of scales are aequilibrated by two
aequal weights, you shall superadd to either end of the balance but a few
grains more, that end must be depressed, and upon the shifting of those grains
to the other end the former again elevated. So that when the Intellect does at
last deflect to one part, this Determination must proceed from hence; that
either the Appearance of verity is somewhat more ponderous on that part, or at
least that the more constant Attention to the Verisimility of that part,
conjoined to the minds impatience, (which too frequently helps to turn the
Scales, and therefore ought to be allowed for) supplying the defect of weight,
makes it seem so.

Most certain it is, we confess, that the Intellect frequently Article 15. That
the Appearance of Truth is always the ca^se of the Intellects inclination.
does, retracting that judgment which of its self, i. e. in the simplicity of
its nature, is either more good, or absolutely good, adhaere to a second
judgment, which of its self is either less good, or absolutely evil: but yet
notwithstanding that in the object, which affects and inclines the Intellect,
is always ipsa very species, the Appearance of Truth, which it observes and is
attentive to. And because that species of Truth may be either real or
counterfeit; therefore may that which is in its own nature really true, be
presented under the disguise of an absolute falsehood or less Truth, and that
which is in its own nature really false, be presented likewise under the
disguise of an absolute truth, or less falsehood: and so the Intellect becoming
subject to deception in the point of judicature, may be allected to the
prosecution of an absolute falsehood, or less truth, while the object remains
obvelated under the delusive vizard of an absolute truth or a less falsehood,
and e contra.

This seriously considered supports three excellent Consequences; (1) that as
often as the Intellect, having adhaered to a true judgment, Article 16. Three
considerable Inferences from the praemises.
quits and pursues a false one, so often of necessity does something intervene
which detracts the genuine or natural Appearance from the good object, and
imposes a counterfeit Appearance upon the evil one, and by that means causes a
mutation of the Intellects assent, or judgment: and therefore (2) that the
commutation of the species or Appearance of the object is the sole immediate
cause of the Commutation of the Intellects judgment and assent: and therefore
(3) that since the Will is obliged, by that necessity formerly declared, to
conform to the conduct and directions of its Guide, the Intellect; it is in
vain therefore to hope or attempt that the Will should change its Appetition,
unless care be first taken, that the Intellect change its judgment, or, that
the Will should be constant to its Appetition, unless we provide that the
Intellect be constant to its judgment. And, therefore, that Mind, which having
discovered the incomparable beauties of virtue is become enamoured on her, and
stands resolved to court no other Mistress but her, ought to be exceeding
circumspect and cautious in this particular, that it submit to the allurement
of no object, until it has profoundly examined whether that species of Good
therein presented, be really true, or only superficial and counterfeit, that so
it may render its self superior to the delusion of painted Vice.

The admirable Des Carts (in 3. part. passion. artic. 22.) praesenting a
general praeservative against all the excesses and Article 17. Cartesius his
general Praeservative against the excesses of Passions.
exorbitancies of our passions, gives us this excellent advice, that having
learned first to distinguish betwixt those motions or Affections which are
terminated in the Soul, and those which are terminated only in the Body, we
should, when we feel our blood and spirits agitated by any affection which
concerns only the body, reflect upon this as a general Maxim; that all things
which offer themselves to the imagination, do tend to no other purpose but to
the deception of the Soul, and to persuade the rational and judicative Faculty,
that those reasons inservient to the Commendation of the object of that
passion, are far more solid, sirme and worthy our assent then really they are,
and, on the contrary, that those reasons inservient to the Improbation or
disallowance of the object, are far more trivial, infirm and less worthy our
assent, then really they are. That when the passion persuades to those things,
whose execution may admit suspension or delay; we abstain from passing our
verdict too hastily upon them, and divert our cogitations to the serious examen
of the inconveniences impendent on their pursuit and execution: or, at least,
to some other object, till time and sleep shall have calmed the impetuous
commotions of the blood and spirits, which the seeming good of the object has
excited. And that when the Passion incites to those actions, whose fleet
occasion gives the soul little or no time to consult and deliberate; we always
endeavor to convert our Understanding to the perpension, and our Will to the
prosecution of those reasons, which are conttary to those inferred and urged by
that passion; notwithstanding they shall, at the first view, appearless valid
and ponderous; for thereby we shall mainly refract and abate the violence of
the passion.

Now, this may be our Exemplar in ordering our advice, how Article 18. General
Rules praescribed by the Author, how to praevent the Delusion of the
Understanding, and dependent seduction of the will by Evil disguifed under the
similitude of Good.
to prevent the Delusion of our Understanding, and the seduction of our Will by
Evil disguised under the similitude of Good. First, we ought to learn the
discrimination of the goods of the Mind, from those pertinent only to the Body:
and then, when we meet with any object apparently good, abstractly to examine,
whether that good concerns either the body alone, or the mind alone, or both
body and mind equally, or more the body then the mind, or more the mind then
the body. If only the body, we are to convert our cogitations upon the reasons
which dissuade, more intently then upon the reasons which persuade the election
of and adhaerence to it, that so we may, if there be any, detect the Evil
couched under that vernish of good, and also conquer the Minds impatience,
which too often bears a large share in our deceptions. If only the Mind, in
that case we are to bring it to the touchstone of the Divine Will: i. e.
examine whether those reasons whereby it persuades our Intellect to an
Approbation, and consequently our Will to an affectation and prosecution of it,
are correspondent to that inseparable or proper sign, or mark of true Good,
Conformity to the Will of God, or not; for the very Soul, or quintessence of
virtue does radically consist* ^n this; that man without all haesitancy,
murmur, diffidence, and reluctance, conform his Will to the indeceptible
Divine Will, as being ascertained, that he can will nothing more excellent in
its self, nor convenient to him, then what God has willed before. If both
body, and mind equally, then to abstract those reasons which insinuate the
interest of Sense, and insist only upon those which praefer it to the mind:
for, if they shall be found worthy of assent, we need the Authority of no other
to justify our election of that object. If more the body then the mind, then we
ought to aestimate the convenience of it by that lesser relation it holds to
the mind, and not by that greater it holds to the body. And finally, if more
the mind then the body, since the interest of the mind is infinitely to be
praeferred to that of the body, where the reasons are equal on each part: it is
manifest, we may safely acquiesce in that judgment, and embrace the object.
But, in case the object seem dubious, and such whose Verity or Falsity is not
easily discoverable, then the only way of avoiding Error in our judgments, is
cohibere assensum, to suspend our approbation of, and assent to the Apparences,
or species on each part offered. And by this power of withholding our assent
does Des Carts endeavor to establish the Liberty of the Will. (Princip.
Philosoph. part. 1. Sect. 6.) This in general, we conceive to be the Art of
rectifying the Will by the praevious information of the Intellect; and that
thrice happy Soul that has learned it, has anticipated one degree of that
Perfection, which is one moity of that State of immortal Beatitude, which we
are confident that knowing Soul of Des Carts once aimed at, and now enjoyes,
without that nothing of measure.

But alas! while we dwell in the Courts of Vanity, walk amongst the snares of
Satan, and carry in our very nature whole legions of frailties, the least of
which too strongly inclines us to the delusions of Vice, if presented in the
colors of Virtue; it is a Province above the power of mere Humanity to acquire
such anhabitual Constancy of our Intellect to its judgment, and of our Will to
its Appetition of real Good, as that neither can be divorced from it, and
alienated to the embracements of specious or splendid Evils, and therefore we
must indefatigably endeavor to conquer part of this inhaerent Indifferency upon
our knees, humbly and fervently imploring the assistance and continual
manuduction of divine Grace, that supernatural Light; whereby the Intellect may
be illuminated to a clarity, that shall trans fix and dispel all the thickest
clouds of Error and falsehood, wherein the optics of Sense are usually
terminated; and modestly suspend our hopes of a total and indissoluble union
with Verity, until our Souls shall have abandoned this body of sin to
corruption, and entered the new Jerusalem, where there is no Indifferency, but
an eternal determination of the Mind and all its Faculties to the Supreme Good,
where nothing shall occur to either Intellect, or Will, but that Supreme Good,
and (in a word) where that Libency of the Will, which some Divines calls the
Perfection of its Liberty, shall become a pure and ineluctable Necessity.

SECT. III.
HAving made it sufficiently manifest, that the Liberty of Article 1. An
objection, that Ignorance is the mother of sin.
man's Will does radically consist in the Indifferency of the Intellect to its
judicature; and amply explained the nature of that Indifferency: it remains
only that we expede that proverbial objection, whereby the best of us are too
prone to palliate our delinquency and excuse our offenses; viz. Omnis peccans
est ignorans, Ignorance is the mother of all Sin. This Aristotle doubtless
alluded to when he said, Qui fieri possit, ut qui de rebus recte aestimat,
incontinens sit? and Socrates also when he said, Fieri non posse, ut in quo sit
Scientia, in eo aliud quid dominetur, atque adeo ut qui de rebus recte
aestimat, non id quod est optimum agat; cum si id agat, necesse sit ((...)) ob
ignorantiam id fieri.

Out of this Labyrinth we may soon extricate our thoughts by Article 2. The
same expeded, by a Distinction of Science Into Habitual, and Actual.
making use of that Clue of a Distinction between Science in Habit, and Science
in Act; For, a man may have a knowledge, and yet neglect to make use of it, as
when he diverts his mind more intently to some thing, then to that which he
does know; or has the clarity of his Understanding benighted with sleep,
madness, wine, etc. and a man may have a knowledge and reduce it to practice,
as when he converts his mind unto, and fixes it upon that only which he does
know. Now if a man Actually know, or has not the acies of his mind levelled at
any other thing but what he does know; in this case, we confess it impossible,
that he should do an action contrary to his knowledge: and consequently, that
holding a clear and perfect knowledge of the decorum or pulchritude of Virtue,
and contrariwise of the turpitude or deformity of Vice, he should forsake the
former to court the later. But if he know only Habitually, or has his
cogitations more attent to another thing, then that of which he has a clear
and indubitate knowledge; since his neglect to use it is aequivalent to the
total want of that knowledge; we have no reason to deny, that he may do what is
point-blanck repugnant to his knowledge; and consequently, though he possess a
clear theory of the loveliness of Virtue, and contrariwise of the ugliness of
Vice, that he may notwithstanding abandon the former and embrace the later.

To this some have inconsiderately replied; that a man may do a thing repugnant
to his Actual knowledge; why? because Article 3. A reply, that the reluctance
of every Delinquents Conscience, does evidence the possibility of man's doing an
Act repugnant to his Actual Science.
for the most part every Delinquent so soon as he has acted amiss, and most
commonly at the same instant, feels himself surprised with a certain horror,
secret regret, reluctance and conturbation of mind, called by Divines remorse
of Conscience: which must of necessity proceed from his cognition of the
amiableness of Virtue which he has repudiated, and of the odiousness of Vice
which he has embraced; since if he wanted this, he must also have wanted that.

Here Aristotle has praevented our Rejoinder by retorting; that every such
Delinquent acts the same part with vinolent Article 4. The Rejoinder, that the
Habitual Science of every Delinquent, is pertu^bed and obnubilated by some
Passion, excited in him: and that the Remors of Conscience proceeds from the
sense of the Loss of Good.
Rhapsodists, who, by the habitual exercise of their memory, use ex tempore to
rehearse a whole sheet of Empedocles moral verses, of which they understand
little, and practice less; or Schoolboys, who distinctly read what their
understanding does not comprehend; or Stage Players, who can gracefully
personate the most magnanimous Heroes; but themselves still continue most
abject and superlative Cowards. For in him who commits a vicious Act, there
always is excited some Passion, either of Pleasure, or Anger, or Ambition, or
Avarice, which raises a tempest in his mind, and so perturbeth, perverteth,
and drowneth that habitual Science; insomuch, that what ever of good is in
virtue, and what ever of evil is in vice, becomes thereby obnubilated, and
darkened; and on the contrary, whatever of difficulty seems to be in virtue,
and what ever of pleasantness in vice, becomes thereby more conspicuous and
illustrated: i. e. Passion is a Perspective, which represents as well the
difficulty of virtue, as the complacence of vice, in magnified dimensions; and
on the contrary diminishes the good of the one, and the evil of the other. And
hence comes it, that the real good of virtue attracteth the mind more weakly,
and the seeming Good of vice more strongly; and on the contrary, the real evil
of vice averteth or disgusteth the mind more weakly, and the seeming evil of
good more strongly. So he that offends, may, we confess, with Ovid, say, Video
meliora, proboque, deteriora sequor, that he knows those things which he
rejects to be the better, and those things which he electeth to be the worse;
but yet, this must be referred unto some other time, when he recognizes his
habitual Science, and calls to mind, that once he had other judgments of those
things: for he cannot justly say so of that time wherein he offended, since
then he judged those things he pursued to be the better, and those he deserted
to be the worse.

Now as for that internal regret, contristation, and poenitence, which invades
the mind of every Delinquent immediately after, and most frequently in the same
moment of the perpetration of his offense; this proceeds from his animadversion
that he suffers some loss of good. But since this his apprehension of the loss
of good, and that reluctance of mind attendant thereupon is but dull and weak,
in comparison of that complacency he is affected withal by the seeming good or
pleasure of evil, which subdues his judgment to an approbation of it: hence it
is manifest, that he considers and perpends the impendent omission of Good, and
the incursion of evil, not seriously and profoundly as he ought, but only
perfunctorily and slightly. For, were the punishment, sorrow, ignominy, and
other evils, which he only lightly and confusedly apprehends, and fears,
profoundly examined and looked into by him, not as absent, not as future, not as
uncertain, and avoidable, but as impendent, present, certain, and inevitable;
without all doubt the smallest glimpse of reason would be sufficient to let him
see those forcible determents, nor could he be so mad as from the rock of
knowledge to precipitate himself into the most horrid gulf of vice. And
therefore albeit an offender may say that he saw and approved the Good, but
embraced the Evil, yet is that Inconsideration or Non-advertency, by reason
whereof he does not sufficiently discover all the qualities and circumstances
of the evil object, and what and how great mischiefs must necessarily ensue
upon his actual prosecution thereof, a kind of Ignorance. And in this sense
only can we allow Ignorance to be the mother of Sin; for had man sufficiently
understood the evil thereof, he had never bin vicious.

To conclude therefore, this Ignorance must prove but an Article 5. What kind
of Ignorance that is, which may, in some degree excuse a Delinquent.
invalid and ridiculous plea at the judicious Tribunal of Justice, nor ought a
Delinquent to slatter himself with the vain hopes of impunity by such an
excuse; that he sinned for want of knowledge, that he prosecuted the apparent
Good he saw in the object, that it was above his power to prevent the delusion
of his understanding by Evil praesented under the species of Good ((...), we
cannot countermand Apparences) that no man is vicious with his own consent, nor
happy against his will, according to that Proverb, Nemo malus ultro est, neque
beatus non volens, and that he wanted an ability of J^udgement to do otherwise:
this we say cannot extenuate his guilt, and consequently not avert the
punishment due thereunto. For, that Ignorance which excuses, is of another
nature; such as we may more properly call Inscientia mera, mere Nescience,
Ignorantia pura ac invincibilis, pure and invincible Ignorance; such as that of
Cephalus, when mistaking her to have bin a wild beast couchant in a brake he
discharged his dart at his beloved wife Procris, and unfortunately slew her;
and that of the constant Deianira when she poisoned Hercules with a shirt dipped
in Nessus the Centaures gore, which she intended for a Philtre to revoke his
affections from Iole; and that also of the fatal handed Gentleman, who shooting
at a Deer in New-Forest, killed William Rufus: but that Ignorance, of which we
here discourse, is in proper truth (...), Incuria, vel Negligentia mera, mere
Negligence, Inadvertency, or Heedlesness, and is therefore for distinctions
sake denominated Ignorantia crassa, affectata, supina, gross, affected, supine
ignorance.

To understand the nature of this Non-excusing Ignorance the more distinctly,
let us observe, that every Delinquent must in justice charge the Ignorance he
praetends, upon one of these two Causes; either that himself was to himself the
cause of his ignorance: or that he neglected the means and advantages of
acquiring knowledge, i. e. that he did not employ his Cognoscent Faculty on the
examination and consideration of the real good or evil of his action, with that
care, seriousness, and sedulity, which was requisite.

To the First of these Causes belongs the ignorance of a Drunkard; for in being
the Cause of his Ebriety, he is also the Cause of his Ignorance; and 'twas in
his power to have praevented this, by the praecaution of that: and therefore
his Ignorance is so far short of extenuating, that it naturally aggravates his
culpability; and he, if Aristotle may be judge, deserves a double punishment,
one for making himself drunk, another for the crime committed in his
Drunkenness. Hither also we are to refer his Ignorance, who resists not the
force of a Passion or perturbation of his mind in the first motion or beginning
thereof, while it is yet but weak, and to be suppressed by a small opposition of
reason; but permits it to acquire more violence, and gain upon him by degrees,
till its impulse grow impetuous, and more inoppugnable: as also his, who
suffers a vicious Inclination, which he might without any considerable
difficulty have at first refracted and totally extinguished, to grow into a
settled Habit, which pleading praescription and possession, is hardly ejected,
but plays the obsolute Tyrant ore the mind, and holds the Scepter of both
Understanding and Will by the ineluctable title of Conquest. Thus if a man, who
having a rare Bird in his hand, willingly lets it sly, should complain that he
cannot recover it again; it is not to be expected that any rational person should
pity him for his loss, but rather deride his folly, in that he manumitted it
when it was in his power to have kept it: and if a man contract some dangerous
disease by intemperance, who can afford him half so much compassion, since it was
in his power not to have bin intemperate, as if he had bin invaded by some
impartial Epidemick Contagion, against which none the greatest temperance is an
infallible praeservative? To this purpose were these words of Aristotle
intended; Nemo enim caecitatem, quam natura, morbus, ictus fecerit, exprobret,
sed caeci potius misereatur; at si illam aut ebriositas, aut intemperantia alia
fecerit, non id opprobrio ducat? (in 3. Ethic. cap. 7.)

To the other belongs his ignorance, who being hurried on to Article 6. ^^ur
weighty Reasons, convincing, that man has an Absolute Power in himself to
control the temptations of Evil.
the prosecution of Evil, by the impetuous rapt or swindge of Passion, can yet
say Video meliora proboque: for in this case also was it in his power to have
more seriously and sedulously examined, sifted, and praeconsidered the evils
impendent on that action, and so to have avoided it; We say, absolutely in his
power, for four weighty respects. (1) Because we frequently observe, that if in
the same moment, when we are prepared to commit a sin, and already entered upon
the execution, there chance to come in some grave and virtuous Person, whom we
revere, or some Magistrate, whose revenging sword we sear, intervene: we
instantly become conscious of our wicked intentions, and desist from the
perpetration of it. (2) Because there are many Virtuous Persons, who having
learned and practiced that noblest militia of conquering themselves, can
command themselves even in the highest orgasmus and fervor of their passions;
holding it most base and unworthy the dignity of a generous mind, to be
surprised with the subtlest Ambushes of Vice, and led captive by the Pygmie
armies of sensual Temptations. (3) Because it is not in vain that God,
compassionating the frailties and deceptibility of humane nature, has
vouchsafed to accommodate our understanding with those faithful and powerful
auxiliaries, Laws, Praecepts, Exhortations and pious Praecedents, to which we
may, in the hottest charges of vicious temptations, with safety and assured
Conquest recurre; and upon which if with sufficient attention we reflect the
eye of our mind, we shall become (...), ejus domini, quod res esse apparet,
Lords Comptrollers of Apparences, i. e. detect the frauds and impostures of
Evil, though dressed in all the glorious ornaments of Good. (4) Because no man
endevoring to excuse his offense, can truly say Video meliora proboque; but he
does manifestly grant the action he does to be Deliberate, and Praecogitate;
which is as much as this, it was absolutely in my power to have omitted the doing
of it, and to have done the contrary good. For none can say so of an
indeliberate action, as when he feels a commotion of his blood and spirits at
the first touch of Anger; which is the reason of Seneca his affirmation (2 de
Ira 3) quod primus motus non sit voluntarius, that the first motion which an
object excites in the mind is involuntary, and the ground of that Maxim Primi
motus non sunt in nostra potestate.

What these First Motions, which objects, their species being Article 7. What
those First Motions are, which objects inevitably excite in the Mind: and that
the Consequences of those motions are praeventible.
by the mediation of the nerves and spirits transmitted to the mind, excite
therein, are in the general; though Epictetus has furnished us with a
convenient brief description of them, in these words, Primus motus est quem
creant visa animi ((...) appellant Philosophi) quibus men's hominis prima statim
specie accidentis ad animum rei, pellitur, non voluntatis sunt, neque
arbitrariae, sed vi quadam sua sese inferunt hominibus nos^itandae: yet the
most apposite and most familiar way of explaining their nature and extent,
which our meditations could find out, is to exemplify them in some one
particular beginning Passion, and chiefly in that of Anger, where these
Impulses or motions are most sensible, because most forcible. Which that we may
the more worthily perform, let us, with Des Carts, concede two distinct
species of Anger, (1) one caused in a moment, which invading with some
violence, cannot be concealed; but discovers it self for the most part by
coloring the face with a Vermilion, or Aurora tincture on a sudden; but
performs little, and is easily and soon calmed. (2) Another, which invading
with less violence, is not to be discovered, unless rarely by inducing paleness
upon the Countenance, by any signs in the beginning; but being of a less
diffusive condition, does more corrode and gall the heart, and consequently
produce more dangerous effects. To the first of these, they are most obnoxious,
who have the most of Love, Nobleness or sweetness of disposition habited in
them. For it arises not from any profound hatred, but from a sudden
Aversation, repentinely surprising the Mind: and because loving, good, and
Heroic minds are always propense to imagine, that all things ought to proceed
in that manner or course which they judge to be the best, therefore so soon as
they discover any thing to be carried on in a contrary course to Good, they
instantly make a stand in their thoughts, become offended at it, and grow
angry; yea many times when the matter concerns not them in special; for since
they love much, they take to heart, (as the vulgar phrase it) resent, and
appropriate the Cause of them they love, as nearly as if it were their own,
insomuch as what would have bin no more then matter of Indignation to others,
proves matter of Anger to them. And because that Inclination, whereby they
become possessed with a constant propensity to love, does effect, that they have
always much of heat, because much of blood in and about their Heart; therefore
that repentine Aversion, which suddenly surpriseth them, cannot but propell
some small quantity of Choler (the Tinder whereon the sparks of this Passion
fix and foment) to the Heart; nor that little of Choler but be accended, and
excite, in an instant, a great commotion, and effervescence of the blood
thither propelled. But this Commotion lasts but a small space of time,
because the impulse or force of the unexpected Aversation is of no continuance;
and so soon as they deprehend the matter for which they were angry, to be of no
moment, and such as ought not to have commoved them to that height; they
becalme themselves, conjure down their spirits, and become affected with a
reluctance against and a poenitence for that Passion, and so destroy it in the
Embryo or shell. With the other, weak, abject, and ingenerous minds are most
transported. For though it seldom discover it self in the beginning, unless by
some paleness in the face; yet is its force by degrees increased by reason of
that agitation which the fervent desire of Revenge exciteth in the blood, which
being permixed with that Choler propelled to the heart from the inferior part
of the Liver and Spleen, kindles therein a sharp, pungent, and corroding Heat.
And as those minds are most generous, and noble, which are most inclined to
Gratitude; so are those the most proud, abject and base, which suffer
themselves the most to be transported with this kind of ignoble Anger. For by
so much the greater do Injuries appear to be, by how much the greater value
Pride makes a man put upon himself, and by how much the greater aestimation is
set upon those Goods which are taken away by that Injury: and by so much a
higher rate are those goods prized at, by how much the more weak, abject, and
ignoble the mind of him is that aestimates them, because in truth they are
dependent upon others pleasure; nor does a well ordered mind lose any part of
its happiness by being deprived of them. Now, having duly praeconsidered all
things occurrent in this pregnant example, we may not only without difficulty
understand what those first motions or incitements are, which objects exciting
in the mind thereby obtrude themselves upon the Intellect, or rather compel
the Intellect to apprehend them under that species in which they praesent
themselves; but also that, though those motions are not in our power, yet the
Consequents or Actions to which they provoke us, are subject to our
Deliberation, Examination, and Arbitrary Election, or Rejection; since every
Action, is the Conclusion of a Practical Syllogism, and every Conclusion
praesupposeth two praecedent Propositions, and these again praesuppose
Deliberation, and consequently that who ever committing an Evil Action, does
yet say Videoque meliora proboque, does in that confess his Action to be
Deliberate and Arbitrary, which is as much as to confess that it was absolutely
in his own power not to have done it.

And as for that proverbiall subterfuge (...), (...), Nemo m^lus ultro est,
neque beatus non volens; Aristotle has long since subverted it by answering,
That though it be true in the later part, insomuch as no man can be happy,
because not virtuous, against his will, yet it is false in the former, insomuch
as vice, whereby man becomes Evil, is voluntary ((...)) whereupon M. Anton.
said (...): qui vero sui ipsius animi motus certa ratione consilioque non
gubernat, necessario miser est. (lib. 2. number. 5.) And therefore though many
have thought to palliate their vitiosities, by affirming that no man does
commit a sin voluntarily, but being compelled thereunto by the impulse of some
perturbation: yet it is manifest, since every Delinquent gives either occasion or
way to that perturbation, and suffers himself to be transported by the impulse
thereof, beyond the sphaere of reason, that no coaction can intevene.

To conclude, we are ready to confess, that among those many excuses, which the
Sophistry of the Advocates of vice has Article 8. Necessity, and Fear conceded
to be, in some measure, Excuses: and what are the objects of Excusing Fear.
alleged for the extenuation of its Culpability, the most weighty and
considerable is the violence of Necessity and Fear. But, all violence must
proceed from an external Principle, and is not admitted without some Renitency
in the thing that suffers it; and that Necessity, whereby any man is coacted,
must proceed from an external and present Cause; and fear is an internal
Passion, though excited by an external Cause, viz. a future Evil; and
differs from Cupidity in this, that this, though it be excited by an external
cause also, viz. a future Good, yet it is joined always with a Libency or
Willingness, but Fear with a Renitency or Unwillingness. Upon which
consideration was it, that Aristotle concluded him exceeding stupid and
ridiculous, who, having vitiated his friends wife, should for excuse pretend,
that he was constrained to that perfidious and immodest action by the violent
temptation of pleasure; bur holds him excusable who is compelled to omit an
office of friendship by the praevention of some more considerable incommodity
impendent upon himself, since the Necessity of the one is more violent and
urgent, then the obligation of the other. For the more easy decision of all
disputes concerning the more or less pressure of these kinds of Necessity,
Cicero puts this Case. Si constitueris te cuipiam advocatum in rem praesentem
esse venturum; atque interim graviter aegrotare filius coeperit, non sit contra
officium non facere quod dixeris; magisque ille cui promissum sit, ab officio
discedat si se destitutum queratur.

This praemised, we may safely conclude, that a small and light fear is not to
be accounted sufficient to excuse a malefaction; because it cannot usurp upon
and countermand the Liberty of the Mind; nay nor a great and strong fear (which
is therefore allowed by some great Clerks for an excuse, because it may
sometimes invade and stagger a mind in other things constant and generous)
since it cannot so oppose the Liberty Elective, as not to leave the mind
possessed with some Libency. And this is to be understood, not in respect to that
Evil, which is sustained or undergone in the praesent, but to that far greater
one, which is avoided, and in comparison of which the less Evil has indeed the
reason of Good; because it is as it were the means whereby the greater Evil is
averted or prevented, as when Merchants throw their treasure overboard, for
fear of drowning, and a Traveller delivers his purse to Robbers for fear of
having his throat cut. Now, how far this kind of fear, which seems to
necessitate the commission of a small Evil for the probable praevention of a
greater, may be extended by way of Excusation; as also of what sorts those
evils must be which justify this fear; the exactest and profoundest of
Moralists have found it no easy matter praecisely to determine; chiefly because
according to the variety of men's Temperaments, ages, sexes, Educations, Habits
etc. what is but a weak and light fear to one, may be great and potent to
another; but all consent that we are to understand it to be a fear of no less
then Death, Mutilation, torment, servitude, long exile, taedious imprisonment,
aeternal dishonor or ignominy, privation of all, or the greatest part of ones
estate, or livelihood (and in this particular, not in respect of a man's self
only, but also for those who depend upon him for temporal subsistence, as wife,
children, parents etc.) as also that kind of fear which is a species of
Reverence, and such as may be in a subject, in respect of his Prince, in a
child in respect of his Father, in a wife in respect of her husband etc. We
said that fear which seems to necessitate the commission of a small evil etc.
thereby insinuating, that it only seems so to do. For, Truth its self has
taught us, that we ought not to do evil, though never so small, for prevention
of another evil, though never so great; and every man knows that Fear (unless of
doing Evil) is wholly excluded the society of virtue. Which our late Solomon
(whom we can hardly think upon, without a devout Adoration of his deified part)
reflected upon, when he affirmed for a Maxim of general truth, That a Coward
can hardly be an honest man. And this we desire our Reader heartily to accept,
as a sufficient enquiry into the nature of man's Free Will.

CHAP. VIII. Of Fortune.
THat this Phantsme, though of no great antiquity (comparatively) has under
the disguise of a Article 1. The Antiquity and Genealogy of Fortune.
Reality, so long and so universally possessed the heads not only of the Vulgar
(whose rank and muddy brains are ever more fertile in the production, and more
favorable to the conservation of Monsters, then Nilus and all Africa) but
even of some of those more cultivated Explorators of truth, who well knew the
absurdity of Multiplying Entities, and pretended to examine every Idea
occurring to the mind, whether it had an exemplar, or prototype in real
Existence; that so, though they could not attain to a full cognition of the
distinct Essences, or simple Forms of Objects, they might at list acquire an
assurance of their Reality, or Being in rerum natura: this, we say, seems to us
no contemptible Argument, that the Venom of the Forbidden Fruit has a
stronger and more infatuating operation upon the posterity of Adam, in the old
age of the world, then it had in its youth and middle age; and that the sun in
the Microcosme has sufferd a greater and more demonstrable decay of Splendour,
Clarity, and Influence, then Bodin (method. Histor. cap. 8.) out of Copernicus,
Reinaldus, and Stadius, has affirmed that in the Macrocosme to have sustained,
and confessed by its nearer approach to the Earth, and more Southerly
inclination, since the days of Ptolomie. For (first) though Simplicius (2.
physic. comment. 39.) has a certain obscure tradition, that Orpheus engaged in
the expedition of the Argonauts, composed a votive Hymn to this Fairy Queen,
which was afterward inserted into the idolatrous Liturgy of the Delphian
Apollo, together with whom she was solemnly invocated: yet has, Macrobius,
much the better Antiquary of the two, faithfully observed (5. Saturn. ib.) that
she was, if not unborn, yet unnamed in Homers time; subjoyning as a reason
thereof, quod priscis illis temporibus omnia, quae sierent, referri ad Deos
Authors solerent; that more simple and intelligent Antiquity used to refer
all events to the wise procuration of the Gods. Which is evidence sufficient,
that Fortune could not mount up to an Apotheosis, till the world grew into its
Dotage, and man sunk a whole sphere below that of his Ancestors simplicity and
knowledge. And (2) that, whenever she was borne, and whoever was her Father,
yet Ignorance was her Mother; besides the convincing Authority of our own
Reason, we have that of the impartial Cicero, in these words: Stultitia, Error,
Caecitas and Ignoratio rerum atque causarum, Fortunae nomen primo induxisse,
certum est. And so much the more of weight may this Argument bear, by how much
the more manifest a Contradiction they incurr, who have either defended, or
advanced her reputation; for though no one among those many Writers, who have
professedly treated of her Nature and Power, has denied her extraction from,
and necessary dependence upon that accursed Beldam, Ignorance: yet have most
agreed, that she is something more then Nomen inane, a mere and empty Name, or
Chimaera; and some allowed her the dignity of a considerable Influence upon the
actions of Man; nay, others have gone so far as to exalt her virtue to a
competition with Providence Divine, and consigned her a throne among the
Celestial Deities, as is intimated in that verse of Juvenal (Satyr. 14.)

-- sed te Nos facimus Fortuna Deam, coeloque locamus. And this briefly
concerning the Antiquity and Genealogy of this Nothing.

As for the full description of her Nature, or more properly, what Kind of
Activity the chiefest Philosophers have allowed Article 2. Plato and Arist.
their Descriptions of fortune, examined, and illustrated: and 3 Conclusions
inferred thereupon.
her, and to what order of Causes referred her; this we cannot so
satisfactorily present by any other way, as by a short Commemoration, and
aequitable Collation of their several Desinitions of her.

Plutarch (1. placit. 29.) makes Plato to have defined her thus; Fortuna est
causa ex accidenti, and consequens inopinato in iis, quae consilio fiunt,
Fortune is a Cause by Accident, and unexpectedly supervenient in those actions,
which are deliberately and upon consultation performed: and Aristotle thus;
Fortuna est caussa per accidens in iis, quae rei alicujus gratia, appetitu
movente, fiunt, eaque incerta and instabilis; Fortune is an Accidental (yea and
an uncertain and instable) cause, interesting it self in those actions, which
are done by an Agent, upon the incitement of its Appetite, in order to its
consequution of an object. Which words, indeed, seem to comprehend, in Epitomy,
all that the Philosopher (in 2. physic. cap. 5.) intended in his more prolix
description of Fortune; abating only this, that he there confines her
concernment only (...), rebus Contingentibus, to Effects purely Contingent, i.
e. such as may, or may not come to pass, and are therefore of dubious or
uncertain event. To explain this, they exemplify in him, who digging in the
earth, with no other design, but to plant a tree, found a great Treasure, of
which he never thought: for (say they) the Invention of the Treasure is an
effect by Accident, i. e. evenient above the hopes and besides the intention of
him that dug; and so the Digger insomuch as he is Causa per se of the
digging, is also Causa per accidens of the invention of the Treasure. Such an
Accidental Cause, therefore, do our Philosophers call Fortune: and the Event
it self, viz. the invention of the treasure, they call Rem fortuitam, a
Fortuitous Effect. But whereas Arist. has frequently advertised, that Fortune
((...)) and Chance ((...)) are different each from other in this, that Fortune
is proper only to things done by Causes, whose activity is Arbitrary; and
Chance common both to such, and also Inanimate or mere Spontaneous Causes (as
when a stool falls, and breaks a Glass.) and consequently that all Fortune is
Chance, but not every Chance Fortune: hence may we observe, that he would have
as well Fortune, as Chance to belong to the classis of Contingents, and that all
Contingents belong to the classis of Possibles. More expressly, that since
among Possibles some are such, as that their Event cannot be interdicted,
impeded, or countermanded, as this, the sun cannot be hindered from rising again
to morrow morn; and others such, whose event is not necessary, as this, it is not
necessary, though possible, that it should rain to morrow a^ sun rising;
therefore is it manifest, that a Possible of the first sort, is the same with
that which is called Necessarium, absolutely Necessary, or such whose Contrary
is purely Impossible; and of the second sort, the same with that which is
called Contingens, merely Contingent, or of an uncertain event, such whose
Contrary is aequally possible. Further, in respect that the mere Contingency,
or Ambiguity of any Event must be founded on this, that either some Liberty
interveneth, by reason whereof that which otherwise would come to pass, does
not; or that which otherwise would not have come to pass, does; or some other
Cause interposeth, which besides its proper destination and the unpraemeditated
concurse of certain other things, effects that some even^, which, otherwise
would, does not come to pass, or that some event, which otherwise would not,
does come to pass: hence is it manifest, that this Posterior kind of
Contingency, is in the general that, which men call Chance; and if it be
especially in Man, besides or beyond whose intention any Effect eveneth, then
is it what they call Fortune: unless that sometimes they confound both these,
and then it is indifferent whether the event be referred either to Fortune, or
Chance.

However, we perceive (reflecting upon the former Example) since the Double
Effect, viz. the digging of the earth, and the invention of the treasure, had
but one single Cause, viz. the man that dug: that, for this reason, the
Digger may justly enough be said to be Causa per se, in respect of the one, and
per accidens in respect of the other. To which we may add this, that since in
Effects merely Natural, one and the same thing may be both Fortune and Nature,
or a Natural Cause: therefore Gassendus had very good reason to justify
Epicurus in this particular that he made Fortune and Nature no more then
synonoma's, signifying one and the same thing in Reality.

Now though common Inquiry may go away satisfied with Article 3. Their
Anatomy of her Nature, desicient: and a more perfect one praesented.
this pausible Adumbration of Fortune; yet cannot a profound and more ocular
Scrutiny be terminated therein: for the Example introduced to explain it, comes
largely short of a requisite Adaequation; insomuch as no rational man can
appositely enough accept either him that dug, or his Action of digging, for
all that is comprehended under that obscure notion of Fortune. Wherefore,
omitting the consideration of Res Fortuita, or the Event, which is most
frequently apprehended for Fortune it self, or the cause of that insperate
event; let us understand Fortune to be, such a concurse of various Causes, made
without all mutual consultation, or praecogitate conspiracy betwixt them, as
that from thence does follow an Event, or fortuitous Effect, which neither all
the Causes concurrent, nor some of them, nor especialy he to whom the Event
happens, ever in the least measure intended, or could expect. Now, according to
the tenor of this Defifinition, in regard to the fortuitous Invention of a
treasure, is required not only the Person, who digg's and finds it; but also
he, who first dug and hid it: it is no obscure nor controvertible truth,
that Fortune, or the Cause by Accident of the invention of the treasure, is the
Concurse both of the Occultation and Effossion thereof, in that particular
place. We said, without mutual Consultation, and besides the intention of any
or all the Causes concurrent; thereby intimating, that though one or more of
the Causes may have happily intended that event: yet nevertheless it is properly
and absolutely Fortune, in relation to that Cause, which intended it not. Thus
if any man, who foreknowes, or at least conjectures, that such a Person will
come and digg in such a place, does there hide treasure, to the end that the
other may find it: in this case, in respect to him that hid it, the Invention
of the treasure is not a Fortuitous Effect; but in respect to him, who
unexpectedly finds it, it is. Thus was it not altogether Fortuitous in respect
of Nitocris, what happened at the Violation of his Tomb; in regard he praesumed
that, in process of time, there would be some King or other, who invited by
this promising Inscription [If any of my Successors, the Kings of Babylon,
shall want money, let him break open this Sepulcher, and thence take what may
supply his wants; but on no condition, unless his wants be real, let him
attempt it: for it shall redound to his no swale detriment.] would open it: but
yet, in respect to Darius, that instead of money he therein found this deriding
Engravement [Had'st not thou bin insatiable with riches, and covetous of sordid
lucre; thou would not have thus profaned the Ashes of thy Praedecessors, and
ransack't the sacred Dormitory of the Dead,] this was merely Fortuitous. And
thus also, though Democritus has pleaded hard to free Fortune from having any
hand in the incomparable Death of good old Aeschylus; why because his bald
pate, being mistaken by a volant Eagle for a white stone in the field, was the
cause why the Eagle dropped a Tortois perpendicular thereupon: yet, had we bin
of the Jury, we should have found her guilty of the Murder; (1) in respect of
the Poet, since that sad event was besides his intention, he at the same time
having withdrawn himself from the Town, for fear of being destroyed (according
to the tenor of the Astrologers praediction) by the fall of an house, nor could
he possibly foresee that prodigious mischance impendent: (2) in respect of the
Eagle, who dropped not the Tortois with purpose to brain the Poet, but to break
its shell, that so he might come at his prey, the flesh thereof. However, we
are willing, because, in truth, we ought to acknowledge, that if we regard the
height or punctilio of her Propriety, Fortune is chiefly, when among all those
several Causes, which concur, no one either principally, or collaterally
intends or aims at that Event, which unexpectedly succeeds upon that their
concurse: of which we have a most illustrious and competent Example in the
Dilatation of the death of Socrates, a day beyond the time praefixt by his
Judges, for the Execution of their Sentence upon him; as Plutarch (de Fato)
has praecisely observed.

We have it from the pen of that oraculous Secretary of Nature, Article 4.
Fortune, nothing but a mere Negation of all Praenotion in a Concurse of natural
Causes, respective to a fortuitous Event.
Dr Harvey, that he never dissected any Animal, but he always discoverd
something or other more then he expected, nay then ever he thought on before; so
useful and infinite in variety is the Magna Charta of Nature: and perhaps some
of our Readers may here have occasion to say as much of this our Dissection of
Fortune; for while we have exercised our thoughts in the exploration of her
Nature, we have unexpectedly found that, if considered per se and revera, she
has no nature at all, i. e. that in Reality she is nothing. For, when we have
abstracted all those Causes in the Concurse, which act per se, or by natural
virtue; there remains no more but a mere Privation or Negation of all
Praenotion in the concurrent Causes of that particular Concurse, and also of
the intention and expectation of the subsequent Event: nor can that
unpraemeditate Concurse of Causes be rightly accounted the Cause of the
Fortuitous Event, by any nearer relation then that which Philosophers have
termed Conditio sine qua non. Since, as the Admotion of any combustible body to
Fire, may be said to be the Cause of its combustion, in this respect only, that
it was Conditio sine qua non, or, if that Admotion had not praeceded, the
combustion had not succeeded: so also cannot that Concurse of Causes, from which
any Fortuitous Event does result unexpectedly, be said to be the Cause thereof,
in any other respect but this, that it was Conditio sine qua non, i. e. if that
Concurse of Causes had not praeceded, that Event had not succeeded, though not
one of those Causes in the single energy of its nature, nor all in confederacy
ever any way intended it; the Analogy betwixt these two cases standing fair
and full in all points.

Again, forasmuch as this indeliberate Syndrome or Combination of Causes, is
always uncertain and various, the Causes being Article 5. Epicurus commended,
for illustrating the instability and uncertainty of Fortune.
neither elected, nor connected, nor managed by any Providence of their own: we
cannot in justice but applaud the wary judgment of Epicurus in this, that he
called Fortune, (...) a Cause instable in Persons, Times, and Manners; which is
aequivalent to this, that since she is a Cause of uncertain and indeterminate
insluence, none but Fools can hope that this Chamaeleon should constantly
appear in the same colors, or wear the same Countenance.

Nor is he less to be commended for his, (...), Article 6. Her Indivinity
manifested: and how she came by her Deification.
Cave ne habeas Fortunam Deam (apud Diogen. Laert. Epist. 3. Epicuro
conscripta.) endeavors to degrade Fortune from her imaginary Divinity, and
deride the egregious folly of her solemn Worship; for so great is the
imbecility of vulgar minds, that what they do not well comprehend, they not
only immoderately admire, but superstitiously revere, as something wholly
Divine, and as far above Nature, as it seems above their Capacity: and
undoubtedly man's Ignorance of the praevious Conspiracy of Accidentaly
concurrent Causes, from which any Event extraordinary and superintentional does
emerge; first praevailed upon him to invest Fortune in such a specious
disguise, under which he might, with less dishonor to his own^ Intellectuals,
advance her to the reputation of a Deity, and adore her. It Is more then
probable, that men did not, at her first Canonization, either much care for, or
enquire into the condition and extent of her Power; and evident, that when she
began to be cried up for producing strange Effects in the transactions of the
world, and by a kind of impervestigable superintendency to dispose the activity
of Natural Causes to the induction of Events above or beside their proper and
Customary Destinations: then began the Vulgar to think themselves concerned in
the conciliation of her favor, and early atonement of her displeasure; and so
by those, to whom she seemed friendly and prosperous, was she accounted a Good
and Propitious Numen, and to those, to whom she appeared Inclement and Adverse,
an Evil and Malevolent one. And hence (the Error, like Rivers, still enlarging)
were stately and magnificent Temples erected for her popular and solemn
Adoration, and several Inscriptions respective to that particular Attribute,
which her fond Votaries conceived most eminent in her, or most advantageous to
themselves, engraven in capital letters on their Porches; such as' (...) (one
of which I have seen at the house of that ingenious Benefactor to Antiquaries,
Mr Vernon, in Essex, with no small cost and difficulty dug up in a field
near Smyrna, and together with many other very antique Monuments brought by him
into England) Malae Fortunae, Averruncae, Blandae, Calvae, Vitreae, Equestri,
Fallaci, Aureae, etc. a large catalogue of which Appellations we may read in
Pliny (lib. 2 cap. 7.) Plutarch (lib. de Fortuna Romanorum.) and Natalis Comes
(lib. 4. Mytholog. cap. 9.) This Pliny, with some indignation at the ridiculous
delirium of the world in the Deification of this Nonentity, takes ample notice
of in these words: Toto mundo, and locis omnibus, omnibusque horis, omnium
vocibus Fortuna sola invocatur, una nominatur, una accusatur, una cogitatur,
sola laudatur, sola arguitur, and cum convitiis colitur; volubilis, a plerisque
vero and caeca etiam existimata; vaga, inconstans, incerta, varia, indignorum
fautrix: huic omnia expensa, huic omnia feruntur accepta; and in tota ratione
mortalium, sola utramque paginam facit; adeoque obnoxiae sumus sortis, ut Sors
ipsa pro Deo sit, qua Deus probatur incertus.

We are not ignorant (nor, in duty to the praeservation of their memories from
ungrateful Detraction, ought we to conceal) Article 7. All sober Philosophers
vindicated from the guilt of asc^ibing Divinity to Fortune.
how difficult it is for any man to impeach any one Philosopher, among those
many, whose Names or Writings have hitherto escaped the jaws of Oblivion, of
this absurd Delusion of ascribing Divinity to Fortune. For though Plato (de
legibus. lib. 4.) has this saying; Deum omnia, ac secundum Deum Fortunam and
Tempus omnia gubernare; and Aristotle (2 Phys. 4. affirms that some there
were, who held, Fortunam esse causam quidem, sed humanae menti obscuram; and
Stobaeus (Ecles. Physic.) tells us of others, Qui partem aliquam Fortunae, ex
eo esse Divinam censerent, quo quidam temere agentes optatum finem
consequerentur, caeteros vero prudentia utentes optata d^stituerent; who
opinioned, that Fortune was in some part Divine, for this reason, that some
men, who enterprized their designs rashly and inconsiderately, did not
withstanding accomplish them successfully, and happily attain their ends, while
others who grounded theirs upon the most apparent probability, and managed the
means conducing to their procuration, with great prudence and circumspection,
were however fooled in their attempts, crossed in their hopes, and frustrated of
their purposes, by the sudden intervention of some occult impediment, which as
no Forecast could discover, so no Caution praevent: yet cannot all this be
justly interpreted any other then their wary and tacit Confession of their
Ignorance of the cryptick ways, and imperceptible Ends of Providence Divine;
nor did these great Book-men speak other then the Dialect of the Illiterate,
and conform their Expressions to the customary notion of the Multitude, when
they referred to Fortune those Contingents, which to the jndgement of Reason
seemed to want a Natural Series of Causes proper for their induction, being as
it were obtruded upon man by a power Supernatural, i. e. so far above the
praecaution of his Prudence, as the investigation of his Sapience. And though
some few perhaps, whose Curiosity was weak, but Superstition strong, may be
found to have contributed toward the propagation of this Error; yet cannot that
in reason be extended to the attainder of the major and more judicious number
of Philosophers: who upon the strictest examination of their Relics, must be
found guilty of no more then the continuation of that laudable custom of their
Praedecessors, in transmitting the most abstruse and difficult mysteries of
Science, in the more comprehensible Allay of Symbolical and Emblematical
traditions; and in this particular, what the Multitude could not well
understand under the Metaphysical notion of Providence Divine, disposing the
confederations of Natural Causes to the production of Events either above or
besides their native and proper virtues, or, at least, above the investigation
of Reason; this they accommodated to weaker Capacities, in the easy
Repraesentation of Fortune.

We said the more comprehensible disguise of Symbolical and Emblematical
Article 8. The Necessity and use of Alleg^^ical, Symbolical, and Emblematical
Traditions, invented by the Ancients.
Traditions; because, though it be commonly conceived, that primaevous
Antiquity used to invent Parables and Emblems rather to invellope the Arcana of
Philosophy and so conceal them from the profaning eyes of Ignorance, then to
render them more intelligible: yet Parabolical and Poetical Fictions conduce
tam ad lumen and illustrationem, quam ad involucrum and velum, as well to the
illustration of darker, as the involution of more evident pieces of Truth; as
the Oedipus of this last Century, the Lo. St. Alban (in praefat. ad lib. de
Sapient. Veterum) has acutely observed.

Nor ought we to be so vainly credulous as to admit, that the Ancients, being
better acquainted with Simplicity and Benevolence, then Fraud and Envy, would
expose their names to infamy, and the just execration of succeeding Ages, by
drawing a curtain of Allegories, Symbolisms, and Similitudes, betwixt the eyes
of Posterity, and the naked glories of Verity; thereby to detain them in the
most horrid darkness of Ignorance: especially while it is manifest, that such was
the rudeness of the Illiterate in those blinder times, when Contemplation was
accounted inglorious Idleness, and Action the only end of life, that most were
either incapable of, or impatient of the study requisite to learn any thing,
which was not reduced down to a familiarity with Sense; and consequently, that
the professors of Science had no other way left to insinuate the Maxims, and
secret Conclusions in physiology, into the narrow minds of their Scholars, but
by the mediation of their Senses affected with Corporeal Representations. Which
is also the reason, why Hieroglyphics were much more ancient then Letters; and
Parables then Arguments.

Now, that the Philosophers Description of Fortune was only Article 9. Their
Descriptions of Fortune, only Emblematical.
Emblematical; needs no other remonstrance, but this of Pacuvius (apud Auth.
lib. 3. ad Herennium)

Fortunam insanam esse, and coecam, and brutam perhibent Philosophi;
Saxoque illam instare globoso praedicant volubilem;
Ideo, quo saxum impulerit Fors, cadere ev Fortunam autumant.
Coecam, ob eamrem esse iterant, quod nihil cernat, quo sese applicet:
Insanam autem aiunt, quia atrox; incerta, instabilisque sit:
Brutam, quia dignum atque indignum negat internosc^re.
Philosophers paint Fortune, mad and blind,
Fixed on a Globe revolved by every wind
Of Casualty: importing her to fall,
Where Chance converts her whirling pedestall.
Her eyes valid over with the skarf of Night;
'Cause she does never distinguish wrong from right.
Frantique, because Unconstant, Giddy, Cruel
To him, at night, who was, at morn, her Jewel.
Irrational, 'cause she does never elect,
By merit, whom to grace, whom disrespect.
Nor had those ingenious Painters and Statuarics, whose happy Fancies invented
an Alphabet of Things, and composed Article 10. As also the Images of Fortune
framed by Painters, and Statuaries.
a silent language of Figures, intelligible by the eye, to express the several
attributes of Fortune; any other design, then by a pleasant affectation of the
Sense (the only Criterion of illiterate Heads) to offer a gentle violence to
the mind, and by a most familiar way of information, conduct the captived
thoughts through the labyrinth of the mystery, to an easy and durable
perception of the Deuteroscope, or Mythological intention. Thus the Scythians,
as Piccolomineus (in 8. gradu Philosoph. Moral.) relates, had an Image of
Fortune without feet; sensibly intimating, that the Goods of Fortune must be
beholding to the legs of Virtue, to support them in the constant benignity of
their nature; i. e. they fall to the ground, and perish in a depraved use,
unless they be managed by Prudence. Thus the Smyrnoeans, as Pausanias (lib. 4.
Messenicorum. page 178.) has recorded, had a statue of Fortune, like Atlas,
supporting the Pole with one hand, and holding in the other the Amalthaean
Horn, or Copia Cornu: intuitively mporting the Universality of her Empire, and
that Riches are rather showred down on the heads of Mortals, by the free bounty
of Providence Divine, then collected by the hands of Human Industry; which had
I beheld, I should instantly have reslected upon that observation of Solomon
(Eccles. 9. verse. 11.) That the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to
the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of
Understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but Time, and Chance happens
alike to all. Thus others, pourtraying her bestriding a Serpent; would have the
Spectator intuitively understand from the theory of that Express; that Fortune
holds the bridle to Human Prudence, and can at pleasure countermand the
profoundest Policy. And others, by representing her riding on a running Horse,
lash't on by Fate, which treads upon his heelcs; tacitly instruct the
beholder, that Fortune must at last be overtaken, and vanquished by Destiny. To
conclude, a copious list of many the like Emblematical and Symbolical Idols of
Fortune, together with their several Significations and Mythologies; the
ranging pen of Bernhardus Coesius (de Mineral. lib. 2. cap. 5. Sect. 12.) has
collected, and exhibited together in one sheet: and theresore we should defraud
the Curiosity of our Reader, not to remit him thither for more ample
Satisfaction.

Now, from a review of this disquisition into the nature of Fortune, Article
11. The review, tolerating the name of Fortune, in respect to man: but
detesting it, in respect to God.
it is obvious to the meanest capacity that if we respect only the Proenotion and
Expectation of human Reason; then none the most praecise in Christianity can
justly quarrel at the customary use of the Notion: but if we respect the
inslucnce and disposition of Providence Divine extended to all occurences in
the world; then none but the most barbarous, or Atheistical Ignorance dare
defend it. Which distinction the learned Spondanus (in Comment, in Homeri
Iliados libr. 7. page 123.) has more fully and elegantly delivered thus;
Minime audiendi sunt, qui sortium dispensationem fortuitam esse dicunt. Quod
Ego tamen admitto, si Homines tantum spectaveris: sed illoe etiam ex
Providentia Dei omnino pendent. Eo sensu etiam accipiendum est nomen Fortunoe;
quoe enim consilio humano non fiunt, causam quoad nos non habent: sed illa
omnino Deus regit and moderatur.

CHAP. IX. Of Fate.
SECT. I.
IT IS not unknown to the meanest in the Commonweal Article 1. The convenient
reduction of all opinions, concerning the essence of Fate, to 2. General Heads.
of Learning, that no less then an Age can suffice to the observant lecture of
that Vatican of Books composed by Philosophers of all times, concerning this
perplexing Theorem; there being more Discourses (abating those, which the
kindness of Time has subtracted) now extant thereupon, then any other
subject, that ever exercised the cogitations and pens of Scholars: as must be
acknowledged by any, who has surveyd the singular Iatrophilological Treatise
of that judicious Parisian, Gabriel Naudae^^, de Fato and Vitae Termino. But
yet, such has bin the singular fortune of Fate, that it has obtained an
exemption from that general Experiment, Tot sententiae, quot Authors: there
being found, upon a just audit of them all, fewer Opinions then Books
concerning it; nay, what is one degree of wonder higher, a diligent scrutiny
may soon explore, that they all fall under the comprehension of only Two
Catholic Heads; some understanding Fate to be Aliquid Divinum; a certain
power Divine, and the rest, Aliquid mere Natural, a certain Constitution
merely Natural.

In the Classis of those, who have conceived Fate to be a Divine Power, the
highest seat belongs to the Platonist and Stoic; according to whose doctrine,
methodized and summaried by Plutarch (lib. de Fato) we may consider it in a
twofold Notion.

First, (...), ut Substantia, as a Substance. In which sense Article 2, What
the Platonist and Stoic meant by Fate, considered ((...)) as a substance.
it is accepted for God Himself, or that sempiternal Reason, or established
method, according to whose tenor He has praeordained and disposed All things
in the World, and so connected Causes to Causes, that all Events whatever,
Arbitrary and Fortuitous, individually depend upon, and indeclinably result
from that subalternate Series, or Complication of Essicients. For thus Plato
(in Timaeo) one while affirms that Fate is ipsa Anima Mundi, the very Soul of
the Universe; and another while, Naturae Vniversi aeterna ratio ac lex, the
eternal reason and law of Nature: and thus also both Zeno and Chrysippus are
cited by Plutarch (in 1. placit. 28.) as defining Fate to be, Vis spiritualis,
ac Ratio ordinis universa gubernans, a Spiritual Power, and constitution
governing All things according to an order eternally praecogitate and
praedecreed. And all the rest of the Stoical Family, as well generally quoted
by Diogenes Laertius, as Panaetius and Possidonius (at least, if He be the true
Father of that Book, de Mundo, vulgarly conscribed to Aristotle, out of which
the text is extracted) quoted by Stobaeus (Ecl. Physic.) have unanimously held,
that Fate was the same with God, Jupiter, and the Universal Men's. To whom we
may justly associate Seneca also, who, (in 4. de Benefic. and 2. Natural.
Quaest. 45.) says, in downright terms; si Fatum, Jovem dixeris, non mentieris:
if you please to assert that Jupiter and Fate are one and the same thing, you
shall speak the truth. Hence comes it, that though Poets sometimes refer all
events to the procuration of Jupiter; and sometimes again to Fate: yet may not
the nicest Critic impeach them of Inconstancy or Contradiction; since those
Terms differ only in the sound, not in the notion; as signifying one and the
same Eternal Principle, disposing the virtues and conspirations of all second
Causes to the opportune effecting of Events, designed by it self, and so made
indeclinable. Thus Homer, introducing Agamemnon as pleading his excuse fot
being instrumental to a misfortune, makes him incriminate upon Fate and Jupiter
at once, in these words:

-- (...),
(...), --
Non Ego Causa,
Verum Jupiter and Fatum.
Secondly, (...), ut Actus, as an Act; according to Article 3. And, what
((...)) as an Energy or Act: together with the e^ymological reasons of those
sundry Appellations, the Stoics have imposed upon it.
which Acceptance, we may understand Fate, partly to be ipsum D^i decretum,
the very Decree or absolute Command of God, whereby He has determined all
Events to Necessity of Futurition; from whence the Latin word, Fatum, importing
a Decree pronounced, is by Grammarians derived: and partly, ipsum ordinem,
seriem, vel concatenationem Causarum, in natura statutam; the order, series, or
subalternate concatenation of Causes, according to whose praesctipt tenor all
Events praedestined come to pass, in respect to the Decree pronounced. For thus
much may be collected from that Definition of Fate ascribed to Plato by
Plutarch (de Fato) viz. est lex Adrastaeae, the law of Divine Justice,
consigning to every thing, what is convenient to its nature, and which no man
can clude, or infringe: but more perspicuously from that notorious one of
Chrysippus, Fatum est sempiterna quaedam ac indeclinabilis series rerum, and
catena volvens semetipsam, and implicans per aeternos consequentiae ordines, ex
quibus adapta, connexaque est; which we have formerly introduced, and
interpreted, in our Chap. concerning the Mobility of the term of man's life. To
which, for more assurance, we may annex the respective signification and
importance of each of those various Appellatives, which the Stoics have
accommodated to Fate. For they have named it (1) (...), because it is a
connected series, or subalternately-dependent syntax of Causes and Effects: (2)
(...), because it involves and contains All things in that definite and
invariable concatenation: (3) (...), because all Events are the Necessary
designations thereof; or, because it self is also under the same restraint of
an immutable definition: (4) (...), because no attempt can praevail to an
alteration infringement of its tenor: (5) (...), because it is a Constirution
Eternal: (6) (...), because it is a distribution made to every Individual: (7)
(...), because it comprehends whatever is, by Consignation, due to every man:
(8) (...), because as the original, so also the Dissolution of all things is
subject to its appointment: (...), Parca, because it is the peculiar Lot or
Portion destined to every man. But as for this aequivocal Denominative, Parca;
insomuch as it not only determines the state of all other things in general,
but also the Life of man in special, quasi Nendo, as it were by spinning out a
thread of commensurate longitude: thereupon did Hesiod (in Theogn.) dichotomize
it into three distinct species; viz. (1) (...), in respect to the
Irrevocability of time past, which exactly resembles a thread already spun,
and wound upon the reel or fuze; (2) (...), in respect to the Decurrent, or
Praesent time, which responds to a thread now in twisting, in the hand of the
Spinster; (3) (...), in respect to the Future, or Lot yet remaining behind to
every man, which holds an analogy to Flax not yet spun off the distaff. Which
is the Summarie of Possidonius (de mundo) and Apuleius (10. de repub.) their
Mythologie of the ingenious Figment of the Three Fatal Sisters. Article 1. The
second Classis of Philosophers, who understood Fate to be a Constitution merely
Natural subdivided into 2 distinct Sects: viz. (1) those who assert the
Immutability and Inevitability of Fate; (2) those who defend the possibility of
its Alteration and Evasion.


SICT. II.
IN the other Classis of Philosophers, who have apprehended Fate to be Res pure
Naturalis, a Constitution merely Natural, devoyd of all Divinity, nor dependent
upon any eternal Decree; we find a subdivision of two different Sects. For,

(1) Some have proposed to themselves a Series of Natural Causes, so
harmoniously adapted and linked together by mutual revinction, that the
posterior being continually suspended on and moved by the praecedent, perform
their operations compulsively, i. e. they cannot but do, what they do: so that
thereby is inferred a Necessity so absolute, that it admits of neither Evasion,
nor opposition; such a necessity, as would be no whit inferior to the Stoics
Lex Adamantina, or Adrastaea, formerly mentioned; if this only difference be
allowed, that according to that, Fate would be a Chain of Causes constituted by
God; but according to this, a subalternate series of Causes, whose
Constitution, reciprocal concatenation, and eternal duration are made by, and
dependent upon it self, and is therefore no less Necessary and Invariable then
the other. And

(2) Others have, indeed, likewise allowed a Series of natural Causes mutually
complicated; but yet have they reputed, that the Inferior Causes in this chain
are not so dependent upon, nor commoved by the Superior, but that they may be
impeded from doing those things, which by the impulse of their inhaerent
Essiciency, and without the intervention of any impediment, otherwise they
would have done. Impeded, we say, by things purely Contingent, or Counter
Agents endowed with, and using the Arbitrary Liberty of their Will.

The Coryphaei, or Leaders of this Sect of Philosophers, were Heraclitus,
Empedocles, Leucippus, Parmenides, and (who Article 2. The Leaders of the First
S^ct, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Leucippus, Parmenides, and chiefly Demo^^itus.
took the right hand of all the others) Democritus; as we have found upon the
list of Cicero (de Fato.) For, albeit the Foundation of his Physiologie was the
same with that of Epicurus, Fortuito factum esse mundum, that the Universe was
made by Chance; which Hypothesis we have formerly explained, examined, and
exploded: yet did He strenuously endeavor to impose thereupon this disagreeing
superstructure, Fato omnia fieri, that all things are effected by Fate;
confounding two most contrary Notions, mere Contingency, and incluctable
Necessity.

If any demand, how we can justify this our Accusation of Democritus; we
answer, that it may be genuinely collected Article 3. Democritus justly charged
with the patron^ge of Inevitable Fate: and his doctrine concerning it*
concisely rehearsed.
from hence: that it was his opinion, that Fortune is nothing else in reality
but Nature, and that Nature is bound, by her own adamantine laws, to do what
she does, in all particulars. For the First of these positions, that Nature and
Fortune are Identical; we cannot much dispute: since all the Attributes of
Fortune are bur surreptitious* and usurped from Nature; nor does Fortune, in a
mere philosophical Sense, import more then Man's Ignorance in the Di hoti of
many Effects, which Nature produces, or are at least produced by natural
means. For the Second, that Nature is its own Fate, or, more expressly, that
Nature being only a constitution of Causalities resulting from Chance, or from
a fortuitous disposition and setlement of the Universal Matter, in that Figure
the adspectable World now bears; does necessitate her self to the causation
of all things: this He has conceived inferrible from this process of reason.
Atoms (says He, apud Magnenum) being the Catholic Principle, of which all
things consist, have an ingenite or connatural Motive Faculty essentially
inhaerent; by the uncessant activity whereof they are perpetually agitated or
commoved: and all things, by coalescence composed of Atoms, cannot but conform
to the same motions, by which their principles are commoved. And sithence some
Atoms tending one way, are by the occurse and justling of others diverted to
another course; both the Diverting and Diverted from the direct line of their
native tendency, cannot but observe, continue and pursue those necessary
motions. By the same reason, some bodies, composed of concreted Atoms, as they
are praecipitated one way, by the impulse of their own coessential Faculty,
may, by the occursation and arietation of others steering a different course,
be deflected from the perpendicular of their motion congenial, to some other
transverse, oblique, rectilinear, etc. so that both the Deflecting and
Deflected cannot but observe, continue, and pursue those compulsive motions.
And this, in General, is that Fate, or Necessity, whereby Democritus would have
all things effected, and by which the World was at first composed, in the same
Figure, we speculate at this day; for, as the Universal Principle, Atoms,
concurring, crowding, rebounding reciprocally, in an infinite space, by the
agitation of their own inexistent Faculty, could not but convene, coalesce, and
cohaere into any other Form, but what they did: so now having acquired that
form by Chance, can they not either change it, or not observe and execute
those motions begun, and by the mediation or intercession whereof all Events
are brought to pass. For, in Plutarch, (1. placit. 26.) He says plainly,
Necessitatem nihil esse aliud, (...), quam lationem, percussionem,
repercussionem Materiae; that Necessity is nothing else but the Lation,
Percussion, Repercussion of the material Principle of all things, i. e. of
Atoms. From hence we have an opportunity to interpret that passage in
Simplicius (2. physic. comment. 59.) that some of the Ancients held an opinion,
that (...), Material Necessity was the sole Causatrix of all Effects; in
respect that the Matter of Bodies is not idle and unactive, as most have
dreamt, but uncessantly operative; and that, not by impression, but Inhaerency,
as being to it self the Principium a quo of all its motions. And this we here
touch upon, opportunely to discriminate this Doctrine from that of others, who
constituted a mere Formal, or Agent Necessity, distinct from the material
principle of the world; whether that Agent be simply Natural, according to the
Physiology of Aristotle; or Primus Opifex, the First Operator, according to the
hypothesis of Plato, and the Stoics, who also sometimes radicated that
Necessity, whereby Evils are continually existent in the world, in the Matter
thereof, as Seneca (de Provid. 5.) excusing the non ablation of Evil by the
Creator, says positively, Non potest Artifex mutare materiam, it was not in
his power to Abstract it, because not to alter the Matter. But, not to leave
our Explanation of Democritus Fatum Materiale imperfect; we may, from what has
praeceded, perceive at what mark these words of his were directed;
Necessitatem, qua omnia fiunt, esse and Fatum, and Iustitiam, and Providentiam,
and opisicem mundi (apud Plutarch. 1. placit. 45.) that the Necessity, whereby
all things are effected, is both Fate, Justice, Providence, and Maker of the
World: viz. this, that the Series of things, in which the reason or essence of
Fate does consist, could not have bin otherwise constituted; that upon this
Series it depends, why one thing is accounted Just, and another Unjust; why the
world is governed thus, and all things proceed according to the praesent
method, and no other; and why the adspectable form of the Universe was made in
all points responsible to what it now holds, etc. For, He referred the
Causation of all things to those newly explicated congenial motions of Atoms;
and so conceived that even the Soul, or Mind of man (which He also fancied to
be a certain Contexture of sphaerical or orbicular Atoms) is variously
agitated, not only by those internal motions of its own insensible particles,
which vary according to its individval Complexion (i. e. the Atoms composing
the Soul of a Melancholy man, are of one sort, at least of one contexture;
those of a Choleric, of another; those of a Phlegmatic* of a third, etc.) but
also by those Extradvenient motions caused by Objects; by whose Species, or
Images incurrent (which Atoms also constitute) the Mind cannot but be
Attracted, if they be consentaneous and allective, or grateful; nor not be
Averted, if they be dissentaneous and repulsive, or ungrateful. That, if the
Mind be not always allected by Attractive Species; the reason is, because at
the same instant there occur unto it the more potent solicitations of their
Contrary, Averting Species: and if it be not always Averted by Repellent; the
reason is equal, viz. because at the same instant it is more strongly
solicited by their Contrary, Attractive Species. That therefore, the Mind
cannot but be carried on toward Good, or that which is grateful and allective,
so long as it discovers no Evil admixt thereto: nor not be averted from Evil,
or what is ungrateful and aversant, so long as it perceives no Good to be
commixt therewith. That therefore, the Mind cannot, when two Goods are
objected, but pursue the greater Good; as that which attracteth more potently:
nor, when two Evils are objected, but avoid the greater; as that whereby it is
averted more potently. That, when two objects, the one Good, the other Evil, at
the same time praesent their Species; it cannot but neglect the Good, so long
as the Evil averts more potently then the Good attracts: nor not be carried
toward the Good, while the Evil averts more weakly, and the Good attracts more
strongly. Finally, that since, by reason of the Ignorance, or Dimness of the
Mind, it does frequently not perceive the Evil consequent upon its prosecution
of some Good; therefore is it subject to Deception in some cases, and is often
carried on to that, from which it ought to have bin averted: nor perceive the
Good that is consequent upon its prosecution of some Evil, and is therefore, as
often averted from that object, to which it ought to have bin converted. But
notwithstanding, insomuch as all objects, by this and no other way, occur unto,
and affect the Mind; still it cannot but Necessarily be carried whither it is
carried; nor but be averted from that, from which it is averted: and
consequently, that there remains to it only a Desire of Truth, i. e. that no
Counterfeit Species may occur, but that all objects may appear such as in
reality they are, nor Good be concealed under the disgusting vizard of Evil,
nor Evil gilded over with the splendid semblance of Good. For this is the sum
of what Empiricus (2. advers. Physic.) makes Democritus to have desiderated,
when He said; (...), Exoptat rerum imagines consentaneas posse nancisci. Now,
by this complex Argumentation, Democritus may be understood to have inferred;
that though some Actions seem situate within the praecincts of our own
jurisdiction, or that it is absolutely in our power to Elect, or Reject this or
that object; insomuch as every man's experience does demonstrate to him, that he
does and can consult and deliberate about the Good and Evil of Objects, and
actually electing the one, refuses the other; and that, not by Compulsion, but
Freely: yet notwithstanding is nothing really in our power, because not only
the occasion of our Consultation, but also the Consultation it self is imposed
upon us by inevitable Necessity. First, that the Occasion of Consultation (or
the Exhibition of many objects, which almost equally affecting the Mind, and by
reason of the aequipondium of their Verisimility, or moments of Good, holding
it suspended in aequilibrio, of necessity engage it to a Deliberation) cannot
but be imposed upon us; we conceive it not obscure to him, who shall deduce the
conducing Series of things ftom a due Epoche, or height, and analytically undo
the chain of Causes: and Secondly, that also the act of Consultation is a
Necessary Effect, is manifest from hence; that when two objects occur to the
mind, so equally Attractive, that their Apparencies of Vtility, or
Praesentations of Good, are aequilibrated, and reciprocally counterpoise each
other; the mind must of necessity be agitated by a kind of Fluctuation, and
detained in the suspense of Indifferency, or Indetermination, or Consultation,
until it acquiesce in its Election of that Object, whose praesentation of
Vtility seems to praeponderate the others. Which, aequitably audited, amounts
to no more then this; that Election is nothing but the prosecution of an Object
which either really is, or at lest seems more Good; and that a spontaneous one,
without all coaction or renitency: in respect that man does both spontaneously
affect, and willingly prosecute Good. And that you may not admire this bold
assertion, viz. that both the Occasion and Consultation, and free, or rather
libent Election of Objects, are all links in the Chain of Fate, and so
comprehended under this Natural Necessity, propugned by Democritus: the Stoics
intercept your wonder, by obtruding another as strange, viz. that it depends on
the same Concatenation of things, that you now read this our discourse of Fate;
as Manilius (lib. 2.) Hoc quoque fatale est, sic ipsum expendere Fatum. And
this, because whatever Action of any man you shall suppose; it can be no
difficulty, according to this Hypothesis, to find out the proxime Cause
exciting him thereunto, and to refer that Cause to the permotion of another
remote one, and that third to the permotion of a fourth, that fourth, to the
induction of a fifth, etc. unravelling the series of Causes, so that it must at
length be inferred, that that supposed action could not but follow upon those
other actions subalternately praecedent, and consequently, that it must be, as
Democritus would have it, Fatal, or Necessary. Which opinion Aristotle ardently
impugneth (in lib. de Interpre. cap. 8.) when discussing the verity and
necessity of Propositions, He contends to evince; that though of two opposite
singular propositions, which concern a thing either Praeterite, or Praesent,
one must be true, the other false: yet the Canon holds not in two Contrary
singular propositions, which concern a thing Future; the Verity of the one not
necessitating the Falsity of the other. For, as He there argues, if every
Affirmation, or Negation concerning a thing to come, were true or false, ex
Necessitate: then would the Futurity of any thing include a Necessity of its
Futurition, i. e. whatever is Future would be Necessary, and on the contrary,
whatever is not Future, would be Not-necessary: and upon just inference,
nothing could remain either Fortuitous, or Arbitrary; which to admit, is an
Incongruity so manifest, that the repugnancy of every man's Experience detects
it; an Incommodity so intolerable, that it not only disparageth, but confuteth
it self. And this, if there be any Fidelity in the records of our Memory, is
the Summary of their Theory, who have apprehended and asserted Fate to be a
mere Natural Constitution of Causes, subalternately connected; as not dependent
on any thing Divine, nor any Eternal Decree; so not capable of any mutation or
interruption, by the intervention of any Impediment, purely Fortuitous, or
Counter-activity of any Arbitrary Agent.

SECT. III.
Article 1. The Principal of the Second Sect, Aristotle and Epicurus.
IN the other Division of Philosophers, who also conceded Fate to be a mere
Natural Constitution of Causes subalternately dependent, etc. but yet denied
the inevitable or necessary insequution of all Effects upon that concatenation;
allowing the possibility of its mutation, or interruption by either Chance, or
man's Free will: the Principal are Aristotle and Article 2. The Grounds of the
Authors imputing the opinion both of Fates Identity with Nature, and the
possibility of its Mutation and Declination, by either Fortuitous or Arbitrary
Antagonists, to Aristotle.
Epicurus.

First, as for Aristotle; that He held Fate, or fatal Necessity to be nothing
but very Nature, or (if you like it better) every particular Cause acting
secundum suam naturam, naturalemve ductum, according to its proper or natural
Virtue; is manifest from his own words, in sundry places of his Writings. To
particular; (1) He says (in 2. phys. cap. 6.) Eas generationes, acoretiones,
and alterationes, quae violentae sunt (ut dum ex art, and ob delicias, cogimus
plantas aliquas praemature pubescere, adolescereque) esse (...), non Fatales,
hoc est non Naturales; making Fatal Effects to be mee^ly Natural. And (2) He
says (1 Meteorol. cap. ultim.) (...), Fatalibus temporibus magnas quasdam
hyemes, imbriumque excessus, quibus creentur diluvia, contingere; eo modo, quo
and contingit hyems statis anni temporibus: which rightly paraphrased, imports
thus much; that as Winter, the Sun receding from our climate, at some certain
period of the year, according to the Ecliptic progress consigned unto it by
Nature, is the regular effect of the Suns remove to larger distance; even so
are hard Winters, and immoderate rains, the regular effects of some periodal
Conjunctions of the Planets, proceeding in their motions according to the
settled Constitutions of Nature. From whence we have an advantage to observe,
that though Stobaeus (Ecl. Phys.) tells us; Aristotelem non tam existimasse
Fatum esse Causam, quam modum Causae advenientem rebus ex necessitate statutis;
that Arist. conceived not Fate to be so much a Cause, as the manner of a Cause,
advenient to things determined by Necessity: yet nevertheless are we so to
comment upon this his nice descant, as that we understand, Fate not to be any
new kind of Cause, but Nature her self, which, in respect to her Agency, is
called a Cause, and in respect to the certain, proper, and necessary manner or
way of her acting, is called Fate. And, that He impugned the former Error, viz.
that all Agents, included in this Universal Subalternation, act ex inevitabili
necessitate, or cannot but do, what they do; is not obscurely intimated in
this, that He defined Fate to be pure Nature. Since the Works of Nature are not
effected of inoppugnable necessity; as may be boldly concluded from the
frequent Experiments not only in Generation, which is commonly impeded, by the
intervention of any indisposition or impatibility of Matter, and other
resisting Accidents; but also in Generous and virtuous Minds, which easily
subdue and countermand those strong inclinations, or propensities to Avarice,
Luxury, Audacity, Incontinency etc. which may not unjustly be esteemed the
genuine Effects of their very constitutive Principles, and branches that shoot
up from the root of their Corporeal Temperament. Upon which reason, we may
conjecture, that Arist. reflected, when He said of Socrates, praeter naturam,
ac fatum suum, continens evasit: He acquired an Habit of Continency, even in
spite of the contrary solicitation of his individual Nature, and particular
Fate.

Secondly, as for Epicurus; that his thoughts made an Unison Article 3.
Epicurus unanimous to Arist. in the point of Physical and Eluctable Necessity.
with those of Aristotle, in the key of a Non-ineluctable Fate, is sufficiently
constant from hence; that having admitted a certain Necessity Natural in this
sentence, Naturam a rebus, ipsarumve serie, ((...)) doceri, cogique, sive
necessitate agi (in Epist. ad Herodotum:) He yet denied the Inevitability, or
Absoluteness thereof, in another Fragment of his revived by Stobaetis (in Ecl.
Phys.) where He delivers as a general Canon, Omnia sieri trium modorum aliquo,
((...)) Necessitate, Consilio, Fortuna. For, in that he makes Fortune, and
Consultation, or man's Free will equal competitors in the empire of the world
with Necessity Natural, He manifestly excludes it from being (...), sole Despot
or Monarch, and reserves to the two others an equal dominion. Which assurance
may duly be augmented by the superaddition of this also; that Cicero (de Fato)
introducing Epicurus disputing about the verity of Future Events, makes him
deny, with Aristotle, that of two contrary singular Enunciations about a thing
to come, the one must be true, and the other false: subnecting this reason;
Nulla est in natura talis Necessitas.

And, certainly, as He stood equal with Aristotle, in the denial; so has He
outdone him, by many degrees, in his endeavors Article 4. The scope of Epicurus
his Figment of the Declination of Atoms in the human Soul: and his
Accommodation thereof to the tuition of man's Liberty, epitomized.
for the Refutation of this unsound opinion of an Absolute Necessity: insomuch
as he excogitated his Hypothesis of the Declination of Atoms (illustrated in
the incomparable Commentary of Gassendus) as a motion, which once conceded,
does totally infringe the indispensable rigor of Fate, and conserve an Evasory
or Declining Liberty for the Mind of man. This Plutarch taught us, in two
perspicuous texts: (1) when He says (de Anim. Solert.) that the motion of the
Declination of Atoms in the Human Soul, was subtly invented by Epicurus,
(...), that Fortune might be brought on the theater of the world, there to act
her part, and the Arbitrary power of man might not be abrogated: (2) when He
declares (de Stoic. repub.) that the same Epicurus (sese in omnem partem
versare, ingeniumque contendere, in id incumbendo, ut quomodocunque a motione
sempiterna liberum tueatur Arbitrium, ac pravitatem esse inculpabilem non
patiatur;) racked all the nerves of his wit, to find out a way for the
protection of man's Free will; and so that evil might not praetend to
inculpability.

Now, though we may not train along the thoughts of our Reader, out of the
direct tract of our praesent Theme, into a wide Digression concerning Epicurus
his whole Romance of the Declination of Atoms in the Soul; especially having
lately remitted him to Gassendus his accomplished Comment thereupon: yet can we
not impede his progress along the straight line of method, here to arrest him,
while we inform him briefly, How he accommodated that fiction to the
vindication of man's Liberty from the inexorable Coaction of Fate. We conceive,
that Epicurus, having observed 3 kinds of Motion in Animals, but principally in
Man, viz. Natural, Violent, and Voluntary; took it for granted, that the
primary Cause of each was to be deduced from Atoms, the Principium a quo of all
motion: and hereupon concluded, that the spring of all Natural motion, was the
primary motion congenial or inhaerent to Atoms, viz. that which physiology
calls the motion of Gravity, whereby an Atom is praecipitated ad lineam rectam,
to a perpendicular; that the spring of all Violent motion, was the motion of
Reflection, or that which arises from occursation, arietation, or repercussion
of one Atom by another, whereby the Atom reflected, is carried ad lineam
obliquam; and lastly, that the spring of all Voluntary motion was the motion of
Declination, to which no region is determined, nor time praefixt.

But might not Democritus, and other Defendants of Absolute Necessity natural,
have excepted against this, as insufficient to Article 5. An Exception, in the
name of Democritus, against Epicurus Inference.
the protection of man's Evasory Freedom, by returning; that because this
motion of Declination is no less Natural (for it is derived from no other
principle, but Atoms themselves) then that of Gravity; therefore does it still
remain, that All things are effected by Fate, as well when Epicurus his
Hypothesis is conceded, as before. Insomuch as all things, which were to come
to pass, by reason of those various motions of Arietation, Repuls, Declination
etc. by an eternal series, and kind of subalternate Concatenation, are
consequent one upon the heels of another; and particularly that event of
Cognition and Appetition, to which man's Liberty appertains; and so are brought
to pass by an equal Necessity. For, that the Mind of man may display, or
execute that Liberty Elective, whereby it affects and prosecutes any object,
conceive it to be an Apple; necessary it is, that the Image or Species of that
Apple be first emitted from it, and being transmitted through the mediatory
organs of sight, invade, percell, and commove the Mind to know, or apprehend
it. Necessary to the Apple, before it can transfuse its visible Species to the
eye, that it be put in some place convenient for adspect, by him, who gathered
it from the tree or received it elsewhere. Necessary, that the Tree, which bore
that apple, be first generated by a seed, and nourished by the moisture of the
earth, concocted by the heat of the Sun. Necessary, that that Seed be derived
from a former apple, and that from a former tree, planted in this or that
determinate place, at this or that determinate time: and so by retrogression to
the beginning of the world, when both the Earth, and all its Vegetable seeds
had their origination from the Concursions and Complexions of Atoms; which
could not (being agitated by the impulse of their own inhaerent Faculty Motive)
but convene and coalesce, and acquiesce in those Figures, those situations, at
that time. Again, if the Soul, or Mind be also a Contexture of orbicular Atoms;
those Atoms must have bin contained in the Sperm of the Parents; must have
consluxed thither from certain meats and drinks, as also from the Aer and beams
of the Sun; those me ats must have bin such and no other: and so subalternately
successive from eternity, the Event will be found to come to pass by the same
Adamantine Necessity, whatever of the Causes, lateral or concurrent (which must
run up to an account beyond all Logarithms) you shall please to begin at.
Because from Eternity Causes have so cohaered to Causes, that the last causes
could not but concur; which being deduced into act, the Mind could not but
know, and knowing affect, or desire that particular object, viz. the Apple. And
what is here said of Causes, the same in all points is to be understood also of
Atoms, which constitute those causes, and from whose congenial motions the
Causes derive those their Motions, by which they attain to be Causes.

To this Exception, that we may compose some Response, such Article 6. The
justification thereof, by a Respons conform to the Physiology of Epicurus.
as may seem Consentaneous to the Doctrine of Epicurus, and to contain somewhat
of Probability, at least; we must usurp the liberty to assume: that such is the
Contexture of Atoms in the Soul, or Mind, its Declinant Atoms can break that
Rigidity arising from other Atoms, and so make its nature Flexile to any part;
in which Flexility, the root of Liberty does consist. And therefore, the mind,
being allected by the Species of any object, is indeed carried toward that
object; but so, that if another object shall instantly occurr, whose Attraction
is aequivalent, it may again be invited by, and carried toward that object
also: so that, deflecting from the first, it may become aequilibrated or
indifferent to either part; which, doubtless, is to be Free, or Arbitrary. And
that the Mind, being thus constituted Flexile and Indifferent, does at length
determine it self rather to one then the other part; this arises from hence:
that the impression of one Species is more violent then of the other; and
consequently that the Election succeeds, upon the Apprehension of that object,
whose species appears either positively good, or comparatively more good.
Finally, that the Mind, when it electeth or wills any object, is as it were
the principal Machine, or main Spring, by whose motions all the Faculties, and
the members destinate to execution are excited, and carried thither, whither
the Mind tends: and this by mediation of the Spirits discurrent, or rather
transmitted through all parts of the body. All which Lucretius fully expresses
in these Verses:

Declinamus item motus, nec tempore certo,
Necregione loci certa; sed ubi ipsa tulit Men's:
Nam dubio-procul his rebus sua quoique voluntas
Principium dat; and hinc motus per membra vagantur. lib. 2.

Again, perhaps Epicurus will not gainsay, but that the motion of Declination
is as much Natural as the motion of Gravity; But yet will He by no persuasions
yield, that the Mind, being contemperate of Declinatory Atoms, is so affected
and attracted by Necessity toward one object, that it cannot instantly be
deflected to another. For, as a mixed Nature is made, so is the Mobility of its
insensible parts varied: and from various Natural motions retused or refracted,
arises a Third Nature, according to which its motions may be said to be
Voluntary and Natural both; insomuch as they proceed a Natura libera, from
Nature free and uncoacted. Nor will He deny, supposing the Occursation and
Arietation of Atoms, that it is pure Necessity, that Percussions, Repulses, and
either Reflections or Cohaesions should succeed among them: but yet may He
refuse to allow a Necessity of such Occursations, as if they could not be
impeded, nor their Consequents be diverted. Hence, concerning that eternal
series of the Causes of the Apple, and the Mind; Epicurus will grant, that when
things are already effected, a kind of Necessity may be attributed thereunto,
such in respect whereof those things cannot be uneffected; since, non datur jus
in praeterita, there is no countermanding things Praeterite: but before those
things were peracted, there was no such Necessity; since both Fortune, or
Contingency, and the opposing Liberty of man's Will might have interrupted,
inverted, and changed it. For few are ignorant of the wide disparity between
these two Assirmations, viz. What is once done, cannot be not done: and what is
done, might not have bin done. Since, in the Former, a thing is considered as
already past; and in the Later, as yet to come: and as according to the Former
it is Necessary; so according to the Later, it, may be or Contingent, or
Voluntary. By which reason, was it possible, that the Apple might not have bin
praesented to the eye; possible, that the Tree which bare it might first have
withered; that the Seed, of which that tree was generated, might either have
proved abortive and steril, or else have bin sowed in some other place; that
other of its Causes might have bin diverse ways praepeded: which also may be
affirmed of the Mind, and its Causes; and consequently none of the many Causes,
which did antecede the Appetition of the Apple, can be conceived to have bin
Necessary, as they might if the Causes were of themselves incapable of
Impediment, or if there were one Cause Paramont to all others in the
Concatenation, which by an absolute sovereignty, or despotique power, had
directed and coacted them. Allbeit we concede, that the Appetition of the Apple
by the mind, is the Consequent of the Minds Cognition thereof, and that
Cognition the consequent of its Occursation to the eye, and that the Consequent
of its Position in a place convenient for sight, and that the consequent of its
Existence, and so from link to link retrograde up to eternity: yet
notwithstanding can no man justify this Inference, that therefore the Mind is
Necessitated to that Appetition; because still there remains a Posse to the
Mind of being Averted from the Affectation and Prosecution thereof, in case
either the Species of a better object, or a suspicion of poison therein
concealed, shall intervene, or a refrigeration of the Stomach by the
dyspeptical and slatulent juice thereof be feared, or any other Cause of moment
sufficient to persuade the mind to abstain from the use thereof, shall be
interposed,

Nor is this Rejoinder disswasive; that, when the Mind is averted Article 7.
The most weighty Rejoinder, (of the oonnexion of those Causes, which Avert the
Mind from, so found too light.
from the Appetition of the Apple, the Causes Antecedent were not such as might
induce the mind to an Appetition, but such as induced it to an Aversation; and
that these Averting, not those Attracting Causes were so connected to the
series of Fate, that the mind could not but be averted from it.

well as of those, which Attract it to an object, to the eternal Series of Fate
to overbalance Epicurus his defense of man's Liberty.

For, though the Mind be contemperate of such a Contexture of Atoms, as that it
may be Commoved by the irruent Species of external Objects; yet is the nature
of its contexture such also, as that it can derive from it self some motions
distinct from, nay contrary to those motions excited by Extradvenient Images;
which motions being instituted by no other Principle but it self, are
manifestly Spontaneous and Voluntary, and by which it is empowered to resist
External motions, and therefore may not so be carried to one Object, as not to
be, upon advantage, deflected to another. And hence we may Conclude, that the
Mind is not obliged to a necessity of any one Object; but stands Free to refuse
that, and elect another: and that the Reason of a thing to come, is not a
little different from that of a thing already past; since, in respect to a
thing Future, there remains an Indifferency to the Mind of electing either of
two Objects, but in respect to a thing Praeterite, there is a Necessity of its
election of one. If this Solution be thought too light, we can superadd another
of weight sufficient to counterpoyse the Doubt; viz. that which Carneades in
Cicero insinuated, when he taught, that the Epicureans might have defended the
Liberty of man's Mind, without their commentitious Declination of Atoms. For
having once declared, that the Mind has Voluntary motions of its own
institution, they needed no other Argument to confute Chrysippus: to whom when
they had conceded, that no motion can be without a Cause Movent; there remained
no reason why they should have granted, that all Effects have their Antecedent
Causes; since to the will of man no Causes are Antecedent, it being to it self
the Principium a quo of all its motions Voluntary.

And this is the faithful Abridgement of Epicurus his Doctrine concerning Fate,
as a Constitution merely Natural, and capable of interruption, alteration,
opposition, by either of the Two other in his Triumvirate, viz. Fortune or pure
Contingency, and the Liberty of man's mind, which He conceived Copartners in the
Empire of the World..

SECT. IV.
THere is yet another Species of Fate, retaining to our Second Article 1.
Mathematical Fate briefly described.
Genus ((...)) whose exceeding vanity and inconsiderableness had well-nigh
occasioned our total Inconsideration thereof, in this place; and that is Fatum
Mathematicum sive Astrologicum, the Mathematicians and Astrologers Fate; being
a certain imaginary Necessity Natural, imposed upon all Sublunary Agents, and
more especially upon Man, as the most analogous Recipient, by the inoppugnable
Influence of Celestial Bodies, respective to their Motions, Positions,
Connexions, Aspects.

It Is no wonder, we confess, that the Chaldaeans, a Mercurial Article 2. The
gross Vanity thereof concealed from many Philosophers, only by the cloud of
Transcriptive Adbaesion to Antique Traditions.
and volatile Nation generally infatuated with Astral Idolatry, were the
Inventors of this Planetary Destiny; since they Deified all they understood
not, and advanced their observations of the circumvolutions of the Spears,
together with their Orbs of light, to such a height of insolence, that they
fancied the Hebrew Alphabet represented in the Figures of the Asterisms, and
praetending to the skill of reading the Celestial Ephimerides, by spelling
those Characters, which the Planets in their Conjunctions, Oppositions, and
other Apparitions seemed to make, into words and sentences perfectly
signifying, to the exact and intelligent observer, the intent of God concerning
not only the subversion of Monarchies, mutation of States, religions, etc.
general Events, but also the prosperity or adversity, the health or sickness,
life or death of particular persons: as Rabbiben Ezra, and out of him Gassarel
(without the concealment of his strong inclination to the same superstitious
Arrogance) has observed, and by several experiments alleged endevour'd to
patronize, in the 13. Chap. of his Unheard of Curiosities. Nor is it a wonder,
that the Hebrew, and after them the Grecian Astrologers, with great
ostentation of transcendent knowledge, and no less then privacy with the three
Fatal Sisters, sedulously promoted the same splendid Error, of ascribing the
Empire of the world to a Heptarchy of Erratique Stars: since, upon the
testimony of the greatest Antiquaries, Rabbi ben Ezra, in ductore dubiorum.
we may justly assirme, that the Hebrews added to the vanities and absurdities
of the Chaldaean, and the Graecians to the wild Romances of the Hebrew
Astrology; the stream thereof, by long running in the channel of time,
contracting more and greater Impurities. Which is a chief reason, why we
inhaerite so dark and imperfect a knowledge of the great Astronomical Sagacity
of the more simple and upright times of Abraham and Moses. Though this be no
wonder, we say, yet it is a considerable one, that even many Physiologists, who
praetended the indagation and tradition of nothing but Verity, of verisimility
at least, have liberally contributed toward the diffusion and propagation of
the same Delusion. Witness that peremptory speech of Pliny (1 not. Histor.)
singulis sydera tributa sunt, clara divitibus, minora pauperibus, obscura
defunctis, and procujusque sort lucentia ad munera mortalibus. Nor can we
conjecture, what should occasion the Deception of so many and so great
judgments, in this easy particular; unless that grand Cause of Popular
mistakes, viz. Transcriptive Adhaerence to all, that seems praesented in the
reverend habit of Antiquity, especially if gilded over with the Estimation of
Rare and Sublime: the Wit of man being naturally prone to Affect and Admire,
rather then Indubitate and Examine those Transmissions, which concern the
remotest Difficulties in Nature, and above all, the Energy and Configurations
of Celestial Bodies. Prodigia cum narrantur, excipi solent favore mirantium,
and quanquam non ad verum exacti sint, postquam semel Scriptorem invenerunt,
pluribus placent, veneratione crescunt, vetustate commendantur; was Nicopompus
his saying, in Joh. Barclaii Argenis, lib. 2. For, had they divested their
minds of all traditional Praejudice, and but reflected their thoughts, either
upon the Hypothetical Necessity of the Matter, or Subject, whereon the Stars
are supposed to discharge and six their uncontrollable influence; or upon the
extremely different Fortunes of Twins, conceived and borne under the same
Constellation; or upon the double Impiety of ascribing to remote, weak, and
perhaps unconcerned Causes, those Effects, which proclaim their designment by
an Infinite Wisdom, and their Praeordination to Ends above the sagacity of
Human Providence; and of charging all the most nefarious Villainies of sinful
man upon the innocuous and exceeding both useful and comfortable Creatures of
God: had they, we say, but pondered any one of these Reasons, that sufficiently
demonstrate the Absurdity of Planetary Necessity; doubtless, they had soon
reclaimed their belief from this dishonorable seduction, and would no longer
have abused themselves with an opinion, that all the Occurrences of every
Individual man's life, together with the time and manner of his death, are the
inevitable Effects of those Stars, which were Lords of the Horoscope, either
at his Conception, or Nativity, or both.

The First Reason, whereby this Chaldaean Fate may be demonstratively Article
3. The Absurdity of Sydereal Necessity evicted (1) by an Argument desumed from
the Hypothetical Necessity of the Matter on which Celestial Impressions are to
operate.
redargued of extreme vanity, we desumed from the Hypothetical Necessity of the
Matter, whereon the Planets exercise their power. For, according to their own
Concession, Omnis receptio est ad modum recipientis, All bodies ought to be
Analogous, i. e. praedisposed to admit either the benign, or malign
influences of the Heavens; for Alteration is of necessity praevious to
Production, and before a body be configurate, necessary it is that the Matter,
whereof it is composed, be altered and variously praepared; and praepared it is
by Second Causes, but perfected by First. Thus the Geniture of the Male, though
perfect and prolisical in its self, must yet be frustrated of its end, unless
it meet with convenient and patible Materials whereon to actuate its Plastic
virtue, viz. the Blood and seminal infusion of the Femal, proportioned both in
quantity and quality to its Efficiency. Thus the Aer of Egypt, because Nilus
(being (...)) does yield no Evaporations sufficient to the generation of
Clouds, continues still serene and unobnubilated; notwithstanding the potent
Attraction of the Sun, Moon, and other Sydereal Magnets: and though all the
Planets should convene in the watery sign of Pisces, as before the catholic
Deluge Respice page 143.
, and threaten an Apertio portarum to that Climate; yet, because the material
Cause of rain, Evaporations, is there wanting, must their conspiracies be
defeated, and their Influences become languid and ineffectual. And theresore,
by equal reason, unless the Planet, which is Lord of the Geniture, shall find a
Subject qualified in all points for the admission and promotion of this
Celestial Fate, which our effronted Genethliacks have conceived it to immit
into Embryons and Births, all its magnified Influx must miscarry, and be lost
in an invalidity as absolute, as the labor of that Statuary, who should
attempt to melt Marble with Fire, or mould sand into an Image, without a
convenient Cement. If this be, as it must be true; that the Praeparation of the
Matter, on which the Impressions of Superlunary Bodies are to operate, does
depend upon Sublunary and determinate Causes: then may we, with more honor,
recurr to that excellent sentence of the Poet;

Libera stat nobis men's, nulli subdita coelo.

The Second praegnant Argument, wherewith the more sober Article 4. (2) By the
common Experiment of the unaequal Fortunes of Twins.
sort of Book-men usually deride the Arrogance of our Genethliacks? (who blush
not to promise to the world exact Copies of the Rolls of Destiny, and divine as
considently as if they had bin of the Cabal with all the Asterisms) we derived
from the common Experiment of Twinns: who, though procreated of the same
Seminalities, faecundate in the same Ovarie or bed of nature, and (for ought
even our most perspicacious Harvey knows to the contrary) conceived in the same
moment, and so under the same Ascendent; are notwithstanding many times
observed to differ in Sex, physiognomy, genius, condition of life, and mostly
in the manner and time of their death. Thus Esan and Jacob, who may, without
the dispensation of a Figure, be said to have bin but one and the same Birth,
the younger Midwising himself into the world by holding fast his brothers heel,
and so if not indubitating the right of Primogeniture, yet at least portending
his future purchase and usurpation thereof; were yet so disparate n their
Complexions, Dispositions, Fortunes, course of life, Age, and dissolution; that
our Secretaries of Heaven must either demonstrate that the face of the Heavens
was varied in that short moment that intervened betwixt near Nativities; or
confess it to be the hand of Providence Divine, which distributed to each his
peculiar Lot, not the irrational Stars that caused that vast disproportion.
And thus Proclus and Euristhenes, Gemini not only in their production, but in
the Crown of Lacedaemonia, and so aequally disposed by their Fortunes also to
the promotion of that Influence, which the then paramont Conjunction of the
Pianets had impressed upon them: did neither live in equal glory, nor perish by
equal and synchronical Fates. On the Reverse; how many Myriads have proved
Twinns, in their Decease, who were utter Aliens in their blood, nativity,
constitutions, professions, inclinations, fortunes? Dare our Judicial
Astrologers assirme, that All, who fall in battle at once, had one and the same
sydereal Fate, which necessitated that their Copartnership in the grave?
unsainedly, nothing acquainted with letters can be so contradictorily impudent.
What excuse have they then left them, for stopping their ears against that
grave Admonition of the oraculous Zoroaster; (...), Ne tu augeas fatum, Beware
thou do not aggravate thy Fate. which signifies no less then this; in thy
power it is, either to promote, or frustrate the virtues of Celestial Influxes:
to promote them by Cooperation, to infirm and defeat them by
Counter-inclination or repugnancy. To which we may accommodate also that
memorable Aphorism of the Prince of Astrologers, Ptolemy; Potest is, qui
sciens est, multos stellarum effectus avertere, quando naturam earum noverit,
ac seipsum ante illorum eventum praeparaveril.

Our last Argument to confound Chaldaean Fate, is the Double Impiety inferrible
thereupon. (1) If the Infelicity of Article 5. (3) By the dou^le Impiety,
Inseparable from the belief thereof.
every man be the indeclinable Effect of that malicious Tincture, which the
unfriendly Complexion of the Heavens at his Nativity infused into his nature;
as our ethereal Mercuries assirme: then must it follow, that those glorious
orbs were created by God more for the harm and ruin, then benefit and comfort
of mankind; for whose sake only, subordinate to his own Glory, the whole
Creation was intended. And (2) if all the regicides, parricides, homicides,
incests, rapes, rapines, blasphemies, sacrilegies, rebellions, proditions, etc.
nefarious acts of Miscreants (the very naming whereof will blister the most
innocent lips) be the executions of those designs, which the malevolent stars
in their Confoederations have determined to accomplish by such and such unhappy
Instruments: then must it be conceded, that no Malefactor ought to be
accountable to justice, because he can plead, Non equidem vellem, sed me mea
Fata trahebant; as also, that God is the Author of Evil, by giving to the
stars such noxious power, and such unlimited Commissions, as do autorize them
to operate to the Destruction of his Masterpiece.

To these 3 Redargutions of Astrological Necessity, we might have annexed as
many score, borrowed from Picus Mirandulanus, Bradwardine B. of Canterbury,
Sixtus Senensis, Mersennus, Gassendus, All which heroical Champions of truth
and Providence Divine, have drawn their victorious swords, in this quarrel,
against the Host of Heaven: but, remembering that proverbial axiom, Frustra fit
per plura, quod fieri possit per pauciora, we found our selves obliged to
decline supererogation, and referr the unsatisfied to these incomparable
Authors. However, we ask leave to insert the memorable and not commonly quoted
Confession of Hilarious Altobellus Senior (in praefatione ad Tabulas Regias
Divisionum 12. partium Coeli) in these words. Cum igitur per tot secula
fluctuarit Astronomia and mendax tanto tempore peragrarit totum orbem, quot
modis, quot locis, quot viribus, quot cum temerariis vel ignavis auctoribus,
inverecunda, front perfricta, fornicata est? nunquam, nullibi, nullis (ante
Tychonem, and a Ptolemaeo post aliqua saecula) annuam veracem revolutionem
dedit, neque eventuum verum tempus consignavit, non ipsa, non dilectissima
silia Astrologia. Vtraque enim pavit curiosos mendaciis and adulationibus. Si
autem interdummendaces non fuere, sors favit, vel casus, vel per accidens
congruentia syderum ad illa puncta, and non docta ac naturalis conjectatio. By
which ingenuous Confession of a Person, whose assiduous inquest into the most
recondite mysteries of Astronomy, non only by indefatigate lecture of the
choycest of Urania's Secretaries, but also by the most exact use of Instruments
and Tables, and frequent tempestive Experiments, had enabled him to detect all
those pernicious Frauds, which either the Ignorance, or ostentation of
succeeding Ages had foisted in upon the simple and demonstrable Vranometrical
observations and Axioms of Antiquity; not only to the Corruption, but eternal
Defamation and contempt of that noble Science: how much of just Disparagement
is inferred upon Judicial Astrology, which the Avarice of Divining Impostors,
on one hand, and the superstitious Curiosity of abject minds, on the other,
have exalted to the height of Destiny; we should rudely derogate from our
Readers Capacity, not wholly to entrust to his own immediate judgment. To
ratify and terminate this our reprobation of our Genethliacal Schematists, we
have the like censure of them from S^. Ambrose (in Hexaemero) Nonnulli
tentaverunt exprimere Nativitatum qualitates, qualis futurus unusquisque, qui
natus sit, esset; cum hoc non solum vanum sit* and inutile quaerentibus, sed
impossible pollicentibus.

CHAP. X. The Liberty of Man's Will, Fortune, and Fate conciliated to Providence
Divine.
SECT. I.
THus long have we exercised the Candor and Patience of our Reader, with the
prolix Recitation, Article 1. The intent of the chapter.
and necessary Explanation of the Ancients opinions concerning Fate: and the
residue of our province is to gratify him with the concise Declarement of our
own, both concerning the legitimate Admission of this notion of Fate, and the
Conciliation thereof to man's Free Will, Fortune, and Providence Divine; which
we have formerly invited him to expect, as the grand scope at which all our
praevious Meditations were directed, and the point in which all these lines of
this small matter of Book are concentred.

First, we are to abominate the execrable Opinion of Democritus; Article 2.
Democritus Fate, inconsistent both to the Fundamentals of Religion, and the
Liberty of man's Will: and therefore detested.
not only because it is incapable of due Consistence with the sacred and
indubitable Principles of Religious Faith, which ascertain that the Creation,
Molition, Conservation, and constant Administration of all things, are
impossible rightly to be ascribed to any Cause but the Supreme Being alone: but
also because it is e diametro repugnant to the evidence of that infallible
Criterion, the Light of Nature; which demonstrateth the Soul of man to be an
Arbitrary and uncoacted Agent. For, that man has in himself a power of
inhibiting, or suspending his Assent unto, and Approbation of any object, the
Verity of whose Species is not sufficiently clear and distinct, but Dubious; is
a perfect Demonstration of the Indifferency, or Liberty of his Intellect, and
so also of its charge, the Will, or Faculty Elective: as Cartesius excellently
observes, in Princip. Philosoph. part. 1. sect. 6.

Secondly, that opinion of Aristotle and Epicurus, may, indeed, Article 3.
Aristotle and Epicurus their Fate admitted, in that it is Iden^ical to Nature:
but abomina^ed, in that it clasheth with the Certitude of Divine Praescience.
be defended so far forth as it makes Fate and Nature, or the Concatenation of
natural Causes, to be one and the same thing in reality, though expressed by
different Terms: but ought to be exploded, insomuch as it not only denies the
Verity of Future Events, and so substracts from God the proper Attribute of his
most perfect Essence, Omniscience, by not conceding to him an infallible
Science of all things to come; but also supposes no Creation of natural
Causes, no disposition, no moderation of their Efficiencies by Providence
Divine.

And thirdly, as for that more specious opinion of the Platonist Article 4. The
Platonic and Stoic Fate embraced, so far as it is conceded to be a
Constitution of the Divine wisdom* but abandoned, in that it detracts from
Divine Omnipotence.
and Stoic; we can discover no danger in our adhaesion to it, so far as it
affirms the primitive Constitution, and continual Gubernation of all things in
the Universe by God; by defining Fate to be that Method, series, or systeme of
Causes, which the Divine Nature at first constituted, and established, in order
to the praecise, and opportune effecting all things praedecreed by his infinite
Wisdom: But yet we must cautiously abandon it in this, that it not only
blasphemously invades the cardinal Praerogative of Divinity, Omnipotence, by
denying him a reserved power, of infringing, or altering any one of those Laws,
which Himself ordained, and enacted, and chaining up his arms in the
adamantine fetters of Destiny; but also, in great part, excludes the mind of
man from acting any voluntary part on the theater of the world, and leaves no
room for the intervention of Contingents. Article 5. In what qualified sense
Christianisme may tolerate the use of the term, Fate.


Nor is there any substantial reason to deterr the most scrupulous Christian
from admitting the use of this term, Fate, in a rectified sense; i. e. provided
that He thereby understand, not any blind and unpraemeditate Necessity; but a
provident and well ordered Concatenation of Causes, which (like the Magnetic
Chain, where all the inferior links are dependent on the impraegnating or
invigorating Emanations of the First,) was constituted by the Fiat of the
Eternal Wisdom, and may be varied, or inverted by the occasional
Determinations of the same; and this without incurring the Imperfection either
of Inconstancy or Improvision. For our warrant in this we have no less a
Praecedent, then St. Austin; whose words are these: Qui omnium connexionem
seriemque Causarum, qua fit omne, quod fit, Fati nomine appellant; non multum
cum iis de verbi controversia certandum est: quandoquidem ipsum causarum
ordinem, and quandam connexionem summi Dei tribuunt Voluntati; ac proinde Fati
voce qui voluerit uti, sententiam teneat, linguam corrigat. (in 5. de Civit.
Dei. cap. 8.).

SECT. II.
NOw, as for the Abolition of the seeming Enmity between Article 1. Fate and
Fortune conciliated, in the point of Providence Divine.
Fate and Fortune; it is not obscure, that the Concession of the one is very far
from adnihilating the other. For, if we admit Fate to be a Law, by the Divine
Will imposed upon Natural Causes, according to the tenor whereof all things are
done, that are done; and Fortune to be an Event resulting from a concurse of
Natural Causes, besides, above, or contrary to the expectation, conjecture, and
forecast of man, though praecisely praeordained by the Providence of God* and
connexed to the series of Causes, or Chain of Fate: we cannot but soon perceive
their Convention, Concentration, and Identity in the point of Providence
Divine; nor is there any veil of Discrepancy betwixt them, in their naked and
simple Realities, but that light and thin one, which either the Ignorance or
Sophistry of man has rudely, and perhaps profanely drawn. When a Prince
dispatcheth two Posts to the same place, by several ways, neither knowing of
the others mission; and they meet each other in one moment at their journeys
end: though we may rightly call it Fortune, in respect to them, who nevet
thought of that Convention; yet still is it providence, in respect to the
Prince, who sent them; and limited their time of travel to such an hour. And
undoubtedly, by the authority of no less reason are we bound to acknowledge,
that though many Events hourly occurring to us, which the highest Human
Prudence could never so much as suspect, may without derogation to the sacred
Monarchy of God, be styled merely Fortuitous, in relation to our Improvision:
yet still are they the wise and convenient Praedeterminations of his Special
Providence. Our Memory may rehearse, that the Term, Fortune, has a double
importance; (1) a Concurse of Causes; (2) man's praevious Ignoration of the
Event resulting from that Concurse: and our Reason cannot bur hence infer,
that according to the First, Fortune may be admitted in respect to man, though
not of God; and according to the Last, nothing can interdict our assertion,
that Fortune is a part, not only of Fate, but also of Providence Divine, which,
as has bin profusely demonstrated, comprehends all occurrences, as well those
which are, as those which are not praevised by Man. And in this sense only are
we to interpret that sentence of Plato (Epist. 6.) Deum apparare Fortunam; as
also that other, (in 4. de Legibus) Deum, and cum Deo Fortunam humana omnia
gubernare. This duly considered, we cannot but conclude; that Fortune is
consistent with Fate, by the same interest, that a Species does consist with
its Genus: for that the Analogy is consimilar, is manifest from what
immediately praecedes.

Plutarch, when descanting upon Plato his Distinction of Article 2. Flu^archs
ingenious Assimilation of Fate to the Civil Law: and his design therein.
Providence into Supreme, Planetary, and Sublunary; judiciously interprets
the supreme, to be Intelligentia and benefica Dei voluntas, the Intelligence
and benefical Will of God: and this for two respects; (1) that He might with
greater reason enunciate, that Fate is to be reputed subordinate to the Divine
Will; (2) that He might with greater auctority contradict that proverbial
error, Omnia Fato fieri; though he conceded, Omnia Fato complecti, that all
things are comprehended in Fate. We say All things, not only merely Fortuitous,
and more General Contingents; but also (...), such whose Event is ambiguous,
and suspended on the Election or Aversation of Man's Free Will. And the scope at
which He aimed this Distinction; was to insinuate and commend the Analogy
betwixt Fate and the Civil Law. For (says He) as all actions are not
Legitimate, i. e. are not done according ^o the rule of the Law, which are
under the comprehension of the Law (for the Law comprehends Prodition,
Desertion, and many offenses of the same kind, which yet no man can justify to
be Legitimate: since that only is Legitimate, which is praescribed by the Law;
and therefore He, who kills a Tyrant, does not a Lawful, (though a
Commendable, at least not a punishable Act) but only those, which are enjoined
and expressly praescribed by the Law: even so, though Fate does comprehend all
Events, yet are not* all Events therein comprehended, Fatal, or the
Designations and Effects of Fate; but only those, which follow upon Causes
((...)) in the Divine Disposition Antecedent, or Necessary; such as are the
motions of the Planets, upon which their Rising and Setting follow of Necessity.

SECT. III.
ANd finally, concerning the Enodation of that more then Article 1. Fate
concen^^ic^l to man's Elective Liberty, in the point of Praedestination.
Gordian Knot, (about which many Ancient Philosophers have broken the teeth of
their Reason, and as many Christian Theologists bin driven to make use of the
sword of Faith, to cut it asunder) viz. the Conciliation of Fate to its
apparent Contrary, Man's Free Will; we conceive the most hopeful way of
dissolving the mighty Difficulty to be, with the most penetrating Thom.
Aquinas, to understand Fate, in respect to man, to be no more but that part of
Providence Divine, which Theologists intend by the Term, Praedestination. For
the vulgarly conceived Antipraxis between Providence Divine and Liberty Human,
being once removed: the Repugnancy between Fate and Liberty will also vanish of
consequence. This that we have, in the 4. Sect. of our Chapter concerning the
Mobility of the Term of man's life, to more then a small part performed; the
Memory of our Reader is a sufficient record. However, that we may leave no
stone unturned, under which any the most minute particle of Truth, to whose
Explanation the concernment of our praesent Theme does adlige us, may be
thought to lie neglected: we shall, with permission from, and due submission
unto the Censure of the Church (from whose Fundamentals we humbly beseech the
God of Truth we may never recede in the least) make a second attempt to expound
the mysterious Riddle of Praedestination; that so we may with more perspicuity
evidence the Conciliability thereof to man's Arbitrary Agency.

In order hereunto, we are to observe, that as Theology holds it for Article 2.
The Concord betwixt Theology and Philosophy, in their admission of 2. orders of
Causes natural, viz. Necessary, and Free; the ground of the Affinity both
betwixt the Difficulties, and and Solutions, on either part: as to the
Abolition of the seeming Repugnancy between Fate and man's Free Will.
a maxim, that God created two distinct orders of Causes, in the General, viz.
Necessary, and Free; and that both of these constantly and faithfully execute
the commission of their Natures, respectively, i. e. the Necessary operate by
Necessity, and the Free by Liberty: so also does Philosophy admit it for
Canonical, that both the Necessary and Free aequally acknowledge God for their
Author, and are so comprehended in the episcopacy of Fate; that the Necessary
operate Necessarily, or Fatally, and the Free not Fatally, but Freely. And from
this Consent comes it to pass, that as the Difficulties, which perplex both
Divines and Philosophers, are of great Affinity, if not Identical, in the main:
so also are the Responses thereto of aequal moment: Wherefore it must commend
our studies, to select only those Two Cardinal Doubts, to which all others may,
in some relation, either direct, or collateral, be referred: and, to the
perspicuous solution of each, accommodate such praegnant Reasons, as may be of
correspondent extent in their importance.

The Former, being desumed from Divine Praenotion, is by the Theologist
proposed thus. Either God knew definitely and Article 3. The First c^p^tal
Difficulty, desumed from Divine Praescience; as stated by Divines.
certainly, that Peter would deny Christ: or He did not know it. That he did
not know it, cannot be affirmed; first, because He praecisely praedicted his
Abnegation; secondly, because Truth it self cannot lie: and if He had not known
it, He not bin Omniscient, and consequently not God. Therefore He knew it
definitely and certainly: and upon inference; it was impossible to Peter, not
to deny. For had it bin left to his Election, and he using that Liberty had not
denied: then might the Praenotion of God have bin argued of Fallacity, and his
Praediction of Falsity. But if it was not in Peter's power, not to have denied;
it is manifest, that he wanted the Liberty of Election.

And by the Philosophers thus. Either the Gods have a definite Article 4. The
same, as stated by Philosophers.
and infallible praescience of the future events of Contingents (i. e. whether
of 2. contrary Events, in possibility, shall be deduced extra Causas, or
actually succeed) or they have no knowledge at all of future things; or they
have an indefinite, and only conjectural cognition, such as even Man may justly
praetend to: but neither the 2. nor 3. proposition can be endured, without the
joint toleration of most horrid Absurdities, and inevitable praecipitation upon
that dangerous rock, the Commensuration of the Infinite Science of the Gods, by
the Finite extent of man's capacity; and therefore the First remains only to be
asserted. If therefore the Gods have a certain Praenotion, which of 2.
Contraries, whose Event is equally possible, as to the virtues of their Causes,
shall come to be effected: manifest it is, that that particular Event, whose
Ambiguity is determined to Certainty of Futurition, and is actually brought to
pass, is Fatal or Necessary, i. e. could not but come to pass. For, otherwise,
the Gods must be confessed subject to Mendacity. One of the two therefore, must
be granted, viz. that all things come to pass, Necessarily, as they are
foreknown and Praedicted by the Gods; and so that the word, Contingens, is
excluded, as importing no Reality, but a mere Chimaera; or, that the Affairs or
Occurrences of man, are neither praecognite, nor procured by the Gods; the
Impossibility of which assertion, does also fully exclude all Contingency.

To the Solution of this Difficulty, it is well known, the Divines Article 5. The
full solution of the same, by virtue of the Div^^s Discrimination of Necessity
into Absolute and Hypothetical.
have most judiciously accommodated their Distinction of Necessity into
Absolute and Suppositional. For instance; that 2. and 3. make 5. or that
yesterday is praeterlapsed, is Absolutely Necessary: but, that I should to
morrow take a journey into the Country, or write a Consult for such or such a
Patient, is not absolutely Necessary; yet if I suppose, that I shall travel; or
write; then there arises a Necessity of my traveling, or w^iting, ex
Suppositione, from that my Supposition. Now, in respect it is manifest from this
Distinction, that the Necessity Absolute of any Action does destroy the Liberty
of the Agent; but the Suppositional does not (for though I journey, or write,
according to my Supposition, yet was it possible to me to have done neither)
thereupon do they most excellently reason thus: that Peter's Abnegation was
foreseen and praedicted by God, as an Event to come of Necessity, not Absolute,
but Suppositional, by which nothing was detracted from Peter's Liberty of not
denying. For, as now in the praesent, if He be interrogated concerning his
Master, he is entirely Free or to avouch, or disavow his knowledge of him; so
also will He be in the Future, when He shall be interrogated. Wherefore, as, if
He now determine himself rather to deny, then affirm, and according to that
determination actually deny; He does that Freely, notwithstanding from the
moment he denied, his denial is Necessary, insomuch as it is supposed that he
has actually denied: so also in the Future; when He shall determine himself
rather to deny, then affirm, and according to that determination shall
actually deny, shall his denial be Free, or Arbitrary; however it cannot but be
granted Necessary that He has denied; because he has already actually denied.
Nor is it paradoxical, or difficult to affirm, that this Suppositional
Necessity, and Peter's Liberty are not (...), Discordant, or Inconsistent, in
any respect; because the Necessity is subsequent, not antecedent to the
Determination of his Liberty; and because it does not consist so much in Re,
vel Action, in the Thing or Action it self, as in Temporis Circumstantia, the
Circumstance of Time when 'ti^ done. Since, when we say, it is Necessary that
Peter has denied; that Necessity is not understood to have bin any thing
Antecedently in him, which compelled him to deny: but that it is radicated now
in Time it self, which as it is really past, and cannot be not past; so the
Action done in that past time, however it was done, cannot be not done. And
hence it is evident, though no man can justly assert, that it was Necessary to
Peter to deny, because according to that assertion, there must be understood
some Antecedent Cause, by which he was coated to deny: yet justified it may be
that Now it is Necessary that he has denied; because the Action being once done,
and so impossible to be not done, all the Necessity falls upon the Praeterition
of the Time. Now, in respect that God is Omniscient, He cannot but Foresee that
Peter will deny; yet that Divine Praenotion of Peter's Abnegation, is subsequent
to the Divine Praevision of Peter's Free Determination: and therefore God
Foresees that Peter will deny, only because He Foresees, that Peter, abusing
his Liberty, will freely determine himself to a denial. And hence comes it to
be embraced amongst the most judicious Schoolmen, as a truth indisputable;
That Peter will deny, not because God has praevised and praedicted that he
will deny: but that, because Peter will deny, when he shall be examined,
therefore and for no other reason does God Foresee and Foretell that he will
deny. For, uti Scientia, praeteritam rem pro objecto habens, nullam rei
praeteritae, ut ita and non aliter fieret, necessitatem infert: ita
Praescientia, rem suturam pro suo objecto habens, rei futurae, sive Futuritioni
nullam potest infer necessitatem: utraque enim est extra rem, and in Deo
actio Immanens; that as Science having for its object a thing Praeterite, does
induce no necessity thereupon; that it should have bin so, and no otherwise, so
also does Praescience, having for its object a thing Future, infer no
necessity upon its Futerition, that it shall so and no otherwise come to pass;
for both Science and Praecience are distinct from, and alien to their Objects,
and Actions Immanent in God, i. e. not at all effluxed to the object, to the
destruction, or alteration of its Nature: this, we say, is a Verity which
demonstrateth it self, and which we have more praecisely insisted upon, in the
4. Articl. 4. Sect. of our discourse of the Mobility of the term of man's life.
And that all Cognition is a thing really distinct from, and extraneous to its
Object; and that a thing comes to be actually, what it is not from the
Cognition thereof by an Idea in all points consimilar, but from it self, or its
Efficient Cause: needs no other probation, but the conviction of this instance;
that Snow is white, not because it is known to be white, but contrary, that it is
known to be white, because really it is so. To speak a profound truth plainly,
in few words; herein consists the Disparity between Divine and Human Cognition,
viz. that Human can be extended only to Praesent and Praeterite: but Divine
does extend it self, with equal Certitude, to Future Contingents also. Now,
insomuch as Praeterite Contingents were sometimes Future, and in the same
condition with those, which are yet Future; and again, those which are yet
Future may be understood to be praeterite in time to come, and in the same
condition with those, which are already Praeterite: manifest it is, that as
neither Divine, nor Human Cognition is the Cause, why Contingents already
Praeterite, are praeterite; but, e contra, they are known as Praeterite,
because really they are so: in like manner, that those which are Future, are
not therefore Future, because God holds an exact praenotion of them, as Future;
but, e contra, because they really are Future, therefore does God hold an exact
praenotion of their Futurition. And upon this Basis was it, that many
Schooolmen erected that Axiom, Praevisionem Dei nihil influere in humanas
actiones; that the Praevision of God has no influence (coactive) upon the
actions of man. Now, what has bin argued for the Praevision and Praenotion of
God, is also to be extended to his Praediction; especially because it is
uncontrovertible, that Praediction is posterior or subsequent to the Praenotion
of any Contingent, yet in the womb of Futurity: since what is not exactly
foreknown, can never be certainly foretold. For which respect, shall any urge
upon us, that the Divine Praenotion and Praediction cannot be Fallacious; we
shall most willingly concede their position, as most indubitate, because
nothing can be prognosticate by God, as Future, which is not really Future:
but, when it shall be thence inferred, that if Peter had once the absolute
power in his own hands to have not denied, and rightly using that arbitrary
power, had actually not denied; in that case, the praenotion and praediction of
his denial by God had proved Fallacious; we must reject the Illation, as
illegal and absurd, because had not Peter's denial bin realy Future, God had
neither praevised, nor praedicted the same. For, it is the Reality of its
Futurition, that supports the Certitude of the Praediction of any future
Contingent. And therefore, in case Peter had bin not to deny; God had as
certainly praedicted, that He would not deny: since so the Supposition had bin
quite contrary, viz. that Peter, rightly using his Liberty of Election, would
determine it, not to a Negation, but Affirmation. Whereupon we may safely
conclude (1) that Peter's Abnegation was Future, and (2) that God both praevised
and praedicted the same, upon no other Necessity but only this: that Peter,
when it should be in his own power to determine himself to either part, would
then actually determine himself rather to Disclaim and Abjure, then own and
avow, his Master. Thus the Divines.

And thus the Philosophers. Non quia Dii definito norunt Article 6. The
Solution of the same by the Philosophers proving that the d^finite Praenotion
of future Contingents, is no Cause of their definite Contingency: but, e
contra, the definity of their Futurition, the c^use of their d^finite ^^anotion.
Contingentia, ideo illa eventura sunt. Neque enim, quia Dii norunt, ideo
necessario eveniunt; sed quia, cum naturae sint an^ipitis, aut talem, aut talem
exhibebunt exitum; norunt Dii necessario qualem, seu utrum obtinebunt: adeo ut
Contingens, ex sua quidem natura indefinitum sit, sed respectu tamen notitiae
Deorum definitum. Quinetiam constat, nostra quoque notitia Contingens definito
cognosci; cum, viz. proprie Contingens deinceps non sit: sed necessario
consequitur antegressas, cur fiat, Causas: Says Ammonius (in lib. de
interpret.) The whole importance whereof is this. That the definite praenotion
of Contingents by God, is in no relation the cause of their definite
Contingency; but, their being of themselves definitely Future, or their
Ambiguity being to be determined to Definity of Futurition, is the Cause of
their praenotion by God. For, though a Contingent be Indefinite, in respect to
its own nature, i. e. it is equally determinable, by the Liberty of its Causes,
to either of two contrary Events: yet, in respect to the Praenotion of God, it
is Definite; because God has an infallible praenotion, to which of two
contrary Events its Causes will determine it. All which may be confirmed a
Minori, from the Praenotion of Man; experience assuring, that Physicians
frequently prognosticate and praedict the death of their deplored Patients,
even to an hour. Not that their Prognostics have any influence upon the
Disease, to determine it to Mortal, when yet it is Dubious: but that the
determination of the disease from Dubious to definitely Mortal, by its causes,
is the ground of their Prognostic.

Here, lest we be misconceived to confound Divine and Human Article 7. The
Disparity betwixt Divine and Human Praenotion.
Praecognition, we advertise; that the Praenotion of God is Infallible, because
a Priori, i. e. He foreknows Contingents, while they are yet only in
Possibility, and in the womb of their Causes; nor to him, who demands, Why, or
How God foreknows Events, while they are yet in the Dark, or Nothing of
Futurity? can any other response be given, but this, that He is Omniscient, i.
e. God: but the Praenotion, or (rather) Praesagitition of man, is Fallacious,
because desumed a Posteriori, from Effects educed extra Causas, into actual
Existence.

Which vast Disparity may be most adaequately Exemplified Article 8. The same
exemplified.
thus. God certainly Foreknows that Peter shall fall sick, and die of such or
such a disease, viz. a Pestilent Fever. How? because He foreknows, that those
Causes, which in respect to the Ambiguity or Indifferency of their event may,
or may not generate an intense putrefaction and malignity in the humors of
Peter's body, shall lose that their Possibility, and determine themselves to the
actual production of that particular malignant or pestilential inquinament in
his blood, which constituteth the essence of that disease: and that the disease
so generated will be so violent and inoppugnable by the force of Nature, that
the Temperament of Peter's body, being too weak to sustain such a
disproportionate Encounter, will thereby be dissolved, and so Death shall
inevitably succeed.

But the Physician can only conjecture, that Peter may fall sick of such a
malignant Fever; why, because He discovers that Peter's praevious Intemperance
has prepared the continent Cause, or Fuel for a putrid Fever; and that the
access of Malignity, either by Contagion communicated, or from an intense
Corruption of humors internally kindled, may, according to the Aptitude of its
nature, seize upon that praepared fuel, and Ferment it into a pestilential
Fever: but Definitely He does not know, that Peter shall fall sick of such a
pestilential disease; in regard, it transcends the maxims of his Art, and the
Capacity of his limited Reason, to foreknow, whether the Possibility of such an
Effect from such Causes, shall be determined to Necessity. Nor can He praedict,
that Peter being invaded with that disease, shall certainly perish thereby;
until the Dubiosity of the Fever be actually determined to Lethality: for
then, from Symptoms, that signify the total Succumbency or yielding of Nature
to the victorious fury of the disease, he may, with good warrant and honor,
praesage the imminent death of Peter..

SECT. IV.
THe other Capital Difficulty, being erected upon a certain circumventing
Socraticisme, or Interrogatory Sophisme Article 1. The Second Capital
Difficulty, erected upon a sophism called Ignava Ratio; as it respects both
Theology, and Philosophy.
(most adaequately denominated by Cicero (de Fato) (...), Ignava Ratio, an
unactive Argumentation; because, praevailing upon the mind, it stupefies the
same to a perpetual Restiveness, or Supinity, by charging even the Thoughts of
every man upon the absolute and inoppugnable praeordination of Destiny; and
consequently adnihilating the use of Piety, Prudence, and Circumspection in all
the actions of our lives) on that side which respects Theology, bears this
form.

Either I am, from Eternity, praedestined and Elected to immarcescible Glory;
or Reprobated to interminable misery. If the Former; then notwithstanding all
my Impieties, I cannot be Damned: if the Later; then notwithstanding all my
pious endeavors, I cannot be saved. But one of the two must be true: and
therefore, since all my Good or Evil actions are of no avail, to what end shall
I afflict my self with unnecessary, because fruitless care in any action of my
life? Better is it for me, to grant a general Indulgence to my Genius, and
provide for naught, but the satisfaction of all my Sensual desires; since that,
nor ought else, can neither countermand my Election, nor promove or confirm my
Reprobation.

And on the otherside, which respects Philosophy, it is praesented thus. If
the Decree of Fate be, that I shall recover of such a sickness; then, whether I
consult the Physician, or not, I shall however recover: but if the decree of
Fate be, that I shall not recover; notwithstanding my use, or neglect of the
Physician, I shall not recover. And one of the two is necessarily Future:
therefore is it vain and needless for me to use the Physician.

In order to our hoped Solution of this prodigious Problem, we beg leave to be
our Readers Remembrancer, that among Article 2. Two eminent Opinions of Divines
touchant the Solution of this Difficulty, recognized: and their judicious
Modesty, in duly acknowledging the mystery of Praedestination, to be Arcanum
Divini imperii, commend^d.
Divines there are two eminent Opinions, concerning this (...), or almost
incomprehensible mystery; in both which they have expressed so opportune and
becoming a Modesty, as must extort from every ingenuous person not only a
worthy Acknowledgement, but superlative Commendation. For, being reduced to an
admission of some kind of Necessity, and considering how inconsistent any the
weakest Necessity is with Liberty, wherein the Good and Evil, and so the
Laudability and Culpability of all the Actions of man, must be confessed to be
essentially radicated: they thought it the highest point of Wisdom to secure
their routed judgments by a mature retreat to the Sanctuary of Ignorance;
conceiving it a pitch sublime enough for the most aspiring thoughts of man to
mount up to the Apostles o Altitudo! and soberly becalming the distractions of
their Reason, by the Laudanum of Faith. If so, it is no shame for us to confess
this Wonder of Praedestination to be Arcanum Divini Imperii, not only
impervestiga^^le by the acutest and profoundest Speculation of Man, but also
too abstruse for the clearer intelligence of Angels.

The Former opinion states the Abstrusity thus. That God, from all eternity,
did Praedestinate, or Elect, out of the whole stock, or mass of mankind a
definite number of persons, to whom, sine ullis eorum menitis, operibusve bonis
praevisis, and ex pura sui Bonitate, without any respect at all to his
Praevision of their Good works, but merely of his own Favor and Benignity, He
had decreed eternal Felicity: and the rest He decreed to Reprobate, or Damn to
eternal Infelicity; yet, ex praevisis eorum malis operibus, in respect to his
praevision of their Future Evilworks.

The other thus. That God did as well praedestinate some men to Glory, from his
praevision of their Good; as others to misery, from his praevision of their
Evil actions. Or thus. God, from Eternity, decreed to create the World, and
therein a certain number of men, who should be capable of deserving well, or
ill at the hands of his Mercy, or Justice, according to the right use, or abuse
of that Liberty of their Understanding and Will, which He was pleased to endow
them withal. And, compassionating the Deceptibility of their Nature, He also
decreed to diffuse upon the souls of all men, that Supernatural Assistance,
which Divines call Sufficient Grace; that so they, who should, by the right use
of their Elective Liberty, husband their stock or portion of sufficient Grace,
to empower them to the performance of Good Actions, should be Elected to Glory:
but they, who should abuse both their Liberty, and his Auxiliant Grace, to the
doing of Evil Actions, should be Reprobated to misery. And finally, because He
foresaw, that some would rightly use his Auxiliatory Grace, and constantly
persevere in that state of Piety until death; and that others would neglect,
condemn, and abuse it, and never repent perfectly, but die in that horrid state
of Impiety: therefore did He decree everlasting Glory to those, and as lasting
misery to these. And this we conceive to be the most intelligible Adumbration
of this more then Aenigmatical Subject.

Now, of these two Opinions, the First seems as wholly incapable Article 3. The
First opinion found totally incapable of Expedi^ion from the Sophisme, Ignava
Ratio.
of Expedition from the intricate Entanglings of the praecedent Interrogatory
Sophisme; as the Absolute Decree of Reprobation is of a full Conciliation to
the Liberty of man's Will. For what Liberty can remain to those men, who are, by
a decree Antecedent to all praevision of their future Good actions,
praedestinate to Glory? And were there any Contrapractical Liberty remaining to
them, and should their Will, according to that liberty, elect evil, and they do
such actions, whose guilt might deserve Damnation Eternal, at the tribunal of
Justice Divine: in that case, would the Decree of their Election be eluded and
countermanded. Nor is it less Contradictory, to reserve a Liberty to those, who
are Reprobate; since, for this reason alone, that they are not Elected, it is
impossible to them, notwithstanding all their Good inclinations, endeavors, and
performances, to bring themselves into the number of the Elect. And yet damned
they shall be, and justly too, for their Evil works: but how is it possible for
them to do Good, and not Evil of Necessity, when the decree of their
Reprobation is supposed Antecedent to Gods Praevision of the future concurse,
or conspiracy of their Will to the tenor of that Decree; and when they are left
such deplorable wretches, to whom Damnation, and so the Patration of evil
Actions only remain possible? To evade this Difficulty of Difficulties, many
eminent Doctors of the Chair as well in Universities, as Synods, have
fabricated for themselves as many Sanctuaries of Distinctions. Some adscribing
to God a certain Science Conditionate, or Hypothetical (they unanimously phrase
it, Scientia Media, and are so immoderately delighted with the Acuteness
thereof, that, as the more then generally learned, Dr. Prideaux has
satyrically observed (in praelect. de Scient. Media.) de genuino ejus parente,
haud segnius ac de Puero vivo inter meretrices, 1. Reg. 3. est decertatum,
there has bin as passionate and sharp a conslict between Fonseca, Molina,
Leonhardus Lessius Lovaniensis, etc. Jesuits, for the honor of its Invention,
as was betwixt the two Ha^lots about the right to the Living Child) others
requiring, if not to the justification of the Decree it self, yet at least to
justify the Execution thereof, the concurse of Good Works, so necessarily, that
no man can ever attain to Glory, but by the scale of Merits, at least those of
our Savior: and others mincing, or extenuating the Elective Liberty of man
into a mere and simple Libency (which we have more then once specified, and as
often described) and accordingly attempting to salve the Repugnancy thus; that
the Elect are therefore Free, because they do their Good works Libently, or
Willingly; and likewise, that the Reprobate are also Free, because they do
their Evil works Libently. Hereupon, to him, who shall charge upon them with
this Vnactive Argumentation, they instantly oppose; that there is very great
reason, why every man, endowed with this Libency, should most strenuously
endeavor the constant practice of Good, rather then Evil: because, though He be
uncertain of the Decree concerning his Election or Reprobation; yet is He
certain of this, that no man shall ever be assumed into Glory, unless he shall
have done Good, nor any be excluded the Celestial Eden, unless He shall have
done Evil. To which they add, that it is the main Duty of every man, to the
utmost of his power, to ascertain himself rather of Election, by his
perseverance in good; then of Reprobation, by a debaucht and desperate
resignation of the scepter of his Will to all the temptations of Evil: that so
he may praevent, or mitigate that Fear and Anxiety, which must otherwise
uncessantly excruciate his mind, during his whole life, by acquiring a settled
confidence, that from God, who is infinitely Good and Just, he has no cause to
expect evil, while the scope of all his endeavors is, to deserve well, at least
to obtain Mercy at his hand. To conclude, lest man should in the interim either
Glory in himself, as if He ought, according to justice, to be Elected, for his
good works sake; or Complain of the rigor of the Decree of his Reprobation,
murmuring that it was not his fault, why his name was not inscribed in the Book
of life: they check his Glorying with this cooling card of the Apostle, O Homo!
quis te discernit? and hush his Complaint with, Tu qui es, qui respondeas Deo?
Nunquid dicet vas Figulo, quare me fecisti sic? Nunquid sacere illi licet aliud
vas in honorem, aliud vero in contumeliam? (Roman. chap. 9. ver. 21.) And if
this satisfy not; they here set bounds to Curiosity, and lime the wings of
those Eagle Wits, who would soar higher then the lower region of the mystery,
with that grave advice of the Canonized Doctor: Quare hunc trahat Deus, illum
vero non trahat, noli judicare, si non vis errare; or that modest rule of
Cornelius Tacitus, Sanctius and reverentius visum, de actis Deorum credere,
quam scire.

But as for the Second Opinion; to our first inquisition, that Article 4. The
Second Opinion, to a great part, extricated from the same Labyrinth.
seems capable of extrication from the forementioned Labyrinth, without much
difficulty thus. I am (says Adrastus, or the Fatist) either Elect to glory, or
Reprobate to misery, by an eternal Decree of God. This we grant to be most
true; but with this additional qualification: that Himself is Now the Cause,
why He was from eternity Elect, or Reprobate. For, He is now in that very
state, in which God foresaw that he would be, when educed into existence,
endowed with reason, and assisted with sufficient Grace, for the clear
discernment of Good from Evil; and it now depends upon the Liberty of his Will,
that God has praevised him operating good or evil: so that the Decree of his
Election, or Reprobation, is subsequent or posterior to the Divine Praevision
of his future good, or evil Demerits. To speak yet louder; God therefore Elected
him to Glory, because He Foresaw that he would use both the Liberty of his
Understanding and Will, and that Supernatural Light, or Divine Grace, which
the Compassion of God vouchsafed for his Assistance, as he ought, to enable him
to lead an honest and pious life: and therefore Reprobated him to misery,
because He Foresaw that he would Abuse the Lights of Nature and Grace, in
constantly and impenitently doing actions point blank repugnant to their
frequent and importune Advisoes. This being inferred, the Fatist cannot but
perceive, that it lies on his part, now to do well, and with all the nerves of
his Mind to Cooperate to Divine Grace: that so God, from eternity foreseeing
that his Conformity to the dictates of his Grace, may have Elected him. For if
he shall counterinflect his Will to the Inclinations of Divine Grace, and
pursue Evil: those Evil works shall be very they, which God from eternity
having respect unto, has Damned him for the Guilt of them, and impoenitence
for them.

Nor can He elude this truth, by pleading; that God does Article 5. The Fatists
Subterfuge, of the Infallibility of Divine Praenotion, praecluded.
from eternity Foreknow, whether He shall be Elect, or Reprobate: and that
therefore of Necessity he shall be, what he Will be; since the Divine Science
is incapable of Elusion, or Mutability. Because, though God, indeed, had an
infallible Praecognition, from Eternity, whether he would be Praedestinate, or
Reprobate; yet is that Praecognition grounded upon his own eternal Decree, and
that eternal Decree grounded upon his eternal Praevision of the Fatists Good or
Evil life. So that the actual Determination of the Will of man to the constant
prosecution of Good, is the Basis, or first Degree in this mysterious Climax of
Praedestination; the Praevision thereof by God, the second; the respective
Decree of God, the third; and his indeceptible Praescience the fourth and last.
Not that these Antecessions and Consecutions are Temporany, i. e. not that the
Praescience of God is posterior to his Decree; and his Decree posterior to his
Praevision (for those 3. make but one simple and entire Act in the Divine
Intellect and Will: and Eternity is but one permanent Now, incapable of
Division, because of Cessation) really, but Anthropopathically: i. e. that
narrow and remote Man, when he speculates the nature of his own Free Will, and
that of Divine Justice, as integrally Consistent; is necessitated, for
comprehension sake, to suppose some Momenta Rationis, or Priority and
Posteriority in Eternity, as we have singularly enunciated in the 2. Articl. 4.
Sect. 6. chap. praecedent. Article 6. A second subterfuge of the Fatist, viz.
that the Subsequence of the Decree to Praenotion, does implicate the
possibility of its Elusion and Mutability; praevented.


Again, the Fatist can justly promise to himself no greater protection by this
farther objection; that, if the Divine Decree be subquent to Divine Praevision:
therefore is it in his power to stagger the Certitude of the Decree, and
dissolve its rigor into an arbitrary Mutability. Why? because the Decree is
not made, nisi supponendo, quide esset facturus, but upon a Supposition what
the future Actions of his life would be: and the Immutability thereof is
established upon the Necessity Suppositional, which Article 7. A third
Conclusion, viz that the posteriority of the Decree of Election to Gods
praevision of man's future Good actions, does make man the Author of his own
Discretion* detected and redargued.
can diminish nothing of the Liberty of man, as we have more then once
professedly evinced.

And as little solid reason has He to argue thus. If God did therefore Elect
me, only because He eternally praevised those Good works, which I now do: then
(ipse ero, qui me discernam) shall I my self be to my self the Author of my
Discretion. For, it is not man, who by his own single power can make this
Discretion, but the very Grace of God alone; without which no man can ever
attain so high as the foot of Goodness.

Conclude we, therefore; though it be not difficult to man's Reason, Article 8.
Two Extracts from the praemises; (1) that the Cooperation of man's Will to
sufficient Grace, may be conceived a Cause of his Election* (2) that to render
a reason, why God did not constitute All men such, as that All should cooperate
to sufficient Grace and so be Elect; is an impossibility to man's understanding;
other then this, that such was his eternal Will.
to investigate the Cause, Why God was pleased to ordain this vessel for
Honor, and that for Dishonor; why He, by the vigorous Magnet of his special
Indulgence, does Attract this, and not that man; still dispensing a sufficient
portion of his illuminating Grace to all men: since it is not obscure, that the
Concurse, Conspiracy, and Cooperation of this man's Will to that sufficient
Grace, may inoffensively be conceived to be the Cause, at least a Cause, and so
e contra. Yet is it (and the Acutest Wits have, from the Flaws made in them by
the more then Adamantine Hardness of this Rock, had great reason to conjecture
it will always continue) the most Desperate Difficulty, that ere perplexed the
Cogitations of inquisitive Mortality, to explore the reason, why God made men
of such a condition, as that some would be destinate to Honor, and others to
Dishonor; and not All men such, as that they should willingly suffer
themselves to be Allected by the Loadstone of his Love, or be willing to
cooperate to his Grace diffused upon them: when, had it seemed convenient to
his Wisdom, He might have made All men such, as that they would, with all
ardency of Affection, and force of their Wills, have Cooperated to his Grace,
and so have bin Elected to Honor. And certainly, from hence alone, that our
Delection of Virtue, or Vice (conform to which our Minds are carried on with a
kind of infraenable Tendency; and to which the Praevision of God being
extended, He has either Elected, or Reprobated) is necessarily dependent upon
the Notions, or Species of things objected to our Senses, and traductively to
our Cognoscent Faculty: there remains to us more then a great occasion of
applauding and admiring the Modesty and judgment of the Apostles Exclamation,
o Altitudo! especially when the Exhibition, or Praesentation of those Notions,
and Species does depend upon that Concatenate Series, or subalternate syntax
and Disposition of Causes and Effects, which God, when He Created the World,
according to the Model of his own imperscrutable Wisdom, thought good to
institute. And this we have judged to be a faithful Summarie of what the
Divines Respons to this Circaean Charm, or Sophisme of Adrastus contains.

The Remnant of our Assumption, is only to contract those voluminous Discourses
of Philosophers, which perpendicularly point at the Solution of the same most
bloody and impious Sophisme, into a sew medullary or essential lines.

Plutarch (de Fato) as Platos Interpreter, insisting upon the praerecited
Adaequation of Fate to the Civil Law; hopes to Article 9. The former Sophisme,
(ignava Ratio) in part dissolved, by Plutarchs Distinction; that though All
effects are compr^hended in, yet all are not caused by Fate.
decide the mighty Controversy by distinguishing thus: Tametsi omnia, quae
fiunt, Fato contineantur; non tamen Fato omnia fieri: ac ejusmodi esse ea, quae
Contingenter, sive Libere, ac Fortuito fiunt. That though all things, which
come to pass, are contained in Fate; yet are not all things effected By Fate:
and particularly those Events, which are merely Fortuitous, and those which are
effected by Arbitrary Agents. Now, according to this eminent Distinction, we
may concede; that it is, indeed, comprehended in Fate, not only that Thou,
being cast upon the thorny bed of Sickness, shall or recover, or perish, but
also that thou shall or Consult, or Neglect the Physician: But positively deny,
that therefore either thy Convalescence, or Death is Fatal, since it is
Contingent; as also, that thy use, or neglect of the Physician, is Fatal, since
it is Arbitrary.

Notwithstanding this nice and specious Distinction, we Article 10. The
insufficiency of that D^stinction, to the total solution of the Difficulty,
duly acknowledged.
confess, there remains a Difficulty, and such a one as the greatest Oedipuses
of the World may, without dishonor to their Perspicacity, despair of its
satisfactory Dissolution; viz. How it can be, since there is some Cause, which
condueeth rather to thy Convalescence, then Destruction; or, e contra, rather
to thy Destruction, then Convalescence; and some Cause, which induces, or
inclines thee rather to Consult, then Neglect the Physician, or, e contra,
rather to Neglect, then Consult him: and since those Causes had others
Antecedent to them, and those were connected to others, and those to others,
etc. retrograde along the chain of Fate: How it can be, we say, that these
Effects, being admitted to be Contained in Fate, may not be also admitted to be
Caused by Fate. Especially, when we cannot, without passion, quarrel at his
Construction, who shall tell us; that to be Contained in Fate, is as much as to
be connected to the Series of Causes, and that little less, then to be Effected
by Fate. To palliate, not cure the Itch of Curiosity in this particular; we ask
leave, with the sublimest and most daring Contemplators of the World, to recurr
to that General Asylum; Non debet Humana Sapientia supra Divinam illam
gloriari, juxta quam vetamur scrupulosius inquirere, quamobrem Deus sic
ordinarit. And this the reason was of our saying, that the second opinion of
Divines, to our first inspection, seemed capable of Extrication from the
Labyrinth of the Fatists Vnactive Argumentation: for our second and more
profounding meditations have found it far otherwise. However, we judge it
worthy our Readers Patience, here to acquaint himself with the subtle Evasions
of some Philosophers; especially when He shall survey them in epitome. Article
11. The most promising Responses of some Philosophers, concisely praesented:
viz. of


Plato (in 10. de Repub.) sagely discoursing about the future Infusion of Souls
into Bodies, imagines some certain Sorts, or Lots; which Lachesis distibuting
to souls, as she pleases, thus inaugurates them: Non vos Demon excipiet, sed
vos Daemonem eligetis; your Genius shall not obtrude it self upon you, 1. Plato.
but every one shall elect his own particular Genius. And soon after, as a
Comment upon his former Parable, He superaddeth thus much; Virtus sola extra
omnem servitutis noxam est; libera plane and servire nescia: quam prout quis
vel honorabit, vel negliget; ita plus vel minus ex ea possidebit. Culpa omnis
est penes eligentem; Deus est extra omnem culpam. Virtue is alone superior to
all servitude and compulsion, being absolutely Free, and nescious of
subjection: of which every man shall possess more or less, according to his
estimation, or neglect thereof. All blame is lodged on the Electors side: and
none can be on Gods. In both which parabolical praesentations collated, we need
not the optics of Sphinx to discover a lively adumbration of the Later opinion
of Divines, which is yet warm in our memory; for therein appears a shadow or
pale description of Divine Praedestination, joined hand in hand with the future
use of man's Liberty: and this becomes the more visible by Virtue, which is but
the repraesentative, or succedaneum of Divine Grace.

And as for the mythology of his imaginary Sorts, or Lots; Plotinus (Enn. 2.
lib. 3. cap. 15.) unriddleth them to be, not only the Disposition of the
Univers, at what time the Soul is immerfed into the body; nor only the
individual Temperament of the Body, derived by traduction from the Parents; nor
only the condition of the Climate, region and place; but also All other
Extraneous Insluences, by which the Mind may be either Adjuvated, or Impeded,
in its right Ratiocination, Judicature, Election, and Prosecution of Good, or
Evil.

Seneca (in 2. Not. Quest. 35.) vindicating their Devotion, who fled to the
Sanctuary of Prayers, Vows, and Expiations, 2. Seneca.
as a more certain Praeservative from the Combustion of Lightning, then a
Chaplet of Laurel (whose case holds no remote Analogy to theirs, who in
sickness address to the Physician) has this observable and pertinent passage.
Hoc habent commune nobiscum, quod nos quoque existimamus vota proficere, salva
vi, ac potestate Fatorum. Quaedam enim a Diis immortalibus ita suspensa relicta
snnt, ut in bonum vertant, si admotae Diis preces fuerint, si vota suscepta.
Ita non est hoc contra Fatum, sed ipsum quoque in Fato est. Aut futurum,
inquit, est, aut non. Si futurum; etiam si non susceperis vota, fiet. Falsa est
interrogatio; quia illam mediam inter ista exceptionem praeteris. Futurum,
inquam, hoc est, si vota suscepta fuerint. Hoc quoque necesse est, inquit, Fato
comprehensum sit; aut suscipiat vota, aut non. Puta me tibi manus dare, and
fateri hoc quoque Fato esse comprehensum, ut utique fiant vota; ideo fient.
Fatum est, ut Hic disertus sit; sed si literas didicerit. Ab eodem fato
contin^tur, ut literas discat; ideo discet. Hic Dives erit: sed si navigaverit.
An in illo fati ordine, quo patrimonium illi grande promittitur; hoc quoque
protinus fatum est, ut naviget, ideo navigabit. Idem dieo tibi de
Expiationibus; effugiet pericula, si expiaverit praedictas Divinitus minas; at
hoc quoquo fato est, ut expiet; ideo expiabit, etc.

And Chrysippus (apud Agellium, lib. 6. cap. 2.) being pressed hard by the same
ponderous Argument of the necessary Exhibition 3. Chrysippus*
of the Species of objects of the Mind; is driven to assimilate the Mobility of
the Mind to that of a Cylindre, or Bowl, which in respect to both its Gravity
and Figure, is naturally indifferent either to acquiesce, or be agitated,
according as it is either permitted to its own quiet, in plano, or deturbed
from it, by an external impuls. And this upon Design, by that familiar
Comparison to illustrate the Liberty of the Mind to be of such a constitution;
that though it cannot but be commoved by the Species of Objects irruent through
the gates of the Senses: yet nevertheless is it still in its own power to
afford, or deny its assent unto them, i. e. or to Elect, or Reject them. Which
was our only scope, in our praecedent Discourse concerning the First Motions of
the Mind, and their Consequences. The words of Chrysippus are these. Sicut
(inquit) lapidem Cylindrum, si per spatia terrae prona atque deruta jacias;
causam quidem ei, and initium praecipitantiae facis; mox tamen ille praeceps
v^lvitur; non quia tu id jam facis; sed quoniam ita se modus ejus and formae
volubilitas habet: sic ordo, and ratio Necessitatis Fati genera ipsa, and
principia causarum movet; impetus vero consiliorum, mentiumque nostrarum,
actionesque ipsas voluntas cujusque propria, and animorum ingenia moderantur.

To which we may consarciate the most plausible and promising Respons of a
School-man. Voluit Deus homines deliberare, 4. Aquinas.
eligere? Deliberant sine ulla vi, and eligunt per voluntatem. Et tamen hoc
ipsum, quod electuri fuerunt, vidit ipse ab aeterno: sed vidit, non coegit;
scivit, non sanxit; praedixit, non praescripsit. Quid titubant hic nostri
Curiones? Miselli! non alius mihi locus videtur in clariori luce, nisi quod
petulca men's ista identidem se scalpit, and exasperat, mala quidem scabie
infecta litigandi, and disserendi. Quomodo enim (inquiunt) si Deus praevidit me
peccaturum, and non potest falli ista praevisio; non peccem necessario? Certe
non necessario, pro tua mente: libera voluntate hic interveniente. Nempe hoc
praevidit Deus, ut eo modo pecces, quo praevidit: providit autem ut libere;
igitur necessario libere peccas. Satin' hoc clarum? sed enim Deus ipse in nobis
omnis motus Auctor. Communiter Auctor, fateor: sed non nisi boni Fautor. Ad
virtutem accingeris? illo sciente and excitante sit. Ad vitium? Sciente,
sinente, and sapienter moderante in bonum finem.

But alas! All this is Aer: and Curiosity is no Chamaeleon. Article 12. These
acute Responses aequitably audited, and their import found to be no more then
this; that man has a Freedom of Assent, but not of Dissent to the Will of God.
For though we extend these ductile Distinctions to the extreme of their
capacity, and rack their importance with all the nerves of the strongest
reason: yet will they at length be found so far short of attaining so much as
to the outside of the remote Mystery, as Impossibility is beyond Difficulty,
Infinite beyond Finite, Omniscience beyond Nescience; in a word, as the
inscrutable Counsels of Divinity are above the comprehension of narrow, crass,
and frail Humanity. Had they said no more then He, who being assaulted with the
same consternating Scruple, returned in short; Fata volentem ducunt, Nolentem
trahunt: they had contracted (but increased the weight of) their Speculations.
For that rich and emphatick Sentence comprehends the substance of all their
larger Evasions; and yet for all that the sum there of arises to no more
then this: Though man has a power of Non-resistance, yet he has no power of
Resistance; i. e. though man has such a Liberty, that he may be drawn
Not-unwillingly, yet not such as that he may not be drawn Unwillingly; or, more
plainly, that man has a Freedom of Assent, but not of Dissent; for who has
resisted the Will of God?

Nor could it have proved any Disparagement, but contrariwise, Article 13. A
Dehortation from immoderate Curiosity, in Divine Mysteries: and concise
Adhortation to conform unto, and calmly acquiesce in the Revealed Will of God.
the highest Honor, to which the circumscribed Intellectuals of dark Mortality
have any reason to aspire, here to have confessed a Ne ultra, and humbly
acquiesced in a becoming despair of other satisfaction then this: Deus, ab
aeterno, Fati syntaxin, causarumve naturalium seriem subalternatim sic
ordinavit, and sanxit; quia sic ordinavit and sanxit, i. e. quia
imperscrutabili ejus sapientiae sic visum est. When the Wit of man, wanting the
Ballast of Piety, bears too much sail, it cannot escape oversetting: especially
when it adventures upon the immens, vertiginous, and bottomless ocean os
Providence Divine; where All that is discoverable, is darkness and horror. What
greater Prudence did the great Plato ever show, which might consecrate his
Memory to the venerable esteem of inferior Ages, then that in his introduction
of Socrates, praeparing his Auditors, when He was to dispute about some things
which concerned the Attributes of the Divine Nature, with this excellent Allay,
or suppressive of immoderate scrutiny in such reserved mysteries: Aequum est,
nos meminisse, and me qui disseram, and vos qui judicabitis, Homines esse; meet
it is for us to remember, that both I who am to discourse, and you who are to
judge, are but Men. The Arcana of Gods Decrees are like the meridian Sun; on
which the more we gaze, the less we perceive: and all we can gain by our
audacious inspection, will be only Blindness and too late Repentance. When the
most Learned and Acute, whose monuments of Perspicacity are the most refulgent
Gemms in the embroidered coat of Fame, have found their Disquisitions
terminated in the sensible Mellifice of Bees, the contexture of Spiders, the
spinstry of Silkworms (not to advance to those Giant Problems of the reciprocal
Afflux and Reflux of the Sea; the sensible torrent of the Aer from West to East
under the Tropicks; the Cause of Earthquaks; the motions and distances of
Celestial or Quintessential bodies; the Circumference and Diametre of the Globe
Terraqueous, and its Libration or suspension upon Nothing; the verticity and
Alliciency of the Loadstone; the nature of the Soul, etc.) we say, when the
most Eagle-eyed Indagators have found themselves discouraged, and at a loss in
these minute Mechanics of Nature: what a distracted Insolency is it for us to
Attach those infinitely more inexplorable Abstrusities of the Divine
Praeordination, which are too intense for the stronger Optics of Cherubins?
What did grave and modest Antiquity design, by their erecting of the statue of
that Monster, Sphinx, over the doors of their Temples? only this; by the
commination of imminent Destruction, to deterr the Curious from prying into the
recluse and abscondite Sanctum Sanctorum of the Deity. This the profound Euclid
more then glanced at, when, being interrogated by some Philopragmonist (who
hoped to confound the Mathematics with the Metaphysics) concerning the Nature
and Polity of the Gods, He made this incomparable answer: (...); as for other
things concerning the Gods, I know naught, but this I know full well, that they
detest and abominate the profanely Curious. And this that reverend Father also
reflected on, when He said; Vt multo facilius invenit syderum Conditorem
humilis Pietas, quam syderum ordinem superba Curiositas; ita firma stabilique
fide sciamus omne Dei judicium justum esse, and ubi investigare non poteris
quare ita judicaret, sufficient scire quis judicaret. Since therefore it is
impossible for us to make our selves privy to the Concealed Will of our
Creator; all that remains on our part, is to endeavor, with all humility and
serenity, to conform and cooperate to his Revealed: assuring our selves, that
He, who is All Wisdom and Goodness, can will nothing but what is Good, nay
infinitely better for us, then what our imperfect and deceptible understanding
can instruct our Will to desire for our selves. This was the noblest resolve of
the noble Epictetus. Semper magis volo, quod Deus vult, quam quod Ego: adjungar
illi, velut minister and assecla; cum illo appeto, cum illo desidero, and quod
Deus vult, volo. And in truth, this is the only true Halcyon, that can calm
all the distracting tempests of our Cares; the imperturbed Haven, wherein the
Weather-beaten vessels of our Minds may safely Anchor, and bid defiance to all
the impetuous Gusts of Adversity, and Temptations; the Magisterial Elixir of
all virtue, and so of all real Delight; nay, Heaven anticipated; and the Term
wherein both my Cogitations and Pen shall acquiesce.

All Glory be to God on high, on earth Peace, and Good Will toward men.
FINIS.

