Man's but a shadow, and a Picture is That shadow's shadow yet don't judge
amiss. Though here you only on the shadow look What follows read. The
Substance is in the book.


THE INTERCOURSES OF DIVINE LOVE BETWIXT Christ and his Church, OR The
Particular Believing Soul.

Metaphorically expressed by Solomon in the first Chapter of the Canticles, or
Song of Songs.

Opened and Applied in several Sermons, upon that whole Chapter.

In which the Excellencies of Christ, the yernings of his bowels toward
Believers, under various circumstances, the workings of their hearts toward,
and in, communion with him, with many other Gospel Propositions of great import
to Souls, are handled.

By John Collinges, D. D.

Solomon divinitus inspiratus, Christi, and Ecclesiae lauds and aeterni
Connubii cecinit Sacramenta, simulque expressit sanctae desiderium animae, and
Epithalamii carmen exultans in spiritu jucundo composuit Elogio, figurato
tamen. Nimirum velabat and ipse instar Moysis faciem suam, non minus forsitan
in hac part fulgentem, to quod illo adhuc in tempore, nemo, aut rarus erat,
qui revelata facie, gloriam illam speculari sufficeret. Bernardus 1 Sermon. in
Cantica.

London, Printed by T. Snowden, for Edward Giles Bookseller in Norwich, near
the Marketplace. 1683.

To the Lady Ann Knightley.
Madam,
AMongst the many Spiritual mercies by which within these fifty years last
past, England has been exalted to heaven (as our Savior said of Capernaum)
the plenty of good Books has not been the least, so as there is hardly any
point in Divinity, which has not been judiciously handled, both dogmatically,
polemically, and practically, and discourses upon it published in our own
Tongue. The things hid in times of Popery, yea and for many years in the
beginning of our Reformation, have been made known; the things covered have
been revealed; what was at first spoken in darkness, has been told in the
light, preached upon the house tops, and so published, that all those who would
might read, and understand. Certainly no Nation under Heaven (of which we have
any record) was ever blessed with the Means of Grace to that degree; none ever
had more judicious Interpretations of the Word of God, nor more serious and
faithful Applications of it to the Consciences of men and women; so as if
either the Doctrine or Duty of the Gospel be yet hid to any, it is much to be
feared that it is to such only who shall perish. But of all good Books we have
been exalted in none more than those which have bin wrote on practical
Subjects, Books of all others to be most highly valued, as more immediately
serving the great end of man, in showing him the way of Salvation, directing
his coming to Christ, and walking with him, of which we have had such plenty,
as indeed there would be no more need of writing on such Subjects, if the
Vanity of our Natures did not more incline us to a discourse upon the same
Argument newly wrote, than to what has been written as well some years since,
by which means, the multiplying of good Books does not a little contribute to
the much reading of good Books, and that I am sure contributes much both to
knowledge and practice (the two great ends that every Preacher ought to aim
at;) so as I cannot be of their mind who would have no more written of this
nature, because so much has been already wrote, any more than I can be of
theirs, who think there is now no such need of Preaching, because formerly
there has been so much. So long as there are any Souls in the World, who know
not Christ, and live not up to the Rules of his Gospel, there will be need both
of the one and of the other; nay, were there none such, there would be need of
it, to keep up the Grace of God bestowed upon men in its warm exercise. Nor me
thinks should there be one Preacher of the Gospel who should not publish the
glad tidings of it, and leave some Record to the Ages to come, of his
faithfulness in that work. The Riches of Divine Grace can never be too much
published, we can never enough declare his love, who for our sakes became poor,
that we through his poverty might be made rich. Such like thoughts as these,
Madam, have brought these Discourses into a more public light: They were
composed many years since, soon after my entrance into the public Ministry. I
am willing they should be a Testimony to the world, what Doctrine I then
Preached, and see no cause yet to be ashamed of, and what scope or design I
have always propounded to my self: The Gospel of the Kingdom; Christ; The
faithsul saying, worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jes^^ came into the
world to save sinners, 1. Tim. 1. 15. The Apostle Doctrine, Acts, 4. 12. That
there is no Salvation in any other then in Christ, for there is no other name
under Heaven given amongst men whereby we must be saved, were the great things,
I took my self concerned as a Preacher to publish to the world. Together with
what our Savior has taught us, That he who believes him i not condemned: But
he that believes not is condemned already -- shall not see life, but the wrath
of God abides on him, Joh. 3. 18. 36, and that Faith without works is dead.
These were the great things I had in my eye, to open, explain, and apply to
people. My apprehension that I saw much of these things revealed in the Song of
Solomon (though clouded under Metaphorical expressions) was that which led me
to the study of that difficult portion of holy Writ; than which undoubtedly
there is no portion of the Old Testament more Evangelical, according to the
common Hypothesis agreed by the most valuable Divines in all Ages, viz. That it
contains a Dialogue between Christ and his Church, or particular believing
Souls in it. If any think I might have chosen plainer Texts from which to
discourse these things, I freely yield it as to many of them. But shall this
excellent Book, always acknowledged a sacred portion of holy Writ, by the
wisest man upon earth styled the Song os Songs (that is, the most excellent
Song) lie by us as the Vision of a Book that is sealed, or be bound up in our
Bibles for nothing? Or can there be any work more worthy of a Divine, than to
attempt the clearing of so incomparable a piece of Divine Revelation from that
darkness which it pleased God to cloth it with in a time, when the most which
he spoke concerning Christ, was in Types (...) Prophecies, or Metaphors. Time,
together with the Sermons of christ and his Apostles, have expounded the Types
and Prophecies of Christ. Is it not a work worthy of us to explain the
Metaphors, that we might have a Christ wholly unveiled? There Is no great fear
of any dangerous erring in the case, if he that explaineth takes care, that
his Explication agrees with plainer Revelations. Madam, I think I may further
say, that there is no portion of holy Writ so copiously as this, expressing the
infinite love, and transcendent excellencies of the Lord Jesus Christ. None
that more copiously instructs us, what he will be to us, or what we should be
toward him, and consequently none more worthy of the pains of any who desires
to Preach Christ. My Meditations upon the second Chap^^r composed in my maturer
years, were published some years ^^nce: Those upon this Chapter have (being
done in my younger time) staid, till I could get some leisure to peruse them my
self, and correct some things in the style, especially (our juvenile fancies,
seldom pleasing us in our maturer years.) You will, I hope, Madam, pardon my
Dedication of them to your Ladyship: Your ^^lf knows how great Obligations you
have laid upon me: I cannot answer them: These are all the Requitals we can
make our Friends for their kindnesses. Silver and gold I have none, but what I
have I humbly present your Ladyship with; nor shall I have been wholly
unserviceable to your Ladyship in your highest concerns, if any thing in these
Discourses shall help further to inflame your Soul with love to him who is the
chiefest of ten thousand, and contribute to the sending of your Soul to Heaven
in the admiration of your Beloved, where you shall see him as he is, whom these
Discourses will but show you as in a glass darkly. Now the God of Peace, that
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep,
through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good
work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

April 3. 1683. Your Ladyships most humble Servant, JOHN COLLINGES.

TO THE READER.
SOme few years since, I was prevailed with to publish some discourses upon the
Second Chapter of this excellent Song. I had then by me these upon the first
Chapter, but they being composed in my younger years, I was desirous first to
peruse them, before I suffered them to come forth into the World, since which
time I have had so little rest that the perusal of them has taken up much
longer time than I then thought upon. The publishing of my discourses upon the
Second Chapter first obliged me to take something out of these discourses, to
make those as intelligible as I could, concerning the Penman, of the Book, and
the Nature form, and style of it, which I have here restored to their due place
with some advantage (all those things falling in to the handling of the first
verse) I am not, upon the persual of notes composed so many years since, my
self much pleased with the largeness of my discourses upon the five or six
first verses, occasioned from the variety of Propositions raised from them, but
there are couched in those verses some very great points, and my consulting so
many expositors as I did, together with my proneness to suspect my own judgment
rather then those whom I had reason to prefer before my self, was the cause of
that. Nor did I think it much material, if I saw a Proposition offered me by
any valuable interpreter as feunded on one of those verses, which I saw was a
Proposition of truth, and justifiable from other Scripture, whether it were
certainly there founded or no, for he pretends to too much skill, that will be
too positive in giving the sense of a metaphor in this or that Text. It is
enough for a modest Interpreter to give a probable sense of such expressions,
and to prove it from a plainer Revelation. I hope thou will be so charitable to
me, as to think that I troubled not a Popular auditory, with all that thou will
find here in the opening of the several verses. I bless God I was never so idle
as to make up discourses to people of what I knew they did not understand. What
I found in my notes put in for my own Satisfaction I have let go, not knowing
but my book might fall into the hands of some Scholar, who might be able to
judge from what Satisfied me, upon what grounds I formed such Propositions of
truth as I did from the several verses so preparing the matter of more Popular,
and practical discourse. I bless God I always looked upon the work of the
ministry, as the most grave, and serious employment under Heaven, whether the
Minister speaks with reference to explication or application. In the first he
acts as an Interpreter, making the words of the eternal God, more plain, and
intelligible to the infirm capacityes of his people. How great is that work to
be the Lords Interpreter? In the latter he acts as an Ambassador, persuading,
and offering terms of peace between God, and man, and using all his art in
entreating men to be reconciled to God. Who is sufficient for these things? As
to the former we have no more accommodate means, then searching the Original
texts, comparing the usage of words in one Text with the usage of them in
others, consulting Interpreters who have gone before us, then using our own
judgments, as to what they have said, or our own thoughts shall further suggest
to us; thou will discern that this is the method I have used, and if in any
thing I have been mistaken, I have erred neither wilfully nor singly. When I
had examined the several verses, my work was to raise Propositions from them so
interpreted, to open them, to justify them to be divine truths from other
places of plainer Revelation. For my method, and style, it is what I judged
most accommodate to the end of my work. No man discourses to any length upon a
subject without a method, some use a Cryptick method, which is only for their
own conduct, others a plainer method for the advantage of others, the former
may do well enough in the Schools, where the end is only to raise some
subitaneous affections; I never thought it proper for the Pulpit, where the
Preachers end is or should be, to inform his People in the great things of God,
and to affect their hearts, and in order to it he is bound to speak with the
best advantage both for their memories and understandings, thou will find I
have kept to the ordinary plain method of explication, confirmation, and
application. No man having drank old wine desires new, for he says, the old
is better. In the proof of Propositions I have rather studied the evidence of
holy writ, and Scriptural reason, then other more uncertain Topics, knowing it
the duty of Ministers to take care, that the faith of their people, may not
stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. One plain Text of holy
Writ more confirms a Proposition of Divine truth to an understanding Christian,
then an hundred rational arguments. For my style it was the least of my study,
my Opinion always was that what Augustine calls diligens negligentia, was the
best diligence as to that; while I was yet a very young man I had learned out
of him, that it was no Solecism in a Preacher to use ossum for os, for (says
he) an Iron key is better then one made of gold, if it will better open the
door, for that is all the use of the key. I had learned out of Hierom, that a
gaudry of phrases, and words in a Pulpit is but Signum insipientiae. The words
of a Preacher; says he, ought pungere, non palpare, to prick the heart, not to
smooth and coax. The work of an Orator is too precarious for a Minister of the
Gospel. Gregory observed that our Savior has not styled us the sugar but the
salt of the Earth, and Augustine observes, that though Cyprian in one Epistle
showed much of a florid Orator, to show he could do it, yet he never would do
so any more, to show he would not. The study of words, the right placing of
them for their better chiming, etc. I always thought a puerile, and pedantick
thing, fitter for a School boy, then a minister of the Gospel. Honest Souls
when they come to hear the word do not come to see Reeds shaken with the wind
of Ostentation and Vainglory, nor yet to see men clothed with the soft raiment
of fine expressions and phrases, (which for the most part like such clothes
have least efficacy to warm a Soul, or to keep it in any Religious heat) they
come to hear a Prophet, yea more then a Prophet, a man that shall reveal the
mind and will of God to them. To me the most tunable tongues in Pulpits, always
ring most awke. It is beneath the gravity of a Preacher to tickle a wanton Ear.
The end of all words is but to convey to our minds the knowledge of things, and
those are the best words that do that best, grandia granditer dicenda. I never
thought my self further concerned as to words, then to speak intelligibly, and
so as through no rudeness or indecency of phrase to make Persons nauseate my
discourse who had a just Reverence for divine things. Words will always follow
matter, but matter does not always attend words. I bless God I early discerned
and avoided this trifling, rather desiring to humble that style which was at my
tongues end, then to strain my tongue to a dialect which I either thought my
People understood not, or was beneath the greatness of the subjects of my
discourse. If any think the portion of Scripture undertaken in these discourses
not fit for a Preacher, they should do well to consider, whether it be not a
portion of holy writ, and such a portion as the eminentest Divines in all ages,
and of all persuasions have thought worthy their pains to inquire the sense of.
Having thus far Apologized for the following discourses I leave them to thy
candor and judgment, begging Gods blessing upon them to thy Souls advantage,

April 3. 1683. JOHN COLLINGES.

The First Chapter of the Song of Solomon paraphrased, and turned into English
Meeter, so as it may be Sung in the Ordinary Tunes, in which the English Psalms
are sung.
I.
THE Kisses of thy Mouth (Dear Lord) V. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of
his mouth.

Let my Soul only have,
No Earthly thing I do desire,
No worlds fine things I crave. Of thy mouth.

Let me thy Gospel Doctrines have,
By them O speak to me
So by thy Grace, that I in them
Thy special Love may see.
II.
A Kiss Lord! is but a small thing,
But a Love-token it is,
The Least of that is Sweet to me,
Lord grant me but a kiss.
One Kiss is sweet, but not enough: Kisses pl.

Let me more kisses have;
My wants are more than one, therefore
More Kisses I do crave.
III.
Thou have varieties of Grace
My Soul of wants as much:
For thy loves are better then Wine.
As are my wants, my dearest Lord,
O Let thy Loves be such.
Drunkards are pleased with wine, but I
In it no taste can find.
O Let me only know, that thou
To my poor soul art kind.
V. 3. Because of the savor of thy good Ointments: thy name is as an ointment
poured forth.
IV.
The knowledge thou have given my soul
How much thy Loves are worth,
Above created things is that
Alone which draws it forth
In breathings after Thee. Thy Name
Is Ointment poured out,
Which with its fragrant smell perfumes
The places it about.
V.
Therefore do the Virgins love thee.
Therefore the Virgins do thee love.
The undefiled mind
Can satisfaction no where else,
But in thee only find.
Every such Virgin will thee love
And thee alone desire.
Thy sweetest Ointments fuel are
To feed that sacred fire:
VI.
V. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee.
Lord I should come to thee: thou art
The term to which I move;
I should (O Lord!) run after thee
In the scent of thy love.
But I can neither run nor come
Unless thou first me draw.
Either my lusts do me seduce,
Or Satan does me aw.
VII.
Draw me.
O put forth thine Almighty hand,
Let power, and love constrain
My feeble Soul to follow thee,
And with thee to remain.
Lay hand O Lord! upon my will,
Then I shall willing be:
Put strength into my legs and I
Shall then run after thee.
VIII.
Run. --
Lord move me first, then I shall move
And stand no longer still,
Yea I shall move with strength to do
What is thy sacred will:
I shall not only move, but run,
Make have, and not delay,
To keep thy precepts, if that thou Will help me in my way.
IX.
It shall be then my meat and drink
To do what thou requirest.
Thou Lord shall then of me receive
Whatever thou desire.
I shall nor faint, nor weary be,
But persevering run,
Until the race be finished,
Which my soul has begun.
X.
My Lord! not I alone, but mine
Shall also follow thee: We will run.

I shall make known thy ways to all
That shall converse with me.
Sinners by my example shall
Be turned to thy Grace,
When they shall hear, how thou to me
Have shown thy pleasant face.
XI.
My Soul melts, I did speak but now
The King has answered. The King has brought me into his Chambers: we will be
glad, and ejoice in thee. --

And me into his Chambers brought,
Unto his Royal Bed.
How does my heart, now leap for joy?
How is my countenance glad?
My soul can now despond no more,
It can no more be sad.
XII.
In thee, O Lord! I will be glad,
Thou art my only joy;
-- We will remember thy loves more then Wine.
Thy Loves I will remember, when
New troubles me annoy.
The savor of the worlds sweet wines.
Is a poor transient thing.
But I shall never (I trust) forget
The Love of Christ my King.
XIII.
In him all things excelling dwell,
Upright things, or Uprightnesses love thee.
They Have chosen him their throne;
The Saints will him sincerely love,
And will love him alone:
The more upright the greater love
They to the Lord shall bring.
Who loves them with the greatest love,
And is the Lord, their King.
XIV.
V. 5. I am black but comely, O you Daughters of Jerusalem! as the Tents of
Kedar; as the Cartains of Solomon.
You Daughters of Jerusalem.
The City of my God,
You who in the same Church with me
Have taken your abode,
Upbrard me not, that I am like
The Coverings upon
Black Kedars Tents. I Am also like.
Curtains of Solomon.
XV.
I black am from my self, but am
By Imputation white.
By the first birth I am black and dark,
But; by a new birth Light. I am black but comely.

I black am in your curious Eye.
And in my own much more;
But white in my Beloveds sight
Since he has paid my score.
XVI.
V. 6. Look not upon me because I am black.
Look not on me because I Am black.
With a too curious Eye.
Nor with disdain, nor let my black
Visage you satisfy:
Much less dis-colour you. Behold
(Sisters!) and pity me.
My Blackness is not my delight.
Ah! it is my misery.
XVII.
Because the Sun has looked upon me: my Mothers Children were angry with me.
They made me the Keeper of their Vineyards, but my own I have not kept.
The Sun has scorched me with its heat.
It is by that I am tanned.
My Mothers Children also have
Touched me with unkind hand.
Their Vineyard they would have me attend;
Mine own I did not keep.
The envious one has collied me
While I thus lay asleep.
XVIII.
What Souls will not Afflictions tann,
If they be sharp and long?
Or who is not discolored by
Temptations, if too strong?
Worldly distractions spoil the look
Of a Religious mind,
But ah! through negligence I have
Been to my self unkind.
XIX.
V. 7. Tell me O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou
make thy flocks to rest at noon.
But O thou whom my soul loves best,
Tell me where thou do use.
At noon to feed thy flock. At noon
Do not my Soul refuse.
When as Afflictions scorch me most
Be thou at hand to me,
And teach my Soul at such a time
How it may come to thee.
XX.
At noon, [the time when Shepherds are most at leisure.]
O thou Shepherd of Israel,
Let me but know the hour,
When most of thee I may enjoy,
Taste most thy Grace and Power.
For why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy Companions.
By the flocks of thy Companions,
I would not turn aside.
With thee alone I would converse;
Be thou (O Lord!) my guide.
V. 8. If thou know not O thou fairest amongst Women, go thy way forth by the
footsteps of the flock, and feed thy Kids besides the Shepherds Tents.
XXI.
Thou fairest she! do thou not know
Where me at noon to see?
The footsteps of the flock will teach
Thee the right way to me.
Feed by the Shepherds Tents, for there
I shall most surely abide;
The Shepherds that derive from me
Shall be to thee a guide.
V. 9. I have compared thee O my Love, to a company of Horses in Pharaoh's
Chariots.
XXII.
I have compared my love unto
The goodly company
Of Horses which King Pharaoh draw,
Made strong by Unity:
Of Horses which march on to meet
The armed men, and never
Do from the glittering Sword turn head,
But mock at Cowards fear.
XXIII.
V. 10. Thy Cheeks are comely, with rows of Jewels, thy neck with Chains of
Gold.
Thy Cheeks (my Love!) are comely made
With rows of Jewels given
Thee, by my self: Thy lovely neck
Adorned with Chains from Heaven.
I will yet give thee further grace V. 11. We will make thee borders of Gold
with studs of Silver.

Borders of Gold I Will make,
And spots of Silver thou shall have
And for thine own them take.
V. 12. While the King sits at his Table: my spikenard sends forth the smell
thereof.
XXIV.
O may my dearest Royal Lord
From's Table never stir.
How sweetly does my spikenard smell
While's that he sits there.
Even his own Graces will not smell
When he is gone from me;
His Grace in me does daily need
His Royal company.
V. 13. A bundle of Myrrh is my beloved unto me, he shall lie all night betwixt
my breasts.
XXV.
My well-beloved is to me
Myrrh, in a bundle tied.
More precious, medicinal, and sweet
Than all the world beside.
Betwixt my Breasts he shall have place,
There he shall always lie;
It is the place for posies. There
I will this bundle tie.
V. 14. My beloved is unto me as a cluster of camphire [or Cypress] in the
Vineyards of Engaddi.
XXVI.
Engaddi's Vineyards have their plants
Of Camphire [Cypress.] All
Are names too short for me whereby
My Dearest Lord to call.
My sweet companion! thou art fair,
Thou look with Doves Eyes, V. 15. Behold thou art fair my Love, behold thou
art fair, thou have Doves Eyes.

Eyes which both meek, and harmless are,
Not sparkling Cruelties.
XXVII.
Thou have a satisfied Soul,
A rich, contented mind,
A plain and clean, and lowly heart
Which is to others kind,
A tender heart, a mournful Eye,
Exceeding quick. These are
The things which make me say again,
Thou art exceeding fair.
V. 16. Behold thou art fair my Beloved, yea pleasant --
XXVIII.
Nay (my Beloved!) thou art fair
My beauty is to thee
As nothing, worse than nothing, it is
But mere deformity.
Thou fair art, and pleasant too,
Thy conversation's sweet.
Thrice happy souls to walk with thee
Whom thou do please to admit.
XXIX.
Our Bed is green.
When thou within my bed do lodge,
How soon it waxes green?
When thou art gone, no fruitfulness
In it at all is seen.
Not a good work at such a time,
Can my poor soul produce.
Not an heart changed in Churches, when
Thou art not in the Pewes.
V. 17. The Beams of our house are Cedar, and our rafters are Fir.
XXX.
The Beams and rafters of thy house
Of Cedar are, and Fir.
Sweet, beautiful, and strong they are,
Such as shall never stir.
Thy word, and Ordinances Lord,
Support thy Church for ever.
O let my Sins within thy house
Me sever from it never.
CHAP. II.
V. 1. I am the Rose of Sharon, the Lilly of the Valleys.
MY dearest Lord! I Am like the Rose
Which Sharons fields does grace:
Like the Lilly of the Valleys, which
Does beautify its place:
A flower, and the noblest flower
Which in the Fields does grow;
My structure, smell, and fruitfulness,
Thy Workmanship all show.
II.
But Lord! I dwell in the common field,
And in the Valleys there.
To winds, and weather I Am exposed:
I live in daily fear,
Lest Sharons herds would me devour,
Or tread me under-foot:
And leave me naught to speak me thine,
But only a true root.
V. 2. As the Lilly among Thorns, so is my Love amongst the Daughters.
III.
As Lillies are amongst the Thorns,
So I my Love do see.
The Daughters of the peevish world
Are grievous Thorns to thee.
Yet thou art lovely there, and thrivest,
The ugly Thorns commend
My fairest Love and do improve
Her while they do her rend.
V. 3. As the Apple Tree amongst the Trees of the Wood: so is my beloved among
the Sons: I sat down under his shadow, with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste.
IV.
My dearest Lord it is enough,
Amongst Thorns let me be;
If while I stand there thou will be
A shadow unto me.
Amongst the barren Trees in Woods
Let me converse, if I
Thee as an Apple Tree may have,
That there I do not die.
V.
Thy shade, thy pleasant fruit shall be
To me enough for food:
And for protection too, while I
Traverse the untrodden wood.
I like an Hermit sit, and sing;
Thy Apples to my taste
Do much excel what other Trees
Afford the world for mast.
VI.
God manifested in the flesh;
His fruit, etc.
O how exceeding sweet?
When infinite, and finite did
In one Redeemer meet.
Thy suffering being tempted is,
When tempted, my relief.
Saran would rob me of my all,
Thou have disarmed the Thief.
VII.
Lord thy complete obedience
His fruit, etc.
Unto thy Fathers will,
Is all relieves me, when I think
How often I do ill,
While I do good. But O thy death!
Who can describe that fruit?
Which all my soul necessities
Exceeds while it does suit.
VIII.
Thy Resurrection, thine ascending
Unto thy Fathers Th rone*
Thy sitting there, at his Right Hand
Thine intercession:
How sweet they are? And then to think
That thou again wilt come
To Judgment, not me to condemn,
But only fetch me home.
IX.
Thy fruit, etc.
Thine Ordinances Lord, in which
Thy loves thou do display,
The Honey, and the Honeycomb,
Are not so sweet as they.
The Spirits sacred fruit, those sweet
Influxes of thy Grace,
Are what alone me patient make
Of sublunary place.
V. 4. He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was Love.
X.
These things my house of mourning turn drop,
Into an house of Wine;
Wine not which from Earths Grapes does
But from thee, the true Vine.
Thy Love O Lord thy Banner is
Over me, and makes men see;
Men who thee hate, I do'nt belong
Unto their company.
XI.
Thy Loves thy Banner, teaching me
Where to resort, when move;
When I fight for a Victory, His banner, etc.

Then I display thy Love:
It Is that unites me unto thee,
And every one that is thine,
Where e're those colors I but see,
I run to them as mine.
XII.
Protection I from them expect.
Mine Enemies are afraid,
As soon as they see over me
Thy Banners are displaid.
You Daughters of Jerusalem,
My heart is sick for love,
I cannot live without your help,
O to my poor soul move.
V. 5. Stay me with Flag-gons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of Love.
XIII.
My dearest Lord has left with you,
Flaggons, and Apples too.
O reach me something left I dye;
Unto the Scriptures go,
Out of those Fats draw out some Wine,
And quickly bring it me:
Bring me his Apples, why should you.
Your Lords Spouse dying see?
XIV.
I shall not dye, but live, for he
V. 6. His left hand is under my head: and his right hand does embrace me.
Has put under my head
His left hand, or his right hand shall
Embrace me in my bed:
It Is he alone my aching head
Can hold, and give relief:
They Are his embraces only can,
Assuage my poor souls grief.
XV.
How ready is he me to help!
I did but cry, he heard:
His left hand has secured me,
As to the thing I feared:
His right Hand soon shall follow it,
And wholly me release:
His right, and left hand both shall join
My love sick soul to ease.
V. 7. I charge you O you Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the
Hinds of the field, that you stir not up, nor awake my Love until he please.
XVI.
O Daughters of Jerusalem,
I charge you by the Roes,
And by the Hinds, the friendly Hinds,
Which so much love disclose
One to another* Do'nt provoke
My Love, till he withdraw;
By my example wisdom learn,
Sin not, but stand in awe.
XVII.
You live amongst the Roes and Hinds,
Learn not their wantonness.
You Will want the hand of my dear Lord,
When you are in distress.
Judgment for Sin will come as fast,
As if the Roes it brought.
Do not stir up your Lord at rest,
By one rebellious thought.
V. 8. The voice of my beloved: Behold he comes leaping upon the Mountains,
and skipping upon the Hills.
XVIII.
Hark! it is my Beloved's voice:
He comes, he comes to me,
Leaping upon the Mountains, him
Skipping upon the Hills I see.
He Is my Beloved, though not here,
I know his pleasant voice,
And though I see him not, his found
Makes my heart to rejoice.
XIX.
He comes; The Mountain of my Sins
I see lies in his way:
He leapeth over that mountain, and
It causes no delay.
He skippeth over the little hills
Of Creatures opposition:
That he may come to my relief,
In my distressed condition.
XX.
I see him coming; O let me
The glorious sight behold,
With the Eye of hope behold him, and
V. 9. My Beloved is like a young Roe, or a young Heart: Behold he stands
behind our wall, he looks forth at the windows, showing himself through the L
attess.
With the Eye of Faith more bold.
He comes like a young Heart or Roe,
Nimbly, and pleasantly:
Behind the wall he stands, when
In my distress I cry.
XXI.
In at the Windows see he looks,
And through the Lattess sees
Both my behavior, and withal
My sad Calamities.
The Lattess (Lord!) does give to me
But an imperfect sight:
O break it down, appear to me
In a more glorious light.
V. 10. My beloved said unto me. Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away.
XXII.
I hear him say, Rise up my Love,
My fairest one arise,
And come away, for I have now
Put off my dark disguise:
V. 11. For lo the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone.
The Winter, and the Rain are gone,
The pleasant Flowers appear
Upon the Earth, the singing Birds
Do greet the springing year.
V. 12. The Flowers appear on the Earth, the time of the singing of the Birds
is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land.
XXIII.
The harmless Turtles pleasing voice
Is heard on every Tree.
The Fig Trees puts forth her green figs,
The Vines smell pleasantly.
Arise, my Love! Thou fairest one
Make have, make no delay,
It Is a fit season of the year:
Arise! and come away.
XXIV.
Black storms of perfecution
Have kept thee much at home:
The storms are over, nothing now
Hinders, but thou may come.
The Gospel Turtles which lay hid
In Corners, now come forth:
All have a Gospel liberty
To sing their Saviors worth.
V. 13. The Fig Tree puts forth her green Figs, and the Vines with the
tender grapes give a good smell. Arise my love, myfair one, and come away.
XXV.
See how the Saints bud out in grace,
How gracious fruits abound
Upon this liberty, for all
To hear the joyful sound.
Arise you who yet sleep in Sin,
Make have to come, and live:
O go not on presumptuously,
My Spirit yet to grieve.
XXVI.
The Summer will not always last,
Your day of Grace will end;
Come to me while I call, and am
Ready to be your Friend.
Discouraged Souls arise, and thick
To my assemblies come;
The weather's good, doors open you have
No plea to stay at home.
V. 14. O my Dove that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret place of
the Stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely.
XXVII.
My Love! who to the rocks dark clefts
Of late did trembling fly,
And under stairs secret place,
Chose for thy Covert lie.
Pursued by Vultures, now come forth,
Thy Countenance let me see,
For it is comely, and thy Voice
Is pleasant unto me.
V. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the Vines, for our Vines
have Tender Grapes.
XXVIII.
The Foxes which have spoiled the Vines,
The Vines with tender Grape,
Come forth, and take them now for me;
Let not a young Cubb escape.
They shall no longer spoil my Vines,
Chase them into their Den:
I Will be revenged on thy lusts,
And on malicious men.
V. 16. My Beloved is mine, and I am his, he feeds among the Lillies.
XXIX.
I know that my Beloved's mine;
I know that I am his:
This is my Triumph, this my Joy,
My chiefest happiness.
Had not he made himself first mine,
His I had never been:
He first removed my guilt, and then
Purged my Soul from sin.
XXX.
'Midst white, and fruitful Lillies he
Loves to converse and feed;
O let my Soul a Lilly be,
V. 17. Until the day break, and the shadows fly away, turn my beloved, and be
thou like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the Mountains of Bether.
No more a barren Weed.
Until the glorious morn shall break,
And shadows flee away,
O let my glorious Lord be mine,
And I never from him stray.
XXXI.
Turn (my Beloved!) to my Soul,
Be like a pleasant Roe:
Or like the nimble Hearts, which do
On Bethers Mountains go.
In my distressed State O Lord,
Let me not be forgot,
Make have, and turn, and let me feel
Thee, while I see thee not.
A Prefatory Discourse UPON THE SONG of SOLOMON.
Canticles 1. v. 1. The Song of Songs which is Solomon's.

HAving undertaken this excellent portion of Holy Writ, for the Subject of
these Exercises, it is reasonable I should (according to the usual, and
commendable order of Interpreters,) discourse a little, concerning the Divine
Authority of it; concerning the Subject matter of it; the Penman, the time, and
occasion of the writing of it, and concerning the form, especially considering,
that as to some or all of these, there are some difficulties to be assoiled,
more than concerning other portions of Scripture, and concerning some of them,
some things more peculiar to this, than any other Book.

The first Verse of the Song (which I have now read to you) gives me a
sufficient foundation for the most of my discourse of this nature, if in any
part of it I swerve from my Text, I shall yet keep to my business, which is by
these previous exercises, to prepare you for clearer understanding of the
sacred contents of this Spiritual Song.

The Text affords us these three propositions.

1 Prop. That this Book was Solomon's.

2 Prop. That it is a Song.

3. Prop. That it is a Song of Songs.

1.
The first will lead us to a discourse of the Penman, and that, to a modest
Enquiry after the time, and occasion of his writing it, and (that well known)
we shall easily determine the Author, and both from that advantage, and the
auxiliary help of other Arguments conclude concerning its Divine Authority
against all opposers.

2.
The second leads me to the consideration of the form of the writing, being
Metrical and Dramatical. What else occurreth concerning that, shall be there
added.

3.
The third will lead me to the consideration of the Matter and Scope. I begin
with the first of these.

1 Prop. The Book of Canticles was Solomon's.

This is so plainly asserted in the Hebrew Text, (where this is the first
verse) that it cannot well be denied, without the denial of the other matter
contained in it; the only ground of scruple is because of the particle prefixed
in the Original, which is often a note of the Dative or Accusative Case, as if it
were rather dedicated to Solomon, then written by him: But to clear this, we
need not Christopolitanus his fancy, that it is to show us, that Solomon here
sang not of himself, but to the true Solomon Jesus Christ, nor yet Delrio's
fancy, that it signifies as much as secundum, The Song of Songs according to
Solomon, as we say that the Gospel according to Matthew, which was wrote by
Matthew: for the instances in the Titles of David's Psalms, are sufficient to
evidence the Grammar good enough, in making a note of the Genitive Case
sometimes.

Taking that therefore upon the Credit of the Hebrew Text. Let us more
particularly enquire;

1. Who this Solomon was.

2. At what time he wrote this Sacred Book, and what (probably) gave him the
occasion of it.

Solomon was the Son of David: the King of Israel.

Matthew. 1. 6.
The Son of David by Bathsheba, the Wife of Uriah, born in Jerusalem, 2 Samuel
5. 14. So named by his Father David, 2 Samuel 12. 24. at his Birth, it is said,
The Lord loved him. Upon which, v. 25. David sent by Nathan, and called his
name Jedidiah. i. e. beloved of God. (Abulensis thinks it was not his proper
name, nor was he afterward (that we read of) called by it.) Solomon signifies
Peaceable, he was so named before he was born, by Nathan, 1 Chronicles. 22. 9. and
that with respect to the peace, and quietness of Israel in his days. God there
Covenanted with David for him, that he should be his Son, and that he would be
a Father to him, and the Covenant recorded, Psalm. 89. (made with David) had a
special relation unto him. v. 25. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. He
succeeded his Father in the Kingdom by his Fathers appointment, 1 Kings 1. 32.
and reigned with such an affluence of Divine Blessings, as none might compare
with him. He loved the Lord, 1 Kings 3. 3. and walked in the Statutes of his
Father. God in Gibeon appeared to him, saying, Ask what shall I give thee, v.
9. He asks a wise and understanding heart, to judge his people, and to discern
good and bad asunder; which saying, so pleased the Lord, that the Lord not only
granted what he asked, v. 10. 11, 12, 13. but also riches, and honor, so as
there was none like unto him all his days. He builded the Temple, and the Lord
again graciously appears to him upon his Prayer at the Dedication of the
Temple, 1 Kings, chapter 9. The Queen of Sheba, came to admire his wisdom, for he
exceeded all the Kings of the Earth, in Riches, and Honor, 1 Kings 10. 23. Now
of this Solomon it is said, That he loved many strange Women, together with the
Daughter of Pharaoh: Women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Sidonians, and
Hitties, etc. and v. 6. They turned away his heart from God, when he was old,
and v. 5. he went after Ashtaroth, and Milcom, and built high places, for
Chemosh, and for Molech, v. 7. And here arises a Question, to which it is
reasonable that I should speak something in this place, because this Song is
judged to relate much to that action of Solomon's life.

Qu. Whether Solomon sinned in marrying of Pharaoh's Daughter, or whether that
first match of his was lawful?

1.
Theodoret and Suidas conclude that he did sin, and prove it from 1 Kings 11.
1. where this Marriage of his, together with his later Marriages with the
Daughters of the Canaa^etes, seem to be condemned; besides that the law of God
seems to have been against all such Marriages, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. and Ezra. chapter 9. 1.
reckons it up as the sin of the people that they had taken to wife the
Daughters of the Egyptians, etc.

2.
Bellarmine, Cajetan, Soto, Abulensis and others, think, That he did not sin in
this Marriage, to prove which, they produce, 1 Kings 3. 1. where Solomon's
making affinity with Pharaoh, and taking of his Daughter is mentioned, and
afterward v. 3. it is said. Solomon loved the Lord, I walked in the Statutes of
David his Father. Certain it is (allowing no transpositions) after this, God
made his signal appearances to him in Gibeon, and upon the dedication of the
Temple. Besides, they urge the Friendship between David, and the King of Egypt,
and the probability of David's contracting this Marriage for his Son before his
death. They further say, that the Law, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. did not simply, and
universally forbid Marriages, with the Daughters of Idolaters. Joseph Married
Potiphar's Daughter, Genesis 41. 45. Moses Married Jethru's Daughter, Exo. 2. 1.
Boaz Married Ruth a Moabitess. Ruth 2. and Sampson a Daughter of the
Philistines, and David, the King of Geshurt's Daughter, 2 Samuel 3. 2. And there
was a particular law directing the formality of such Marriages, when any were
taken captive. Deuteronomy. 21. 10, 11. Besides there are that observe a wonderful
council of God in it, both to reconcile these two contiguous Nations, in a
politic alliance: and also in regard that Solomon was to be a Type of Christ,
who was to reconcile Jews, and Gentiles unto God. Others think that the Law,
Deuteronomy. 7. only respected the Canaanites Daughters, who by Gods command were to
be blotted out, but that is of no value, for Deuteronomy. 21. 10, 11. they might marry
Captives. They therefore think that he sinned not in his marriage of her, but
1. In his multiplying of Wives expressly contrary to the Law. 2. In his
excessive love to and fondness of her. 3. In his following her to Apostasy.

3.
I think Pineda's opinion is truest: That it was not by any law given to the
Jews simply forbidden, to marry the Daughter of an Idolater, provided, that she
was first proselyted to the Jewish Religion: which was the term which you know
the Sons of Jacob put upon Hamor in the case of Dinah, viz. That his People
should be Circumcised. Thus some of the Jewish Rabbis interpret those
precepts, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. and Exodus 23. 3. Thus the precept, Deuteronomy. 21. 10, 11. is
easily reconcilable to that, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Hence it is very probably concluded
that Pharaohs Daughter, upon her marriage, subjected herself to the Jewish
Religion, and that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 44. 10. favors this opinion. --
Forget also thine own people, and thy Fathers House -- so shall the King desire
thy beauty. Hence we conclude, that Solomon's marriage with Pharaohs Daughter,
was lawful: and contracted by him in his best state, in the beginning of his
Reign: but it afterward proved inexpedient: we read nothing of Solomon's
defection, nor the ill influence of this match till he was old, 1 Kings 11. 1.
4. She, and his other Wives, turned away his heart from God, that it was not
perfect, as was the heart of his Father David. He grossly fell away, so foully,
that some question whether he ever had a truth of grace: others think his
failure, a sufficient foundation for their slippery Doctrine of Total, and
final Apostasy, and conclude him damned; it is something to our purpose to
examine that Question also.

Qu. Whether Solomon's Apostasy was total, and final?

Remonstr. Antisia. art. 5.
The Arminians say he fell away Totally, but not finally.) Some amongst the
Papists, have suspended their Judgment concerning his final Apostasy, witness
the Archbishop of Toledo, who had Heaven and Hell pictured in his Chapel, and
Solomon half in the one, half in the other. Of this mind are Jansenius,
Barradius, Torniellus, Pamelius, Feuardentius, Hostiensis, etc. and amongst the
Ancients, Tertullian and Cyprian; to whom also amongst the Protestants, Zanchy,
and Peter Martyr seem to incline. Amongst the Ancients, Augustine, V. Pl. in
lib. Pinedae de rebas sol. l. 8. cap. 1. and seq V. De-La Champii vindicias
solum.
Prosper, Basil, and Theodoret (to whom Pineda reckons Cyprian and Gregory) are
thought to favor the more severe opinion of Solomon's total; and final
Apostasy. Abulensis, Tostatus, Vega, Pererius, and Belarmine, conclude it. The
Ancient Jewish Writers, and (amongst the Ancients of the Christian Church)
Ireneus, Gregor. Neocaesar: Hilary, Hierom, Ambrose, Cyrill of Jerusalem, and
others: amongst the Papists themselves, Aquinas, Bonaventure, Hugo Cardinalis,
Comestor, Paulus Burgensis, Dionis. Carthus. Genebrard, Damianus, Pineda,
Delrio, Serarius, and Lorinus. And with these the generality of Protestants,
conclude he was no reprobate, nor did fall away finally, nor (say the
Protestants) totally. Solomon saw a great evil under the Sun, Princes going on
foot, while Servants rode on Horseback. De-La Champius observes a greater Evil
than this, in the impudent Jesuits, whose consciences will serve them to
reprobate Solomon, and Canonize Traitors, and other open Servants of Lusts; and
(as he notes) what Dr. Willet long since observed, is in this instance
verified concerning Bellarmine, That it is ordinary with him, when he finds his
own Doctors divided to take in with the worser part of them.

We conclude for Solomon, that he was a true Child of God, and that although he
fell, yet his fall was neither total, nor yet final, but he was restored by
repentance.

And for this assertion, we conceive we have sufficient Evidence from
Scripture, besides the Authorities of men already cited, declaring their
sentiments, from several convictions.

1.
Hierome, Cyrill, and Pineda urge that Text, Prove. 24. 30. where they conceive
Solomon speaking in his own Person, and saying. I went by the field of the
sloathful, and by the Vineyard of the man void of understanding: and lo it was
all grown over with Thorns, and Nettles had covered the face thereof, and the
Stone-wall thereof was broken down, v. 32. This I saw, and considered it well,
I looked upon it, and received Instruction. To which Pineda joins, Prove. 30. 1,
2. which (if with the Jewish Rabbines, we could conclude that unknown Agur to
have been Solomon) would give some auxiliary strength to that in the 24th Chap.
to advantage which, Pineda's observation of the (ancient) Septuagint, mixing
the 24. and 29. and these words of the 30th Chap. together as if all were spoke
by the same man, and of himself, may be worthy of consideration.

2.
Bachiarius, Serarius, and De-La Champius urge a 2d Argument, from 1 Kings 11.
43. and 2 Chronicles. 9. 31. where it is said, that when he died he was buried, with
the Kings of Israel, which they think strengthened by their observation, that
the Scripture mentions the the burial of Ammon, Joram, and Joash. (3 Wicked
Princes) elsewhere. But we must have better Arguments than this, for we are
told, that Abiam, 1 Kings 15 8. was buried in the City of David. so was
Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 8. and Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 12. 1. when on the other side,
Manasses, (though reconciled to God before his death,) yet had not the honor
of that burial. As the wisdom of divine providence, has left the surface of
the Earth, for a common walk, both for the just and unjust: so nothing appears,
but that the will of God, has left the bosom of it in any part thereof, a
common bed for them; nor do I find any sufficient evidence of any consecrated
burial-places so early in the world, which had there been, and had we found
Solomon's Tomb there, it would have told us no more than the Churches opinion of
him, and that usually to Princes, is very charitable, and questionless would
have been so to him who was the greatest Prince which the Earth ever saw.

3.
But certainly for that argument which De-La Champius, and Pineda, both bring
from the Covenant, made with David concerning Solomon, mentioned 2 Samuel 7. 14.
1 Chronicles. 17. 13. and Psalm. 89. v. 20, 21, 22, etc. to the 37th v. we may say of
it as David of the Sword of Goliath. There is none to it: Let us a little view
the Text: In the first you have the words of God spoken to Nathan, going to
enquire Gods approbation of David's design to build a Temple; the Lord denies
David liberty, but takes his offer kindly, and bids the Prophet tell David;

That when his days should be fulfilled, and he should sleep with his Fathers,
God would set up his seed after him, which should proceed out of his bowels,
and establish his Kingdom, v. 13. I will establish the Throne of his Kingdom
for ever. v. 14. I will be his Father, and he shall be my Child. If he commit
iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of Men, and with the stripes of the
Children of Men: But my mercy shall not depart from him, as I took it from Saul
whom I put away before thee. In the book of Chronicles, 1 Chronicles. 17. you have
the same thing repeated, only there. v. 14. you have: I will settle him in my
house. In the 89th Psalm. you have a larger account of that covenant, so far as
concerns David. v. 20. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. v. 29. -- His seed also
will I make to endure for ever, etc. If his Children forsake my law, and walk
not in my judgments: Then will I visit theer transgression with the rod, and
their iniquity with stripes: Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him. Nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn
by my Holiness, that I will not lie unto David.

In this Text you plainly discern a Covenant made with David, on the behalf of
his Seed, and that Seed of his, that should sit upon his Throne (which was
Solomon) as well as on the behalf of himself. Concerning him God says: 1. I
will establish the Throne of his Kingdom. 2. I will be his Father, and he shall
be my Child. 3. If he sins, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with
the stripes of the Children of men, Psalm. 89. I will visit his transgression
with a rod, and his iniquity with stripes. 4. My mercy shall not depart from
him as from Saul. Psalm. 89. Nevertheless my loving kindness, will I not utterly
take from him. Nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.

1. God covenants that although Solomon should sin, yet he would not take his
mercy from him. The very term of Mercy signifies more, than the continuance of
the Crown to him; for (as Tychonius observes) David would have understood
little mercy, for his Son to have enjoyed a temporal Kingdom, and lost an
eternal inheritance.

2. The punishment which God threatens to him in case of sinning was but a Rod.
The Rod of Men: for if we should allow nothing to Pineda's Criticisme, upon the
term used [Enosh] to signify men here, which properly signifies a weak old man,
who cannot lay on strokes hard, but chastises his Child gently, so as the Rod
of Men here mentioned, should be opposed to the grounded staff mentioned Isaiah
30. 32. which God makes to rest upon others, yet certainly the termof a Rod;
with the adjunct of Men speaks a very gentle chastning, with which eternal
punishment is no way consistent.

3. Add to this; That the Holy Ghost, (the most certain Interpreter of
Scripture) 1 Cor. 6. 18. Applies the very promise here made to the Children of
God, I will be a Father unto you, and you shall be my Sons, and Daughters: I
say who so considers these things must certainly conclude that Gods
obligation by this Covenant extended further, than the continuance of the
temporal dominion in his line, which is also advantaged, by the consideration
that Solomon in his life time was chastened with the Rods of Men, 1 Kings 11.
God 1 Cor 11. 32.
stirred up against him Hadad: Rezin and Jeroboam, He was doubtless chastened
of the Lord that he might not be condemned with the world.

Nor can any reasonably think to avoid the dint of the Argument, drawn from
these Texts, by telling us, That a greater than Solomon is understood in them,
even he of whom Solomon was but a Type.

For although it be true, that diverse of the Ancients favored that notion,
(amongst whom was Augustine, Ambrose, Tertullian, and Theodoret) and that some
passages in the aforementioned Texts seem to be by the Holy Ghost himself
applied to Christ, amongst which that eminent part of this Covenant I will be
to him a Father, etc. besides that others seem applicable to no other, as where
he promises to establish his Kingdom for ever: yet it is as true, that the
promise I will be to him a Father (as I showed before) is also by the Holy
Ghost applied to believers, 1 Cor. 6. 18. and those who understand the Hebrew
Idiome, know that the term (...) does often signify less, than Eternity
strictly so called, and it is as certain that Hierome, and diverse others of the
Ancients apply these Texts literally to Solomon. Possibly they compound the
business better, who (considering Solomon as a Type of Christ) divide the
Covenant made with David, betwixt Solomon and Christ, thinking that part
concerns Solomon, and part concerns Christ. Sure it is, that Solomon built
the material Temple not Christ, and Solomon alone, (not Christ) was in a
capacity to forsake the Commandments of God; and for the promissory part, if we
say it concerned Solomon in the letter, and Christ in the Mystery and Antitype:
I think we shall not much err: nor will this interpretation at all weaken the
strength of our argument.

4.
I find a 4th Argument for this eminent Person, brought from 2 Samuel 12. 24, 25.
compared with Neb. 13. 26. and 1 Kings 3. 3. from whence De-La Champius
observes 3 things.

1. That it is said God loved him. 2 Samuel 12. 24. -- And the Lord loved him.
Neh. 13. 26. He was beloved of his God. 2. In token of this love God gave him
his name Jedidiah, i. e. beloved of God. 3. The Scripture says, he loved the
Lord. The consideration of the latter makes the plea vain, of those who (to
avoid the dint of this Argument) would interpret Gods love of that general
favor which he extends to every Creature, distinguished from that by which he
elevates the Creature to a participation of the Divine Nature: for that love is
not so efficacious, as to produce a reciprocal love in the Creature to God
again, we therefore love him because he loved us first, which being granted,
unless we grant God as mutable as man, and deny what he has said, that whom he
loves, he loves to the End: We must allow that Solomon, notwithstanding his
great miscarriages, was yet beloved of God, and died in a state of Grace.

Now to these Arguments, might further be added, as strong presumptions in the
case, yielding at least some auxiliary strength. That no Text speaks so
desperately concerning Solomon; that the Scripture, 1 Kings 11. 4. speaking of
his falling, seems to hint it a sin of infirmity in his old age, and through
the great temptation of his Wives: That he did only tolerate Idolatry, not make
it the Religion of the Nation. That he after this (as is at least probably and
generally concluded) wrote (in testimony of his repentance) the book of
Ecclesiastes. That he was the Sacred Penman of Scripture. These things may much
confirm our charitable opinion in the case, for although it be true, that I
know no reason to the contrary, but that God, who made use of the Son of
Perdition, to preach his everlasting Gospel, might also with consistency
enough, to the wisdom of his Providence, make use of a Child of Perdition, to
write, and ingross what his holy Spirit first dictated; nor (says Augustine)
has God less consulted his own glory in it, for now all the good and glory of
the truth revealed in those books will be given to God; Beside, it is said that
Balaams Song is also recorded in Scripture, and a piece of holy writ: yet
considering that no one book of holy writ was wrote by such a withered hand as
that of a reprobates; and that the Scripture fixes no such mark upon this
great Person, who was the Author of three Books there, and that one of these
Books, at least appears (let Bellarmine say what he will) to be wrote after the
days of his Vanity, and has in it evident marks of his nauseating his lusts,
and former vanities of pleasure, love, riches, etc. Nor have there been wanting
some, who have thought so of the other two Books also, viz. the Proverbs, and
the Canticles. And to these if we add that he was an eminent Type of our Lord,
and Savior Jesus Christ: I say if we lay all these things together, we shall
(I think) neither stand in need of the Rabbinical figments, (who tell us formal
stories of Solomon's repentance:) Nor yet of that auxiliary help, (in which
Pineda much triumphs) which Petrus de Castro affords; from that Sculpture in
leaden Plates, (wrote in ancient Arabic Characters) and first discovered to
James the Apostle, afterward, to the aforementioned Bishop of Granada, who
sought for them V. Pinedam de rebus Solomonis l. 8. cap 1. V. Eman. Thesauri
Patriarch.
and found them (says Pineda) per altos Granatensis montis cuniculos, and
latebras; in which leaden Plates there should be engraven in Arabic so much
concerning Solomon, as in English sounds thus. -- And he bewailed his sin with
a great lamentation, and it was forgiven him, and he died faithful and in
peace. I say there will be no need of these Apocryphal helps, we have a more
sure word of Prophecy: and stronger Scripture arguments: engaging us to
conclude Solomon's repentance, and Salvation against some of the Ancients
speaking doubtfully; and the more modern Papists, speaking both peremptorily
and impudently in the case; and must conclude that Emanuel Thesaurus speaks
like a profane Poet, when he tells us concerning Solomon;

Primu e Christi Proavis Stygem coluit,
Et Primus intravit.
Indubio Argumento; nam Idola posuit non sustulit,
Et Flenda leguntur non fletus.
V. Merceri prefat. in Cantica.
Having thus far given you a Character of this great Person, who wrote this
sacred Book, and by this digression served my design a little, in showing you
that there is no ground from his miscarriages to conclude against his being the
Penman, either of this or the other pieces of Sacred Writ, to which the Hebrew
Text entituleth him, and which the Ecclesiastical Juries in all ages, have
found his. The next thing we have to enquire, is the time and occasion of his
writing it, concerning which, the Scriptures silence has given Writers the
greater liberty to abound in their several senses; I see no great V. Greg.
Magni P^oiog. in Cantica.
prejudice, either to Solomon himself, or to the Divine Authority of this
Sacred Book, from the opinion of those, who think that Solomon wrote this Song
in the beginning of his Reign, when he first Married Pharaohs Daughter (first
proselyted to the Jewish Religion) at which time it is said, 1 Kings 3. 3.
Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the Statutes of David his Father, and that
his Marriage with Pharaohs Daughter gave him the occasion of this Heavenly
Meditation (for which the greatest ground they have, is that passage, chapter 1. v.
9. I have compared thee to a company of Horses in Pharaohs Chariots.) Nor yet
from the opinion of those who think that he wrote it in the close of his life,
after his return to fellowship, and communion with God. If therefore any shall
contend that he wrote the Book V. Pinedam in prefat. in Eccles. Et Delrio in
prolegom, in Cantica.
of Proverbs first; this Book next, and Ecclesiastes last of all, grounding
their conjecture upon 1 Kings 4. 32. where i^ is said that he wrote 3000
Proverbs, and his Songs were 1005. Or if others think that he first wrote this
Book of Canticles, (which being Poetry, they think best suited his younger
years) then the Book of Proverbs, and last of all that of Ecclesiastes, (the
matter contained in the Book of Proverbs, seeming to be the mature issue of
years, and the matter of Ecclesiastes, speaking a contempt of worldly Vanities,
like that which is found with gray hairs, that have learned righteousness) I
shall not contend with either. There are some who make an observation upon
Solomon's calling himself in Ecclesiastes, King of Jerusalem; In the Book of
Proverbs, King of Israel: In this Book only Solomon; whence they conclude that
he wrote this Book in the first of his years, before he was come to the
Kingdom. The Book of Proverbs next, before he came to dwell in Jerusalem, and
that of Ecclesiastes last, in his more perfect state, but possibly their
conjecture is better, who think that Solomon's spiritual contemplation of
Christ, (with which his heart seems in this Book to be ravished) was the
cause why (forgetting his Titles of Honor) he calls himself by no other name,
than that of Solomon, and as through all the Book he speaks to and of Christ
under no other notion than that of a Beloved, and a friend, so he mentions not
himself under any higher notion than Solomon, and a Love, a Spouse, etc. V.
Bernardi Hom. 1.
glorying more in being the Spouse, and Friend of Christ, than a great King in
Jerusalem. Or finally, if any will assert that he wrote this Book last of all,
which seems to be the opinion of Bernard, Delrio, Hierome, Bachiarius, Cyrill,
etc. I am indifferent to close with either party, only abhorring the opinion
which was anciently condemned in Theodorus Mopsuesta, by the Council of
Constantinople (says Delrio) and which Philastrius mentions amongst the
Heresies, whose Author he knew not, viz. That it is but a Love-Song, made
Sixtus Senensis in Biblioth. l. 8. haer. 9.
by Solomon, having relation to Pharaohs Daughter, or the Shulamite, to which
opinion also Castalio and Grotius seem to incline, and the Anabaptists in
Germany are charged with it by Sixtus Senensis, which opinion indeed, is
deservedly rejected, and justly to be abhorred of all sober Christians, and
there needs no other witness in the case against it, than the great reverence
of this Book which the Church of the Jews had, (to whom (says the Apostle)
were committed the Oracles of God, and who were sufficiently cautelous what
they stamped, with that sacred stamp of Scripture Canon) who did not only
constantly own this Book, as much as any other, (making it a Dialogue between
God and their Church, or betwixt their Church, and some of their Patriarchs)
but also barred any from reading of it, until they arrived at their sacerdotal
year; whether for fear of a vain interpretation of it, or in regard of the
difficulty they justly conceived, as to the expounding the metaphors (with
which as with so many Stars it is adorned) or fathoming the mysteries, which
they conceived lay couched in it, I shall not in this place determine. Sure I
am, as the Authors of the aforementioned gross and unhandsome conceptions, have
nothing to give countenance to their wanton fancies, besides the comparison of
the Love here mentioned, to a company of Horses in Pharaohs Chariots, and the
mention of the Shulamite, Caat. 6. 13. with another or two expressions of that
Nature, upon which expressions the Vanity of their hearts only has hindered
them from putting a spiritual interpretation: so even some of these
expressions, with diverse others in this Sacred Song, make their impure
conceptions highly improbable; for (if the Dialect of times be not strangely
altered) it was certainly a strange commendation, for so learned and wise a man
as Solomon, to give of a Woman whom he loved, to compare her to a company of
Horses, her Head to Mount Carmel, and her Eyes to Fish Pools, her Nose to a
Tower; her Teeth to a flock of Sheep, etc. all which with diverse such
(seemingly uncouth) expressions we have in this Song.

After all this we shall find it no difficult thing to determine the Divine
Authority of this Book: The Apostle says that Holy Men wrote the Scriptures as
inspired by God, we have evinced, that the Penman of this Book was an Holy Man:
both in the former and latter part of his life. That he wrote this Book, is
universally agreed, and that he wrote it by a divine inspiration, can be as
little questioned by him, who understands aright the Jewish reverence of it,
and ranking it equally with other Books of the Canon. Besides that the Churches
constant possession of it, requires some force of argument, before it can be
rejected; and this has not yet appeared.

Several witnesses indeed have come against it, but either they have not been
agreed, or they have spoke nothing Cogent in the cause.

1.
Whereas some object the many amatorious expressions throughout the Song: It
signifies little to those who have so far observed the Scriptures, as to take
notice, that as the Apostle makes use of the Ordinance of Marriage, to
represent the mystical Union between Christ and the Church, Ephesians. 5. 32. So
Christ is expressly called a Bridegroom, his Church, and the believing Soul in
particular, the Bride, Joh 3. 29. And that his preparing the Soul for, and
uniting the Soul to himself, is called a Betrothing, Hos. 2. 14, 15. and the
Church is called the Lambs Wife, Rev. 22. and a pure Virgin, 2 Cor. 11. Yea so
far is this from being an argument against the Divine Authority of this sacred
Book, that the uncouthness of the same expressions, is an argument, that it is
no mere Woman here intended, for besides that (which Mercer notes out of
Aben-Ezra) that modesty would not have allowed Solomon to have left such
expressions (had they been to have been carnally interpreted) upon public
record to posterity. Nor was it lawful to the Jews to make their Sisters their
Spouses, (yet is it a phrase often used in this Song, My Sister, my Spouse)
besides what I noted before of the strange comparisons used, if they were
carnally to be interpreted.

2.
Whereas it is objected by others that the name of God is not once mentioned
throughout the Book. They might as well (upon this account) quarrel at the Book
of Ecclesiastes out of the Canon, or if not that, yet the Book of Esther, which
are both subject to the same charge, if any will tell us, that though the name
Jehovah be not found in Ecclesiastes, yet other names of God are (...), etc.
Besides that neither those names are peculiar to God, nor yet to be found in
the Book of Esther. We also say (with Mercer) That there is hardly a verse in
this Song, wherein mention is not made of God, and Christ, according to that
metaphorical way of expression, in which it pleased the Holy Ghost to dictate
this Sacred Song to Solomon: nor V. Sexti Senensis l. 8. Biblioth. haer. 8.
Delrio in Isag^g. p^aefcom. in Cantica. Bernard.
was their need of any further mentioning of God, in a discourse composed in
this form, than under the notion of a Beloved, etc. in which notion he is
frequently mentioned. And certainly, had this objection been of any value, the
superstitious Reverence which the Jews had of the name Jehovah, would have
engaged them first to have picked this quarrel: which yet it did not. But
Bernard gives another reason, (and with him I find Sixtus Senensis Delrio, and
others agreeing) which I confess pleases me, Amor loquitur qui Dominum nescit,
etc. God is not indeed made known to us in this Song, under the names of (...),
all which speak, Power, Lordship, Sovereignty, Sufficiency, etc. Gregor mag. in
Prol. in Cantica.
It is love here speaks: Quando vult timeri dominum; quando vult honorari
patrem, quando amari sponsum se nominat Dominus. Solomon's design in this Book,
is to set out God in Christ, reconciled to his Church, and to the souls of his
People, embracing them in the arms of loving kindness. Those other names of
God, Jehovah, Elohim, etc. spoke the power, and greatness of God, which well
suited the first dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, which was more hard,
and rigorous, than the latter dispensation of it. So that Deus s^se nunc
pastorem, nun^ fratrem and amicum, nunc sponsum, de industr^a nominat, non
absque mystery, etc. Sixtus Senensis. l. 8. Delrio in Isag. praef. com. in
Cantica
the not naming of God under those forementioned notions through out this
book, only speaks it a more evangelical portion of Scripture, than some other
Books of Holy Writ are. Solomon's design in this Book was to set out God in
Christ reconciled to the Soul, embracing it in the sweetest arms of loving
kindness, and tender mercies: The wisdom of the Holy Ghost therefore directs
Solomon to speak in a dialect, proper to the matter he writes; nor is there
any thing more usual in Scripture, than for Gods people (going to him for
mercies) to give him names expressive of that sufficiency which is in him, and
of that suitableness in him, to the necessitous state of his people, and
readiness to help him. David praying for Divine Protection, calls God his
Rock, his Shield, his Buckler, his strong Tower: and Christ has taught Gods
Children to say unto him Our Father!

Nor thirdly, Is their quarrel against this Sacred Book considerable, who have
this to object against it, That no place of it is quoted in the New Testament,
for besides that by the same allegation, they may blot out the Book of Judges,
Ruth, 2 Samuel 2 Chronicles. Ecclesiastes, and diverse of the small Prophets, out of
the Canon of Scripture, I say besides this, there are some phrases in the New
Testament, which (in the Judgment of Beza and others,) seem to be borrowed out
of this Sacred Song, such as those, Joh. 6. 44 No man comes to the Son but he
whom the Father draws, compared with Can. 1. 4. Saint Paul tells his
Corinthians, that his desire was to present them to Christ as a Chaste Virgin,
which corresponds with Chap. 5. v. 2. of this Song, where Christ calls his
Spouse Undefiled.

From what has been said appears, that although the Penman of this Book was
Solomon, yet a greater than Solomon was the Author of it, Solomon (an holy Man)
spoke in it, as he was inspired by God. I proceed to the 2d Proposition.

2. Prop. That this Book is a Song.

1.
This argues it a piece of Hebrew Poetry: wrote (originally) in Meeter, upon
which account it differs from most of the other Books of Holy Writ. But more
particularly I shall open this in 4 or 5 particulars: 1. It is I say a Song,
one of those which the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. calls Spiritual Songs, it may be too
hard a task for me to determine, why it pleased the Holy Penman of this
Scripture to write it in this, rather than in any other form, I shall by and by
show you that it was a Song of Love, and (possibly) the holy Penmans design
being to discourse the Souls Communion with Christ (here) under that Metaphor
might be one cause, (Marriage-Songs being very ancient.) 2. To this I shall
only add the observation, which some have made of that singular virtue, which
the composing and singing of Songs, has had to excite and inflame the
affections. I remember our Divine Poet tells us, That he was most with God;
while he was exercised in his Divine Poetry, Besides, the suitableness that a
Song has unto the natures of others, the same Author observes, -- That a verse
may hit him who a Sermon flies,
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.


Whether Solomon's consideration of these, or any of these things, might rather
incline him to write in this, than in any other form; I shall not undertake to
determine.

1.
Secondly, It is a Song of Love. I noted to you before, the ancient custom of
singing Songs at Marriages, in praises of the parties so joined together. These
Songs were called (...) and (...) a The Argument of them usually, was the
(supposed) mutual desires of the Bridegroom, and Bride; and they were also
filled with the respective praises of each of them; with the praises of their
Garments, Beds. etc. Solomon guided by the holy Spirit of God (who often
resembled the Spiritual and mystical Union between the Church and the believing
Soul, and Christ so, of a Marriage) makes choice of this kind of Song, in this
Book; of this Nature is the 45th Psalm. and that Song, Isaiah 51, 2, 3. (though
the Argument of that differs.)

^.
Thirdly, It is a Spiritual Song. The Loves which are here sang, are no Carnal
Loves, but Spiritual, it is not as some profanely fancy, a discourse of Love
betwixt Solomon and Pharaohs Daughter: or Solomon and the Shulamite, I have
heretofore showed you the vanity of that conceit, it is Sponsa mystica, a
mystical Spouse that is here represented to us under that notion; I have said
enough before to prove this.

4.
Fourthly, It is Dramatical, or (...) a Song of parts composed after the form
of a Dialogue, which was very usual in their Songs of Love; Here are in this
Song 3 sorts of Persons, which have their parts. 1. One who is represented
under the Notion of a Beloved. 2. Another who is represented under the notion
of a Spouse, a Love, a Sister, etc. 3. The third sort are the friends of the
Bride-chamber, ordinarily in this Song represented under the notion of the
Daughters of Jerusalem: who they are represented under these disguises is
matter of our further enquiry.

1.
Abating those (whose profane fancy we have already rejected) who think that
Solomon is the beloved here mentioned (making the whole book but a wanton
Love-Song) I think the generality of Interpreters are reasonably well agreed,
that God himself, or more particularly the Lord Jesus Christ (the 2d Person in
the Trinity considered as mediator,) is he who is in this Song set out to us
under this notion of the Beloved.

2.
It is almost as universally agreed, that, The Church of God in the general,
and the particular Servants of God, Members of that Church, are those here
represented to us, under the notion of the Spouse, but whether it were the
Church of the Jews, considered distinctly, from the Gospel Church, or the
Church of the Gentiles, distinct from the Jewish Church, or the Church, and
People of God in all ages, concerning this there are several opinions,
according to the particular fancies, and affections of Interpreters, or
according to their different notions, and apprehensions, concerning the matter
of this book, which some will have to be historical, and make it little more
than a Narrative of what God had done for the Church of the Jews, of which mind
is the Calder Paraphrast, and the most of the Jewish Doctors. Others will have
it prophetical, amongst whom are Luther, Alsted, Brightman, Aquinas, and Mr.
Cotton, etc. Others again Doctrinal, instructing us in that near Communion, and
Fellowship betwixt Jesus Christ and his Church, and every particular believing
Soul, and setting out that nearness of relation, and affection, which is
betwixt them, together with their mutual apprehensions each of other; yet it
cannot be denied, but there are some particular passages in it, prophetical,
and more specially relating to the Church long after Solomon's time.

By the friends of the Bride-chamber called, the Watchmen, the Daughters of
Jerusalem, etc. in this Song, are undoubtedly to be understood, the Ministers
of the Church in respective ages, with the chorus fidelium, the whole company
of Believers, etc.

5.
The last thing which is observable, as to the form of this Song is the
figurative dialect in which it is written; Besides the continued Allegory of
two lovers, running quite through the Song, the Spiritual mysteries of it are
expressed with a greater variety of Metaphors, than are found together in any
other part of holy writ; which make it more difficult to be understood, and
which possibly might be one reason why the reading of it was restrained in the
Jewish Church. This made that devout man long since cry out; Hic Bernard. in
hom. 1. in Cantica.
panis colestis, quis vero frangit? non equidem mihi istud temere arrogandum,
sic expectetis a me, ut non expectetis, nam and ego unus sum de expectantibus.
Here is heavenly bread! but who can break it? I cannot rashly arrogate such a
faculty to my self expect it from me, as not expecting, for I my self am
expecting the revelation of it. And thus much shall serve for the second thing.
The third follows.

3. Prop. It is the Song of Songs (...) --

1.
The Song of Songs, (as some think) because it consists of several Songs
relating to one and the same Subject, compacted togegether in one, and the same
book.

2.
Or (as others) because it is the most excellent Song; The Hebrews haveseveral
ways, by which they express the superlative degree, one is by apposition of
Substantives, (as here, the Song of Songs.) V. Merceri ad loc.
putting the latter Substantive in the Genitive Case Plural. So that by the
Song of Songs is meant the most excellent Song, now this is so called. 1.
(1) Either relating to the other Songs which Solomon made, for 1 Kings 4. 32.
he made a Thousand and five; of all his Songs 2.
this was the most excellent: Or else (2.) relating to the other Spiritual
Songs in Scripture, you read of the Song of Moses; of the Song of Miriam, and
Deborah, of the Songs of David, etc. but no Song like this: This is the Song of
Songs; of all the other Songs Solomon made in Holy Writ, this is the most
excellent, not in respect of the Antiquity of it (as some have fancied) for
doubtless the Song of Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, was far more ancient; nor yet
because of the noble Author of it, who was the wisest man upon the Earth. But
in respect of the Spiritual matter of it. Look (says Bernard) upon all the
other Authors of Songs in Scripture, and their respective Songs. -- Sane omnes
(ni fallar) cecinisse reperies pro percepto suo, vel suorum commodo. -- hic
vero divinitus inspiratus Christi, and Ecclesiae lauds, and sacri amoris
gratiam, and aeterni connubii cecinit Sacramenta. Other composers of Songs you
will find sang them upon receipt of some outward mercy conferred upon them, and
theirs: But Solomon (here) inspired by God, sings the praises of the Church,
and Christ, he sings concerning the Seals of sacred love, and the Eternal
Marriage. Those are the excellent Songs, which set cut the Excellencies of the
Lord Jesus Christ. This Book is wholly Evangelical, wholly Spiritual. But I
have spoke enough also to this third Proposition. Give me leave to make some
application of this discourse.

Use 1.
In the first place, Let me speak to all of you, who shall hear my further
discourses concerning any part of this Book, (as once God spoke to Moses at the
Burning Bush) Put off thy Shoes from off thy Feet, for the place whereon thou
stand is holy ground. While I shall be opening those figurative expressions,
by which it pleases the Holy Ghost (by Solomon) to discourse these Spiritual
Loves; -- Procul O procul este profani. Saint Paul (to Titus) says, Unto the
pure all things are pure; but unto them that are defiled, and unbelieving;
there is nothing pure but even their minds, and consciences are defiled. I am
sure it may be said so of every line of holy writ, to the pure heart, every
line there is pure: not so to the impure, the reason is because their own
minds, and consciences are filthy, and impure. Here is no wantonness in these
sacred lines, they contain indeed discourses of loves, but altogether Divine
and Spiritual, (though under carnal disguises.) Oh let not your wanton hearts
bring hither any unclean thoughts.

Use 2.
Secondly, Methinks much of what I have said, may engage your minds to
attention to me, while I shall endeavor to unfold the Spiritual mysteries in
this Book.

1.
The Penman of this Book was Solomon. The name of a King, (amongst men) carries
with it a great reverence, and authority, but Solomon was no ordinary King, the
Lord gave him such a degree of wisdom, that none before or after him, were ever
like unto him, 2 Chronicles. 1. 12. The Queen of Sheba thought it worth her travel
to come from the utmost parts of the world, to be his auditor, and went away,
admiring his wisdom; nay more, he was one whom the Lord loved, thence he had
his name Jedidiah, 2 Samuel 12. 24, 25. we may therefore expect to hear the
secrets of the Lord from his mouth, rather than from another man; When the
disciples, Joh. 13. 23. were at loss for an interpretation of what Christ said,
they beckned to the Disciple whom he loved, to inquire his meaning, and were
presently satisfied: further yet, he was an eminent Type of Christ. It is
Solomon that speaks, but he speaks as the Organ of Christ, (...), says Greg.
Nyssen. Christ uses Solomon as his instrument, and by him speaks to us. But
this brings me to a second Consideration as much engaging you to attention, and
far more than the former.

2.
A greater than Solomon is here. Solomon speaks in this Song in the Person of
Christ, and Christ by him here speaks unto you: Solomon's hand holds the Pen,
but Christ guides his hand to every letter in this sacred Song.

3.
Nor was this holy Song (as you have heard) composed in Solomon's time of
deviation from God, that indeed would have weakened the authority of it; but
either in the former part of his life before he went astray from God: or in the
latter part, when he was again returned unto him; be it which it will, we are
by it strongly engaged to the study, and understanding of it, as it from a
great experience informs a gracious soul, to what degree of communion with
God it may arrive, and what sweet intercourses (even in this life) betwixt
Christ and a believing Soul are attainable by that Soul that follows after
them, whether in its Virgin State, before it has more notoriously estranged
itself from God, or upon a true repentance after eminent backslidings.

4.
The exceeding sweetness, and spirituality of the matter, highly commends it to
every spiritual heart: There is no part of the Word of God, but is exceedingly
sweet, and precious, the historical part of it is so, for if it be pleasant to
read the Histories of Nations; and Kingdoms, etc. how much more sweet should it
be to every gracious Soul, to read and understand the series of Divine
Providence toward that People, whom (above all the Nations of the Earth) he
set apart for himself, whom he miraculously conducted, and for them made his
holy Arm so eminently bare in the sight of all the Nations of the world: The
preceptive part of the Word of God (which we call the Law) is also exceeding
precious to a gracious Soul (it was so to David, sweeter than the Honey, or
Honeycomb, etc.) and St. Paul (as to his inward man) delighted in it. But of
all the portions of holy writ, the Gospel part is most sweet. That which
reveals, a God in Christ reconciling the world to himself, which tells you what
Christ is in himself, considered as Mediator, God-man, etc. which discovers
the Excellencies and desirableness of him who is Totus desideria; altogether
desires. Those parts of Scripture which let us know what Christ is to his poor
people, how tender of them, how jealous for them, how condescending, and kind
to them, and how dear and precious they are to him: Of all the portions of holy
writ Experience speaks those most exceeding sweet to us, where Christ is set
out in the pantings of his heart, and yernings of his bowels toward his poor
Children. Such is this portion of holy writ: when we shall have taken off the
Vail of Metaphors, with which this sacred portion of holy writ is covered, we
shall find that there is scarce any portion of holy writ, wherein those sweet,
and spiritual mysteries of the Souls union, and Communion with Jesus Christ,
are more fully, and affectionately described.

5.
The more special form of it as a Song, does likewise commend it to our
attention, there is a secret virtue in Poetry, engagine Peoples hearts, and
affections to attention. If a wanton Love-Song, which discourses the virtues,
and beauty of Creatures, can lay such an hold upon our Ears, and Hearts; what
should this Song do! which discourses the Excellencies of him who is the
fairest amongst the Sons of Men, the chiefest of ten thousand, altogether
desires, and his particular indearments to the Souls of his Creatures, which
have no comeliness but what he puts upon them; certainly the hearing of these
discourses must ravish every spiritual heart. This is the Song of Songs.

6.
Finally the Metaphors with which this excellent Song is clothed, must needs
give it a great advantage with every ingenuous Soul, which naturally desires
the understanding of what is hid from it, we may suppose God therefore to have
thus phrased this Spiritual Song, that we might have greater desires kindled in
us to understand the mind and will of God revealed in it. The harder the Shell
is, the sweeter the Nut will be found, when once the Shell is cracked.

Use 3.
Lastly, What you have heard; may serve you as a Key for the unlocking this
whole portion of Scripture, and guide you in the understanding of my future
discourses. By the Beloved speaking in this Song, you are to understand the
Lord Jesus Christ. By the Spouse (whom he sometimes calls his love) you may
understand the Church, and more particularly every truly believing Soul. By the
Watchmen, the Ministers of the Church, whom God has set to watch for Souls. By
the Daughters of Jerusalem (sometimes mentioned) either the Members of the
Church, or the Neighbors of it. The two first have the greatest share in the
Song, the others sometimes speak, and are sometime spoken to, But this is
enough to have spoken by way of preface, It Is time to leave the threshold, and
to enter in to this pleasant House.

Only give me leave as an Epilogue to this discourse to subjoin the Judgment of
Ludovicus de Ponte (though a Papist, yet a learned Man) who has copiously
interpreted this Spiritual Song, and (allowing him the Popish Devotion for the
Sacred Virgin, which makes them all think they see her in every Text) has done
much in it well. It is prefixed to his Latin Commentary. To this purpose.

The Book of Solomon (which from the nobleness of the Argument is called the
Song of Songs) is, a spiritual conference betwixt that God, who is three and
yet one, or betwixt Christ who is true God, and Man, and his Church, whether
ancient or modern: and every gracious Soul which is a Member of that Church. In
which discourse God has a double part, and personateth two several Persons:
The person of a most wise Instructor or Master: delivering to his Disciple the
sublime Doctrine of Faith and Holiness. 2. The Person of a most endeared lover,
extolling and courting his most beloved Spouse, with wonderful praises; and
enriching her with great gifts and favors: The Church also represents a double
Person. 1. The Person of a Disciple, or Spouse, toward God, or the Person of a
Mistress, or companion toward other Souls which she calls the Daughters of
Jerusalem.

The Argument of this Conference, as well became such Persons, is sublime,
pleasant, profitable, and abundantly copious, for whatsoever the ancient
Prophets sang, whatsoever the Evangelists afterward related; or the Apostles
Preached, whether relating to the mysteries of faith, or to holiness, and
Gospel perfection, it is all in this Song comprehended in the style of lovers;
(the style being Spiritual not Carnal.) But because the Metaphors and
Similitudes, which fill this whole Book, are taken from Carnal Marriages. We
must pill off the bark, that the letter might not kill. That being once taken
off, the spiritual part lying within, will enlighten the Soul, and quicken, and
inflame and perfect it. For according to our Saviors words, it is the Spirit
that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: and the words of this Song are
Spirit, and life, to those who do sincerely consider them. For as the Ancient
Priests Macch. 1. 20.
of the Jews (as we read in the Book of Macchabees) when they looked for the
sacred fire, which they had hidden, found nothing but thick water, which water
(to the admiration of all) when the Sun shined out of the Cloud again, was
turned into fire: so he who looks upon the Book of Canticles with carnal Eyes,
will only find the puddle-water of words, which the outside letter seems to
show, which will fill his heart with darkness instead of light, with a carnal
chilling instead of spiritual heat. But if the divine Sun inlightens, that
which seemed puddle water, will become celestial fire, wonderfully inlightning
the understanding, and inflaming the will. --

But although the whole Book of Canticles contains 8 Chapters, and by
Interpreters be divided into three, five, or more parts, yet I believe the
first, and second Chapters are a sum, or breviary of all those mysteries of
Faith, which are contained in the six other Chapters; which is evidenced from
this, that the close of the second and of the last Chap. are much the same, to
show us, that the narration of matter is finished in the second Chapter, and
that from the third Chapter begins a new discourse of the same mysteries
under new Metaphors, and Similitudes.

Discourses of Divine Love BETWEEN CHRIST and the CHURCH.
From the first Chap. of the Song of Solomon.
Sermon I.
Cant. 1. 2, 3. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth: for his loves are
better then Wine. V. 3. Because of the savor of thy good Ointments. Thy name
is as an Ointment poured forth: therefore do the Virgins love thee.

I Have observed in my prefatory discourse, that some have fancied that this
Book is called The Song of Songs, because it contains several Songs in it: It
is in our Bibles divided into 8 Chapters, and by Interpreters into several
periods, according to their particular fancies. Ludovicus De Ponte conceives,
as I showed you, that the two first Chapters contain a Breviary of all the
rest: and as an evidence of it, alleges the same close both of the second,
and eighth Chapter: and from the third Chapter he thinks there begins a
repetition of the same spiritual mysteries, under new Metaphors, whether that
notion (in the extent of it) be true or no: doubtless the two first Chapters
contain much spiritual Doctrine, informing us in the near communion betwixt the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the believing Soul. A learned Interpreter distributes
this Chapter into two parts, the first he calls Prooemium, a Preface, the
second Colloquium, a Conference betwixt the two great Interlocutors in this
spiritual discourse.

In the former you have two things. 1. A Prayer. 2. An Apology. The first in v.
1, 2, 3, 4, 7. The second (as a Parenthesis) v, 5, 6. The Prayer consists of
three Petitions, each of which is urged by suitable arguments. The first
petition is v. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Month. The second, v.
4. Draw me. The 3d is v. 7. Tell me O thou whom my Soul loves, etc. where thou
feedest, where thou make thy flocks to rest at noon. The further distribution
of the Chapter, and the several verses in it, I shall leave, until I come in
order to them.

My Text contains the first Petition, with an argument annexed. The petition
in those words. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth. The argument in
the latter words, for his love is better then Wine. For the just understanding
of the words, we must consider, 1. Who it is that speaks. 2. To whom the
Speech is directed. 3. what the import of the Petition is.

1.
As to the first our Translation puts it out of doubt, and it is as universally
agreed amongst Interpreters, that the Person speaking is she who throughout the
whole Song bears the Person of the Spouse, by which (having already rejected
the notions of those who understand Pharaohs Daughter, or the Shulamite, as
also of those who restrain it to the Jewish Church) must be understood; either
the Church in the general, or the believing Soul in particular, who here
speaks.

2.
Either to the Bridegroom [the Lord Jesus Christ] or to God, the Father of this
Bridegroom, whose it is to bless us with all spiritual blessings, in and
through him. Supposing the latter, the believing Soul directs her request, as
her beloved directs (when he commands us to pray, saying, Our Father.) If the
petition be understood, as directed to the Lord Jesus Christ: Let him kiss me,
is as much as, Do thou kiss me. Vicem nominis supplet vis amoris, the force of
her love supplyeth the omission of his name (says Lud. de Ponte.) It is a very
usual dialect of Scripture, to put the 3d Person for the 2d: so the Psalmist:
God be merciful unto us, and bless ^us. But

3. Qu. What does the Spouse mean by Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
Mouth?

Some read it, He did kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth. Thus the ancient
Chaldee Paraphrast. Blessed be the name of the Lord, who gave us his Law,
written by the hand of Moses his Scribe, who wrote it in two Tables of Stone;
and spoke with us face to face, as a man who kisseth his Companions: through
the greatness of his love wherewith he loved us more than threescore, and ten
Nations. But the style of the Song is rather pathetical and optative, than
historical and narrative: and it is rather referred to Christ as Mediator, than
to God the Father, or the Lord Jesus Christ, considered (only) as God (...)
over all blessed for ever; besides that the Hebrew word (being in the future
tense) referrs rather to the time to come, than to the time past, and I see no
need of inventing a figure.

Luke 7. 38. Job 31. 27. Prove. 24. 26.
There is a threefold kiss, of which you read in Scripture. 1. The kiss of the
feet. Thus the penitent Woman, Luke 7. 38. kissed her Saviors feet. 2. The
kiss of the hand, Job 31. 27. If my mouth has kissed my hand. 3. The kiss of
the lips. Prove. 24. 26. and so in many other Texts.

The Schoolmen tell us of a sevenfold kiss: a kiss of 1. Love 2. Union. 3.
Reverence and Honor. 4. Adoration. 5. Reconciliation and Peace. 6. Treachery,
as Joab kissed Abner and Amasa, and Judas kissed Christ. 7. Wantonness.

According to the usages of several Nations, there were several sorts of
kisses, distinguished by their objects, and ends, they were wont to kiss the
head, lips, cheek, shoulders, hands, backs, feet, of their superiors,
inferiors, and equals, and that for several testimonies, which yet (I think)
are reducible to two heads:

1. Genesis 50. v. 1.
For a testimony of honor, reverence, and subjection. Thus Parents were kissed
by their Children: Jacob came near and kissed Exodus 18. 7.
Isaac, Genesis 50. 1. Joseph fell upon his Fathers face, and kissed him. Thus
Exodus 18. 7. Moses went out to meet his Father in Law, and did obeisance and
kissed him, and Orpah kissed her Mother in Law: Ruth 1. 14.
Thus the Persians were wont (according to the differences of Persons in
respect of quality) to give differing kisses. Equals kissed one another lips,
the Person who was but a little inferior, kissed his superiors Cheek. The
lower sort fell at their superiors feet, and kissed them: Thus Idolaters
showed their reverence to their Idols, and the true Worshipers of God were by
this distinguished. -- They 1 Kings 19. 28. Hosea 13. 2.
had not kissed Baal, 1 Kings 19. 28. and the Idolaters in Israel, said. Let
the men that sacrifice kiss the Calves, Hos. 13. 2. Thus also we are commanded
to kiss the Son: least he be angry, Psalm. 2. 12. which Jerome translates:
Purely worship the Son. This is now a kiss wherewith we ought to kiss Christ,
but this is not the kiss of the Text.

2. Osculam amoris (...) Symboli^m. ^illyr.
Secondly, Kisses were used for a testimony of love, which sometimes was
hypocritical, and so the kissing deceitful, such were the kisses of Joab and
Judas, ordinarily real; which might be considered 1.
either as continued or interrupted. Kisses were 1. Used in token of continuing
love; As appears by the several precepts of the Apostles Genesis 31. 55. 2. 2 Samuel
14. 33.
regulating the use of them, by a law of holiness and chastity, Romans 16. 16. 1
Cor. 16. 20: etc. Or 2. In token of renewed love and reconciliation. Thus Laban
kissed Jacob upon their reconciliation, Esau kissed Jacob, and David kissed
Absalom. Beza thus gives the propriety of this testimony in affection, Whereas
our life lies in the breath which goes out of our lips, and our Soul goes
away, when our breath at last goes; the joining of the friends lips and mouths,
signifies, Beza in 2. Hom. in Cant.
that they are so dear each to other, that they could willingly unite Souls,
(if it could be) and bestow their lives each upon other.

The kiss of the text, must needs be this. In testimonium amoris, for a
testimony of love. But still here remains a question: whether she desires the
kiss of Reconciliation. 2. Or that which is a pledge of continuing love.

1.
Those who understand the first, confess a breach betwixt God, and his
Creatures, which indeed there was made, in the beginning of the world, which
breach is (as to the meritorious part) made up by the incarnation, death, and
passion of Christ. Indeed there was an ancient Covenant of Grace concerning it,
Genesis 3. revealed immediately, 2 Cor. 5. 18. 19. Col. 1. 21. Ephesians. 2. 16. Dan. 9.
24.
but I say it was done (quoad pretium) by the incarnation, and death of Christ
according to those Texts, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. Col. 1. 21. Ephesians. 2. 16. according
to the prophecy, Dan. 9. 24. And (as to the particular application of that
purchase) it is daily done by the Spirit of God, working faith in us, by which
we are united to Christ. Now the question is whether the Spouse here beggeth;

1. Christ's coming in the flesh, being incarnate and dying for us, for the
fulfilling of the eternal Covenant of Reconciliation, (to which some incline.)

2. Or, the kiss of Justification; the actual reconciliation of the Soul unto
Christ, and application of Christ to the Soul by f^rth.

3. Or, The further influences of ^ Love, as pledges of that, first Grace, and
Seals of that Original love of his to the Souls of his People.

1.
Indeed, the Eternal Son of God kissed us (and he stooped much to kiss us) when
he took upon him our nature, uniting finite, and infinite, corruptible and
incorruptible, when he nothinged himself for us* and this was foreseen, and so
might be desired ( Abraham saw the day, and rejoiced, Joh. 10. 48. and not only
Origin, and Bernard Joh. 10. 48.
of old, but many modern interpreters, think that the Spouse here, has a great
respect to this matchless testimony of Divine Love: which being granted, the
Text is no other, than the breathings and pantings of the Church of God then
living, or the Mat. 13. 17. 7.
particular members of it, after the Incarnation of Christ, which doubtless was
a great object of their desires. Kings and Prophets, and Righteous men desired
to see the things, which the Disciples saw, 2.
and did not see them, etc. Others understand the text of those testimonies of
Divine Love which followed the death of Christ, particularly, The sending of
the Spirit. It is true this is called The promise of the Father; and was so
under the old Testament, Ezech. 36. etc. and it proceeds from Christ, as the
great testimony of his love, nor indeed does Christ otherwise testify his
special love, than by the influences of his Spirit: but I cannot tell why we
should restrain it to the particular dispensation in the days of Pentecost. I
think Piscator 3.
expresses the sense well by suum erga me amorem patefaciat, let Piscat ad loc.
him manifest to me his love: let me know that he loves me: yet supposing it
the Reconciled Believing Soul that speaks: it seems rather to be understood of
further grace, than the first grace of regeneration, and reconciliation unto
God, the desire seems to be a desire of free familiar communion with Christ.
This seems to be the main of her request, the great sum of her desires, the
uppermost of her Souls concernments. -- Quid ta^u minimum and submissum quam
Osculetur^^ me, Osculo or^s sui. Ludov. de Ponte. ad loc.


But observe yet further. She begs but a kiss, not let him embrace me: but let
him kiss me. She asks modestly, if (says the woman in the Gospel) I might
but touch the Hem of his Garment. Thus the woman of Canaan also. Truth Lord:
but the Dogs eat the crumbs. Thus the Spouse. If he would but kiss me: Oh! how
precious is the least of Christ to a gracious Soul? It is better to be kissed
by him, than to lie in the worlds arms, to be a Doorkeeper in the House of
God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

3.
But thirdly, The word is plural. One kiss will not serve the turn. she is not
a stranger, but a Spouse. The plural number either imports, (...)
1. Various dispensations of Grace, Or 2dly, Repeated influences of the same
Grace. 1. It may be understood, as denoting various Beza ad lo^. Lud. de Ponte
ad lo^.
dispensations of Grace: Beza says the Lord kissed the Soul thrice: 1. In this
life, when he is by faith united to it. 2. In the day of death, when the Soul
is taken up into the enjoyment of God. 3. In the Resurrection, when Body and
Soul shall be united, and together glorified. Another reckons up 7 kisses with
which the Lord kisseth his Peoples Souls. The Grace of 1. Incarnation. 2. The
descending of the Holy Ghost. 3. The preaching of the Gospel. 4. Reconciliation
to God. 5. Sanctification. 6. Divine Consolations. 7. The kiss of Glory. And
the same Author makes the Spouses petition comprehensive of all these; certain
it is, there are various dispensations of Grace, there is quickening,
strengthening, comforting Grace: and there may be frequent repetitions of these
to the Soul, according to its particular wants, and Gods favor toward it, and
you may indifferently understand the Text in either sense.

^.
Fourthly, The Spouse here does not only desire kisses, but (...) the kisses of
Christ's mouth: concerning which observe these 2 things.

1. The kiss of the mouth, was the highest kiss. This was the kiss of Love, the
kiss of Reconciliation, Osculum pacis, the kiss of the Hand, Feet, etc. was a
kiss of honor and reverence, and subjection: V. Lud. de Ponte, Originem Bezam,
Giffard, Ainsworth, Gl. Ord. etc. ad loc.
the kiss of the mouth, was the kiss of love and friendship, of peace, and
reconciliation.

2. I find most Interpreters hinting by this expression, something yet more
special, viz. Communion with Christ in his word. The word indeed is the fruit
of the lips, and comes out of the mouth, and God may seem (in some propriety
of speech) to kiss the Soul with the kisses of his mouth, when he speaks to it
in his word: The Lord will speak peace to his people, (says the Psalmist) and
I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, (says the Lord by his Prophet
Isaiah) some expositors to further this notion have observed that the word
(...) signifies sometimes to instruct, but I cannot find that usage of it in
holy writ. Grace is poured forth upon Christ's lips; she desires those kisses,
some drive the notion higher; observing the difference between the Doctrine of
the Law, and that of the Gospel: the first is terrible, the second sweet, and
comfortable: holding forth nothing but the love of God in Jesus Christ,
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their sins: hence the Gospel is
called The word of reconciliation.

5.
Lastly. She says Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. She desires not
only to hear the Doctrine of the gospel, but that Christ should speak it to
her. The Preacher speaks to the Ear, Christ to the heart: Quoties ergo in cord
nostro, quod de divinis dogmatibus, Orig^n. ad lo^.
sensibusque quaerimus, absque monitoribers invenimus, toties oscula nobis, a
Sponso esse data verbo Dei credimus (says Origin) so often as we find God by
his word Speaking to our hearts, so often does our beloved kiss us with the
kisses of his mouth.

This is sufficient to have spoken for the Explication of the matter of the
Text. There only remains something more circumstantial to be observed.

1.
The words are Vox Sponsae. The Voice of the Spouse. According to the civil
usage of our Country, (and I think most others) the Lover speaks first. Here
the Spouse begins; It is so betwixt God and the soul; Christ speaks first. He
is found of those that seek him not and of those that enquire not after him. He
first loves us, and our Love to him proceeds from his Love first manifested
to us: But you must not understand her that speaks as one that is a stranger,
and in a state of disunion, with her beloved: but as one that is already
espoused; and made a Spiritual Bride: not desiring first grace: but further
grace, which she needs as well as the first grace, for he gives both to
will, and to do, he is both the author and the finisher of faith, and other
grace.

2.
Secondly, The words are Vox Volentis. The Language of a willing Soul, Willing
that Christ should come near unto it, and take it up into fellowship, and
communion with himself. God's people are a willing people. They are indeed made
so by a divine power. Psalm. 101. 2. But Certum est nos velle cum volumus (says
Aug.) It is God who makes us of unwilling, Willing* When he has had his first
work upon our wills, and subdued that strong hold unto himself: Then we are
willing. Nay more;

3.
Thirdly, They are Vox cupientis. The voice of a panting Soul, not barely
content that Christ should kiss it, but passionately desiring his kisses. They
are as much as, Oh! that he would kiss me. Every gracious Soul passionately
desires fellowship, and Communion with Jesus Christ: Oh! (says holy David)
when will thou come to me? Neither is this all, the words are not only to be
considered as a good wish, or passionate desire, but as a fervent prayer.

4.
Lastly therefore, they are Vox supplicantis. the Language of a praying soul,
where observe,

1.
What she beggs: Not riches, not honor, not pleasures, not (...), but (...),
not the good things of fortune: but the riches of grace: her Petition is like
that of David, Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon me, Psalm. 4.
6. Let others take the ring; let her have but the kiss, and it is sufficient
for her; but single influences of Grace will not serve her turn, every look of
grace is sweet, and frequent influences of Grace are necessary for her.

2.
Secondly, Observe How she begs: 1. Reverently. Let him kiss 1.
me. Thus we ought to draw nigh to God, with Reverence, and Godly fear.
Reverence becomes the great Majesty of Heaven and Earth, those that come
without it toward God, understand not his greatness. 2.
2. She begs humbly. But a kiss. The crumbs that fall from the Lords Table, the
touch of the Hem of his Garment, any thing 3.
of Jesus Christ, that may but argue distinguishing love. 3. She asks boldly,
not rudely but boldly. Thus we ought to come to the Throne of Grace with an
holy boldness, the boldness of faith, the word is in the future tense, and may
be translated. He shall kiss me, or he will kiss me. His Majesty requires
reverence. His promise 4.
gives boldness and confidence. 4. Lastly, she asks fervently. There is a
bluntness discernable in the form, [Let him kiss me,] which speaks the Souls
fervency. Besides the trina repetitio, repeating the same thing by three terms,
denotes (as Lud. de Ponte observes) flagrantissimum cordis affectum. The most
flagrant, earnest desire of the Spouses heart.

I have thus far opened to you the Spouses first Petition, in which the
believing Soul, with a Reverent, holy, humble boldness, yet with all possible
fervency, begs of the Lord Jesus Christ, [her Spiritual Husband] some special
distinguishing token of his love, more especially a near fellowship with him,
in his ordinances, and the sealing up of his love to her soul, in Gospel
Doctrines.

2. Argu.
This first petition she presses with a double Argument. 1. The first drawn
from the Excellency of his love. This she sets out, per modum comparationis:
comparing it with Wine, and preferring it before it. 2. Comparing the name of
Christ with Ointment, and that not shut up in a box, but poured out. Thy name
is as an Ointment poured forth, v. 3.

2. Argu.
Her 2d Argument is drawn from her Love to her. Beloved; in the close of the
third v. The Virgins love thee, and the cause of this love is expressed to be
the savor of his good Ointments, Because of the savor, etc.

Let me open the terms by which these Arguments are expressed:

We translate it, because thy loves are better than Wine: what we translate
Loves, the Septuagint translate (...), whom the Vulg. Lat. and the Arab.
Interp. follow. [Thy Breasts] the Syriack translate it Bowels, otherwise there
is no difference in the Translations.

Delrio tells us that Alanus (an Ancient Interpreter) makes these words, not
the continued speech of the Spouse, pressing her Petition by an Argument, but
the reply of her beloved to her, assuring her of his love, and that he valued
her Breasts, above all things: That which (probably) led him into this mistake,
was his interpreting the word (...) as if it were (...) Breasts, and not
understanding how in any propriety of Speech, the Spouse could commend the
Breasts of her beloved, they being parts, from which usually, the woman, not
the man is commended (in ordinary Speech) but as the whole stream of
Interpreters runs another way: so this seems to be no constraining argument,
to enforce us to acknowledge such a sudden and a subitam, and abruptam verborum
commutationem, (as Delrio calls it) abrupt change of words, as this
interpreta^io^ must necessarily infer. For ^. 1.


Though it be true that (...) signifies a breast, Ezekiel. 23. 3. v. 21. yet (...)
signifies beloved: And loves in the Abstract, and so it is translated, Ezekiel.
16. 8. it was a time of love.

2.
Suppose we should allow more authority to the Septuagint, than to our Hebrew
Text (for which there is no reason) yet it is not improper to assert these the
words, of the Spouse speaking to her beloved: for although the God of Nature,
intending the woman for the Nurse has provided that sex with larger breasts:
yet the man has breasts also, and such (if you will believe the Philosopher)
as may have milk in them.

3. Genebrarduss ad lo^.
However, he who runs, may read the expression figurative. Amoris seeds est in
cord, and in uberibus quae, cordi adhaerescunt. The heart is the seat of love,
and the Breasts are nigh to the heart, and this evidenceth the difference of
Interpreters, as to the translation of the word, as to this Text, to be but a
word-bate for Ubera tua, and Amorestui, Thy Breasts, or thy loves, are much the
same thing in signification.

4.
Neither lastly is this the only Text in Scripture, where the breasts of men
are mentioned (if we should be constrained to that sense, Isaiah 60. 16. Thou
shall suck the Breast of Kings, so also God is said to bear his People from the
Belly, and to carry them from the Womb. They are Metaphorical expressions, and
it is granted on all hands, that if our Interpreters, (with whom concur most
modern Interpreters) have not hit the literal signification of the word: yet
they have not missed the sense, in translating it, Thy Loves.

By which Interpreters generally understand, either the private influences of
Grace, with which God refreshes the particular Souls of his Saints, or: The
public ordinances and institutions of the Gospel, by which God expresses his
love to his Church in general, and every believing Soul in particular.

1. Some understand Divine institutions. Ordinances are indeed the Breasts at
which Christ suckleth his Children, those means by and through which he
conveyeth the streams of his love to them: and there is a great excellency in
them. David prefers a day in Christ's Courts, before a 1000 elsewhere. Origin
observes, that in some copies instead of quia ubera tua, etc. it was quia
loquelae tuae, thy Speeches are better than Wine, which also excellently suits
with the former expression. ^on a^t^m lat^at quod in quibu^dam ^x^inplaribus
pro co quodlegim^s. Quia bona sunt ubera tua super vinun, invenimus Scripture,
quia bo^e s^nt lo pu^le (...) super vinum Origin: Hom. 1. super Cantica in v. 3.
The kisses of his mouth. This sense in the general notion of it much pleases
many Interpreters, though something divided in their more particular notions.
Origin interprets it, Dogmata tua, thy Doctrines, and seems indifferently to
understand it of the Doctrine of the Law, or of the Gospel. The Popish
Interpreters reading it Breasts, expound it concerning the two Testaments, so
Genebrard, etc. Others interpret it more strictly concerning the sweet Doctrine
of the Gospel, which Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 2. compares unto Milk, which as
new born Babes, we ought to desire, and concerning the Apostles and Prophets,
which were the first Instruments which God made use of to convey that Doctrine
to us: The sweetness of the Gospel (says Aquinas) is meant here, by which (as
with Milk) those who are Babes in Christ are nourished. Mr. Brightman (making
this the Speech of the Jewish Church) understands it of the Doctrine of the
Law, which also suiteth with David's high commendation of the Law of God, in his
19 Psalm. and in the 119. more largely.

2. But (reading it [Loves:]) possibly they may better interpret it, who
understand it concerning the Graces of Gods Holy Spirit. When we speak of the
Grace of Christ, we either understand, that goodness which is essentially in
him, as he is the fountain of all Grace; full of Grace and Truth (the fullness
of the Godhead dwelling in him) or that goodness which he communicates to his
People, in the free pardon of their sins, and acceptance of their Persons; Or
3 dly. Those fruits of his Spirit which abide and dwell in us, such as faith,
love.

Gregor. ad loc.
I find some Interpreters both ancient, and modern, interpreting the Text of
the latter: So Gregorius Mag. That love to thee, and to my Brethren, which thou
have wrought in my heart; But Beza observes. That it is not usual, to Saints
to commend their own graces, and therefore doubtless it is to be understood of
that Grace, which is and remains in Christ subjectively, of which we are the
Objects; and to this sense agree the most sober, and spiritual Interpreters:
making the phrase to signify that sweet pleasure which the Soul takes from the
feeling of Christ's love. And possibly this is that Vis lactandi, that suckling
virtue, which Delrio mentions, which Christ's puts forth, refreshing the Souls
of his Saints with his consolations.

The word is in the plural number: by which the Hebrews were wont not only to
express a multitude of things, but also the infinite virtues, and dimensions of
any thing. You must not think (says Beza) That in the One Essence of God there
are more numerical loves No; in him all things are one, and he is one. But his
grace is manifold, in respect of our feeling, and apprehension: and he deals
out his love to us in different measures according to our different necessities
or capacities.

The Chaldee Paraphrast with some of the Heb. Doctors, understand here the
Concret, by the Abstract, and interpret God's loves, to be his beloved people
of the Jewish Nation; whom he prefers before Wine, viz. before any other
Nations, threescore and ten Nations; to which purpose, by their Cabalistical
Art they have found out the numerical letters for 70 in the word which we
translate Wine. But I shall not insist upon so fond, and improbable a Notion.

Having therefore spoken. Enough for the Explication of the Subject, Thy loves;
Let us endeavor to understand what is praedicated of this Subject.

They are better then Wine] good before wine, says the Heb. Text, which is but
the same thing in their dialect, who so use (ordinarily) to express the
Comparative degree.

1.
1. Good (in the Philosophical notion of it) is whatsoever is the Object of our
desire, the nature of it lying in a convenience and sutableness of the thing
unto our natures which makes it desirable; which a thing may be either upon the
account of pleasure or profit, or nobleness. Accordingly the Heb. word (...) is
variously translated; merry, Esther 1. 10. Beautiful, Ruth 3. 7. Thy loves are
more good, i. e. more sweet, pleasant, profitable than Wine.

2.
2. Wine (in its primary signification) is the juice of the Grape, whose proper
Effect it is to make the heart of man merry Psalm. 104. 15. But this were too
low a signification for it in this Text. We must therefore allow a figure. The
Hebrews were wont under the notion of wine, to express all other delectable,
and pleasant things. Hence Ahashuerus his feast is called A Banquet of Wine;
though it cannot be imagined, that Wine was all the guests had for their
intertainment. It is an usual Synecdoche, to express all things that fall
under a common genus, by some Eminent Species. Some of the ancient R. Soi.
Jerchi in Genebrard.
Rabbis, understood by Wine here quamcunque Laetitiam; whatsoever is pleasant
and acceptable. And in that sense Mercer, and the best of modern Interpreters
agree. For that other interpretation, Number. 15. 5. Hos. 9. 4.
which some make of it, who understand by loves, Gospel Doctrine, and by [Wine]
the Doctrine and dispensation of the Law though it seems to have some
advantage, by the use of Wine, in the legal oblations, and it be a truth, That
the Doctrine, and dispensation of the Gospel being more sweet and perfect, is
better than that of the Heb. 9. 1.
Law which brought nothing to perfection. Yet I cannot think it the sense of
this Text.

Let us conclude then, that the words are the Language Either of the Church of
God preferring the enjoyment of God in the Doctrines, and dispensations of his
word and Gospel: or the words of the believing Soul preferring the influences
of divine grace, before the sweetest of all creatures comforts. And this I take
to be the most free and consistent sense, and interpretation of the words.

The particle (...) may be conceived here to have a double use.

1.
Either To give a reason of her former desire, that her beloved Nu^s autem ne
videatur insano quodam affectu rapi, sed plane prudenti consilio etc. Beza in
Cant. Hom. 1.
should kiss her with the kisses of his mouth; Which she professes to be like
theirs, who desire wine: They desire that because it is good. She desires these
because there is a far greater goodness in these heavenly influences, than
there is in the best of created comforts* by which she shows that she was not
carried out to these desires insano quodam affectu, sed prudente consilio
(says Beza by prudent advice, and deliberation; reason dictating to us, the
choice and desire of the things, which are most excellent: Not by an heady and
misguided passion.

2.
Or else to make an argument which might be advantageous to her for the
obtaining of her request; drawn from the Estimate of Christ's love with which
her Soul was possessed: Lord I esteem thy favor to me above all created
comforts in the world: Therefore let not my Soul want it. And so it suteth with
that of David Psalm. 4. 6. Lord lift Psalm. 4. 6.
thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us. Thou have put gladness into my
heart, more than the time that their Corn, and Wine increased. And thus these
latter words of the Text contain the Spouses first Argument, by which she
urges her petition mentioned in the former part of it. She proceeds v. 3.

V. 3.
V. 3. Because of the Savor of thy Ointments: Thy name is as ointment poured
forth; therefore do the Virgins love thee.

The Sept. translate it thus (...)

The Vulg. Latin joyneth the former part of this verse to the former thus; Thy
breasts perfumed with the best ointments are better than Wine.

The difference is not much, nor is it an easy labor, to determine it, because
the points and stops which make it, are of no great antiquity, (at least as
some think) the Hebrew (translated for a word) seems to be thus: To the smell
of thy good Ointments. Thy name is as Oil, or Ointment poured out. Therefore do
the Virgins love. (...) This seems to be (in our dialect) an harsh sense, and
the connection is not clear. To help it therefore Piscator translateth it Quod
attinet ad odorem, etc. As to what belongs to the savor of thy good Ointments,
etc. The Tigurine Version make the middle words as a Parenthesis, and translate
it thus: For the smell of thy good Ointments (for thy name is as an Ointment
poured out.) Therefore do the Virgins love thee.

The only question is whether the Spouses design in these words be to give a
reason why her beloved had such an excellent name. viz. because of the savor
of his good Ointments. Or to give a reason why the Virgins loved him; or of
both these together: I think of both. The words will bear it. But let us come
to enquire the import of the words more particularly.

[(...)] The thing spoken of is Ointments, these are said to be 1. Good, and 2.
to have a Smell. The Hebrew word, from which the word [here translated
Ointments] (...) comes, signifies to be fat, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Jeshurun waxed fat.
(...) Jer. 5. 4. This word properly signifies fatness, and usually signifies
Oil or Ointment, because of the pinguid nature of those things; Pro. 21.
so Prove. 21. 20. Hos. 2. 5. The word signifies any kind of fatness, Hos. 2.
whether caused by Nature or Art. But it is not here to be taken literally; he
needs no Oils, nor sweet Ointments, to make him sweet. But you must know that
those Eastern Countries abounded with plenty of Spices, and other sweet
ingredients, of which several compounds were made, Oils, and Ointments, which
were exceedingly grateful to the outward senses; of which they made both a
Religious and a Civil use. They made a Religious use of them; 1. In Sacrifices.
2. In Consecrations.

1.
Oil was used in Sacrifices: Especially in such as were Eucharistical. Hence
you read of the Oil of gladness, (for it testified joy and gladness.) The first
use of it in this kind, of which you read in Scripture Genesis 28. 18.
was Gen 28. 18. When God had preserved Jacob in the Night, in token of his
thankfulness, he took the stone upon which he had slept, and set it up for a
pillar, and powered Oil upon it, he did Genesis 35. 14.
the like again Genesis 35. 14 whether it were done, as a note of the consecration
of the place, to the service of God, or an Eucharistical Sacrifice, may
possibly be questioned by some, but the latter seems to me most probable,
considering the subsequent use of Oil (under the law) to this purpose, of which
you may read in Leviticus Chapter 2. v. 1. 3. 4. It was not lawful, in offerings
which Number. 5. 15.
were to bring iniquity to remembrance. Numb. 5. 15. No* testimony of Joy might
there be shown.

2.
It was also used in Consecrations of persons; and that either to the Kingly,
Priestly, or Prophetical Office. Samuel used Oil in the ^ Sam. 10. 2. Chapter 16.
11. ^3. ^ Kings 10. 3. ^xod. 30. 22.
anointing both of Saul, and David to the Kingly Office. The same you read also
in the anointing of Jehu, 2 King. 10. 3. Elisha the Prophet was anointed. So
was the High Priest. You have a description of the Oil, and a particular
Precept, and direction for the composition of it, Exodus 30. 22. This was called
the holy anointing Oil, with which Aaron and his Sons were anointed. The
Tabernacle (also) and the Ark, with all things belonging to them, were to be
anointed with it, as you will find in that Chapter.

Besides this Sacred use of Oil there was also a civil, and ordinary Kings 17.
^. ^ech. 16. 13. ^ra 3. 7. am. 14. 2. her 2. 12. ^e 7. 46.
use of it. Thus they used it either for bodily nourishment; the widow 1 Kings
17. 12. Told the Prophet that she had but a little Oil in the cruse. Or, 2. For
delight and pleasure, as we now use our sweet powders, our dry, and liquid
perfumes. Joab charge the woman of Tekoah (being to personate a mourner) not
to anoint her self with Oil. Esther and the other Maids, that were to be
brought before Ahashuerus; were (for 6 months) to be perfumed with Oils. Christ
complains of Simon that he had not anointed his head with Oil. Mary anointed
Christ with Oil, or Ointment, Joh. 11. 2. and the Woman poured out a Box of
Ointment, Spikenard upon his head.

Now from this civil and sacred use of Oil, and the effects, the terms of Oil,
and Ointment, and Anointing are also used metaph^rically in Scripture. Thus Oil
and Ointments in Scripture signify the graces of Gods Spirit, and Anointing
signifies that gracious Divine Act by which we are made partakers of those
graces. To this sense the Psalmist speaks, God has anointed thee with the
Oil of Gladness Psalm. 45. 7.
above thy fellows, Psalm. 45. 7. which the Apostle applies to Christ, Heb. 1.
9. and St. John expounds, saying, The Spirit was Heb. 1. 9. Joh. 3. Acts 10.
38. Psalm. 1^^.
not given unto him by measure, which is plainly expressed, Acts 10. 38. God
has anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with power. And as the
holy anointing Oil (under the old Law) wetted not Aarons- head alone, but ran
down upon the Skirts of his Garment, so this holy (metaphorical) Oil does also.
Hence as David said, Psalm. 92. 10. Thou have anointed me with fresh Oil; and
the Psalm. 92. 10.
People of God then were called the Lords anointed: So (under the New
Testament) the Children of God are said to have an unction, and it is said that
this Anointing abides in them. Thus that of St. John is made good, Of his
fullness we have received grace for grace. By Christ's Ointments, we understand
then, the Grace that was poured out upon him, and which dwells in him: and in
this sense I find the generality of sober Expositors agreed.

Now these Ointments are said to be (...) good, the signification of which
term, I opened to you before, and when I come to the propositions of Doctrine,
I shall more particularly show you the goodness of them in every notion of
good. But these Ointments, are also said to cast a Savor. -- At the savor of
thy good Ointments.

A smell or savor is Qualitas olfactu sensibilis, some quality of a thing
which we discern by our external sense of smelling, being conveyed to us by the
mediation of the Air: By the smell of Christ's Is. 11. 2.
Graces, we can understand nothing else, than the Spiritual sense of the love
of Christ, which by the mediation, and breathing of the holy Spirit of God is
discerned by the Soul. The word in the Hebrew (...)
signifies any perception of a thing, it is used, Is. 11. v. 3. where it is
said of Christ, that the Spirit of the Lord (resting upon him) shall make him
(as we translate it) of a quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: the
Hebrew is he shall be smelled, in the (...)
fear of the Lord. And Judge. 16. 9. we translate it, when it touches the fire,
the Hebrew word is the same, when it smells the fire; that is, when the fire
comes to it: when it has any sense of the fire. I conclude then; that as
Christ's Ointments are the graces with which he is filled: So the savor of
these Ointments, is nothing else than the souls perception, and sense of that
Christ, by the mediation of the holy Spirit of God, breathing his grace, and
love upon the Souls of his People. And this is sufficient to have spoken for
the explication of this first phrase. It follows, (...) Thy name is as an
Ointment poured forth, Job speaking of God says, what is his name? and what is
his Sons name? Let us enquire a little concerning the name of Christ in this
Text.

A name is an appellation given to some person, or thing, either to express the
nature, and being of it; or to distinguish it from another thing. God cannot
properly be said to have a name, because no term can fully explicate to us his
divine essence. But yet God is pleased in some little measure to make himself
known to us: Now whatsoever God thus makes himself known unto us by, that is
his name: More particularly: The second Person in the holy Trinity, considered
as our Mediator, and in reference to the great work of man's redemption, had
several names: One expressing the two natures which were united in that Divine
Person, that was his name Emanuel, which signifies God with us. Another
expressing the great work which he had to do, viz. To save his People from
their sins, therefore V. Greg. mag. ad loc. V. Genebr. ad loc. Lud. de Ponte ad
loc. Lyra ad loc.
his name was called Jesus. A third expressing his designation and consecration
to his Office; thus he was called Messiah and Christ, both signifying the same
thing Anointed. Gregory understands it of the name Christ, and the name
Messiah, so does Lud. de Ponte. Genebrard, Lyra, and others of the name Jesus.

But I know no reason why we should dispute so nicely for the particular name,
when as Christ had several names, either expressive of his Divine, or Human
nature, or of his personal capacity, as both Natures were united in him: or
else expressing the virtues and graces of his Person: or else relating to one
or another, or all his sacred Offices; and indeed what is said in the Text, is
true concerning every name of Christ as well as another: Each of his names is,
As an Ointment poured forth. And besides I see a more comprehensive
interpretation of the term equally true with this: Thy name. Whatsoever thou
art made known by unto us; thy word, ordinances, grace, gospel, it is all like
Oil poured forth, (...) the word translated poured forth, (...)
comes from the Hebrew Radix (...) he has emptied, or exhausted. Christ's name
is compared to Oil, and to Oil emptied, and poured out.

2.
Oil in the Box is sweet, very sweet, it makes the Box sweet, but it casts not
forth its smell abroad: nor is the sweetness of it so exceeding great and
overcoming, as when it is poured forth. It is said of the Ointment, with which
Mary anointed our Lord, that when she brake the Box, the savor of it filled
the room. Joh. 12. 3.


2.
Nor is it said, thy name is as an Ointment dropped out: but as an Ointment
poured forth as Ointment (...) emptied, or exhausted, (...) (says the
Septuagint version.) Take the Lord Jesus Christ, as he is one with the Father,
God over all blessed for ever; so he is the Fountain and Original of Grace,
full of good Ointments: But now look upon him as our Mediator, in which notion,
the names of Jesus, Christ, Messiah, Emanuel, etc. belong unto him, so he is as
Oil poured forth. The grace of the hypostatical union is poured out upon him,
he is God with us. The fullness of the Godhead, dwells in him (...), bodily.
The Revelation of Christ to the world, as the Savior of the Sons of Men, is as
an Ointment poured forth, which smells sweet in the Nostrils of all the world,
and fills the whole Creation with a sweet savor. The more special revelation
of the Lord Jesus Christ unto the particular souls of the Saints, is as an
Ointment poured forth. Christ apprehended, and applied by faith unto the soul
is exceeding sweet to it. To you that believe (says the Apostle) he is
precious.

It follows, (...) Therefore do the Virgins love thee.

Amongst men, the term Virgin, signifies one who has not lain with Man,
neither as a Wife, nor as a Strumpet. By a metaphor the Servants of God in
Scripture are called Virgins, because it is their duty, and will be their care
to keep themselves unspotted from the world, from all filthiness, both of Flesh
and Spirit (as the Apostle speaks) the 144000 glorified Saints, mentioned,
Rev. 14. 4. Rev. 14. 4.
are called Virgins. The professors of the Gospel at large, are so called in
the parable, Mat. 25. of which, though as to the matter of Mat. 25. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5.
their own salvation, some were wise some soolish, yet all kept themselves from
the Paganish Spiritual Adultery with Devils, Stocks and Stones. Gods People of
Israel anciently was called a Virgin, Jer. Jer. 31. 4. 13.
31. 4. 13. And Saint Paul professes it his desire, to present the Saints at
Corinth -- as a chaste Virgin unto Christ, to which purpose he was jealous over
them with a godly jealousy, 2 Cor. 11. 2. 2 Cor. 11. 2.


The word here translated virgins comes from the Heb. root (...) which
signifies to be hid and covered, either Because the gravity of former times
caused Parents to keep their Virgins, as it were hidden, in their Houses, until
Marriage. Or else because the modesty of those more innocent times, allowed not
Virgins to go without their Vails; as it were hidden from vulgar sight.
Rebeccah, when she Genesis 24. 65.
came near unto Isaac, took a Vail, and covered herself; which usage continued
a long time after, especially in public Assemblies. Tertullian has a peculiar
Book de velandis Virginibus, concerning the vailing of Virgins, where he
bitterly inveigheth against those who had broken those bars of modesty, and
calls them capita nundinatitia, pudorem ostentatitiae Virginitatis, (what
would he have said to the bare Necks, and open Breasts of this Age?) But I told
you by Virgins here are meant the true Children of God, who are called hidden
ones, Psalm. 83. 3.
Psalm. 83. 3. such who (being cleansed) have neither spot nor wrinkle, but are
holy, and without blemish; thus of old, Origin, and Gregor. magnus, and more
lately Beda with the generality of modern Expositors, interpret it. Mercer by
Virgins seems to understand the Gentiles, who had not heard of Christ, yet
should be also induced to love him, upon the report of his Excellencies,
revealed to them in the preaching of the Gospel, but the other Interpretation,
is proper enough, and more generally received, to which I shall adhere. These
Virgins love Christ (...)

The word translated love, is ordinarily used, and so interpreted it has a
great cognation with (...) voluit he has willed, and (...) desideravit, he
has desired. Love is nothing else, but a willing of good to the object
beloved, and desire is the eldest Daughter, and first fruit of love.

For the particles (...) therefore, they show the cause of the believers loving
of the Lord Jesus Christ, because of the savor of his good Ointments. The
excellencies of grace which are in him, of which it has a spiritual sense.

This whole verse comprehends a second Argument, by which the Spouse inforceth
her first petition, The first was drawn, from that high esteem which her soul
had of the love, and grace of Christ. 2. This is drawn, from that particular
affection which she had for him (common to all spiritual Virgins) which she
shows was not brutish, and irrational; no, it was because he was full of grace;
which was more precious, than the most excellent Ointments, and she had
received the savor of this grace; for his discovery of himself to the world as
a Savior, and more specially to her soul as her Savior, was as an Ointment
poured forth.

You may now take the substance of these two verses, and so of the Spouses
first and great petition thus:

Oh! That it might please my dearly beloved Savior, who is my Spiritual
Bridegroom, to show me some token of special love, and to multiply those tokens
to me more specially, in and by the words of his Mouth, in Gospel Doctrines to
speak unto my Soul, which does really The sum of the 2 verses opened.
prefer the tokens of his love, and influences of his grace, before the most
choice of all creature comforts. My beloved is full of grace and love, which is
sweet like good Ointment; every discovery of himself is as sweet as Ointment
poured forth, therefore does my Soul love him; and not my Soul only, but the
Souls of all those, who are not deflowered by the world, and by lusts.

From the words thus opened, several propositions of truth may be observed.

1 Prop.
The mercies which the believing Soul thirsts after, are spiritual
distinguishing mercies.

2 Prop.
The least of Christ [a kiss] is exceeding precious to a gracious Soul.

3 Prop.
Though the least influences of grace be precious to believers: yet they will
not be satisfied, without the fullest dispensations of grace, and most frequent
repetitions of it.

4 Prop.
Believers have special thirstings after the Word of God: The kisses of his
Mouth.

5 Prop.
The thirst of a true believer will not be satisfied without a Spiritual,
inward communion with Christ in his Ordinances. The kisses of his Mouth.

6 Prop.
A gracious Soul will be very bold and earnest with God for this spiritual
communion with him.

7 Prop.
The Lord Jesus Christ has Loves: A variety of Grace.

8 Prop.
The Loves of Christ are better [than Wine] than all created comforts
whatsoever.

9 Prop.
The believing Souls knowledge of the Excellencies which are in Christ, is the
ground of its earnest desire of fellowship, and communion with him.

10 Prop.
It is an excellent Argument for a Soul to use with God for the obtaining of
favors from him, if it can truly say, that it prefers his favor before all
created goods.

11 Prop.
The Lord Jesus Christ has good Ointments, which cast a savor.

12 Prop.
The name of Christ is as an Ointment poured forth.

13 Prop.
Virgin Souls love the Lord Jesus Christ, for those excelling graces which they
discern in him.

2.
Sermon II.
Canticles 1. v. 1. 2, 3. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth; for his
loves are better then Wine: Because of the savor, etc.

I Have (in my former Exercises) opened the Text, and named those propositions
of Doctrine which are couched in the words, or rationally to be deduced from
them. I come now to the particular handling of them, beginning with the first.

Prop. 1.
The thirst of a believing Soul is after Spiritual distinguishing mercies.

1.
Nature teaches every one to say, who will show us any good? Good is a thing
that all the creation is enamoured upon. God is the fountain of all goodness;
Every good and perfect gift, comes from above, from him who is the father of
lights. Who being not a debtor to the creature, must needs dispense it out
freely. Hence that goodness of God which is his goodness of Beneficence, not
only dwelling in him as a piece of his divine perfection: But flowing from him,
as a stream from the fountain of his liberality, is properly called Mercy,
whether it be good to us in respect of its sutableness to our outward and
bodily wants, or to our more inward, and Spiritual necessities. Hence the
Mercies and savours of God, are either Bodily [respecting out outward Man] or
Spiritual [respecting our inward man.] The former (such now, as life, health,
peace and prosperity, riches, etc.) are such as God gives to his Enemies, as
well as to his Friends; he makes his Sun to rise upon the evil and Mat 5. 45.
the good: And sends rain on the just and unjust, Math. 5. 45. Spiritual good
things again, are either Gifts of common or of Special Grace. Gifts of common
grace, such as knowledge, invention, memory utterance, etc. These are indeed
Spiritual gifts, so called by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 1. chapter 14. 1. because
given out by the Spirit of God; and tending to innoble the Spiritual part, and
they are also called the best gifts. 1, Cor. 12. 31. They are so in their kind,
better, than those which only concern the outward man; but St. Paul himself,
mentions better than these in the very same Text; I show you a more excellent
way. Neither are these distinguishing favors, but given in common to wicked as
well as to good men: But now there are Spiritual mercies (...) so called: Not
only because they come from the Spirit of Grace, and innoble the Spiritual part
of man, but because they are suited to the greatest necessities of our inward
man. Such are the grace of Justification, Union to and reconciliation with God,
pardon of Sin, and the Senses of that pardon, together with all the fruits of
the Spirit of regeneration, and Sanctification. These are the distinguishing
favors of God, which difference the Child of God from him that is not. Now I
say these are those favors which the believing Soul thirsts after, and
longs for, expressed here under the Metaphor of kisses.

2.
And properly expressed under that notion. Men and women use not to kiss such
as they hate but such as they have an affection for. It is a civil usage
amongst us so to salute strangers indeed, but frequency of kisses speaks a
distinguishing love, and some intimacy of Affection and are not ordinary,
unless amongst very intimate Friends, such as is the Husband and Wife, Brethren
and Sisters etc. But yet a little further.

3.
When Isay the thirstings of gracious Souls are after such distinguishing
tokens of divine love. I understand it not Exclusively. The Children of God are
made up of flesh and blood, as well as any others, and subject to the same
necessities and infirmities; they have in them cravings, and lustings of the
flesh. David prays hard for his life Psalm. 39. ult. and Abraham for a Child,
and Job for health. Jonas is fond of a gourd, and Agur beggeth food convenient
for him, and although, Rachel may be too importunate for a Child, and Paul for
the removal of the Thorn in his flesh, yet there is a lawful desire of the good
things of this life allowed, yea, commanded us in that form of Prayer, which
our Savior prescribes. We are bid to pray, Give us this day our daily bread.
But the Child of God first seeks the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, according to our Saviors prescript, Mat. 6. 33. I remember David has
such an expression as this, Psalm 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord,
that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days
of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his holy
Temple. If a Child of God had but one thing to ask of God, this should be it,
that it might behold the face of God; this is that which it would seek after,
and look out for. Yea, this is that which their Souls desire eminenter. These
are the things for which they will wrestle with God, and will not let him go
until he shall bless them with them. Other things they will beg, but these are
the things their Souls will spend their strength in, and lay the stress upon:
did you hear the secret pleadings of the awakened Soul with God, you would
easily discern the difference between the desires it has toward outward
things, and those which are in it toward Spiritual, and distinguishing
mercies, and be easily able to say: Those are the things that this Soul would
have, pardon of Sins, sense of Gods love, victory over its lusts, and
corruptions; strength, and enlargement of heart in the service of God. These
are the things which this Soul would have. It asks a Ring, but the kiss is that
to which it has most mind. And all this must be understood of the gracious
Soul, when it is itself; not in its fits of passion and infirmity: then Elijah,
and Job, and Jonah, and any of the Children of God may speak according to the
flesh, the law of their members prevailing against the law of their mind, has
brought them into captivity to the law of Sin. These things being premised for
the explication, the truth of the proposition will be abundantly evidenced from
the example of the man according to Gods own heart (holy David) and that in
several Psalms, Psalm. 4. 6. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon
me. There be many that say, who will show us any good, but Lord lift thou up
the light of thy Countenance upon me. The light of the Sun will please others,
but it is only the light of thy Countenance, that Psalm. 63. v. 1. 2.
will please me, Psalm. 63. v. 1. 2. My Soul thirsts for thee, my flesh
longs for thee: in a dry and thirsty land where no water is. To see thy
power, and thy glory in the Sanctuary. The sight of the Sanctuary will please
another, but nothing will please David, but the sight of Gods power, and glory
in the Sanctuary. Other-where he prays, that the Lord would show him his way,
and unite his heart to fear his name. That God would come unto him, and show
himself unto him, etc. Nor is it hard to find out the reason of it, which lies;

1.
In the sanctification of the renewed man, he has a new heart given unto him.
A new heart signifies a new understanding; a new will, and new affections. New,
not as to the faculties themselves, but as to the motions and operations of
them, in which the soul still follows the dictates of reason, and proceeds in
the method of a rational creature.

1. The Soul is renewed in its understanding; from whence proceeds a new
notion and Judgment concerning things. The old Serpent cheated our first
Parent, when he persuaded her that the fruit of the forbidden Tree was to be
desired, because in the day she should eat thereof, her Eyes should be opened,
and she should be as God, knowing good and evil; for from that day forward she
was struck blind, and the Disease, (according to Divine ordination) proved
hereditary: All we who are the Children of Adam, are born blind, neither able
to take the true notion of good and evil, nor yet to make up a Judgment
concerning either, discerning the things that differ: but naturally every one
calls Evil, good, and good, Evil. The Psalmist says, that man stood not in
honor, but became like the Beast that perishes. In this much like the Beast
indeed, that we are merely led by the conduct of a sensitive appetite, not
discerning those things which are truly and spiritually good: and the reason of
this is our not understanding our selves, for the nature of all good lying in a
convenience, and sutableness of the object to us, a knowledge of our own state,
and wants, must reasonably be supposed to a right judgment concerning good and
Evil. But amongst other Evils accrewing to us by the fall, this was one, that
we are by nature Blind as to our own State, and Strangers to our own Souls, not
understanding that we are by Nature, Children of Wrath, poor, miserable, blind,
and naked, but conceiting that we have need of nothing. Hence it is that the
Soul is not able to judge of the goodness of Union and Communion with God,
pardon of sin, reconciliation with God, etc. Nor indeed does it come to
understand it, until the Eyes of the understanding be opened, by the
application of Spiritual Eye Salve, laid on by the Finger of the holy Spirit of
God. Till this time, the Soul sees no beauty in Christ, nothing for which he
should be desired. The goodness of Riches, and Pleasures, and Honors, it
knows, but as for that transcendent goodness and Excellency which is in Christ,
what it is, it does not understand; Hence it naturally desires, life, health,
riches, honors, success in worldly affairs, and such common gifts, as may
serve it in the world, with credit, and applause, and reputation. But for
spiritual things, for distinguishing tokens of love, it is not able to take the
height, and length, and depth, and breadth of the love of God in them, nor to
discern their convenience, and sutableness to its undone state and condition;
hence (with the Cock in in the Fable) it prefers the Barley Corn before that
Pearl of great price, for the purchase of which, the wise Merchant is willing
to sell all that he has. But now the regenerate soul has its Eyes open, to
discern the things that are excellent, and as it is taught by the Spirit of
conviction, the truth of its natural and unregenerate Estate, so its Eyes are
opened, to see that nothing but the special love of God in Christ is a good
suitable to it, or worthy of its caring for: and hence, the soul is taught by
it is own reason, to thirst after these manifestations of Divine Goodness, as
those which above all others, are proportioned to its wants, and highest
necessities.

2. But 2dly. These desires are not the product of an enlightened understanding
(only) but of a renewed will also. So woefully depraved is our corrupt nature,
that the inferior powers of our Souls, have withdrawn themselves from the
command of reason; and whereas it is the method of a reasonable Soul, to
embrace or refuse a thing with the will according to the judgment, which is by
the understanding given in concerning it: it often falls out otherwise by
reason of our Souls disorder.

He that not only knows the will of God, but also approves those things
which are most excellent, yet has no hearthimself to close with them, he is
ready to teach another (like the hand of a Statue in a way which directs a
Traveller, but moves not) he teaches not himself; hence the renovation of the
understanding (although the great wheel of the Soul) is not sufficient to make
the Soul to will those things which are spiritually good. Man's Soul is like a
Clock broken in pieces, every of whose Wheels must be mended before it will
again move truly. But the gracious man is renewed, as well in Spirit as in
Body, and in Mind. The day of the Lords Power is come upon him, and of
unwilling, he is made willing. God has given him to will, Phil. 2. 13. taking
away that natural enmity and stubborness, which was in his heart, and
disposing, and enabling him to will those things, which are in themselves most
desirable, and which are most pleasing unto God. Now there is nothing more
pleasing unto our Heavenly Father, than to see his Children, more sond of their
Fathers love, than of any thing else which is in his hand to bestow upon them:
And this is the true reason of the gracious Souls thirst after spiritual things.

3.
To which may be added (secondly) the Souls assurance, That other things shall
be added to it, Mat. 6. 33. If (says the Apostle) he has given us his Son,
shall be not with him give us all things? All inferior good things are but
appendices to these great spiritual blessings with which the Soul is blessed in
Christ Jesus, the Woman that has her Husbands heart, easily commands his
purse. The Child of the bosom needs not trouble itself for a new Coat; It is a
spiritual subrilty of a gracious heart, to be most desirous of spiritual
things; other things will come alone, they are but appurtenances to this great
possession, and an easy faith will assure the Soul, that if Men who are evil,
know how to give good things to their Children, who are once possessed of their
Affections, God will not be wanting to his People, especially considering, that
his liberality extends to the grass of the Field, and to the Birds of the Air,
because they are his Creatures.

Use 1.
Let this notion (in the first place,) show you the vast difference betwixt the
renewed soul, and that which is yet in its natural estate. Grace (considering
our weak estate) is not so easily discernable in us, from our Actions, as from
our Affections. The bent of the heart does best discover the state of it,
whether it be renewed or no. All Men and Women in the Christian world come
under one of these three ranks. They are either, 1. Profane, and dissolute
Persons. Or 2. Hypocrites, or seeming professors, who have a form of Godliness,
but deny the power thereof. Or 3. Such as are Disciples indeed; the true
Children of God. God is the fountain of all mercy, and goodness, and nature
itself teaches man something of this. Hence every ones Soul is looking out
toward God for some good, or other. 1. The worldling, and profane Person says,
who will show us any good? But what is the good which he thirsts after? an
increase of Corn, and Wine, and Oil: The objects for the lusts of the Flesh,
the lust of the Eye, and the Pride of life, let the Swines belly be filled with
these husks, and he is satisfied, let who will take Grace, and Heaven, and
heavenly things; as he understands not his need of them, no^ the excellency
that is in them, so neither is his Soul carried out in any desires after them.
2. The Hypocrites design is of another nature, he would fain appear to be
something (though indeed, all his glorying be but a vain show, and a mere
appearance) when indeed he is nothing. Now that which he desires is something
proportioned to this end, he possibly covets the best gifts, like Simon Magus,
who when he saw, That through the laying on of the Apostles hands, the Holy
Ghost was given, said, Give me this power also, that on whomsoever I lay my
hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost, Acts 8. 18. The Hypocrite may desire a
gift of Prayer, a gift of Prophecy, and such like common gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which may serve his design in appearing Godly, and Religious, and this
satisfies him. 3. But the gracious Soul is satisfied with none of these. All
his desire is after the gifts of special grace, the obtaining of union with,
and reconciliation to God, the light of Gods countenance, etc. and nothing less
than this will satisfy his thirst. It is reported of Luther (indeed he reports
it of himself) that when he first Preached the Gospel in Germany, he was much
courted by some great Persons, and presented with many gifts, which made the
good man jealous, that God intended to put him off with these things, but
(says he) Protestatus sum, etc, I made a protestation to my God that I would
not be so satisfied. The Sons of Keturah may be put off with portions, but
Isaac must have the inheritance): The gracious Soul, is a true Artabazus; he
thinks his Saviors kiss is better than a Cup of Gold: and indeed I know no
better evidence of a gracious heart than this, to be found unsatisfied, without
the special, and distinguishing love of God, yet that you may not deceive your
selves, I must tell you, that as it is possible, that one who is a stranger to
God, may desire these distinguishing favors from God: So the desire of those
good things which are but the issues of common providence, is often found in
gracious Souls, and that in too high a degree. But as the former proceeds
from some inconstant principle, and lasts not long in the unregenerate Soul,
nor is much in earnest, while it continues, but like Augustines desire to be
rid of his lusts, while in the mean time (as he confesses) he secretly
desired, that God would not hear his prayer: so the latter desires in the Child
of God, are secondary, and subordinate, or (if irregular and immoderate) no
more than fits of passion, out of which grace soon recovers him.

Use 2.
Secondly. Let me beseech you all to make these spiritual distinguishing
mercies of God the object of your desires. I hope there is none who hears me
this day, but is sometimes breathing out the desires of his Soul unto God in
Prayer. Oh! let this be the lauguage of your Prayers: Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his Mouth: Let others beg of God Riches, and Honors, and the favors
of Men: Let others beg the golden Ring, but do you desire the kiss. Consider,

2.
The Soul of the rational Creature stands obliged by the law of reason to
desire the best things: Is there any thing to be compared with special grace?
this is that more excellent way which the Apostle propounds to be coveted
before the best gifts. You read in the book of Esther, chapter 5. v. 9. 11.
concerning Haman, that he called for his Wife, and tells her of the great
honor to which the King had advanced him, and of his great Riches, but (says
he) all this avails me nothing, while I see Mordecay suting in the Kings
Gate. When the poor worlding sits down, and thinks how God has blessed him
with Riches, Honors, and whatsoever contentments the creature can afford him,
has he not cause to say, All this avails me nothing, whilst I have no
assurance of the love of God, whilst (for ought I know or have reason to
believe) the wrath of God may be flaming against me, and I one of those who
shall after all these sweet enjoyments, spend an Eternity in that fire which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Riches profit not in the day of Wrath,
no nor any thing else will profit in that day, but an interest in Christ. How
much better is a dinner of Herbs with the love of God, than great Treasures
with his hatred? A morsel of bread with an interest in Christ, than a stuffed
Ox with the wrath of God?

Secondly, These influences alone will evidence distinguishing love. Indeed
other gifts may possibly speak no love at all. The Israelites desired a King,
God granted them their desires, and says by his Prophet that he gave them a
King in his Wrath. It may be truly said, concerning the gifts of God to many a
poor Creature, he gives them Riches in his Wrath, Honors in Wrath, outward
prosperity in Wrath, outward good things dipped in divine vengeance, the wrath of
God may smoke against them while the quails are betwixt their teeth. Poenalis
nutritur impunitas. This is a secret of Divine Justice, which every one sees
not. It is the saying of a devout Author, that God often uses impios melle suo
punire, to punish wicked men with their own Honey. But God never gives a kiss in
Wrath, he cannot give osculum Iscarioticum, where he kisseth, he loves. God
throws the good things of this life amongst his Enemies, his Friends living in
the same world, it may be get something of them, but they are no distinguishing
mercies. But whomsoever he kisseth, that Soul is certainly beloved of him.

3.
Thirdly, There are no petitions please God so well, as those which are put up
for spiritual things. When Solomon begged of God a wise and understanding
heart, it is said that the saying pleased the Lord well. Yea God showed that it
pleased him well, for he received in abundance what he asked not. Nor is this
hard to be conceived by us, who have the same affections toward our own
Children, had any one of us who are Fathers, 2 Children, and we should put it
to their choice, what they would ask of us, and the one should ask that we
would settle so much land upon him, the other should tell us, he desired not
our lands, but should importunately beg that his Father would love him best,
would not the latter please you best? should we not be ready to give that
Child-more than it asked? You read of the two Daughters of Naomi, Orpah, and
Ruth, Ruth 1. 14, 15. they both followed their Mother in law while she was
full, but when she was empty, Orpah kisseth her Mother in law, and leaves her,
Naomi would have had Ruth have done so too; but v. 16. Ruth refuses, and tells
her: Whither thou go I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge, thy
People shall be my People, and thy God shall be my God, where thou die, I
will die, and there will I he buried. Which is as much as if she had told her,
that she valued the company of her Mother above all other concerns. Did not
this think you indear her to Naomi? and certainly nothing can more endear a
soul to God, than for it to judge his favor better than life, and his loves
more than Wine.

Now to engage your hearts to prefer the kisses of God before any other good
things, with which the hand of his providence can make you happy, there needs
no more, than that you should be truly possessed with the notion of your own
wants, and rightly understand the differences of good. He that knows how much
more excellent than the Body, the Soul of man is: will quickly understand that
those things which are proportioned to its wants, are more desirable goods than
those which are only suited to our more outward concerns. Study but the
excellency of the love of God, and the vanity, and Earthliness of the Creature,
the state of your souls by nature, and with respect to that guilt, which by
multitudes of Sins you have contracted, from which nothing can excuse you but
the blood of Christ, nor any thing evidence your absolution (to quiet your
accusing, and condemning consciences, but the kisses of his Mouth, and you will
need no more to evince to you, that these celestial kisses, are of all good
things the most excellent, the most desirable, which being well understood, the
rational Soul directly moves to a choice and desire of them above, and before
all other things.

Sermon III.
Canticles 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.

IT is the Spouse that speaks; she says not, Let him embrace me, nor (as
elsewhere) He shall lie all night betwixt my breasts, but, Let him kiss me. --
Quid tam minimum and submissum, quam osculetur me (is De -- Ponte his note upon
the Text.) A kiss is the least token of conjugal love and affection. Hence
observe,

Prop.
The least tokens of Christ's special, distinguishing love are very desirable to
believing Souls.

The free Love of God shining out through Christ upon souls predestined unto
glory, in the pardoning of their sins, the acceptance of their persons, the
renewing of their natures, in strengthening, quickening, comforting influences
of grace, is what we call the distinguishing Love of Christ, being not the
effects of his Philanthropy, but his (...); now the tokens of this are more or
less, or may be so called;

1.
According to the degree of their Emanation from Christ and the Spirit of
Christ; Or,

2.
According to our judgment and apprehension, or Estimation.

1. According to the degree of their Emanation. God, whose heart is at all
times the same toward his people, yet is pleased gradually to discover it, and
to manifest himself unto his people. As the Sun in the Firmament (whose Light
in it self is always the same, and which has always the same ability and
aptitude to illuminate the Air, and to refresh the Earth with its Beams, yet)
gives out its Light variously according to its position in the Firmament, or
aspect upon the Hemisphere, its nearness to, or distance from the Object to be
enlightened, or refreshed, or as it is more or less hindered by the
interposition of Clouds or Vapors; so does the Sun of Righteousness also
diffuse his Beams variously. Or, as indeed a prudent Father, though at all
times his heart be full of love to his Children, yet in the discoveries and
manifestations of it, he governs himself by his own prudence relating to the
Child's good, and with respect to the Child's behavior and demeanor toward
him: So though whom God loves, he loves with a great love, and to the end;
yet as to the discoveries and manifestations of it, he governs himself by his
own Infinite Wisdom, and with a great respect, to his Peoples carriage and
demeanor toward him. Hence it is, that though every Child of God, be beloved
of God with the same special and distinguishing Love; yet every one lives not
under the same manifestations and emanations of it: He shows to some more, to
some less, to some scarcely any, according to the Wisdom of his Counsel, and
the good pleasure of his own will. One soul shall have just light enough to
discern that the day is broke in his soul, that the Sun is arisen with healing
in his wings upon him; another shall hardly have so much light, as to discern
that, but shall walk in the dark, and see no light. Another shall have the Sun
of Righteousness more fully shining upon him, and be able to say with Job, I
know my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see him with these Eyes; and though
Worms shall destroy this body, yet in my flesh I shall see God: Or with Paul,
Romans 8. 38. I know, and am persuaded, that neither life, nor death, nor any
thing shall separate me from the Love of God in Jesus Christ. Yea the same soul
shall sometimes see its Beloved standing as it were behind the wall, and
looking in upon it through the Lattice; see him in a Glass darkly; another time
it shall see him with a fuller sight, as in the house with it, face to face.
One while it shall only see as by a Wicket of hope open, and possibly but
imperfectly open neither; another while its vision shall be as it were of the
Heavens opened, and Christ sitting at the right hand of God, making
intercession for it.

2. The more or less of special and distinguishing grace is often measured by
the soul's apprehension, and particular fancy (which judgment possibly is not
always according to Truth, but yet such as we ordinarily make.) Thus we
commonly judge the comfortable reflections of Divine Love, to be the greatest
tokens of it. The sweetest indeed they are, but possibly the strengthening
Influences of Divine Grace, by which the soul is enabled to perform its
spiritual duties, and to fight the good fight both against motions to sin from
within, and temptations to sin from without, may be no less manifestations of
special and distinguishing grace. But take your measures how you will, the
gracious soul valueth at an high rate the least manifestations of such grace as
may evidence to it that it is beloved of God with a special and distinguishing
love. I do not say the least of these will satisfy such a soul: That it will
not, for the soul in which God has caused by his Spirit a spiritual thirst
after himself, is continually crying out, Give, Give! The soul will not be
satisfied, until in the Resurrection it awakes with God's likeness; but in the
mean time, the least influences of this nature, will be to it very precious and
desirable.

The truth of this Proposition will appear to you from the petitions of several
of the Servants of God in holy Writ, more eminently those which we read of
concerning David, Psalm. 4. 6. There be many that say, Who will show us any
good? Lord (says he) lift up the light of thy countenance upon me; and in the
following words he declares, that it should be more to him than the worldlings
Harvest or Vintage greater matter of gladness, than their increase of Corn,
Wine, or Oil: And Psalm. 84. 9. he asks no more than that the Lord would look
upon the face of his Anointed. What can be less than Beholding, and giving the
soul a good look? The liberty that the Birds of the Air, the Swallow and the
Sparrow had, to make their, Nests about the Lord's Altars, one would think
argued but a small favor; yet David prefers their condition before his. One
would think the Office of a Doorkeeper in the Lord's House, were but a small
preferment; yet David valueth it above a Mansion in the Tents of wickedness.
The several expressions which David makes use of in the Psalms, to testify
his desires after God, such as Beholding, Looking upon him, Remembering him,
etc. are all evident proofs of this. The Woman, Luke 7. 38. counts it honor
enough to sit at Christ's feet, to wash his feet with her tears, and then to
wipe them with the hairs of her head. The Woman of Canaan is called a Dog, and
contented with it, so she may but lick up the Crumbs under her Master's Table.
You read of another Woman that cried out; If I may but touch the Hem of his
Garment. The Prophet Zechariah foretold of a time when men should take hold of
the Skirt of a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have heard God is with
you. Any thing of Christ is precious to a soul that has once tasted how good
he is. Joseph of Arimathea must have his dead body; and the Disciples must run
to the Sepulcher where he was laid. The People of God of old had a favor for
the dust of Zion, and the stones thereof. But much more precious must the least
emanations of that virtue be which is in him suited to the wants (the spiritual
wants of poor souls. What can be less than a look, a smile, a word? yet we find
these have been very precious to the People of God.

What can we think of less, than the hearing of a Prayer; yet David esteems
this ar an high rate, Psalm. 116. 1, 2. For this he professes his love to God,
and his resolution to call upon him so long as he lived. One would think that
of all other Fellowship and Communion with Christ, a Fellowship with him in his
Sufferings, were least desirable. St. Paul glories in this, and speaks of it
as a thing desirable, Phil. 1. 10. chapter 3. 11. And we read of the Apostles
praising God, that they were thought worthy to suffer for the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ. The same Spirit that was in all these Servants of God, is yet to
be found in the souls of such as have any acquaintance with, or relation to the
Lord Jesus Christ. And indeed our reason will tell us, that it must be so, if
we consider but these following particulars, which will give you a reasonable
account of the truth of this Proposition.

1.
The least token of special, distinguishing Grace, is of an infinitely sweet
and salvifick nature and evidence. There are common gifts of the Spirit of God,
which indeed may be sweet, and very grateful to a spiritual nature (such are
the gifts of Prayer and Prophecy, etc.) but yet are not of a saving nature, or
evidence; a man may have them and perish for ever; but it is not so with such
influences of the Spirit, as are tokens of special distinguishing love;
spiritual gifts are to be coveted, because of a subserviency in them to
spiritual and saving ends; but they are not of a saving nature, and have
nothing of a saving evidence in them; but in the least token of special
distinguishing love, there is something of an evidence for Salvation; the least
of it is of a saving nature: Faith, that is but as a grain of Mustard seed, is
as much saving, as the strongest Faith is. The measures of our comforts much
depend upon degrees of grace, but our Salvation does not. Christ bids Zacheus
go home, for that day Salvation was come to his house. Salvation comes to the
soul that hour in which the least of special love shines upon it; the least of
that brings Salvation, and consequently is exceeding sweet, and must be so, if
you consider this soul, as first seeking the Kingdom of God, allarumed with the
spiritual sense of its misery by nature, its lost and undone condition in Adam.
This is the one thing that such a soul seeks after, in comparison with which,
all other things are as dross and dung to it. That it may discern it self
beloved of God, one of those for whom Christ died, and whose sins are washed
away with his blood, for this it has wept, and prayed, and resolved to seek
after it, and resolved not to be silent.

2.
There is no evidence of special Love, but is suited to some great spiritual
want of the soul. Our souls are exposed to a great variety of wants. All the
tokens of God's special Love, are suited to some or other of these wants. Our
souls are impotent and weak, both to the performance of spiritual duty, and to
resist our spiritual adversary; to this want now strengthening grace is suited.
They are dull and heavy, and move heavily in spiritual duties; to this,
quickening grace is suited. They are sad and troubled for fear of God's wrath;
to this consolatory grace is suited. There is no influence of the special Love
of God, but is suited to some special want or burden of our souls, and
therefore the least of them must be exceedingly desirable, for so every thing
is that suiteth our necessities, and so much the more as it suiteth some more
special and eminent wants. If the Sun does but arise upon the soul, it heals,
Mat. 4. 2. though it shines not out in its fullest glory, if Christ spreads
but a wing over it, there is healing in that wing. His very shadow gives
delight to the soul, Cant. 2. 2. the least of his fruit is pleasant to its
taste. If (says the woman) I can but touch the Hem of his Garment, I shall be
whole.

3.
Such is the purity of the Saints Love, that though they may have an Eye to the
Recompense of Reward, which his Love brings; yet they love him for himself, who
appears to their souls as Totus desideria, altogether desirable. It is his Love
which their souls thirst after; now the least special token of Love shows
that he loves it, and his heart cleaves to it. He that valueth the Love of his
friend, regards not the quantum of the Token, but the nature of it; if it be
of such a nature as he does not ordinarily give to any common friend; that is
it which he eyeth. If a soul can see any thing which speaks its Lord joined
to it, cleaving unto it, this is it which makes it valuable. A discerning soul
will take little joy in gifts of common providence, Riches, Honors, good
Relations, common gifts. It may and will desire these things while it is in the
flesh, as they fill up some emptinesses in that our state, but it can by no
means be satisfied with these things. As Haman said when he had been telling
his Wife of his great preferments and honors; All this does me no good, so
long as I see Mordecay sitting in the King's Gate; my Enemy is honored and
advanced as well as I: So it says; The Lord has given me riches, honor, etc.
but all this does me no good, so long as I see the haters of God enjoy as much
of these things as I do; let me have some special token of 4.
God's Love. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.

Fourthly, The Child of God knows, That the least token of Christ's special
love, is more worth than all the world. There is no proport on betwixt a
corp^ral and a spiritual good; betwixt what is suitable to our flesh, and to our
wants in this life, and what is suitable to our Souls, and necessary for us with
respect to our eternal felicity. The Philosopher could say, Animus cujusque est
quisque. The mind of a Man is the Man. The Christian knows that Anima cujusque
est quisque. The Soul of a Man is the Man: What shall it profit a Man, if he
should gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? The sensual Man values his
life above those things that are only good, because of their subserviency to
that. The rational man valueth his mind above his flesh, and accordingly sets a
price upon knowledge and moral Virtue, above those things that merely gratify
his sense: The spiritual Man valueth his Soul, his Soul considered not only as
a rational Being, but as a Spirit, an immortal Spirit, capable of the favor of
God, and an union and fellowship with him; and ordained to an eternal
existence, not only above his body, which he knows is made up of dust,
molded up into flesh, and blood, and bones. but above his mind. It really is
of more value, and he is made apprehensive of it: hence he cannot but value the
least that tends to make that happy above any thing else whatsoever. Besides,
he knows himself created to an eternity, and believing that his reason teaches
him infinitely to prefer what is good for him, with reference to an happy
existence to eternity above any thing that can only serve him for the short
time he is to be clothed with flesh, and to live in this world: This Election
of the loves of Christ before all things else, and the value he puts upon the
least tokens, and manifestations of it, does naturally and rationally follow
his knowledge, convictions, and faith, and proceeds upon the same reason,
upon which any reasonable creature valueth a greater and more comprehensive
good, above what is of an inferior virtue, and more insignificant.

Nor is this other than according to the workings of our Souls in 5.
other cases toward Creatures which we have made the objects of our love. The
good look, and smile of an Husband, a letter from him, a small token (be it
never so small) how welcome, and acceptable is it to the Wife? The reason lies
in her love to her Husbands Person. To you that believe (says the Apostle) he
is precious. It is impossible, indeed rationally impossible that a Soul should
believe, (take it in what sense you will) but it must love the Lord Jesus
Christ, Take believing as it signifies no more than a firm, and steady assent
to the proposition of the word revealing Christ to us as he is the eternal Son
of God, the brightness of his Fathers glory, the express image of his Person,
full of kindness to the Sons of Men, pitying them, taking a delight in them,
willing to save them, and to communicate of his fullness to them, and to this
end coming from Heaven to Earth, clothing himself with out flesh, encompassing
himself with creature infirmities, then dying upon the Cross, that he might
purchase us unto himself, etc. I say it is not possible, that a Soul should
firmly, and steadily assent and agree to these things, but he must love Christ.
But if you take believing in the second sense, as it signifies the Souls
receiving of him as its Lord, and Savior, its resting and relying upon him,
and trusting him with all its Spiritual and Eternal Concerns, it is impossible
but that the Soul should have a love for him above all created Objects, and
having so, it cannot but naturally desire to be mutually beloved, and be
passionately desirous of some evidences of it, and the least evidences of the
reciprocations of love on his part, who is so exceeding dear in the Eyes of the
Soul, must needs be exceedingly desirable to, and valuable by that Soul.

6.
This is yet further advantaged from the consideration of the exceeding low
Opinion and Estimate which grace teaches every soul upon whom it has shined,
to have, and make of it self. The proud man valueth nothing but great things
from his friend; nay he scarcely thinks any thing great enough for him to put
any value upon. The reason lies in the high opinion which he has of his own
worth and merit; but the humble man puts a value upon the least kindness;
because he has a low and mean opinion of himself, so he looks upon every
thing as more than he could merit, or challenge. Naaman huffs when the Prophet
sends to him to go and wash in the waters of Jordan, he expected the Prophet
should have come out and stroked him, and he thought the Waters of Abana and
Parphar, were as wholesome as those of Jordan were. The Centurion desires but a
good word from Christ, when Christ spoke of coming to his House, Mat. 8. 8.
Lord (says he) I am not worthy thou should come under my roof. The Woman of
Canaan knowing her self to be a Dog, challenges no more than Crumbs. Every
gracious Soul is sensible that it deserves nothing but Hell and Wrath, this
makes the least tokens of Divine love highly valuable in its Eyes, who am I
said Elizabeth, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? who am I says an
humble Soul that the Lord should look upon me, that the Sun of righteousness
should shine so much as with one healing beam upon my Soul? Hence it valueth
the least tokens of special love. It valueth nothing less than that this
proceeds from its knowledge, and spiritual judgment of things that differ. It
valueth the least of this. This proceeds partly from its knowledge, partly
from that humility, with which it is clothed, as with a Garment.

7. Lastly, This Soul knows that Christ's Love will not terminate, and be
bounded with little things. The least tokens of distinguishing Love, are but
the Earnests of a greater bargain, they are but the first fruits to a larger
Harvest. Those that are planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the
Courts of our God, Psalm. 92. 13. God at first gives the soul but a good hope, a
glimpse of his glory, but it shall go on from faith to faith, and strength to
strength.

Use 1.
Are the least tokens of Christ's distinguishing Love so valuable, so desirable?
what should then his fullest and largest tokens be, the things which God has
prepared for them that love him, which Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard,
nor can it enter into the Heart of man to conceive? The Assurance of his Love:
The Manifestations of himself to his Saints in glory? If it be so sweet so
desirable, to see him in a glass darkly, what will it be to see him face to
face. If his kisses be so desirable, what will his embraces be? If the Hem of
his Garment be so full of virtue, and a touch of that so desirable what is his
long white Robe which is the white linen of his Saints? If a good word, a good
look be so good, what will it be to be set as a seal upon his Heart, and upon
his arm. Surely that love will be as strong as death, as the coals of that
fire which send forth a vehement flame. Let this notion of truth, and the
experience which any of your souls have had of the truth of it, kindle in you
further flames of desire after the further enjoyments of Christ in this life.
Imperfect tastes of desirable things use to do so in other things. Quo plus sunt
potae plus sitiuntur aquae. Yet in all created goods there is ordinarily more
in expectation, than fruition, but it is not so in Spiritual things. The
Apostle prays for the Ephesians, That they might be able with all Saints to
comprehend what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know
the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that they might be filled with all
the fullness of God, Ephesians. 13. 18, 19. It is most certain that there are many
holy, and gracious Souls, that want assurance, they may live, they may die
without it, but that Soul has nothing of grace, that does not desire it, that
does not thirst and pant after it. 2. What will it be to be ever with the Lord!
what an object of spiritual thirst and desire is a fullness of communion with
our Lord in his Fathers House, when we shall know as we are known, see Face to
Face. How should this fill all our hearts with desires to be dissolved, that we
might be with Christ, which is best of all? The least of Christ is good, but
that full fruition is best. Let this discourse leave some strong pantings in
your hearts; 1. After the assurance of Gods love. 2. After the further
manifestations of Christ's strength to, and in your soul to enable you further
to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord. 3. After the beatifical visions of
God in another life.

Use 2.
Learn hence the great difference there is betwixt earthly, and spiritual
objects of our desires and delights. The worlds Crumbs are little valuable, tho
some are fond of its Loaves. The good things of the world derive much of their
value from the quantity of them, that it throws into our laps. The minimum quod
sic, the least portions of the pleasures, profits, or honors of it, have
little of value in them, but the least of Christ is exceeding precious; the
things of the world affect not the Soul, or or its necessities, they are not
certain pledges of greater measures, they will go but a little way, to fill the
creatures emptinesses, but it is otherwise with Spiritual blessings in and
through Christ.

Use 3.
Thirdly, You may from hence observe the difference betwixt the Hypocrites, and
the Saints desires after Christ. An Hypocrite may pretend some desires after
Christ, nay he may really desire something of his love, consider Christ as a
Savior, as one that brings the Soul to life, and immortality; so he must
necessarily be the object of the desire of every man that has any view of his
own mortality, and that Eternal State to which man is ordained. Even Balaam
says, Oh that I might dye the death of the Righteous, that my latter end might
he like his. But mark ye, these are the fullest manifestations of Divine Love,
these are more than the kisses of his Mouth, but for those tokens of love,
which are below these, for such manifestations of the love of Christ, as tend
to the inabling of the Soul to serve and glorify God, by the subduing of Man's
will to the will of God, the mortification of lusts, and corrupt affections,
these are not at all valuable to a sensual man, not indeed to any but to the
changed and renewed Soul. I do not know any one thing from which a Man may take
better measure of himself, and a good Christian may better distinguish himself
from one that walks in a vain show, and merely glorifieth in appearance than
this:

To a good Christian the least of Christ's distinguis^i^g love is exceeding
precious, and more precious than the greatest portions of the worlds goods. The
workings of the Spirit of Christ within, and upon the Soul, subduing the will
of Man to the will of God, mortifying our Members, and the deeds of the Body:
Taking the affections off the Earth, and Earthly things, and fixing them on
more sublime, and spiritual objects; the giving of the Soul a good hope through
grace, these are things which we usually count some of the least tokens of
special, and distinguishing love. Really they are great things (nothing of
Christ is little) but we judge ordinarily according to sense) we ordinarily
esteem a sense or assurance, or full persuasion of the love of God, a much
greater thing than these. But now for a Soul to set an high price, and value
upon these, to be more satisfied, more to triumph, and rejoice in the conquest
of a lust, the victory over a temptation, than in the conquest of all our
Enemies: More to desire that our hearts may be filled with love to God, desires
after God, delight in God, than to have our Barns filled with Corn, or our
Purses with Gold and Silver, this I take to be such a difference between a
Christian indeed, and a Christian in a mere Name, Title, and outward
Profession, as a Christian may rest in, when he is inquiring into his Soul for
evidences of the truth of grace. Other manifestations of the love of God, may
be desired for our selves, and with a respect only to our selves, and the quiet
relief and peace of our own Spirits; a Christian can desire these only for the
glory of God. Try your selves therefore Christians by this Touchstone: An
Hypocrite may desire to know that his Sins are forgiven, and that God would not
impute Sin to his Soul, or that he would impute a righteousness without works;
an Hypocrite may desire to live with God in glory, but these lesser tokens of
love he valueth not.

Use 4.
But alas! even the best of Gods People must I fear be here reproved, not for
their no valuing of these kisses of Christ (that is incompetent with a Child of
God) but for their not enough valuing of them, and being too passionate and
unsatisfied for want of the comforting manifestations of Divine Love. I have
before told you that these sensible manifestations of Divine Love are
exceedingly desirable, and there is no Child of God, but is concerned, to wish,
to pray, to labor for them. But we must take heed that we be not like our
little Children, whom we shall sometimes see too much slighting, and
undervaluing, and ready to throw away what good things they have, because they
want some particular thing, which they have a mind to, which it may be, we that
are their Parents do not see so proper for them, especially under their present
circumstances. It was lawful for Rachel to wish for, to pray for Children, but
she sinned in saying to her Husband, give me Children, or else I die. Hannah
was much in the same error, 1 Samuel 1. 8. weeping, not eating, and vexing her
self, because she had no Child, and in the mean time forgetting that God had
given her an Husband, who was better to her than ten Sons. So it is lawful, nay
the duty of a good Christian to pray, to endeavor for the sweetest and fullest
manifestations of Gods love. But I have often thought, that though these be
good things of a Spiritual nature, and so vastly differing from the good things
of this life, yet in this they agree with them, that they must be asked with
submission to the will of God, because they are not de necessariis ad salutem,
things that are necessary to life, and eternal Salvation, but such which a Soul
may want without any breach of Gods Covenant with the Soul. 2. But for a Soul
not only too passionately to desire these things, which speaks its not
submitting to the will of God in his not dispensing them to it, but to
overlook, deny, or undervalue all the tokens for good, which it has received
from God, merely because it has not these, and to conclude that it has
nothing of Christ's love; this is certainly what does no become a Christian.
Certainly a Christian ought as much to value himself upon those emanations of
grace, by which he is enabled to serve and honor God, as upon those by which
his Soul is rendered more at ease, more refreshed and comforted. Every kiss of
Christ, every measure of special distinguishing love is, and ought to be
precious to a believing Soul.

Use 5.
Let me in the last place bottom upon this discourse a double word of
exhortation,

1.
The first respecting the Men of the world; those I would persuade to leave off
their pursuit of their worldly and sensual satisfactions. I would speak to them
as one standing this day in wisdoms Porch, and crying after them in their
hottest pursuits of the world, Come and turn your hearts hither, you that are
simple ones, and void of understanding. I shall have a fairer opportunity to
speak to these, when I come to consider the argument by which the Spouse
backeth her Petition. But alas, we had need make these cries often, you can see
the world, and the gay and fine things therein precious, and run after them
with a swift pace, but you can see no excellency in the kisses of Christ,
nothing for which they should be so desired, when alas the world is but like a
brave glass, which whole is of some value, but if broken in pieces, the small
pieces of it are worth nothing. Christ, his love is like a wedge of Gold, or
like a most precious perfume, the least particle, the least drop of which has
its value; there is no emanation of his special loves, but is suited to the
Souls wants, and to some eminent necessity, under which the Soul labors.
Hear Solomon speaking to you, Prove. 1. 22. How long you simple ones will you
love simplicity? -- And Fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof, I will
pour out my Spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you. Your reason
tells you that a vessel of Silver, or Gold is much preferrible to one of Earth,
or Glass, and as for other reasons, so for this (which you ordinarily say)
break a vessel of Earth and Glass, the pieces are worth nothing, but if one of
those more valuable metals be broke, the least pieces have their value. Why
should not the same reason instruct you, that Christ's favor is to be preferred
to all the world can afford you, a little of the world is not much valuable, a
plentiful estate, the highest pitches of honor, a belly full of pleasure, that
indeed may appear desirable; but the least tokens of Christ's love, the least
expressions of his favor are most valuable things. The kisses of the world are
for the most part but Oscula Iscariotica, or Joabitica, like the kisses of
Judas, who in order to the betraying of his Master first kissed him, or like
the kiss of Joab to Amasa, who under pretense of kissing him, smote him under
the fifth rib, and slew him. Christ's kisses are kisses of peace and
reconciliation, of love, and favor.

2.
Secondly. This notion calls to all those that are true Christians, and that
for three things.

1.
For a due value of the least tokens of Christ's special, and distinguishing
love, look narrowly to make up your judgment, whether what you take to be such,
be such or no, and there you must take heed that you do not make conclusions
from the gifts of common providence. No man can judge of the love or hatred of
God to his Soul from any thing which befalls him in this life. No man can judge
of any special love from Gods giving him a longer life, greater measures of
health, a more plentiful estate, or any thing of this nature. God gives the
worst of men their portion in such things as these. No nor ^dly from common
gifts, such as those of knowledge, utterance, etc. look therefore narrowly to
make your judgment, and the surest Judgment is from such things, as more
conform you to the nature, or will of God; but if you will find aliquid
Christi, any thing which you can call Christ's, or speaks his distinguishing
love, take heed of undervaluing that.

Secondly, It calls to you for the use of all means for proficiency, and growth
in Grace: Such as hearing the Word, Prayer, the use of all the Ordinances of
God, for in reason if the least tokens of Christ's special love be desirable,
greater manifestations of it are much more desirable. Labor for more holiness,
more heavenly-mindedness, more subjection of your will to the will of God. Has
the Lord blessed you with a faith of adherence, a power given you from above to
cast your Souls upon the Lord Jesus Christ? Labor for faith of evidence, be
like the Travelers to Zion (of which David speaks) Psalm. 84. that go from
strength to strength, until they all appear before the Lord in Zion. It may be
a good question sometimes to satisfy a troubled doubting Soul, what is the
Minimum quod sic, the lowest degree or measure of saving grace, but it is an
ill hearing from a lazy wanton Soul.

Lastly, it calls loudly to us to thirst after Heaven, where the believing Soul
shall be the Lambs Wife, and follow him whithersoever he goes, and be blessed
with the clearest vision, and the fullest embraces of its beloved. Oh how
pleasant will the mansions of glory be to those Souls, to whom the imperfect
views that it has had of Christ in this life have been so desirable, while we
are present in the Body, even Paul himself owneth himself absent from the Lord.
Now indeed we are the Sons of God, now we are in a capacity of his kisses,
tokens of special love, sufficient to uphold and refresh our Souls, but there
we shall be at the rivers of pleasures, where there is not only pleasure, but
fullness of pleasures, and that for evermore. O Blessed are they that shall be
always before the Throne of God, seeing their Redeemer with those Eyes, and
taking their fills of his love.

Sermon IV.
Canticles 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.

BY the beloveds Kisses mentioned in this Text, I have understood Christ's
special and distinguishing love, and the tokens of it, by which, either as God,
blessed for ever, or as the Mediator of the world, he may discover his
kindness to the Children of Men, or the Members of his Church in common; from
whence I have already observed, that the heart of a Believer is after
distinguishing love. Kisses being the least of those Evidences, I have showed,
That the least tokens of Christ's special, and distinguishing love, are, and
will be very sweet to Believers Souls.

But I observe the word is in the plural number. Kisses, and so may signify
either. 1. Various dispensations of Grace. Or, 2. Various repetitions of the
same Acts of Grace. Hence the next Proposition arises.

Prop.
That although the least dispensations of special and distinguishing love be
exceeding sweet, and precious to Souls which have once tasted how good the Lord
is, yet their hearts will be after fuller, and frequent dispensations and
repetitions of it. I take both these to be comprehended in the plurality of the
term. (...)

Grace is a thing which is but one piece considered as it is in God, their's
nothing plural in the one Divine Being; but as the Sea, which is in itself but
one, yet as it washes upon several coasts, receives several names and
denominations, as the English Sea, the Irish Sea, and the Baltic Sea: So as
the Grace of God respects the several necessities, and wants of us
necessitous Creatures, it also obtains several names, and admits of several
distinctions, and is showed by several Acts. The Grace of God in the sense I am
now speaking to, it signifies nothing but the free love of God looking upon
the Sons of Men with respect to the several necessities of their Souls. Its
variety arises from us, and our necessities, it is not divided in the fountain
only in the stream, and thus Grace admits of several distinctions, which I
shall open to you in a few words, that you may rightly understand the various
notions of it.

1.
The most famous distinction of it is into that which does render the Soul
acceptable to God, and that which is love, and freely given, but does not make
the Soul acceptable in Gods sight, at least not first acceptable, or is not
that for which God does at first accept the Soul. The first is that which we
call the Grace of Justification, which is the free love of God shining upon the
Soul, imputing to it a righteousness without works, and not imputing
transgression (as the Apostle expounds it, Romans 4. 6. 8.) the second we call
the grace of Regeneration and Sanctification, which is the love of God freely
showed to the Soul, by which its heart is renewed and changed, and filled with
new habits, and dispositions, inclining and inabling it to what God requires
of it. This is Grace, it is from the power, and free love of God, though it be
not that grace, for which God at first accepts the Soul (as the Papists say.)

2.
This Grace of Regeneration and Sanctification, is also usually distinguished
into Habitual and Actual. Habitual Grace is nothing else but the free love of
God shining upon the Soul, inabling it to will, and to choose the things that
are good, and pleasing to God, he gives to will (says the Apostle,) and we
are made willing in the day of his power (says the Psalmist) Actual or acting
Grace, which is the love of God showed to the Soul in inabling us to do the
things that are good, for as it is he that gives to will, so it is he who
gives to do, both of his own good pleasure; and our Lord told his Disciples.
John 15. 3. Without me you can do nothing.

3.
There is another distinction of Grace into Preventing and Subsequent.
Preventing Grace is that love of God which preventeth, and goes before any
good motions, or actions of ours, according to that of the Prophet, I was found
of them that sought me not, and of those that did not inquire after me. This is
usually called the first grace. Subsequent grace is that love of God which
follows this, and is variously manifested to the Souls of Gods People. In the
first we are merely passive, we only receive it: in the other we are active.

4.
There are other notions of grace, but I shall instance only in one more.
Special grace is the free love of God either concerning the being of a true
Christian, or 2dly, Concerning its well being. That grace which concerns the
being of a true Christian, which quickneth the Soul which before was a Child of
Wrath, dead in trespasses and sins, is either the Grace of Justification, and
what concerns that; this is first grace, and preventing grace. Or, 2. The
grace of Regeneration, by which a new heart is given unto us, and we are
inclined, disposed, and enabled to the operations of a spiritual life. Or,
Secondly, What concerns the better being of a Christian in the managing of
all the actions, and concerns of the spiritual life. This again is divided into
quickening grace, strengthening Grace, and consolatory 1.
Grace. 1. Quickening grace may either signify that love of God, by which our
Spiritual powers, habits, and inclinations are drawn out into acts. 2. Or that
whereby a Soul is made more active and lively, and free in the service of God,
which removes those difficulties, that heaviness, and deadness, and dullness,
which we often find upon our Souls as to spiritual things. For this you read
David so often praying in Psalm. 119.

2.
Strengthening grace, which is the love of God showed to the Soul in further
inabling it both to its spiritual actions, and to the managing of the good
fight against the World, the Flesh and the Devil; the Apostle calls it a
being strengthened with might in the inward Man; of this Saint Paul speaks,
Phil. 3. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

3.
Consolatory grace, which signifies the love of God shining upon the Soul,
that is sad, and heavy, refreshing it either from the view, and sense of the
truth of its gracious habits, or from the sealings of some promise, giving the
Soul an assurance, or full persuasion of the love of God. David cries out,
when will thou comfort me? Thus you see the variety of gracious dispensations,
the love of God is one as it is in him as the fountain, but it divides itself
into several streams, as it shines upon diverse Souls, or the same Soul
oft-times in differing circumstances, or with respect to diverse wants which our
Souls have.

Secondly, As there is variety in the dispensations of grace, so grace
discovers itself in various acts. Divines say that the grace of Justification,
so far as it respects the Souls State, varieth not. Nor is repeated, but the
acts of grace referring to our justified estate, they are repeated. God does
not pardon sin before it is committed, but repeateth his gracious act in
pardoning, as the Soul repeateth its transgressions.

Now this is that which I say in this proposition, that the Spouse of Christ,
the truly gracious Soul is not satisfied with any single dispensation of grace,
nor with a single act, it desires not only the first grace, but further grace,
not only the grace of Justification, but the grace of regeneration also, not
only gracious habits, but that it may be excited, and quickened to spiritual
actions, not only that it may do them, but that it may do them with some
strength and vigor, with some life, and cheerfulness, it desires renewed acts
of pardon, renewed influences of spiritual strength and life. Let us but a
little see it in the great instance of David the man according to Gods own
heart, we shall find him speaking to our purpose in several Psalms, Psalm. 19.
13. Cleanse thou me from secret faults, there he beggeth for pardoning love,
will this satisfy this holy man? will he think it enough if God pardons his
Sin? see what follows in that Psalm; Keep back thy Servant from presumptuous
sins, let them not have dominion over me; he must have strengthening as well as
pardoning grace, he desires to be freed from the commanding, as well as from
the condemning power of Sins. Look into the 51 Psalm (a Psalm much spent in
petitions for special grace) v. 7. He prays for pardon. Purge me with hyssop
and I shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter than the Snow, he speaks in
an old Testament phrase, with reference to the Levitical rites. Christ speaks
to Peter, Joh. 13. much in the same dialect, Except I wash thee, thou can
have no part in me. But the meaning is pardon me, remove the guilt of my sin
from me; but is this enough for this holy Man? Is this all that he asks of
God. No, v. 8. Make me to hear the voice of Joy and Gladness, that the Bones
which thou have broken may rejoice. There he prays for Consolatory Grace:
Well, will this yet satisfy the thirst of this holy Man? No, he must also have
a renewed Heart, a right Spirit. The Spirit of God resting upon him, dwelling
and abiding in him: A right Heart as well as a righteous Heart, v. 10. Create
in me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. v. 11, 12. Take
not thy holy Spirit from me. Uphold me with thy free Spirit. He must not only
be set right in Gods way, but he must be kept right, and upheld in it. Look
upon him in that 119 Psalm, Psalm. 119. 28. Strengthen me according to thy Word.
The Lord had given him the Pardon of his Sin, he had given him Wisdom, so as he
tells us in that Psalm, he was become wiser than his Teachers. God had
sanctified Affliction to him, so as by it he had learned to keep Gods Statutes.
The Lord had given him an heart to love his Law, to make it his Meditation
night and day, yet he cries, Strengthen me O Lord: And again, v. 25. Quicken me
in thy way, Quicken me after thy Loving Kindness. v. 4. O Quicken me in thy
Righteousness. Has he enough yet? No; one thing he yet wants, v. 42. Mine Eyes
fail for thy Word, when will thou comfort me? There is hardly any Dispensation
of Grace which we do not find David in that Psalm pleading with God for. This
one instance of David is enough to show you the temper of every Soul, which
has but once tasted how good the Lord is. Nor indeed can it be otherwise:

1.
If we consider the Beauty and excellency which appears to such a Soul in
every Dispensation of Grace. The Spouse says of Christ in another part of this
Song, He is altogether lovely. There is no part of Christ which is not in
itself lovely; he is the brightness of his Fathers Glory, the fullness of the
God Head dwells in him bodily: As every Beam of the Sun, every Emanation of
that Body of Light is lovely to him whose Eyes are open to discern it: So every
Beam of the Sun of Righteousness, every Emanation of his Love must necessarily
be lovely to the Soul that has its senses exercised to discern betwixt good
and evil. All Beauty is attractive; whatsoever appears to our Souls lovely
and beautiful, appears also desirable. But this is not all, though Beauty and
Comeliness be attractive, and allures our Souls into an earnest desire after
it, yet profit is more.

2.
Secondly, There is no Dispensation of Divine Grace, but suiteth some great
want of the Soul. It is the same Reason that I gave you why the least of Christ
is so precious: Because the least of his Grace is suited to some great want of
our Souls. What I there applied to the least of his Love, I here apply to the
varieties of his gracious dispensations, and indeed reasonably; for there would
be no variety in grace, if there were not a variety of defects and wants, and
emptinesses in our Souls; that which distinguishes divine grace, is our
various wants and necessities, and we can as naturally not desire a supply for
our own discerned defects and wants, as we cannot desire various emanations of
divine love, suited to the supply of them. Nature prompteth us to desire a
supply for every craving of our Souls. The Soul is sensible that it daily
sins, and cannot but desire pardoning grace, and say unto God every day,
Forgive us our debts; it is sensible, that it wants purity and holiness, and
therefore cannot but desire a right Spirit. Its wants are many, and it
therefore desires various dispensations of grace to supply them; they are
daily renewing, therefore it desires repeated acts of grace to be renewed also.

3.
A third reason lies in the Concatenation of grace. The Philosopher says,
Virtutes sunt Concatenatae, that all virtues are chained together, and no man
is truly virtuous, but has in him the habits of all Virtue, they make Virtue
to lie in the reduction of the whole Soul, to the rule, guidance, and conduct
of reason. I am sure Gratiae sunt concatenatae, the Graces of Gods Spirit, are
like Pearl stringed together, and that upon a double account: 1. With respect
to themselves. 2. With respect to our sense, and apprehension. Pardoning grace
never goes without renewing and regenerating grace. God never says to any
Soul. Thy Sins are forgiven, but he adds, sin no more. The Grace of
Consolation never goes without the Grace of Sanctification. The Grace of
Regeneration is always attended with some degrees of that Grace which
strengthens, and quickneth the Soul unto its Spiritual work and duty. 2. As
to our sense of it. The Grace of God being as I have before said, nothing else
but the Love of God freely shining upon us, with respect to our several
circumstances, and diversified wants; the Soul is prone from the want of a
supply as to one thing to suspect its want of all. Hence it is that it
suspecteth the want of the love of God in the whole, from its sense of the want
of it in part. Indeed this oft-times is the error of a Soul that is truly
gracious, from its not distinguishing betwixt those things that are necessary
to Eternal life and Salvation, and those influences that are merely
accommodating, and tending to the better being of the spiritual life, the
dispensations of which are not merely directed from the divine love, but from
the divine wisdom, and sometimes are withheld from the wisdom of God, by which
he directs his own motions to their ends. Hence as Gideon, when the Angel
came to him, and said, The Lord is with thee, O thou mighty man of valor,
replied. If the Lord be with us, why am I thus? So the Soul thirsting after the
love of God, if any go about to persuade it, under its sadness, and dejections
under the sense of its weakness as to spiritual duties, or dullness, and
heaviness in the performance of them, that yet the love of God is toward it, it
has a truth of Grace, it cries out, If God loved me, why am I thus? I am weak,
why am I not strengthened, or my Soul is dull, and dead, and heavy, why am I
not quickened? Or I am sad, and dejected, if God loved me, why am I not
comforted? The Soul of a believer is apt to conceive, that because Love is one
in God, therefore it (...) be a sharer in his love, while it wants any one
aspect of it, (...) might suite its spiritual wants.

4.
Another reason may be, the possibility which the Soul, apprehends of obtaining
all grace. Let a thing appear to us never so, beautiful, never so useful, yet
if we lie under an apprehension of its impossibility to obtain it, this
moderateth its desires after if;nay extinguisheth them; for our Reason forbids
our Wills to move after things which we apprehend not possible to be obtained:
But such is the goodness of God toward us, that there is no dispensation of
his love, but he has somewhere or other promised and revealed to us as
possible to be obtained by us. Now good apprehended possible to be obtained by
us, is the proper object of the desires of our Souls, we are told, that it has
pleased the father, that in Christ all fullness should dwell, And that the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, 1 Col. 19. 2 Col. 12. and of his
fullness (says the Evangelist Joh. 1. 16.) We have all received grace for
grace. To pass by other interpretations of that (...) some understand, Grace
suited to all that Grace which is in Christ. There is no habit of Grace in
Christ suited to our human nature and state, but believers may receive
something from him in proportion to it. There is no love of God to Christ,
which fitteth us, or may fit us in our proportions, but we may receive. Nay
there is no love of God which flows from the fullness of the Divine Nature, of
which we are capable, but the believer may receive. For says the Apostle, the
Fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him (...) bodily. In him as our mediator, that
he might communicate to those that are the members of his body, and that I take
to be the properest sense of those words, Of his fullness, that is, of the
fullness of the Godhead, which dwelt in him as Mediator, and dwelt in him, so
as that he could communicate it to those that believed in him. Hence he tells
us, that all power was given unto him both in Heaven and Earth, and that the
Son of Man had power upon Earth to forgive Sins, and that God had given unto
him Eternal life, that he might give it to whomsoever he pleased, so as the
Soul apprehends all grace, not only beautiful and lovely, but also as possible
to be obtained by it from Christ, and having such apprehensions of it conjoined
with its beforementioned apprehensions of the beauty and excellency of it, and
the usefulness of it, with respect to the various; and renewing wants of the
Soul, it must necessarily desire it.

Use 1.
This notion may (as the other which I have handled) show you (...) difference
betwixt the desires of the Hypocrite, and those of the true Child of God after
Grace. There may be some desires after Grace in Souls, in whom there is no true
and real change of heart, but they are either terminated, 1. In the common
gifts and graces of the Spirit. Or 2. in the Comfortable manifestations of it.
3. Or (at furthest) in some particular dispensations of it.

1.
The common gifts and graces of the Spirit of God, may be desired by those in
whom the love of God does not dwell. By common gifts, I mean knowledge,
utterance, an ability to pray, to discourse of the things of God, etc. And the
reason is, because these may serve a double end, which an Hypocrite may have.
1. His honor, and credit, and reputation in the world. Common gifts and graces
may give Men and Women a great name in the Church of God, though they will give
a Man no place in the Kingdom of God. They may (especially as times may go)
much serve a man both as to his lust of gain and covetousness, and also as to
his lust of Ambition, and seeking after the honor which is from men, and serve
him to appear as some body in the world, and to make him pass for a great
Professor, and help him to preferments also in the Church, and so serve his
Belly. You have an eminent instance of this in Simon Magus, Acts 8. 9. of whom
it is said, That he used Sorcery, and bewitched the People of Samaria, giving
out himself to be some great one. v. 13. He beheld the signs, and miracles that
were done; this Man, now (to augment his reputation, and probably that he might
be in a capacity to get more money than he had been able to get by his tricks of
Hocus Pocus, and diabolical Arts) seeing the Apostles conveying the Holy Ghost
to their Disciples, by their laying on of hands, he did not only desire the
graces of the Spirit thus far, but offered them money, for that power, that upon
whomsoever he laid his hands, they also might receive the Holy Ghost. There is
no doubt but whatsoever may promove the lusts of an Hypocrites heart, may be
the object of his desire. Now as a National knowledge of the things of God, or
the common practical gifts and graces of the Spirit, may serve a man as to his
profit and advantage, or as to his honor and reputation, so they mightily
gratify the lusts of an Hypocrites heart, who does all to be seen of Men, and
whose utmost design is but to glory in appearance, and in the praise of Men.
Besides this, they may also serve him very far in the quieting of his natural
conscience. Natural light discovering to us that there is a God does also show
us that there is some homage due to him, and hence arises a natural obligation
upon men to be doing something in discharge of this homage, to which these
common gifts are subservient. The like might be said of moral habits, (which
are but common grace) men that are (...) touched with the love of God, or
desire to please him, may yet see a beauty, and a profit too, in a moral, just
and righteous conversation, and desire so much grace as may keep him from the
scandal, and reproach of the world, and from the ruining of himself, and Family
or Relations.

2.
Nay Secondly, his desires may extend to the consolatory manifestations of the
love of God, the pardon of his sins, and the sense of that pardon; what should
hinder? In a time when a Prince is free of his pardons, it is not impossible
that some of his Subjects may take out their pardons that it may be, have no
great sense or apprehension that they stand in need of them. Hypocrites that
live within the compass of the Church of God, are often hearing of sin, and the
wrath of God due to sin, to Original sin, to Actual Sins, to Sins of Omission
and Negligence as well as those of Commission, and Presumption; they also hear
daily proclamations of Gods grace, and readiness to forgive, what should hinder
but that they ex abundanti cautela, tho they be not touched with any great
sense of sin, tho they have some good opinion of their own Righteousness may
yet earnestly desire to know their iniquities are forgiven, and that the
Righteousness of Christ might be imputed to them also, that they may know, that
they also shall another day stand righteous before God.

3.
Nor do I see any reason why they may not go one step further, and passionatly
desire some strengthening and assisting grace, against some particular lusts.
Some extravagant desires or lusts of the heart of man do not only expose him to
the wrath of God in another world, but to the wrath of God manifested in this
life. Such now as the lusts of the flesh, drunkenness etc. Experience tells us
that the pursuit of these ruins men's healths, estates, reputations; whatsoever
is desirable to us in this life and concerning such extravagant motions of our
affections and passions, as have these issues which are contrary to the natural
desires of life and health, and prosperity in the world; I cannot tell any
reason but that an hypocrite may sincerly, desire of God strength against them.
But now in this stands the child of God distinguished from all hypocrites; In
his desire after all grace, not this or that kiss but every kiss of Christ's
mouth, every manifestation of the love of God to a soul, particularly such
manifestations of Gods love, as serve not at all to gratify any desires of the
flesh whether respecting gain and profit, or honor and reputation in the
^^rld, but such as serve to make the soul more holy, and spiritual, (...) like
to God, more compliant with the will of God in all things; the hypocrite
desires influences of grace, not that he might glorify God but merely that he
might serve a turn.

Use 2.
Secondly, This discourse will let us see The great difference betwixt the
desires that are found in the child of God after Grace; and those desires which
may be found in him after the things of the world. The best of Gods people are
compositions of soul and body, as they have a spiritual part which has its
desires and cravings, so they have the cravings of the flesh also; their
outward necessities justify in them some desires of the things of this life,
but now these desires are limited, If God will be with me says Jacob, and will
keep me in the way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put
on, so that I come again to my fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be
my God, Genesis 28. 20, 21. Two things (says Agur Prove. 30. 7.) have I required
of thee, deny me not them before I die. Remove far from me vanity, and lies,
give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me. The
child of God is so far from desiring abundance of the world, that he often
prays against it. He would not be full lest (as Agur expresses himself v.
9.) he should deny God and say who is the Lord? he would not be wholly empty,
lest being poor he should steal and take the name of God in vain. As to grace
he is like the horseleaches daughters still crying, give, give. But for the
world if he has food convenient for him, he says to all the world as Esau
once to Jacob. I have enough my Brother, I have enough, keep that thou have
unto thy self. No child of God covets all the world. His conversation is as to
it without covetousness, if he has but Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, if
he can but make a competent provision for his family, and have but something to
give to them that want, he blesses God he has enough; but as to grace, he may
be added as a fifth thing to those four which Solomon Speaks of which never say
they have enough. Nor indeed do I know two worser evidences against any soul,
than never to think it has enough of the world, and yet to be satisfied with
any measures of grace. I must confess I have been often troubled to see those
whom I should otherwise have judged excellent Christians so fond of the
enjoyments of this world, and so unsatisfyed when the providence of God has
crossed them in those desires and expectations. I wish I could see equal
pantings in the souls of some who yet would be thought great professors, after
Christ's kisses, as I often see in them after the kisses of the world. But alas
that is impossible that nail would drive out the other, Sirs, that is a
dreadful text which you have, 1. John 2. 15. Love not the world, neither the
things of the world: If any man love the world, the love of the father is not
in him. The world is a thing that may be touched with a Saints hands, and
moderately used for his necessities, but it must not be loved, it must have no
place in the Child of Gods Heart. What shall we say then to such Professors, as
are much more fond of sensual satisfactions to gratify their sensitive
appetite, than they are of the Grace of God to mortify that appetite, to
sublimate their affections, subjugate their passions, to learn them in all
Estates to be content to submit their wills unto the will of God: How dwells
the love of Christ in such Souls as are more fond of the worlds kisses than of
his?

Use 3d.
But I shall shut up this discourse with a word of Exhortation, persuading you
to speak after the Spouse in my Text, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
Mouth. Cease not till you have brought up your hearts to this frame, that they
cannot be satisfied without something of Christ's fullness, without some tastes of
all the riches of Grace; whatsoever I have given you as the reasons of this
truth, may be used by you as arguments in the case. There Is no kiss of Christ,
no Beam of Grace, but has its lightsomness, and glory in it. No dispensation
of Grace but is suited to some eminent want of the Soul, if you discern it not,
the fault is in your Eyes, you do not understand the cases of your own Souls so
well as you ought to do, it would be no Grace, no Love, if it were not
proportioned to some want in us. It will be an hard thing for you to satisfy
your Souls in the having any truth of Grace, if you find not your Souls
thirsting after every manifestation of it. There is no influence of Grace, but
is possible to be obtained. There is a fullness of the Godhead in Christ
considered as your Mediator, and he is therefore full, that we might drink
abundantly of his fullness, but to all these before enlarged upon, I shall add
two.

1.
It is an evidence of true Grace to be thirsty after all Grace. That Soul
loves not Christ truly that does not desire that he should love it fully. True
love is satisfied with nothing less than all of the Beloved, and renders the
Soul jealous presently, if it wants but one good look bestowed upon another.

2.
Secondly, The more thou have of Grace, the more thou will doubtless have of
Glory. I know some question whether there shall be any degrees of glory, for my
own part I see little reason to question it; doubtless those that lie most in
Christ's Bosom here, shall sit nearest him upon his Throne hereafter. I shall
shut up my discourse with four or five directions in this case.

1.
First, Labor to understand the various emanations of special, and
distinguishing Grace, how many ways the Sun of Righteousness may shine upon
Souls with healing in his Wings. I am afraid many talk of Grace, special
distinguishing Grace, who do not understand it as they ought to do. Study to
understand Christ's saving looks upon Souls, and to distinguish them from other
looks, which have no such saving virtue, and evidence in them. Christ's saving
looks upon Souls, are either such as evidence pardon of Sin, or contribute to
the change of the heart in first or further degrees of holiness: Or comforting
us with the view of our own sincerity, take a right notion of Christ's kisses.

2.
Be sure in thy desires of further Grace thou forgettest not to be thankful for
what thou have, the least token of love for good to thy Soul is more worth than
the world, there is nothing little in Grace. I before observed to you the
passions of some Christians, who are ready to overlook all that God has done
for their Souls, if they want some particular dispensation of Grace, which
their hearts are set upon.

3.
Make use of what thou have. To him that has shall be given. It is a saying
which our Savior applies to the parable of the sower, Mat. 13. 12. Luke 8.
18. and to the parable of the Talents, Mat. 25. 29. In the two first places the
meaning may be: To him that has in actual possession, so it may be conceived
as a promise of further grace to those who have any thing of the truth of
grace, but in the 25. Mat. 29. it is plainly to be understood of such as make
use of, and improve what they have, for it is spoken with reference to those
Servants that had ten Talents, and had gained other ten, and five talents, and
had gained other five.

4.
In thy desires of more Grace distinguish betwixt necessary and comfortable
influences betwixt manifestations of the Spirit given thee to profit withal,
and such as are given thee to make thy life more easy, and cheerful, the first
thou may beg more absolutely, and be as earnest for them as thou will. The
latter must be asked with more explicit submission to the will of God, they
being such as are not only not necessary to thy glorifying of God, under all
circumstances, but not necessary to the eternal Salvation of thy Soul, and such
for which the wisdom of God may see more reason under some circumstances to
withold from thee, and that in order to thy edification and improvement in
holiness. As to such influences, though thou ought to desire them, and to
pray for them, yet thou ought also to be content to wait for them. David did
so: His Eyes failed, while he said; When will thou comfort me?

5.
Wait upon God in all his own institutions. The Ordinances of God are usually
called means of Grace, because they are usually made use of by God, as means
in, and by which he communicates his Grace in the several influences of it to
our Souls. These Ordinances are the Word, Sacrament, and Prayer. The first
Grace is usually dispensed to us upon reading, or hearing the Word of God, and
so is further Grace also. Therefore the Apostle Peter commands us to desire the
sincere Milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby. I had (says David)
perished in my affliction, if thy Word had not been my delight. The Law of the
Lord (says David) is perfect, converting the Soul, the Testimony of the Lor d
is sure, making wise the simple, the Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing
the heart, the Commandment of the Lord is pure inlightning the Eyes, Psalm. 19.
6. 7. Christ's love is a thing different from the Word, but it is shown to the
Soul in the use of the Word. Infinite instances might be given you of Christ's
kissing Souls, (manifesting his special love to Souls, is it which I mean by
it) in the reading, and especially in the hearing of the Word; there it is,
that is, in the use of that, that he usually speaks to the hearts of Men and
Women, hence the Apostle tells us, that the holy Scriptures are able to make
the Man of God wise to Salvation, and are profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instructions in righteousness: Yea, and for patience and
comfort too, Romans 15. 4. For whatsoever things were written before, were
written for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. The Sacrament that is another mean, the Sacramental
believing, eating of the Bread and Wine, is an eating of the flesh, and a
drinking of the Blood of Christ, a feeding upon all Christ's fullness as
Mediator. Prayer is a mean of all Grace, whatsoever God has promised in a way
of Grace, is all promised upon this condition, That he will for it be inquired
of by his People.

5.
Walk humbly and uprightly before God. The humble he will teach, (says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 25.) and to the humble he will give more Grace, Ja. 4. 6. 1
Pet. 5. 5. he dwells with those that are of a contrite and humble Spirit, to
revive the Spirits of the humble, and the hearts of those that are contrite,
and for the upright he has told us, that he will withold from them no good
thing. But this is enough to have also spoken to this Proposition. There is
another term in the petition of the Text. which I shall take notice of, she
prays not only that her beloved would kiss her, and that not with one but
many kisses, but she adds of his Mouth. But of that hereafter.

Sermon V.
Canticles 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.

I Told you in the close of my last diseourse that I should not yet leave this
Text, because of the last words [ -- of his Mouth;] which we must either be
allowed as a Pleonasme, and superfluous, or to contain in them yet some further
spiritual Instruction. The Jews say there is not the least tittle of the Law,
upon which great things do not depend; nor do I fancy the allowing of more
Pleonasms in holy writ, than must necessarily be allowed. I shall therefore
take notice of what Origin and Beza, and diverse others have before me noted
from the addition of these words; That the believing Soul thirsts after a
communion with Christ in his Word. Mr. Ainsworth taking special notice of the
term kisses, understands the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is the Word of
Reconciliation, as kisses are amoris and reconciliationis symbola, the tokens
of love, and reconciliation: I am sure the notion is in itself true, whether
the sense of this Text or no. The Law works Wrath, (faith the Apostle) the
Doctrine of the Gospel alone speaks love, and peace, Christ's Spouse here (say
some interpreters) desires his manifestation in the Flesh, and the publication
of the Doctrine of the Gospel, together with the comfortable application of
those Doctrines to her conscience. I am sure there is a truth in that. Let me
therefore a little make use of their notion. Take this for the Proposition:

Prop. It is of the nature of a believing Soul to thirst after a communion with
Christ in his Word, his Gospel especially, and the teachings of his Spirit in
and by that.

I here join two of those propositions together, which I distinguished upon the
opening of the words. She desires the kisses of his Mouth. 2. That he should
kiss her with the kisses of his Mouth. This Proposition will offer me an
opportunity to discourse to you, the affection of the believing Soul, to the
words of Christ, both in the more external, and more spiritual, and internal
teachings and ministrations of it.

The words of the Gospel are the words of Christ, the kisses of his mouth,
whether they be applied, and set home to the particular conscience yea or no.
The ministration of the Gospel is in itself exceeding glorious: Therein (says
the Apostle,) is the Righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith. Romans 1.
17. Therein in Gods way of Salvation revealed to lost sinners, and by it life
and immortality are brought to light. Now this word of God is to be considered;

1.
As written for our Instruction. For says the Apostle, Romans 15. 4. whatsoever
things were written before, were written for our learning, that we through
patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

2.
As preached. So it is the Ordinance of God for our faith, and therefore called
The word of Faith, Sanctification, Consolation and Eternal Salvation, for
indeed the supply of all the spiritual wants and necessities of our Souls.
Hence there are three ways by which our Souls have a communion with God in his
Word: Reading, Hearing, and Meditation.

1.
Reading is one means by which we come to the knowledge of the will of God in
his Word. The King of Israel was commanded to read in the Book of Gods Law all
the days of his life, that he might learn to keep the Law of his God, and there
is a blessing pronounced to him that reads. Indeed he that reads the word
as it lies before us in our Bibles has this advantage, that he is sure what
is there plain to his understanding, is the undoubted, pure Word of God; and
while a man reads the Scriptures he is but repeating of Gods Word to his own
soul, or hearing God immediately speaking to him.

2.
Hearing the word preached is another means of communion with God in his Word.
This is an Ordinance of God, and such a one, as he honors with being the
great means of calling, and saving such as he has ordained to life: So as in
that ordinance a soul has an opportunity to meet God, to draw nigh unto him,
to hear him speak unto it. We must take heed that we do not think, that all
which we hear out of pulpits is spoken by God; God no further speaks by the
Minister, than the Minister keeps unto his Text, and speaks according to
the Scriptures, either by way of interpretation, or application. And therefore
every good Christian, is to search the Scriptures whether what their Preachers
deliver be consonant to them. Those noble Bereans mentioned Acts. 17. did so
when St. Paul was the Preacher, and are commended for it, The Scriptures are to
be judged by no other rule, but Sermons are to be measured by the holy
Scriptures. No man has communion with God by hearing, further than so far as
that is consonant to the will of God which he hears. But admitting the
Minister of Christ answers his name and Office, and faithfully reveals, and
applies the will of God, while we hear we have communion with God; God
communicates his holy will unto us, and we communicate with him by an obedient
Ear who has commanded us to hear that our souls may live.

5.
A third way is by Meditation. This is an act of our inward man standing upon
the things which we have read or heard, as necessary to the souls spiritual
nourishment, as Digestion is to the nourishment of our bodies by what is their
proper food; a duty much practiced by David Psalm. 119. 97, 99. And a good man
is described by it. Psalm. 1. 3. He meditateth in the law of the Lord night and
day. By this, the soul does not only fasten the word of God upon it self but it
also dives deeper into the depths of it. I say this communion with God in his
word is very desirable to the spouse of Christ. I added his gospel especially.

The Word of God in the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament is made up
of several parts.

1.
There is in it sacred history; no unuseful part of holy Writ, it being that
which more than any other acquainteth us with Gods way of of providence with
his people of old.

2,
You have in it many Moral Instructions, and Precepts of Christianity and
Godliness, an admirable part of Scripture, that which makes the holy Scriptures
to be what no other book in the world is, a light to our feet, and lanthorn to
our paths. Showing us what we are to do, what to decline and avoid but yet
these are not properly called Gospel doctrines.

3.
You have in it many Prophesies, or predictions of what God intended to do in
the world, most of which are fulfilled; some we yet live in the expectations of.

4.
You have also in it many terrible threats, and curses, and many woes denounced
against the violaters of the law of God; these are excellent portions of holy
Writ, to keep your souls in awe and make us afraid of sinning against God, but
these are not properly Gospel Doctrines but properly belong to the Law which
declares and works wrath.

5.
You have also in those sacred books, many declarations of the good will, and
love of God to poor lost Sinners declared in, and through Jesus Christ. You
have an historical part of the Gospel, declaring what Christ has done, and
Suffered for us, a declarative and promissory part, proclaiming Salvation to
poor lost creatures, and promising life and Salvation, and all grace to some
poor undone sinners, promises for the conferring, and increase of grace. These
and such like, I principally understand by Gospel Doctrines. The Doctrine of
Gods free grace in the pardoning of sin, and the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to the soul. Doctrines that reveal Christ and tend to bring the
soul to Christ, or direct the soul in walking with him. Now I say tho the
believing soul values every line of holy Writ, and has a reverence for the
whole Word of God, and desires a communion with God in reading, and hearing and
meditating in every part of his revealed will, yet it has a special thirst
after those portions of it which contain these Revelations: Other parts are
sweet but these are sweeter than the Honey and the Honeycomb. No portions of
Scripture are like these to the believer. Every verse in the book of God is a
Star but as Stars differ one from another in glory, so do the Revelations of
the will of God in our apprehensionsa, s more suited to our necessities. For
the proof of the proposition: There is so much reason for it, that were it not
that it is fit your Faith (for the help of which the Ministry is ordained)
should not stand in the wisdom of men but in the power of God, I might for bear
the use of any Scripture texts in the case. The World was many hundred years
old before there was any written Word of God, (of which we have any record.)
The first that we read of was the Book of the Law which the King of Israel was
commanded to have always before him and to read therein all the days of his
life. Saul was the first King of Israel; he was a wicked man and regarded not
the divine Law. The next was David (the man according to Gods own heart.) See
his Affection to the word Superlatively expressed Psalm 19. 7, 8, 9, 10. 11. The
Law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul, the Testimony of the Lord is
sure making wise the simple, the Statutes of the Lord are right rejoicing the
heart, the Commandment of the Lord is pure enlightening the Eyes. The Judgments
of the Lord are true and righteous altogether; more to be desired are they than
gold, yea than much fine gold, sweeter also than the honey and the Honeycomb.
Psalm. 119. 14, 15, 16. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much
as in all riches, I will meditate in thy precepts and have respect unto thy
ways, I will delight my self in thy statutes, v. 97. Oh! how I love thy law, it
is my meditation night and day. Read over that excellent Psalm at your leisure,
you will find in it a strange variety of expressions setting out David's value
of, and thirst after the Word of the Lord. I had (says he in one passage)
perished in my affliction, if thy Word had not been my delight. For the Word of
God as delivered by Ministers, you shall all along the History of the Scripture
observe, you read not of one good King of Judah and Israel, but they were very
desircus in all cases of consulting with the Prophets of the Lord; and no doubt
but the reading the Law, and the Exposition of it in the Sanctuary, was the
reason why David, Psalm. 42. Psalm. 63. and Psalm 84 so passionately bewailed his
being banished from it. In short, look through all the New Testament, you shall
find no company of Believers but by some Expressions or other declaring their
Zeal for, and fondness of the Word of God. And the same Spirit continued in
gracious Souls after the times that the Scripture makes mention of. I remember
Hierom tells us of a good woman, whom he says he could never find without a
Bible in her hand; and Mr. Fox in his Martyrology tells us a story of Three
Maids (in Lincolnshire, if I remember right) who sold their Estates in a time
of Persecution to buy a few Leaves of the Bible. It were infinite to tell you
the instances we have in Ecclesiastical History, of the great thirst after, and
delight in the Word of God, which good people have expressed. What need we any
further Instance than what the Experience of our own Age does afford? How
naturally do Souls born again, as new born Babes, desire the sincere Milk of
the Word of God? It is true some Hypocrites (especially in times when Religion
is in credit and reputation) may lay hold of the Skirts of a Jew, and say, We
will go with you: I mean, may show some fondness of hearing and reading the
Word; but no Child of God, no regenerate man, but is indeed thirsty of it. So
that as it was said of Paul, as soon as he was converted, Behold he prays; so
it may be said of every man and woman, let them before have been never so
loose, and vain, and careless as to reading and hearing the Word; Behold he
reads, or Behold he hears. Nor indeed is it possible it should be otherwise.

1.
If we consider first That this is the Will of God concerning every Soul. The
Soul is unchanged till it be in some degree willing and obed ent. So as what
St. Paul spoke more openly, he says to God though more privately, Lord what
will thou have me to do? Now this is one of the first things that God calls
such a Soul to do. Hear, (says God) and your Souls shall live. As God said to
Paul, Go into the City, and it shall be told thee what thou should do. So God
says unto the changed Soul, Go to Church, and hear my Word, and go and read in
my Word, and there it shall be told thee what thou should do. Augustine tells
us a story, that being in a great Agony of Spirit, and not knowing what to do,
he heard a voice as out of an inward Room, saying, Toll and lege, Take up and
read. The Soul in this does but conform himself to an impression that is made
by the Spirit upon his heart, and is coaevous to the hour of his New Birth; and
this you shall see exemplified not in this or that particular Soul, but in
every Soul born of God. The Infant is not more naturally disposed to suck the
breasts of the Mother or Nurse, than such a Soul is disposed to read, and hear
the Word of God from the impression of the holy Spirit of God upon it in the
first hour of its Conversion.

4.
Nor is any thing more reasonable than such an impression, if we consider God's
Ordination of his Word as the pabulum animae, the food and nourishment of the
new born Soul. 1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born Babes, desire the sincere Milk of the
Word, that you may grow thereby. And for this very reason this thirst after,
and delight in the Word of God, never goes out of a sanctified heart; for the
Word is the proper nourishment of the Soul in all states; it is not only Milk
for Babes, but Meat for stronger ones. By these things men live, says
Hezekiah. The just shall live by Faith, says the Prophet. The Word is the
object of this Faith. You shall observe that the God of Nature has planted in
most sensitive creatures a knowledge of their proper food, and an appetite or
desire to it. The God of Grace has given the renewed Soul a knowledge of its
proper food too, and created in it an appetite to it, so as no soul is born
again without a knowledge of the Word, as that by which it is to live, or an
appetite to it. Nay, it is not only necessary to uphold the Spiritual Being of
the the Soul, but to all the purposes of its well-being. Such a Soul finds
the Word an inexhaustible Fountain, a large Storehouse, a Shop that has a
Salve for every Sore, a Medicine for every Distemper: Hence indeed it is
morally impossible that a regenerate Soul should not value the kisses of
Christ's mouth: The Breath of Christ is comforting to those that are sad;
strengthening to those that are weak; quickening to those that are dull; an
healing to all the Soul's Diseases: and there are infinite Records of the Cures
done by it, both in Scripture, and in all Ecclesiastical Story, and in all
Experience. A Christian converted, cannot meet with another, but he or she has
some story to tell them of, some Cure wrought in them by the Word of God. I had
perished, says one, in such an affliction, if the Word had not been my
delight. I had perished, says another, under such a temptation, if such a
Promise had not supported me. O the infinite Cures which the Word of God Read
and Preached has done upon a numberless number of Souls! Look almost into any
Church of God. There are many Souls that were dead in trespasses and sins, and
by the Word were brought to life; many Souls that were dropping into the
bottomless Pit, whom the Word laid hold upon, and saved from it. Here Is a
broken heart, that was bound up by some lines of holy Writ. There Is a tempted
Soul fetched out of the depths of Satan by a Promise in the Word. There hangs a
poor fearful doubting Soul resolved by it, and brought to a settled state. The
Regenerate Soul meets with these Stories in all its new company. And

3.
Thirdly, It has a reason to believe them, because it has had it self a great
Experience of the Virtue of it. The Word (says such a Soul) it is that which
has saved my Soul from Hell. My Soul, my poor Soul, was in a full career to
the Devil, the Word in such a Sermon, in such a Scripture met me, and turned my
face Heavenward; others my companions in sin dropped into the Pit; my foot was
upon the brink of perdition, it is God's mercy I was not ingulphed in Eternal
Misery. God showed me this mercy by his Word; Shall that Word be ever out of
the taste of my Soul? Shall not I wait upon God in the Reading and Hearing of it
as long as I live? Has Christ conveyed his Breath, his Life into my Soul, by
the kisses of his mouth, and shall he not by it convey all things that my
immortal Soul stands in need of? Let others that never tasted the good Word of
the Lord, to whose Souls the Lord never created the fruit of the lips, peace,
peace, undervalue and despise the Word of the Lord, let them undervalue
Scriptures, and despise Prophecyings, and count vain idle Books better to read
in than the Book of God; vain, idle discourses better than lively, Soul-saving
Sermons. I have tasted better things, I know otherwise.

4.
Once more, There appears to the renewed Soul, a beauty and excellency in the
word of God surpassing all other writings of what* nature soever. You shall
observe in the world two or three sorts of People. 1. Some there are, who
indeed hardly deserve the name of rational Creatures, they delight in no fort
of knowledge in nothing of any tendency to ennoble the mind of man, but only in
sensual things; hence they almost hate a Book or any thing which may have any
tendency to adorn and any way ennoble the mind of man. 2. Others have some
delight in knowledge, but it is an airy knowledge of things that are
superfluous, and signify nothing as to the use of man's life, a knowledge of
things only which please the fancy, tickle the senses, furnish the tongue with
discourse for all humors and companies. Romances and Play Books, any Books of
idle discourse, and foolish stories please them, but for the knowledge of such
things, as should ennoble their minds, they have no fancy for it nor any Books,
or discourses that have any tendency to such an end; these are a sort of
titular Christians that are not yet come up to the highest forms of Heathens.
3. There is a third sort of more noble Souls that love Knowledge, and despise
vain and airy knowledge, that islueth in no good and worthy end as to man's
life; but seek such a knowledge, as may make them wife to the rational ends of
the life of man. You shall now never find these men much employing themselves
with reading or hearing of Plays, or reading Romances, they abhor the feeding
of their Souls with Coals, and Dirt, and cheating themselves with lies and
falsehoods, nor debauching their minds with sordid and silthy Books and
discourses, they will be reading Books of H story and Philosophy, which may
serve their Souls as to the most noble ends or life; and indeed such as are
come thus far, are yet but come on to the highest forms of good Pagans. But the
good Christian is got beyond these, he has discerned that God is the greatest
good, and the fruition and enjoyment of God is the fruition of the greatest
good, and that the enjoyment of God, an acquaintance, fellowship, and communion
with him, is more to be desired than all the world besides. Whatsoever Books or
discourses therefore have either in their own nature, or by any ordination of
God, a tendency to bring the Soul of Man to a knowledge of God, to an
acquaintance or communion with God appear to him the best Books, the best
discourses in the world, and this he does by as rational an operation of his
Soul, as a sober Man counts a true History better than a Romance, or a
Lecture of Moral or Natural Philosophy better than a Play, or an ^dle sight.
All flows from his right notion of his chief end, for that being once truly
fixed in the Soul of Man, he measures other things by their tendency, or no
tendency, as means in order to that end. It is because the sensual Man makes
the satisfaction of his senses the and of his life, that he thirsts after merry
Meetings, Balls, and Dances, and Revellings and Chamberings, and Wantonness,
and Books of fine words, and full of filthy, or at best witty discourses, as
the best Book to spend his time in, and discourses to spend his time upon. It
is because the moral Man has fixed upon the ennobling his mind with human
knowledge, and habits of moral virtue, that he despises those things
beforementioned, as contrary to his design, and the main end of his life, and
chooses rather the moral writings of Seneca, Aristotle, Plato, etc. than any
other idle Books to spend his thoughts upon. And it is because the true
Christian has fixed upon the glorifying of God, and the saving of his own
Soul, as the great end of his life that he thirsts after, and has such a
delight in the World of God, and the Interpretation and application of that
(which is that which we call Preaching.) 2. Besides, the Philosopher observes,
that like delights in its like. Look what complexion the Soul is of, such
things it desires, thirsts after, and delights in. Hence the dirty filthy
Soul, where sense, and passion, and corrupt and debauched affections
predominate, covets filthy Books, and filthy discourses, which are but the
issues of Souls of the same complexion with itself, the Soul that is something
cleaner, and has got its passions something more subjugated unto its reason;
delights in, and desires Books and discourses of its own complexion, and
which are the issues of Souls like unto itself. The Spiritual Man being refined
to a further degree and pirch, minding the glory of God, and Spiritual things,
has a thirst after the Word, and Sermons which are the true and faithful
Interpretations, and applications of that word, as being more pure and
Spiritual, and so more like to it in its renewed State, wherein we are
transformed into the likeness of the word* Thy word is pure (says David)
therefore does thy Servant love it, Psalm. 119 140. It is as natural to the
renewed Soul, to thirst after the pure Word of God, and Spiritual discourses
from, and upon it, as it is to an impure, unrenewed Soul to thirst after filthy
Books, obscene discourses, or for the Philosopher, or moral rational man to
desire after, or to delight in Books; or discourses of its own complexion;
especially also if we consider, that as sober moral discourses tend both to
confirm and promove habits of morality, so the Book of God, and Spiritual
discourses upon, and according to it tend to confirm and to promove Spiritual
habits in the Soul.

5.
Lastly. The Souls of believers must needs more especially desire, and delight
in those which are more strictly called Gospel-Doctrines, and discourses
relating to them, because those are they which are suited to the greatest and
most pressing wants of the Soul; those are the Doctrines wherein the Lord
speaks peace and pardon, that contain the words of reconciliation. I create the
fruit of the lips, peace, peace (says God by his Prophet Isaiah.) In the
historical part of Scripture, God speaks instruction in wisdom to his People,
and tells them the course of his Providence in the world in the government of
it both with reference to his People, and to their Enemies. In the law and
preceptive part of Holy Writ, and the threatenings of Holy Scripture, he tells
them their duty, what is his will they should do, and avoid, and what he will
do unto them in case they be disobedient to his Commandments, and do not walk
in his Statutes, and keep his judgments. In the prophetical part of it, so far
as it is but an History of what God has said and done, he confirms them in
their apprehensions and faith of Gods knowledge of future contingencies, and
also concerning his faithfulness. But it is in the Doctrines of the Gospel
alone, that he declares his love to poor Souls in and through the Lord Jesus
Christ, what Christ has done and suffered for the redemption and salvation of
Man, what he is yet ready to do for all such, as truly repent and believe, and
accept of the Mediator. It is in that alone that he offers healing to the
Nations; now every gracious Soul being one who must be supposed to have felt
something of the burden of Sin, and the wrath of God due to Man for Sin, it is
no wonder if the special thirst of such a Soul be after the revelations of
Christ in the Doctrines of the Gospel, as being most suited to the state of a
Soul that is weary, and heavy laden, and seeking for rest, and being wearied in
its own endeavors, and finding none. No wonder if such Sermons, such
Preaching, be most sweet and acceptable unto it, if such portions of Scripture,
such discourses from Scripture be most acceptable, and grateful to it is
thoughts, and most sweet to its meditations, as being such which must deliver
it from the trouble, and uneasiness, which the Law which works wrath has
given to it, finding itself a great transgressor of it. Thus I have doctrinally
discoursed, the hunger of the Soul after the Word of God, and a communion with
God in it by reading, hearing, or meditation, and the reasonableness of this
appetite of the Soul to it. There is yet a more excellent, internal communion
of the Souls communion with God in his Word, which infinitely excels this,
and consequently is the more special object of the renewed Souls Spiritual
hunger, and thirst, to which I shall speak. But I shall first make application
of this discourse.

Use 1. This Notion may help us to take some measures of our Spiritual State,
whether we be the Spouses of Christ yea or no, the Souls desires, or no desires
after communion with God in his Word; its delight or no delight in that piece
of communion with God, will go a great way to determine our Spiritual State,
and how it shall fare with us in the day of Judgment. I am sure negatively it
is a good note. He that has no desire after, no delight in the Word of God
has nothing of God, or Christ in him. And this is evident from all Scripture
experience, and reason also. David's experience is instead of all, though many
more examples might be produced out of Holy Writ. There was never any good King
of Israel or Judah but called for the Law of the Lord, and much desired and
delighted in the Lords Prophets. It is impossible that the Word should have
done any Soul good, and the savor of it not be left upon it, engaging it to
prize and value it so long as it lives. I only except an extraordinary hour of
temptation, in which I have known good Souls, afraid to read, and hear, but
alas they are at that time not themselves, and act not from a free use of their
reason. This reflects sadly,

1.
Upon such as neglect reading the Word. Some indeed cannot read, I know not how
to excuse these, in times and places where they have such plenty of means to
learn. As I think those Parents will be inexcusable before God another day,
that take not care to have their Children, when young, learned to read: So I
think those grown Personswhom their Parents have neglected, inexcusable, who
have not used such means as the Age affords in great plenty, to learn to read,
and can hardly believe that Soul to have any fear of God, or love to God in it,
that does not apply itself to this piece of knowledge. But alas: how many can
read, that hardly take the Bible in their Hands from one end of the week to the
other, Surely we may conclude the Bible never did their Souls good. They cannot
but have heard, that the Lord commanded the King of his People to read in the
Book of the Law all the days of his life. And by Gods order was read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath Day; and can any think himself excused from reading
the word? we cannot be always hearing, nor does so much knowledge come into
our Souls by hearing as may by reading. Am I in none of your bosoms? Is there
not amongst some of you a sad neglect of Reading the Scripture? Let me tell you
it speaks you to have tasted very little, if at all, how good the Lord is.

21.
Secondly, How sadly does this reflect upon those who despise Prophecyings! It
is a dreadful Text, 1. Joh. 4. 6. We are of God: He that knows God hears
us; he that is not of God hears not us. It is true, no Minister of Christ can
say, He is of God, in that strict sense as the Apostles did, whose Calling was
not of men, nor by men, but immediately from God. It is also true, that every
one who talks out of a Pulpit is not of God. Many run whom God never sends, and
you shall easily know them by the message they bring. But every faithful
Minister of Christ, that faithfully opens, and conscienciously applies the
Word of God to Peoples understandings, hearts and consciences, is of God; that
is, he is sent of God; he is the Ordinance of God; and he that knows God,
that has ^^y saving experimental knowledge of God, will hear such a one: If
there be any that despises such Prophesying, he is not of God. Now this men
may do from looseness and profaneness, and this too many are guilty of, and by
it proclaim to the world, that they were never born again of the uncorruptible
Seed of the Word; that they never yet tasted the goodness of God in an
Ordinance. There is another generation that despise Prophecyings, pretending to
the immediate Teachings of the Spirit of God. I shall in my next Discou se (God
willing) show you, that no pious Soul can undervalue the Teachings of the Holy
Spirit, nor think them needless, but he that looks for them, in opposition to
the Teachings of the Word of God, or otherwise than by, and in the Teachings of
the Word, is ignoranr, knowing nothing. The Spirit brings to our remembrance
the things which we have heard of God. I never yet knew a pious Soul that du^st
slight Reading, or powerful Preaching. I have indeed known Religious Souls
neglect and despise some men's little jinglings of words in Pulpits, flaunts of
Rhetoric, and playing with words, or disgorging their malice and passion, (and
they deserve to be despised and abhorred of all;) but I never yet knew that
pious Soul that did not hunger after the Preaching of Jesus Christ, in a plain,
Scriptural, powerful manner. I would say to any that pretend to despise
Sermons, pretending to the Teachings of the Spirit immediately, as Paul spoke
to the Galatians, Gal. 3. 2. This would I learn of you; Received you the Spirit
by the Works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? So say I, you pretend to
some change of heart, to a Receiving of the Spirit: Received you the Spirit by
an immediate afflatus or impression, or by the Hearing of the Word? Besides,
how shall the impressions of the Spirit be known, tried, or judged, but by the
Word? for St. John has taught us, 1 John 4. 1. That every Spirit is not to be
believed. And the Apostle warns the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2. 2. not to be
shaken in mind, troubled or deceived, by Spirit, nor by Word, nor by Letter.

I shall shut up this Discourse with a word of Exhortation: Which of us is
there who has not an ambition to be the Lamb's Wife, and to be thought the
Spouse of Christ? Evidence then your selves to be such by your hunger after a
communion with God in his Word, by your much Reading, much Hearing, by your
meditating in the Law of the Lord night and day. For the written Word, you have
no plea to the contrary, no excuse for the Word Preached; I wish Christians had
more general encouragement. We have too much of of the word of man in Pulpits,
too little of the Word of God; and as it is in Trade, the false and corrupt
making of Wares, depretiates the Commodity, and brings it out of esteem with
such as abhor to be cheated: So the abundance of false Preaching, by which I
mean, not only Preaching of unsound Notions, but Preaching vain Philosophy,
idle Speculations, turning Sermons into Harangues of Oratory: In short,
whatsoever is not intelligible Scriptural Preaching, with a true design to show
men the way of Salvation, and to direct them into it, and in it: I call this
false Preaching: We have so much of this, that it has brought a discredit upon
the Ordinance. I would have you, as our Savior directs, Take heed what you
hear, and how you hear, and that will oblige you to take heed whom you hear.
But withal, Take heed that you hear; for God has told you, that Faith comes
by hearing: He has said, Hear, and your Souls shall live: And blessed be God
he has not left us without some that Preach Jesus Christ and him crucified,
and desire to know nothing else amongst people. I cannot tell you how long you
shall have any of the days of the Son of Man; work while it is day; when the
night comes no man can work. We have had faithful, powerful Preaching a long
time, (possibly Christ never had a Church on Earth, had such handling the Word
of God so long a time) does not the Candle begin to fail, and burn in the
Socket? We have an Ezra's Temple, but is not Solomon's destroyed? 2. There Is no
such way to recover your Light, and keep it with you, as to cry after it, and
to make use of it while you have it. God will not take away his Word from
hungry Children. Where are our Rogers, Sheppard, Hooker, Fenner, Preston,
Sibbs, Buroughs, and others? It Is time to recover your Appetites, that you may
recover your Bread. 3. Consider, you that love the Lord, will be the first that
want it. Prodigals of their Souls, can feed upon any Husks, though they fill
their Bellies with nothing but wind and crudities. That you may recover your
Appetite to the Word, Purge your selves of your lusts. I shall conclude with
that of James, Jam. 1. 21, 22. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and
superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which
is able to save your Souls: But be you doers of the Word, and not hearers only,
deceiving your own selves.

Sermon VI.
Canticles 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.

IT is not, Let me hear the words of his mouth; though that be intended, the
words of God's mouth, may be brought to us by men like unto our selves, as they
were spoken to the Israelites of old by the Prophets; the Spouse begs not only
the Words of her Lord, but that they might be spoken from himself: She beggeth
his words, but so that they may be kisses, tokens of his love and favor to her
Soul: She beggeth not only a more external Communion with God, by which God
communicates his Will to our exterior senses, but an inward Communion, that
God by his Word and Gospel would speak unto her heart, that the Word might not
be to her a mere sound, much less the savor of death unto death, but the
savor of life unto life.

Prop. The great desire of a gracious Soul, is after an inward spiritual
Communion with Christ, in his Word and Ordinances.

This is a Point not so well generally understood by the crowd of Professors;
suffer me therefore to spend a few words in the Explication of it.

All Communion imports mutual and reciprocal Communication. It is an action
wherein two Persons do communicate themselves each to other, Communion with
God, implies God's communication of himself to his creature, and the
creature's communication of it self unto God. To restrain my discourse to the
present Subject I am about; There is a more external Communion we have with
God, with reference to his Word, in the reading it, or hearing it read or
Preached, or meditating in it. God then communicates his Will to us, by the help
of Letters, Words and Syllables, by which we understand things, or by the voice
of his Ministers, sent in his Name to open his mind and will unto us; and we
communicate with God, giving him the homage of our Eyes and Ears, our common
sense and imaginations; this I call a more external Communion: And there is a
more spiritual internal Communion, which a Soul has with God in it. I call it
a Communion, because God in it does communicate himself to the Soul, and the
Soul communicates it self to God. God speaks by his Word to the heart, and
the heart receives the Divine Impressions, and surrendreth up it self to the
Will of God. In the other there is no more than a communication of the Divine
Will (on God's part) nor any more than the homage of our exterior senses, our
faculty of reading and hearing, the service of our Eyes and Ears, our common
sense, and power of Imagination, and of our understanding receiving the notions
of Truth. In this Communion with God in his Word, there is not only on God's
part a communication of God's Will, but also of God's Power, by which the Soul
is 1. Irradiated as to the understanding, enabled to see things in another
light more fully and clearly 2. Subdued as to the Will, so as the man is made
willing and obedient to the heavenly Revelation, transformed into the likeness
of the Word, so convinced of the truth of it, that it can no longer withstand
it, whether it be a word of Instruction, which is the Object of our Faith; or a
word of Reproof, for conviction of Sin, or a word of Consolation, for
refreshing the Soul; the Soul can no longer deny, or dispute, or doubt of the
Proposition, no longer stand out against the Precept, no longer refuse to be
comforted. The Word of the Lord comes here to the inward part of the Soul. 2.
There is a further Communication on man's part of himself to God. In the former
Communion he only lends God his Eye to read his Will, his Ear to hear it, his
imaginative power to think upon it, his Passive Intellect or Power to receive
Notions of Truth. Here he communicates his whole Soul to God, his Will and
Affections, his whole Man. It is true, here God speaks first, we do only velle
quum volumus, agere quum agimur (as Augustine expresses it) that is, we only
will when we are made willing, and act when we are first moved and acted. There
are some who are great Patrons for the Power of Man's Will as to things
spiritual, that would elude those Texts about the Teachings of the Spirit, and
the Teachings of the Anointing spoken of by St. John, by asserting, That there
is such a constant concomitancy of the holy Spirit with the Preaching of the
Gospel, that whosoever will may be willing, and obedient, and believe, and
repent, and be obedient. I should hearken much to this Notion, if the Authors
of it could give me a good account how it is then, that of two persons hearing
the same Sermon, and sitting under the same ministration of the Spirit, one man
only hears it, thinks upon it a little, and receives some notions of it, to
fit his Tongue with discourse; another has his heart changed by it, and
transformed into the Image of God, and wholly changed as to his Will and
Affections, and his whole Conversation. That it is so is demonstrably true, I
would know whence it is, unless they will make man a God unto himself; that is,
the first cause of truly good and spiritual motions. Now this internal
Communion with God in his Word, which in Scripture is called the Teaching of
the Spirit, and the Teaching of the Anointing, being such as few are acquainted
with, is little known in the world, and therefore some count it Canting, and so
unwarily blaspheme the Teacher, and cannot understand any thing else by it than
Ministerial Teaching. Others again can understand no Teaching of the Spirit in
and by Ordinances, but dream that Souls under the Teachings of the Spirit, must
live above Duties and Ordinances, and so turn it into mere Enthusiasm,
immediate impressions (which they pretend to) from the holy Spirit of God. It
may be therefore worth our while to understand it a little.

You read of it prophesied of old, Isa. 54. 17. That the Children of the Church
should be all taught of the Lord. You read in the New Testament of words which
the Holy Ghost teaches, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Yea it teaches us not words only, but
things, 1 John 2. 27. But the Anointing which you have received in him, abides
in you, and you need not that any man should teach you; but as the same
Anointing teaches you all things, and is truth, and is no lie. Yea it was
Christ's own Promise, Joh. 14. 26. But the Comforter, which the Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance
whatsoever you have heard from me. So as that there is a Teaching of the
Spirit, is out of all doubt. The only Questions are;

1.
1. Whether this be concomitant with Ministerial Teachings, and superadded to
them; which we maintain against those who are for immediate Teachings in
raptures, and by immediate impressions; or a thing separate from them, and to
which Ministerial Teachings are rather hindrances than any furtherance; which
is what we deny. For though we limit not the Holy One of Israel, but say, that
as he did of Old, thus teach his Prophets and Apostles; so he may by more
immediate Impressions and Revelations, teach his People still what they are to
do, or to avoid. Yet we say, that the Book of Scripture being finished and
sealed, no such Revelations are by any to be expected; and if any man think he
has any such Impressions, Revelations, or extraordinary Teachings, they must
be proved by the Word, with which, if they do not agree, they proceed not from
the holy Spirit of God, neither have they any Light in them. Secondly,

2. Whether the Teachings of the Spirit be any thing more than Ministerial
Teachings in the Preachings of the Gospel, which Teachings have such a constant
presence of the Spirit of Grace with them, that if a man will, he may with
those Aids and Assistances do what God requires of him in order to his Eternal
Salvation, and avoid what God would have him to avoid. We affirm they are, and
that there is no such power in the Will of Man, in the use of those common Aids
and Assistances, and that there is a Teaching of the Spirit in the use of the
Word, far beyond the power and virtue of the Word. The Object of this Teaching
we make to be the Elect of God. Reprobates as well as chosen Vessels, may be
taught by the Ministerial Teaching of the Word, and have that external
Communion with God in his Word, which I before mentioned; but the Elect of God,
and such as shall be eternally saved only, know any thing of these Teachings;
and to such are restricted throughout all Scripture, in such places as make any
mention of them. The more immediate Object is the Understanding, Will and
Affections. The Ministerial Teaching reaches the Eyes and Ears, and exterior
senses, and thence comes into the thoughts, and into the understanding more
confusedly and imperfectly; it reaches not the more inward part of the Soul.
The things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 12. are revealed to those who have
received the Spirit; V. 14. The Natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit, nor can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. I
therefore call it an internal spiritual Communion with God in his Word. But yet
for the fuller understanding of this, it is reasonable that I should show you
how the Spirit Teaches the Elect Soul in and by the Ordinance, that you may
see and understand what there is more in this Spiritual Teaching, in this
internal Communion with God in his Word and Ordinances, than in the mere
Teaching of the Letter, mere Ministerial Teaching separated from this.

I told you before these Teachings were not by immediate Enthusiasms,
Impressions, or Revelations of new things; for, I pray observe, there is a
twofold Revelation; the one I may call A simple, immediate first Revelation.
Thus God of old taught the Patriarchs and Moses, and the Prophets, and the
Apostles. All Scripture was by inspiration from God, and holy men spoke as they
were inspired by God. Thus God was pleased to teach the Guides of his Church,
before the holy Scripture was written, at least fully written, and a Curse
annexed (as a Seal to that Book) to them that should add any thing to it. This
is a Teaching some would be at, but what need of it, if the Scriptures (as the
Apostle tells us) are able to make the man of God wise to salvation, furnished
to every good work?

Secondly, There is another kind of Revelation, which we may for distinction
sake, call a compounded, mediate Revelation; it is the further Revelation of
what God has revealed in his Word; but we wanted a proper medium to see it in;
we were blind and dark, and our Eyes stuck in the bark and surface of
Scripture. Thus it is yet true, 1 Cor. 2. 10. That God reveals to his People
by his Spirit, the deep things of God, the things which Eye has not seen, nor
has Ear heard, nor can it enter into the Heart of man to conceive the things
which God has prepared for them that love him. But of this I shall speak more
by and by.

That I may therefore give you (at least) my apprehension concerning the due
notion of the Spirit's Teaching, so as it shall not be confounded with bare
Ministerial Teachings, which I take to be a great debasing of the notion of it,
on the one hand, nor be made opposite to Ministerial Teaching, and that made
useless on the other hand: I shall show you that in order to the Salvation of a
Soul, there is a Teaching of the Spirit necessary added to, or over and above
Ministerial Teachings. I shall open it in four or five particulars.

1
1. The Spirit teaches by special Illumination. There is a common
Illumination, which is the Effect of the Spirit also; but of the Spirit working
in a way of common grace, by which men receive the common notions of Religious
Truths. There are two diseases or faults in the Soul of a Christian, which
hinder its learning spiritual things.

1. The first is, a listlesness, or indisposition to learn or hear any thing of
that nature. You may see this in men's slighting of the Word of God, till God
has wrought some saving work in their hearts, they have no mind to read the
holy Scriptures, nor yet to hear them faithfully opened and applied: And could
you but enter into peoples hearts (which yet you may know by what was the
temper of your own hearts before God wrought a change on them) you would see
this yet further confirmed unto you; this God in conversion removes; but this
is not that which I have here to do with.

2. There is besides this a natural blindness and deafness, that a poor
creature cannot see nor hear. In Jer. 5. 21. you find these words, Hear now
this O you foolish people, and void of understanding, who have Eyes, and see
not, Ears, and hear not! Every natural man is one of these who have Eyes, and
see not, Ears, and hear not. The mysteries of the Kingdom of God are
foolishness to the natural Soul; what a notion of Regeneration had Nicodemus?
Joh. 3. what notions of Justification, Union with Christ, the indwelling of the
Spirit, Faith, etc. have some others discovered? Natural men have rational
Souls, as well as others, and by the workings of them understand many
Propositions in Religion, which shine in the light of Natural Reason; but there
are Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, Doctrines that shine only in the light of
Scripture; of these they understand little or nothing: Nay, for the more common
notions of Religion concerning the Immortality of the Soul, the Nature of God,
the Doctrines of Faith, Repentance, Good works; when once the heart is changed,
the Soul sees them in quite another light, and has quite another notion of
them than it had before, while it was only under the instruction of Reason, and
the Ministerial instruction of Men. Paul prays for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.
17, 18. That the God of Glory would give them the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation in the knowledge of him, the Eyes of their understanding being
enlightened, etc. It is the Spirit that inlighteneth the understanding, and
inableth it to a fuller, and further comprehension of, and insight into the
Spiritual Mysteries of the Kingdom of God. When the Disciples came to our
Savior, Matthew. 13. 10. and asked him, why he spoke to the multitude in
Parables, he tells them, v. 11. because it was given to his Disciples to know
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to the multitude it was not given.
From hence have proceeded the vain speculations and reasonings of one part of
the world, that have pretended to more Learning and Knowledge than others; and
the profane scoffs and mockings of a more silly part of it, at the greatest
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God. Some by Wisdom know not God, being under the
mere conduct of reason, and tying up themselves to the mere informations of
that natural Eye: Some knowing less, have blasphemed God, and the holy things
of God, counting their own Ignorance a sufficient excuse for their Blasphemy.
None knows the things of God aright, but he that is under the Teaching of the
Spirit. Take the first Principle of all Religion, viz. That the holy Scriptures
are the Word of God; no Soul knows this as he ought to know it, but he that
is under a further Teaching than that of the Church, or of Reason; much less
does it know the momentous Propositions that are contained in those holy
Writings. To all knowledge there is required, 1. A sufficient Revelation. 2. A
sufficiency in our faculty to receive and comprehend the Revelation. The holy
Scriptures are a sufficient Revelation of all Truth. There are no Mysteries of
the Kingdom of God to be admitted, but what are there revealed. But we want a
visive faculty, a sufficiency in our understandings to apprehend, and to
conceive them, till the Lord by the finger of his Spirit touches our Ears, and
says, Ephatha, be opened. When Peter made his confession of Christ, for which
Christ blessed him, Christ adds; Flesh and blood has not revealed it to him.

2,
Secondly, The Spirit teaches by a special Application of the Word to the
Conscience. The Word as written is no more directed to one man than to another;
it equally concerns all men. When we Preach we are like Benhadad's Archers,
we draw Bows at adventures, and let the Lord's Arrows fly, who is it that
directs them betwixt the joints of one harness more than another? that when we
reprove sin, and denounce the Judgments of God against it, says to this or
that sinner, Thou art the man; or when we display the grace of the Gospel, and
open the Promises of God, teaches one Soul to apply them, while another
refuses the comfort of them: All special Application of the Word to the Soul,
(which indeed is the true Teaching) is from the holy Spirit of God. It is the
Spirit that was promised, Joh. 16. 8. to convince the world of Sin,
Righteousness and Judgment. It is the Spirit which convinces the Soul of
Truth, of Wrath, of Love, indeed of any thing of Spiritual Revelation. It is
the Spirit that makes the Word stick to the Soul: All the Ministers on Earth
cannot make a threatening to stick to the heart of an hard and impenitent
sinner, nor a Promise stick to a broken and contrite heart, until the Spirit
comes and joyneth with the Ministration of the Word. We sometimes meditate of
the Lord's terrors, and compose Discourses with the best Art we are able, and
in the vanity of our hearts, are, it may be, sometimes saying within our
selves, Surely this Sermon will alarm some sinners, open some blind Eyes.
Another time we study the Grace of the Gospel, and with the best Art we can
compose Discourses to affect Souls with the sense of the love of God in Jesus
Christ, and are ready to think, surely this Discourse will affect some Souls,
and bring them to love and admire Jesus Christ, to seek to him for pardon and
forgiveness, to receive him as the Savior of man, as their Savior. We go
about our work, and when we have done, we see cause to return unto the Lord
that sent us, mourning, and saying, We have labored in vain, and spent our
strength for nothing, and in vain. The Spirit of the Lord moves not upon the
face of our waters; there is not one Soul washed from its filthiness: The Angel
comes not and troubles the waters; though our people lie from year to year at
the Pool, yet possible not a Soul is cured of its infirmity. The Word is but a
dead letter, it is the Spirit that quickens whom he pleases. The Word, the
Minister teaches us by communicating notions, but the Spirit only teaches by
particular and effectual Application of notions to our Souls advantage.

3.
Thirdly, The Spirit teaches by evident Demonstration. There is a threefold
Demonstration of things. 1. The Demonstration of Sense. Thus it is
demonstrable, that the Fire burns, that Snow is white; all know that
spiritual things come under no such Demonstration. 2. The Demonstration of
Reason; thus a proper effect is a demonstration of the cause: Some Propositions
in Religion are indeed capable of this demonstration. The Creation
demonstrateth a Creator, etc. But alas! there are very few things in Religion
that fall under the demonstration of Reason; most Propositions of that nature
depend upon Revelation; and the^truth of them is to be judged from thence. That
Christ is the eternal Son of God; That he took upon him our Nature; died for
Sinners: In short, all the main Propositions of Religion, all Propositions
immediately concerning our Salvation, all Articles of Faith, are things which
fall not under the demonstration of Reason. 3. There is therefore Thirdly, a
Demonstration of the Spirit. St. Paul tells us his Preaching was in the
Demonstration of the Spirit, that is, attended with the Demonstration of the
Spirit; and (let Scoffers say what they will) if this Demonstration of the
Spirit attends not all our Preaching, we do but beat the Air, and labor in
vain. Logicians rightly tell us of two sorts of Arguments: The one they call
Topics; the other Demonstrations: The difference of them lies in the effects
they have upon our minds: The former make a thing only probable to us, the
other make it certain. If a notion appears only probable to us, we have some
doubts and fears, and suspicions about the truth of it. Nothing is demonstrated
to us, but that of the truth of which we have no further doubts, against which
we can make no Objections. Now nothing but the Spirit of God thus teaches. The
Gifts of Ministers are various; the discourses of some may be mere words,
oratorial discourses; these of all others have least influence upon any but
airy Souls; others more mind their work, and knowing that nothing but the Word
of God lays hold on the Conscience, endeavor to prove what they say by holy
Writ; and some in this are more happy than others, as they are more skilled in
the Scriptures, and the true sense of them; others are more rational in their
discourses, men of great parts, good reason; though the second sort of these
best discharge their Office, yet the effect of the best is to make a thing but
probable to the Soul. The Soul will find out some distinctions, excuses and
evasions, until it comes under this Teaching of the Spirit; it is an easy
thing to make it probable to the Soul, that it is in a road and highway to
Hell and eternal destruction; that sin is the vilest thing in the world; that
there is no way of Salvation but by Jesus Christ: In short, any Gospel
Proposition may easily be made probable, either by reason working from connate
natural Principles, or (at least to those Souls that own the Scriptures to be
the Word of God) from Propositions of holy Writ; but still I say, till the holy
Spirit of God comes to teach the Soul, the Soul will not be fully persuaded,
indeed not at all persuaded, but have this, and the other thing to say against
it. Nothing silenceth the Soul to the revelation of any Spiritual Truth, so as
it disputes it no more (unless it be perhaps in a fit, or under some great
temptation) but this Demonstration of the Spirit.

4.
Fourthly, The Spirit teaches by Recapitulation, or bringing to remembrance. I
have my ground for this from that of our Savior, Joh. 14. 6. The Comforter,
which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach
you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have
said unto you. This Teaching by way of bringing to remembrance, is an excellent
way of Teaching. It is one reason why Christians profit no more by hearing,
because they never meditate; they seldom or never call to remembrance what they
have heard. If a Schoolmaster should learn a Child his Grammar Rules once, and
never make him bring them again to his remembrance, he would learn but little.
An improvement in notional knowledge of spiritual things, does depend upon
often calling to remembrance what we have heard. But the Spirits bringing to
remembrance is yet a more excellent thing, and there is the same disproportion
betwixt our own bringing to remembrance, something we have read of the Word of
God, or heard out of it, and the holy Spirit's bringing to remembrance; that
there is betwixt Ministerial Instruction, and the Instruction of the Spirit of
God at the first. As man's instruction and first teaching reaches no further
than that power of man's Soul, by which he receives the bare notion of a
thing, and that imperfectly too; but the holy Spirit instructs the heart, and
reins, and teaches the secret and inward parts of the Soul: So man's bringing
to remembrance things which we have heard from God, does no more than revive
the notion of them in our understandings, making the first prints of them more
deep, plain, and legible: But the holy Spirit's bringing things to remembrance,
is a bringing them to the remembrance of the whole Soul, renewing those motions
of the will and affections which it taught the Soul with reference to those
Propositions, which by Ministerial Teaching, or by reading the Word, were
first, by the help of our Eyes, and Ears, brought into our Souls, and carried
by the holy Spirit of God further into the understanding, the will and
affections, by which the Soul is anew instructed, convinced, comforted,
strengthened, etc. to which our repetitions of, and discourses of what we have
read and heard, serve but as means to so noble an end; and without the
attaining of that indeed, is of very little significancy to our Souls real
profit and advantage.

5.
Lastly, The Spirit's Teaching, is by strengthening and quickening the Soul to
practice. We call upon men not to be hearers of the Word, but doers of it also;
but we cannot make them so, we cannot give them an inward Principle of Life,
either strengthening, or quickening them to do what we call to them for; and
this is the reason why we oft-times labor in vain, and spend our strength for
nothing and in vain. Old Adam is too hard for young Melancthon. We see this in
the experience of every Schoolboy. The best Teaching is by practice. Let a
Child learn his Rules never so well, he understands them not till he comes to
reduce them to practice; therefore the best Teachers put Children upon practice
as soon as they can. Solomon tells us, Pro 1. 7. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Knowledge. The end of all Knowledge is practice. We therefore
desire to know, that we might practice, and he that has not been taught to
practice in the things of God, has indeed learned nothing. By this time I hope
I have showed you, that admitting the teaching of the Letter, and of the
Ministers, there is none left for the teaching of the Spirit; and that there is
a vast difference betwixt a mere external Communion with God in his Word, and
an internal Communion with him in and by the Word; so as we have no reason
either to despise Ordinances, or to rest in that external homage which we pay
unto God in the observance of them, and sufficient reason why the Soul of an
understanding Christian should not be satisfied with the reading and hearing
the words of Christ's mouth, without the kisses of his mouth. For the proof of
the Proposition, I shall give you first the instance of holy David; take it as
it lies before you, Ps. 63. 1, 2. 3. O God (says he) thou art my God, early
will I seek thee, in a dry and thirsty Land where no water is; he means no
waters of the Sanctuary. The title of that Psalm tells you, that Psalm was
composed when David was in the wilderness of Judah, in the time of his
persecution by Saul, when he had not the liberty of God's Public Ordinances.
In this condition he thirsts, he longs, for what? for thee, says he.
Further yet, v. 2. To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in
the Sanctuary; Because thy loving kindness is better than life. You see David's
desires are not terminated in a coming into the Sanctuary, but a seeing the
power and glory of God in the Sanctuary, in an understanding the
loving kindness of God revealed in his Sanctuary. And (in the expression of the
same passion) Psalm. 42. 1. As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so
pants my Soul after thee O God: My Soul thirsts for God, the living God;
when shall I come and appear before God? It is manifest by the last words, that
the thing which David thirsted after, was a communion with God in the
Ordinances of his Worship; but yet not after a mere external communion with
him. My Soul pants after thee O God, for God, the living God. So in Psalm.
119. v. 18. Open my Eyes O Lord, that I might discern the wonders of the Law;
not my Ears only to hear thy Law; or my Eyes, that I may read the Doctrine of
the Law, but that I may discern the wonders of thy Law. Paul did not think it
enough that the Ephesians and Colossians had the Word of God amongst them, and
Preached to them by Apostles, and men immediately deriving from them; but for
the former he prays, that the Eyes of their understanding might be opened; and
for the latter, That the Word of God might dwell in them richly; but what need
have we of any Scripture in the case? I appeal to the experience of every good
Christian, what Soul is there that knows any thing of God, or of the nature
and end of Ordinances, that can be satisfied with mere reading of a Chapter, of
hearing of a Sermon, without finding his heart at all affected with what he
reads or hears, any operation of it at all upon his heart and conscience.
Formalists indeed, who think that God is pleased with noises and empty sounds,
and with mere bodily labor, which profits nothing, may be satisfied with
going to Church, and hearing a discourse from a Pulpit, and that too of small
or no tendency to do good to a Soul; but it is impossible that a conscientious
Christian, that looks upon Ordinances as opportunities, under a Divine
appointment, wherein God has promised to meet the Souls of people and bless
them, wherein God has appointed to come, and to speak unto peoples Souls,
should be satisfied with the mere external action or homage, but he must thirst
after that blessing which God has promised to his people, when he meets them
in places, or duties, wherein he has recorded his Name to dwell. But I shall
show you further, how highly reasonable this is upon this Hypothesis, That
there is such an inward communion of God with his People in his Institutions.

One reason may be, because a mere outward Communion with God is not
distinguishing mercy; and this is known to every Soul who knows any thing of
God. Pariter adeunt, pariter audiunt, (said Augustine) Hypocrites as well
Saints go to Church, hear Sermons, read Chapters. This is a favor God gives to
all within the pale of his Church, which is a field has Tares in it as well as
Wheat; a Drag-net, whose swallow has in it good Fish, as well as bad. Every
Hypocrite may yield God the homage of his Eye and Ear, and some thoughts. I
showed you before, that it is of the nature of a Child of God to thirst after
distinguishing mercies: This is that which such Souls long after, to have some
tokens of good from God, which may speak God's loving kindness to them. They
are awakened to a sense of their lost condition by nature, and to a fense of
Eternity; and they know nothing but the Adoption of Sons; nothing but an Union
with Christ can do their Souls any good with reference to their greatest wants.
Besides, such Souls as they thirst after what is best suited to their Souls
greatest wants; so they have learned to value the Love and Favor of God above
all earthly things: They know that all within the pale of the Church, are not
in the favor of God; many are called, and few are chosen. Strait is the way,
and narrow is the gate that leads to eternal life, and few there be that find
it. Many shall seek to enter, and shall not enter.

2.
Secondly, A mere external Communion with God, is upon the point no Communion
with him. It is indeed improperly called a Communion with him. God (says our
Savior) is a Spirit, and from thence a Christian concludes, that those who
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth. I told you before, That in
all Communion, there must be a mutual communication. In our Communion with God,
God communicates something of himself to the Soul, and the Soul must
communicate it self in some degrees unto God. Now in our mere external
Communion with God, in the hearing of his Word, or reading of it, what does God
communicate to us? nothing but the revelation of his Will to our exterior
senses, or common sense and understanding, and the last but in an imperfect
degree. What does man communicate of himself to God? he lends him his Eye, to
gather up the Letters of a Book to present them to his understanding; he lends
him his Ear, to hear sounds, which may carry some notions of God to the
understanding; he lends him a little bodily presence and labor, to do for a
little time what he has commanded him to do; but all this while the man
communicates not his heart and soul, his will and affections to God; nor does
God communicate any thing of his power and goodness unto the Soul. So that if
we consider God as a Spirit, and who requires of us the homage of the Soul and
inward man, it is upon the point no fellowship and communion with God at all.

3.
Thirdly, A mere external fellowship and communion with God in his Word (if it
may be so called) wants those two adjuncts, which most allure and inflame the
Soul with desires; they are pleasure, and profit: There is no true pleasure in
it, no true profit and advantage to a Soul arising from it. I noted to you
before, that one reason of the Soul's thirst after communion with God in his
Word, is the pleasure and sweetness which every pious Soul finds in it. David
says, the Word was sweeter to his taste than the Honey and the Honeycomb; and
he says, That one day in the Lord's Courts is better than a thousand
elsewhere. But let us a little wistly consider wherein the sweetness of the
Word lies; what makes the Bible to be sweeter than another Book? or a Sermon
to be a more pleasant discourse than any other? The sweetness cannot lie in the
gratifying of our exterior senfes, or of our fancy; much reading is a
weariness to the flesh; so is much hearing, much study: The sweetness of the
Word of God, and discourses out of it, lies in the fittedness of the
revelations there, and of such discourses, to the distresses, and spiritual
necessities of the Soul, and the insight the Word gives us into the great
things of God, the great Mysteries of the Kingdom of God: Now no pleasure, no
delight, no sweetness of this nature arises to, or in any Soul, from a mere
external communion with God in it. Hence it is that carnal unregenerate men had
rather spend four or five hours at a Play, or a Musick-meeting, or Ball, than
one at a Sermon; they find no sweetness, no pleasure at all in the Word. The
Preacher indeed may be as one that has the voice of a pleasant lovely Song,
and have some witty sentences; this may please them; or if they be persons that
are profane, and hate all Religion and Godliness, he may use his wit in some
jeers and squibs at Religion, and this may tickle their lusts a little; but a
discourse out of Scripture tending to the true ends of Preaching, informing the
Judgment in the Doctrines of Faith, or persuading the practice of Godliness,
are the most unpleasant sounds in the world to such men's Ears. There is no Soul
breathing, that takes, or can take any pleasure from, or find any sweetness in
reading, or hearing, that experienceth no inward communion with God in the
action, or at least that desires none. 2. A second great Attractive and mover
of our desires, is profit and advantage; and in this case it must be the profit
and advantage of our Souls; for they are actions from which no worldly profit
and gain does arise ordinarily. Now all the profit that can be so much as
imagined to arise from the world, as merely read in our Bibles, or heard opened
from the Ministers of the Gospel, or meditated upon, can be nothing but some
superficial notional knowledge in the things of God. Knowledge indeed is an
excellent thing, and as pleasant to an ingenuous Soul as Light is to the Eye,
and such a Soul counts it amongst his gains, and this may, and does draw out
not only true, and good, and pious Souls, to read, and hear Sermons, and study
the Scriptures, but it may, and does entice and allure others. But the pious
Soul feeth a profit beyond this he has read, 1 Timothy 3. 15. That the holy
Scriptures are able to make a man wise to salvation, through Faith which is in
Jesus Christ. V. 17. To make the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to
every good work. He has heard that good words from thence have made Souls
better, when sorrow has made the heart to stoop; this is the profit, this the
advantage which he promises unto himself from the Word of God; this makes him
thirst after a real, inward, spiritual communion with God in his Word; he knows
nothing less than this can answer the ends which his Soul aims at. That it is
not being in the Sanctuary, but his seeing the power and glory of God in the
Sanctuary, which must effect this. Hence it is, that though a more External
communion with God in his word be sweet and desirable to him, yet he cannot
take up with it, but he thirsts after the Teachings of his Spirit, in and by
the Word. But I see I must leave much of this discourse to other opportunities.

Sermon VII.
Canticles 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.

4. THere is yet another Reason to be assigned, and added to what you have
already heard, why an understanding pious Soul cannot be satisfied with a bare
external Communion with God in his Word. That is the danger which it apprehends
from such a performance, when the Soul rests in it, and takes up with it,
Heb. 4. 12. The Apostle tells us, The word of God is quick and powerful.
Whatsoever means are used in order to an end, if it be of a quick and operative
Nature, if it reaches not the end, it certainly does harm. Pbysick that is
quick and operative, if it conduces not to the healing of the Body, usually
impairs it, and does it harm. The hearing and reading of the word are means in
order to the Salvation of our Souls, by the working of Faith in us, changing
our hearts, and transforming us into its own likeness, if they profit not in
order to that end they certainly prejudice the Soul. Isa. 55. 10. As the rain
comes down from Heaven, and the Snow, and returns not thither but waters
the Earth -- So shall my word be that goes out of my Mouth. The Apostle lets
us know, that Ministers in preaching the Gospel, are unto God a sweet savor of
Christ in them that are savea, and in them that perish. V. 16. To the one they
are the savor of death unto death, and to the other, the savor of life unto
life. We read in the Gospel of two effects of the Word Preached by Christ and
the Apostles; some believed, others were hardened. This must necessarily make a
pious thinking Soul, that considers reading and hearing the Word, as they
indeed are, not as ends, but as means in order to a more noble end, that it
cannot but long after this spiritual inward communion with God in these
Institutions. There Is nothing more to be dreaded than an hardened heart; and
without this inward Teaching of the Spirit of God in and by the Word, the Soul
certainly hardens, and grows worse by and under it. I shall now come to
make some Application of this discourse.

Use 1.
From it you may learn, That there is a more internal communion with God in his
Word, than the most of common hearers are aware of. God's speaking to our Eyes
and Ears, our common sense and understanding is one thing, his speaking to our
hearts, to our will and affections is another thing. It is one thing for a man
or woman to give God his bodily presence, his Eyes, and his Ears in an
Ordinance; another thing for the Soul to give up his will in it to comply with
the will of God in what he shall reveal unto it. I am afraid this is a notion
is little either understood, or attended to. Men and women think they have done
their work, and fulfilled their duty, if they have but read a little in their
Bibles, and come to Church to hear a Sermon, never regarding what inward
communion they have had with God either in the one or the other; and look at no
further Communication of God unto them, than to let them know his will; nor at
any further communicating themselves unto God, than in lending him the presence
of their outward man, and the more out-parts and powers of their Souls. This
apprehension of men makes them stand amazed at God's Peoples being so fond of
Sermons, and running after them. Indeed, were this all that good men and women
expected, they might possibly not be so exceedingly thirsty after them, though
even a notional knowledge of the will of God, is no contemptible thing; but
they have further expectations upon Ordinances than this amounts to. They
said, Isa. 2. 3. Come you, let us go to the mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his
paths. They know that God promised of old, That wheresoever he recorded his
name to dwell, there he would meet his people and bless them. And that the same
Promise extends to the New Testament, and that there the Lord has promised,
where two or three are gathered together in his Name, he will be in the midst
amongst them; which Promise being not of his Essential presence, (for so he is
never absent from us) but concerning the presence of his grace, it is a promise
of blessing, so as they are not satisfied without some token of God's favor
and blessing.

2. Br.
From this discourse also may be concluded, in what communion with God through
the Spirit lies. Some would have it to lie in mere Enthusiastical raptures,
impressions and revelations, and that the way to enjoy it, is to cast off all
Forms, all Duties and Ordinances; these are the things they make to be the
things that are above, mentioned in Col. 3. 1. Certainly there is a form of
sound Doctrine, which the Apostle Paul commends the Romans for yielding
obedience to, Romans 6. 17. A form of sound words, which he commands Timothy to
hold fast, 2 Timothy 1. 13. These are not that form of Godliness in men that deny
the power of it, which the Apostle speaks of in that Epistle. There are Duties
and Ordinances, to be above which, is to be above the Rule which God has given
us. Our Souls communion with God through the Spirit, is not out of Ordinances,
but in and by them. The Teaching of the Letter is not opposed, but subordinated
to the Teaching of the Spirit. There is room enough for the Teaching of the
holy Spirit, after the Minister has done what he can to teach us; nor is it to
be blasphemed by ill tongued men, because themselves do not understand what it
means; they only speak evil of the things they know not. The Power of God upon
the heart fastening the words we read and hear, upon our hearts and
consciences, as a Nail in a sure place, is a thing only known unto the Souls
that have had experience of it.

3. Br.
But the great thing I desire you might be instructed in from this discourse,
is, The difference betwixt a profane person, and hypocrites, and the true
Children of God, which may be discerned from their affections to the Word of
God. The profane person wholly despises and slighteth the Word of God, both
the written Word, and the Word Preached; it serves him for nothing but a
subject to exercise his profane wit upon. The Hypocrite driving another design
glorying in show and appearance; he must have some pretended respect at least
to the Word of God; but he rests merely in reading or in hearing, and regards
not either how far God in the Word communicates himself to him, nor yet how far
he communicates his Soul unto God in the Ordinance. Let an Hypocrite go with a
multitude, and hear a Sermon, he has enough if he can but say, I have been at
the Ordinance, whether his Soul has been at all instructed or affected;
whether any Word of God has come nigh to his heart, laid any hold upon his
conscience yea or no; he has no true thirst after any communion with God in
the Ordinance; if he has been but seen in the Lord's Courts, or at most be
furnished with matter of discourse to talk of amongst Christians, so as they
may take him to be a Disciple, his ends are satisfied. But it is otherwise with
a Child of God; he is troubled when he comes from an Ordinance, if he does not
find he has had some communion with God in the Ordinance. That God has either
more sealed, and further confirmed some Truth to his Soul, or convinced him of
some sin, or comforted him with some Promise; some way or other spoken unto his
heart. Methinks the difference betwixt an Hypocrite and a Child of God in this
case may be resembled, by the going of a Child with another companion (who is
no Child) to a Father's house, where they find themselves splendidly
entertained; but the Child sees not his Father's face; the Child's companion
is pleased, and comes home talking, and boasting of his entertainment; but the
Child's heart is sad; the end of the Child's Journey was to see his Father's
face, and to have his Father's blessing; without this the good cheer does him
no good. The formal Hypocrite comes home from Ordinances, pleasing himself that
he has been at Church, that he has heard a quaint learned discourse, and his
tongue may run great descants upon such things as these. The Child of God is
satisfied with none of these things; he went to his Father's house, that he
might see his Father's face; if he can find no evidence of that, his Soul is
discontented and unsatisfied; he cries, I have labored in vain, I have lost
another day of grace, and opportunity of salvation; I have been seeking the
Lord in vain, and waiting upon him for nothing. And this is the very reason why
a pious Soul cannot hear every body, nor take up with all Sermons or
discourses; he does not go to Church to hear the voice of a man, but the Word
of God, and goes with an expectation to meet with a blessing from God; and
therefore he will hear where the Word of God is so opened, so applied, as he
can expect God's blessing upon it. He cannot expect that God's blessing should
go along with any to whom he has said, Psalm. 50. 16, 17. What have thou to do
to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth,
seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee? He will not
therefore sit under the Ministry of one that is openly profane and wicked, and
of a scandalous life: Nor one that teaches other Doctrine, than what is
according to sound Doctrine and godliness, and the form of sound words
delivered in the Word of God; or him that gives heed to Fables, and endless
Genealogies, which minister Questions rather than godly Edifying which is in
Faith, 1 Timothy 1. 4. When he goes ^o an Ordinance, he goes not to hear the
words of men puffed up, but the words of God, and expects that God should
meet him, and bless him; and therefore governs himself accordingly in hearing,
so as he may probably meet with a blessing from God, which he cannot expect
from one who so discharges his work, as he proclaims to all, that God never
sent him, though he runs.

In the next place, this will give us another advantage to try our state with
reference to God's favor; An earnest desire after an inward spiritual
communion with God in any Ordinance or Duty, and the dissatisfaction of a Soul
without it, will very much argue a man or woman to be a Christian indeed;
whereas a bare going to an Ordinance, a bare fancy or desire to hear, or a mere
hearing, will speak a man no more than a nominal titular Christian, and be an
evidence, that the Soul rests in a mere bodily labor and exercise, which
profits nothing. This is a great point; the being in the Sanctuary, will
satisfy an Hypocrite; nothing but the seeing the power and glory of God in the
Sanctuary, will satisfy David the man according to God's own heart. But it is
hard for us to keep a medium in any thing almost. As in the heart of a
Formalist, there is nothing of this desire, nothing of this dissatisfaction; so
many times in the heart of a good Christian, there may be too much of this
dissatisfaction, and a discontent and dissatisfaction founded in some mistake;
let me therefore a little enlarge upon this so useful a Subject.

1.
1. A satisfaction with a bare reading or hearing the Word, speaks nothing
above formality, nothing above what an Hypocrite may arrive at. It is said,
that Herod heard John Baptist gladly, yet he was not got up to the Hypocrite's
Form. There was a people in Ezekiel's time, of whom God complained, Ezekiel 33. v.
30, 31, 32. that talked against the Prophet, by the walls, and in the doors of
their houses, yet spoke every one to his Brother, saying, Come I pray you and
hear what is the word that comes forth from the Lord. And came as the people
came, and sat before the Prophet as the Lord's people, and heard his words,
but would not do them; with their mouths the^ showed much love, but their
hearts went after their covetousness. And v. 32. the Prophet was to them as a
very lovely Song, of one that had a pleasant voice, and could play well on an
Instrument; they heard his words, but they did not do them. And in the time of
the Propher Isaiah, there was a generation that sought the Lord daily, and
delighted to know the Lord's ways, as a Nation that forsook not the Ordinances
of God -- and took delight in approaching to God, Isa. 58. 2. yet the Lord sent
his Prophet, to cry aloud against them, not to spare to lift up his voice like
a Trumpet, to show them their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their
sins: And doubtless there is such a generation still, as a generation of
profane persons, that despise the Word and Ordinances of God, and blaspheme
God, and his Word; so another generation, that must read, and must go and hear,
and may take some delight in it: They may delight in the style, and phrase, and
wit of the Preacher, or in the Learning that is mixed up with the discourse; or
in the Notion of the Sermon, and desire to hear, especially (some kind of
Preachers) upon these accounts; or to furnish their minds with some notional
knowledge of the things of God, that may serve them as to their credit and
reputation in the world; or furnish their tongues with discourse in religious
company; all this will speak nothing to prove a man a Christian indeed; one
whose heart is changed and transformed into the likeness of the Word. All this
may be without any desire after the kisses of Christ's mouth, but a desire
after the feeling the power of the Word upon our hearts, and a dissatisfaction
of spirit, until a man finds something of this upon his Soul, this will speak
a man or woman not to rest in a form of godliness without the power of it; yet
even this dissatisfaction may be too much, and this happens, when it
proceeds from some mistake and misapprehension of Religious Souls. This
principally happens in two cases.

1. The Soul's judging it self from its sensible experiences, not from its
direct motions toward God and its desires. The motions of our Souls toward
God, must be warily distinguished from the sensible returns of God upon our
Soul. The first will speak the Soul beloved: The latter speaks it highly
favored, (...) much graced by God. A pious Soul is not to judge it self so
much from God's returns to it in this particular, as from God's workings in it,
kindling in it those holy desires which move it after what it may be it does
not yet seem meet to the wisdom of God, that it should attain. I have not told
you that the Spouse of Christ does at all times find, that Christ has kissed
it with the kisses of his mouth; but that such a Soul's desires will be steady
and constant after such a thing, and will not be satisfied with a mere bodily
labor, and external performance of a duty.

2.
The 2d mistake may be, from the Soul's not considering the variety of those
kisses by which our blessed Lord may kiss the Souls of Believers in and by the
Word, but keeping its Eye upon some particular influence of grace which it
passionately desires; and not finding that God satisfies it as to that, it
concludes, it has had no influence from God at all: As now, supposing a Soul
sad and troubled, it is exceedingly desirous of comfort and satisfaction, and
says, Lord, when will thou comfort me? In expectation of meeting God in this
way, it goes out to hear the Word, and not meeting with that peace and comfort
which it wanted, it is ready to conclude, that it has met with nothing, and
has had no near, inward, spiritual communion with God. As to this, the Soul
must rectify its mistake; the profit of the Word is not limited to one thing;
it is (says the Apostle) profitable for reproof, and correction, and
instruction in righteousness.

There is a kiss of instruction in righteousness. It may be thou can not find
that God by the Word which thou have heard, has spoken, or sealed peace to thy
Soul, but thou art still full of troubles, and fears, doubts and dejections;
well, but if thou find that God has more sealed and confirmed some Truth to
thee, that he has made thee to see further into the Mysteries of the Kingdom
of God, to see some Truths of concernment to thy Soul in a clearer and fuller
light; do not say that thou have not met with God in the Ordinance. The opening
of the Eyes, especially to discern the Mysteries of the Gospel, is one of the
kisses of Christ's mouth. If thy love be not (so far as thou can see) further
influenced; yet if thy Faith be promoved, this is a great thing. It may be thou
came to hear, hoping for strength against the temptation; God possibly has
met thee, and has given thee a further light to discern the temptation, the
methods, and depth of Satan's subtilties in it; this is a kiss.

There is an instruction in Duty (as well as Doctrine) which deserves this
name. Thou come to the Word, hoping God will speak peace to thee, and take
the thorn out of thy flesh that buffeteth thee. It seems not good to God to do
this; but thou go home from hearing, more submitting to the Will of God,
more resolved to wait upon God, more convinced that it is thy duty to lie at
the foot of God, and to wait his will and good pleasure. This also is a kiss of
his mouth.

There is a kiss of Reproof and Correction. When God by his Word reproves and
corrects a Soul; when he reproves the Soul, and the Soul is reproved (as is
said of Abraham, when the Pagan King reproved him) this is a kiss of his mouth:
Reproof and correction are things, for which God has told us, that his Word is
profitable for, and a Soul ought to look upon it self as having had a communion
with God in his Word, when a wise reproof has met with an obedient Ear. In
short, if a Soul after hearing, though it has not the desired mercy, yet
finds it self more prepared to want it, more quieted in the present want of
it, more patient under the afflicting hand of God, that the grace of God is
more sufficient for it than it was; this is an excellent kiss of Christ's
mouth, a certain token that God in the Word communicated himself to the Soul
(though it may be) it has not been just in that way and method, and particular
dispensation that the Soul expected.

I shall finish my Discourse upon this Proposition with a Word of Exhortation.

3 Use.
If this be the frame of one that is the Spouse of Christ, let us labor to
find our hearts in this frame. I remember the words of Absalom; What (says he)
do I at Jerusalem, if I may not see the King's face? Jerusalem is called the
City of Solemnities, thither the Tribes went up, the Tribes to the Testimony of
Israel. Jerusalem was as pleasant a place as any was at that time in the
world, and Absalom being the King's Son, had undoubtedly accommodations, as
good as the City could afford: But Absalom had displeased his Father, and was
sensible he was under his frown; and it was not for the pleasantness of the
City, that he desired a liberty to return, but that he might see the reconciled
face of his Father; and therefore he says, What should I do at Jerusalem, if
I may not see the King's face? Without that, Jerusalem was to him but as
another place; nay in this worse than another place, because it was a place
where others enjoyed that which he wanted. Every Courtier, every ordinary
Servant of David's Family, saw his face; Absalom might not: I do only allude to
it. In or near Jerusalem was Mount Zion, called the Mountain of the House of
the Lord, because the Temple stood nigh to it. It was prophesied, Isa. 2. 2.
That in the last d^ies the Mountain of the Lord's House should be established
in the top of the Mountains, and should be exalted above the Hills, and all
Nations should flow unto it. And many people should go, and say, Come you, and
let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob,
and he shall teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. It Is not the
going up to the Mountain that pleases a gracious Soul, unless it finds it
self, when there, taught something of God's ways, and enabled to walk in the
Lord's paths. I shall prets this Exhortation by some Arguments, and offer you
something of Advice in this case.

First, For Arguments, what I gave you for Reasons may serve. Thus you shall
show your selves to be Christians indeed. The Wise must see the face of an
Husband, though a little Child may be pleased with the Picture. Take an
Ordinance, of it self it has something of the impression of God upon it: God
is there as a man in a Picture; but this can never satisfy a truly thirsty
Soul after God; he thirsts after God himself; My Soul (says David) thirsts
for thee. David must see the power and glory of God in the Sanctuary. An
Hypocrite may have a fancy to go to Ordinances, to hear Sermons, etc. that is
common to persons that shall perish with such as shall be saved: There may be
many ends which Hypocrites may have, which that may serve well enough: But
herein as to this point stands a good Christian distinguished from all
Hypocrites and Formalists in the world as to this particular.

Secondly, Till your hearts be brought to this, Duties will be nothing else but
a continual task and a burden to your souls. There will be no great pleasure
arising to any Soul from a bare reading or hearing the Word of the Lord. The
Formalists among the Jews, that looked at nothing but the bodily labor, quickly
came to profane the Table of the Lord, and to account the meat there
contemptible, and to say, Behold what a weariness is it! Mal. 1. 13. Amos tell
us, chap. 8. 5. that they said, When will the New Moon be gone, that we may
sell Corn, and the Sabbath that we may set forth Wheat. Nothing will deliver
the Soul from the burden of religious duties, I mean, the looking upon them as
such, but some Sweetness discerned in them, or some Profit, which it discerns
arising from them, neither of which will be discerned by any Soul, which
tastes nothing of God in them, nor has any Communion with him by, and through
them; but these things I before touched upon, as also the danger of a mere
bodily labor in this religious Duty; I shall therefore rather spend the
Remainder of my time in directing you what to do, that you may not only hear
the words of Christ's Mouth, but be kissed with the Kisses of his Mouth.

1.
Go out to hear the word of God as the word of God. The Apostle blesses God on
the behalf of his Thessalonians, 1 These. 2. 13. That when they received the
word of God, -- they received it not as the word of men, but (as it was in
truth) the word of God, which effectually works in them that believe. I am
afraid this is one thing which is much wanting in many Preachers, and more
hearers; the former do not go out to preach the word, as the word of God: The
other do not go out to hear it under that notion, as the word of God. It is a
Phrase has a great deal in it, and is comprehensive of all that previous
preparation which is our duty with reference to an Institution of God, and that
to so great an End as the Salvation of the Soul is. If I remember right,
Plutarch does somwhere complain of the Heathen, that they went to the Temples
of the Gods (...), not as men do to a place, to which they set out upon design
and due deliberation, considering whither they are going, and what their
business was there; but as men who step in by the by into a place: Whereas he
says they should come (...), prepared out of their Houses: What wonder is it
if God should not meet them in his Ordinance, who come not out of any fixed
design to meet him. Your Friend hardly thanks you for making his House your
Inn, stepping out of your Road to see him, when your main design is at another
Journeys end: But he thanks you that that is the main design of your Journey.

1. That man goes to hear the word of God as the word of God, that aright
fixes his end before he goes to hear. Our Savior seems to reflect upon the
want of this in those that went to hear John the Baptist. Matthew. 11. 7. What
went ye out into the wilderness to see? A Reed shaken with the wi^d: But what
went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft Raiment: Behold they that wear
soft Raiment are in Kings houses. But what went ye out for to see? A Prophet:
yea, I say unto you, and more than a Prophet. I would have every Man and Woman
before he or she goes out to hear the word of God, say to himself, My Soul,
whom am I going to hear? A man that shall speak to me smooth things, and
deliver himself in words that are proper to express what he says: But whom am
I going to hear? One that has a pleasant Voice, like one that sings to, or
plays well upon an Instrument, such a one I may hear in the Schools of
Rhetoric and Oratory: But whom do I go out for to hear? One that can discourse
rationally upon an Argument; I may hear such a one in the Schools of Aristotle
and Plato: Whom then do I go to Church for to hear? A Prophet: One that
discourses of the things of God; yea, and more than a Prophet: I am going to
hear God and Christ himself speaking to me him, of whom God has said, This is
my well beloved Son, hear ye him. For though it be a man that speaks, yet it
is a man sent of God, clothed with the Authority of Jesus Christ, and speaking
to me his Words, and in his Name; nor am I to regard any thing I hear, but what
agrees with what he has spoken, or his holy Prophets and Apostles, who were
immediately inspired by him. The setting right of a Persons first end, design,
and intention, gives a mighty conduct to his Actions. And (as I before said) it
is very unreasonable to expect Gods presence, and Blessing with, and upon us,
where the Heart is not set right with reference to its Intention and Design. It
is true as to the first Grace, God is found of those that seek him not, and of
those who do not enquire after him. No Soul would ever be converted, and
brought home to God, if God did not meet it in his Word, before it had thus
rightly fixed its design and intention in coming to hear the word of God, but
what God may do and sometimes does out of his abounding and preventing Grace,
is one thing, what a Soul may expect from God upon the account of any promise
is another thing, the Archer may possibly hit the mark, though he has never by
his Eye levelled his Arrow at it, but he cannot promise himself that good hap.
No Soul that sets not his heart aright to seek God in any Ordinance,
particularly this of hearing his word, who does not before he go, set his Face
toward Jerusalem, set this as a mark in his Eye, as the thing which he
proposes to himself.

2.
Secondly, It does not only comprehend the end of Intention and Design, but
also the manner, and certainly none can pretend to hear the word as the word of
God, but he must go to it without any levity, and with all manner of
Seriousness, and composure of Spirit. No Reverence, and Submission of Spirit
can be imagined too much for the great Majesty of Heaven. We ought not to go to
hear the word as if we were going to hear an Oration, much less as if we were
going to a Play.

3.
Thirdly, We cannot be thought to hear it as the word of God, without some
previous lookings up to God for a Blessing upon it. We go for the Teachings of
the Spirit. Our Savior tells us, Luke 11. 14. He gives his holy Spirit to them
that ask him. Christ first begged the Spirit for us, John 14. 16. I will pray
the Father, and he shall send you another Comforter. That comforting Spirit is
the Teaching Spirit, v. 26. The Comforter which the Father shall send in my
Name shall teach you all things. As Christ at first prayed to the Father to
send the Comforter, the Spirit that should teach us all things: So he expects
that we should pray for him for our selves. The holy Spirit is given to those
that ask him; this is a piece of our Household Preparation.

2.
Attend particularly to those Impulses which at some times thou may have to
hear. A Christian shall sometimes find some particular impulses upon him to
hear. I would not be hear. I would not be here mistaken, I know there is a
dangerous Opinion imbibed, and promoved by some Enthusiasts, that Christians
should never go to perform a Duty, whether praying or hearing, but upon some
particular Impulse or Motion. I call this a dangerous Principle, because it is
the first step to casting off all Duties and Ordinances. But yet let no
Christian neglect such special Impulses. Impulses to Actions that are contrary
to our Duty in the revealed Will of God, ought to be rejected, contemned, and
abhorred; they must come from the boilings of corruption in our own hearts, or
from the evil Spirit. Impulses to Actions which are not expressly commanded, nor
yet forbidden, must be considered, and we ought to obey or not obey them, as
Circumstances, pro hic and nunc, at this or that time, may determine it lawful
or not lawful, expedient or not expedient, with Reference to the General rules
which God in his word has given us to guide all our Actions by. Impulses to
the Performance of our Duty under due Circumstances ought never to be
neglected. It may be well presumed, that God has something to say to the Soul
in particular at such a time, when he gives it a special item and monition to
go to hear.

Thirdly, be sure thou go to hear with an humble Heart, and with as much of
a poor, broken, and contrite Spirit as thou can. There is a Promise, Psalm.
25. 9. The humble he will teach, and another Isa. 57. v. 15. Thus says the
high and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, and whose name is Holy, I dwell in
the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit,
to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the hearts of the contrite
ones. And Isa. 66. v. 2. To the man will I look even to him that is of a poor,
and contrite Spirit, and that trembles at my word. God sends the proud Soul
empty away; take heed of going to hear with a proud Heart, self-opinionated as
to Knowledge, or self-conceited. God teaches the humble, dwells with the
humble, looks upon the humble. The Rain that dasheth off, and runs down
the Mountains, rests in the Valleys; the Instructions, Reproofs, Convictions
of the word which fall upon Men of proud and high Conceits and Opinions of
themselves, rest, and are drunk in by low, and humble Souls. The broken and
contrite Heart is like the plowed ground, which is in itself more apt to
receive, and drink in the word, than that ground where the surface is not at
all broken, but there is besides particular Promises made to Broken Hearts. The
word you know is compared to Seed in the Parable of the Sower, Matthew. 13. and
in several other Texts, the Husbandman uses not to sow his Seed in the whole,
but in the broken ground.

Fourthly, Be sure you go to hear with unprejudised Hearts, willing and
desirous to learn. Prejudice naturally barreth the Ear to Instruction: Ahab's
prejudice against Micajah stopped his Ears against the word of the Lord to him,
and proved his fatal Ruin and Destruction. I should never advise Christians to
sit under the Ministry of any person they are prejudised against, it much
contributeth to a prejudice against the word of the Lord spoken by them; if
therefore in that case I could not remove my Prejudice, I would choose another
Preacher; but I further added, that you should go with Hearts willing and
desirous to know the Will of God: It is the chapt, thirsty ground that most
drinks in the Rain, and is made most fruitful by it; it is the Soul that
hungers, and thirsts after the word that profits by it, and has a
communion with God in it; though the Word be Gods, and he breaths upon the
Soul according to his own good pleasure, yet he breaths upon, he teaches no
Souls but those Souls that are willing, and desirous to learn and to be
instructed. It is true, it is he who first makes them willing, who first
enclineth their Ears to hear; but he first prepares the Heart, and then
causes his Ear to hear, as to Prayer; so in hearing, he first circumciseth the
Ear of a man, and enclineth him to hear his Statutes, and then he teaches
them: He deals not with us as with Stocks, and Stones, but as with rational
Creatures in a rational way.

5.
Attend unto the word which thou go to hear. No teaching, no good is to be
expected from any teaching, where the person only lends an Ear, but suffers his
Mind extravagantly to wander here and there. The Schoolmaster has no Patience
for such a Scholar, I am sure God has no Blessing for such a Soul as in
hearing does not hear, nor incline his Ear to Understanding. The Scholar gets
little by his Master or Tutors reading upon an Author, if the Scholar attends
not to the Text of the Author. The Spirits teaching is but a Commentary upon
the word, it brings to remembrance the things which we have heard from God.
The Soul that attends not to the word which he reads, or hears, can expect
nothing of the Spirits teaching; the word is not like to dwell in that Soul,
that will not suffer it to come so much as over the Threshold into it, I mean
into its memory or notion.

6.
Take heed of Vexing the Spirit in its Teachings. It was laid to the charge of
the Israelites, Isa. 53. 10. that they vexed his holy Spirit. They vexed the
Spirit by an afterwork, rebelling against his word, not being obedient to what
they were taught. But men may in hearing vex the Spirit in its Teaching, either
by Non-Attendency, suffering their hearts to be wandering elsewhere, when God in
his word is teaching the Soul; this vexes any Father, or Master in teaching a
Child; but of this I spoke before. And not only so, but by not giving a special
regard to its special Instructions: Scarce any of us but in hearing shall find
some notions of truth, some particular passages that God sets more particularly
home, and do in a special manner affect the Soul. The not observing them, or
quick forgetting of them is a special vexing of the holy Spirit in its
Teachings of our Souls.

Work together with the Spirit, in calling to remembrance: what you have heard.
Talk of the Law of the Lord when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, when
thou sit by the walls of thy House, when thou go out, and when thou
come in. The Jews had Phylacteries. Rolls of the Law fastened to their
Garments, to keep the Law in their mind perpetually. Our Savior blamed them
for their broad Phylacteries and narrow Practice; but he blamed not the means
to keep the Law of God in their minds, only they used them to a wrong and false
^n^, and used them not to the end for which they made them.

8.
Follow the word with Prayer. Do not only pray for the Spirit before thou
hear, but pray for the abidings of^ it after thou have heard, to bring to
thy remembrance what thou have heard from God.

9.
Labor to practice what thou hear. The Master or Tutor is weary of teaching
the Scholar, to whom he has read Lecture after Lecture, but yet he will do
nothing; but on the contrary, how cheerfully does an ingenuous Master teach
that Scholar, that to his utmost p^tteth in practice what he has read to him,
and then comes to his Tat^r begging to be further taught and instructed. The
Spirit of God will give over that Soul, that pretends to be ever learning, and
yet never comes to any practical Knowledge of the Truth. He that is not a mere
hearer, but a doer of the Word also, 2.
is the man that shall be blessed indeed.

^.
Sermon VIII.
Canticles 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; for his Loves
are better than Wine.

I Have done now with the matter of the Spouses (that is the Churches, or the
particular believing Souls) prayer in this her first Petition; I have nothing
(as to the petition it self) to consider but the form of it. As to the matter
we have found, that the thing she would have, is Some Special, distinguishing
favor. Some token of God for good to her which might speak him to love her
with the Love of a bridegroom to a bride, a Husband to his Wife.

I have showed you, that she asks modestly but a kiss, thereby letting us
know how precious the least of Christ's Special, distinguishing love is to the
truly believing Soul. Not that the least dispensations, and measures of grace,
will satisfy the Spiritual hunger and thirst of a pious Soul; it is one thing
for a pious Soul to prize, and value the least, another thing to be satisfied,
and fully contented with it, she therefore mentions Kisses in the Plural
Number, as well to signify the variety of gracious Influences, as their
frequent Emanations. I have further taken notice of her particular desire after
a communion with God in his word, especially Gospel Doctrines, and that not
only a more external Communion with, God in reading, hearing and thinking upon
it: But the more real internal Spiritual communion with God in his word which
the Soul has by the teachings of the Spirit, She desires not only to hear the
words of his mouth, but to be kissed with the kisses of his mouth. I have now
nothing to do but to consider the form of her words, and see if from thence we
can gain any further Spiritual Instruction.

The words are first Vox volentis, the Language of a Soul, that was willing to
receive these impressions; if she were not willing, she would not have made
them the matter of her request.

Secondly, They are Vox cupientis, not only the Language of one that was
willing but of one inflamed with a desire after the object willed and proposed.
They do not express a bare velleity with an indifferency as to the thing. They
sound a great deal more then. He may, if he will, kiss me with the kisses of
his mouth.

Lastly, They are Vox petentis, the language of one upon her knees, begging it
of God, as the great thing which she sought after. And as I observed to you in
the opening of the words, she begs reverently, modestly, humbly, boldly,
fervently: The form of her Petition speaks a well ordered Prayer, a Prayer
according to the Rules which God has given us for putting up our
Supplications. Hence results the Proposition.

Prop. That believing Souls are not only very willing, but exceedingly desirous
of a near, spiritual communion with Christ, and to obtain it will use rightly
ordered Prayer.

In the Proposition here are three things predicated of such a Soul as is the
Spouse to this glorious Bridegroom.

1. Its willingness that the Lord should have a near and spiritual communion
with it.

2. It is not only willing but desirous of it.

3. That in order to it, it will make use of rightly ordered Prayer.

I have already told you in my former Discourses, That Communion (strictly
taken) signifies some actions wherein two or more mutually impart, or
communicate themselves each to other. Now of this you know amongst men there
are various degrees. We have some communion with strangers, more with our
neighbors, friends and acquaintance; most of all with our nearest Relations;
the Father with his Child, the Husband with the Wife; of all other the
communion betwixt the Husband and Wife, is the nearest. The Husband
communicates his heart, his love and affection, more to his Wife, than to any
other person: So does the Wife reciprocally to her Husband; so that of all
other, the Conjugal Communion is the nearest; such is that mentioned in the
Text. God communicates himself to all his creatures in some degree or other; he
feeds the young Ravens when they cry; he makes his Sun to shine upon the
just and upon the unjust: And they in some degree communicate themselves to him
as their Creator: The young Ravens cry; the wicked man houls upon his Bed; the
vilest man in distress cries, Lord help me. This is like the Communion now that
we may have with Strangers, yea Enemies. God does further communicate himself
to those within the pale of his Church. To the Church belongs the Oracles of
God; God further reveals his mind and will to such as are within the bosom of
it: They also do communicate themselves unto God more than the others, that is,
they pay him a further homage; they give him a more steady, constant, bodily
service; they read, hear, pray, etc. This is like our communion with neighbors
and ordinary friends. But now God does further communicate himself unto some
persons: He communicates his grace and power to their wills and affections;
they are thereby made partakers of the Divine Nature, transformed into the
Image of God, and they reciprocally having received this Divine grace, give up
their hearts unto God; this is that which I mean by near, conjugal communion,
being like the communion which the Husband and Wife have each with other, of
all other the fullest and nearest. I say,

1.
First, The believing Soul is willing that God should have such a communion
with it. It is passively willing, not unwilling: Indeed every regenerate Soul
is further willing than this comes to; but that I shall show you by and by
under another Head. This alone will distinguish such a Soul, from the Soul of
an Hypocrite. Take an unregenerate man, he is not willing to this; he may be
willing that God should impart himself to him in outward blessings, which may
gratify his sense, and serve him as to his renewing necessities in the world;
or that God should impart to him some spiritual gifts; these may serve him as
to his profit, or as to his honor, credit and reputation in the world; and he
may be willing to communicate and impart something of himself to God (as I have
before showed you) but that God should unite their hearts to fear his Name,
(which was the prayer of David) that God should cleanse them from their
corruptions, incline their hearts to his Testimonies; this they are not willing
to. They are like some woman, that will say of such a person as makes love to
her, she likes the man well enough to sit and talk with her; but for an Husband
she cannot abide him. Thus the best unregenerate man deals with God. Some
there are, profane persons, that cannot endure the Name of God or Christ; hate
his Word, and all acts of communion with God, or any thing that relates to
him; but now the formal Hypocrite, he can be content to go and sit and hear a
Sermon, and read a Chapter, wherein he hears God speaking to him; yea and to
pray sometimes, by which duty he talks with God; but he abhors that God
should come near to his Soul, to captivate his understanding, to subdue his
will, to direct his affections to truly spiritual Objects, he withdraws his
heart and affections from God. I think Augustine somewhere confesses, that in
his unregenerate state, he often prayed to God that he would give him strength
against a particular corruption, when in the mean time he in his heart wished
that God would not hear his prayer. The unregenerate man is not willing that
God should have any near communion with him: He is not willing that the Law of
God should be wrote upon his heart, nor that the Lord should rule over his
inward man.

Secondly, The Regenerate Soul is not only willing, but desirous: The
willingness that is in him, is not a bare, lazy velleity, and a passive
willingness, but an active willingness; he being made willing, his will
commands his affections to move toward that which his will has chosen; and
indeed there is no true willing of any thing without this; for good being the
proper Object of the rational appetite, no sooner has the understanding
discerned it, but the will chooses it, and naturally moves by desires toward
it.

Thirdly, I observed to you, that the words are in the form of a Prayer. What
the Will has chosen as good and suitable to a man's necessities, and upon that
account has by desires moved toward, it commands the assistance of the
outward man in the use of any proper mean to obtain. Prayer being an Ordinance
and appointment of God, as a means in order to the obtaining any good thing
which he has promised; it is but a reasonable motion of a reasonable Soul. I
put in the term rightly ordered, because, as I shall show you further anon,
there is a sufficient ground for it, in this form of words by which the
Spouse's Petition is expressed; and it is not every Prayer that is acceptable
to God, but such alone as he has directed, God has not only directed our duty
as to the matter, but also as to the manner of the performance. But this is
enough to have spoken, to give you the sense of the Proposition. I shall show
you now the ground or reason of it, whence in this thing there is such a
different temper and complexion betwixt the regenerate and the unregenerate
Soul. The foundation of this lies in the change of the heart, which is wrought
in the Child of God, which supposed these motions of his Soul, will appear to
be no more than the regular motions of reasonable Souls so complexionated. The
Scripture every where describes the Child of God as a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.
17. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature, old things are passed away,
and all things are become new. Ephesians. 4. 23. Be renewed in the spirit of your
mind; And that you put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness. Col. 3. 10. And have put on the new man, which
is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created him. The Child of
God is transformed by the renewing of his mind. Romans 12. 2. Regenerated and
born again. Joh. 3. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God; born again of Water, and of the Spirit, as our Savior
expounds it, v. 5. Now this change, this renevation respects not the
substantial power and faculties of the Soul. The same powers and faculties, the
same understanding, will and affections; I mean the same powers which we call
so remain, but they are changed as to their quality and aspect unto Objects.
The same wheels of the Soul remain, but they are set right, and move more
regularly toward what are indeed their true and proper Objects. The natural
man's understanding is blind, and dark, and weak, and impotent; he calls
good, evil, and evil, good, bitter things sweet, and sweet things bitter; his
palate is vitiated, so as he neither does, nor can discern things truly and
spiritually good. Until his nature be cultivated by moral Discipline, and some
ingenious Education, he is like the Beast that perishes, and judges of good
and evil merely by sense. When it is cultivated he judges of it by reason, and
determines good and evil according to rational Principles, and in that rises
no higher, than to the perfection of an Heathen Philosopher, who knew nothing
of any such thing as Union and Communion with God, and either believed nothing
of the Immortality of the Soul, and so took not himself concerned to care for
that, or at least had a faint belief, and an imperfect notion of it. But the
renewed man has his understanding opened, to discern more excellent things. He
easily sees, That God is the chiefest Good, and thence concludes as
rationally, that the happiness of man must needs consist in the enjoyment of
God, in Union and Communion with him; as the Heathens determined, that the
happiness of a man must necessarily lie in the f^uition of, and an union with
the summum bonum, the greatest good: This being determined by the
understanding, by that new light and power of discerning, given it by God: The
will, of whose nature it is to follow the Dictates of the Understanding,
ordinarily chooses and embraces it, by as natural and rational a working as
that wretched Soul that knows no be tter things than good Meat, and Drink,
and Clothes, and Estates, chooses them, and embraces them before other
things: Or the more cultivated Soul chooses Learning, and Knowledge, and moral
Habits. Only in rega rd there is a particular Debauchery and Corruption of the
Will of man, there is a particular work of God upon the Will, changing and
altering that, or else in Spiritual things it would not follow the Dictate of
the Understanding, and this may be seen in things benea th this Order. We
indeed usually say, the Will is a blind faculty, and follows the dictate of the
Understanding; but since the Fall, man is so much mancipated and enslaved to
his sensual Appetite, that we see in daily experience it does not. The
drunkard, the unclean persons are daily proofs of it, who know well enough that
the prosecution of their Lusts in those things does not only destroy their
contrary moral Habits, but ruin their Lives, Health, Reputation, yet cannot
forbear the pursuit of them. But the Will being thus renewed to choose the best,
spiritual good, the affections move in a natural Order after it, and the
outward man is commanded to all actions pursuant to it. So that I say, this
Renovation of the whole Man according to the Image of God is the true cause of
the Souls willingness, and earnest desire after these nearest degrees of
Communion with God: The understanding being thus fully enlightened, to discern
that God is the chiefest good, and that man's greatest happiness must lie in an
Union with him, and enjoyment of him.

2. To which I know nothing can be added, but those measures of experience
which every renewed Soul has how good the Lord is. The experience of any good
adds much to our Souls value of it, as it confirms to us our notion and
apprehension of it. Many things appear better to us in contemplation, than in
fruition: But there can be nothing in nature conceived, more effectual to
inflame our affections after any Object, than when besides the goodness our
Understandings have discerned in it, upon which our Wills have made their
Election of it, a superadded experience confirms our noton of the goodness of
it. There is no justified Soul but has in some measure tasted how good the
Lord is, and how good a Fellowship, and Communion with God is, so as it does
but move rationally, in willing and desiring the nearest and most intimate
degrees of it.

I added further: That this Soul as a mean to obtain it, will use rightly
ordered Prayer. The Reason and ground of this evidently appears, if we consider;

1. That Prayer is the means to obtain it. No man can be so much as presumed
truly to will, and to desire any thing which he uses no means to obtain, or as
to which he does not use the proper means to obtain it, if he knows it, the
good is here is not sensible, or rational, to be acquired by natural or moral
means, but is truly and highly spiritual; the Communication of the Divine
Influences to the Soul, and most inward part of man; the means must be something
of Divine Institution, something which God has appointed as a mean in order to
so great and blessed an end. Prayer is one mean of this Nature. He gives his
holy Spirit to them that ask him, says our Savior. This is a Divine Means,
under a Divine Ordination, and Institution, with reference to such an end. This
the Believer knows, and it is a means within his Power. God has sent forth
the Spirit of Adoption into his Heart, teaching him to cry Abba Father. The
Spirit helps his Infirmities with strong cries, and groans which cannot be
uttered.

2. He also knows, that it is not all Prayer will be effective of this, but
Prayer according to the Will of God, effectual fervent Prayer. A man may ask
amiss, and not receive. Though therefore an Hypocrite that takes up with a form
of Godliness, and aims at no right end in his acts of Homage, but drives a by
Design for himself in all his duties, and seeks himself more than God, may
content himself with such performances as answer the low mark which he levells
his Arrows at: Yet the pious Soul that has a true aim, and design in his
Actions, must mind such a performance of them as shall bear a proportion to the
true end he aims at; but this is enough to have spoken for the Explication
and Confirmation of this Proposition; what this rightly ordered Prayer is, (God
willing) I shall further open to you in the Application of this Discourse.

Use 1.
From hence in the first place we may take some measures of our State with
reference unto God. None of these things can truly be said of a wicked man, or
formal Hypocrite.

1. It cannot be said that he is truly willing to have such a Communion with
God and Christ, as I have been opening and describing to you. They would not
have God rule over them; they would have a Christ to save them from the Wrath
to come; but they would not have Christ to dwell in their Hearts, to subdue
their Lusts, no Hypocrite can truly say this. They have no desires after such a
Communion with Christ. Their desires are all terminated in themselves. They say
to the Almighty depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. If at
any time they pray for any thing of this nature, it is coldly, and lazily, and
formally, secretly wishing they might have no Answer to their Prayers. Indeed a
true willingness, an hearty desire, and fervent Prayer after this spiritual,
inward, near Communion with God, may I think be trusted to, as a mark of one
who is a Christian indeed. It must argue a mighty change in the Heart of man,
and such a one as no moral Principles, no change upon the mere cultivation of
Nature, can be imagined to effect. Here is clearly a good pursued, which no
natural man discerns, no natural Understanding judges, the Eyes of the
Understanding must first be opened. Here must be an alteration of the Will of
man, the natural bent and inclination of it must be changed. This change cannot
be from our selves, nor from any Creature, but from him alone who gives to
will, and to do.

2d Br.
Secondly, You may hence observe, that it is not a mere willing a near
Communion with Christ that will evidence a truth of Grace. It must be a
willingness declared by Intense desires, and attended with Suitable endeavors.
It is easy for men to say they are willing Christ should Reign over them, and
do his will in and upon their Souls when they are really unwilling. Yea, there
may be a real faint velleity, but attended with a carelessness as to the
obtaining what we pretend to will. All Grace, habitual Grace is expressed under
the notion of willing, God is said to give, To will and to do: To make his
people a willing people in the day of his power. There are promises made, to
those who are Willing, and obedient. And If a man will, let him come and drink
of the water of life freely, and Paul Says no more than To will is present
with me. But these Scriptures must not be understood of a merely pretended, and
professed willingness, nor a faint willingness, issued in a few Short breathed
wishes, but of a true and real willingness discovering it self in the intense
motions of the Affections, and the intense pursuit of the thing, willed, by the
whole man. Such a willingness Speaks a change in the heart and where it is
present with the Soul is accepted.

Use 2.
But let us upon this occasion enter into our hearts, and try our Spiritual
State upon this issue, viz. Whether we be truly willing and desirous to have
this near, inward, conjugal Communion with this glorious Bridegroom. To prove
this, the Apostle has expressed the Union between Christ and the Soul, made by
faith in the Justification of a Soul, by the moral Union which in Marriage is
betwixt the Husband and Wife, Ephesians. 5. from v. 25. to the End. We shall also
find that state excellently shadowing out the Communion which should be, and is
betwixt every Soul and Christ; I mean every believing Soul.

1. The Husband and Wife are made one flesh. Not essentially, but morally this
was a piece of the Law of Marriage upon its first Institution Genesis 2. 24.
Sutably to this the Apostle Speaks. 1 Cor. 6. 26. He that is joined to the
Lord, is one Spirit. Believers are by Peter said to be made partakers of the
Divine Nature. Where there is this true Communion between Christ and the Soul,
there is in his measure the same mind in him tha^ was in Jesus Christ. He in
the general wills the same things that Christ wills. The Glory of God, the
Sanctification and eternal Salvation of his own Soul, and the Souls of others,
he can as to the main say, Fiat voluntas mea; mea quia tua. Let my will be
done, mine because thine. If he does in any thing err, and not will what Christ
wills, it is through ignorance, passion or infirmity, when he sees his
error, his will alters; hence in our prayers, in things as to which we are
not sure that it is the will of God we should have them, every true Christian,
though he may ask for them, prays after his Lord's copy, nevertheless not my
will but thy will be done. Can thou say this? That the same Spirit is in thee
that was in Christ, that in the general, in the main thou willest nothing but
what Christ wills, that thou art one Spirit with Christ?

Secondly all Conjugal Communion requires forsaking of Father and mother, Genesis
2. 24. A forsaking them to that degree, as to dwell with the Husband, so as to
adhere to the Husband, or Wife in case of an opposition, this is also the Law
of this Spiritual Marriage Psalm. 45. 10. Hearken O Daughter and consider, and
incline thine Ear. Forget also thine own people, and thy Fathers House, The
Wife that will maintain duly her Conjugal Communion must: 1. Not dwell in her
Fathers house if he may not be with her there. 2. She must forsake the
Precepts, Counsels and Advice of her dearest relations, where it is contrary to
the will of her Husband. She must 3. Forsake them in what they are Enemies and
opposite to her Husband. What are our own people? What is our Fathers House?
But the world and men of it, the Counsels and Imaginations, and inclinations of
our own hearts? A true Christian that is by Faith united to Christ is not
obliged in order to his or her Communion with him, wholly to forsake the world,
and cast off Earthly Friends converse or relations, he is only bound Not to
dwell in the world not to make that his whole business, but to have his heart
in heaven, to use the world as if he used it not. Not to hearken to the
Precepts, Counsels, and Advices of the world contrary to the will of Christ.
Not to take the worlds part in opposition to the Law of Christ; thus much the
Wives Conjugal Communion with her Husband, and the Souls Spiritual Conjugal
Communion with Christ calls to it for, the preference of Christ's will, both to
its own natural Will, and to all the Wills of men.

Thirdly. Look as in Marriages, the Communion following that moral Union
requires a cleaving of the Married Persons each to other, Genesis 2. 24. So the
Communion that follows this Mystical Union requires this of every Christian,
to cleave unto Christ, to his Truths, his Interests and Concerns in the World,
his Friends, his Will, all that is his. This cleaving I understand not as
restrained to the inward motions of the Affections, as it is said, Sechem's
heart clave to Dinah: But I extend it further to all overt Acts, by which this
inward Affection may be discovered, in the same sense as we say to our Friends.
I will stick to you, or I will stand by you. Christ performs his part he
sticks, he cleaves to the Believers, in all its Spiritual Combats, and Dangers
with, or from, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: Thus must we cleave to him.

Fourthly, It Is a piece of Conjugal Communion. That the Wife does nothing but
she will first acquaint her Husband with it, ask his Counsel, take his
Direction. The Husband also imparts much of his Counsel to his Wife: It Is a
piece of our Communion, true Communion with Christ, to do nothing without
taking Counsel of him in his Word, without asking his Directions in Prayer, in
every difficulty where we have not a clear direction in the Word of God, to fly
to him by Prayer and Supplications.

Are your Souls willing to entertain such a Communion with Christ as this is?
Are you desirous of it? Do you pray for it? This speak^eth well for the Union
betwixt Christ and your Souls, nothing less than this will.

Use 3.
This Discourse may be further useful to some Souls, that it may be cannot
satisfy themselves in that Communion which they have with the Lord Jesus; they
would willingly that Christ should impart more of his Loving Kindness, and of
his Power to their Souls, and they are troubled, that they can no more freely,
no more fully give up themselves to him; their Hearts are not united enough to
love and fear God, and indeed the best Souls are seldom satisfied in the
Reception of Grace, or in the Actings of it. Now such Souls as are overmuch
troubled in this case, troubled to that degree as for want of degrees to
suspect all the truth of Grace in their Souls. This may be some satisfaction to
hear, that it speaks a Soul to be the Spouse of Christ to be truly willing,
sincerely desirous, much in Prayer for those degrees of nearest Communion with
Christ which it stands in need of. In Earthly Marriages three things are
required, 1. Consent of Parties. 2. Consent of Parents. 3. Publication of it to
the World. The first alone is essential to the Union. The second to make it a
perfectly lawful Act. The third only to avoid Scandal and to keep up Civil
Order in the World. In the Spiritual Marriage the Consent of Parties makes the
Union. Christ's Consent to be united to thy Soul, is evidenced in his Word
declared by us, who are his Proxies to espouse you to this Husband. If thy Soul
also truly consents, if thou truly desire this Union, and that Communion
which follows and ought to follow it, the Match is made, thou art joined to
the Lord, though it may be there be not a Publication of it to thy own Soul,
much less to the World.

Use 4.
I shall conclude with a Word of Exhortation, To labor for this evidence of
Grace. That you may be truly willing to, truly desirous of such a Communion
with Christ, as I have been describing. You that are yet strangers to it,
labor for the beginnings of it. You that find any thing of it, labor to
uphold it, and labor for the Perfection of it. To the first, by way of
Counsel, I would only speak a few things.

1. Labor to be convinced of your sad condition, till Grace has brought you
into this better State. Christ told the Woman of Samaria she had had many
Husbands, and he whom she then enjoyed was not her Husband. Unregenerate Men
have many Paramours; for there is no Soul but cleaves to something, one man's
Heart cleaves to his Pleasures, another to his Profits, but all these are not
the reasonable Souls Husbands, the Soul cannot feed upon these things. Let a
Woman be married to a Man, and run away from him she may have another Paramour,
but he is not her Husband. It is Man's Case; he was in Creation united to God,
he is run away from God, and follows many Lovers, but none of these are the
Souls Husbands. O therefore return to your first Husband, what can you imagine
God should do for any of your Souls, more than any one of you would do for a
Wife, that had run away from you, and clave to another man.

2. Look as the Woman that wants her Husband, has none that so naturally
cares for her, none that will be a covering to her Head, or a Light to her
Eyes, so neither has the Soul in its state of disunion with God, any that will
care for it, as to its Spiritual and Eternal Concerns. I might add the infinite
advantages of this Union and Communion; I remember the Argument used by Hamor
and Sechem, to persuade their People into a Willingness to be circumcised, that
Sechem might be married into Jacob's Family. Shall not (say they) their Cattle,
and Substance, and all that they have be ours, only consent to them? Shall not
the Grace, and Glory, and Kingdom of Christ be yours, only consent to him, and
be willing to a Communion with him? But it is the Lord that must persuade
Japhet to come, and to dwell in the Tents of Shem. No man comes to the Son but
he whom the Father draws; and while there is a spiritual Union, it is
unreasonable to think there should be any Willingness in a Soul to any near
Communion with Christ. We may use Arguments with Souls estranged from God, to
reconcile them to him, and it is our Duty so to do; till God concurreth with
the work of his Spirit they will be of no force.

Let me therefore turn to such with whom this mystical Union is made. Nor shall
I need use words with any such, to persuade them to a consent or willingness
to, or desire of this near Communion with Christ which I have been discoursing;
there is no such Soul but must be willing, must be desirous of it: But there is
none of them which has attained, there is no such Soul but has attained
something, nor any that has attained to Perfection, none but may receive from
Christ more than it has received, none but desires his Heart might be more in
subjection to Christ than it is. The way further to attain is Prayer, rightly
ordered Prayer. It is the Spouse that speaks in the Text, she had attained,
she was already united to her Spiritual Bridegroom; but yet she finds her Soul
in a continuing need of his Influences, and further Tokens for good to be
showed unto her, for these she uses Prayer as an apposite means. Only we may
ask and not receive, because we ask amiss. Let us look over the form of the
Spouses Petition, and see what we may learn from thence to guide our Souls in
our Applications to God.

First, The word in the Hebrew (...) in the future Tense, which is often used
for the (...) Mood in the Hebrew, and may indifferently be translated, Let him
kiss me, or He shall, or will kiss me with the Kisses of his Mouth. Her Prayer
was the Prayer of Faith. This is a prime requisite in all our Prayers to God.
Math. 21. 22. And all things whatsoever you shall ask in Prayer believing, you
shall receive. Jam. 5. 15. The Prayer of Faith saves the sick. He (says the
Apostle) that comes unto God must believe that he is, and that he is a
Rewarder of those that seek him. Nor is that General Faith enough for that Soul
that goes to God, for any particular Mercy, there must be a more particular
Faith, both as to Gods Power, and Love, with reference to that good thing, that
God is able to do that thing for him: yea and willing also so far as in his
infinite Wisdom he shall see it good. When the blind men had come to Christ
begging Mercy, Matthew. 9. 27, 28. (says he) Believe you that I Am able to do
this? They said, Yea Lord, then he touched their Eyes. Nay the Prayer of Faith
signifies more, a trusting and relying on God for the doing of the thing we
ask. It is very much to observe how much the holy Scripture lays upon this
with Reference to the hearing and answering our Prayers. Jam. 1 5. If any of
you lack Wisdom let him ask of God: But (v. 6.) let him ask in Faith, nothing
wavering: According to your Faith (says Christ) so be it to you. The
Unregenerate man cannot ask in Faith, he wants the Habit, his Soul is shut up
in Unbelief, and Gods People may be too guilty of not asking in Faith, giving
too much way to temptations, and hearkening too much to the jealousies and
suspicions of their own Souls.

Secondly, The Spouses Phrase speaks an holy boldness. He shall kiss me with
the Kisses of his Mou^h, Indeed this differs but gradually from the other it
must be a boldness of Faith, and in this Sense we are to come boldly to the
Throne of Grace. Ephesians. 3. 12. We have boldness and access with confidence,
through the Faith of him. Hence Heb. 4. 16. Let us therefore come boldly unto
the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in a time
of need.

Thirdly The abrup^ness of the Phrase speaks Passion, and Ferveney. The
fervent Prayer of the Righteous avails much. Jam 5. 16. (...), The working
Prayer When the whole Soul is in Prayer set on work, the Understanding
discerning the good the Soul prays for, discerning God able to give it, and
willing also, discerning the Promise by which God has made himself a Debtor to
the Creature for it. The Will in willing it, the Affections in intense desires
of it. Men may pray, and their Souls be hardly set at work at all, only they so
far as it influenceth the Eye to see Words in a Book, or the Understanding to
invent Words which the Tongue may utter. This Prayer signifies little, it is
the fervent working Prayer that avails much, when the whole Soul is at work,
wrestling with God as Jacob did, that it may receive the Blessing.

Fourthly, The form of the Word speaks Reverence: Let him kiss me. O that it
might please the Lord to kiss me, (so much the Phrase sounds in our Dialect.)
In all our Service of God, he requires Reverence and a godly Fear. He that
dares not to come to God, but doubts whether he may presume to ask of him,
knows not the Lords goodness, he that dares to come without Reverence knows
not the Lords Majesty, and Greatness. As boldness and Confidence without
doubting, becomes us with respect to his Goodness, Love, and Faithfulness, so
Fear and Reverence becomes us with reference to the Greatness and Majesty of
the Divine Being.

Lastly her Speech speaks Modesty: She asks but a Kiss. Modesty is not
opposite to an holy Boldness in Prayer. She peremptorily asks something which
might speak his special peculiar Love: Yet there is a modesty imported in her
words, in that she asks no more than the Kisses of his Mouth. In three things
we should show a Modesty in Prayer, if it be rightly ordered.

1. In the asking the good things of this Life, with a due Submission to the
Will and Wisdom of God. It speaks too much boldness with God, to be too
importunate for things that are not absolutely and infallibly good for us under
all circumstances. It is enough for us that God has promised to withhold from
us no good thing. We prefer our own to the Divine Wisdom, in such importunities.

2. In the asking of Spiritual Mercys Modesty ought to be showed also, in
submitting our selves to the Will of God, as to Dispensations, or Degrees of
gracious Manifestations, not absolutely necessary; they may be asked, but they
ought to be asked with limitations; if God sees they be good for us, if he
that knows our Hearts, sees that we will use them for his Glory, etc.

3. In not prescribing time to God, as to the granting of those things, which
are not in the present time necessary. We ought to believe God wiser than our
selves, and to limit our Requests by the Terms of his Promise, to beg the
things which God has promised, upon the Terms which he has promised.

I have now finished my Discourses as to the Spouses first Petition, Let him
kiss me with the Kisses of his Mouth: I shall in my next exercise proceed to
the Argument by which she backeth this her first Petition, For thy Loves are
better than Wine.

Sermon IX.
Canticles 1. 2. For thy Loves are better than Wine.

I Have done with the Spouses first Petition, Let him kiss me with the Kisses
of his Mouth: Wherein (as I have showed) she manifested her Desire after near,
and special Communion with her beloved, and some distinguishing token of his
favor; I come now to the Argument, by which she backeth this Petition, that is
expressed in the words I have now read to you. The Argument is drawn, from the
value she had for his Love. The reason of her before mentioned Desire, was the
excellency she apprehended, in the favor of her Lord, which she expresses in
a way of comparison; She says, It is better than Wine. And she makes this her
Estimate of the Love of Christ, an Argument for Gods manifestation of it to her
Soul. I showed yon the Sense of the words before, I have nothing now to do, but
to discourse the Propositions arising from the words so opened, the first of
which was.

Prop. That Christ has Loves. There are Loves in Christ. He is not only
lovely, and so the object of our Love, the chiefest of Ten thousand; but he is
Loving, and we are the Objects of his Love. Of old, He rejoiced in the
habitable parts of the Earth, and his Delights were with the Sons of Men, Prove.
8. 31. The Apostle tells us, 1 Jo. 4. 16. That God is Love. It must be
understood of God in Christ: For take Man as he is stated upon the Fall, and
our God is toward him a consuming Fire. We are in that state as Stubble, dry
Stubble, he is a consuming Fire; But the Apostle tells us 2. Cor. 5. 19. That
God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself. God in Christ is Love
toward poor Creatures. There are Loves in him. Let me a little open the Term. I
desire you to take notice of Two things. 1. That it is Spoken in the Abstract;
2. In the plural number, not Love but Loves.

First, Love in the strict, and proper Notion of it, signifies the Persons or
the Creatures Propension and Inclination to some Object, and its Complacency in
it. And in this Abstract, and purer Notion of it, it agrees to the Divine
Being, and Christ is the Subject of Love, There is in the eternal Son of God,
strong Propensions and Inclinations to do good to the Sons of men. To love, the
Philosopher says, is Velle bonum; to will good to another: There is in Christ
a Propension a strong Inclination to will good to the Sons of Men; He has a
Complacency in some of the Sons of Men. Love is a Term that signifies
Affections, and all our Affections are but the motions of our Wills toward
their Objects. We say, there are no Affections in God: That is true; But there
is something in the Divine Being, which is proportionable to what in us we call
Affectiions. In us Affections are extravagant Motions, mutable Passions; there
are no such things in God: In us something out of our selves draws out our Love.
There is no such Passions and Affections in God: But if we consider Love in its
pure Nature, as it is the kind motion of the Will to an Object, so Christ is
Love, and he has Loves; that is, there is in him, pure and admirable
Propensions and Inclinations of his Will to do good to the Children of Men,
especially to some particular Souls amongst the Sons of Men. These indeed are
not kindled in the Divine Being, from any thing in us, or out of itself, as
Flames of Love in the Creature usually are: Yet even in Creatures Love
oftentimes is an inaccountable thing, but in God it is always so; he shows
Mercy because he will show Mercy, and loves freely. That Is the first thing.

But Secondly, The word is plural, not Love but Loves. God is one, and his Love
is one, Christ's Love is one in himself, but as the River, that went out of Eden
to water the Garden of Paradise Genesis 2. 10. was one in its Original, and
Source, but from thence it was parted, and became into four Heads. So that
O^eness of the Divine Propension and Inclination to do good to poor Creatures,
being out of the Divine Being it divides itself into many Heads, and as the Sea
which is one in itself, yet as it passes by several Lands and washes upon
various Shoa^s. receives several Names, and so admits of a plural number; so
the Love of Christ, which in him is but one Good Will to poor Creatures; yet as
it shows itself, in Serving the necessities of various Souls, or the various
necessities of the same Soul, so it becomes Loves, and admits of plurality,
there is in Christ pardoning Love, and an healing Love, a strengthening Love.
and a comforting Love; therefore the Spouse says Thy Loves. There is but One
Love in Christ, but it becomes many when it washes upon various Shoars, and
touches our diverse wants.

Thirdly, The plural Number speaks the Dimensions of that Love which is in
Christ, or rather the want of D^rensions in it. The plural number has no
bounds, the singular is bounded by Unity, but the plural has no bounds, if you
be to express Millions of Millions of Millions, it is all still but the plural
number. Loves reaches infiniteness. When the Spouse says, Thy Loves, it is as
much as thine infinite, unmeasurable Love, Christ has not only a good Will, a
kind Inclination, and Propension to the Sons of Men, but an infinite,
unmeasurable, unfathomable Propension and Inclination to do good to the Souls
of his Saints. The Apostle prays for the Ephesians. Ephesians. 3. 17, 18. That
Christ might dwell in their Hearts by Faith, that they being rooted and
grounded in Love, might be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and, depth, and beighth, and to know the Love of Christ
which passes knowledge, height, and depth, and length, and breadth, are the
boundaries of our knowledge but the Love of Christ passes knowledge.

Fourthly, Love signifies some Specialties of Affection. A good man has Love
for many Women, but Love's only for the Wife of his Bosom. Loves signify both
a common, and a singular and special Love. Christ has a Philanthropy, or
common Love for all the Sons of Men, but he has an (...), a special Love and
Kindness for some. Joseph caused all his Brethren, to have a Mess set them, but
for Benjamin, a double Mess. God gave Esau the Mountains of Edom. There was
Love, but Jacob had the Blessing, Esau had his Love, Jacob had his Loves. That
the Gospel is preached to every Creature, is from Christ's Love, but that any by
the Gospel are made New creatures this is from his Loves. It is kindness to
them that they have the Gospel, but a far greater kindness, a kindness of
another nature to the Soul that it is enabled to receive the Gospel, and is
turned into the likness of it.

5. Loves may signify the Effects, and indications of Love, and indeed Terms of
Affection applied unto God, do very ordinarily in Scripture signify this, Et
affectum, and effectum; Both the Motion of the Divine Will within itself, and
the effect of it, upon the Creature. So it is true, that Christ has Loves, his
Good Will to poor Creatures does not exhaust itself in one or another
Emanation, in one or another Stream, but in various Emanations, in a multitude
of Streams, and thus you see there are two things in the Proposition asserted.

1st. That in the Lord Jesus Christ, there is an infinite, unmeasurable
Good Will to the Childr of Men, (...) such of them as are by Faith united to
him.

2dly. That this Good Will of Christ toward them, declares itself in a great
variety of Indications and Effects, Suited to their various necessities; It is
not a Love that evaporates in Air, as the Love of some impotent persons, whose
Love toward us terminates within their own Souls.

These are the two Points I have to prove, and they, are of exceeding easy
demonstration, to those who believe the History of the Gospel, or the Matter,
and Propositions of the whole Word of God.

Solomon tells us of Christ under the notion of Wisdom (the Apostle calls
Christ The Wisdom of God, 1. Cor. 1. 24.) that before ever the Earth was, when
there were no Depths nor Fountains abounding with Water, when God prepared the
Heavens, and set a compass upon the face of the Deep, when he established the
Clouds, Prove. 8. 24. 25. 31. He was Rejoicing in the habitable part of his
Earth, and his Delights were with the Sons of Men. The Apostle tells those of
the Ephesians who were Saints and faithful, That they were chosen in Christ
before the Foundation of the World, that they should be holy, and without
blame before him, in Love, predestined unto the Adoption of Children, by
Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will. To the
Praise of the Glory of his Grace, wherein (...) has made us accepted through
the Beloved, in whom we have, Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the Riches of his Grace. etc. There is no portion of the
Word of God, that part of it especially which we call the Gospel, but affords
us an abundant proof of this; What meant his being made Surety of a better
Covenant for us (as the Apostle to the Hebrews tell us?) His being given for a
Covenant for the people, Isa. 42. 6. a Light to the Gentiles, to open the Eyes
of the blind to bring out the Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in
Darkness out of the Prisonhouse? His being the Lamb slain from the beginning
of the World, Rev. 13 8. His Speaking by the Mouths of the Prophets (as the
Apostle tells us) His growing up as a tender Plant, and as a Root out of a dry
ground, having no form, nor comeliness, nor beauty to be desired, his being
despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs, his
bearing our griefs, and carrying our Sorrows, being Smitten of God, and
afflicted, his being wounded for our Transgressions and bruised for our
iniquities, when the chastisement of our peace lay upon him? His suffering
strips that we might ^e healed, etc. What signified his incarnation, his death
and (...) his resurrection, and ascension, his taking care for his Gospel to be
preached to every creature, etc. his being grieved for the hardness of peoples
hearts, and troubled for their unbelief, his frequent preaching while he was
upon the Earth, his weeping over Jerusalem, his invitations of people to come
unto him that they might have life, his complaints that they would not come
unto him, etc. I say what do all these things signify from him who needs not
his creature, being over all God blessed for ever, but that he has loves, an
infinite good will to the Children of men? No man is at cost, takes pains in
any business, suffers hard things to go through it, but either out of
kindness to himself or to another. Our Lord did not do, and suffer these things
for himself, he had no need of them, if it were for us it speaks his loves.

2. But this is no more than what every one who owneth Christ, and the Gospel
will easily grant, That Christ is Love and has a Love for the Sons of men, yea
and that there is an infiniteness, and unmeasurableness in the Love of Christ.
But that he has Loves in the Other sense: Some Specialties of Love, some
particular propensions to some Souls more than others; this is what the proud
world cannot so easily digest. Yet is this as plain in the Revelation of holy
Writ as the other. It speaks of an Election or choice of some to Holiness and
Happiness before the foundation of the world; the choice of Some must suppose
the passing by or not electing others, experience shows us that not only the
good things of common pro vidence, but even the external means of Grace are
granted to some not to others.

3. Neither does this grate so much. The most perverse opiners in this point
must grant the publication of the Gospel, an effect of the Love of Christ, and
that there is a very inequal distribution of it by the wise Providence of God,
but as to them to whom the Gospel is alike preached, they know not how to allow
Loves in Christ; have they then forgot what the Apostle says, Romans 9. 6. For
they are not all Israel which are of Israel; Neither because they are the seed
of Abraham are they all Children: But in Isaac shall thy seed be called, that
is, They who are the Children of the flesh these are not the Children of God,
but the Children of the Promise counted for the seed. And again. Romans 2. 28.
29. He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which
is outward in the flesh: But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and
circnmcision is that in the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose
praise is not of men but of God. Does not experience teach us that even where
the Gospel is preachd some repent of their sins, some are hardened, some
believe, others are locked up in unbelief, some are holy and blameless, others
are lewd, and profane. But they will say. This is not from any Loves in Christ,
he his alike to all, but from the differing motions and inclinations of the
will of man. I yet ask, Whence is it? Seeing human Souls are Equal and have the
same powers, and faculties, how comes it that one man loves God, and the ways
of God, another hates and abhors every thing almost that has the image and
Superscription of God upon it? Is a man a God to himself and the first cause of
any motions that are truly and spiritually good? Is it not God that gives to
will, and to do, of his own good pleasure? Has a man any thing which is good
which he has not received? If one has received such a power, such an
inclination, such a disposition from God, there is Special Love; then Christ
has Loves besides a common Philanthropy, a good will to the generality of
mankind, showed in other things which will not bring Souls to Eternal
Salvation, he has a special Love and kindness to some Souls, which he
manifests in such dispensations to it, as shall certainly bring the Soul to
Eternal Life and Salvation; and these are those of which the text Speaks.

But I have Spoken enough in evidence of so plain a Proposition as this is. I
come to the application.

Use 1.
1st. How should this Revelation of Christ reconcile the world unto him. Christ
has Loves for us, why should there be found in our hearts, or ways, any hatred
to, or opposition against him? Yet is not the World full of this? What is an
opposition to the publication of his Gospel, an hatred to his Ministers, to his
People, to his Laws, and holy Institutions, but an hatred to him? Christ has
so judged of it, he told some of the first Minister s of his Gospel, Math. 10.
14, 15. That in the day of Judgment it should be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrha than for those that did not receive them, and hear his words. Wicked
men, and Enemies to the Gospel are in Scripture called unreasonable men, 2.
Thessal. 3. 2. Absurd men. The absurdness, and unreasonableness of men that are
Enemies to Christ and the Gospel (for of such the Apostle speaks there,
praying to be delivered from those that are unreasonable upon many accounts,
but eminently in this, that they hate, and do all the despite and mischief
they can, to him who is full of Loves to them. We shall sometimes find in men
and women a strange aversion from such as truly Love them, they cannot get up
their hearts, to love a man, or woman, that Loves them, but it is very brutish,
very unreasonable for any of us to hate, and malign, and to seek to destroy one
that Loves us. Such brutes are all those that are Enemies to Christ and his
Gospel. Christ has Loves for us, these Loves are declared in his Gospel, that
declares God in Christ reconciling the world to himself not imputing their
sins; the publication of the Gospel, is a great act of this Love, the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, are the Messengers to publish this Love; what an
unreasonable thing it is now for men to make them the But of their malice? I
remember when the Jews cried out concerning Christ, Crucify him, Crucify him,
and Pilate asked them, why? What evil has he done? They like a company of
unreasonable bruits could give him no answer, but still they cried out the
more, Crucify him, Crucify him. Does not the same brutish cry hold up even at
this day in some wretches mouths. They can give no reasonable account why they
should oppose the publication of the Love of Christ to poor lost Sinners, yet
they do it with a rage reaching up to Heaven. This is now to be unreasonable
men. why should you persecute him who loves you. Yet verily as St. Paul said
of himself The more he loved the Galathians the less he was beloved of them, So
it fears with Christ, and all that has relation to him the more faithful the
Minister of Christ is in preaching the Gospel, the more diligent, and zealous
he is to gain Souls to Christ, the most hated he is, and the reason is because
it thus fared with Christ. Joh. 15. 18. If the world hates you, you know it
hated me before it hated you. But Oh let this reconcile your hearts unto
Christ. That he has Loves. No ingenuous man but will repay Love for Love. He
who repayeth hatred for Love, is of the Devil eminently, he does Evil without a
provocation, because he Loves to do Evil.

Use 2.
Secondly, What an Invitation does this Notion afford to the most miserable,
forlorn Souls, to Kiss the Son, to receive, and close with the Lord Jesus
Christ. Whilst our Lord was, upon the Earth, he told the people, That when he
was lifted up he should draw all men after him. Alas! that this word [All] in
that Text must be englished by Many. Christ is lifted up upon the Cross, and
therein he has showed us, that he has Loves, Infinite Loves: For Greater Love
than this has no man shown, than that a man lay down his Life for his Friends.
Yet this is greater Love, while we were Enemies he dyed for us; Yet how few are
drawn after him? How few can be persuaded to accept him as their Lord and
Savior? What is the reason one man is drawn after his sensual Appetites, after
his Lusts, and those draw quite from Christ? Men cannot be his Disciples,
except they deny themselves, mortify their Members. Others are drawn after the
World, and are not at leisure to come to Christ; and besides, the friendship of
the World is enmity with God! Others have some thoughts of coming to Christ,
but they are afraid Christ should not receive them. I shall have occasion to
Speak to the 2 d sort when I come to the next Proposition, to show you that
Christ's Loves are better then Wine: Indeed both to the first and Second I might
Speak as Saul once to his Courtyers will the Son of Jesse give you Vine-Yards,
etc. Can the World, can your Lusts, give you Peace of Conscience and joy in the
holy Ghost? Will they bring you to the favor of God, and to eternal Life? But
they are only the 3 d Sort whom I would here Speak to. Is there a Soul here
that is almost persuaded to be a Christian? A Christian, not in Name, but in
Deed, and is afraid Christ should not be willing to receive it? Hear what God
says 2 Cor. 6. 17. Come out from amongst them, and be you separate (says the
Lord) and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. Observe what I
have bin discoursing, Christ has Loves, an Inclination and Propension to do
good to the Sons of Men; He has declared it in a variety of gracious Acts from
before the Foundation of the World. It encouraged the Servants of Benhadad to
go to Ahab, to beg their Masters Life, that they had heard that the Kings of
Israel were merciful Kings. Let this be an encouragement to you to come to
Christ, to hear that Christ is a merciful High Priest, who casts away none
that comes unto him. Certainly it would encourage the greatest malefactor to
go to a Prince to beg his pardon, and to th^o^ himself into the arms of his
grace and mercy, if he could but be persuaded, that the Prince were full of
Love, and had a particular propension and inclination of kindness to the family
from which he derived. This you have heard particularly made good to you
concerning Christ. You that have been the greatest trangressors, the oldest
Sinners, yet return and come, I remember, when Isaac told Esau, that Jacob had
come before him, and got the blessing, he replied, Father thou have many
blessings, bless me also. It may be you may be thinking so in your hearts,
such, and such persons, they have obtained the blessing, they had not been so
vile, so prosane as I have been. O but yet remember, the Lord Jesus Christ has
many blessings, not Love, but Loves, come unto him, and he shall bless thee
also. When thy thoughts are overwhelmed in the thoughts of thy sins, sink them
again into the thoughts of Christ's Loves, thou will find that is as great a
depth as the other is; Yea thou will find the same difference as betwixt the
Shore, and the main Sea* Near the Shore the Mariner may find it several fathom
water enough to drown a man: But off at Sea, he finds himself out of the
soundings, all the lines he has will find no bottom So a Soul in the thoughts
of his sins may find himself beyond his depth, he is drowned in the thoughts of
them. Ah but yet there is a Sounding, his Sins are not Infinite; so there is a
sounding, but if he lancheth his thoughts into the depths of Gods grace, and
Christ's Loves, there is no soundings, let therefore no Soul be discouraged from
coming unto Christ.

Use 4.
Fourthly. Has Christ Loves? How suitable a Savior has God provided for poor
sinful creatures. The Apostle to the Hebrews Heb. 7. 26. having said of Christ.
v. 25. That he is able to the uttermost to Save them that come unto God by him
adds For such an high Priest became us, etc. Give me leave upon this argument
to make use of the same words. Christ has Loves, such a Savior became the
Sons of men, and that upon a three fold account.

1. As love stands opposed to hatred, and wrath, and Enmity. Considering man as
Gods Creature, he was not hated of God, God h^teth not the work of his own
hand; but considering him as a lapsed creature as degenerated into the Plant of
a strange Vine, after that God had created him a generous, noble plant, so he
became the object of Gods wrath, hatred, and Enmity. We were Children of wrath
by nature says the Apostle, E ph. 2. 3. God is angry with the wicked every
day, How Suitable, to us now is it, to have a Savior? That is Love, and who
has Loves, considering the aversion in the holy Divine Being, from Mankind as
rebellious Seed, a Seed of Evil*doers? Who could have suited us to have become
a Savior unto us, but one who had akind propension, and inclination to us,
inclining him to the great work of man's Redemption, and Reconciliation to God,
especially also considering, that there could be no remission of sins without
blood, no reconciliation without the reconcilers Death, he had need have loves
that should dye for his Friend, and he much more who should dye for Enemies
that were by his death to be made friends.

2. As Loves signifies multitude, and infinitness of Love. We have all a
multitude of sins, and there is a kind of infiniteness in sin; indeed our Acts
of Sin are not infinite, we cannot number them, we cannot measure them, but
they are to be numbered, that is our comfort; so that the balance is on Gods
side, he has infinite Mercies. But there is an infiniteness of a will to sin
in every Sinners heart, if a Sinner were let alone he has such a depth of
vileness in his heart, that if he were to live infinitely he would sin without
limits, without bounds, infinitely; there is an infiniteness in the guilt of
Sin, we had need of a Savior that should have Loves, an infinite of Love, a
multitude of Mercies for our multitude of Sins, numberless pardons for
numberless Sinnings; we Sinned yesterday, we sin this day, and we shall sin to
morrow If Christ had not Loves, we could have no hopes.

3. Thirdly such a Savior became us. As Loves signifyes a Variety of gracious
inclinations. We have a variety of wants, Our wants are not all of one nature,
we have need of Love to pardon us and to bring us into a state of favor, Love
to preserve us, and uphold us when we are in such a state of favor, One or
another gracious aspect, and inclination of Christ, would not have been enough
for our Souls, which are not only miserable, and stand in need of mercy, but
poor, and stand in need of the riches of divine grace, and naked, and stand in
need of the long White robe of Christ's righteousness, and blind, and stand in
need of his Eye Salve. We are all Emptiness, and stand in need of his fullness
that we might receive of his fullness, Grace for Grace. Less than infinite
Loves, and variety of gracious inclinations, a readiness to serve our Souls in
a variety of distresses with a suitable Supply of grace, grace suited to every
necessity of our Souls could not have fitted our Souls which have not only
wants and infirmities, but are encompassed about with wants, and infirmities.

Use 5.
Fifthly, Let this report of Christ to your Souls engage you to endeavor to be
made the Objects of these Loves. I have observed to you before, that this text
does not speak of the Love of Christ, with respect to his Father but with
respect to us, to the Sons of men; they are the objects of the Loves of Christ
here mentioned. How should we all study and endeavor that we may be the
Beloved, the objects of these Loves, not of his Love only, but of his Loves.
Arminians keep a great deal of stir with a Philanthropy in Christ, a common
Love, which he has for all the Sons, and daughters of men. Nor is the question
betwixt them, and other Divines so much about the thing, as the extent of it.
Sober Divines will (many of them) grant in Christ a common Love to all mankind
and speak of some things which they take to be the effects, and products of it;
but admit it, yet it is certain he has also an (...), a good pleasure of his
will, or Special kindness to some Souls. So he has Loves; that is, the
benignity, and kindness of his inclinations is more to Some than to others. Let
none of us satisfy our selves to be the Object of Christ's Love, unless we be
the object of his Loves. I shall press this only with One Argument. It is
this; Nothing but the Loves of Christ can serve our Souls as to their true
Spiritual and eternal Concernment. There is a great stir made in the world,
about a common Love which Christ should have for all the Sons, and daughters of
men, and there are many that would make the Death of Christ to be the Effect of
this Common Love. And so conclude that he intentionally dyed for all and Every
man. Others are not of that mind, but yet will allow, all men and women in the
world to receive some good from Christ and that not only considered as God
over all blessed for ever, and one with his Father, and so in him we live, move
and have our Being; But as Mediator. It is from him they say, that the world
yet stands, that the Gospel is preached to the worst of men. I see little in
this worth the contending for. I would gladly know what real advantage accrueth
to any Soul from being the common object of Divine Love? Admitting that all
shall! not be saved for whom Christ dyed (which they must hold who hold that
Christ dyed for all and every man, unless they hold universal Salvation) I
would fain know what relief any Soul can have from this notion of Christ's dying
for all which some so much contend for? Supposing that all men shall not be
saved, but those only, whom Christ has loved with a Special Love? Nothing can
possibly revive a Soul troubled as to its Spiritual, and eternal concerns, but
some evidence of that. It is said of the young man who came to Christ so
hopefully, Mar. 10. 21. kneeling to him, and saying, Master what good thing may
I do that I may obtain everlasting Life; that he loved him. With that general
Love which he has for all his Creatures especially such as have any seeds of
goodness in them; yet the Text says he went away Sorrowful. Let us labor for
the Special Love of Christ: Such tokens of his Love as may distinguish betwixt
us and those who shall perish.

Use 6.
But (to shut up this Discourse.) This notion calls upon all of us who would
be like Christ to have Loves also. There are two Loves, which are much our duty
upon this view of our great Lord and Master, 1. Love to him. 2 Love to our
Neighbors, especially those in whom any thing of Christ's appears.

1. It calls to us for Loves to Christ. This in point of gratitude; If (Says
our Savior) you love them which love you, what reward have you? Do not even
the Publicanes the same? Our Love to Christ is but a Love to him who has Loves
for us, and indeed this speaks to all men for Love to him, but more
especially, O Love ye the Lord, all you his Saints. It is the opinion of great
Divines, that all the world is beholden to Christ as Mediator, that from his
Mediation there issues some good to the worst of men. But he has eminently
extended his Love to his Saints, he has loved them with a singular Love. If
there should be Love wanting in their hearts to Christ they should be of all
men, and women in the world most inexcusable, what could he have done for any
of the Sons of Men which he has not done for them? What greater thing could
they have asked of him, then he has prevented them in asking? O Love you the
Lord all you they that believe. Do you ask me how you should show your Love to
him? The first motions of Love are in the heart; Love there is seen in
delighting in him, breathing after him. It next shows itself by the lips
Speaking well of him to others, defending his interest, and concern in the
world. If we come to more external acts; That of David, Ps. 16. 2. 3. is true
here, O my Soul thou have said unto the Lord thou art my Lord, my goodness
extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth, to the
excellent on whom is all my delight. Our Love to Christ must be seen in our
actings in our stations for the honor, glory, and concern of Christ in the
world. In our kindness to the poor flock of Christ. Christ calls a want of Love
to them a want of Love to himself 25. Math. But that brings me to the Second
with a short discourse upon which I shall shut up this discourse.

2. It calls you for Love to men especially to those in whom you see any thing
of Christ. The argument for this arises from our duty to study a Conformity to
Christ, he had a kindness for all, when he was born, good will toward men was
proclaimed by the multitude of the Heavenly host Luke. 2. 14. There also lies
an obligation upon usfrom the law of Christ and from this great Example, to be
kindly affectionate toward all, There lies also a Precept upon us to do good
to all. And again says the Apostle. Owe nothing to any, but this; That you
love one another. Indeed there is not the same degree of affection, nor the
same acts of Love due to all (as to that we must be ruled by the Word of God,)
but Love is a debt upon us which is due to all men. Therefore wrath, hatred,
anger, strife, malice, are (...) where reckoned up by the Apostle as the fruits
not of the Spirit but of the flesh. In a kind Child of God there should be a
general love and kindness to all mankind, though to be expressed in a
Scriptural order as to the degrees, and acts of it. So it was in Christ.

2. But secondly it calls to you for a more Special distinguishing Love to all
those in whom you see any thing of Christ. Do good to all (says the Apostle)
but especially to the household of Faith. The Soul of every Member of Christ
should cleave to these, with whom he is united, not only by a common nature
(being the same flesh and blood with him) but by a common faith, by the
ligament of Members of the same body, whereof Christ is the head. Give me leave
to press this the more upon this argument because I find the Apostle St. John
pressing it upon the same Topic, 1. John. 4. 11. If God so loved us we ought
also to Love one another. v. 12. -- If we love one another God dwells in us
and his love is perfected in us, v. 16. He tells us that God is love and he
that dwells in Love dwelling in God. Every good Christian may see much more
in the meanest, poorest true Christian to engage him to Love him or her, than
Christ could ever see in the highest Saint to oblige or move Christ to love him
or her. When thou wallowedst in thy blood, when thou had nothing of the
lineament of a Saint in thy Soul not so much as a line of any Spiritual
Goodness, he passed by thee, and it was with him a time of Love as to thy Soul;
there is not a child of God in the world, but there is something of holiness,
and righteousness, something of the image and Superscription of Christ to be
seen in his Soul, something of the Divine nature resplendent in his Soul. It
may be there is more in some, less in others, but there is in all some. When
thou have a temptation upon thee to aversate thy brother, or to turn away thy
heart, or head, or hand from him. O remember Christ has loves and and he that
dwells in Love dwells in him. And that it is he whose heart is full of of
Loves for thee who has commanded thee to Love thy Brother. But I have spoken e
nough to this first Proposition.

Sermon X.
Canticles 1. 2. For thy Loves are better than Wine.

IN my last discourse I showed you that Christ has Loves, kind affections, and
inclinations to the Children of men and more especially to the Souls of his
Saints, which he is ready to declare and express, yea has already expressed in
acts of kindness, and these not of one but various kinds, suited to the
respective necessities of his people, a salve for every Sore, a Supply for
every want. I come now to show you the quality of his Loves, which in my Text
is set down positively, and comparatively. In our translation according to our
Idioms or propriety of Speech the positive is to be understood in the
comparative particle. A thing cannot be called better than another, unless it
has some positive absolute goodness in it self, but in the Hebrew it is more
plainly expressed. That says, Are good before Wine. (It is their way of
expressing comparatives.) It makes no difference in the sense. Good before
Wine. And better than wine, are phrases of the same sense. In the Explication
of the Text I told you that though Wine strictly signifies the juice of the
Grape, yet by a Synechdoche here it signifies all created goods whatsoever can
be sweet or profitable or advantageous to us. The Proposition is plainly this.

Prop. The Loves of Christ are good befo e [or better than] all created
comforts, and enjoyments whatever. I have already showed you what the Loves of
Christ signify, viz. His good will, his kind affections and inclinations to the
Souls of men. Of these here the Spouses predicates. 1. A goodness. 2. A
transcendent and excelling goodness. My work must be to demonstrate both. 1.
That they are good. 2. That they are good before wine, before all Sublunary
goods, all created comforts of what nature soever. 1. That they are good.

The true nature of all good lies in the convenience and Sutableness of things
which we so call to some wants, and necessities that we have and lie under.
Hence the Philosopher describes Good to be the Object* of our desires, what all
men desire, for we desire nothing, but in order to the supply of some want or
other that we are sensible, and apprehensive of. A man may indeed desire what
is not good, but he must apprehend some goodness in the thing which he
desires. So that to demonstrate the loves of Christ to be good, there needs no
more than to prove them convenient, and admirably Suited to some thing which we
want to Supply us in that want. That I may restrain my discourse to the Loves
of Christ as mediator, I shall only premise, what I hope you all believe: That
we have Souls as well as Bodies, the Soul is an essential part of man, and as
much excelling and better than the Body, as the body is better than raiment
This admitted, whatsoever suiteth the Souls wants must necessarily be good and
eminently good. The Souls wants are many, but its principal wants are reducible
to five heads. 1. Pardon, Righteousness, Peace, Purity, Hopes, or assurance of
Eternal life and Glory.

1. It wants pardon of Sin. This is a want which the Soul brought into the
world with it, it was by nature dead in trespasses and Sins, conceived in Sin,
brought forth in iniquity, a Child of wrath by nature Ephesians. 2, 3. This want has
grown upon the Soul from the day of its birth. Its Childhood and youth were
altogether vanity; who knows the Errors of his life? The righteous falls seven
times a day, who can tell how often he offends? It is true, not one of many
is sensible of this want, but that only increases their misery. It is certain
this is a great want of a Soul, Christ else had never directed us to pray,
Forgive us our debts. There is a debt of ten thousand Talents, upon every Soul,
that has not tasted of Christ's pardoning grace. That it is not arrested for it
proceeds only from Gods patience, who sometimes bears long with vessels of
wrath fitted for destruction. The Love of Christ is Suited to this want. It is
he that forgiveth Sins and washes the Soul from the guilt of sin with his
blood. He dyed for our sins (says the Apostle.) He was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities says the Prophet Isaiah. Chapter
53. 5. We have Redemption, and forgiveness of Sins through his blood. This Love
of his, is so suited to this want of the Soul, that it can be supplied no other
way. God forgiveth sin and none but he: who but the creditor can discharge the
debtor; but it is for Christ's sake that God forgiveth us, Ephesians. 4. 32. Without
blood there is no remission; this was tipyfyed (as the Apostle teaches us) by
the Beasts of old slain for Sacrifices of Expiation, and Atonement, and without
his Blood we could have had no Remission; for it is very vain (as the same
Apostle instructs us) for any to think that the blood of Bulls and Lambs and
Goats could de away Sin.

2. Secondly, The Soul wants Righteousness. A righteousness wherein it should
stand before God as if it had never sinned against him. For the righteous Lord
(says the Psalmist) loves righteousness, and the Apostle tells us Romans 3. 15.
That God declares his righteousness for the remission of Sins. Such is the
nature, or at least such is the will, of God, that he remits no sins, but upon
a first declaration of his righteousness. Neither does God accept any Soul but
the righteous Soul: we have no righteousness, our works will not make this Web.
God therefore imputes Righteousness without works. Romans 4. 6. In the Gospel
God has revealed his righteousness from faithto Faith. Romans 1. 17. This is the
righteousness of Christ. Romans 8. 3. For what the law could not do because it
was weak through our flesh, that God himself has done, sending his Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemning sin in the flesh, That the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. Hence Christ is by the
Prophet called the Lord our Righteousness, and the Apostle says he was made of
God for us wisdom, righteousness; And hence the Apostle Prays. Philip. 3. 8,
9. That he might win Christ, which he expounds. v. 9. And be found in him, not
having my own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the
Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. It is called the
Righteousness of God because it is that which God accepts us for; the
righteousness of Christ, because it is his perfect Satisfaction to, and
obedience to the law; and the righteousness of faith because it is by faith, by
us received, and applied, and made ours. But in Christ and from Christ the Soul
must find, and have that righteousness in which alone it can stand before God.

3. A third great want of the Soul is Peace. Peace with God. Peace with itself.
Romans 8. 7. The Carnalmind is Enmity to God. Take a man in his natural state, he
is an Enemy to God, and God is an Enemy to him. He has no peace with God, and
if he has any quiet in his own mind, it is but a Truce not a Peace, the
product of Gods silence, not the product of his favor. Now in Christ and in
him alone the Soul has peace. In the world (says our Savior to his
disciples) you shall have trouble, but in me you shall have pcace. My peace,
says he, I give unto you, I leave with you; It is he that has reconciled the
whole number of the elect to God by his death, and it is he who does by his
Spirit, and the word of reconciliation committed to his Ministers actually
reconcile Souls unto himself. He is therefore called our Peace, we have Peace
with God through him, Romans 5. 1. And therefore the Apostle in all his
Salutations prefixed to his Epistles prays, Mercy and Peace from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

4. A fourth great want of the Soul is Purity. No unclean thing shall enter
into the new Jerusalem, Take the Soul of a Christian Naturally, it is an
impure, filthy Soul; what can be clean that is born of a Woman? Or how can that
which is clean come from that which is unclean? The connate proneness of our
hearts to whatsoever is evil, and the natural aversion of our hearts to any
thing that is good is a sufficient proof of this. The promise of the clean
heart, and of the new heart in Ezekiel. 36. (as you know) are both from God. and
Heb. 9. 14. the Apostle tells, us That the blood of Christ purges our
Consciences from dead Works to serve the living God: Hence the Apostle. 1. Cor.
1. 30. Tells us, that Christ is made unto us Wisdom, Sanctification, and
Redemption.

5. The 5th great Want of the Soul which I mentioned was, Hopes or Assurance,
of an happy Existence to all eternity: This Want now accrueth from the Soul's
Immortality. The Consideration that God has created us under an Ordination to
an Eternal Existence and State. Admitting this (which indeed is the main thing
that distinguishes a reasonab'e Soul from the Soul of a brute Creature) it is
impossible that the Soul should be under any degree of Happiness, that has not
some Hopes or Assurance of Glory, That its Soul shall go to God when it leaves
the Body. And that the Body shall rise again in a joyful Resurrection, in which
it shall be again united to the Soul, that both may live with God for ever. Now
this is a Good which flows unto the Soul, from the Loves of Christ: This
needs no further proof than: 1. That no Soul is born to this glorious, and
incorruptible Inheritance, for we are by nature Children of Wrath, and eternal
life is the Gift of God, (as the Apostle tells us) Romans 6. The Gift of God is
eternal Life, and it is a gift which comes from God to us by the Hands of
Christ. John 17. 2. As thou have given him Power over all Flesh that he should
give eternal Life to as many as thou have given him: And John 10. 28. Speaking
of his sheep (says he) I give unto them eternal Life, and they shall never
perish. Now as their having a certain right to, and their future possession of
eternal Life, is necessary for them in another Life, when this transitory Life
shall be determined; so the hopes, or full assurance of it is necessary for
them, to make them in any measures happy while they live here. And this is in,
and from, Christ also and therefore he is called our Hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1. And the
the Apostle, Col. 1. 27. says, Christ in us is the Hopes of Glory: That is,
all the Hopes we have of Glory are from Christ. This is abundantly enough to
evince that positive goodness that is in the Loves of Christ, their high and
suitable conveniences to the necessities and wants of our Souls. I shall in the
next place show you the transcendent Goodness and excellency that is in them,
that they are, as the Text says, Better then Wine, or as it is expressed in
the Hebrew Idiome, good before Wine. Wine, as I have before showed you,
literally Signifies the Juice of the Grape. Figuratively whatsoever is good,
sweet and excellent in the World. Now take it in one or both Senses, The
Demonstration is very easy. I shall make it in 3 particulars.

1. First all the Goodness that is in Wine, (taken either literally for the
Juice of the Grape, or Figuratively for all created comforts) lies in a
Sutableness of them, (and that but for a time neither) to the more external
wants of a Creature. Three things must be yielded concerning all created Goods.
1. None of them reach the wants of the Soul, which is the best and noblest part
of man. What do Pleasures, Riches, Honors, whatsoever this world affords,
signify as to the Souls wants? It wants Pardon of sins; Will any of these
procure or purchase it? It wants a Righteousness wherein to stand before God;
Will these procure it? It wants Peace of Conscience, Will those give it? It
wants Purity, Will they cleanse it? It naturally wants a Right and title to
Glory, and the Hopes or Assurance of it; Can any of these help the Soul to it?
They indeed suit the more external wants of Man. The wanton Sense wants
grateful Objects, They will Supply it; The body wants Food, and Raiment, they
will Supply it; But for the more inward Spiritual Wants of the Soul, they have
no Sutableness to them, no convenience. But (as I have showed you) the Loves of
Christ have, nay, they are not only suited to the Souls greatest wants but to
the Bodies also, at least so far as the Soul has influence on the Body, upon
the Happiness of which it undoubtedly has; for a good Conscience is a
continual feast: The Contentment which Grace fills the Soul with, the
Mortification, and Subduing of the Passions, and stubborn Will of Man, have a
great Reflection upon the Health and cheerfulness of the Body. So that here is
a double Argument to prove the Loves of Christ better than Wine. 1. From their
Sutableness to the necessities and wants of the Soul, which are the wants of
the noblest part of man. 2. From their sutableness to the wants both of Soul
and body, by reason of the Reflection which the Souls good has upon the
outward Man, even in this Life, to say nothing of the joyful Resurrection of
the Body, and the Happiness both of Body, and Soul, reunited in the Enjoyment
of God for ever. 2. All created Comforts last but for a Season, and that a
little Season. They only suit the wants of our Bodies in this Life. Riches
profit not in the day of Wrath: Honors lie down with our Bodies in the dust,
Pleasures cease, when our senses which they gratified are gone: Nay very often
the Sutableness or gratefulness of these created Goods extinguisheth before the
determination of our natural Lives. When Barzillai was Fourscore years old his
Eye took no pleasure in seeing, nor his Ear in hearing. There are days in this
Life, Eccles. 12. 7. in which a man shall say he has no pleasure in them? What
do Riches, Honors, Friends, Pleasures, signify in a day of Sickness? 3. No
created good suteth all our wants, one suteth one want, another fills up
another Emptiness, none suteth all: But the Love of Christ as it suteth our
Soul wants, So it is Suited to all times, and is certain, and a Supply to all
wants of Souls. This is my first Argument to prove his Loves better then Wine.

2. Secondly there is no need or want, which Wine, or created goods supplieth
but the Love of Christ will supply, and much more eminently, and abundantly:
Let me open this in a few particulars.

1. Wine in regard of the Subtle, Spirituous nature of it, has a great virtue
to exhilarate the Spirits and to raise up the Affection of Joy. Hence you read
of those who shout by reason of Wine. Psalm. 78. 65. And the Psalmist says,
Wine makes glad the heart of Man. Psalm. 104. 15. and Ecc. 10. 19. Wine makes
merry. But do not the Loves of Christ do this much more? Ephesians. 5. 19. And be you
not drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess, but be you filled with the Spirit,
speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs, making Melody
in your heart to the Lord. David, Psalm. 4. cries out, Lord lift thou up the
light of thy Countenance upon me, for thou thereby shall make my heart more
glad then theirs, when their Corn, and Wine, and Oil increases. Those who are
critical in words in the Latin Tongue distinguish between Voluptas and
Gaudium. Pleasure they make to be nothing but the Sensual Appetites
Satisfaction, it is common to Beasts as well as Man. Gaudium or Joy they make to
be the proceed of the satisfaction of the rational Appetite; the first is
merely sensual, and beastly, the latter alone becomes a Man who is a
reasonable Creature. I am sure that Mirth which is in the Soul of man, that
Exhilaration of his Spirits, which arises from the sense and apprehension of
the Love of Christ unto the soul, is a Satisfaction to the Rational, Spiritual
Appetite; so the nature of it must be more Spiritual, more Suited to the
reasonable creature, then any Wine, or indeed any created comforts can be.

2. Wine is of excellent use to allay our thirst, and in Physic and Chirugery
under deliquiums, etc. This is a great execellency that is in it. Prove. 31. 6.
Give wine to those of heavy hearts. In Surgery it is of use to wash and
cleanse wounds, etc. Hence you read in the Gospel, of the good Samaritane that
he put Wine and Oil into the wounds of the man that was fallen amongst thieves.
But in this respect are not the loves of Christ good before Wine? Wine only
satisfies the cravings of nature, the drought of the body for want of
moisture. If a Soul hungers and thirsts after righteousness, Wine will not
allay that thirst, the Loves of Christ will; and surely the thirstings of a
Soul are far greater wants than the want of liquor for the body. Wine may be of
some use in Deliquiums and failures of the Vital, and Animal Spirits. But if
the Soul faints for Gods Salvation, Wine is of no use, the Loves of Christ
are. Wine may wash and purify the wounds of the body and keep them from
putrefaction, but the Loves of Christ alone can purify the wounds of a Soul and
resist putrefaction there. He was anointed to preach glad tidings to the meek,
to bind up the broken hearted, to appoint to them that mourn in Sion, Beauty
for Ashes, and the Oil of gladness for the Spirit of heaviness. Isaiah 61. 1,
2, 3.

3. Wine will make a man forget his affliction. Prove. 31. 6, 7. Give wine to
him who is of a heavy heart, let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember
his misery no more; but now wine does this by bringing a man unto a kind of
stupefaction or temporary deliration, and the Affliction, must be merely
external, and not in extremity. Wine makes a Man forget his affliction only by
putting him besides himself. The Loves of Christ have a proportionable effect
upon the Soul, but of a far more high and excellent nature. Let a Soul be bowed
down to Hell and not know what to do, Let but the Loves of Christ shine upon it
in the sealing of any promise, it forgets all its poverty, and misery. The Soul
will rejoice in Sufferings, glory in tribulation, etc. the Martyr cries out
that the fire is but as a Bed of Roses. So that you see there is never a good
quality in Wine but something proportionable to it, (only infinitely excelling)
is to be found in Christ's loves.

My last demonstration of the truth of this Proposition is this. Wine though it
has many excellent qualities, yet has it also some ill qualities; The Loves
of Christ are not such. There is an excess in Wine says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.
18, 19. Be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess. It is a mocker (says
Solomon) it will intoxicate, breed many diseases, many a one perishes by
drinking too much Wine. But no Soul ever perished from the excess of Christ's
love to it, no Soul ever contracted any distemper from it, he you filled with
the Spirit, says the Apostle in the same Text, where he tells us there is an
excess in Wine.

Much of what I have said concerning the excellency of the love of Christ above
Wine, taken in a literal sense, is as true concerning it, in its figurative
sense, as it may be supposed and interpreted to signify and created comforts,
they only are suited to our External wants only, they are but temporary and
uncertain, they also have some ill qualities attending them. I shall therefore
add no more Doctrinally.

Use 1.
By way of application. We may in the first place observe in o what a degree of
debauchery the generality of the Sons and Daughters are fallen. Nothing more
becomes a Man or Woman considered as a reasonable Creature, than to discern
aright betwixt things that differ, and to judge aright concerning them, and
accordingly to make our Election, and to guide our practice. But supposing what
you have heard to be truth, where is the man of many, that rightly discerns,
rightly judges, or aright guides himself in practice? where is the man that
judges the loves of Christ better than Wine.

How many are there that judge Wine better then the loves of Christ. Wine, not
in the figurative sense, as it signifies all outward, created comforts, but in
the literal sense, as it signifies nothing but the juice of the Grape,
fermented and a little refined from its dregs, does not every one thus judge,
that uses Wine immoderately? that sits bibbing at a Tavern until the Wine
inflameth him, Christ by his Apostle Paul has said, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. Be not
drunk with Wine wherein is excess. How many are there, that tarry long at the
Wine, that go to seek mixed Wine, that look upon wine when it is red, when it
gives its color in the cup, when it moves itself aright, till at last it
biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, till it causes woe, and
sorrow, and contentions, and wounds, and redness of the Eyes (as Solomon
Speaks, Prove. 23, 29, 30, 31.) and yet have no sense of the Loves of Christ,
no thoughts of it, make no enquiries after it, take no course for the obtaining
it. Do not those poor wretches Love wine better than the Love of Christ, that
will not abate life a cup of wine to gain it? Those that for an intemperate cup
of wine, will be disobedient to the rule which Christ has given them. My Soul
in this contemplation, even aches to think what will become of drunkards, by
whom I mean not those only who reel in the streets and are intoxicated with
Wine, but those who take a greater pleasure in drinking than in praying or
hearing the word of God or obeying his will.

2. But if we extend the notion of wine further, to signify all sensual
Satisfactions, all created comforts, Lord how many are there in the world that
in this betray their folly, and discover the corruption, and debauchery of
humane nature. How few are there in the world that do not prefer some creature
or other before the loves of Christ; indeed as the Poet-saith -- Trahit sua
quemque voluptas; Every one is not alike taken with every sensual object, the
Apostle tells us we have (...), every one has his proper lust and corruption
by which he is drawn, away, the lusts of the flesh, are one man's proper lust,
the lust of the Eye is another proper lust, the pride of life is another.
Separate from mankind, drunkards, lascivious persons, vain persons, persons
that are covetous, and too greedy of the worlds riches, ambitious men, whose
God is honor and applause, credit and reputation in the World, how few will
you leave? But I hear some say this is an hard censure upon mankind, men indeed
are flesh, and blood, man has natural Senses and naturally seeks the
gratification, and Satisfaction of them, but we hope we do not prefer the
satisfaction of them before the Loves of Christ showed in the pardon of sin,
peace of conscience, purity of heart, the hopes of glory. This were a very sad
thing, and it is a very hard judgment to pass upon any Soul; we must plead not
guilty to this Indictment. Say you so? my next question is how will ye be
tried? will you be tried by the ordinary rules of trials of your preference in
other cases: answer me then, or call your souls to answer themselves in some
few questions: What do you most delight to hear of? what do you please your
selves most in? what do you employ your selves most in the pursuit of? what do
you most postpone, and put behind in the motions of your lives? which do you
most neglect for the other? etc.

1. What do you most delight to hear of? The loves of Christ are not the
objects of any sense but the Ear, but they may be heard of. Sermons should be
principally such discourses; discourses of Christ's love; we preach Christ
Crucified, can thou be patient to hear discourses of the loves of Women,
discourses of worldly businesses of vanity, many hours, and can thou not with
the like patience and delight sit out a Sermon of one hour? art thou never
saying, when will this vain, idle, discourse be done, this discourse that tends
nothing to the good of my Soul, and yet often saying when will this Sermon be
done? Judge then whether thy Soul judges the loves of Christ better than Wine?
There are those that can rise up early in the morning, that they may follow
strong drink, and continue till night, till Wine inflame them, and can not
thou rise up early to hear of the love of Christ, and sit an hour or two, till
the report of his love inflameth thy Soul. Had thou rather hear a wanton idle
story, than a Gospel story? how do thou then prefer the loves of Christ
before Wine; thou manifestly give the preference to a sensual satisfaction.

2. What do you most please your thoughts in the contemplation and meditation
of? My meditation of him (says David) shall be sweet. Our thoughts must feed
themselves with some objects; we are so encompassed with the straits and
necessities of this life, with the various diversions, and temptations, that I
think it unreasonable to put the trial there. Whether have the loves of Christ,
or worldly objects most of your thoughts, none would acquit themselves upon
such an inquiry. But which are your Souls most pleasant Bread, which are your
sweetest meditations? this will try a Soul; undoubtedly such objects as a Soul
most prefers, it will be most pleased in the contemplation of. But is this
the case of the most of men? can they say, that though they have more thoughts
upon the World, and sensible objects in it, yet the meditations upon the World,
and the other are rather thoughts of necessity, than of delight and pleasure?

Thirdly, What do you most employ your selves in the pursuit of? Is it sensible
satisfactions, or Christ's love, I do not here mean by [most] a frequency of
action, or length of time, but a warmth, and fervency, and intension of
affection, and a Christians circumstances, and station in the world may be such
as will enforce him to spend more of his time, and more of his action about
worldly than about spiritual things, but which does the Soul press most hard
after? which pursuit has most of the strength and vigor of the inward man?
That doubtless has the preference in the man's judgment: it is an ill sign to
see a man work hard, and pray coldly, lazily, perfunctorily, when men spend
their strength for that which is not bread, when a man so toileth in his
pleasures, when he presses so hard after the World, that his whole heart may
be discerned and read in those pursuits, and but half his heart can be
discerned in his pursuits after the loves of Christ, he comes late to an
Ordinance of God, he sleeps, when he is there, he does the work of his God
negligently. My Soul (says David presses hard after thee; it is an excellent
sign, when tho the motions of the Soul be after the World, yet the pressings
hard of the Soul are after Christ, and his loves.

4. In the motions of your lives, what do you most postpone and put behind?
that which is most postponed, is least preferred, Let my Tongue (says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 137. 6.) cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not
Jerusalem before my chief Joy. We have an English saying, That meat and drink
may be had, but work may stay: it intimates our preference of meat and drink
before labor, the end of which is chiefly to procure meat and drink. Do you
say I must pray, I and my House must seek the Lord, I must hear that my Soul
live, my labor in my calling, that may stay? It is a very ill sign, that the
Soul prefers earthly things before heavenly things, when he postpones the means
to obtain things heavenly, to the means for obtaining things that are earthly,
when every trifling business, will turn him off from prayer, reading, hearing
the Word. It is true, there is a time for all things. But when the Worlds time
is admitted to jostle out Gods time, and Gods time is not reserved to him, and
the worlds time never yields to Gods time, it is a very ill sign that Christ's
loves have not the preference in the Soul.

Lastly. Which do you most neglect for the other? Our Savior tells us, Mat.
6. 24. No man can serve two Masters, for either he will love the one, and hate
the other, or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other, the neglect
of one thing to give place, or room to another, sufficiently argues the
preference of that for which we make room, before that, by the neglect of which
we make room for it. Do you neglect the world and the things of the world, to
give room for the loves of Christ, and the means to obtain them, or do you
neglect the loves of Christ, and the means he has appointed for the gaining of
them for the world, and the means you are to use for the gaining of it? But I
have I fear said enough not only to convince you that the most men and women in
the world are guilty of a false judgment, either judging Wine in the literal
sense, or at least in the figurative sense, better than Christ's love, but also
to convince Gods own People that they do not sufficiently live up to, and
practice what they profess to Believe. I might add another thing.

6. Whosoever purchases Wine or a satisfaction from any creature by a
disobedience to the commands of Christ, does most certainly judge, that Wine,
that creature, better then Christ's loves. The demonstration of this depends
upon this, That no man or woman can truly say they love Christ, or groundedly
expect that Christ should love them, that does not keep his Commandments, or
that wilfully, ordinarily, and presumptuously breaks them, tho there none
lives who does not, sin against God.

Use 2.
I shall shut up this discourse with a word of exhortation, which must be to a
preference of the loves of Christ before Wine. I shall press this exhortation
upon you by some arguments.

My first argument shall be drawn from the reasonableness of this; That a
reasonable Soul should judge of things not according to any appearances from
false representations, but as they are. I have spoken enough to persuade any
person, that believes that he is not a mere lump of flesh, but has a
reasonable Soul, and that he is not a creature of this life merely, but
ordained to an Eternal Existence, and that the Soul of every man by nature, and
his state is such as the holy Scriptures speak it to be, that the loves of
Christ are more suited to his necessities, and his true, and real wants, than
it is possible that any created comforts should be; now admitting this, what
more does become areasonable creature than to judge them so* All other judgment
is but fallacy, and deceit, and of all deceit, and fallacy, there is nothing so
unworthy of a man as to cheat and deceive himself. Thus every Soul does that
judges any thing better than the Loves of Christ. Further yet there is nothing
more unworthy of a man then to outlaw himself, and suffer his passion to
domineer over his reason; the course of man's Soul according to reason is for
his will to follow the dictate of his understanding, for him to pursue the
things, which he judges most excellent; and though in other things indeed man
does not so' he sees that which is better and does that which he confesses
and judges worst, yet all this is passion, and so far as a man walks or
acts thus, he acts not reasonably, but this is but the first argument, and
considers them merely as men.

2. The second shall concern you as Creatures. What an indignity do you put
upon the Creator to prefer the Creature before him: Wine is but a Creature,
Riches, Honors, the World and all that is therein it is all but a Creature.
Christ is God over all blessed for ever. It is a mighty degradation of God in
our hearts to prefer any thing to his loves. How can any man think that God
should look upon that Soul that dethroneth him, and prefers some of his
creatures, yea of the meanest of his Creatures in his affections before him,
how righteously shall God leave that Soul to the creature as its portion, that
chooses it, and chooses it in preference to his loves.

Thirdly, Consider what an ill requital this is of Christ's love to you? This
argument now concerns you as you are Christians, and believe that Christ in
the fullness of time left his Fathers Throne, and took not upon him the nature
of Angels, but the nature of Man. Christ in his love, his redeeming love to you
has manifested a double preference. 1. A preference of your good to his own
glory and manifestative favor from God his Father. Christ indeed in his estate
of humiliation, was the beloved Son of his Father, his Father in that time
proclaimed him his only begotten Son in whom he was well pleased. But he had
not those manifestations of that love as before he was incarnate. He was made a
curse for us that the blessing of Abraham might come down upon us, he cried out
upon the Cross, my God! my God! why have thou forsaken me? 2. A preference of
you to Angels. He took not upon him the nature of Angels, but your nature, now
how ill do you requite this love of your Savior in preferring a creature to
it; how can we believe the Gospel, and all that it tells us of the dying
loves of Christ, and do this? Oh therefore let not this be the condemnation of
any poor Soul that hears me this day, let none of us incur the guilt of this
Idolatry. God aggravateth the Peoples sin of Idolatry from this, that they said
to a stack and to a stone thou art our Father; the more base and low and
unworthy the object is that is preferred before another, the greater is the
provocation of the preference. Let us then so live, so walk as by our
conversation to evidence to the world, that the Loves of Christ to our Souls
are better than all the Wine which the world can afford us. Let us not break a
divine Precept to embrace any thing which this World can afford us, in this we
shall be so far from acting like to Christians, or Creatures, that we shall not
act like men possessed of reasonable Souls. Let us in our hearts more thirst,
in the Spirit after Christ's Love, than the worlds embraces, let us delight more
in any reports of the love of Christ, any discourses concerning it, than in any
worldly objects. Let us be more diligent in use of means to gain Christ's love,
than to gain the whole world. Let us be more satisfied in the enjoyment of any
thing of it, than if we enjoyed all the World can afford us. I remember Solomon
says, The blessing of God makes rich; and adds no sorrow therewith. The
Loves of Christ make the Soul happy, and mixeth no sorrow with that happiness.
Wine is a sweet liquor, but it will intoxicate, in time it will grow flat, and
acid, and there is no created good, but will at one time or other grow flat,
and sharp, if the Soul be not drunk with it. There is a satiety in pleasure,
riches, honor, there is a time when there will be no pleasure in them, when we
shall be able to see no goodness at all in them. Let us neglect them upon the
prospect of the vanity of them, and the vexation of Spirit that is in them
before we come to experience their vanity and rottenness. I have showed you a
far more excellent object. -- Christ's loves are better than Wine.

Sermon XI.
Cnt. 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth: For thy loves are
better than Wine.

FOr thy loves are better then Wine.] I have handled these 2 Propositions,
which the matter of these words affords us. I have now only further to
consider, the relation they stand in to the Petition, considered as an argument
used by the Spouse to enforce it. I have already showed you, they are brought
in by the Spouse. 1. Partly to show us the reason why the Spouse so earnestly
desired these tokens of Christ's distinguishing love, viz. because she had found
them good, yea good before Wine, (as is the Hebrew Idiom) 2. Partly as an
argument she inforceth her Petition drawn from the value she set upon the love
of Christ. Each of these will afford us a distinct Proposition.

Prop. 1.
That the ground of Believers earnest desire after the tokens of Christ's
distinguishing love, and nearest communion with him, is their knowledge, and
experience, of the goodness, and transcendent excellency of it.

Prop. 2.
That it is a good argument, for Christians to use in pleading with God for the
choicest dispensations of his grace if they can truly tell him, that his Grace
is very precious to them. These 2 propositions remain yet to be handled, I
begin with the first of them.

1 Prop. The ground of Believers earnest desires after the tokens of Christ's
distinguishing love, is their knowledge, and experience, of the goodness and
transcendent excellency that is in it.

I say their knowledge, of the goodness, and transcendent goodness of those
tokens of Divine Love. By knowledge I here mean no more then their believing
apprehension. God has in his word revealed the excellency of them, this
revelation they have read, and heard, and God has wrought in their hearts a
firm and steady assent to the Divine Revelation: This indeed is Gods first work
in the Soul, the motion of the will, and affections follow it. I added [and
experience.] Experience is a sensible evidence. Knowledge is gained by reading,
and hearing, experience by seeing and enjoying; knowledge conduces something
to move the Will and Affections, experience more. The reason is, because good
things in the fruition, and enjoyment of them, do not always answer our first
apprehensions of them, and expectations from them, but nothing can be imagined
more potent to incline the whole Soul to any thing than knowledge in
conjunction with experience justifying our apprehension. As we have heard
(says the Psalmist, Psalm. 48. 8.) so have we seen in the City of our God; when
a Soul has not only heard of the Loves of Christ, but its Eyes has seen them,
the Soul has tasted how good the Lord is, this mightily engages the
Affections. Especially if we further consider, that whereas in all sensible
objects called good, the fruition, or enjoyment rarely answers the report of
them, or the apprehension of them which the Soul first entertained and
apprehended: it is quite contrary here, the enjoyment infinitely transcends the
notion and apprehension, so that as the Queen of Sheba said to Solomon; It was
a true report that I heard in my own land of thy Acts, and of thy wisdom,
howbeit I believed I eved not their words, until I came, and mine Eyes had seen
it, and behold the half was not told me, thy wisdom, and prosperity exceeds
the fame which I heard, 1 Kings 10. 6. 7. So says the Soul, that being
justified by faith has arrived to a peace with God; Lord it was a true report
that I read in thy word, and heard from thy Ministers, while I was yet in my
natural state, and condition of thy loves, and the infinite sweetness that is
in them, how beit I believed not the words, until my Soul came to taste
something of it, and behold the half of that quiet, and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost, the half of that serenity of conscience, and satisfaction, which
the Soul has from a peace with God, was not told me, thy loves far exceed the
fame which I heard.

I shall lay the proof of this Doctrine upon these 2 Propositions, which have a
natural rational evidence to every reasonable Soul.

1. The Soul of man naturally, and necessarily knowing an object to be good,
and wanting it in whole or in part to any considerable degree, does desire it,
and without such knowledge it desires it not. It is a rule in Philosophy, we
will nothing, but what to us appears good, It is our misery in our lapsed
state, that many things to us appear so, which are not so, but they must so
appear or we cannot will them. Three things must concur to make any thing the
object of a reasonable Souls desires. 1. An apprehended goodness in it. That
is, an apprehended Sutableness in it, to our state, or circumstances, if there
be never so much goodness in a thing if we have no knowledge of it, no
apprehension of such goodness in it, our will moves not by desire toward it.
Hence it is, that the Clown desires no learning, and the man of learning and
knowledge desires no excess of gold or Silver. Though there be a goodness in
learning and knowledge. Yet the Clown apprehends it not, so does not desire it,
and though there be some degrees of goodness in a great estate, yet the
Philosopher and man of contemplation apprehends it no further than as it
serves for a Viaticum, a Traveling Penny to pay for food and raiment whiles
he passes through the world. And indeed this is the true reason why the
sensual profane man says to the Almighty, depart from me, and to Christ, what
do I care for thee? for being under no conviction of his lost, and miserable
estate, and possibly hardly believing that he has an immortal Soul, or shall
have any existence beyond this Life, he sees nothing in Christ, or the loves
of Christ, that any way suteth the necessities, and wants of his Soul, and,
Ignot i nulla cupido, what good a man does not know he never longs for. 2. A
Second thing, concurring to make the Object of desire is an apprehended
possibility of attaining to or enjoying what he apprehends so suitable; for the
reason of man will not suffer his Soul to move toward what he apprehends
impossible to be attained. Hence as no Scholar ever heartily desired all kinds
and degrees of learning and knowledge: so no worldling ever desired all the
Gold and Silver in it. Hence it is also impossible that a Soul under an
habituated despair should heartily desire the Love, and favor of God, which it
apprehends not possible for it to obtain. 3. The object of it must be something
which the Soul wants, either in whole, or in part, either as to the thing it
self, or as to some degrees of it, or at least what it apprehends itself to
want? Still apprehension is necessary, for De non Entibus, and non
apparentibus, eadem est ratio. It is the same thing as to this motion of the
Soul not to have a good, and not to apprehend that it has it. for our Souls
move according to their apprehensions; and this is the reason, none desires
being (though they may desire the continuance of it;) the healthy man desires
not health (though he may bless God for it and desires the continuance of it.)
The Ignorant bold presumptuous Sinner desires not the Love of God, the pardon
of Sins; he thinks he is sure of all. Hence now it is that the believer desires
the Loves of Christ, it apprehends them good, possible, and what its Soul
does stand indaily, and further need of, which apprehension is the reason why
our Souls desire any thing, be it of what nature soever; we can desire nothing
but what we must apprehend good, suitable to us in some of our circumstances,
possible to be attained, and such as either wholly, or in some degree at least,
we need.

2. According to the degree of our knowledge or apprehension of the goodness of
any object so are our desires after it. This will justify itself upon
experience in all other things, we do not desire them according to the degree
of goodness in them, for then every man must desire the favor of God, Union
and Communion with him, but according to the degree of our knowledge, or
apprehension of such a good, as such. Now there are various degrees of
knowledge.

1. The first and meanest is the mere act of our Understanding. which by the
help of our Eyes, and Ears gains the knowledge of things, And thus the vilest
of men may know that the Loves of Christ are good, yea good before wine, that
is, they may have so read in the Bible, so heard from Ministers of the Gospel.
And even this knowledge may produce in a bad man a desire after these things,
proportioned to his apprehension. Hence such a man may faintly will, and lazily
desire these things.

2. A Second degree of Knowledge is Opinion. This rises a little higher, the
man who thus knows that the Loves of Christ are good, does not only know it
from reading, or hearing, but from probable Arguments. Nor is it difficult for
a wicked man thus also to know that the Loves of Christ are good. As Soon as he
can be made to believe that there is a God, and that he is the Fountain of
Good, and that Jesus Christ is the Eternal Son of God, and Equal with the
Father, both in Essence and all Divine Perfections, his Reason will persuade
him that there must be a Goodness, yea, a transcendent Goodness in Christ's
Loves. But while Flesh and Blood only reveals this thing unto him, his
Knowledge is uncertain and faint, and he is subject to thoughts that he may be
mistaken, and therefore though he may sometimes desire Christ's Love, yet it is
but by fits, and with incertainties, according to the Nature of the Knowledge
and Apprehension he has of the truth of the things.

3. A Third degree of Knowledge is Persuasion, arising from Demonstration. Now
there is 1. A Demonstration of Sense; thus we know the Sun shines, the Fire
burns, etc. 2. A Demonstration of Reason; when we can conclude a thing from
infallible Principles of natural Reason. 3. A Demonstration of Faith, which is
the Demonstration of the Spirit. When men know things from the holy Spirits
fully persuading them of the truth of this, or that, from a Divine Revelation.
This is the Demonstration of faith.

4. There is yet a further and higher degree of Knowledge, that arises from
Experience, being a sensible Evidence of the truth of what the Soul had before
received a little of, from the sight of the Eye and hearing of the Ear, and
more from the persuasion of the Spirit, and some Argumentations within itself.
I say now that according to the degree of the Souls knowledge and apprehension,
so are the workings of the Affections: This of desire in particular. Hence the
desires of Believers to the Loves of Christ, must necessarily be the strongest:
For the degree of the Knowledge and Apprehension the Believer has of the
goodness of them, is higher than it is possible any other Souls should have.
Other Souls may have read Books discoursing the Loves of Christ, or heard
Discourses of that tendency, or judge so from Arguments of Scripture, which may
make such a thing probable to them: But none but these have any persuasion
wrought in their Souls by the Spirit of God, of the Excellency of them, none
else have had any real Tastes and Experience of them Knowledge and Experience of
the Goodness of any Objects being those things which move the Soul to desire
them, and the degree of the Souls apprehension of such Goodness and Excellency
in Objects, the ground of the Souls Intention in such desires; it must
necessarily follow that a good Christians Knowledge and Experience of that
Goodness which is in Christ's Loves, must be the grounds of their desires after
them. There needs no Scripture to prove this, it is evident to our Reason.
Yet take the Instance of David, Psalm. 4. 6. David desires of God to lift up the
light of his Countenance upon him. Observe now v. 7. what made him prefer the
light of Gods Countenance to the Worldlings Corn, and Wine, and Oil, Thou have
put gladness into my Heart. Accordingly he tells us Psalm. 9. 10. They that know
thy Name will put their trust in thee. Hence you shall observe that David
concludes many of his Psalms of Praise with Prayer. But, will some say, If
they have had experience of the Loves of Christ, why should they yet desire
them? None desires what they have. This is true, if our Enjoyments were
perfect, but there is an height, and depth, and length, and breadth of the
Love of God in Jesus Christ, an height which the Soul has not taken, a depth
which the Soul has not fathomed, a length and breadth which the Soul has not
measured from end to end. It is true, we desire nothing but what we want,
either in whole or in part, therefore in Heaven will be no desire, That which
is perfect will be come, and all that which is in part only, will be done away:
But we shall never be filled with the Loves of Christ till our Mortality be
swallowed up in Life. I come now to the Application.

Use 1.
We may learn from hence. That God must show some act of Love to us, before we
can show any Love to him. Desires after the Loves of Christ, though sincere,
are the least, and first, and lowest motions of our Souls toward God. These
(you have heard) must arise from a Knowledge and Experience of the goodness of
those Loves. Now this Knowledge, this Experience, must be the Gift of God to,
and the work of God in, and upon the Soul, yea, and that not in a way of common
Grace and Illumination, but in a way of special Grace; for though a common
Illumination may produce some faint desires, yet it will produce no sincere and
effectual desires, because the Knowledge, begot by them, will be flitting and
uncertain, and attended with Doubts, Fears, and Incertainties. So as till the
Lord by his Spirit has wrought in the Soul a persuasion of Faith, commanding
the Soul without dispute to give credit to what he has revealed in his Word,
there will be no sincere desires in the Soul after these things. The Schoolmen
tell us there are three ways by which we gain the Knowledge of a thing. By
Signs, Conjectures, and Effects, (as some Causes are known.) 2. By the enquiry
of our Reason into the nature of it. 3. By Divine Revelation. The Excellency of
the Loves of Christ is a spiritual thing, and to be judged upon Spiritual
accounts, and in a Spiritual manner. The natural Man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. So as the natural Reason of a Man will
serve him very little to the gaining of this Knowledge, by the Effects, having
never experienced it he cannot know it; so as there is no other way to know it
but by Divine Revelation, God (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 10.) has revealed
them to us by his Spirit. And v. 12. We have received the Spirit which is of
God, that we might know the things that are freely given us of God. So as that
I say God must show some special token of his Love to our Souls for good,
before we can show any Love to him, or make so much as one step toward him.

Use 2.
Observe from hence, That a Believers Soul moves rationally and accountably
enough in all its desires after the Loves of Christ. The Souls of Believers are
not so unintelligible as some profane Persons would make them in their
Passions for, and Motions toward Christ's Loves. The Knowledge a Soul has, or
the Experience which it has had of the Goodness and Excellency of any Object,
moves the reasonable Soul to the desires of it. Admitting the Believer to see
things in another Light than a natural Man has, or can see in, to have other
Notions of Good and Evil, and to take the measures of them from their
subserviency to the Spiritual and eternal good of the Soul; the Passions and
Desires of his Soul after Christ's Love, are as natural Motions of the
reasonable Souls, as the Worldlings Desires after Riches, or the sensual Man's
Passions for such things as gratify the sensitive Appetite. The Reason why
every Soul moves not after these Spiritual Things, is because every Soul sees
not the Good and Excellency in them. Multitudes hardly know (that is, believe)
they have immortal Souls that shall outlive their Bodies in a state of
Happiness or Misery; or if they know or believe that, yet they do not believe
that there is no other name under Heaven by which they can be saved, but only
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ: Nor ever had any experience of the Love of
God to Souls. Their deriding of Religious Passions, and the Breathings of pious
Souls after the Manifestations of Divine Love, flows from their ignorance of
them, and their unreasonable Rudeness, in speaking evil of the things which
they know not. The original difference betwixt a person truly pious, and
panting after the Love of Christ and others, lies here: These Creatures know
that they have Souls, Souls ordained to an eternal existence, either in Hll, or
Heaven, in eternal Happiness, or in eternal Misery. They believe what God has
said, that there is no other Name under Heaven by which Men and Women can be
saved, but only the name of Jesus Christ, neither is there Salvation in any
other. That he that believes on him is not condemned, and he that believes
not is damned already, the Wrath of God abides on him, and he shall never see
Life; they do not only read these things in their Bibles, and hear them from
their Preachers, but the Holy Spirit of God has firmly persuaded them, that
they do as fixedly believe them, as they do any thing of sensible or rational
Demonstration; they have more waky thoughts, with reference to Death; Mortality
and Eternity, are things more in their Eyes than in the Eyes of others: Again,
they have tasted and experienced more of the Love of Christ. Allow the Souls of
others to be in the same Circumstances, they would have alike Motions; but
because they are ignorant, knowing nothing of Spiritual Things, or at least
nothing as they ought to know it, thence it is that their Souls move not; this
is now but the natural working of reasonable Souls in other cases, nor is there
any such unaccountable, or unintelligible thing in it.

Use 3.
And indeed this gives us the true Reason why every unregenerate Soul is so
cold in its motions toward Christ, and also may inform us how far it is
possible such a Soul may go in motions of this nature. The Reason why such a
Soul moves no more, is want of Evidence, which such a Soul has of the Goodness
of his Loves. Simple Goodness, and Excellency in an Object, is not attractive
of the Soul, but Goodness apprehended by, evidenced, and appearing to us. All
the apprehension that it is possible, a natural man should have of the Loves of
Christ, must be from Reading, Hearing, or its own Reasoning and concluding from
what it has so heard, or read; for it wants both the demonstrative persuasion
of the Holy Spirit, and also any experimental Tastes or sensible Evidence. All
Knowledge which has no better Foundation, will arise no higher than to beget
in the Soul an Opinion, and leaves the Soul at some Incertainties, and unfixed,
and hence its Motions toward an Object of which it has no better Evidence,
are also uncertain and faint, and fluctuating. Knowledge being the Foundation
of Desire, Reason will tell us that the Desire must bear proportion with the
Knowledge. The unregenerate man, having no Knowledge of Spiritual things, that
is productive of more than an Opinion, the desire must be uncertain and faint,
according to the nature of the Opinion that causes it.

Use 4.
By this also Christians may be able to take some Measures, and make up some
Judgments of themselves, whether the desires they find in their Souls after
Christ, and his Loves, be such as are peculiar to the Souls of Believers, yea
or no. We usually say that Desires after Grace are Evidences of it, and there
is a truth in it, but all desires are not so; for as I have said, there may be
desires after Christ and his Loves, in an unregenerate Man, commensurate to
that knowledge which he has of the Goodness of them; but this will speak
nothing of good to the Soul, only such Desires, as flow from a Christians
Knowledge of Faith, and from Experience. He that has only a knowledge of
Christ and his Loves, from Reading the word, or from the Report of Ministers,
may so far desire Christ's Loves, as may serve him for his own ends, nay though
he has no great Faith as to that eternal State of Happiness to which Christ
brings the Soul, but has only received Notions of such ablessed State, to
which he gives no great credit, yet for his own Security, because his notions
may be true, though he has no great fixed persuasion of them, he may yet
desire the Loves of Christ so far as to bring him to an everlasting Happiness.
As a Merchant that has heard a Report of the rare Commodities, and cheapness
of them, in a Country, which Report he does not so far believe, as he will
adventure an Hundred Pounds to try the Issue, yet may desire the Commodities at
such Rates as he hears of; so may an unregenerate man that has fate under the
Preaching of the Gospel, and heard abundantly of the Excellency of Christ, and
the rare effects of his Love, though he will not do any thing toward the
obtaining them, yet may wish that Christ loved him, that he might be made
partaker of such Love, though all this while in Heart he believes little or
nothing. That you may not therefore deceive your selves in this point, take a
few notes of such desires as are indeed Evidences of Grace.

1. They are not mere velleities, lazy wishings, and wouldings as we say, but
always attended with the use of means which we judge or find proper to obtain
our desires. And indeed this alone without anything further said, will try this
issue; a desire arising from the knowledge and experience a Soul has of the
goodness of an Object is always attended with the use of what means are within
our reach for the obtaining of it. Hence a Souls pretended desire of the pardon
of sin through the blood of Christ, and of living with Christ in glory, not
conjoined with fervent prayers, with an endeavor to reform our lives, and to
sin no more, is of no good significancy at all. It is only an indication, that
the man or woman would be happy, and secure as to eternity (if there be such a
thing which he has heard;) but now when these desires are attended, with sad
reflections upon ourselves for sin, serious endeavors against sin, and hearty
and fervent prayers to God for pardon, these things speak the truth, and
sincerity of our desires.

2. Desires upon knowledge and experience of the goodness of a thing are
always most intense, and strongest. If you observe it, the desires of our
Souls are augmented from a double cause 1. The certainty of our knowledge of
that goodness which is in the thing desired. 2. The quickness of our
apprehension of the want of it: The more full, and certain knowledge that we
have of the goodness and excellency of an Object the more we desire it. For I
told you before it is not the simple goodness, and excellency of a thing that
draws out our Souls after it, but our apprehension of such a goodness, hence
in reason it must follow that the desire must be strongest in that Soul, where
the apprehension is most full and certain. And all goodness being measured by
us by the suitableness of the thing to our wants, the quicker and fuller
apprehensions the Soul has of its wants of Christ love, the stronger must the
souls motions for, and toward it be. Now the believing Soul, having the most
certain knowledge of the goodness of the Loves of Christ, and having also the
fullest, and quickest apprehension of its wants of them, of necessity its
pantings after them must be most intense, and strong; As the Heart pants after
the Water Brooks (as David speaks, Psalm. 42. 1.) Hence it is that when the
Prayers of Hypocrites are but complementings of God, a few words of course, the
prayers of the Saints are wrestlings with God (as Jacobs prayer is styled)
strong cries, and groans which cannot be uttered (as the Apostle speaks, Romans
8.) where any Soul finds such desires as these, it has reason to rejoice,
and be comforted concerning the truth of its grace, tho it finds its actions
imperfect, and Gods manifestations of himself to it in consolatory influences
not so full. In this sense it is true, that desires of grace, are indications
of it, provided they be such desires, as flow from a knowledge, or any
experience of Divine Love, I mean a knowledge of Faith, a certain firm
persuasion wrought in the heart of that goodness and excellency that is in
Christ, and his loves, not a mere knowledge from report, and the credit of
others, but such desires can never admit of a regardless carelessness, whether
the Soul obtains what it desires or no, but will be attended, with an
inquiry after, and a due use of all means for the obtaining the thing desired.
And besides, they will always be strong desires according to the nature of the
good desired, and the apprehended degree of the Souls want of it; and hence
again: The Soul that has these true desires, will find them attended with
trouble and unquietness till it has in some measure at least obtained the
thing which it desires, for as the wise man says of Hope (so it is true of
desire) deferred it makes the heart sick. The Soul filled with desires is like
the Woman in Travel, pained till it obtains the thing desired. As when the
desire is accomplished, it is sweet to the Soul, Prove. 13. 19. So while it is
accomplished, there must be some bitterness, and uneasiness in the Soul. But
now desires after Christ and his loves, attended with no trouble, no uneasiness
for want of the accomplishment and obtaining of them, faint and cold, and
languid desires without the use of means within, our power to obtain the thing
desired are of no significancy as to a truth of grace. Solomon has two sayings
in his Proverbs that may be applied here. Prove. 13. 4. The Soul of the sluggard
desires, and has nothing, but the Soul of the diligent shall be made fat. And
Prove. 21. 25. The desire of the slothful kills him, for he refuses to
labor. Two things are said of the slothful sluggard. 1. That he desires and
has nothing, he never obtains his desire. 2. That his desires kill him, they
do him hurt, no good; what is the reason? Because he refuses to labor: But
the Soul of the diligent is made fat. Solomon speaks as to the things of this
Life, The Soul of the sluggard desires and has nothing. It is as true as to
Spiritual things, the Grace of God, the Loves of Christ. The Souls of
Sluggards, that will sometimes say, O that I had my part in Christ, O that my
Iniquities might be pardoned, O that I might live with God in Glory, etc. but
never will do any thing toward these things, not so much as deny themselves in
a Lust, nor keep under their Body, and bring it into Subjection in any thing;
these Souls have nothing. The truth is they have nothing of any true desire
proceeding from any sound knowledge, or any true experience, but they shall
have nothing. Their Desires kill them, if they trust to these desires of Grace,
as Indications of a truth of Grace, they kill them, they cheat their own Souls
to an eternal ruin, and destruction. But the diligent Soul is made fat. That
Soul, that from a sound and firm persuasion of the goodness, and excellency of
the loves of Christ, desires to taste, and further to taste of them, and is
diligent in the use of means to have its desires accomplished, that Soul shall
be made fat. That Souls desires shall be accomplished, tho it may see it falls
short of its duty in the use of means, and tho it may be God is not pleased to
give the Soul the sensible manifestations of its love, so that its desire is
deferred, and while it is so differred, the heart is pained, and it meets with
some trouble and uneasiness, through the not accomplishing of its desires to
its sense, yet, it shall be made fat. The hope of the righteous (says Solomon)
shall be gladness, so the desire of such a Soul; the diligent Soul, shall be
satisfaction. This is according to the words of our Savior, Mat. 5. 6. Blessed
are they which do hunger, and thirst after righteousness for they shall be
filled. Thus much I have thought fit to add in this place in answer to that
question, which we sometimes meet with, Whether the desire of grace be grace? A
true resolution of it is of mighty use sometimes to Souls under melancholic
distempers, or in an hour of temptation to relieve them, where they both want
sensible manifestations, and a just view of the sincerity of their own actions.

Use 5.
I shall shut up this discourse with a word of exhortation. 1. To all to look
to their desires, their pretended desires after Christ, and his loves. That of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16. 22. is a dreadful Curse. If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ let him be Anathema, Maranatha, accursed till the Lord come. Love
is the complacency of the Soul in an object, the first fruit of its desire.
None has a true complacency in an object, but he desires an union with it in
such a degree as he is capable of. Hence every one that lives under the
preaching of the Gospel, and has heard of Christ will pretend to desire him.
But one desires him from a knowledge by hearsay of the goodness of his loves,
another desires him from a knowledge of faith, a settled persuasion of it
wrought in his heart by the Spirit of God, and some tastes and experience of it;
you have heard that the desires of the Soul which arise from a knowledge of
report and hearsay, are weak and faint, and cold and lazy, and will speak
nothing of good for the Soul that has them, you have heard the other desires
are strong, and intense, vehement and fervent, active and diligent. Nothing
more relieveth a Soul sometimes, than to find in itself; that though it wants
a strength to perform, yet to will is present with it, tho it cannot yet
rejoice, and delight in the apprehension of his loves, yet for these are its
desires. Nothing more kills and destroys a Soul, than to trust to desires
of grace, as indications of it, which indeed are not so. O therefore look to
your desires after Christ. See that they proceed from knowledge and experience.
For experience indeed it depends upon Divine influence, and breathing upon
the Soul, and the holy Spirit of God like the wind breaths where it pleases.
But see that your knowledge of the goodness of these loves be a knowledge of
faith, not a mere knowledge from report and hearsay, as we may know many things
of which we believe nothing; that is, we know such things are written,
reported, talked of, rake heed this be not all the knowledge your Souls have of
the loves of Christ. I have showed you that the Knowledge of Faith, is a
knowledge of persuasion of the excellency of the loves of Christ in themselves
(for I am not now discoursing of the persuasion that you have a particular
interest in them) a firm, settled, constant persuasion of the Soul, that the
love of Christ is the most desirable good in Heaven or Earth, better then Wine
yea better than life itself. This is the work of the Spirit of God in the Soul.
A man can by no study persuade himself of this, we can, by no art, no words, no
arguments of ours persuade Souls of this. All that you can do, or which we can
advise you to do in this case, in the use of such means, to the use of which
God has promised his blessing, or in the use of which God ordinarily
concurreth with his blessing. These means are reducible to a few heads. 1. His
Word. 2. His Sacrament. 3. Prayer. 4. A reformed holy life and Conversation.

1. The Word is the great means; he has given you it in writing, that you may
exercise your selves in it by reading, he has appointed the Ordinance of
Preaching, that you may receive it by your ears; neither reading nor hearing
will beget in your Souls such a knowledge of Christ's love as will be productive
of this knowledge which I call the knowledge of faith, but they are both means,
means within our own power, and with the use of which God uses to concur, and
in the neglect of which, no^e can expect that the holy Spirit of God should
work such a knowledge of the excellency of Christ and his loves, as will be
productive of these desires after them. The Word of God is therefore called the
Word of faith, not only because it contains the substance of what we are to
believe, but because it is that with the use of which God ordinarily concurreth
in giving the Soul a power to believe, therefore the Apostle tells us, That
faith comes by hearing. If you would know Christ, and his loves, read, hear
the Word of God, and that in a conscientious manner, but I have had occasion to
speak of this under a former proposition.

2. The holy Sacrament is another means, at least for a further knowledge of
Christ and his loves, I am not of their minds who think that the Lords Supper
is a means for conveighing the first knowledge of faith, concerning Christ and
his Loves, to the Soul; if it had, Christ doubtless would have given it in
commission to his Apostles, not only to go and preach to, and Baptize all
Nations, but also to Administer the Supper to them, which he did not if any
will say, both Sacraments are intended, I shall not contend, but the Apostles
practice expounds our Saviors precept, who baptized none till they believed,
and made a profession of their true faith in Christ, the Sacrament is not a
means for ignorant persons and unbelievers, to come to the first knowledge of
Faith, but an excellent means in order to the getting a further knowledge of
Faith, that is a confirmation of their Faith in the love of Christ.

3. A third means is Prayer. He gives his holy Spirit in all the manifestations
of it to those that ask him.

4. The last I mentioned, was a reformed holy life and Conversation. None know
the loves of Christ more fully and effectually then those Souls, who walk with
him most closely. You know the promise of Christ's manifestation of himself, is
to those that love him, and keep his commandments, but of these things I have
before enlarged in my discourses upon some former propositions.

Sermon XII.
Canticles 1. 2. For thy Loves are better than Wine.

I Am now come to the last proposition I observed from these words, which I
told you might be either considered, As a Reason why she desired the tokens of
Christ's distinguishing loves, (a reason drawn from her knowledge and experience
of the goodness, the transcendent goodness of them. In this notion I have
already spoken to the proposition arising from them, Or, 2. As an argument of
her petition by which she pleads with God, for the thing which she desired.
An argument drawn from the value she set upon his love. From whence results
this proposition.

Prop. 10. That our value, and estimate of the love of Christ above all other
things is an excellent argument for a Soul to use with God for the obtaining of
it.

An argument is a mean brought either to prove a proposition, or to move the
Affections. The Logicians bring arguments to prove the just connection of
Subjects, and Predicates in propositions. The Orator uses them to move men's
wills and affections, the business of the Soul with God in any prayer, is the
business of an Orator; the Arguments he has to use, are such as may move God
to bestow the good things upon him which he desires. If you observe all the
prayers of the Servants of God upon Sacred Record, you shall find them much to
consist of Requests, or Petitions, and arguments backing, or enforcing those
requests. These arguments you will observe drawn from several heads. Sometimes
from the Nature of God. Sometimes from their relation unto him. Sometimes from
the promises made in the case. Sometimes from the greatness of their misery.
Sometimes from Gods Power and the freeness of his Grace. Psalm. 25. 7. According
to thy mercy remember thou me for thy goodness sake O Lord. Sometimes from
their faith, alliance to, and dependence upon God, Psalm. 25. 2. O my God I
trust in thee, let me not be ashamed. So from various other heads, I say
amongst others: A Souls just prizing and valuing of the loves of Christ, is an
excellent argument for a Soul to use to enforce a petition for them.

2. The goodness or badness, the strength or weakness of an argument derives
wholly from its subserviency to its end, its cogency, or no cogency. The End
here aimed at is by prayer to obtain the loves of Christ, so as the goodness of
the arguments to be used in this case depends upon the force they have with God
to move him to grant the requests of our lips.

3. Persuasive arguments have their force either upon a natural account, and
that is mostly from the infirmity of our Natures, which renders them subject to
be affected with fine words, passionate expressions; we must not imagine that
God can be moved with any such thing, and therefore fine phrases in prayer are
very insignificant things: Or else upon a moral and rational account. As now
amongst men, if one can come to another, requesting a favor from him, and say,
Sir, you promised it me, there is a force in this argument, upon a moral and
rational account, such an argument is this, in this case. If a Soul can go to
God pleading for the manifestations of his love unto it, and truly tell him,
that it valueth his love and favor above all created comforts, tho the bare
naming of this, and delivering it in fine, significant words will do nothing
with God in order to the obtaining of it, nay though this affection and temper
of our Souls, can merit no influence of grace from God, yet considering the
persections of the Divine Nature, and the obligations which God has laid upon
himself. It will have a great moral virtue, and efficacy, and be of great force
with him for the obtaining the influences of Divine Grace, and the
communications of his love.

Hence I shall desire you in the first place, to observe what frequent use the
People of God have made of it in their applications to the Throne of Grace.
David especially, Psalm. 42. 1, 2, 3. As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee O God; my Soul thirsts for God,
the Living God, when shall I come and appear before thee, O God? His Request
there lies in the last words, That he might come and appear before God, the
Argument he uses is from the value he had for such a mercy, so as the Heart did
not more pant after the waterbrooks. The same Argument he uses, and much in
the same case, Psalm. 84. 1, 2. The great Petition of that Psalm was for a
liberty again to enjoy God in his Ordinances; what is the Argument he uses to
enforce this Petition? How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts? V. 1.
My Soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord; my heart and my
flesh cries out for the Living God. So he goes on in a variety of Phrases, all
expressing but his great value and estimate of such a mercy, to that degree
that he prefers the condition of a poor Sparrow, or Swallow to his own in
the want of it. You have him using the same Argument again, Psalm 63. 1, 2, 3. O
God thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my Soul thirsts for thee, my
flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty Land, where no water is. To see
thy Power, and thy Glory, as I have seen Thee in the Sanctuary. Because thy
loving kindness is better than life. The Petition is much the same, and the
Argument the same. I might instance in many other places of the Psalms, but
this is sufficient: And certainly this were enough, if no more could be said to
justify this Proposition. That Argument which the man according to God's own
heart used, and so often used, is certainly a good Argument, and of due force
and efficacy; but this was an Argument he often made use of. But I shall
further show you the value of this Argument from Reason.

First, This Argument speaks Christ in the Soul. What the Apostle says in
another case, No man calls Jesus Christ Lord but from the Spirit, may be
applied in this. No man can truly say that he prizeth the Loves of Christ above
Wine, above all created comforts whatsoever, but from the Spirit; none but the
true Christian, the truly spiritual man, sets any considerable value upon
Christ's Loves. To you that believe (says the Apostle) he is precious. Now
what Joseph said to his Brethren of Benjamin: Bring your Brother Benjamin, or
see my face no more. God has said to every one of us, Bring Christ with you,
or see not my face. We are all transgressors from the womb, and God hears not
sinners for their own sakes, but for Christ's sake; therefore we are commanded
to ask in Christ's Name. God indeed as our Father by Creation may hear us
crying for temporal good things in the day of our wants; so he hears the
young Ravens when they cry for food to him. But we are blessed with Spiritual
Blessings in Christ, and upon the account of Christ; he gives the first grace
upon the account of Christ's Intercession pleading for the Application of the
purchased Redemption. He gives further grace upon the account of Christ's
Intercession for us, and the Spirit's Intercession for us: For we know not what
to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us,
with groanings which cannot be uttered; and he that searches the heart knows
what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes Intercession for the Saints
according to the Will of God, Romans 8. 26, 27. Now a due estimate and value of
the Love of Christ in a Soul, is an Indication of the Spirit of Christ dwelling
in the Soul; hence it must needs be an Argument of force with God; for he that
searches the heart, knows the mind of the Spirit, making Intercession for
the Saints, according to the will of God.

Secondly, The force of this Argument lies here, in that it lays hold upon
many Promises. The Promises are but as so many Bonds in which God has made
himself a Debtor to his Creatures. All Promises oblige the truth and
faithfulness of those persons that make them: God being the true and faithful
One, cannot lie; He is faithful that has promised (says the Apostle;) so that
if it be a sufficient Argument to use with a man to obtain any thing we would
have, to tell him, He has promised it, it holds toward God more strongly,
as his truth and faithfulness is much more certain and infallible than any
Creature is. Besides that, it is a further advantage when Promises are made
upon a due and just consideration; for these is not only the truth, but the
justice also of the person promising is concerned to the fulfilling of them.
Hence in Scripture you shall ordinarily find the Servants of God pleading the
Word, the Covenant of God, spoken to, and made with them, Psalm. 119. 49.
Remember thy Word unto thy Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope; and
in many other Texts of Scripture. I say, when a Soul can go to God, and say in
truth, that he valueth his love and favor above Wine, above Life, above all
created comforts, this Argument lays hold upon several Promises of God. I
will a little enlarge upon this: ^. It lays hold upon a Promise of filling
and satisfaction, Matthew. 5. 6. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, for they shall be filled. It is a mighty large and comprehensive
Promise. To fill a Soul with the influences of Divine Love, is a very great
thing. It is not easy to fill the covetous man with Wealth; but he may be
sooner filled with Riches, than the Soul of a good man with the Love and Grace
of God. But here is a Promise of being filled: Open thy mouth wide (says God)
and I will fill it. To whom is this Promise made? To him that hungers and
thirsts after Righteousness. Righteousness is Grace, whether you take it for
the Righteousness of Justification, the Righteousness of Christ, in which every
Soul must stand righteous before God: Or the Righteousness of Sanctification,
habits and acts of Holiness wrought in us, and done by us, they are both from
Grace, from the free Love of God shining upon our Souls. He that hungers and
thirsts after it, is he that intensely desires it. Hunger and thirst are
natural passions arising in us from our want of due aliment; nature enforcing
in us a sense of that want, (and of all other) they are the most vehement.
Thence our English Proverb, Hunger will break through stone walls; and
experience tells us, to what hard things these passions have brought people,
not only to eat Carrion, but to kill and eat their own Children; yea the flesh
of their own Arms; so as hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, imports
vehement desires after Grace, which desires testify the Soul's estimate of it,
and value for it; and to those who thus hunger and thirst the Promise is made,
that they shall be filled.

Again, such a Soul has a right to those Promises of all Grace propounded in
the most large and comprehensive terms, and general phrases; as where God
promises a new heart, the water of life, his coming unto Souls, dwelling in
them, abiding with them. The Soul that can go to God; and truly say,, that he
prizeth the Loves of Christ above all things, lays hold of all these Promises
of which the holy Scriptures are full, Isa. 55. 1, 2. Ho every one that
thirsts, come you to the waters, and buy, without money, and without price,
buy wine and milk. So Rev. 22. 17. Let him that is athirst come, and whosoever
will, let him drink of the water of life freely. Joh. 14. 23. If any man love
me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto
him, and make our abode with him. So v. 21. He that loves me, shall be loved
of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self to him. These now, and
such like, are general Promises comprehensive of all the Love of Christ to the
Soul, in the various manifestations of it, according to the Soul's diversified
necessities, with respect to its several circumstances. Now observe to whom
these Promises are made, to those that love Christ, and in evidence of that
love, hunger and thirst after him, to them the Promises are made, 1. That the
Father will love that man or woman. 2. That both Christ, and his Father, will
come unto him. 3. That they will manifest themselves unto them; that they will
dwell, and make their abode with them. That they shall have Wine and Milk
without money and price. Now I appeal to any ordinary capacity, what evidence
of Love any Soul can give greater, than the valuing of his Loves above all
other things. So that, where this can be said in truth to God, God is
challenged upon a multitude of Promises, even so many as are made, to the Love
of God, and Christ, and to the Soul's hungrings and thirstings after him. Nay,
there is yet another sort of Promises, which such a Soul challenges, viz. all
those Promises of a further supply and increase of Grace to those that have the
Seed of Grace: As Matthew. 13. 12. To him that has shall be given, and he shall
have in more abundance. I might add many more of like nature; but there is
hardly any of you but know how to furnish your selves with them. Now where the
Soul can challenge God upon a Promise, and lay claim to the mercy which it
asks, from an obligation which God by his Word has laid upon himself, to
give it: This is a great Argument, for it touches God upon the account of his
Truth and Faithfulness.

3. Further yet this argument touches God as he is a tender Father. God (you
know) to let us know his heart to his poor Creatures, amongst other names of
relation has taken to him that of a Father, to let us know there is in his
gracious nature something analogous or proportionable to the heart and bowels
of Earthly Parents to their Children, and accordingly our Savior argues, that
if any of our Children ask of us bread, we will not give them a Stone, nor a
Scorpion instead of Fish, and thence concludes, that if we being evil know how
to give good things to our Children, much more will our Heavenly Father give
good things to them that ask him. You, many of you know the heart of a Father.
To which of you would it not be a great argument, to draw you out to any acts
by which you could manifest your loves to a Child, for your Child to come, and
beg your love to it, telling you, that it valueth your love above all things in
the world, that it had rather have your love, your heart toward it, than have
all the estate you can give it? Shall there not be something in the heart of
God proportionated to this affection in your hearts? Is it possible that a
Child of God, should come to God, and in sincerity say to him; Father! I beg
some tokens of thy special distinguishing love to my Soul, thou that know
all things, know that I love thee, and that my Soul does value thy loves
above all that the world affords, and Gods heart should not yearn, and his
bowels melt toward such a Soul? God must say of the voice of such a Soul, as
Isaac sometimes said, It is the voice of my Son Jacob. None but a Child can
speak such a language.

4. Finally. No arguments can be of more force to use with God, than such
wherein the Interest of his own glory is concerned. The Glory of God being his
own great end, which he pursues in all his actions, he uses a great argument
to God, that says unto him, Father glorify thy self. So gracious is God, that
he gives us leave to fetch arguments from our selves, our own wants, and the
misery we are in, which arguments affect God, as he is a God full of pity and
tender compassion. But those arguments which we can fetch from the Interest of
his own glory, seem to have a greater force, as complying with what is the
Lords great and chiefest end. He that sets an high value and estimate upon the
love of Christ, gives God a great deal of Glory, preferring him to all things
in the world, for God cannot be more glorified by the Creature, than to be in
heart esteemed above, and preferred to the whole Creation. So as that Soul that
goes to God with this argument, does in effect say; Father! my Soul has
glorified thee upon the Earth, and does give thee the glory of being the most
excellent object, and more desirable than all the world besides. Now therefore
glorify thy self in manifesting of thy love to me, that I may further exalt
thee in thy rich and free Grace. I now come to the application.

Use 1.
By way of Instruction, first, we may observe, That the meanest Child of God is
furnished with a better argument to encourage his hopes in his addresses to the
throne of Grace, than the greatest and proudest Sinner in the world has. There
are arguments, which Sinners may use, from the infiniteness, and freeness of
the divine bounty and goodness, from their relation to God, as his Creatures,
from the greatness of their misery, etc. and they may obtain something from God
upon these pleas, from that infinite goodness, and compassion that is in the
Divine Nature; but no unregenerate man can use this argument which has in it a
much greater force. On the other side, there is no the meanest child of God,
not the meanest believer that is in the world but has this argument to use
with God. Other arguments may be of avail with God for the obtaining some good
things of this life, this is of force for the obtaining those of highest
consequence relating to the internal, and eternal happiness of the Soul.

Use 2.
Secondly, This offers us a great encouragement to examine our selves upon this
point, Whether we have a due estimate of the loves of Christ, Whether we can
truly say to our blessed Lord, That his loves are better than Wine, and that we
value them not only above all sensual satisfactions, which the profane
scandalous Sinner does not, but above all sensible satisfactions, which no
unregenerate carnal man does. I remember when our Savior examined Peter about
his love to him, he propounded to him this question, Joh. 21. 15. Simon Peter
love thou me more than these? I do know that many Interpreters by [these] in
that Text understand his other Disciples standing by. There was a time when
Peter preferred himself (as to his love toward his Master) to all the other
Disciples: Tho (says he) all should deny thee, yet I would not deny thee.
Peter since that time was humbled, our Savior had a mind that his humility
should be manifested, and therefore (say some) he propounds that question to
him: but I remember Bernard in one of his Sermons upon the Canticles puts
another sense upon the words, Love thou me more than thou love these? and
so it may be referred either to the company with whom he was, or to the
diversion of fishing, they were employed in, or to the great draught of fish,
which they had taken. I do but allude to the text, who so truly loves the Lord
Jesus Christ, if all the persons, and things in the world were before him, must
be able to say, I love Christ more than these. Admit his friends and nearest
relations to be in his Eye, all the pleasant and delectable things in the
world, all the Crowns and Scepters, and honors in the world, all the Gold, and
Silver, and Houses, and Lands in the world in his Eye: He must be able to say,
I love the Lord Jesus Christ more than these; yea if his own life be set before
him, not to be enjoyed without the loss of Christ's love, he must be able to say
that he loves Christ more than that, Mat. 10. 37. He that loves Father or
Mother more than me, is not worthy of me, and he that loves Son or Daughter
more than me, is not worthy of me, Lu. 14. 26. If any man come to me, and hate
not his Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters,
yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. But I have formerly given
you some directions how to try your selves, whether the loves of Christ in the
apprehension of your Souls are good before Wine, and shall therefore add no
more on this argument.

Use 3.
In the third place; This notion may be of great use to relieve Christians
doubting whether they have any one good Argument to use with God in their
applications to him. 2. Whether any of their Prayers have at any time pierced
the Heavens, and been accepted of God. A good Christian is often doubting,
whether he may go to God or no; whether he has one good Argument to use, which
may be of avail with God. We have many words to say, many Arguments to use; and
when it is a clear day with the Soul, it can easily discern it, and fill its
mouth with words of several natures; but in a dark day, under the prevailings
of Melancholy, or boisterous Temptations, it can find many Arguments to deter
it from Addresses to God, its own vileness and unworthiness considered with
God's purity and holiness, the multitude of its sins, its former Prayers (as it
fancieth) lying by not answered, but it cannot find one Argument to encourage
it. But every Christian has at all times many Arguments, if he could discern
them. David made his vileness and unworthiness an Argument, Psalm. 25. Pardon
mine iniquity (says he) for it is great. That Is an Argument all have, and at
all times. Ah! but (says the Soul) this is no other than the vilest person
has: He may plead the freeness of Divine Grace. The Soul that goes to God for
Free Grace, can never want an Argument, but still this is common, and no more
encouraging a Believer, than another man. We may plead our own misery, and sad
state; misery is the object of Grace and Mercy; but still this is common. The
vilest sinner may go and plead with God for mercy, because his state is
miserable. A true Christian would have an Argument of a more special nature,
and such a one as in the use of, he could go boldly and with confidence to the
Throne of Grace. Admitting this Proposition, every good Christian has such an
Argument; such an Argument as no unregenerate man has, such an Argument as he
may go to God with, with boldness and confidence: God was never yet wanting to
the truly hungring and thirsty Soul after his Love; such an Argument as if
pleaded with God, and being in truth, always prevailed with God.

Use 4.
I shall shut up this Discourse with some few words of Exhortation.

1. To all: To labor to bring up their hearts to this, to prize the favor of
God above all other things whatsoever. How you shall know whether your hearts
be brought up to it or no, I have before showed you; but suffer me here to give
you some Directions in the case, and to press it with some Arguments. Until we
do find that our Souls do set such an estimate upon the Loves of Christ, we can
never use it as an Argument with God. This is therefore the first thing which
we have to do, to be restless till we find that we can say it in truth, that we
value Christ's Loves above all earthly things. Nor will this ever be
effectually done, till the holy Spirit of God comes upon our hearts with its
impressions and demonstrations; all that we can do will bear no more than the
notion of means in order to that blessed end. Of that nature much may be
directed.

First, Let thy Soul and its immortal state, with its condition referring to
that state, be much in thy thoughts. It is one great reason why men neglect and
are careless as to the Loves of Christ, because they do not remember they have
immortal Souls, nor consider any future state, or their own circumstances
relating to it. Men know that they have bodies, and experience hunger, and
thirst, and cold, and so are very busy in taking care what they shall eat, and
drink, and put on, but they do not know, at least they do not attend to their
knowledge of it, and have no certain knowledge and persuasion that they have
immortal Souls, that can no more die with the body, than eat, drink, or sleep
with it, so as they take no further care than for their outward man. Neither do
they attend to the consideration of the condition of their Souls with respect
to an eternal existence, but run away with presumptuous fancies that God will
not suffer them to perish for ever; determining concerning their Souls
according to their fancies, and the dictates of their own vitiated reason, not
according to the revelations of the Divine Will; would men think more of their
Souls, and consider the immortality of them, would they determine concerning
them, according to Divine Revelation, it were impossible they should so far, as
generally they do, neglect the care of them. They would quickly see that all
the good things of the world could not affect the Soul with any good, and
therefore must needs be invaluable things compared with those things that will
secure the Souls happiness both here and for ever. If men believed they had
immortal Souls, their reason would teach them quickly to conclude that they are
better than the body, which is but earth, and which must return to dust and
consequently whatsoever is good for the Soul, must be infinitely more good than
what only serves the necessities of our earthly part, and that neither but for
a little time. But the truth is, as the Fool has said in his heart there is no
God: So he has also said in his Heart, I have no Soul, no such immortal
substance as Preachers talk of, there is no such thing as Heaven, or Hell; most
unregenerate men are in their Hearts Atheists. The natural reason of all men
teaches them to look after their concerns and interests, and to prefer
greater, before lesser interests, and to value what makes for their greatest
interests, above what is only subservient to an interest of lesser value. Men's
preference of created comforts before the loves of Christ proceeds merely
from their ignorance, that they have Souls to look after, or at least unbelief
of it, if they notionally know it, their not understanding the nature, and
spiritual concerns of their Souls, or at least their erroneous fancies and
conceptions, of an universal Salvation of all, or all at least that are
baptized; the first thing to be done rationally to possess Men and Women of the
excellency of Christ's loves, above Wine, above all sensual things, or any
sensible things, is to possess men of this knowledge, and to keep their Eyes
waking to the consideration of it, and to engage them to take their measures of
these things from the revelation of the will of God, in his word, not from
their own wild fancies, and ratiocinations.

Secondly, Possess your Souls of the impossibility of their receiving of any
good, any thing suited to their necessities, but only from Christ. There is no
other name given under Heaven, there is no Salvation in any other. The power
over all Souls is committed unto Christ. The Father forgives Sins, but it is
for Christ's sake; as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you (says the
Apostle) we have Redemption, forgiveness of Sin through his blood. In him we
have righteousness, peace, through him we have access, an entrance into the
hol^est of all; the Father has given unto him Eternal life, that he should
give it to whomsoever he pleases. There is no good thing suited to a Souls
wants, but it deriveth from Christ. Good things suited to the more external
wants of our Body, derive from God as the great preserver of man, and flow from
that common providence of his which daily works in the upholding and
preservation of created Beings; but good things for our Souls derive from
Christ as Mediator, and as they are purchased by his blood, so they are
dispensed out by his Spirit. This now can appear to a Soul from no other light
but that of Revelation, study therefore the holy Scriptures, meditate therein
night and day, they testify all this concerning Christ. A full persuasion of
these two things, 1. That we have immortal Souls, ordained to an eternity,
either of happiness or misery. 2. That nothing but the love of Christ can
furnish them with those good things which are proper, and necessary for them,
with respect to their Eternal Happiness, are enough to convince Men and Women
that the loves of Christ are as much better than Wine, and to be preferred to
it, as the Soul is better than the Body, and the things suited to its wants,
better than those things which are only suited to the wants of the outward man.
But still I say, and every days experience, makes it good, Non persuaseris
etiamsi persuaseris, you shall not persuade Men and Women, tho you say enough
to persuade them, though you shut up their mouths, and they having nothing to
say, such a power has lust in the heart of man, into such a debauchery is the
nature of man degenerated. Admitting men to believe, that they have immortal
Souls, and that the Holy Scriptures are the Word of God, there is nothing in
nature has a fuller evidence than this truth, that the loves of Christ are
preferrible to all things in the world, and a man cannot act like a reasonable
creature in preferring any thing unto them; yet who believes it? who lives up
to this demonstration? It is God must persuade the Soul of this, and till the
Soul has this written and engraven upon it by the finger of his Spirit, it
will never so Judge. Lastly therefore,

Pray mightily that God would open your Ears, to see this, and persuade your
Souls of the truth of it, for till he does it, in vain are men's persuasions. To
move you to it, consider,

1. This will bear some proportion to the love of Christ to mankind. Christ
loved us more than these, more than all the Kingdoms, and pleasures and
profits, and honors of the world, yea more than his own life, yea he preferred
us to the Angels, the fallen Angels, for he took not upon him the nature of
Angels, but the nature of man.

2. This will speak the Soul to be a wise and understanding Soul. Certain it is
(as I have already showed you) that the loves of Christ are good before Wine.
The wisdom of a Soul lies much in a right discerning betwixt good and evil,
and betwixt that which is good, and that which is more good or better. The
excellency of a Soul lies in its conformity to God, he is an Atheist who
owneth not God to be the first Being, and to be of all Beings, the most
excellent, and perfect Being. So as necessarily, that Soul that comes nearest
in conformity to God, must be the most excellent Soul, now that Soul which
acts most up to the principles of improved and pure reason, and to the rule
of that holy Writ, which we all confess to be the revealed Will of God, and
lives most up to the Divine Pattern, doing what God does, that must needs be
the most wise, excellent, understanding Soul. Now will not a little reason
serve to convince us that Christ is the most excelling Object, and therefore to
be preferred to all sublunary enjoyments? Does not the Scripture represent him
to us as altogether desires, as the chiefest of ten thousand, as the well
beloved of the Father in whom he is well pleased, as he whom we ought to love
with all our heart, all our Soul, all our Strength? Does not the Father, the
Heavenly Father love him above all other objects? To which of the Angels said
he at any time. Thou art my Son, this day I have begotten thee; and again, I
will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son, -- He was brought up with
the Father, and daily his delight, rejoicing always before him.

3. This will speak an heavenly sublimated Soul, purged from the dregs of
sensuality and from an earthly mind, a Soul risen with Christ, and seeking the
things which are above, Col. 3. 1. The preference of Wine, any sensual
satisfactions, or any sensible enjoyments to the loves of Christ, speaks a
dirty Soul, that feeds upon carrion, and can be filled with wind.

Lastly, You have heard what an argument this will supply a Soul with in all
its addresses and applications to God for any grace or favor, no argument can
be more moving, more prevailing with God, none that lays hold upon more
promises, or that touches God more as a tender Father. O therefore labor for
this frame of Spirit, and give your Souls no rest until you find that they
indeed do prefer the love of Christ before all other things in Heaven and Earth.

Exh. 2. Br.
Secondly, This notion calls to all you who profess Godliness, and to any
thing of the Spirit of Adoption, which teaches to cry Abba Father, to take
heed of a Carnal mind, an heart cleaving to any created comforts in excessive
degrees, so as for the enjoyment of them, or any of them to run the hazard of
the loves of Christ; you will by it prejudice your souls in a great argument,
which you might use at the Throne of Grace. There are amongst others, three
distempers of heart, which those that would do much with God in Prayer must
take heed of.

1. A revengeful, not forgiving frame of Spirit. It is a dreadful Text, Mat. 6.
15. But if you forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Heavenly
Father forgive you. Our Savior has taught us to pray, Forgive us our Debts,
as we forgive our Debtors.

2. A doubting and unbelieving frame of Spirit. He that comes unto God must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, he that
lifts up his hands unto God, must lift up pure hands, and that without doubting?

3. Thirdly, A Carnal heart, cleaving to the world, and preferring the things
of the world, to the loves of Christ, and the good things of Grace.

3. Br.
Lastly. Is this such an argument of force with God? Let then such as can use
it in truth make use of it, I doubt not but I speak to many, who can in truth
say, that they value the loves of Christ the tokens of his special, and
distinguishing love above all earthly contentments; when you go to God plead
this, take unto you words, and say, Lord, let me be made a partaker of thy
special distinguishing love, thou know that my Soul valueth it above
mountains of Gold, Rocks of Pearl, or ten thousand Rivers of Oil.

Obj.
But possibly some may say, This is to plead my own merit.

Sol.
I answer, no, for consider who it is that has wrought in thy heart this value
and esteem. Is it not God? Did flesh and blood reveal any such thing unto thee;
thou do not then plead thy own merit, thou only pleadest with God, from what
he has already wrought, and begun in thee.

2. It is but the pleading of the promise which God has made to them that love
him and keep his Commandments.

3. Neither do thou plead thy esteem, and value for the loves of Christ, as
meritorious, as thinking that thy prizing the loves of Christ, meriteth the
further manifestations of them to thy Soul, thou only pleadest it as a gracious
habit wrought in thy Soul, by which God has fulfilled in thy Soul the
condition of the promise; thou only beggest of God, that he who has wrought in
thy Soul that condition to which he has annexed his promise, would now fulfill
also that promise to thy Soul which is annexed to that condition.

Thus I have finished the discourses I designed upon the first Petition of the
Spouse as pressed by her first Argument; Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
Mouth: For thy Loves are better than Wine.

Sermon XIII.
Canticles 1. 3. Because of the savor of thy good Ointments: Thy name is as an
Ointment poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee.

I Proceed to the next Proposition, which I at first observed from these words,
which I then largely opened.

Prop. 11.
Christ has good Ointments, which cast a savor, my meaning is (according to
my former explication of the words) That the Lord Jesus Christ, is filled with
the graces of the blessed Spirit, which in themselves are as good Ointments,
and whose excellency is discerned by every true Believer, by every Soul that is
espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ (to use the Apostles phrase, I have espoused
you to one Husband.) For a further discourse upon this Proposition, let me
first show you,

1. What I mean by Christ's Grace, and when I say he is full of the Graces of
the holy Spirit.

2. In what respects these graces are like to good Ointments.

3. What particular graces of the Spirit, are thus like to good Ointments.

4. Whence it is that they are discerned, and more effectually discerned by a
gracious heart than another. We read in the Psalmist that Christ was anointed
mith the Oil of gladness above his fellows, Heb. 1. 3. That he was anointed
with the Holy Ghost, and with power, Acts 10. 38. That phrase in the Epistle to
the Hebrews; borrowed out of Psalm. 45. as I showed you, is excellently
interpreted by John: God gave not the Spirit unto him by measure, Joh. 3. 34.
The Grace of God was said to be upon him, Luke 2. 40. and he is said to be full
of Grace and Truth, Joh. 1. 14. Grace in Scripture, as it relates unto God, is
usually taken in one of these two senses:

1. For the favor, and free love of God by which a Person is accepted of God,
and so Grace is in St. Paul's Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, and in his
other Epistles opposed to works; thus we are Romans 4. 4. Ephesians. 2. 5. Romans 3. 24.
said to be justified by Grace, saved by Grace. In this sense it is also in
Scripture applied to Creatures; Esther obtained Grace (that is favor) in the
sight of the King, Esther 2. 17. and so in many other Texts. Or 2dly it is
taken,

For some holy and virtuous qualities, and dispositions, by which (our Persons
being first accepted in Christ) we are acceptable unto God: Thus it is said,
Joh. 1. 16. Of his fullness we have all received Grace for Grace; thus Love is
called a Grace, 2* Cor. 8. 6. and in this sense the Apostle tells the
Corinthians, God is able to make all Grace to abound to them, 2 Cor. 8. 9. In
this sense we are commanded to grow in Grace, that is in holy and virtuous
dispositions, or habits, 2 Pet. 3. 18. It is expounded by 2 Pet. 1. 5. Add to
your (...) virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and
to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness,
brotherly-kindness; and to brotherly-kindness, charity. The Grace of Christ is
taken in a double sense.

1. Subjectively, For that free love, and favor, which is subjected ^ Joh. 14.
15. Romans 1* 7.
in Christ, and being in him as its Fountain, flows from him to cur Souls. In
this sense Christ is said to be sail of Grace, and truth, full of love, free
love toward his Peoples Souls, and truly in this sense Grace comes by Jesus
Christ, for out of him God loves no Soul. In this sense the Apostle wishes to
the Romans, Grace and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ. Take Grace in this sense, Christ is the Subject of it, and the medium
by whom it flows from the Eternal Father to the Children of men; he himself
was from Eternity, beloved of God, and that both necessarily, and freely, being
his Fathers Son, begotten from Eternity, the Father loved him, delighted in
him; and indeed in this sense Christ may be said to have been the object of
Grace, but he was not anointed with this in time, he had it from before all
times, only as to the Grace of Union, the humane Nature, until Christ assumed
it was not beloved of God, Christ assuming it, it became the object of this
Grace.

2. But secondly the Grace of Christ is also taken objectively for that Grace
which was poured out on Christ as Mediator, and this is either;

1. The Grace of Union, which is the free love of God assuming the humane
nature into a personal union with the Divine Nature, in which thing God put a
great deal of dignity upon, and showed a great deal of love unto our Nature.

2. The grace of Sanctification, by which I understand not the same which the
Children of God receive upon Regeneration, when of unholy they are made holy,
of impure they are made pure, of proud they are made humble, etc. But those
holy dispositions, and qualifications, which were found in Christ, considered
as the Son of Man by virtue of the union of the Divine Nature, with the Humane
Nature, and his anointing with the Holy Ghost (not given by measure unto him)
by which he was not only acceptable to his Father as Mediator, but he is also
exceeding lovely to his Saints. So that when I say Christ has good Ointments;
abundance of Grace; I understand,

1. Abundance of free love which dwelt in him as God over all blessed for ever,
to be dispensed out according to the particular exigencies of all his Peoples
Souls.

2. Many gracious dispositions, which eminently dwelling in the Godhead from
all Eternity, were also by the Spirit, poured out upon the Humane Nature in his
Incarnation. These are here called by a Metaphor Ointments, and good Ointments.

1. Because by the communication of these from the Divine to the Humane Nature,
in the personal union of both Natures in the Lord Jesus Christ, Christ was
sanctified and set apart, and constituted as a person fit to be our High Priest
and King.

This (as I told you in my last discourse) was one of the sacred uses of Oil,
which the Jews made, there was a sweet anointing Oil, made by Gods special
prescript, for the consecration of the High Priest, the Tabernacle, and their
holy Utensils; with this also they anointed their Kings. This did but typify
the anointing of the Holy Ghost; and by the receiving of this Unction Christ
was constituted our High Priest, and the King upon the Holy Hill of Sion. By
the Grace of Hypostatical Union he was made so: I mean by the union of the
Divine and Humane Nature in the one Person of Christ. Christ indeed had an
Essential Kingdom, equal with the Father by his Eternal Generation, but he
obtained his Mediatory Kingdom, by virtue of his Incarnation, and Unction. The
new and living way was consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his
flesh, Thus he was made our High Priest, our King, our Prophet; and by his
gracious dispositions and qualifications, he was made fit for a Mediator. For
such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
Sinners, and made higher than the Heavens, who needed not daily as those High
Priests (under the law) to offer up Sacrifice, first for his own Sins, then for
the People, etc. Heb. 7. 26. 27.

2. The Graces of Christ were like good Oils, or Ointments, as they were used
in Sacrifice, they cannot indeed so properly be called a Sacrifice, but they
were as the Oil poured upon the meat offering. There is a dispute whether the
Passive Obedience of Christ only, or his Active obedience also, be imputed to
us, and be our righteousness; not to meddle with that, supposing his passive
obedience to have alone been the Sacrifice, yet his Active obedience must be
allowed, as the Oil poured upon it. The meat offering was usually some Beast or
Bird slain, but then they were to come, and pour Oil upon it. Christ's death
upon the Cross was his offering: That was the Sacrifice, but his Graces were as
the Oil poured upon this offering, had not he that died been pure, and holy,
righteous, and separate from sinners, meek, obedient, etc. he could not have
been accepted for others, for he must have offered for himself, as the Apostle
teaches us, Heb. 7. 26, 27. Thus his personal graces, and perfections, were
like good Oils, with respect to the use of Oil in Sacrifice, upon the account
of them it was that he offered up to his Father a Sacrifice for the Sins of his
People, which was acceptable.

Thirdly. The Personal Graces and perfections of Christ, were like good Oils
for their sweet savor. These perfections are those things which make the name,
and person of Christ as a sweet smelling savor in the Nostrils of every
understanding gracious Soul; what is it which makes any Soul love Christ; what
makes its own private meditations of him, or the report which it receives of
him, so exceeding sweet to the Soul, but these excellencies and perfections,
which are in him: His free, and infinite love, to the Sons and Daughters of
Men, his pity and compassion, his slowness to conceive a wrath, and readiness
to forgive, his freeness to heal his Peoples backslidings, his purity, and
holiness, his patience and meekness: These are those things which make Christ
appear so lovely, and amiable to gracious Souls. Lastly like good Oils, they
serve the Soul for food. What does a Soul that hungereth, and thirsts after
Righteousness seed upon, but the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ? (some
indeed have found a Righteousness of their own to feed upon, but I doubt
whether those Souls that feed on nothing else will appear fair, and well liking
in the great day of the Lord:) Suppose a Soul pined away in the sense of its
iniquities, what does it live upon, but only the free Grace and mercy of God in
the Lord Jesus Christ? As Hezekiah said in another case; By these things men
live: so does every Spiritual Soul make use of the Grace of Christ, and may
say: By the Righteousness of Christ I live, by thelove, pity, and tender
mercies of Lord Jesus Christ I live: By his fullness of grace I live, for, of
his fullness we receive Grace for Grace. Thus you see how upon all accounts, The
grace of Christ is like good Ointments.

But thus much generally. We are upon a Bed of Spices, it is good for us to be
here, let me therefore speak a little more particularly, showing you
particularly:

Qu. 3.
What these Graces of our Lord Jesus Christ are, which are upon all these
accounts, as good Oils, or good Ointments.

I shall answer this in several particulars:

1. The Grace of Union, is as a good O^l. There is a threefold Union
considerable with reference to Christ. 1. His Eternal Union with his Father.
This is what he says in the Gospel once, and again, I and my Father are one,
but it is not proper to call this Grace. It was natural; his Generation who can
declare? 2. The second is the Hypostatical Union of the Divine, and Humane
Nature, in the One Person of the Mediator. This was Grace, the assumption of
our Nature, to make one Person, with the Divine Nature, this was an act of
Grace; it was not Natural, not Eternal, but the product of Divine, and free
(...) time. It was the Grace both of the first and of the second Person in the
Trinity, to assume humane nature into an Union with the second Person. 3. There
is an Union of Christ with Believers, I in you (says Christ) and you in me.
These are mysteries (the two latter I mean) not to be fully known, and
understood, until Christ's second coming. At that day (says our Blessed Lord)
Joh. 14. 20. You shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and Lin you.
That there is such a thing we know, how it is we do not know: but in the mean
time this is also of Grace. This in the second sense is terminated in Christ,
in the last it is terminated in the truly believing Soul. I am sure both are as
good Oils. That Grace which was both from the Father, and himself considered as
God, by which our Nature was assumed into a oneness with the Second Person in
the Godhead. This is like a good Oil, this was the sweet anointing Oil of his
Consecration, by this he Was constituted out High Priest, capacitated to offer
a Sacrifice to his Father, both meritorious, and acceptable. As God he could
not die, as merely the Son of man he could not merit, as God-man, he could do
both. O this makes Christ exceeding lovely in the Eyes of a Spiritual
intelligent Soul: Christ as God is full of Glory and Majesty; but his Glory is
invisible, his Majesty is incomprehensible; but now when the Word was made
flesh, and came and dwelt amongst us, then as the Evangelist says) we beheld
his glory, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of Grace
and Truth. All the comfort of a Soul depends upon Christ's Incarnation, and
what he did, and suffered, as manifested in the fl sh. Oh! how sweet this is to
the Soul to think of this, together with the satisfaction, which by virtue of
this, he gave to Divine Justice, and the daily intercession which he makes,
together with the consideration, that in this Capacity he entered into the
Heavens, as our forerunner; and we sit together with, and in him in heavenly
places (as the Apostle speaks) are matters of exceeding sweet Meditation; upon
these the Soul lives, and supporteth its faith. The Grace of Union also
considered in the last notion is exceeding sweet. This Grace is rooted in
Christ, and terminated in the Soul. By this the Soul is consecrated to God, by
virtue of this it is consecrated a Priest to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices to
God acceptable through the beloved; by this it is comforted and refreshed, when
it is terrified with the thoughts of the disunion with God, occasioned by the
fall of Adam, and that separation which its daily sins make betwixt God and it:
By this the Soul lives its Spiritual life, for Spiritual life lies in the
union of the Soul with God, which is made by, and in Christ.

Secondly, The Grace of Love in Christ, is as a sweet Oil or Ointment: That
holy disposition which is in him, by which he takes delight in the Sons of Men,
wills them good with respect to their several capacities. God is love (says
the Apostle) Christ is Love as he is God, but as Mediator he is infinitely full
of love; his pardoning Grace, is nothing but free love respecting a guilty
creature, his healing, restoring Grace is free love respecting a backsliding
Soul. I will heal your backslidings, and love you freely. He has in him
comfort for them that are sad, strength for them that are weak; now is not this
an Ointment that gives a good savor? I appeal to any Soul that has been
pricked at the heart for sin, and felt the load and burden of it: How sweet
has it been to a Soul to apprehend the Lord Jesus Christ as one who pardons
its iniquities! How sweet has it been to a Soul smitten with the sense of its
backslidings, to apprehend Christ as one who heals backslidings, and has
mercy even for the rebellious also! When a Soul is discouraged at the
apprehended difficulty of duty, the strength and prevailings of sin, and
corruption, how sweet is it to the Soul to think of Christ's strengthening
grace, the Promises against the Dominion of sin, and the over-powering of
temptation, etc. That we who of our selves can do nothing, yet can do all
things through Christ that strengthens us!

Thirdly, The Righteousness of Christ, is a good Oil or Ointment. There is a
threefold Righteousness may be conceived in the Lord Jesus Christ. 1.
Considering him as God; so there was in him an universal rectitude and
perfection of nature. What is essentially good, pure and perfect, is the object
of Love. Thy Word is pure (says David) therefore does thy Servant love it. 2.
Considering him as Mediator, so his Righteousness was his Active and Passive
Obedience: Whether both be imputed to us for Righteousness, that is another
question, as to which I shall only say this; That the usual Objection, That his
Active Obedience was but the debt of his humane Nature, which was a Creature,
and therefore could not be imputed, is of no value, for his Righteousness was
the Righteousness and Obedience of a person that was God Man, so had a
surplusage infinitely beyond the debt of the humane Nature considered as a
creature. Most certain it is, he had a Righteousness, yea and a Righteousness
which is reckoned to us for Righteousness: his Name is, The Lord our
Righteousness; and he was made of God for us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption; and this is a sweet Ointment; for by this the
Soul knows that God has said to it, Take away that Soul's filthy garments, and
clothe it with a change of garments: By this it knows, under the utmost sense
of its own unrighteousness, that it has a Righteousness, wherein it shall
stand before God, and its Sins shall be as if they never had been; by this the
Soul knows that its imperfect duties, and short performances of the Divine Law
shall be made up, through the more perfect performance of the Lord Jesus. 3.
There is also a Righteousness of the humane Nature of Christ, which was the
conformity of his Soul to the whole Will, and Law of God. There is no holy
disposition required of any humane Soul, but was to be found in the Lord Jesus
Christ. Holiness, Meekness, Patience, universal Obedience; now this also is a
sweet smelling Ointment.

1. As these dispositions render any Subject lovely, any creature, though found
in it more imperfectly, much more Christ in whom they are found most eminently.
There is none but naturally loves one who behaveth himself blamelesly, in whose
heart we can discern no guile; one who is in his behavior humble, meek, lowly,
gentle, patient, full of goodness; now these, and all other excellent Virtues
being in Christ eminently, make him the excelling Object of our Love: Christ
was meek and lowly, Matthew. 11. 29. he was humble, condescending to those of low
degree. He made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2. 7. Though he was rich, yet
for our sake (says the Apostle) he became poor. For his patience, he was led
as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before the Shearers, so opened he
not his mouth. What should I speak of his readiness to forgive, his praying to
his Father that he would forgive those that crucified him; all these made
Christ an exceeding lovely Object.

2. But now Christ as Mediator has not only these excellent habits as
Ornaments for himself, but as the Fountain of Grace, to distribute to us. Of
his fullness, we have received Grace for Grace, 1 John v. 16. These are now
Christ's good Ointments, for the savor of which the Spiritual Virgins love
him. And that they may do so, it is necessary they should receive the savor of
them. At the savor of thy good Ointments: So then, they must not only cast a
savor, but the Soul that loves Christ for them, must receive the savor of 4
Qu.
them. The last Question is; How a Soul receives the savor of them? I answer
two ways.

1. By Faith: I mean not here Justifying Faith (that brings in experience to
the Soul, of which more by and by) I mean here only Faith of Assent; whose
Object is the Proposition of the Word, to which the Soul fixedly and steadily
subscribeth; So as the Revelation which is there, becomes as certain to it, as
matter of sensible demonstration: For Faith is (as the Apostle tells us) the
Evidence of things not seen.

Secondly; The Soul receives the savor of these good Ointments: By Experience
it has tasted how good the Lord is. What it bath heard of God in his Word, it
has seen in the communications of his Grace. There is no knowledge like to
this, and there is no Spiritual Virgin, but has had less or more, some
experience of the Lord's good Ointments. But I come to the Application.

In the first place, this may inform us of the Excellency of the Lord Jesus
Christ, what an adequate Object he is for every Soul to take a delight and
pleasure in? It may be worth your observation, how the Language of the
Scripture concerning Christ, is such as seems to court the humor of every
Soul, to a seeking after a propriety and interest in him, by showing him to
have something in him suitable to it, that so it might take our hearts off
beguiling Objects. Every Sinner naturally says, Who will show us any good?
Good is the common Mistress of the World: Every one courts it. They only differ
in their fancies and apprehensions of what is so, and court shadows and
Chimera's. One says, Who will show us any good? That is, some way to get a
penny. How shall we heap up Silver as the Dust, and Riches as the Sand, and
join house to house, and field to field, until there be no room left in the
Earth? Come unto me, says Christ, I will give you the Riches of Grace, the
Riches of Glory, Rev. 3. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the
fire, that thou may be rich, and white Raiment that thou may be clothed,
and the shame of thy nakedness may not appear. What shall it profit thee (says
he) to gain the whole world, and lose thy own Soul? Another man he cares not
for money, but for his necessary uses; but he hunts after honor, that is his
good; he would be (...), some great person in the World; he would be led about
the Streets, and hear men cry out; Thus shall it be done to the man whom the
King delights to honor. This man now looks upon Silver and Gold but as white
and yellow Earth, and Sand, Idolized a little by a relative value some put upon
it. He snuffs up the Air, and desires no more than a great Name in the world.
Christ, to take them off this pitiful pursuit of the Wind and Chaff of the Air,
the empty Air of Court Favor, or popular Applause, tells them, he has honor
for them. To as many as receive him, he gave a p were to become the Sons of God.
And if Sons, then Heirs, Joynt-Heirs with Christ. They shall Reign with him;
They shall judge the World; They shall be Kings and Priests to the most High
God, etc. There is a third sort that cries, Who will show us any good? Their
good is the tickling of their Senses* delicious Fare and Drink for their taste;
fine Raiment for their touch; sweet Odours for their smells; Music for their
Ears, etc. Give them but enough of Wine, and Strong Drink, and Dancings, and
dainty Food, costly Apparel Perfumes, sweet Ointments for their Hair, etc. and
a few such trifling vanities, which perish with the using, and they have
enough, let who will take Silver, and Gold, and Honors, etc. Now that the Lord
might draw off these sensual Hearts, he proponndeth himself as the object of
Pleasure; he at whose right hand is pleasure, a fullness of pleasure for
evermore; one who has Oils, and sweet Ointments, Wine, etc. Thus he allureth
the appetite of every sinner, propounding himself as an object proportioned to
it.

Use 2.
In the second place, This Notion will afford every one of us a Note by which
we may try our interest in, and acquaintance with the Lord Jesus Christ. The
Note is this: If thou be a Spouse of Christ, thou have a savor of his good
Ointments. Do the excelling graces of Christ, make him appear pretions to thy
Soul? 1 Pet. 2. 7. To you that believe he is precious. To an unbeliever Christ
is vile; every unbeliever does not speak vilely of Christ, but he has a vile
estimate of him, he judges vilely concerning Christ, he has no esteem for
him, he sees no excellency in him for which he is to be desired; he can
understand the value of any Gold, but that which Christ calls Gold tried in
the fire, Rev. 3. 18. He can fancy the value of any honor, except that of
being called the Sons of God, he can taste any pleasure, but that which arises
from a Souls Union, and communion with Christ. By this we may try our selves,
what relation we have to Christ.

Use 3.
In the last place, this Notion of Christ's good Ointments offers me a fair
opportunity to persuade Men and Women of pleasure, Vain, Christless, careless
Souls, to endeavor an acquaintance with Christ. There is a generation in the
world, whom pleasure enticeth from God and his ways, their temptation lies not
in their Chests, they value not riches, if they have money, they throw it away
as dirt; it lies not in honors, they have no itch after great places, no, but
it lies in the cravings of their external senses. Their senses itch, and they
must scratch them and this is their undoing,and must be so, so long as the
practice of Religion lies in self-denial, and a mortification of our members.
They must drink Wine in Bowls; and stretch themselves upon their couches of
Ivory, and anoint themselves with chief Ointments, and chant to the sound of
the Viol, and invent to themselves instruments of Music. Give them but a few
glasses of brisk, and generous Wine, and a lesson or two upon some instrument
of Music, with a foolish wanton Song: Give them but gay cloths, and a powdered
Perriwig, a few patches, or a little paint for their faces, they regard not
whether they have a penny in their Purses yea or no, and verily Pleasure is the
undoing of many a Soul; the Woman (says the Apostle, it is as true of the man)
that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. As there are pleasures, the
mere use of which is sinful, so there is scarce any kind of pleasures, I mean
such gratifications of the outward senses, as come under the name of
Voluptates, but expose Souls to temptations to greater sins, and indispose the
Soul to the greatest duties, they are Snares in which the Devil catches many a
poor Soul. Now how shall these poor Souls, be drawn off from this, that it may
not dance itself into Hell fire? Certainly by no means so effectual as the
discovering to it, that as these pleasures are pernicious, and dangerous to the
Soul, so there are far greater pleasures to be found with Christ. Perfumes
often are but like paint to a Sepulcher; the body, the clothes, by a little art
smell sweet, the mind and Soul (the more noble part of man) stinks (it may be
through sordid conditions) but most certainly in the Nostrils of God, as being
out of Christ; the Beggar that has been anointed with the good Ointments,
mention^d in the Text, though he smells of the Dunghill, of putrified Sores, in
our nostrils, yet in the nostrils of God, and of all S^i^ts, has a thousand
times sweeter savor than the most costly perfumed Sinner in the world. O
therefore come to Christ, that thou may have of his sweet Ointments.

Br. 2.
And let this engage every Child of God to study Christ more, to labor for
more knowledge of the Scriptures, for more experiences of the Grace of Christ.
How often do we put a Box of sweet perfume, or aflower to our nostrils? How
seldom do we medirate of Christ, or smell of his sweet Ointments? Consider, 1.
Has not Christ good Ointments? have not you had experience of them? Nay 2.
Herein lies their excellency, their sweetness is inexhanstible; you have, i^may
be, tasted a little of the sweetnesa of Grace, and communion with God, but ah!
how little?

3. Lastly, The more your Souls are acquainted with him, and the mysteries of
his Grace, the more you study him, the nearer you come to him, the more
exceeding sweet he, and his grace will appear to your Souls. He that comes too
near a Box of Ointment, smells a worse savor then at a distance; there is an
ill smelling earthiness in all the worlds sweets; but the nearer your Souls
come to Christ: The nearer fellowship and communion you have with him, the more
exceeding sweetness you will discern in him.

Sermon XIV.
Canticles 1. 3. At the savor of thy good Ointments: Thy name is an Ointment
poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee.

I Have opened these words, and from them handled already one Proposition of
Doctrine.

I now proceed to the second from those words, Thy name is an Ointment poured
forth.

The name of Christ is an Oil, or Ointment poured out.

Prop. 12.
When I opened the words, I told you a Name, is either a word or words
expressive of the essence of a thing, or serving to distinguish one thing from
another. In the first sense God has no name. No word sufficiently expresses
the essence of God; what is his name? What is his Sons name? It is secret it is
wonderful. But so far forth as God, or Jesus Christ is by any terms made known
to us, so far he is said to have a name. More especially I told you, that
Christ as Emanuel, or God with us, has several names: Jesus, Christ, Messiah,
Emanuel; these are all his names. 2. Whatsoever Christ is made known by to his
People, or to any Soul by, that is his name, but that I may yet speak a little
more fully, and distinctly, I will show you; 1. What I mean by the name of
Christ in the Proposition. 2. In what sense this name of his, is like an Oil,
or Ointment poured out. 3. I shall prove it to you, and show you whence it is
so. Lastly, I shall apply it.

Q^. 1. What in the Doctrine is meant by the name of Christ?

I have told you in the general, those proper names, whether relating to his
Person or Offices, which the Scripture gives him. Let me instance in some of
them.

1. Emanuel (or it may be more properly Immanuel.) When that Ahaz, Is. 7. 14.
refused to ask a sign, the Lord graciously promises him one. A Virgin (says
the Prophet) shall conceive, and bear a Son, and thou shall call his name
Immanuel. The Angel gives him this name, Mat. 1. 23. The name it self is
Originally Hebrew, made up of three Hebrew words. (...) El. signifies God,
(...) signifies us, (...) signifies with, and thus the Angel interprets it.
Mat. 1. 23. This is one of the names of Christ, and signifies the Hypostatical
Union of the two Natures, in the One Person of the Redeemer, and therefore
Piscator (I think) says right that it ought not to be given to any Creature;
Cheitomeus tells us it was given to Christ. 1. In respect of his Person, in
which God was united with our Nature; and 2. In respect of his Office, we have
an advocate with the Father (says St. John) 1 John 2. 1. even Christ the
righteous. So he is God with us; that is, on our side, in that sense, as the
phrase is taken, Number. 14. 9. The Lord is with us, sear them not, and Judge. 6.
13. If the Lord be with us, whence is all this?

2. I will join two other names together, indeed they are the same, only one is
of an Hebrew extract, the other Greek; Messiah and Christ: the one comes from
the Hebrew Verb (...) he has anointed with Oil, and the Noun properly
signifies one that is anointed; (...) in Greek signifies one that is
anointed: you have the signification of Messiah warranted, Joh. 1. 41. we have,
s^y they, found the Messiah, that is, the Christ, and thus even the Samaritans
understood it, as appears from the language of the Woman, Joh. 4. 25. I know
that when the Messiah comes, who is called Christ. The Jews were wont to anoint
both their High Priests, and Kings, and Prophets, as you shall find in that one
instance, 1 Kings 19. 16. compared with the known Text for the anointing the
High Priest in the Book of Exodus; those that were thus anointed, were in the
Hebrew called Messiahs. The High Priest is so called, Levit. 4. 3. If the High
Priest that is anointed do sin; the word is there the Messiah. The same name is
applied to Saul, the King of Isra^l, 1 Samuel 24. 6. The Lord forbid (says
David, when his men would have had him killed Saul) that I should do this thing
to my Master the Lords anointed. In the Hebrew it is the Lords Messiah, yea,
and the People of God who have received the Unction of the blessed Spirit, of
which the legal Unctions were a Type, have this name applied to them, Psalm.
105. 15, Touch not mine anointed, in the Hebrew it is, touch not my Messiahs,
but look, as though there be many Antichrists (that is many that are enemies to
Christ) as St. John tells us, 1 John 2. 18. yet there is an (...), one special
Antichrist to whom that Name belongs, and to whom that Name is as a proper
Name; whereas, as to others, it is rather an Appellative. So though there be
many Messiahs many Anointed ones, to whom the Name agrees as a kind of an
Appellative Name; such were the Jewish High Priests, and some, if not all their
Kings and Prophets; yea and all the Lord's People, yet there was one to whom
this Name eminently and most properly did belong, who was The Messiah: This was
Christ. Daniel calls him Messiah the Prince, Dan. 9. 25. From the going forth
of the Commandment, to restore Jerusalem, and to build it, unto Messiah the
Prince shall be seven weeks. And although the second Psalm literally respects
David, an eminent Type, as well as Progenitor of Christ, yet by the Application
of it to Christ in the New Testament, it appears that he was intended in it.
There Christ is called the Lord's Messiah, against the Lord and his Anointed,
etc. It is a Name which agrees to Christ as he was Anointed with the Oil of
gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45. 8. That is, with the Holy Ghost, and with
Power, as it is expounded, Act. 10. 38. The Spirit not being given unto him by
measure, Joh. 3. 34. He was Anointed to Preach glad Tidings to the meek, Isa.
61. 1. By this Name some think both Natures in Christ are expressed, as well
the Divine Nature Anointing, as the Humane Nature Anointed. Justin Martyr
thinks he was called the Messiah, not only because he himself was Anointed but
because he Anointeth. This is now a second Name given to the Lord Jesus, and is
(as I shall show you) as Oil poured forth.

3. A third peculiar Name of Christ you have, Genesis 49. 10. where he is called
Shiloh. Jacob in his last blessing of his Sons says, The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from his feet, V. Pagn.
till Shiloh come. There is a d^spute amongst Etymol^g sts, for the Original of
that word, some will have it to be derived from (...) which signifies a Son.
Until Shiloh come, that is, until the Son of God comes; or till Judah's Son
come, which must be understood either of David, or of Christ: But I do rather
agree with those who derive it from the Hebrew Verb (...), which signifies to
be a Peacemaker, a name very proper to Christ, who made Peace between God and
Man, betwixt Jew and Gentile, and is therefore called Our Peace. This Name of
Christ is also an Oil poured forth.

4. A fourth peculiar Name of Christ is the Name Jesus. The Mat. 1. 22. Luke 1.
30.
Angel you know gave him that Name, Matthew. 1. and gave also the reason of it,
because he was to save his People from their sins; he therefore came into the
world, that we might be saved from our Enemies, and from the hands of all that
hated us. When old Simeon had him in his Arms, he called him The Lord's
Salvation. Jesus signifies a Savior. These are some of his personal Names,
every one of which is to the Soul as a sweet Oil, or Ointment poured forth.

2. But he has a second sort of Names, which are the Names of Office given to
Christ upon the account of several Offices which he was to bear; and thus he is
called Our Mediator, Our Advocate, Our King, Our High Priest, The Prophet, etc.

First, He is called Mediator. It is a name you will find in the New Testament
given to our blessed Lord four times. One Mediator between God and Man, even
the Man Christ Jesus (says the Apostle to Timothy) 1 Timothy 2. 15. The Apostle
to the Hebrews calls him, The Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb 9. 15. Of the
New Covenant, Heb. 12. 24. The Law was ordained in the hands of a Mediator,
Gal. 3. 19, 20. Socinus tells us, that this word in Scripture signifies no
more than God's Interpreter; but the Word in the Greek is derived from (...),
me^ius, and signifies a middle person, one who stands in the midst betwixt two
offended parties, and appeaseth them. Su^das interprets it by (...), one that
makes Peace. A name excellently agreeing to Christ, who was God-Man: God with
us: Neither God only (after his Incarnation) nor mere man. 2. Because being
thus God-Man, he interposeth himself betwixt the Offended Creator, and the
Offending Creature, and takes up the difference between God and Man. This Name
of Christ is as an Ointment, or Oil poured forth.

Secondly; He is called our Intereessor, and Advocate, Heb. 7. 25. He ever
lives to make Intercession for us, Romans 8. 34. He makes Intercession for us,
1 John 2. 1. If we sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ
the Righteous. The Office of an Advocate is in a Court to appear, engage and
plead for his Client. Christ as an Advocate appears in the Court of Heaven for
Believers, pleads their Cause, answers the Accusations which Satan brings
against them, interceedeth for them, etc. This is a sweet Name. This is as an
Oil poured forth to a Soul conscious to it self of its manifold failings, and
the imperfections of its best performances.

Thirdly, He is called a King. Pilate called him so in mockery to the Jews, and
refused to alter the Superscription of the Cross which had so expressed him.
God calls him his King; I will set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion. He is
called so not only with regard to his Essential Kingdom, which he has as God
over all, blessed for ever, nor only with respect to his Political Government
of his Church, which is, or should be every where executed according to his
Laws and Prescripts, but with respect to that special Dominion which he has
over his Saints, by which he does both surprise their Enemies, bruising Satan
under their feet, strengthening them against their lusts and corruptions,
commanding them into a conformity to his Will, and to the practice and
exercises of those habits of grace which he has bestowed upon them.

Fourthly, He is called our Priest, our High Priest. The Apostle to the Hebrews
calls him the High Priest over the House of God. The High Priest of our
Profession, a great High Priest. The Office of the Priest was to enter into the
Holiest, to offer Sacrifice for the People, to pray for them, to bless them.
Christ did all this: He once offered up himself for us; he entered into the
Holiest, whither our forerunner is entered (says the Apostle;) we are blessed
with all spiritual blessings in him. He was (says the Apostle to the
Galatians,) made a Curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come down
upon us.

Fifthly; He is called a Prophet; that is also his Name: That Prophet (by way
of Eminency) Deuteronomy. 13. 3. Joh. 1. 21. Act. 3. 23. The woman of Samaria
perceived that he was a Prophet, Joh. 4. 19. He is a Prophet not only as he
could, and did foretell many things to come, but as he teaches and instructs
his People. This he did while he was here upon the Earth, going about, and
Preaching in the Temple, in the Synagogues, in the Streets, upon Mountains,
etc. but when he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men; he made some
Apostles, some Evangelists, others Pastors and Teachers; for the continual
building up of his Church; and not only so, but by his Spirit instructing them
in, and revealing to them the deep things of God, the things which Eye has not
seen, nor has Ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive.
Now all these pieces of Christ's Name are to the believing Soul as Oil poured
forth.

But besides these personal Names of Christ, and his Names of Office. Whatever
else Christ is made known by is his Name. I will mention but three things.

First, His Word is his Name. The Gospel of Christ is his Name, that expresses
to us what Christ is. Christ says, that he had manifested his Father's Name
unto the men whom he had given him out of the world, Joh. 17. 6. that is his
Fathers Truths, the Doctrine of his Gospel. The Lord Jesus is made known by his
Gospel. That does the same thing for Christ, that our Name does for us; it lets
the World know whose Son Christ is, what he is, what he has done and suffered
for Sinners, and this is to the Soul exceeding sweet, as an Oil that is poured
forth.

Secondly, His Mercy is his Name. All those declarations of his love and good
will toward his Peoples Souls, of which his Gospel is full. All the Emanations
of his Love. When the Lord tells Moses his Name, he thus proclaims it; The
Lord, The Lord merciful, slow to anger. As God gets him a great Name upon
Pharaoh, and the wicked of the Earth, by executing Justice and Judgment; so he
gets himself a great Name amongst his Saints, by showing me^cy. His Name is, I,
even I am he that blotteth out transgressions for my own Names sake: I will
heal your backslidings, and love you freely.

Lastly, His Truth is his Name. By Truth I mean his Faithfulness in fulfilling
his Word. Thy Truth reaches unto the Clouds, says David, Psalm. 108. 4. David,
Psalm. 138. 2. resolves to praise God's Name, for his Loving Kindness and for
his Truth. Jesus Christ is much known to us by his Truth and Faithfulness to
his Promises, making good to his Peoples Souls, what he has said; hence he is
called the Amen, the Faithful; and the true Witness, Rev. 3. 14. Pareus (upon
that Text) says, that Christ is called the Amen for that reason which the
Apostle gives, 2 Cor. 1. 19, 20. because he is not Yea and Nay, but he is Yea;
and because all the Promises of God in him are Yea and Amen. Thus I have opened
to you what that Name of Christ is, which the Spouse compares to an Oil, or to
an Ointment poured forth.

2 Qu. But why to an Oil poured forth?

Certainly for the usefulness of it under that circumstance. Ointment in the
Box, Oil enclosed and kept up in the Vessel, is no way so useful as when it is
poured out. If we use it for food, it must be poured out, if for Medicine, if
for Ornament, which way soever we use Oil or Ointment, it must be poured out,
then it becomes useful to us. But that which I take to be what is principally
intended, is, Thy Name is exceedingly, infinitely sweet. Oil is sweet in the
Vessel where it is kept; it is sweet, if but dropped out by drops. But says
the Spouse of Christ, Thy Name is as an Oil or Ointment poured forth. Thou have
not only a sweetness and excellency in thy self, but all the grace and mercy in
thee is communicated, and that not in drops, or little measures, but as Oil
poured forth, that has scope of Air enough to diffuse it self in and by. If
Christ had No Name by which he could be made known to us, yet there would be in
him (as God blessed for ever) infinite goodness, as well as Majesty and Glory;
the fullness of the Godhead would be in him, he would be full of Grace and
Truth; but now his Name makes him to be as an Oil poured forth; by that we
behold his glory, the glory as of the begotten of the Father, full of Grace,
and Truth, Joh. 1. 14. When the invisible, incomprehensible excellency, love,
and grace of Christ is made known unto us, either by the Gospel, or by the
emanations of his grace and mercy, or the demonstrations of his truth, and
faithfulness, by any of his personal names, or names of Office, which are given
to him, then like Oil, or Ointment poured out, he appears to the Soul
transcendently, incomparably sweet. This now appears both from Scripture, and
from experience.

1. From Scripture; how sweet are thy words unto my taste, faith David, Psalm.
119. 103. More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold,
sweeter also than Honey, and the Honeycomb, Psalm. 19. 10. In his name shall the
Gentiles trust, Mat. 12. 21. Adam had a little of Christ made known unto him:
One promise (we read of no more) The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents
head, Genesis 3. 15. It was like Oil poured forth, and kept him from a deliquium,
in the sense of the first sin, and his being turned out of Paradise; Abraham
heard a little of Christ's name, it was to him like Oil poured forth, he saw my
day, and rejoiced (says Christ, John 8. he saw the day star arise afar off; he
saw but the morning, the dawning of the morning too, of Christ's day, and at a
great distance how sweet was it to him? He saw my day (says Christ) and he
rejoiced. I might give you very many instances of the sweetness which the
Saints of God perceived upon the several discoveries of Christ made to them.
But what needs any further demonstration, than what arises from the
consideration of the thing, and from the experience of any Child of God to whom
Christ is, or has been made known! how sweet must rest be to one that is
weary! ease to one that is heavy laden? both these are promised from Christ.
Mat. 11. 29. how sweet must the name of a Savior be to one that is lost and
undone, the name of Redeeme^, to one that is a Captive! The name of a Mediator
to one that has offended a potent adversary, able to crush him every moment?

2. I appeal further* to the experience of every Child of God, even every Soul
who has tasted any thing of Christ, and who has heard any thing of his Name,
when a Soul is troubled to think, how often, how heinously it has offended
God; how sweet is the name of a Mediator, when it is brought to a sense of its
sin, and apprehends itself lost and undone, how sweet is it to remember the
name of Jesus, given unto Christ, because he was to save his People from their
sins? when a Soul considers, that without Blood, without a Sacrifice; there
is no remission of Sin, how sweet then is the name of an High Priest over the
House of God; who offered up himself once for our Sins, and having done so,
ascended up into Heaven, and ever sits at the Right Hand of God to make
intercession for the Sins of his People. How sweet to the Soul that is afraid
lest its lusts should have dominion over him, is the name of Christ as a King,
given unto him, because he is to rule in the hearts of those who are once
subjected and subdued unto him. How sweet are his mercy, his truth, his
promises, when at any time the latter are applied to the Soul, and the former
any way made known in the Soul?

Does any one ask whence it is that the name of Christ is so sweet to the Soul?
I answer,

1. Because it signifies him, to be the fountain of the greatest spiritual
good to us; his name Messiah and Christ signify him to be separated, and set
apart of God for the accomplishment of the great business of our Salvation; his
name Emanuel signifies him to have Hypostatically united in one Person, the
Divine, and Humane Nature, that he might be a fit Mediator, that he might die,
and merit salvation for us by dying; his name Jesus signifies that he is a
Savior; his name Shiloh speaks him to be a Peacemaker, his name of an
Advocate, signifies him to transact our business in Heaven for us, his name of
High Priest signifies him to have offered for us a propitiatory Sacrifice, to
have made an atonement for us, to bless us, to interceed for us; the like I
might say of his other names. Now if the name of a friend, who has done some
great kindness for us, be oft-times sweet, like an Oil poured forth unto us,
how much sweeter must be his name, by whom we are blessed with all Spiritual
blessings?

Secondly. Because by his Name, or in his name, our greatest blessings are
obtained. How sweet must that name be to the beggar upon the use of which, all
its wants are supplied. Is salvation worth any thing? There is no other name
under Heaven by which we can be saved, but only the name of Jesus; do our Souls
want any thing? Whatsoever you shall ask in my Name, that I will do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son, John 14. 13. Whatsoever you shall ask the
Father in my Name, he will give it you, chapter 16. v. 23. Is the Soul trembling
under the sense of its guilt, does horror surprise it? do the terrors of the
Lord distract it: a wounded Spirit who can bear? by the discovery of the Lord
Christ's name to it, in the Gospel, promises, in the mercy, truth, and
faithfulness of Christ, it is freed from these. The discovery, the least
discovery of Christ to the troubled Soul, is like the Sun beam to the weather
beaten and be-wildered Traveller, like the shadow to him whom the heat makes
faint, like light to him that fitteth in darkness, like life to him that
fitteth in the shadow of death. How sweet is the discovery of Christ's truth in
his promises, the sealing of a promise to a poor doubting Soul? Every Soul that
has experienced it will say. It is like Oil poured forth.

Use 1.
I come to the application of this discourse, Is the name of the Lord Jesus so
exceeding sweet, like an Oil poured forth. Oh then Origin. in Homil. in loc.
what is Christ himself? It is Origens application; Si solo nomine -- Quid ejus
faciet substantia? How sweet is the Oil upon the Crown of the head, when that
which runs down to the skirts of the garment, is so sweet? Open all created
boxes, admit that all their sweet qualities would unite, and conspire to make
one compounded fragrant smell, distill all the odoriferous herbs that the Earth
brings forth, mix all the sweet gums, and odoriferous spices of Arabia, and
the whole Eastern part of the world: let them all make one body, and contribute
all their delicious qualities, to the composition of one Oil or Ointment to
please the wanton sense of a Creature, what would they all signify to one
Christ? Oh blessed Jesus; thou that art altogether delights, clear the Nostrils
of vain Creatures, stopped with their own lusts, and the vanities of pitiful
creature satisfactions, and contentments, that they may take the air of thy
delicious names, and follow thee in the savor of thy most precious Ointments.

Br. 2.
Secondly, Is the name of Christ in this life so exceeding sweet. Oh what will
the enjoyment of Christ in Heaven be? When the Saints shall see him as he is,
when they shall be ever with the Lord, beholding his face, rejoicing in his
presence, when they shall be at his right hand, where are, and shall be
Pleasures, and fullness of Pleasures, and that for evermore; here we know in
part, and see in part, and the greatest part of that we know of Christ,
amounts not to the least part of what we do not know; then the Saint shall
see him face to face, and know him, as he is known by him. Surely we should cry
out with the Psalmist, Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to
approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts. Here we sit but under the
shadow of the Apple tree; yet it is with great delight, and his fruit is
pleasant unto our taste; how sweet will it be to be within the arms of it? If a
Garden of Flowers, or a Bed of Spices casts a^sweet smell at a 1000 miles
distance, what will it do when we come near it? O you! to whom the name of
Christ is as an Ointment poured forth, follow the savor of it, it will bring
you to that place of delights, where your Souls shall be ever satiated, but
never nauseated.

Br. 3.
Thirdly, Observe from hence the difference betwixt a natural carnal man, and a
spiritual man. The name of Christ is published in all our parts of the world.
The Gospel is published, that is Christ's name (says Gencbrard upon my Text)
but the natural man discerns no sweetness in it, he can smell sweetness in a
perfume, but in the name of Christ he can smell nothing sweet. Nay what is more
unpleasing to a carnal heart than the name of Christ? and there is reason for
it, for to him Christ's name is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, his name is a
Judge, an Enemy, etc.

Use 2.
In the second place, what an argument is here to persuade those that hear it
to labor for a discovery of Christ's name to their Souls. To persuade sick and
fainting Souls to make application of Christ's name to themselves: To all to
study Christ's name more, to wear it upon their hearts, to meditate of it, etc.

1. To persuade those who know little or nothing of Christ as yet, to get a
knowledge of Christ's name; sweetness naturally enticeth the sense, and attracts
the Soul, shall the incomparable sweetness of Christ draw no Souls unto him?
shall the air of Solomon's name bring the Q of the South from the furthest parts
of the Earth, and shall Christ's name draw never a Sinner, invite never a Soul,
to come and taste, and see how sweet, how good the Lord is? You that are enticed
with the smell of a flower, that lay out your money for persumes of no value;
will you have no value for these sweet Ointments; Alexander the great was said
to have had such a rare temper of his body that it cast forth a natural
sweetness. I am sure there is an infinite, a transcendent sweetness in the Lord
Jesus. O let the Virgins love him! Men and Women that are in a state of Nature,
are in one sense Virgins, not for purity, but as not married to Christ. O do
you love Christ for the savor of his good Ointments! Consider what a
difference there is betwixt this Object of your Loves, and those pitiful
Objects which your Souls are so hot in the pursuit of. One man's heart is after
his Wine, another's after his Riches, a third after the Pride of Life. The Name
of these things is like the opening of a Dunghill, which sends forth a
stench; they bring up an ill report upon your Souls. Christ's Name is like an
Ointment poured out.

2. What an Argument does this afford to persuade troubled, fainting Souls, in
their spiritual Swoonings, and Deliquiums, to apply themselves to the Lord
Jesus Christ. Ludovicus De Ponte upon my Text tells us; Oil is a sign of
Peace, it heals wounds, it nourishes the weak, it feeds the Candle with
light; It exceeds all Liquors. Christ's Name is as Oil, as Oil poured forth;
it brings Peace to a disturbed Soul; it heals the wounds of a wounded Spirit;
it nourishes the weak Soul; it exceeds all created Oil. O meditate upon this
excellent Name. There is something healing and refreshing almost in every Name
of Christ.

3. Finally, Let those who have tasted how good the Lord is, study Christ's
Name more; meditate upon his Name, his Promises, his Mercy, Truth and
Faithfulness more; wear his Name upon your hearts. There is no Christian but is
subject to its faintings. David's Soul fainted for the Lord's Salvation, Psalm.
119 81. But he hopes in the Lord's Word. He had multitudes of perplexing
thoughts, but in the midst of all the comforts of God refreshed his Soul. You
that have experienced the sweetness of his Name, study yet a farther knowledge
of him, and acquaintance with him.

Sermon XV.
Cant. 1. 3. Because of the savor of thy good Ointments. Thy Name is as
Ointment poured forth; therefore do the Virgins love thee.

I Have yet something further to discourse to you from this Text. You have
heard from it, 1. That Christ has good Oils, or good Ointments which cast a
savor. 2. That his Name is as an Oil, or Ointment poured forth. It follows,
Therefore do the Virgins love thee. When I opened the words, I noted to you a
double sense of the term Virgins, each* contrary to the other. Some taking
notice of the term Virgins, as signifying persons in a single and solute state
and condition, understand by it, persons that are natural and unregenerate, not
yet by Faith married and united to this spiritual Bridegroom, intended in this
Song, who upon the pouring out of the sweet Oil in the Preaching of the Gospel
(which is part of his Name) are invited and allured to take a complacency in
the Lord Jesus Christ, to desire him, to will and choose him as their Lord and
their Savior. There is a truth in this: When I shall be lifted up (says
Christ) I will draw all men after me. But I do not think this the sense of the
term: 1. Because I am not willing to interpret Metaphors used in Scripture into
a sense different from all other Texts of Scripture, where the same terms are
used. Now I do not remember that in all Scripture, Heathens, Unbelievers,
Natural and Unregenerate men are called Virgins, but only such as are the
Saints and Servants of God. 2. Nor secondly are they so, they being married to
their lusts and to the world, etc. Upon which account the Scripture expresses
them under the notion of Adulterers, and Adulteresses; persons that are filthy,
unclean, defiled, etc. 3. Neither can the Natural Unregenerate man be said
(while such) to love Christ, because of the savor of his good Oiutments, they
are constantly expressed under the notion of such as hate God, and hate Christ.
By Virgins therefore I then told you the Scripture generally understands the
Saints. Indeed Professors at large in the Parable, Matthew. 25. 1. are set out
under the notion of foolish Virgins. But the wife Virgins are the true Children
of God, Rev. 14. 4. 2. Cor. 11. 1. The Proposition then is this:

Prop. 13. That the Saints (who are Virgins) love the Lord Jesus Christ for
those excelling graces which they discern in him.

In the handling of which, I shall

1. Enquire why Saints are called Virgins, so showing you the propriety of the
Metaphor.

2. Whence it is, that they love Christ, for the savor of his Ointmen^s, and
the pourings out of his Name.

First, Why are the Saints of God called Virgins?

Not because they are not married. The Soul of man will not be alone, it will
be united to something; if it be not united to God and Christ, it will be
united to the world, to lust and corruption. I say, it will not be alone. The
same therefore that are here called Virgins, are elsewhere called The Spouse of
Christ, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, etc. Such as are espoused to one Husband.
God faith of them, I am married to you (says the Lord.) But they are called
Virgins;

1. Because they are free from those things to which Vulgar Souls are married,
but which are not the proper Husbands of reasonable Souls. God has created
man's Soul for himself, and its Maker only can be a proper Husband for it. A
Soul may be united to other Objects, but they are not just Matches, they are
not proper Husbands for Immortal Souls, that are Spiritual Substances, and
under ordinations for Eternity. The most of Souls are married, but they are
unequally yoked. For a Spiritual Substance to be united to a clod of Earth, to
a little yellow Earth or Sand, is a very unequal match. For a Soul to be united
to any sordid lust, any sinful pleasure, is a very unequal match. The Souls of
Voluptuous men, of Covetous worldlings, of Ambitious men, they are indeed
married, they have made a Covenant with their lusts, and with the world, and
with these things; they eat, they drink, they sleep, they converse, they keep a
constant communion, as the married woman does, but they are all this while
Adulterers and Adulteresses, because these things are not proper matches for
the Soul of man; it is like the marriage of a Man to a Beast. Now in this
respect the Saints are Virgins, not defiled with this adulterous Union; they
have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord
Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 20. Hence they are called undefiled in the way, Psalm.
119. 1. They are Virgins with respect to any Marriage-Union with the world, or
any sinful lusts, or any thing which is not a proper match for a rational
immortal Soul. They indeed live in the world, and use the world, but they use
it (according to the Apostles Precept) as if they used it not; they live not
with the world, as the Wife lives with her Husband, delighting in it, looking
upon it as their chief Joy and Portion; they make use of the world, and the
things of this world for their lawful occasions (as the Man may use the Woman
that is not his Wife) but the world is not that, which their hearts cleave to,
or set upon, and in which they take a chief pleasure and delight. For their
lusts and corruptions, they are not free from them, but their hearts are dead
to them. Thus they are Virgins with respect to their state, which is not a
state of absolute independency from the world, or absolute freedom from lusts
and corruptions, but such a freedom from the one and the other, that they have
no constant fellowship and communion with either.

2. Their Life is like the Life of a Virgin, an hidden Life. The Virgin has
her name in the Hebrew from (...), which signifies to hide, because she lived
an hidden kind of life. Virgins anciently lay hid in their Fathers house, and
there they spent their time, not in Markets, and Fairs, and places of public
concourse. Dinah made an escape, and there was (you know) a sad consequent of
it. The Virgins life is most in her Closet, or in her Fathers house. Such is
the life of a Child of God; they are called God's hidden ones; and the Apostle
says of them, Our life is hid with Christ in God. The Spiritual Soul spends
most of its time at home, in its Closet, or in his Fathers house, where two or
three are met together in the Lord's Name (this is their Fathers house on
Earth) or else in Heaven. Our conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. The world
(says the Apostle) knows us not. The Children of God live, but the World
understands not how they live; they walk with God* They live in Christ; the
life which they live in this state, is by Faith in the Son of God.

3. The Life of Virgins is a free Life, free from that care and solicitude
which attends the House-wife. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 7. The unmarried
woman seeks to please the Lord, but she that is married seeks to please her
Husband. The married woman has upon her a great deal of care and trouble; she
has an Husband, she has Children, she has Servants, she has a Family to
take care for; the Virgin has nothing to trouble her, nothing to take care
about, but how to please her Father, who provideth for her what she has need
of. In this respect the Disciples of Christ are Virgins; God has bidden them
be careful for nothing, but in everything by prayer and Supplications, let your
requests be made known unto God, Philip. 4. 6. He has commanded them to cast
their care upon him, assuring them that he cares for them, 1 Pet. 5. 7. As the
Father takes the care of his Virgin Daughters upon himself, so as they need
not be sollicitous, or trouble themselves with cares what they should eat, or
what they should drink, or what they should put on; so has the Lord taken care
for his Children; and every Child of God that walks up to his Principles, and
lives up to his holy Calling, leads a life as void of sollicitous care and
anxiety, as the Virgin in her Fathers house, whose only care is to please her
Father. He is indeed careful to maintain good works but for nothing else; and
thus as with respect to their state, so with respect to the way and condition
of their lives, the Saintsare Virgins. But further yet, they are, or should be
Virgins, with respect to their Qualifications.

4. Virgins are chaste and undefiled. Thus the Children of God are usually
described in holy Writ. I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present
you as a chaste Virgin to Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2. They are called pure in heart,
undefiled in the way; they have not defiled their garments, Rev. 3. 4. Indeed
every married woman is not an unclean woman; there is a marriage bed undefiled
(as the Apostle speaks) and indeed as there is a matrimonial Virginity, or
Chastity, so the Saints are such; for though they be Virgins, yet they are
espoused to one Husband; they are married unto Christ. Though their hearts
cleave not to Objects which indeed cannot be the proper Husbands of a
reasonable, spiritual and immortal Soul.

5. Finally, Virgins are or should be modest in all their behavior. She that
has lost her Modesty, has exposed her Virginity to great jealousies and
suspicions. The Children of God are so in their hearts, in their discourses, in
their hehaviour. But I have opened this Metaphor sufficiently. Now these
Virgins love Christ for the savor of his Name, because his Name is an Oil, or
Ointment poured forth. All these things are spoken in a figure, that figure
which we usually call a Metaphor. Sweet things entice and allure our senses.
Sweet savours are grateful to our smell. Thence it is that it has been an
ancient practice for Men and Women to use sweet Oil, or Powder, that they might
be more amiable and delightful to their Lovers: This you may know was an old
practice, by that instance of the lewd Woman in the Proverbs, who to invite the
young man to her Adulterous Bed, tells him, She had perfumed her Bed with
Myrrh, Aloes and Cinnamon. The Spouse making use of this vain and wanton
practice, to express how pleasant and delightful Christ was to her, fancieth
him as one perfumed with sweet Odours; anointed with odoriferous Oil, or
Ointment. Thy Name (says she) is as an Oil, or Ointment poured forth;
Therefore do the Virgins love thee. That is, thou art possessed of many noble,
rich and excellent habits of grace, which make thee to my Soul appear
infinitely more sweet and lovely, than all the good Oils and Perfumes in the
World can make one appear to the wanton sense of another; and for those
excellent graces of the Spirit, by thee not received by measure, and for the
pourings out, and discoveries of these upon the Souls of the Saints, and the
discovery of them unto their Souls it is, That Souls freed from the pollutions
of the world through lust: Souls that are holy, spiritual, heavenly- minded,
desire after delights, and take an infinite complacency in the Lord Jesus
Christ. What these excellent habits are; what this same unctuous,
sweet smelling Name of Christ is, I have already opened, in my former
Discourse. Let me now a little further show you:

Qu. 2. What there is in the excellent Graces, or precious Discoveries of
Christ, which make Christ so amiable to the Soul?

1. There is in them an infinite, inexhaustible, real goodness. All good is
attractive. Who will show us any good, is, you know, Vox Populi; and it is
impossible a Soul should apprehend any thing fixedly, as really and
transcendently good, but it must be pleasing to it. Light is not more grateful
to the Eye, than Good is to the reasonable Soul: And as our Eye is
proportionably pleased with the glimmerings of Light from a Candle, or the
counterfeit of it in a Glowworm; so the Soul of man falls into the imbracings
of good, when it does but glimmer in a piece of Silver, or dissemble in a
perishing pleasure. Nay, we are not altogether selfish in this motion of our
will, which we call Love: We naturally love what we apprehend good, though we
view it but at a distance from us* Many a man that has no Learning, nor is
ever like to have it, yet loves Learning, as it has in it an innate
Excellency, as it is an ornament to him that has it, and makes him more useful
to the world than his Neighbor. In Christ's excelling graces, which dwell in
him eminently, and essentially, there is such a luster, and brightness, and
glory, that to make the Soul take a complacency in him, there needs no more
than that it be enlightened to see, know, and understand Christ. Hence it is
that many a Soul convinced of the filthiness of sin, and of the fullness of that
Excellency which is in Christ, before ever it have received him, so as to
apprehend its Interest in him, yet loves, admireth him, passionately desires a
part and portion in him, says within it self, Oh that my Soul were brought
unto Christ! Oh that this Christ were my Christ, my Jesus, etc.

2. But there is not only a transcendent goodness and excellency in Christ's
Name, but also a Relative Goodness. Our reasonable Natures force us to love any
thing which appears to us to be Good and Excellent; but we much more love it,
when we discover in it a suitableness to our state and condition; and the more
goodness and suitableness we discern in any Object in proportion to our state
and wants, the more a great deal do our hearts cleave to it, and long after it.
Now every Child of God is apprehensive enough of the proportion which the Name
of Christ bears to the wants, the various wants that it has. It wants a
Mediator, a Savior, an Advocate, an Intercessor, and this that Soul is
sufficiently sensible of, and therefore its heart cleaves unto Christ, and
cries out, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? Or what have I upon the Earth to be
compared with thee? This Soul sees, that there is nothing in Heaven or Earth
that so suiteth the Soul of a Child of God as Christ does. Hence his love to
him is stronger than the Grave, and his jealousy burns like fire.

3. The Virgins must needs love Christ, upon the discoveries of himself to
their Souls, because these discoveries command, and teach the Soul to love him.
Our love to Christ proceeds, you see, upon rational grounds, but not wholly
upon rational Principles; for we are taught of God (says the Apostle) to love
one another; and if without a Divine Teaching we cannot love our Brethren whom
we have seen, we shall much less love Christ, whom we have not seen Indeed this
is the first cause of any love from our carnal hearts to Christ at all, it is
true. No Sacrifice from our hearts flameth, or can ascend toward God, until
fire has first come down from Heaven and kindled it; when indeed love is thus
kindled in the Soul, the fire increases in the Soul; as the apprehensions of
Christ's Excellencies, and discoveries of himself, do increase in the Soul from
the experiences we have of God, or the improvements of our Reason upon
Revelation, to show us more of the Excellency of Christ. I come now to the
Application.

Use 1.
In the first place, This may convince us, That even amongst Professors there
are many that glory in appearance, and not in reality. They are no Virgins;
they have no love for the Lord Jesus Christ. The world it is to be hoped is not
so full of such as go for Virgins in a carnal sense, and are none, as it is of
such as go for Virgins, in a spiritual sense, and are none. Unmarried they are,
but you must understand it only with reference to Christ, who is the only
proper adequate match for a reasonable Soul; they are without Christ indeed,
but not without a-Mate.

First, Too many are Whores instead of Virgins. You shall in Scripture observe,
that sin, especially Apostasy, is compared to Whoredom; and those that live in
sin, to such as live in Adultery. God of old complained of his People, that he
was broken with their whorish heart. Ah! how many Professors are there in the
world, of whom we may say the same; God is broken with their whorish heart. How
many spots are there in our Assemblies? How many of our Virgins that have at
least such black spots upon their faces, as cannot be allowed to be the spots
of God's Children? Some are gone a whoring after other Gods. (Reconciled they
call it to the Church of Rome.) Oh! tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
Tents of Askelon, that Protestants should ever again lick up that Vomit, and be
so sottish, as to adore a piece of bread for God, or fall down before a Graven
Image. Blessed be God there are not many whom God has thus given over; I mean,
not many Professors, though too many that have been baptized into the Name of
Jesus Christ. But how many more have defiled themselves with damnable, or at
least very dangerous Opinions? You read of the Daughter of Jephtah, that she
went up to the Mountains three months to bewail her Virginity. The Mountains
are places of solitude. How were it to be wished for many, that they would go
and sit alone; that they would go up to the Mountains of Solitude, and bewail
the loss of their Spiritual Virginity. They were sound Christians (in
appearance) but they have lost their soundness. They were fond of Ordinances
and Duties, but they have cast off Duties and Ordinances. They were of the
number of Virgins, as we thought, and we were bound in charity so to think (we
judged by the outward appearance) but they have defiled themselves.

Secondly, Many are wedded, and no Virgins. We do not call married Women
Virgins. It Is true, they are not so in one sense, as the notion of a Virgin
signifies a solute or single person; but yet they may be so in another sense,
as the notion of a Virgin signifies one that is pure and chaste. But now, if
you can imagine a Woman married to a Beast, or married incestuously, this
marriage would spoil her Virginity in the fairest notion of it. The Soul
married to Christ, is yet a Virgin, for she is married but to one Husband, and
him the proper Husband for a poor Soul, so that that Soul is yet a Virgin. But
now the voluptuous sensual Soul, that is united to a base and sordid lust; or
the covetous worldly Soul, that is united to the gain and filthy lucre of the
world, is no Virgin, no more than an incestuous Wife is in any notion a Virgin;
and how many of these are to be found in the Tents of persons professing to
Religion! How many Demas's, who have forsaken and forgotten their Religion, and
have embraced the present World? Judas's, who have betrayed their Master and
their Brethren for a few pieces of Silver? Surely the Soul, the highborn Soul
of man, is of too noble an extract, too spiritual a substance to be united to
the Earth. This is certainly a forbidden Relation. Love not the world (says
the Apostle) nor the things of the world; yet never were more to be found
amongst such who are called Christians.

Thirdly, Marriage does not always spoil Virginity, as it signifies Chastity:
But an heart equally cleaving and inclining to two men will; especially if
byast to him who is not the Woman's Husband. She that has one true and proper
Husband, and yet loves another equally with him, or more than he, has lost
her Virgin-heart. Ah! how many of these are there amongst Professors? they are
married to Christ in the face of the Church; they were baptized into his Name,
and are under Vows to be the Lord's: But as God said of old concerning Ephraim;
Their heart is divided, and therefore they must be found faulty. Ah! How many
are there that have divided hearts? that halt between two Opinions, and are not
able to conclude with themselves, whether Baal be God, and they should serve
him; or God be God, and they shall serve him? Nay, they halt between two
Conversations; something there is of Heaven in them, but alas! how much of the
Earth? how much of sin, folly, and vanity? how much of contradiction to their
Profession? where is a Christian Caleb to be found to walk with God fully?

Fourthly, If we have some that are Virgins, yet how few beautiful Virgins?
where is the beauty, the glory of Professors? where is their former shining out
before men? Ah! call your Children Ichabods; call them Ichabods. The Glory is
departed in a great measure from England, from the Professing Party of England.
Where Is the former sincerity, love to God, zeal for God, plainness of heart,
sincerity of conversation, brotherly love, heavenly walking? the World, the
vanities of the World, have spoiled Professors beauty. The Sun of a little
outward prosperity has shone upon them, how are they tanned?

Use 2.
But in the next place this discourse offers us a fair opportunity to try our
Relation to Christ, whether we be the Lambs Wife, who shall hereafter follow
him whithersoever he goes. 1. Are you Spiritual Virgins? There are tokens of
Spiritual as well as Natural Virginity. 1. Purity, and Chastity, in heart, as
well as outward appearance; Blessed are they (says our Savior) who are pure
in heart, for they shall see God; is not thy heart defiled, with sensual
affections, impetuous passions, does not thy Soul cleave to sin, and lust? 2.
Do thou live like a Virgin, an hidden life? does not the world see all that
thou have of a Spiritual life, do thou not like the Pharisees, love to pray
standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the Streets, more than with
thy doors shut about thee, in thy closet? live thou any thing of that life
which is hid with Christ in God? is it thy only and greatest care to please thy
heavenly Father, and Christ thy great Lord and Master? 3. Where Is thy modesty;
the Virgin blusheth presently, when any thing is reflected upon her. Art thou
ashamed when thou committest iniquity, and thy heart reflects it upon thee, or
have thou a Whores forehead, that cannot blush? I might instance in many
particulars more, but these are enough to try thy Spiritual Virginity.

2. A second note of the Spouse of Christ arising from this Text, is a love to
Christ; Love is a natural plant, and grows in every Soul, but love to Christ
is a plant from Heaven, heavenly, a plant sprung up from the seed of God in the
Soul. If Christ should from Heaven propo und the fame question to thee, which
while he was on Earth he propounded to Peter, could thou answer with him,
Lord! Thou that know all things, know that I love thee. This Grace of all
others is most discernable, for love is of an active nature, and will hardly
lie hid. The pantings of thy heart after him, the acquiescence, complacency,
and delight of thy heart in him, will easily discover it to thee if thou
look narrowly. The natural man cannot say, that his Soul cleaves to Christ,
or thirsts after Christ, or takes any complacency in the Lord Christ.

Thirdly. As God is the fountain of good, and blessing to his Creatures, and as
Christ has a fair inheritance of a Crown, an Multi cupiu^t con-regnare, non
compati. Bernard in Cant. Ser. 21.
Heaven, an incomprehensible glory which is annexed to the fruition and
enjoyment of him, so the worst of men may have a kind of love for Christ, or
rather, for what he brings along with himself unto the Soul.

Lastly, Therefore, Do thou love Christ for the savor of his good Ointments;
because his name is an Oil, or Ointment poured forth? He that loves Christ
merely for his Heaven, and Glory, is purely selfish in his love. I deny not but
Moses had an Eye to the recompense of reward, and so has every honest and
gracious heart; without doubt Christ's beneficence, and goodness unto us, and
the benefit which our Souls have, and hope to have from Christ is, and ought to
be a very great attractive, and to draw out our hearts more, and more in love
to Christ, but herein is the purity of the Saints love; he discovers such an
excellency in the Lord Jesus Christ, that were he never to have an Heaven with
him, yet his heart would cleave to him, and infinitely delight in him; if thou
can say, that thou thus love the Lord Jesus, it will indeed speak thee to
be a Spiritual Virgin, a Spouse to the Lord Jesus.

Use 3. Exhort.
I shall conclude my discourse upon this verse with a threefold word of
Exhortation.

1. In the first place methinks from this metaphorical expression of Saints
under the notion of Virgins, I have here a fair opportunity to plead with
Virgins to be Saints; Virgins (generally) have the object of their love to
seek; Lo here a most deserving object for every young man, every young woman
that hears me. Methinks the holy Spirit points out this in the Metaphor
Therefore do the Virgins love thee; Christ here expresses himself under the
notion of some beautiful young man, beautified, and adorned with all the
advantages both of nature, and of art; So that the Virgins must love him. I
noted to you before that some would have the term (...) to be rather a term of
age, then either signifying Sex or State: oh that I could this day prevail with
you who are young men and young women, to love the Lord Jesus Christ. Youth is
an age, a time of love, full of love, but it usually mispends its self upon
vain, and worthless objects, the young man loves his lusts, and his pleasures,
the young woman loves dancings, and foolish sports, and vain company, and gay
and costly attire, but how rare is it to find a young man or woman that
sincerely loves the Lord Jesus Christ? truly amongst young or old, there is
hardly one of a thousand, but of those that are in the height and heat of their
youth hardly one of ten thousand. It is too frequent for us, to give our marrow
to the Devil, and then think to put off God with the bone. O desperate folly
and presumption! offer this now to thy Prince, will he accept it? can thou
expect Sinner that Christ should freely love thee when thou art grown old, who
refusedst him when thou were young? can thou reasonably think that God will
be put off with the fag end of thy life, do thou not know how hardly an old
sinner is brought to repentance? sin is bred and sed in his bones, and it will
not out, art thou aware how acceptable to God the sacrifice of thy youth is?
under the old law no Sacrifice was admitted that was above three years old.
Do not thou remember how kindly God accepted his young. Samuel, Abijam,
Josiah, Timothy, etc. who in their youth inclined their hearts unto him? does
the good nature and handsome features, and sweet perfumes of the young man
please thee, and is there no excellency in the Graces of him who is full of
Grace and Truth? is there no savor in Christ's Ointments? no sweet Odor from
his name poured forth! O come you that are Virgins, behold your Husband! an
Husband, who if you be poor, is able to enrich you, if you be mean and base, is
able to honor, and to ennoble you, who, (what ever you want) is able to supply
you. O that upon the pouring forth of his name amongst you in this Sermon this
day, some of your souls this day might be allured to love the Lord Jesus Christ.

Br. 2.
Secondly, This notion obliges all those that be Saints, or profess themselves
such, to approve themselves to be Virgins, the holy Spirit has so called them;
certainly it should be their great care to answer their name. To keep
themselves, unspotted from the world, undefiled in the way; free from the
pollution of the world through lust. I have toldyou that there are many, who go
for Virgins, but are not, they are wedded to some filthy lust or other, wedded
to the world, defloured by entertainnig some corrupt and dangerous principles,
or declining to a corrupt conversation; we live in a debauched, and a
debauching age, you that stand, take heed lest you fall.

1. If you lose your Virginity, you lose your honor. The young Woman's
Virginity is her honor, your freedom from idolatry and superstition; your
soundness in the faith, your purity, integrity, and holiness of life is your
honor, Hold fast that thou have (says Christ to the Church of Philadelphia,
Rev. 3. 11.) that no man take thy Crown; he who despoileth you of your purity
of Doctrine, and Worship, or who seduceth you to any licentious practices,
takes away your Crown, yea not only your Crown in respect of reputation, but
your Crown of Glory also. John, Rev. 14. 1. Saw a Lamb standing upon Mount
Sion, and with him 144000, having his Fathers name written upon their
foreheaas; and v. 2. heard a voice from Heaven, etc. and they (the 144000) sang
as it were a new Song before the Throne, and the four Beasts, and the Elders,
and no man could learn that Song but the 144000. which were redeemed from the
Earth. v. 4. It follows: These are they which were not defiled with Women,
for they are Virgins, these are they which follow the Lamb, whithersoever he
goes, these were redeemed from amongst men, being the first fruits unto God,
and to the Lamb, and in their mouth was found no guile, for they are without
sault before the Throne of God; not defiled with Women. Non polluti
idololatria, quae est scortat io spiritualis sed virgins fide and spiritu,
(says Pareus) not defiled by idolatry, which is a spiritual Adultery, but
Virgins in Spirit and Faith.

Secondly, Consider, if you lose your chastity. It will be an hard matter to
reconcile you to your first Husband. If the Virgin be known to have lost her
Virginity, it is no easy matter to procure her an Husband of any reputation; if
the Wife has lost her Virginity (that is her chastity) it is an hard matter to
reconcile her to her Husband; If a man put away his Wife, and she go from him,
shall he return to her again? Jer. 3. 1. It is true, the mercies of God are
above the mercies of men, it follows there; yet return unto me (says the
Lord;) but it is no easy matter for a lapsed Saint to recover his peace; many a
Bone must be first broken, and if such be saved, it must be as through fire. It
is a dreadful Text which you have, Heb. 6. 5, 6. O keep your integrity, and
behave your selves like Virgins, live an hidden life more and more to God, and
Christ, more and more reserved from the world; learn what this means, Our
life is hid with Christ in God. Be like Virgins, careful in nothing, save only
to please Christ, who is your spiritual Husband, let your behavior speak your
Virginmodesty; and that you may keep your Virgin State, and behavior. 1. Take
heed of Books, that will principle you to a Spiritual Fornication. There are 2
sorts of Books in the world, which help much to debauch it. 1. Amorous Books
full of lascivious Songs, and filthy stories. 2. Heretical Books. The first
debauch People as to their bodies: the latter as to their faith and immortal
Souls. 2. Take heed of Whorish Company. The Chaste Virgin is often spoiled by
unchaste Society. Dinah went abroad into wanton company, and was deflowred. If
she had kept her Fathers house, she had probably kept her honor. How many
Christians are defiled both in Judgment and Practice, by keeping company with
Papists, Quakers, Socinians, etc.

Br. 3.
Lastly, O love the Lord all his Saints for the savor of his Ointments; for
the sweetness of his Name, which is as an Ointment poured forth. The best are
prone to love Christ only for the Peace of Conscience which they have, upon
their Justification by his blood, and for the Heaven they shall have hereafter
for his sake. His Glory is exceeding sweet. This Love is not to be faulted; but
I would work my own heart, and have you study to work up your hearts to an
higher pitch. Labor to be like Angels. The Angels were never Redeemed with the
Blood of Christ, never knew what trouble of Conscience meant: They have a
natural right to Heaven, yet they love, admire, adore Christ; they are
rational, though spiritual Subsistences. What makes them to love Christ but
the perfections and excellencies which they see in him. Let us study to be like
Angels, to get up our hearts to such a spiritual pitch as this; to love Christ
for the excellency of his person for the savor of his good Ointments. I shall
add no more to this Discourse. I have now done with this third Verse.

Sermon XVI.
Cant. 1. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee. The King has brought me into his
Chambers; we will be glad and rejoice in thee; we will remember thy Love more
than Wine. The upright love thee.

I Have told you that the eight first Verses of this Chapter contain three
Petitions, which the Spouse (by which we understand the Church, or the
believing Soul) makes to her Beloved, the Lord Jesus Christ. The first I have
done with, together with the Arguments ments which she used to enforce it. I am
now come to the second, comprehended in this Verse, with the Arguments by which
she presses it. Her first Petition was in those words; Let him kiss me (...)
the kisses of his mouth. Here she says, Draw me. Our English Annotations make
the connection thus; Lord, do not only invite and call me, by the Preaching of
thy Gospel (which are the kisses of thy mouth) but command me by the Power of
thy Spirit. Or thus; Let me not only be passively happy in receiving tokens of
love from thee, but make me active in maintaining communion with thee. Let me
run after thee, and to this purpose do thou draw me. Thus the coherence of her
Petitions seems to lie. Some there are that do not make this a new Petition,
but adjoyn the beginning of this Verse to the latter end of the former, and
read it thus; The Virgins love thee, and have drawn thee after them; thus the
Seventy read it (...); Se. per fidem, qu^a Christus ubi vidit cong^egatus, etc.
Origin. ad loc. V. Nyssen. ad loc.
and after them Origin and Greg. Nyssen, expounding it of the Faith of the
Saints, by which they draw Christ after them according to his Promise; Where
two or three are gathered together in my Name, I will be in the midst amongst
them. But though there be something of truth in this, yet this Interpretation
is, I think, justly slighted by Lud. de Ponte, and others even of the Papists
(the greatest Admirers of the Fathers.) And although the Copies of the Seventy,
which we have indeed thus read it, yet Symmachus and Aquila, the two other
Ancient Greek Translators, read it as we translate it: And I am sure that is
the true Translation of the Hebrew, where the Verb is in the Imperative Mood,
though there be a little change of the Vowels in regard of the Affix, according
to the Rules of Grammarians: For (...) so I conclude, they are clearly a
Petition, and thus the Vulg. Lat. reads them, with the Tigurine Translators,
Pagnine, Montanus, Piscator, Junius, and indeed almost all others. Agreeing
therefore in that, let me consider, 1. The parts of the Text: 2. Then open the
terms: And thirdly and lastly, Raise and handle such Propositions as it will
afford, and may be useful to us. You may in the Text please to consider,

1. The Spouse's Petition. Draw me.

2. The Argument by which she enforces this Petition; We will run after thee.
Where it is observable;

1. The parties promising; We.

2. The thing promised; A running after Christ.

3. The Spouse's Acknowledgment of her Beloved's speedy Answer to her Prayers:
The King has brought me into his Chambers.

4. And lastly, The Effects this Answer had upon her; they are three: 1. We
will rejoice. 2. We will be glad in thee. 3. We will remember thy Loves more
than Wine. Then you have the Spouse's Justification of her self in this
passion; The upright love thee. Let me now come to open the terms.

(...)
This word (for it is but one in the Hebrew) contains the Spouse's Petition. It
is agreed by all, that it is the Spouse that speaks; by which the Jews, who
understand nothing of the Gospel Church in this Song, understand Abraham, and
the Church of the Jews. Aben-Ezra, Apud Genebrardum.
a Jewish Doctor, would have these the words of Abraham speaking to God to draw
him out of his own Country into Ur of the Chaldees, according to that hard
Precept to flesh and blood, Genesis 12. Solomon Jarchi (another of them) makes it
the voice of the Jewish Church speaking to God to bring them back again to Ibid.
Jerusalem, out of Captivity. The old Chaldee Paraphrast, and Lira with him,
make it the voice of the Church of the Jews coming out of Egypt speaking unto
God that he would go before them, as he did by the Cloud and the Pillar. The
Righteous of that Generation then said, Draw us after thee, O thou Lord of the
whole world: We will follow thee in the way of thy goodness. Mr. Cotton makes
the Spouse to be either Solomon himself desiring to be drawn to Christ, or the
Church of the Jews, desiring Solomon by Laws and Edicts, and Proclamations, to
draw them to their duty. Rupertus his notion applying the words to Elizabeth,
John Baptist's Mother; and of some Popish Writers making them the words of the
blessed Virgin are hardly worth mentioning, any more than theirs, who would
make them the words of the Queen of Sheba to Solomon. We have fixed the Spouse
with the most and best Interpreters, to be the true Church of God, and every
individual believing Soul; and then it is easy to know to whom the words are
directed, viz. unto God; and whether we understand the first or second Person
in the Trinity, is not at all material: For besides that they are both but one
in their operations respecting the creature; Drawing is made in Scripture the
act both of the Father and the Son. No man (says Christ) comes unto me,
unless the Father draws him. And again, When I am lifted up, I will draw all
men after me. But drawing is a term of motion; there must be a term to which;
Whither would the Spouse be drawn? This is not so plainly expressed in the
English as in the Hebrew. I shall speak more to it by and by; but I shall first
open the term Draw, and show you what the Spouse desires of her Beloved in
this term. I find the Verb (...) in the Hebrew signifying four things.

Judge. 4. 6. Exo. 12. 21. Job 21. 33.
1. It sometimes signifies no more than to go, to go on, and forward; so Jud.
4. 6. Go and draw toward Mount Tabor, Exodus 12. 21. Draw out, and take you a
Lamb, that is, go out, Job 21. 33. Every man shall draw after him, that is, by
little and little follow him to the Grave. But it would spoil the sense to
interpret it so in this place. The Me following makes this sense inconsistent.

2. Sometimes it signifies the pulling of a thing or person to a place, by
some violence or force. Thus you read of the Heifer that had not Deuteronomy. 21. 3.
Job 24. 22. ^ Kings 22. 34. Genesis 37 28. Jer 38 ^3. P^^l. 28. 3.
drawn in the yoke, Deuteronomy. 21. 3. So it is said, God draws the mighty with his
power, Job 24. 22. And you read of the man that drew a Bow at adventure. That
is an act of strength and power you know, 1 King. 22. 34. So they drew Joseph
out of the Pit, and Jeremy out of the Dungeon, Genesis 37. 28. Jer 38. 13. And
David prays that he might not be drawn away with the wicked, Psa 28. 3. In
all which places this word is used.

3. Because in love and fair persuasion there is a kind of force, compelling a
reasonable and ingenuous person: The word is sometimes Psa. 109. 12. Jer 31. 3.
Hos. 11. 4. Judge. 4 7. Eccles. 2. 3.
used to express also such an action. It is said of the wicked, Psalm. 109. v.
12. He draws the poor into his Net, i. e. he slattereth him, and under
pretense of friendship enticeth them into ruin. God says, He will draw his
people with the Cords of a man, with the Bands of Lov^, Hos. 11. 4. and that he
had drawn them with loving kindness. Jer. 31. 3. thus Deborah promised to draw
the Israelites to Tabor, that is, to persuade, and to conduct them thither.
Judge. 4. 7. Solomon says, he sought to draw his flesh with Wine (so it is in
the Hebrew, Eccles. 2. 3.) his meaning is, he would entice and please his flesh.

Exo. 19. 13. Jo^. 6. 5. ^s^. 1^ 22. Prove. ^3 12. Psa. 109. 12. Psalm. 36. 10.
4. Sometimes in Scripture it signifies, to lengthen out, and to continue.
Thus it is used to signify the sound of a Trumpet lengthened out. It is
translated prolonged, Isa. 13. 22. d ferred, Prove. 13. 12. Hope deferred (in
the Hebrew, drawn out) makes the heart sick, Psalm. 109. 12. Let none draw out
mercy: We translate it, extend mercy unto him. None of my words shall be
prolonged: The same word is there again used; O continue thy loving kindness,
Psalm. 36. 10. This sense methinks seems not much foreign to this place, as
the Petition refers not only to first, but following grace: We need the
prolongings and continuances of Divine Influences to make us to V. Avenarium,
run after Christ. The word, as the Learnedest Lexicographers in that Language
tell us, signifies, with a secret force to compel one whithe^ we would have
him. It sometimes signifies, with fair words, Reasons and persuasions to draw
one to our side. Forster tells us, that Christ without doubt had respect to
this place, in those Gospel Jo 6. 44. Jo. 12. 42. Mar. 22.
expressions. No man comes to the Son, but he whom the Father draws. And
when I shall be lifted up, I will draw all men after me. And Lud. de Ponte
expounds this Text by that in the Gospel, Compel them to come in. So then when
the Spouse says, Draw me; this is that she means: Lord! Put forth thy secret
Power, thy irresistible and effectual Grace; and compel me to come unto thee,
and to run after thee; move me sweetly, but yet powerfully. Draw me by thy Word
and Spirit, and by the sweetness of thy grace open my heart (says Mr
Ainsworth.) I am weak, Lord, add thy strength. (so T^emellius glosseth.) Divine
grace must prevent, and must Satius est mi^i ut me tra^as scilicet ut vim
quamcunque mi^^ inf^ras quam parcens in meo me torpore securam derelinquas:
Bernard. ad loc.
follow, he that is not drawn, will be hindered by his own corruption. Lust
draws every heart backward from Christ. The Soul must by Grace be drawn to him.
Bernard understands it of an act of power, and thus glosseth. Lord it is better
that thou should draw me by any force, than that thou should spare me,
and leave me secure in my deadness.

But let us weigh it yet a little further. It is the Spouse that here speaks;
The Church of God, the believing Soul; has the Spouse need to be drawn to
Christ? Is she not already come to him, does she not willingly follow after
him, how then does she say draw me? does the Child of God follow him
unwillingly?

To this I answer. 1. The Church does not consist of all true believers, there
may be some in the bosom of that, that have but a name to live, and which had
need be drawn unto Christ. For these the Church may be understood to pray; that
there may not be any in it strangers unto Christ, but that as some are drawn,
so all may be drawn.

2. But Secondly, Bernard (who starts this question) answers it otherwise.
Non omnis qui trahitur invitus trahi^ur. Every one who is drawn, is not drawn
unwillingly. The Bear is drawn to the Stake unwillingly, so is the Malefactor
to the place of Execution; but an hungry man may be drawn to his Meat, and the
Cripple to the Bath, and both willingly; besides, if the Spouse were not
willing, she would never make it her request to be drawn, nor yet, were she
able of her self to go, would she ask to be drawn. Those who are weak, as well
as those that are unwilling, had need to be drawn. How perfect soever the Soul
be (says Bernard) while it sigheth under the body of death, and is Q^anquam
and q^a^taetevis perfectio^s, sit any.
kept in the Prison of mortality, being full of wants, and full of ma quamdiu
gemit sub corpore hujus mortis and seculi nequam retinetur carcere, etc.
Bernard. ad loc.
sin, it goes slowly and dully after Christ, and is not at liberty to follow
him, but must be drawn to its Spiritual duty. I know (says the Spouse) that I
cannot come to thee in Heaven, but by going after thee, while I live here upon
the Earth, and I know I cannot go after thee, unless thou drawest, unless thou
helpest me. She confesses here, that she stands in daily need of preventing
Grace, of drawing, and quickening Grace, from God. It Is true she prays, and so
seems to prevent the Grace of V. Lud. de Ponte ad loc.
God, but in that she prays, it is plain, that the Grace of God had prevented
her; otherwise she would not have said, Draw me. She here desires that Grace
of God which might have a divine, sweet, efficacious, power, and force with it
to constrain her Soul to run after Christ. The Kingdom of Heaven within the
Child of God suff^reth violence, and force, through the power of Lust and
Corruption. She beggeth of God, to oppose the power of his Grace to the power
of her Lusts, and vile Affections. She uses this word therefore to acknowledge
her weakness, and to show that without the help of grace, she could not run
after Christ, according to that, John 15. 4 Without me you can do nothing.
Genebrard says that by this Phrase she teaches us, that the beginning of our
Justification is from God. Bernard, Beza, Lud. de Ponte, and others conclude,
that she teaches, that further Grace is from God. By the word draw, she begs,
not only first grace, but the prolongings, and continuances of Divine Grace,
according to that, Psalm. 36. 10. O continue thy loving kindness to them that
know thee, and thy righteousness, to the upright in heart. The Soul does not
only stand in need of, the sweet and powerful influences of Divine Grace to
bring it to Christ, but to keep it, and to carry it on its state, and exercises
of Grace. For whether would the Spouse be drawn? (...) after thee, says the
Text. V. Mercer. ad loc.
Our translation puts these words after the next Verb, we will run after thee;
in the Heb they follow draw me, and so may indifferently be read with either.
The matter is not much, they must be understood here as well as there, the term
of either motion was the same. Surely it is thither she would be drawn, whither
she had a mind to run. The Spouse is drawn, and comes to Christ. By faith it
runs, and follows after Christ by holiness, and is drawn so by a power inabling
it to perfect holiness, it is drawn to Christ by Death (say some) so Paul
desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, 1 Phil. With reference to this
Bernard puts this question, An hoc dicit cupiens dissolvi? Does (says he) the
Nunc vero quod dicit post te, magis illud postulare videtur, ut conversationis
ejus valeat vestigia sequi. Bernard.
Spouse speak this, desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ? He says
he should be something of that mind, but that the words are not draw me to
thee, but draw me after thee. So that he thinks she rather desires the drawings
of Grace, that she might follow him in an holy conversation, walking as she had
him for an example. The sum then of this petition, considered as the language
of the Church (the collective Spouse) is this.

Lord! I have in my Bosom, many that are indeed drawn to thee in an outward
profession, in that sense in which thou say, When I am lifted up, I will
draw all men after me, they are flocked like Doves to the Windows: Oh let them
yet be drawn more effectually to an hearty embracing of thee, for none so comes
to thee but he whom the Father draws, Lord draw that part of my Members by thy
efficacious grace. Considered as the voice of a believer, the sense is this:
Lord thou have made me thine, thou have by thy mighty powerful work of thy
Spirit drawn me to thee; but I am weak, and feeble, and not able to follow thee
in a course of holiness, nor to watch with thee, thou who at first have put
forth thy powerful effectual Grace in changing my heart, in bringing me to thy
self, continue the same power of thy Grace, commanding me to keep my heart
close with thee, so as I may never depart from thee. I proceed to the next
words.

(...)
We will run after thee. The former word contained the Spouses Petition: this,
her promise: what will thou do O thou fairest, if the Lord will bestow upon
thee the daily influences of his drawing Grace? she here answers, and
preventeth that question (says she) we will run after thee. These words may
also be conceived to have the force of an argument, enforcing her Petition,
Lord! If thou will draw me, I will not hold back, no; We will run after thee.

Here is considerable, 1. The Persons promising, We; where the change of the
number is very considerable; she had spoken before in the singular Number draw
me; here she promises in the plural, We will run. 2. The promise itself, or
thing promised; Will run. The answering of two questions will open these words:
1. What is meant by running. 2. Why she says we will run, when before she had
only said draw me.

Qu. 1. What is here meant by Running; what does the Spouse promise under this
term of running after Christ.

(...)
1. The word in the Hebrew, does properly signify a bodily motion, and you
easily understand what it is to run, it is more than to go, and walk. It is
here by a metaphor applied to the Soul, or indeed to the whole man; for
although some of the Hebrew Doctors, and some others (according to their
different notion of the Spouse, which I before hinted) understand it of
Abraham's bodily motion out of his Country, or the Israelites motions, out of
Egypt, and Babylon, or the Peoples going to the Temple in Solomon's time to
worship God, yet their notions are doubtless much too low, and not at all
agreeing to that notion of the Spouse which we have fixed. I do therefore fully
agree with the most, and the most eminent interpreters, who acknowledge here a
metaphor, and that by running some motion of the mind is signified, analogous
to the motion of the body, which we call running; now what that is, we must
further enquire.

2. Running does not only signify motion, but some strength in the body so
moving. The sick, and feeble person can hardly stand, or go, much less run. The
person running may want some degrees of strength, but he must have legs, and
some strength in his legs, or he cannot run. The Soul that runs after Christ
must first be possessed of some Spiritual strength. The strength of the Soul is
an effect of Christ's drawing. Behold (says the Is. 55. 2.
Prophet) thou shall call a Nation that thou know not, and Nations that knew
not thee shall run unto thee. First God calls, then we run; first he puts
strength into them, and then they use V. Ainsworth ad loc.
the strength, which he has given them, Isa. 0. 31. They that wait upon the
Lord shall renew their strength like the Eagle, they shall run, and not be
weary; first they shall renew their strength, then they shall run.

3. Thirdly, Running imports speed, and celerity in motion. De Dieu ad loc
Psalm. 119. 32. 60.
Festinant em significat actionem is De Dieu his note on the Text. David says,
I will run the way of thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 32. which he expounds, v.
60. I made have, and delayed not to keep thy precepts. Buxtorf in his Hebrew
Lexicon notes that the Greek word (...) which signifies to run hastily, comes
from this Hebrew word, and others fancy that the latin word Rota, that
signifies a Wheel, has its Original from this word also; Delrio interprets
it here by festinabimus, we will make have, and indeed it is the obvious, and
ordinary notion of the word; thus you know running is distinguished from those
flower motions of creeping, going, walking, etc. Running argues a quick and
speedy motion; the Soul having received from Christ the powerful influences of
Divine Grace, stands not still, creeps not, moves not slowly, but makes have
in the ways of God.

4. Running argues a free and cheerful motion. The man that runs has, as we
say, good will in his way; it implies a prompt inclination and readiness of
mind. Thus Forster (an Hebrew Lexicographer) (...)
notes a great cognation betwixt this word, and two other Hebrew words; the one
of which signifies, to bring forth in plenty and abundance; the other, to be
willing, or have a good will to a thing. Buxtorf also observes its affinity to
the latter. Avendrius also observes, that it signifies to move readily, as
the false Prophets ran, Jer. 12. 5. Jer. 23. 21. I have not sent these
Prophets, and yet they ran; as Gehazi ran for his bride, 2 King. 5. 20. Thus
the believing Soul that is once drawn by the Spirit of Grace, moves in the way
of holiness, not dragged on to duty by a Foreign Principle: It is its meat and
drink to do the Will of God: It delights in the Law of God as to the inward
man; it was before unwilling, but now it is made willing, as it is said My
People shall be a willing people in the day of Psalm. 110.
my power. Grace gives wheels to the Soul, and it oileth the wheels when
given. Buxtorf notes, that this word is used only to signify the running of
Men, not of Beasts. Men move not like Beasts rashly and giddily, and merely
when they are whipped on, or out of wantonness, but men propose and know their
end, and move toward it out of a Principle of Reason and Affection: The
believing Soul knows its end, and moves toward it from a conduct of reason;
so it moves speedily and freely after Christ.

V. Robotham and Trap. ad loc.
5. I find some Interpreters judging, that the term likewise implies a promise
of Perseverance. There is one Text of Scripture which seems to advantage this
Notion, Isa. 40. 31. They shall run, and not be weary. When men begin to be
weary, they leave running, they go a foot-pace, and as it were draw their legs
after them. Now, says the Spouse, Lord, draw me, and we will run; we will not
be weary in our courses of holiness and duty, we will not faint and give over.
But running, in its abstract, and single notion, does not conclude
Perseverance; running added, to not being weary does. So here supposing first a
drawing, then a running in obedience to that; while the Lord draws, the Soul
will run; but we shall no longer dance to him, than he pipeth to us. And this I
think sufficient to open the Spouse's Promise: Only add further, that those who
run must have a way, or path to run in. What is the Spouse's way? Beza says,
that Christ is both the Principle from which we run; the way in which we run;
and the End of the Race. It is true, but in a diversified Notion. Christ is our
Pr^nciple in the gracious Influences of his Spirit: Without me (says he) you
can do nothing. Christ in his Word and Gospel is our way. I will run the way of
thy Commandments (says David) Psalm. 119. 132. This is the Race set before us,
Heb. 12 1. The following of Christ commanded, Luke 9. 23. Christ in his
Example, in the fullness of the measure of his stature: Christ in his Glory is
our End. That then which the Spouse here promises, amounts to this: Lord, I am
weak and impotent, I cannot come unto thee, I cannot of my self move after
thee; I am hindered by the prevalency of my lusts and corruptions; Who shall
deliver me from my body of death? Who can but thou alone? Lord, draw me, make
me willing, keep me willing, put forth thy mighty Power, and sweetly constrain
my Soul by thy love, then I shall not stand still, but move in thy wa^es. I
shall not move w^akly, but strongly, not slowly, but cheerfully, freely,
nimbly. I shall not be faint nor weary, but hold on in the way of thy Precepts,
until I come to the fullness of the measure of the stature, which is in thee;
yea until the day break, and the shadows fly away, and I come to thee in that
glory which thou had prepared for them that love thee, and sollow the Lamb in
glory whithersoever he goes. But there is yet one thing further to be
considered.

2. Qu. What means the change of the Number? Her request was in the Singular
Number, Draw me; her promise is the Plural; We will, or we shall run after
thee. Who are these We?

1. V. Lud. de Ponte, and Genebrardum in loc.
Thou and I together (fay some.) Indeed this must be. I live, says the
Apostle, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. We read in Ezekiel's Vision of the
Wheels, of his Vision of a Spirit within the Wheels, without which the Wheels
moved not. Suppose Wheels put upon the Soul, yet the Soul moves not, without
the Spirit moving the Wheels. Ego cum gratia tud (says Genebrard.) But this
seems to me too nice.

2. I rather therefore choose to expound it with the most of Interpreters, and
to say that by We is here meant, The individual Believer, and all her
companions. Ego and adolescentulae mecum, (says Bernard) Ego and Puellae meae
(says Tremell^us) I and my Maidens, I and my Virgins, I and all mine. So it
imports thus much, that the Child of God once drawn to Christ, will make it her
business to draw others along with her. Yet a little further to enquire the
reason why she changes the Number. Does she promise for more than she would
pray for? Or does she envy others that drawing grace which she prayed for for
her self? Doubtless neither: what then?

1. Possibly Bernard's notion may be more acute than solid. We are drawn (says
he) when we are tempted, when we are afflicted, and exercised with trials, we
run when we are refreshed and comforted. She would have the sour for her self,
and the sweet for others. She did not know their strength; here was her
charity. But I say, this seems too nice; for certain it is, that all who run
after Christ must be first drawn one way, or other, and that by power. God's
People are made willing in the day of his power.

2. Beza therefore speaks better, I think: When she says, Draw me, she
speaks in the person of the whole Church, so had a liberty to speak either in
the one, or the other Number: So that as Ludov. de Ponte has well observed, by
this change of the Number, she shows, that the Church, which consists of many,
is yet but One; according to that of the Apostle, Romans 12. 5. We being many are
one body.

3. By this alteration of the Number, she shows, That she believed it as
easy with God to draw many; as one.

4. Lastly, Though the Saints be many, yet the end of Christ's drawing them is,
That they might be one. John tells us, chapter 11. 52. That the end of Christ's
dying was, That he might gather together in one the Children of God which were
scattered abroad. Thus I have opened the terms. But before I part with them, I
must mind you who are capable of that Learning. That the Seventy add (...).
according to which our English Translation should have been. We will run after
thee, in the savor of thy Ointments. The Vulgar Latin follows them; so do
Origin, Ambrose, Theodoret, Vigilius, Hildebrand, Greg. Magnus, Nyssen,
Bernard, Honorius, etc. and generally the Popish Writers; but Lyra, who is one
of them, differs, and agrees with the Hebrew, which has not those words,
and thinks, they were put in by some Expositor in the way of an interlineary
gloss, and afterward got into the Text through the unskilfulness of some
Transcribers. How they came into the Text in Translations we cannot tell: Sure
we are, they are not in the Hebrew and therefore our English Translators had no
reason to put them in, though they make no new Doctrine; for the believing Soul
does in leed follow Christ in the savor of his Ointments. We heard before,
that therefore do the Virgins love him, and it is their love to him which
makes them to run after him. But that is enough to have cautioned you of. I
proceed to the following words of the Text, The King has brought me into his
Chambers.

This I called, The Spouses acknowledgment or testification of her beloveds
answer. The word translated King is the ordinary word used (...)
by the Hebrews to express that relation by; she doubtless means by the King,
the King of Kings, the mighty God; I shall not restrain it to Christ considered
as a Mediator, upon which account he has a peculiar Kingdom: The King, God my
King.

Has brought me.] The word is (...) which in Hiphil signifies he (...)
has made me to come, or made me to go.

(...)
Into his Chambers.] The word is often used in Scripture, translated a Chamber,
Genesis 43. 30. Jud. 15. 1. A Bedchamber, 2 Kings 6. 12. An inward Chamber, Judge.
3. 24. A Bridegrooms Chamber, Joel 2. 16. A Summer Chamber, Judge. 3. 24. It is
also used, Prove. 24. 4. Prove. 7. 27. Job 9. 9. and in many other Texts. It
plainly signifies, the more inner secret, retired part of the house, where
Persons can be most private, and most secure; The King has brought me into his
Chambers, that is, into the places of most private secret communion with him,
where I can be most private, free, and secure; but yet for the clearer
explication of the words, we will more strictly enquire upon two things.

Qu. 1. What is here meant by the Kings Chambers.

Doubtless it is spoken in a figure. The House in the Heavens, not made with
hands, is not (as our Earthly Houses) divided, into rooms, and stories, by
partitions; let us therefore rightly comprehend the notion of a Chamber, and we
shall without much difficulty understand the privilege in which the Spouse
does glory. Three things will give us the notion of a Chamber.

1. It is a lofty place: elevated from the Earth, you know that you ordinarily
call those rooms in your Houses Chambers, which are above the lower floor.

2. It is a place of privacy, In ipsum penetrale thesaurorum ineffabilium
Delrio.
any one is admitted into your lower rooms, Loca quaedam abdita, quietis and
refectionis. Lud. de Ponte
but very familiar friends only into your Chambers, when those of the same
family would be more retired and private, they choose Chambers for that privacy;
our more hidden private fellowship with our friends, or near relations is in
our Chambers.

3. A Chamber is a resting place, we eat, and drink, and have our ordinary
converse with our neighbors in other rooms we lie down, and rest in our
Chambers.

These three things I should think may make us to understand the Spouses
meaning in this metaphorical expression, and what it is that she glories in.

The Lord my King has heard me, and taken me up into the nearest degrees of
close and private communion with him, where my Soul enjoys him, in the most
heavenly, free, and most familiar manner. Qu. 2. But how comes the Spouse thus
soon to glory, who but now was praying that the Lord would draw her, and
facitly complained for the want of the manifestations of his Divine Grace? how
soon is her tone altered? she but now groaned, as one that could not get up the
Stairs, now she glories that she was brought into the Kings: Chambers. To which
I answer two things.

1. Possibly she speaks but in the dialect of Faith; you know the Apostle
calls Faith the Evidence of things not seen. It (like God) calls the things
that are not as if they were, and often forgets the future tense, and speaks in
the Present or Praeterperfect Tense. The believing Soul, while it is in the
dungeon of a desertion, being assured the Lord will do it, can say; The Lord
has brought me into his Chambers. And thus those must necessarily understand
it, who with Piscator, by the Chambers understand Heaven, and Glory.

2. But I rather think the words are to be understood as they lie before us:
She is heard while she is speaking; while she prays, Lord draw me; she is
drawn, and is in Heaven e're she is aware of it; thus the learned Mercer
expounds it.

If you understand the words in the first sense. They speak the virtue and
efficacy of faith, the believer by virtue of it, can look upon things as done,
which yet are to be done, why? because the Soul eyeth the promise, and knows,
that he who has promised is both able, and faithful. If a debt be owing to
you, from an able, and an honest man; you say it is as good money as any in your
purse, you count you have so much as that debt makes, addition to your estate.
Gods hand is an able hand, and he is faithful, the Soul may count upon it, that
it has so much either in Grace or glory, as the Lord has promised it. If you
take the words in the latter sense (as I shall do) they inform you of the
efficacy of Prayer, spiritual, fervent prayer, it avails much; while the
believer is speaking, God is answering. I proceed to the latter part of the
Text.

We will be glad, and rejoice in thee, and remember thy loves more than Wine;
we have heard the Spouses petition, Draw me, she prayed for Divine Grace, that
might both sweetly, and powerfully draw her Soul after Christ. We have heard
her promise, which I told you might be considered as an argument to enforce her
Petition, an argument drawn from the glory of God, and the concern of it, in
the answer; we will run after thee. A prayer for the best things, and to
receive them for the best end, to make her more holy. We have heard, how well
pleasing her petition was, she had no sooner prayed, but God answers, and she
recognizeth her answer; My Lord the King (says she) has brought me into his
Chambers; now she comes to show the effects this quick and gracious answer had
and would have upon her. She mentions three. The first (as some if not too
critically distinguish) respecting her heart: We will be glad. 2. The second
respecting the action of the whole man: We will rejoice in thee. 3. The third
respecting the record of it: We will remember thy loves more than Wine. This
now distinguished her spiritual affection, from a foolish transient passion.

(...)
We will exalt, or be glad.] the Radix (...) is very often used in Scripture, I
will point you to 3 or 4 other Texts, from whence you may gather the sense of
it, Is. 65. 19. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my People, Pro.
23. 24. The Father of the Righteous shall greatly rejoice, Psalm. 21. 5. The
King shall joy in thy strength. So Psalm. 2. 11. Psalm. 13. 11. My heart shall
rejoice in thy Salvation. Psalm. 16. 9. Zech. 9. 9. Forster thinks it rather
signifies the expression of the Joy of the heart, by some outward gesture,
than the mere internal affection. It doubtless signifies the highest affection
of the heart upon its union with its desired object.

(...)
We will be glad.] the Radical word is (...) which signifies to rejoice, and
to be merry, and is very often in the old Testament, used to express the
gladness of the heart. Exodus 4. 14. The rejoicing of a Virgin in a dance, Jer.
31. 13. I shall not insist upon that critical distinction which some make
betwixt these words, restraining the one to the inward affection, the other to
the more outward expression; nor do I think it will hold but clearly both these
are expressed by these two words, whither distinctly, or jointly I shall not
determine, and the sense is this. O Lord thou have heard my prayer; thou have
granted the request of my lips, thou have brought me into thy Royal Chambers,
admitted me to Spiritual, secret, and most sweet communion with thee. Our
hearts shall be most highly affected with thee, and our outward man most highly
expressive of our inward affections. It follows;

We will remember thy Loves more then Wine. This is the third thing she
promises. I shall be very short in the explication of this phrase, more fully
opening the terms, when I come to handle the Proposition, I shall raise from
them. Only this, the Heb. word is (...) we met with it before, v. 2. the
Septuagint translate it (...) the difference is founded I conceive in the
cognation of the two words, signifying Loves, and Breasts, they differ only in
the points, but suppose it were thy Breasts, a figure must still be
acknowledged, because the breasts are near the heart, and that is the seat of
love, so that the sense still must be thy loves, thy gracious influences. More
then Wine, that is more then those things which are most pleasant, and
delightful to us; but I opened this, v. 2. It follows,

The upright love thee] in the Hebrew it is Vprightnesses, or Upright things
love thee; so the Hebrew word properly signifies. (...)
The same word is used, Psalm. 17. 2. Thy Eyes shall behold upright things. The
word is found in this form, Psalm. 9. 9. He shall judge the world in
righteousness, and the people in uprightnesses, so Prove. 1. 3. Is. 33. 15.
Prove. 2. 9. Psalm. 58. ^2. Psalm. 75. 3. If we expound it (as the letter of the
Text is) in the abstract the question will be whether it should be read in*the
Nominative case, uprightnesses love thee, or in the Ablative, in uprightnesses,
they, that is, the Virgins love thee. If in the first sense, the meaning is
this:

Whatsoever is good, and right, is to be found in thee, all the graces love
thee, that is, cleave and are united unto thee. The fullness of grace dwelled in
him, and all virtues, and graces were made perfect in him. But although this be
a truth, yet I do not take it to be the sense of the Text, and in my further
discourses on this Song, I shall have occasion once and again to discourse that
subject.

Secondly, It may be read in the Ablative case. In uprightnesses they love
thee; that is (as Buxtorf expounds it) Rectissime, fortiter. The Saints love
thee most entirely, sincerely, strongly, thus it will afford us this lesson;
That the Saints love to Christ is a most strong, sincere, and entire love. The
Virgins love Christ in uprightnesses, not in word, and in tongue only: but in
deed and in truth, as St. John expounds it; they love him with a true, and
perfect heart. But this will fall in the handling of the Doctrine, which will
arise from the third sense, which is more generally accepted, and which I shall
embrace.

Thirdly, Therefore I agree with those who think the Abstract is here put for
the Concrete; uprightnesses, for the most upright persons. The quality for the
persons endued with that excellent quality; a very ordinary way of speaking in
the Hebrew, and indeed most languages* No wonder (my beloved!) that I should
love thee, for there is not an upright Soul in the world, but loves thee; and
the more there is of uprightness in any Soul, the more that Soul loves thee;
Uprightnesses love thee. Thus now I have largely opened this excellent Text.

The Propositions I shall observe from it and handle them (if God please) in
their order, are these that follow.

Prop. 1.
Souls must first be drawn by God before they will come to Christ, or run after
him, and it is their duty to pray, that they may be so drawn.

Prop. 2.
The Soul being drawn, shall and will run after Christ.

Prop. 3.
That Gods drawing one Soul, will be a means to make many run after him.

Prop. 4.
That God is often very quick in answering his Peoples Prayers.

Prop. 5.
That Jesus Christ has Chambers, into which he sometimes brings his Peoples
Souls.

Prop. 6.
That Jesus Christ is the singular object of the Saints joy, in the midst of
its m^st excellent enjoyments.

Prop. 7.
The Grace receiving Soul, will remember his loves more than Wine.

Prop. 8.
The upright Soul will love the Lord Jesus Christ, and the more upright a Soul
is, the more it will love him

Sermon X^VII
Canticles 1. 4. Drawme, and We will run after thee.

I Come to handle more largely those Propositions from this second Petition of
the Spouse, which in my last discourse I had no more time, but to name, the
first of which was this.

Prop. Souls must first be drawn by God before they can come to, or run after
the Lord Jesus Christ.

I noted to you in my explication of this Petition, that there are two
principal usages of this word Draw, in Holy Writ, it sometimes signifies an
alluring by fair carriage and persuasions. 2. Sometimes a constraining by force
and power; both ways the Lord draws those Souls that come to Christ, or that
run after him, he draws them suaviter, and fortiter, sweetly, and yet
powerfully.

1. There is a drawing by Afflictions, and Chastisements. Afflictions are the
Lords Cords. If (says Job, chapter 36. 8, 9.) they be bound in Fetters, and be
holden in Cords of Affliction. Then he shows them their work, and their
transgressions wherein they have exceeded, he opens their Ear to discipline,
and commands them that they return from iniquity. Thus the Lord drew
Manasses, he was bound by Fetters, and carried into Babylon, and when he was in
affliction he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the
God of his Fathers, and prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him, and heard
his supplication, -- It is added v. 13. Then Manasses knew that the 2 Ch 12.
Lord he was God. I know that Bernard thus interprets this Text (tho he
restrains it not to that sense) but I must crave leave to dissent from so great
a Person, not only because I find scarce any Interpreters agreeing with him,
but because then the thing here prayed for, must be Afflictions, which I do not
know we are commanded to pray for, and I am sure nature restrains us in such
a Petition; neither are afflictions in their own tendency drawing Cords, they
are rather called Cords and Fetters to signify their pinching effects, than
that God ordinarily uses them to draw Souls by unto himself; we read of one
Thief upon the Cross converted at his last hour, and of one Manasses converted
by Festers, but you have but a single instance of each in Holy Writ, and let me
further add, Manasses his affliction was but Fetters, and Imprisonment, nothing
that affected his head, and made him unfit to do any thing but to attend the
distempers of his Body; nor indeed is there any drawing virtue in an
affliction, it rather naturally alienateth the Soul from God: in my experience
in the work of the Ministry, I have known many good Men and Women bettered by
Affliction; but I never knew a bad man or woman, by affliction brought home to
God; it is a fire that so softens the wax, and hardens the clay, and this
agrees with what we have in Scripture. David says, before he was afflicted he
went astray, but his affliction had learned him to keep Gods Statutes, Psalm.
119. But it is said of Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. In the time of his distress he
trespassed more against the Lord; This is that King Ahaz; and I am sure the
same is said of the body of Israelites, Amos 4. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. God
followed them with judgment after judgment, yet they returned not unto him.
Afflictions are good remembrancers to them who have learned their duty before,
but they must be some particular afflictions, that give leisure for
Instructions to be then first given, or time for the digestion of them, if they
can be given. I conclude in short, whatever use God may sometimes make of
Afflictions, it is not the drawing by them, which the Spouse here prays for.

Secondly, There is a drawing by liberal distributions of mercies of common
Providence. Thus God says, Hosea 11. 4. I drew them with the Cords of a man,
with bands of love, So Jer. 31. 3. With loving kindness have I drawn thee, Love
is of a drawing nature, it is like the hook, in the intrails of a Creature,
which draws more forcibly, than Cords fastened to the flesh, and outward
part; But experience teaches us that this is not a sufficient Cord to draw
Sinners Souls to God, God in his parable of the Vineyard, Isaiah 5. repeats
what he had done for the Israelites, and concludes, v. 4. What could have been
done more to my Vineyard that I have not done in it? Yet when he looked, it
should bring forth Grapes, it brought forth wild Grapes; Oppression instead of
Judgment, and a cry instead of righteousness? How many thousands are there in
the world, that are encompassed with Mercies of this nature, they have healthy
bodies, pleasing relations, full barns, plentiful estates, they want nothing,
yet are they Enemies to God, and to the Cross of Christ; nor do the People of
God, ordinarily run most after, or walk most close with God, when they most
abound with the good things of this life. Gods People, Jer. 2. that followed
him in a Wilderness, and in a land of droughts, forsook him when they came into
a land that flowed with Milk and Honey; whence Agur prayed as much against
Riches, left he should (being full) blaspheme God, as against poverty. And even
the man according to Gods own heart, offended more, when he was come to sit
upon his Throne in Jerusalem, than when he was hunted like a Partridge in the
Wilderness, and knew not where to rest, and this is seen in our ordinary
experience.

3. God draws us (thirdly) by the potent arguments of the Gospel, as it lies
before us to be read, or as it is opened, and applied to us by the Ministry of
the Word. Man has a tunable ear, and is a reasonable Creature, so as arguments
have a great force upon humane nature, and the more, as any of us are more
knowing and rational, and able to raise conclusions from Principles. Into this
sense Interpreters do interpret those words of our Savior, John 12. 42. When I
shall be lifted up, I will draw all men after me, after my death upon the
Cross, I will send my Apostles up and down the world, to be witnesses of my
death, resurrection and ascension, and to persuade men to receive me in my true
notion, as the true Messiah and Savior of the world. Accordingly the Apostle
tells the Corinthians that Christ had committed to them the word of
Reconciliation. Now then (says he, 2 Cor. 5. 20.) We, as Ambassadors for
Christ, as tho God did beseech you by us, we p^ay you in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God; and this must be the meaning of that command to the
Servants, Luke 14, 23. Compel them to come in, Christ is not there speaking to
Magistrates, or of their duty, but of the duty of Ministers, who have no power
from him to compel any, but by a lively and powerful Preaching the Gospel, the
potent arguments of which set home upon reasonable and ingenuous Souls, by the
gifts God has given to his Ministers have a kind of compulsory force, and
power in them, and the Apostle tells us, that Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.
and as men are by it drawn to Christ; so they are also by it drawn after him,
and therefore Peter exhorts Christians, 1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes to
desire the sincere milk of the Word, that they might grow thereby. The
believing Soul follows Christ, in the scent or favor of his precious
Ointments. It is the publishing of the Gospel that makes the name of Christ an
Ointment poured out.

Fourthly, God may be said to draw men by the common motions of his Spirit,
impressing good thoughts upon us, either upon occasion of his Providential
dispensations, or while we read or hear the word; some say that there is a
common Ministration of the Spirit attending the preaching of the word,
sufficient to assist every Soul that will, to repent, and believe, and to do
what God requires of us in order to Salvation; that the holy Spirit does
ordinarily attend the preaching of the word, and suggest to and imprint upon
the hearts of those that hear it, some good thoughts, is what will not be
denied; I believe there are but few who have used to attend the preaching of
the Gospel, where it has been faithfully, and livelily preached, but must own,
that he has heard the Lord standing at his door, and knocking. But still the
question is whether this be all the drawing which the Spouse here begs, No
doubt but she begs such a cause, such operations of a cause as should be
productive of the effect. The effects are coming unto Christ, running after
Christ. Coming is not expressly mentioned in this Text, but it is Joh. 6. 44. No
man comes unto me, except the Father who has sent me, draw him, and it is
included in the term running. The question therefore must be whether such a
drawing as is by common mercies, by the preaching of the Gospel, or by the
common work of the Holy Spirit, all which reprobates may have, is sufficient to
innable a Soul (yet a stranger to God) to come to Christ, or to innable any
Soul already come to Christ, to run after him. I think not, and therefore I
conclude in the last place;

5. That both in the Souls first motions to Christ, and its further motions
after him, the Lord puts forth a powerful influence of his Spirit of grace,
beyond the arguments of the word, the suasion of his Minister and the common
work of the Spirit, attending all faithful preaching of the Gospel This I take
to be that drawing, the Spouse here prays for and which our Savior mentions,
John 6. 44. (as some think with an allusion to the phrase of this Text) nay
some bring that Text, John 6 44. to prove this Book quoted in the New
Testament) This I firmly believe, because I am convinced, there is such a work
of the Spirit necessary, and that both as to the Souls first coming to God, and
further walking with God, tho as to the latter the Soul being renewed, and
sanct^fied there be a far less influence necessary than as to the former, yet
even after sanctification, the Apostle tells us that we are kept by the power
of God through Faith to Salvation, and Christ tells his Disciples that without
him, they could do nothing, Joh. 15. 3. And St. Paul says, 2 Gal. 20. I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live, I live by
the faith of the Son of God. But indeed the great question is upon the first.
Arminians will grant special grace to believers, but no more than common grace
to all men in astate of unbelief. Let us therefore first enquire,

1. Whither there be not something of a divine power and influence necessary to
cause any Soul to come to Christ, beyond the Preaching of the Word, and that
common concurrence of the Spirit with the word Preached and all the suasions
and arguments can be used by Ministers; and of what nature this power is.

We affirm it, Jesuits, and Arminians deny it; let me show you upon what
arguments we assert it, I shall not instance in all or the 4th part of what
has been or might be said, only speak something to satisfy you, remembering
that I am now preaching a Sermon, not writing a controversy.

1. Those who assert that there needs no such act of the divine power, must
necessarily make man a God to himself; I mean the Author of the greatest
Spiritual and Eternal good, both in respect of action and fruition, whatsoever
is moved, is moved from a living principle within self, or from another: Either
man is moved to Christ as drawn by the Father, or from a principle of life
within himself. I know they will say it is from his own power of willing; now
besides the multitude of Scriptures, which this is opposed to, Ephesians. 2. 1. You
has he quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and Sins, Psalm. 110. 3. The
People shall be a willing People in the day of thy Power, Phil. 2. 13. For it
is God which works in you to will, and to do, of his own good pleasure. I say
besides these. This opinion makes man the author of the greatest good to
himself. 1. In point of action; it makes him the author of th se gracious acts
and habits by which a Soul is made meet for the inheritance of the; Saints of
life, repentance, faith and new obedience, expressly contrary to those
Scriptures, which tell us that it is given to us to believe, Phil. 1. 29. That
Faith is not of our selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. God gives repentance
unto life, and a multitude of other Scriptures. 2. And in point of fruition
too, man by this Doctrine is his own Savior; for Eternal life is every where
promised to repentan^e, faith, and new obedience, which according to this
principle are all works proceeding from our selves; so man is become a Savior
to himself by this new Divinity, and the author of the highest good to himself,
and has nothing to bless God for, but only making him a Man, not a Beast, for
being endued with a reasonable Soul, and living under the Gospel, he has a
power of himself to repent, to believe in Christ, to do whatsoever Eternal life
is promised to in the Gospel, unless they will say he is beholden to God for
the Covenant of Grace, annexing eternal life to these performances, and
accepting sincerity instead of perfect obedience, which yet leaves the
regenerate Soul no more to bless God for, than the vilest and most profane
Sinner that lives where the Gospel is preached, for he also has a reasonable
Soul, a will equal with others, there is a covenant of grace equally
established for Judas as well as Peter (according to this Doctrine) One is
under the means of Grace, and the common aids and assistances of the Spirit, as
well as the other, for the good inclination of his will to accept the terms of
the Gospel which the profane person has not, the regenerate Soul has no body
to thank but himself, and to applaud himself for the principle of goodness, of
which it seems he is an author to himself.

Secondly. This Doctrine leaves the Soul something to glory in before God. The
Apostle treating of Justification by faith, in opposition to that of works
argues thus. Romans 4. 2. If Abraham were justified by works he has whereof to
glory, but not before God. The Proposition of that Text which alone in this
case, I will make use of is, That God has so ordered the causes in the
Salvation of Man, that man has no cause of glorying before God; to that
purpose he speaks, Romans 3. 27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded; but
admitting that there needed no power, to change the heart, but what is in man's
will, boasting is not excluded, a man has wherein to glory, and that before
God; he shall say Lord! it is true, thou fixedst an eternal Covenant of Grace,
thou made me a man, thou gave me the Gospel, and the preaching of it, but
notwithstanding all that thou ever did for me, I might have gone to Hell as
well as a thousand more, for whom the same Covenant was made as well as me, to
whom thou gave a Soul of the same species with mine, the same Gospel, the
same Preaching, the same common grace, if I had not had a principle of goodness
in my own will, of which my self was the cause; I had been damned,
notwithstanding all thou did for me, as many others shall be for whom thou
did as much as for me. Is not here glorying before God? Is boasting excluded
by this Divinity? The main parts here as to man's Salvation are given to a man's
self! For I pray observe, a man cannot repent truly, and believe, and obey the
Gospel, and perish for ever, now all these it seems a man may do from himself
without any act of Divine power, inabling him more than a reprobate to do them,
but he may have a common Covenant of Grace established for him, as well as
others, he may have a reasonable Soul, he may have the Gospel preached to him,
and the common aids, and assistances of the Spirit, and yet perish for ever. So
as plainly all that necessarily brings Salvation, makes the Soul meet for it,
and accompanies it; all this is from man, nothing is from God, but that,
notwithstanding which, he might have perished for ever.

Thirdly, This Doctrine most absurdly ascribes unequal virtues to Souls that
are equal as to their species, faculties, and virtues. All reasonable Souls are
equal, their faculties are the same, their virtues and powers the same, their
Souls are under equal means, motives, aids, assistances, whence is it, that one
man's will is inclined to believe, to receive Christ, to obey his laws; the
others not? Are not here inequal virtues ascribed to Souls in all points equal,
they are both reasonable, both have the same understandings, the same wills,
the same means, the same common aids and assistances. I ask then whence, if not
from a mighty powerful influence of God upon one man's Soul, one man's will, more
than another* comes it to pass that the Soul of one is softened, changed,
renewed, and not the Soul of another? If it be from a power in the Soul, here
is a mighty inequal virtue, ascribed to one Soul more than to another, of the
same species, endued with the same powers and faculties, and under the same
means, aids and assistances, which is a most inaccountable thing.

4. I shall add fourthly, If there be no such distinguishing powerful influence
of God, making the difference, the Apostle is contradicted, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who
makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou that thou did not
receive? That their Souls are reasonable Souls that differ one from another in
Spiritual things is evident, not only in gifts and endowments, but in saving
spiritual habits, now (says the Apostle) who makes thee to differ? Admit the
Apostle there, not speaking of spiritual saving habits, but of common gifts,
or extraordinary gifts, certainly if it be God who in these makes one Soul to
differ from another, it is much more God, who makes a Soul to differ as to
saving spiritual habits, such as make the Soul fit for the Kingdom of God, and
accompany salvation, but according to this Doctrine man makes himself to
differ. God does no more for the believer than for the unbeliever, for the
elect than for the reprobate Soul; so he has not received, but may glory. God
is beholden to man for inclining his will to him, he is not beholden to God for
inclining his will more than another man's. From hence plainly appears that the
Drawing here mentioned does not signify the mere change of a man's heart or life
from a principle within himself, but a change from a new principle infused from
another, from God; and therefore the Spouse here speaking to her beloved,
says, Draw me.

Thus far now I have evinced that the turning of the Soul from a state, and
course of Sin, must be the work of God, and 2. That it must be a special work,
special grace, but we have yet further to enquire into the nature of this great
work, how God draws the Soul that comes to him.

This I answer in two particulars, 1. It is For^iter. 2. Suaviter.

1. Powerfully. So as though the Soul may a long time oppose itself, yet it
cannot finally resist it, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy People shall be willing, in the day
(...) of thy strength, so is the Heb. Resistance implies the opposition of the
patient to the action of the agent; In all resistance there must be two
parties, whose strength must be either equal, or inequal. If it be equal, there
is no victory on either side. If the Patient be stronger than the agent, the
agents intended effect is not wrought, but if the power of the Agent be greater
than that of the Patient, then the Patient is subdued and conquered to the will
of the Agent. Let us take an instance in Physic; we will suppose a Stomach
oppressed with wind, or peccant humors; the Physician gives Physic to expel
it, if the power of the wind, or noxious humors be above that of the Physic,
the Physic is ineffectual, the wind yet rages, the peccant humors prevail, or
increase, but if the strength of the Physic be more, it expels the wind or
the peccant humor, though they may first make the Person sick, and struggle a
great while with the Physic; such a resistance as this; may be, and is
ordinarily, if not always made to the grace of God; especially to his common
grace. God calls to the sinner for repentance, faith, new obedience, the Spirit
of God concurring with the Preaching of the Gospel stands at the door, and
knocks, Rev. 2. 20. The Soul says, how shall I leave my sweet, and pleasant
lusts, my sensual or carnal enjoyments. But there is a resistance when the
strength of the Patient is above the strength which either the Agent puts
forth, or has, so as all the action of the Agent is frustrated, and thus Grace
cannot be resisted; that is, not finally resisted. It is the will of God to
renew, and change the Sinners heart, and who has resisted his will? The
Spouse, Cant. 5. 2. hears Christ knocking at the door of her heart, and
saying; Open my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled; she makes excuses, she had put
off her coat, and how should she put it on? she had washed her feet, and how
should she defile them? Does the Lord nest in that answer? no; see v. 3. My
beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels were moved for
him. It is much the same case with the Soul in its first conversion, God calls,
invites, persuades, entreats the Soul to leave its sinful courses, and to turn
unto God. Says the poor Creature; I am young, and how shall I abandon the
lusts of youth, I am ingulphed in a course of profitable sinning; how shall I
leave my too greedy pursuit of the world, my pursuit of unjust gain, etc. Thus
it resists a while. But God will not take these answers, he at length -- puts
in his hand by the hole of the door, and opens it. God cannot seriously act,
and be finally opposed, for it is certain his power must be above the power of
the Creature. 2. That he must act powerfully, appears from hence, in that the
effect is upon the will, otherwise inclined, both by nature, and by custom,
which is a second nature; I say the effect is upon the will, a Castle too
strong for all the power of Hell to subdue, the will can be overruled by none
but him that made it; besides, this will is otherwise inclined. 1. By nature,
hence we are said to be stubborn, stiff-necked, to have sinews of Brass; he
knows nothing of the heart of man by nature, that knows not that it is
averse to God. Add to this, that custom has the force of a second nature; how
can you (says the Prophet) that are accustomed to do evil, do well? Nothing
but a powerful operation can subdue, such a mighty Prince as the will of man
is, nor such a mighty Tyrant as custom is. As to the point of resisting grace,
we say;

1. There is a common, praecedent exciting grace, this may be rejected, as the
Pharisees rejected the counsel of God against themselves, for their own
Salvation; thus all reprobates living under the preaching of the Gospel, resist
the grace of God; they have an enmity to the Spirit of God, Romans 8. 6. and
cannot be subject to it, hence it is, that God so often complains, Jer. 7. 14.
I speak to you rising up early, and lying down late, and you have not heard,
Psalm. 81. 14. I called you, and you have not answered; Christ told the
Inhabitants of Hier^salem, that he would have gathered them, but they would
not. And hence appears that it is no wonder that Arminians who will allow none
but common grace before conversion, should contend, that it may be finally
resisted, for there is no doubt but all common grace may be finally resisted.

2. But secondly, We say there is a working, drawing grace, which may be for a
while opposed, but cannot be finally resisted. By this the Soul is regenerate,
and born again, and that not after the will of the flesh, or the will of Man,
but the will of God. This we say cannot be finally resisted; the reasons are:

1. Because by this God gives a new heart, and a new spirit, and causes the
Soul to walk in his statutes, as you will find, Jer. 31. 18. chapter 36. v, 26. Now
grace cannot be resisted but from an old heart, and indeed it is a
contradiction, to say God may be resisted by a new heart. 2. Again if this
grace might finally be resisted, the whole business of man's Salvation, must
depend upon his own goed nature, and the power of his own will, and the
proximate cause of a man's repentance, faith, holiness, must be in himself.

Thirdly, We say there is a co-working Grace, by which (as Augustine says)
being first drawn we move, being acted, we act; this is that grace, which God
follows converted Souls with, that Grace, which follows the Child of God,
all the days of his life, without which he can do nothing, Job. 1^. 3. through
which strengthening and assisting him, he can do all things, through which he
lives, and moves in his spiritual sphere, this is resistible in part, through
that law in our members which rebelleth against the law of our mind, and brings
us into captivity to the law of sin. Hence is the spiritual combat; the
lustings of the flesh against the Spirit. Yet this is but a partial resistance,
not from the whole of the regenerate Soul, but from the flesh in it, which
lusts against the Spirit, from that part which is yet unregenerate. Nor shall
this resistance be victorious, but the same Soul that cries out. O wretched
man, who shall deliver me from this body of Death? shall in the next words say,
I thank God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus I have showed you how God in
the drawing of a Soul to Christ works powerfully.

But 2dly, As he works powerfully, so he works sweetly, powerfully, so that he
will be obeyed sweetly, so that he is freely obeyed, the conversion of a sinner
is an act of power, but not of violence; the mystery of this lies here:
Because the effect of grace is upon the will of man. Violence is then offered
to us, when we are compelled to actions contrary to our wills. The will is not
indeed capable of violence; the will may be changed, renewed, otherwise
inclined, but not forced, force can only be offered to the outward man, and why
those who contend for a power in man, so renew, change, alter, otherwise
incline his own will, should find a difficulty to allow God, as much power as
they claim for man, who is but a creature, I cannot understand: Thus far I have
showed you that a Soul must be drawn before it come to Christ. I have yet
further to show you that it must be drawn, or it will not run after Christ.

In this drawing indeed, there needs not such a power as in the former, the
reason is because now, to will is present with the Soul (as St. Paul says) it
only wants strength to perform. But an influence, a powerful influence there
must be. I believe (said he in the Gospel) Lord help my unbelief! Lord increase
our faith, said the Apostles! without me you can do nothing, says our Savior,
Joh. 15. 3. and again says he, as the branch cannot bring forth fruit except
it abide in the Vine, so no more can you except you abide in me, and 2 Cor. 3.
5. Our sufficiency is of God, we are not able of our selves so much as to think
any thing, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens
me; we are kept by the power of God to Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. The Apostle
speaking of the weak Brother, says, God is able to make him to stand. We stand
in grace, Romans 5. 3. Christ prays that Peter's faith might not fail while
Satan winnowed him like wheat. God gives both to will and to do, both of his
own good pleasure; but I shall not need heap up Scriptures in so plain a case.
I shall have advantage enough to prove it from Reason, concluding from
Scripture principles.

1. In the first place the Scripture speaks of the Children of God in this
life as in a state of imperfection. Not (says the Apostle) as though we were
perfect, or had already attained, Phil. 3. 12. To have no further need of
Grace, speaks a self-sufficiency, and a state of perfection, which is every
where in holy writ denied to man in this life, nothing needs be added to that
man who stands in no need of the power and assistance of Divine Grace, but the
holy Scripture every where speaks of the state of man while on this side
Heaven, as a state in which something is lacking to him, and of Heaven only, as
that state, wherein just Souls are made perfect: wherein that which is perfect
shall be come, and that which is in part shall be done away.

Secondly, As the Child of God before he comes to Christ is in Scripture
represented in a state of death, Ephesians. 2. 1. You has he quickened, Ephesians. 2. 1.
Who were dead in trespasses and sins; So when come to Christ, it represents him
in a state of weakness, To. 5. 6. When we were yet without strength, Christ
died for us. Not only life but strength, was a piece of the purchase of Christ
for us. Christ says as to his Sheep, John 10. 10. I am come that they might
have life, and that they may have it more abundantly. The Children of God are
all as Mephibosheth, the Sons of Jonathan, and so beloved of David, united to
Christ, and so beloved of God, and must eat bread at his Table, but they are
all of them (like him) lame of their Feet. Now those that are without strength
cannot run; running does not only require life as the principle of motion, but
strength also to assist the motion; what the Apostle says of their knowledge,
and prophesying they know in part, and prophecy in part, is as true concerning
all their other gracious habits and acts, they are all but in part, they are in
this like Nebuchadnezzars Image, part of Iron, and part of Clay. Adam indeed
had both his legs, a full strength, and could of himself (without any need of
the assistance of a Mediator) have done all that God required of him in that
state, as necessary to his Salvation, but he fell, and did not only for his
posterity, as well as for himself, lose his innocence, and righteousness, but
his spiritual strength, and ability also. His fall causing the need of a
Mediator, and a coming unto him that we might have life, caused also the need
of the influence of the Holy Spirit upon us, to quicken and innable us, to com^
unto him, and to walk with him, Hence there was a need of such a Covenant for
God to make, as that mentioned, Jer. 32. 40. I will make an everlasting
covenant with them, that I will not turn from them to do them good, but I will
put my fear into their hearts, that they shall never depart from me.

Thirdly, That body of death which remains in the best of Gods People, evinceth
a necessity of a continued powerful influence of grace to keep the Soul in any
motion, especially in any quickness of motion after God. That we have weights
that pressus down, a sin which easily besets us, a body of death as St. Paul
calls it, proper lufts, lustings of the flesh against the Spirit, is evident in
holy writ; we are indeed at last more than conquerours over this inteftine
adversary, but it is through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 7. For lust is so
connatural to us, the lustings of the flesh so strong in us, that our
regenerate part could never else maintain the Spiritual fight. Besides (as I
shall show you) as we have an impotency, so as we cannot so much as will the
thing which is good, so we have also a natural dullness and aversion to it, and
this also remains in part in the regenerate Soul, nor to be conquered without
the influence of the holy Spirit.

Lastly, The many hindrances which the Soul has from its Enemies without,
will also hinder it from running. James tells us, that every man is tempted
when he is drawn away by his own lust and enticed. This is a temptation from
within, a carne, this would be too hardfor a Soul in its own strength But it
has also Enemies from without, both from its grand adversary the Devil, and
also from the world. I must confess I have met with one, and never but one,
that would pretend to maintain a power in man to resist* the strongest
Temptations without any extraordinary assistance of the Spirit of grace, this
he would impose upon the world to believe, because that Joseph resisted the
temptation from his Mistress. That Joseph did resist that temptation, is plain
in Scripture; but that he did it, by no further assistance of Grace, than
Reuben had, who defiled his Fathers Bed, or Absalom who went in to his Fathers
Concubines, will want better proof than any I find in his discourse. I cannot
but think that if man (without the assistance of special grace) had a power (as
he boldly says) to resist the strongest temptations; we should have none
destroy themselves upon temptations to self murder, Atbeistical thoughts, and
Despair. It is an inaccountable thing why any should destroy themselves if this
Doctrine were true, especially if they be persons not before possessed of
atheistical principles, believing there is neither God, nor Devil, Heaven or
Hell; who can give an account (suppose it in the power of the best of men to
resist the strongest temptations without any special grace) how David (the man
according to Gods own heart) came to fall into the sin, first of Adultery, then
of Murder? To will was certainly present with him, (as well as with Paul) how
came he to want a strength to perform, but from Gods withdrawing his special
influence of grace from him, and leaving him to his own strength, which
(though, the strength of a renewed man) yet is too little to grapple with a
strong temptation. If even the best of men without the powerful influence of
special grace, can resist strong temptations, how came Peter to fall by denying
his Master by swearing and cursing that he did not know him? he manifested that
to will was present with him, by his telling our Savior that although all men
should forsake him, yet he would not. God was pleased to withold his powerful
influence, and to leave Peter to the ordinary strength even of a renewed man,
he was not able to grapple with the temptation. It is so far from being true,
that man has a power to resist the strongest temptations, that without Christ's
influence assisting, he has not a power to resist any temptation, whether from
the World, the Flesh, or the Devil. It is Musculus his observation upon John
15. 3, Our Savior does not fay without me you cannot do much, or all, but you
can do nothing. Nor if it be a strong temptation (such as the fear of life
etc.) can a Christian resist and overcome it without a more than ordinary
assistance of Divine Grace proportioned to the degree of temptation. But vain
man would be wise, though he be but as an Asses Colt he would be strong, though
in very deed he is weaker than water, he would be all to himself, though he be
nothing in himself.

5. But for a further proof of this Proposition concerning the necessity of
drawing, powerful influences of Divine Grace, both with reference to the Souls
first motions and coming to Christ, and further motions, in following Christ,
and running after him, I shall but appeal to the experience of all converted
Souls. If there be an heart before me which God has truly changed, any one
that is not only converted from one opinion to another, or one profession to
another, from Paganism to Christianity: but indeed converted from the love of
sin, and lusts, to the love of God, and the hatred of all sin, and an endeavor
to walk close with God, from an opinion and confidence of, and in any
righteousness in itself, wherein it can hope to stand before God* to a trusting
and relying on the Lord Jesus Christ and his Righteousness! I appeal to that
Soul, what was it, think thou, that inclined thy heart to accept of Jesus
Christ for thy Savior, to commit all the concerns of thy Soul unto him, and to
alter thy course of life from a principle of love to God, and obedience to his
will, more than another, who sat in the same Seat with thee, or lived in the
same House, and sat under the same Ministry, heard the same Sermons? how
came thou to be taken, thy Neighbor left? how came thy will to move
regularly, whiles thy Neighbor under the same circumstances still retained his
stiff neck, and iron sinews, and hard heart, and continued in the same lewd and
sinful courses? who made thee to differ? Did thou make thy self to differ?
How came it that he did not also make himself to differ? I know there is no
Soul, whose heart is truly changed, but will say, if almighty power had not
changed me, I had been as bad as any other. And so since thy Soul has been
changed, thou have met with Temptations to sin, thou have resisted them,
overcome them, triumphed over them; others (possibly some very good men) have
fallen by, and under them, who again has here made thee to differ? No pious
Soul that understands itself, but will here cry out Grace, Grace, powerful
distinguishing Grace. So as this Doctrine is consonant to the experience, and
judgment of the best of men, the other contrary to their experience and reason,
and therefore not like to prevail much in the world with any who either
understand what grace and holiness is, nor what the state of man is since the
fall. I could only wish that those who so glory in a power they have to come to
Christ, and to walk with him and run after him, and to encounter and overcome
the greatest Lions in the way, would let us see it, by their strict and close
walking with God, without putting such a sense upon the Commandments of God as
the Pharisees did of old, whom Christ confutes, Mat. 5. according to which they
may indeed be kept, by virtue of that common Grace of God, which he denies to
no man.

This is enough to have spoken Doctrinally upon this Subject.

Sermon XVIII.
Canticles 1. 4. Draw me, and We will run after thee.

I Proceed to the Application of the Proposition, which I largely opened, and
confirmed in my last exercise, viz. That no Soul comes to, or runs after
Christ, till it be first drawn; not only sweetly allured, but powerfully by God
inclined; I come now to apply it.

Use 1.
This in the first place may inform you of the Vanity both of the Arminian, and
Popish Tenets as to this great point. Arminians think it hard to be accounted
Enemies to the Grace of God, yea they will profess themselves to own special
Grace, but by the Grace of God, they understand no more than exciting Grace,
the Grace of God in the Gospel, which has appeared to all men, and by special
Grace they only mean that further Grace which is given to them, who have first
made a good use of the power, God has created in their wills. They say that
wherever the Gospel is preached, there goes alongwith it such a presence of the
Spirit, that if men will, they may without any further influence of Divine
Grace upon one more than another, repent and believe, etc.

That God when he calls them by his Gospel, gives to sinners, not only
necessary, but sufficient Grace, for faith and obedience, and seriously
commands them to believe and obey, under the promise of eternal life if they
do these things, and the contrary threatening of eternal death if they do not.
This calling they say is in Scripture called an Election unto Grace differing
from that unto gloty and Eternal Salvation. This calling is effected, and
perfected, by the Preaching of the Gospel, and the virtue of the Spirit
conjoined with it, and that with a gracious, and serious intention (on Gods
part) of Confess. Rem. cap. 17.
working faith in all those who are so called, whether they believe, and be
saved in the issue, or pertinaciously refuse faith, and eternal Salvation; for
they tell us there is an effectual calling so called, rather from the event,
than from the intention of God, properly so called, which calling obtains its
saving effect, not from any precise intention of God to save men, or because it
is so made by the secret and singular wisdom of God, that it effectually
agrees with the will of him that is called, or because in, and by it the will
of him who is called, is so determined to faith, by an irresistible, and an
almighty power (not less than that of Creation, or raising the dead) that it
cannot but believe, and obey, but because man does not put in a bar (which he
might do) to the call of God, nor resist Divine Grace. They tell us there is
another sufficient grace which is ineffectual, which through a failure on man's
part, has not a saving effect, but is unfruitful, and obtains not its due,
and desired effect, only through man's voluntary and vincible fault; Hence they
will tell you, that they attribute all to Grace, they make that the beginning,
the reason of the progress, and perfection of all good, so that without
preventing, exciting, following, and cooperating grace, the regenerate man
himself, can neither will, nor do any good, nor resist any temptation.

But they mean by Grace, nothing but the means of grace, and such an assistance
of the holy Spirit, as always attends it, and one as well as another has,
that sits under the Gospel; for that which we call special grace or
distinguishing grace (the drawing of the text) by which God powerfully
influenceth the Souls of some, not of others, and works faith and
dispositions to new obedience in them, they deny any such thing, and so
attribute to the will of man, all the change of the heart which we call
conversion or regeneration; hence they will tell you, that God never so works
in any Soul, but man may hinder, and finally resist his operations. This is
their opinion, which how contrary it is to truth, and how absurd it is, I have
showed you in my former discourse; what Bradwardin says of the Pelagians, may
be applied Bradwardin de causa Dei l. 1. cap. 38.
to these Teachers. They make God pauperculum Mercatorem, like a poor Pedlar,
that indeed carries about his Grace, and persuades men to receive it: But man
is made the buyer. Thus (says that grave Author) God should rather, gratiam
suam commutare ac vendere, quam dare; commute and sell his grace rather than
bestow, and give it. Doubtless the will of* God is the efficient cause of every
good thing that is done, the first mover in every good motion, the begetter and
preserver of it. Amantissima genitrix, and vivifica conservatrix (as Bradwardin
expresses it, l. 1. cap. 9. and maintains it from reason, and the
concessions even of Philosophers.) They will tell us they will grant this; That
God is the first cause, and mover as to all good, and that all this is of his
grace, but he moves us only, by external calling, and the common assistance of
his Spirit. They much delight in those terms, [aids, and assistances of his
Spirit] by which they plainly grant the will of man, the first cause, and make
the Spirit but an aiding assisting cause. Again how is the conversion of a
sinner from the Grace of God, whose Grace it seems extends no further before
conversion, to the person to be converted, than to the person that still
continues in its hardness, and inconverted state, so as it is not the Grace of
God that causes the Soul to differ, for as to that, there is no difference,
the same administration of grace, both to those whose hearts are changed, and
to those whose hearts are not changed. They tell us grace, and in the same
degree of administration, may be, yea is resisted, by many of those to whom it
is administered. This opinion must be faulty either,

1. By maintaining that God does not seriously, and efficaciously will the
salvation of any Soul, the contrary to which in words they affirm, and instead
of it say he seriously wills, the salvation of all Souls, to whom the Gospel
is Preached, which is very strange; for which of us seriously wills any
effect, and want no power to effect it, and the thing is not effected? that an
Almighty God should seriously will, what he from all eternity knew should never
be effected, and will that which he has a power to effect, yet never is, never
shall be effected, is a strange piece of Divinity, or sense: Or else it is
faulty,

2. By maintaining a greater power in the will of man in its laps^d state, than
in the will of God, which is against all reason, and can be owned by none but
such as deny God to be omnipotent; I have in opening and proving the Doctrine,
said enough to show you the vanity of this dream, I shall only add a word or
two 1. That this pretended willing of God, which they affirm to be. real, and
serious, and yet inefficacious, not producing the effect, is incomp^tent with
that infinite wisdom and knowledge which must be in him, who is the fountain of
all knowledge, and wisdom* Indeed man who has no knowledge of future
contingencies, may s^riously will, that such a person should be moved,
exhorted, and called upon to do such or such a thing, upon the doing of which
he should have an estate, and yet he may be left at perfect liberty, whether he
will do it or no, and so the reward may not be certain, but contingent to him.
But that God who from all Eternity, had a certain perfect knowledge who would,
and who would not believe, and could not know it, but because he had willed it,
(for the will of God only from Eternity could make that certain, which it
itself was but cont^ngent) I say that this God, should seriously will the
salvation of all those to whom the Gospel should be Preached, and their faith,
and holiness as a means in order unto it; when he from all eternity knew, that
only some of those to whom the Gospel should be Preached, would believe and
obey, and therefore knew it because he had eternally willed their faith, and
holiness, and salvation. I say this is a strange mystery, which it will be hard
for any thinking men of any degrees of sense or reason to understand.

2. Indeed if this Doctrine were true, no Soul could be saved, at least it were
possible that no Soul should be saved. Our Lord tells us, Joh 6. 44. That no
man comes unto him, but he whom the Father draws, and every one as he is
learned and taught of the Father, comes unto him. So then it is not of him
that wills, no^ of him that runs, but of the Lord who shows mercy, and
man that is born again, is not born again, of the will of the Flesh, nor of the
will of Man, of God. And it must be said of God, He has begotten us; not only
he has treated, and entreated us, and proposed salvation to us, but he has
begotten us, influencing, renewing, changing the heart of the Creature by his
power; not leaving us to the power of our wills, upon his word being p^eached
unto us, and the arguments of the Gospel used to us.

I appeal to any whose heart God has changed, whether they think their hearts,
had ever been turned to God if this had been all God had done for them, that
is, given them his Gospel, and by that invited them to turn unto him, nor can
it be supposed, that when an all-knowing, all wise God, from all Eternity, had
a certain infallible knowledge, who should be eternally saved, and of the
powers, and inclinations of all men's hearts, that he should leave the means in
order to this salvation so imperfectly willed, that it was left possible, that
by those means, none should ever be saved, and obtain what he certainly fore
knew, and therefore foreknow because he had willed it. But I have already
abundantly showed you the opposition of these notions to the plain revelations,
and reason of Scripture; It is said that God opened the heart of Lydia, Acts
16. 14. And certainly if man had such a power, being unregenerate, to repent
and believe, upon the proposal of the Gospel, and pressing the arguments of it,
supposing the common work of the Spirit always attending the Gospel, he would
much more have a power, being converted, to walk with God, to run after him,
for the Soul not changed, is not only impotent, but unwilling, and stubborn,
when converted it is willing, though ^e^k, yet not so weak as before
conversion; and according to all reason, the Soul, which is both stubborn, and
wholly weak, has more need of a power (foreign to its own power) which can be
no other than the power of God, then that Soul which is now made willing, and
only weak, and not so weak, as the inconverted Soul is, but this is enough to
show you the vanity of these principles, which yet obtain so much in the world.

2. The Papists say the same thing that the others speak, they will grant, That
man has no power to spiritual things without the assistance of Divine Grace,
he cannot believe (say they) the mysteries of Divine Salvation, this Bellarmine
proves from Joh. Bellarm. de gratia and lib. arbit. l. 6. cap. 2. Ibid c. 4. 5.
7.
6. 4. where he desires his Reader to observe, that it is not, no man does, but
no man can come to the Son, except the Father draws him. Nay he tells us;
that without the special grace of God to help him, man cannot love God, nor
prepare himself for Grace; nor will any thing which tends to Salvation, o^
Godliness. But then they tell us;

Ibid c. 9.
1. That this Grace of God, is not the sole agent. That the Soul of man (as to
the first grace) is no* merely p^ssive, but also active. God indeed calls,
and by special grace excites, and his grace aideth the will of man in
believing. He falls heavily upon Luther, Calvin, and Chemnitius, for saying
that the Soul in the reception of the first grace is merely passive. Pelagians,
and Arminians, ascribe to the will of Man, the whole power of closing with the
promise by faith, being once offered in the preaching of the Gospel; Papists
seem to divide Gods glory, betwixt him, and the will of man. God say they, must
send his Grace, but his Grace is not that alone which produces the effect for
the power of man's will (though infeebled by the Fall) is yet alive, and God
accommodating the Soul with the aid, and assistance of his Grace, the Soul
joins with it, and this they assign for the reason, why one heart is changed,
and not another (for God proposes his special grace to all; where by the way
you may take notice that they call special Grace, what we call common, because
administered to all) because free will works better in him that is converted,
than in the other; thus still Arminians, and they are agreed, that the fountain
of all Spiritual and Eternal Bellarm. ibid l. 6. c. 15. 3.
good is in man's self, that man makes himself to differ, and so has wherein to
glory, and that man is the first cause of any true Spiritual saving motion, and
so inequal virtues, are, as I said before, ascribed to Souls of the same kind,
under the same circumstances, and endowed with the same rational faculties.

Secondly, They also agree, That the operations of Divine Grace are no other,
than what may by the power of man's will be not only opposed, but finally
resisted, so as they shall produce no effect, and that drawing grace, is no
more then an entreating, and moral suasion, no such act of power as we would
have it to be; man comes to Christ alone, he is not drawn. Therein they agree
with the other.

3. Finally they say, the converted Soul, can of itself, do acts of
righteousness, obey the Commandments of God, and ordinarily needs, no
quickening, only assisting Grace. This is not to be allowed in the Latitude,
though there be something of truth in it, there is certainly a greater power,
and ability to spiritual good in the converted, then in the unregenerate, and
unconverted Soul, we dare not say the Soul converted moves not, acts not, but
as acted, and is also in that state merely passive, God has now infused a
principle of life into it, his Spirit dwells in it. But we say that even the
justified Soul still stands in need of a constant divine influx, and that in a
powerful degree; and Bellarmine himself grants that as the Soul has at all
times need of Gods assisting, exciting and protecting grace (for Christ says,
without me you can do nothing) so in some hard cases, and in the performance of
some hard and difficult duties, he has need of powerful influences of Grace.
So as the Jesuit himselfdurst not ascribe so much to the power of man's will,
though altered by grace, as those bold men amongst our selves, who will have
man have a power not only in ordinary cases, but to resist the strongest
temptations. It is a sign they neither ever knew what a strong temptation
meant: Nor what it is to resist and evercome them. But this is enough to show
you the vanity of these Doctrines.

Use 2.
Secondly, My discourse on this proposition will let all of us see the
exceeding solly, of resisting and vexing, or grieving, or quenching the holy
Spirit of God at any time in its operations or motions. you meet in Scripture
with all these terms expressing the opposition which vain man makes to the
holy Spirit of God, two of them, resisting, and vexing are applied to men
wicked and unregenerate, Acts 7. 51. You do always resist the Holy Ghost, and
thus you read of vexing the Spirit. The Apostle writes to the Thessalonians,
not to quench the Spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. and to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4. 30. not
to grieve it. As the man that is unregenerate may resist and vex; so those that
are renewed, may quench, and grieve the Holy Spirit. The Proposition which I
have opened to you, showing you the necessity, of our being drawn by this Holy
Spirit, if we ever come to Christ, or being come, if we hold on in our way, and
run after him, and walk with him, justifies those reproofs, and exhortations of
the Apostles evincing it to be the greatest folly imaginable, voluntarily to do
any such acts, by which this blessed Spirit should be resisted, vexed,
quenched, or grieved.

1. This may be done by persons whose hearts are not yet changed, they sit
under the ministration of the Gospel (which is the ministration of the Spirit,
and a glorious ministration) and besides the suasion of the potent arguments
contained in it, set on by all the art of the Ministers of Christ, gifted by
God for this end, and authorized by God to this work, there is hardly any of
them but find some inward impressions of the Holy Spirit, showing them a
necessity of believing and obeying the Gospel if they would ever obtain Eternal
life, this they cannot deny, but cannot (through the prevalency of their
passions above their reason) obtain of themselves, to hearken to these
admonitions, and yield obedience to these impressions, but after the prickings
of their lusts they must go, they cannot deny themselves in their pleasures, or
profits, (be they never such forbidden fruit;) yet on the other side possibly
their consciences bear so hard upon them, that they cannot quiet them, without
promising, that they will amend their ways, they will turn to God, they only
beg a little time, and cry out with the Sluggard, yet a little sleep, yet a
little slnmber, a little folding of the hands to sleep; like Tradesmen, that
know they must not spend all their time in their Beds, if they do, their
Families must starve, yet their Eyes are heavy, and they cry to those that call
them. It is not time to rise yet, an hour or two hence is time enough. So these
men sitting under the sound of the Gospel, will grant you, that if they live,
and die in such courses as at present they walk in, their Souls must perish to
all Eternity. But this they intend not, only it is not time yet to awake ou^ of
sle p, a year or two hence is time enough, let them have some l^t^s^^ction in
the pleasures of youth, they will repeat and believe before they die, and upon
this presumption, they at present (...) the holv Spirit of God from time to
time, and v^x i^ no^ only appearing in the Ministration of the Gospel, but in
its more common motions and impressions.

This is what I would shortly show you, the vanity of from the asserted truth
of this proposition. Two things I would say to these Souls. That whatsoever
humane action is to be done, naturally requires time and place, and that the
Earth is the place, and this life is the time for such actions, for (says
Solomon, E^^l. 9. 10. There is no work, no device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in
the Grave whither thou go^st, upon which he exhorts us: Whatsoever thy hand
f^^d^^h to do, do it with all thy might. It is only while we are upon the
Earth, that we are in the way with God whom we have made our adversary, and
whom we are concerned quickly to agree with, when we die we are delivered to
the Judge, the Spirit returns to God that gave it. When our Dust returns to
its Dust, Our comp s^um is then dissolved, and no action can be the action of
the whole man. When our bodies come to be covered with Earth, our bodies move,
and act no more. In the Grave, none repents, believes, prays, or praises,
or any way remembers God. Thou say, to morrow, or within a few years I will
amend, I will repent; how know thou in what capacity thou shall then be,
what a day, or a month, or a year will as to thee bring forth? The present time
alone is thine, and but a little of that neither, that which (as Gerard speaks)
dicendo praeterit, currendo praeterlabitur, is gone while thou speak of it,
slipped away while thou think of it. What talkest thou of to morrow, of the
next week, month, year, who have not an inch of time at thy command, nor can
command thy Sun to go back, or to stand still for an hour? If James instruct us
not to say, To morrow we will go to such a Fair or Market, without adding, If
God will; surely vain man should not say at such a time, I will repent, I will
believe, I will turn to God, without saying, If God will let me live to such a
time; and poor creature, what if God will not! What if he will say unto thee,
Thou dilatory fool! This night thy Soul shall be taken from thee, this year,
this month thou shall die. O the most unrea sonable vanity of men in venturing
Eternity upon such uncertain contingencies! yet this is the usual delusion.
Augustine confesses, that his foot was once in this snare; he resisted motions
for his turning to God, with cras, cras, to morrow, to morrow, I will do it,
till at length through the power of grace he brake the snare, crying out, Cras
Domine! cur non hodie? to morrow Lord, and why to morrow? why not to day? This
is but the first thing I would say to these procrastinating Souls, and not that
which properly resulteth from my former Discourse.

2. But though there be an obvious contingency in that, yet we may admit that
thou shall live unto the time thou have prefixed to thy self for thy coming,
and returning unto God, supposing yet that no man comes to the Son, unless the
Father draws, how vain are the promises that thou make to thy self? Admit
thou do live to that time, and that before that time thy heart shall not be
more inamoured upon thy lusts, and hardened in thy sinful courses, but that
then thou shall have as good and fair convictions as now thou have: Yet art
thou sure that God will then draw thee? Art thou sure thou shall then be drawn
by the Preaching of the Gospel? Admit that, Art thou sure of the motions,
impressions, and breathings of the holy Spirit of God? The Preaching of the
Gospel bears the same proportion to the healing of the Soul, that the Pool of
Bethesda bare to the healing of bodily infirmities. Men might lie there many
years; the Gospel tells you of one that lay 36 years, yet was not healed; the
Angel indeed came often down and stirred the waters, but none thrust him in.
There is an healing virtue in the Gospel; it is the word of Reconciliation, the
word of the Kingdom. The Spirit of the Lord attends the ministration of it, it
stirs the Pool; but admit this, if there be none to help the poor Soul that
is impotent into it, it is not healed. What know thou whether the holy
Spirit which breaths where it lists, will breathe upon thee at thy leisure?
God said of the Old World, My Spirit shall not always strive with man. If it
be not perfectly in thy own power to turn to God when thou please, it is the
most unaccountable folly imaginable, for any to resist the holy Spirit, and to
vex it; yet promising himself the operations and effects of it, when he will be
pleased to call for, and to admit them.

But I hear some saying, Do not you determine that the grace of God cannot be
resisted, what need your exhortations then not to resist it?

1. I have told you that the grace of God may be opposed and resisted, but that
Grace by which the heart is changed, is powerful, and finally cannot be
resisted; but certainly the common grace of God (which the Apostle says has
appeared to all men) may be opposed and resisted, and finally rejected, and is
so by the most of those that sit under it; and certain it is, that men's
opposing and resisting of that common grace, may provoke him to deny special
grace to the Soul that does it, and will justify God in the denial of it. For
we have no reason to complain of God's not doing what was truly and purely his
part, whiles we have not done what is our part, and in our power. Now, though
the change of the heart be an act of Divine Power, yet acts of moral
Discipline, and the avoiding gross and scandalous sins, and the performance of
some religious Duties, which God has prescribed as means (though not in
themselves sufficient and effectual) are things within our power, with the
assistance only of that common grace, which God denies to none to whom he does
not deny the Gospel: And in these the holy Spirit may be opposed, and finally
resisted, though he shall not be finally resisted by any Soul that is ordained
to life and eternal Salvation; and it is certainly the duty, and wisdom of
every Soul, to take heed of this Resisting, this Vexing the holy Spirit,
because, as I said before, God shall for ever be justified in the withholding
his gracious acts of power, until man has done what is in his power. To which
I think I may add, that in the day of Judgment, there will be wanting a
President so much as of one Soul, who has followed the drawings of his Gospel,
so far as he had power; to whom God has denied the more powerful drawings of
his Spirit, making a change in the Soul, and subduing it to the obedience of
Faith; and also because God will not have his Spirit always strive with man,
because he is but flesh.

2. But secondly, Even the People of God also fall under this reproof, though
not for such vexings, and resistings of the Spirit, as natural, and
unregenerate men are guilty of, yet for Quenching the Spirit in its motions,
and resistances of it in his operations, whence the Apostle saw need of those
Precepts, 1 These. 5. 19. and Ephesians. 5. 30. We are prone, 1. To Quench the
Spirit in its motions to duty, and to put them off. 2. And to promise our
selves, if we fall, we shall rise again.

When we find some motions to duty, which we have reason to conclude to be from
the holy Spirit dwelling in us, and sometimes from some more than ordinary
suggestions to, and impressions made upon us, we are too ready to put them off
to some other time, promising to our selves that we then will obey them, and
hearken to them, not considering, that as our first coming to Christ depends
upon the Father's drawing; so our running after him depends upon Christ's, and
his Spirit's drawing. Now, though the Lord never forsakes the Soul that is
his, as to necessary grace; yet he often deserts it as to gradual
manifestations, in strengthening, and quickening influences. See that famous
instance, Cant. 2. The Lord called at the door of his Spouse, saying, Open my
Love, my Dove, my Undefiled. The Spouse grieveth her Beloved's Spirit; she
would open in the morning, when she should have had her fill of sleep; when she
should be up and dressed, she had put off her Coat, and how should she put it on?
she had washed her feet, and how should she defile them? At length v. 5. She
rose to open to her Beloved, but he had withdrawn himself, and was gone, -- She
sought him, but she could not find him; she called him, but he gave her no
answer. It is the case of many good and pious Soul. The holy Spirit moves it to
some evident piece of spiritual duty; (for I am not speaking for extravagant
impulses to things no where prescribed, or directed in the Word of God) the
Soul is under some spiritual Torpor, and listlesness; it agrees the thing ought
to be done, and disputes nothing but the necessity of doing it presently, it
neglects it; it may be when it would open to its Beloved, it finds that he
has withdrawn himself, and is gone. It seeks him, but it cannot find him.

2. Secondly, We are as prone also vainly to think within our selves, If we
sin, we will repent, if we fall, we will rise. Or, though we run into
temptation, yet we will not fall by it. All this while forgetting, that
although we live, yet it is not we, but Christ lives in us, and we shall stand
in need of drawing grace to run after God. It is true, that if the Believer
sins, he has an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the Righteous.
If he falls, he shall rise. God will succor him when he is tempted; but all
this proceeds from an influence foreign to him. God is able to make him to
stand, and faithful, so as he shall stand. But yet his own endeavors are
necessary to his standing, and Divine Grace is necessary (if he be lapsed) to
his recovery; and though he may know, if he knows that he is Elected, and
effectually called, and justified, that he shall not perish for ever; yet this
can by no means encourage his presumptuous sinning; for these two Reasons: 1.
Because while he lies under the guilt of sin not repented of, he can have no
knowledge of his Election, or Effectual Calling, but has reason to suspect he
has all this while mistaken the case and state of his own Soul. 2. Because he
may be saved as through fire, and go with an aching conscience even to the gate
of the City of God. Now it is impossible, that in the Judgment of any Soul
under the conduct and command of reason, the pleasure of sin should appear
compensative of the rack of Conscience, and the feeling the terrors of God
upon the Soul but for a few days. If indeed man having fallen from his
integrity, had a power to rise again at pleasure by the help alone of his own
hands, he might have from hence a motive to indulge his corruptions; but if he
has no such power, but what he derives from drawing grace, certainly it is the
vainest thing imaginable for man to sin upon a presumption, of what is not in
his power; and though he be certain of it in the issue, yet he may want it so
long, as may leave him little pleasure of his sinning, little fruit of those
things for which he has been so long ashamed.

Use 3.
Thirdly, From this representation of the state, the present state of Man; We
may observe the difference betwixt our present state, and the state of our
Pro-parent Adam in the state of Innocence. It is a point not half enough
thought of, and the want of a due consideration of it, causes so many
swellings against, and blasphemings of the Truth of God in this point. They
will not understand, that although God made Man upright, and in Honor, yet he
abode not in Honor, but by seeking out inventions, became like unto the Beast
that perishes. The state of Man at first was such,

1. That he needed not have come to Christ for life; he had his li^e in his
hands. There needed no Savior before we were lost, no Mediator or Intercessor,
before man had offended, and consequently, no applications of our Souls unto
him for life and Salvation, and this by the way may show you the weakness of
their reply, who when they are told, that it is no more injustice with God to
call to us for those exercises of Grace in order to our salvation, which in our
lapsed state we have no power to perform, than it is in man to call to him, to
whom he has lent a great sum, which he by his debauchery has spent, to pay
him what he owes him, and to lay him in Prison (though he has nothing to pay)
for God in creation gave unto man a power to do whatsoever in that state was
necessary to his Salvation. I say when they are told this, they usually tell
us, That Adam never had a power to repent and believe in Christ; Nor was
repentance or faith in Christ necessary in that state wherein Adam was created,
nor would it ever have been necessary either to him, or us, had he stood in
that estate, God gave unto Adam and to us in him, whatsoever was necessary in
that state, and if our Fore-fafather, and we (who dyed in him, and fell with
him) have made a Mediator necessary, and repentance, and faith in the Mediator
necessary, and we have no power to these acts, nor ever had, no not in Adam,
how yet is God unrighteous in requiring those acts of us, though we have no
power to perform them?

Secondly, As in that state, there was no need of a Christ, of a Savior, a
Redeemer, nor consequently of a being drawn, or a coming to him: So neither was
there need of any such potent drawing in order to our running after him. Adam
had a perfect power connatural to him, to walk with God in the obedience of his
will. It was the fall that lamed us in our feet, and introduced this necessity
of Christ's drawings in order to our running. Let us in a word or two take a
view of man now in this, that he stands in need of these divine drawings.

1. He now stands in need of a Mediator, and there is no name given under
Heaven by which any Soul can be saved, but only the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, no Salvation by any other.

2. He stands in need of drawing to this Mediator, not only of a Child to be
born a Son again, a Savior prepared, but of the work of the Father, and the
holy Spirit to draw us to, and after this Mediator.

1. Drawing (as I have showed you) imports a fair treating, and entreating, and
alluring Souls to what is their great and only happiness, this speaks man, 1.
In a state of aversion from God and his only felicity. Man's supreme happiness
lies in his union, and communion with God, as the supreme and greatest good;
yet he must be drawn to it, drawn with the cords of a man, allured by man's
Rhetoric, persuaded to it by man's Logic, and ratiocination; we as the
Ambassadors of Christ, must beseech and entreat men to be happy in being
reconciled to God, and thus much is granted to us by those who make themeanest,
and most jejune interpretation of this drawing.

2. Drawing (secondly) signifies an act of power. This speaks us not only
averse, but impotent and weak without strength. We are like Lot in Sodom;
though we daily hear that the wicked shall be turned into Hell, with all those
that forget God, though the Lord uses all entreaties with his poor Creatures,
and the love of God be displayed before us in the fullest measure, yet till the
Lord does by us (as the Angel did by Lot) lay hold upon us, and pull us out of
our sinful state, we move not a jot. Yea verily man in his best estate, man
regenerate, and brought home to God, must also be drawn, or he will not run, he
must be kept by the power of God through faith to Salvation, or he will never
come into Heaven; when to will is present with us, we have no strength to
perform. The Spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. O miserable men that we
are; who shall deliver us from our bodies of death. I need say no more, it
being what is justified by the experience of the best of men, and their prayers
directed to God accordingly.

Sermon XIX.
Cant. 1. 4. Draw me, and we will run after thee.

I Have formerly discoursed from this Text this Proposition, That the Soul till
drawn, does not run after Christ. I am in the application of that discourse,
and that by way of Instruction.

Use 4.
This may inform us in the true nature of special saving Grace. It is a drawing
to, and after Christ. Grace in its general notion signifies nothing but free
love and favor. Let me find grace, or I have found grace, signifies no more in
Scripture, than though I have no worth, no merit, yet show me love and favor;
when applied to God, it signifies no more in the general notion, whether this
love be showed in the collation of the good things which concern this life, or
those which concern that life which is to come, they are all grace in a large
sense, because emanations of divine love, not merited by Creatures. But words
taking their significancy more from use than etymology, Grace in a more strict
and usual notion has been taken to signify, The emanations of Divine love
concerning the Souls, and Eternal Salvation of the Children of men, which is
called the Grace of God which brings Salvation. Now these divine emanations
having different effects, this Grace of God is also distinguished into Common
and special, ineffectual, and effectual; under the notion of common grace, we
comprehend all those effluxes of divine goodness, by which God shows his
kindness to the Souls of men in order to their Salvation, whether they prove
effective of their Salvation, yea or no; under this head, some will bring both
Election and Redemption, owning no other Election, than the eternal counsel of
God to save such as should believe, so denying all eternal Election of persons,
and making Christ's intention in dying to extend to all, either equally, or at
least so far as to put all in a possibility of Salvation, if their own perverse
wills do not hinder. The Publication, and proposal of the Gospel, with the
common influences of the Spirit attending the preaching of it, certainly come
under this notion, for though all hear not that joyful sound, yet it is granted
on all hands, that of those that do hear it, to some it is the savor of life
unto life, to others the savor of death unto death. And this is all the grace
which some will acknowledge, antecedent to the pardon of sins, and
regeneration. But we affirm a further special grace than this is, which we call
special, because it is not equally administered to all, no not to all that hear
the Gospel, saving, because it brings salvation, not only in a general tender,
and offer unto all, but to that particular Soul, upon whom it shines, and so
is effectual, because effective of the blessed end to which it is levelled, and
aimed, and does not evaporate in a mere tender, and proposal of the will of
God. This is that which we conceive expressed here, and in John 6. 44. under
the notion of drawing. Which term is fully expressive of the Nature of it, as
it signifies both, 1. An act of power. 2. An act of sweetness and love.

1. An act of power. The converted Soul is made willing in the day of the Lords
power, Psalm. 110. 3, 4. The holy Scripture describes us in our natural state,
as dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. Enemies to God, Col. 1. 21. and
alienated from the life of God. Having hearts, harder then rocks, then nether
milstones, iron sinews, stiff necks. Let those that think, a mere entreaty of a
Soul to come to Christ, that it might have life, a mere moral suasion, or
persuading a Soul to Spiritual duty, will change it, and renew it, and beget in
it spiritual habits, try what their Rhetoric will do, to melt a rock, or to
raise a dead body. If the disadvantage of an ill education, and a customary
course of debauchery, added to our vitiated nature, has such a power to beget
in us a moral impotency, that the drunkard, and the unclean person cannot
obtain of himself, notwithstanding the advantage of his own ratiocination, and
the potent arguments drawn from the health of his body, the upholding his
reputation amongst men, the preservation of his estate, the pleasing of his
sober friends, to turn from an Alehouse, and Tavern, and from the house of the
strange Woman, no not tho his own experience, and the daily experience of
others, verifieth these arguments; and the acts are but such, as by the force
of reason (supposing the common grace of God denied to none) may be declined.
How shall we ever think, that a man has a natural power to the most sublime
and spiritual acts, and that the power of God must not be put forth upon a
Soul, causing it to love God, and to hate sin, and to believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ. Two things evince this grace to be an act of divine power.

1. The invisibility of Christ and his excellencies. 2. The natural alienation
of our Souls from him; If indeed our need of Christ, or the suitableness which
is in him to the lapsed state of Souls, were either evident to sense, or
demonstrable to reason, or the excellencies of Christ were demonstrable to
either; something might be said for the sufficiency of rational arguments to
persuade the Soul to Christ, yet not enough in that case, for the sensibility
of the goodness of temperance, and sobriety and chastity, their suitableness to
the frail state of our bodies, ready to be destroyed by debaucheries opposite
to these virtuous habits, we see by experience, are not enough to keep Souls
within the circle and bounds of morality. But the other things being neither
subject to the demonstration of sense or reason, it is most irrational to plead
for a power in the will of man to choose them. The sweetness of what the lapsed
Soul in its state of alienation from God tastes in sensible satisfactions, is
a thing evident to sense, and it is most absurd to imagine, that a Soul should
ever call these things bitter, till it be convinced of a more excellent good,
and the incompetency of its fruition both of the one and of the other. Could it
be any thing less than a powerful act of Divine Grace, that could make Moses
willing, to refuse the pleasures of Pharaohs Court, and the honor of being
called his Son, and to choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, counting the reproach of Christ, greater riches then the Treasures of
Egypt? O study, and adore the power of faving and effectual Divine Grace. Do
but consider your own weakness, and the mighty power of Satan in tempting, and
you will be convinced, that there had need be a divine power exerted, in the
collation of saving Grace.

2. But yet as it is mighty and powerful, so it is also sweet; we are drawn to
Christ, but it is with the cords of a man, the divine power put forth, has the
will for the object, which is not forced, but melted, renewed, changed by the
influence of the mighty God upon it. Indeed the will is not capable of
violence, but yet it is capable of a divine influence sweetly renewing, and
changing it, the Soul is made willing, and then it wills, and chooses, desires,
delights in the things which are good, and acceptable in the sight of God.
Grace does not merely exhibit, and propose Christ as a lovely, and beautiful
object, altogether desires, it does not only furnish the Gospel, and fill the
mouths of Ministers with suasive arguments, but it fills the Soul, the inward
man with a powerful divine influence, which quite renews and changes it, and
alters the bias and inclination of it. This is the nature of saving grace,
effectual grace, thus it differs from that Grace of God which may shine upon
reprobates, which they may finally resist, and abide still in darkness.

Use 5.
This notion in the next place wonderfully commends the love of God, to those
Souls that are made partakers of this Grace of God that brings Salvation,
that makes a Soul meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light. The great
boast which those who maintain the contrary systeme of Doctrine to what I have
maintained, make, is, that their Doctrine does vastly more commend the love of
God to mankind. Let us try that a little; According to their Notion of the
Grace of God, it is no more, than might have been consistent with the Eternal
perdition of all mankind; for they say God has determined no particular person
unto eternal life, Christ has laid down a price no more for the Soul that is
saved, than for those that perish. In the Acts of his Providence he does no
more for one than another. Both have the Gospel, both have the common
assistances of the Spirit, and one has no more than another, both have Souls
of the same species, endued with the same faculties, both might have resisted
the Grace of God, and that finally. Now do not these mightily magnify Grace,
who will allow no more of it then what is consistent with the eternal
destruction of all men? yet neither are they consistent to themselves in their
doctrine of Grace, so far as they will allow any thing to it, they pretend the
advancement of the love of God, by their conditional Election, uncertain
Covenant, universal Redemption, common Grace, yet they cannot deny, but that
the far greater part of the world has not so much as the means of grace, the
sound of the Gospel is not in their Ears; and how little of it is there in
Popish Countries, where the People have not the Bible in their own language,
and hear stories, and tales out of the Legends instead of the Gospel? nay, in
Protestant Countries how many places are there, where People have Stones
instead of Bread, Scorpions instead of Fishes, where they from the Pulpit hear
little of Christ, or the great motives of the Gospel to faith and holiness? so
as to make out their notion of their Doctrines, commending the love of God;
they must find out a way to Christ and Salvation, for more than three parts of
the world, without Christ, and that an ordinary way too, (or but few of them
will be saved) yet in this extraordinary, that their Salvation must be without
the Gospel, and the potent motives and arguments of it, the Preaching of it,
and the ordinary concurrence of the Holy Spirit with it. The opinion of Divine^
on the other side is this; That God out of the Mass of Mankind (whether
considered as created, or to be created, they are not so universally agreed)
did choose a certain number of Persons great in itself, but small in comparison
of the whole number of mankind, as to whom he willed a Kingdom of life and
glory: and also chose them and ordained them to obtain this life, by having
Redemption through the Blood of Christ, the forgiveness of sins, and by being
holy and unblameable before him, and to this end sent his Son to die for them,
and gives to the most of them, whom he thus ordained to life, and to faith, and
holiness, as the means of it, his Gospel, and the Ministry of it, by which he
entreats all those to whom it is Preached, to be reconciled to God; but for
those whom he has ordained to life, he powerfully and effectually works in
them by the Spirit of his Grace, by which their hearts (though they may for a
time oppose and resist) yet are subdued to the obedience of faith, and drawn
unto Christ, and by which also being come to Christ, they are drawn after him,
being by his power through faith preserved to Salvation. Now whether is the
Love of God more seen to mankind in the certain Salvation of many, (though
comparatively but few) and ordering of causes accordingly: Or in such an
ordering of causes, as it was possible notwithstanding any thing God had done
for man, all might have perished: And whether is God more glorified by our
predication of him, as one, who though from all eternity he knew who would
believe and live holily, and who would not; yet left it possible that all men
should believe if they would. Or by the predication of him, as one who knowing
all things, because he willed them (so being the first cause of all good in the
creature) ordered all things according to the good pleasure of his own will. In
the mean time this Drawing Grace which we maintain, infinitely commends the
Love of God to those who are thus drawn, if we consider

1. The infinite distance of God from the creature: He is a self-sufficiency to
himself, and in order to his happiness needed not the company of any creatures:
Now if there were no more in drawing grace than some would make, drawing with
the Cords of a Man, entreating and persuading Souls to be reconciled to God,
his love might be just matter of admiration and astonishment: Who are we that
God should treat us, and send Ambassadors to entreat us to be reconciled unto
God? If the Lord had only sent to us to give us warning of a wrath to come, and
timely notice to flee from it, leaving us merely to our own wills, whether we
would hear, or forbear, accept, or refuse. This had been love above the usual
mercy of men, who do not usually spend much time in treating, and entreating
those enemies whom they can easily crush, and tread under foot. Yet had God
done no more for our Souls, though in this he had showed great love, yet we
through the natural stubborness, and perverseness of our hearts, had been
undone for ever. How many are in a high Road to ruin and eternal destruction,
whom God has been thus entreating, and beseeching many years?

2. But now that the Lord should not only do this, but put forth an act of
power, though not saving them against their wills, yet making them willing to
be saved, and in order to it not verbally, but really willing to receive Christ
as tendered to them in the Gospel, so as not only to be saved by him, but to
submit to those Laws and Rules, in the observance of which they shall obtain
Salvation; and not only so, but that God should assist the Soul in the
performance of these acts; not only giving it to will, but to do also. This
certainly must transcendently commend the love and goodness of God to those
Souls that have experienced such grace. That God does not so much for all,
speaks indeed severity to them, but that he does it for any, speaks his
unspeakable goodness and good will to their Souls. I say, that he does not this
for all, speaks to them severity, but yet justice, and that not only in regard
of that stock of sufficient grace, wherewith our Pro-parent was entrusted,
which being lost, God is under no obligation to restore: but also in regard
that God never denies his special Grace, until the Soul has abused his common
Grace.

3. Nay lastly, That the Lord should take care of our Souls after that we are
once brought to Christ, that he should put his fear into our hearts, to keep us
from departing from him, and never depart from us to do us good, that drawing
Grace should follow us all the days of our life. This certainly is the height
of Divine Love, more than this God could not have done for any Soul; those for
whom he has done this, must be highly beloved. What now is left for such a
Soul to do, but to strive after perfection? to live in a constant eying this
All-sufficient God, this Fountain of all Fullness, and living in dependence upon
him: To live in a continual thanksgiving to, and love for that God who has
dealt thus graciously with it, and in a daily care not to grieve that holy
Spirit by which it was first drawn to Christ, and by which it is sealed to the
day of Redemption, and guided and kept, that it does not slip fatally. O love
you the Lord all ye his Saints! Let drawing Grace find no renitency, no
resistance from any of your Souls. God has done for you more than others; what
will you do for God? nay, what can you do for that God, who has not only
called, but plucked you out of the horrible Pit? Take the Cup of Salvation, and
be for ever praising the Lord.

Use 6.
Again, we may from hence learn, though not the proximate, yet a true and
remoter cause why the Gospel is preached to many so ineffectually. Our Savior
tells us, Many are called, but few are chosen Isaiah cried out, Who has
believed our report? to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? Paul in his
Preaching was to some, the savor of life unto life; to others, the savor of
death unto death. When Christ himself Preached some believed, others were
hardened. Whence so great a difference, when the Word was the same, the
Preachers the same, both to those that believed, and to those who were
hardened: They had all reasonable Souls; those Souls had all the same powers,
the same faculties; I mean, powers and faculties that had the same virtues. We
see the same in the experience of every day. Indeed there may be some
Preaching, that may bear no better proportion, to the instruction of the
ignorant, or the conviction of a sinner, and turning him from his sinful
courses, than the Clay and Spittle had to cure the blind man's eyes, from which
no such effect could have flowed, but by a miracle; but where there is the same
Scriptural, spiritual, lively, powerful Preaching, we see this effect. Two sit
in the same seat, one's heart is changed, the other's is not; one goes on in
his lewd courses, and perishes for ever, the other is converted, his heart
changed; whence is this difference? Is it from him that wills, or him that
runs (think you) or from him that calls? from him that shows mercy
because, and on whom he will show mercy? We will grant that the one does not
make that use of God's common Grace which he might, and therefore the Lord
righteously withholds his special Grace. But could not the Lord, if he
pleased, influence the one Soul as well as the other, to make a good use of his
common Grace? Has God (think we) no influence upon men, inclining their hearts
to make a due use of his common Grace? When men have said what they can, the
conversion of every Soul is the effect of the Lord's drawing; and when the Lord
does not draw, the Soul does not, cannot, come or run. The natural man has
many things which draw him another way, and God is not pleased to put forth his
power upon the Soul. Indeed properly nothing but our own lusts draw us another
way, but our natural passions are inflamed several ways. You have an instance
of the principal of them in the Parable of the Marriage Feast which the King
made for his Son, recorded by Luke, c. 14. 18, 19, 20. and Matthew. 22. v. 5,
etc. A certain great man (Matthew calls him a King) made a great Supper,
(Matthew calls it a Marriage for his Son) he bade many, says Luke; he sent
forth his Servants to call them that were bidden to the Wedding, says Matthew.
They would not come, (says Matthew) They all with one consent began (says
Luke) to make excuse. They were invited by potent Arguments; I have prepared my
Dinner, my Oxen, and my Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready, come you
to the Marriage, Matthew. 22. 4. In general it is said, They would not come; they
made light of it; they made excuse? What drew them another way. Lu. 14. 18. The
first said, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must go and see it, I pray
thee have me excused? And another said, I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I
go to prove them. And another said I have married a Wife, and therefore I
cannot come; who is this King? Even the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords; who
is his Son but the Lord Jesus Christ? Of whom he said; This is my Beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased. What are the fatlings killed, how are all things
ready? the Lord Jesus Christ has dyed, there is in his blood a sufficiency of
merit. The Gospel is Preached, the Ministers of Christ are sent out to offer
reconciliation with God, union with Christ to all those to whom the Gospel is
Preached; a great part of them will not come, they make light of the tender of
Grace and Salvation, what is the matter that they find any difficulty to make
have to their own happiness? The three great causes are mentioned, and they
fall under these three heads. 1. Worldly enjoyments. 2. Worldly employments. 3.
Sensual and sensible satisfactions; these have all a power upon man by reason
of that lust which is in them, either the lust of the Eye, or the lust of the
flesh, or the pride of life.

1. Wordly enjoyments hinder some. The first said, I have bought a Farm, I must
go and see it; The young man, Mat. 19. seems to have a good mind to follow
Christ. Christ bids him first go and sell all that he had, and he should have
riches in Heaven. The Text says, he went away sorrowful, for he had great
possessions, Mat 19. 22. Our Savior upon it says to his Disciples, Verily I
say unto you, a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. It is
easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, then for a rich Man to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven Another Evangelist expounds this by one that
trusts in his riches. The desire of getting riches, and the overmuch
complacency, and delight of the Soul in them, together with men's valuing
themselves upon them, are three great drawers of the Soul from Christ. The
first as it over-ruleth the Soul to an evil covetousness, oppression, and
unjust methods and measures of gain, and so brings him into the herd of those
that shall never come into Heaven. The Second as it melts the Soul into
sensuality, and hinders those acts of Self-denial, and Mortification, without
which a man cannot be Christ's Disciple, nor ever come into Heaven. The 3d, As
it swells the Soul with pride; and lifts it above religious Duties, which it
judges too mean for it, suited to poor people, but not to Persons of its
degree and quality in the world.

2. Worldly Employments hinder others. Alas! That Men and Women should be too
busy to attend the making their calling and election sure, but so it is. The
second said, I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I must go and prove them.
Some Men and Women are not at leisure to be saved as they are not at leisure to
pray, that the thoughts of their heart might be forgiven them, or to hear that
their Souls might live. Licitis perimus. As many perish by the ill uses of
lawful things, as by reaching their hands to absolutely forbidden fruit; more
die by meat then by poison. Though the Drunkard cannot keep the narrow path
that leads to Eternal life, yet what hinders, but that a sober Person should?
what more lawful then to buy five yoke of Oxen, and to try, and use them, when
we have them? It is the command of God, that In the sweat of our Face we should
eat our Bread. Ah! But if the Cart draws to the Market, when God calls to the
Solemn Assemblies of his People, the five yoke of Oxen prove of fatal
consequence. O cupide negotiator (says De-Ponte) when a man has so much
business about his body, that he has no leisure to attend the business of his
Soul, he is overbusy, and makes his (...) when his Trading is so much in the
world, as is inconsistent with having his (...) his conversation in Heaven,
then much business makes him mad, and his time is but (like Domitians) spent in
catching of flies, instead of attending the concerns of the Roman Empire, the
concerns I mean of his immortal Soul; I would have the active men of the world
sometimes think whether they have not too much business to manage, and go to
Heaven too. This made our holy Mr. Palmer bless God who had called him to the
work of the Ministry which drew men's minds toward God, whereas most other
employments divert the Soul from God.

3. Sensual and sensible satisfactions, are another kind of things which
potently seduce and draw off the Soul from God. Another said, I have married a
Wise, and cannot come. Never yet any mist of Heaven, but had some impediments
or other; the others prayed to be excused, this guest says, I cannot come,
Riches draw hard, so do worldly business and employments; but ah! Pleasures,
pleasures are the bane of Souls, like the silly Be, they are drowned in their
own Honey. Gods voice grates upon the Ears accustomed to Music, and all manner
of delightful sounds. A bleeding crucified Christ is a most ungrateful object
to the wanton Eye that has been used only to behold pleasant things. Yet it is
to be observed that he does not say, I am going to an Harlot but I have married
a Wife, and cannot come. Still, Licitis perimus. These are those potent
Seducers, which suiting with the strong and natural bias, and inclinations of
our hearts draw off from Christ. Man is too weak to withstand the force of
them, God does not please upon every Soul to whom the Gospel is Preached, to
put forth his power. Hence Souls of the same species, under the same means, and
assistances, yet incline and move diversely. There is, there can be, nothing in
man that makes him in practice to differ from his Neighbor. Let not therefore
he who is thus drawn, glory, for it is God who has drawn him. Nor let any
murmur on the behalf of those who are not thus drawn. Grace is the Lords own,
he may do with it what he pleases; Augustine says well concerning Grace, the
cause why it is given to one, not to another, may be hidden and secret, but
unjust it cannot be. In the mean time (as I said before) I believe at the great
day there will be not be found so much as one Soul that shall be able to accuse
God for the denial of this Grace, this powerful, and effectual Grace, who has
not voluntarily, resisted, and vexed the holy Spirit of God in the use of that
common Grace, for the want of which he has no reason to complain; and shall
not the Lord be justified in refusing to draw those, who have first suffered a
base lust (which was in their power to have resisted) to draw them away from
him? Shall not this powerful Grace be righteously denied to them, who have
suffered themselves by a revel to be drawn from a Sermon?

2. Further yet we may from hence have an account of those many startings
aside, from God of which his own People are guilty, and the inequality of
gracious motions, and actions. Some seem to us to stand still, others to move
very slowly, others with great heaviness, and difficulty. All this difference
depends upon the inequal distributions of Divine Grace, for although when this
Oil is once in the Cruise, it shall not fail from it, till Grace shall be
swallowed up in glory, but so much influence of Grace shall be continued as to
justify the Lord in his promise, that he will never depart from the Soul to do
it good, and he will put his fear into the heart, that it shall never depart
from him; and the Soul shall be preserved by the power of God through faith to
Salvation, yet there may be, and are great differences as to the degrees of
Gods Administrations. Nor yet possibly must the blame of these Souls not
running, rest upon God for not drawing? For although the Lord may sometimes do
it upon his prerogative and sovereignty,

1. To show the freeness of his Grace in all the emanations of it, and that he
is under no obligations to measure out to every Child an equal portion of the
riches of his Grace, but as in the disposal of his other talents of Riches, and
common gifts, he may if he please make inequal distributions as it pleases
him, giving out to some 10, to others 5, to others but one, so he may do as to
his Talents of distinguishing Grace, whiles yet every one has enough to
conduct and preserve his Soul unto eternal life and happiness.

2. Secondly, He may do it to lay his people under the potent conviction of
this truth, That their running depends upon his drawing. God himself sometimes
assigns this as the reason of his substraction of worldly enjoyments, that they
might know who it is that gave them. Hosea 2. 8. 9. For she did not know that I
gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her Silver and Gold, which
they prepared for Baal. Therefore will I return and take away my Corn in the
time thereof, and my Wine in the season thereof, and will recover my Wool, and
my Flax, etc. Thus also the Lord may do as to the dispensations of his Grace
(that Grace I mean which is not necessary to Salvation) did we always find an
equal strength against our lusts, and to our Spiritual duties, an equal
readiness to, and cheerfulness in the Service of God, we should attribute too
much to our renewed nature, and not know in what a daily derivation from, and
dependence upon God, even the best Souls live, and that all our fresh springs
are from him. Did we Sail to Heaven through the Sea of this world, always with
a Trade wind, we should not understand that the wind of Divine Grace (which is
the breathing of the holy Spirit) blows where it lists. But when we are
becalmed in our voyage for the new Jerusalem, and forced to lie at Anchor,
then we learn that without Christ we can do nothing.

But though this must be said to aver the Sovereignty of God, and to assert his
wisdom, yet most ordinarily these withdrawings are upon some provocations on
our parts, the Clouds in the Heavens are caused from the Vapors which arise
from the Earth. God can never be so provoked against a justified Soul as to
withdraw himself wholly, but he may be, and is oft-time so far provoked, as to
withdraw his gradual influences, so as the Soul shall feel that it is not with
it as at former times, and cries out, where is my God become? When the Lord
offers a wind, and the Soul refuses to open its Sails when he moves, and
the Soul quenches its motions, and grieveth him in his operations, he many
times hides his face from it, and it is troubled; the Soul that has grieved
the quickening Spirit, shall smart alittle for the want of quickening Grace, and
complain of dullness, and heaviness, and listlessness to its Spiritual Duty. I
say this oft-times, yea most ordinarily is the cause. So as though it wants
these divine drawings, yet its want of them, is the punishment of its iniquity.

I shall conclude this discourse with a word of advice, what such Souls should
do, under such dispensations.

1. Search and see whether some late sin, has not provoked God to these
withdrawings. See if thy conscience (which in this case is thy best informer)
does not tell thee, that such a time thou had an impulse or motion to prayer,
or such a duty (and that under convenient circumstances) and thou neglectedst
it; or offered thee some help, and thou neglectedst it. And now the righteous
Lord has left thee to thy own strength, and thou feast what thou art, and
humble thy Soul before God, and renew thy covenant with him.

2. If thou can not find that any such blot has clave to thy Soul, yet
acknowledge the Lords wisdom, the freeness of his grace, and his righteousness
in his dispensations. We must allow God to do many things in infinite wisdom,
and righteousness, though we cannot see or understand it, we must not look in
this life to understand the reason of Gods works. It is enough for us to know
that he has done it, and that all his works are done in wisdom and
righteousness.

3. Take heed of lowing thy Sails, when thou think the wind abates. This you
know is contrary to the methods of Mariners; I am sure it is contrary to the
wisdom of Christians; keep thy heart at such a time with the most diligence,
working and striving against sin. Tow thy Ship if thou can not Sail as at
other times. Go if thou can not run, and keep thy Soul ready for a wind,
whenever God will please to send it.

4. Fourthly, Beg the returns of the blessed Spirit. Tell God of thy Souls
weakness, or the strength of thy corruptions, or temptations; say unto God as
Jehosaphat said in another case; Lord I have a mighty host coming against me, I
know not what to do, I have no strength against it, but my Eyes are unto thee.

5. After this, I know nothing more to be done, but a patient waiting for God,
according to the resolution of the Church, Isaiah 8. 17. I will wait upon him,
that hides his face from the house of Jacob, I will look for him.

Sermon XX.
Canticles 1. 4. Drawme, and We will run after thee.

I Am dwelling yet upon the first Proposition of Doctrine I observed from these
words, That the Soul must be drawn to, and after Christ before it will run
after him. (It is a great point, and I am willing to make the utmost
improvement of it that I can. The improveableness of it for our instruction is
all you have yet heard.

Use 2.
In the next place, certainly there may be made some improvement of this
notion, to assist to judge concerning our spiritual state, concerning faith and
holiness. These being from the ordination of God so necessary to Salvation,
that without them we cannot see God, mistakes about them are like diseases that
affect the vital parts, exceeding dangerous. All that this Doctrine will help
us in, as to this particular, is in letting us know,

1. That that faith which will do the Soul any good as to Eternal Salvation
must be (as the Apostle styles it, Col. 2. 12.) a faith of the operation of
God. The work of Faith with power, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Thessal. 1. v. 11.
It is called the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. Not of our selves, it is the gift of
God, Ephesians. 2. 8. The work of God, Joh. 6. 29. This is the work of God, that you
believe on him whom he has sent. It is not only the Commandment of God, 1 John
3. 23. and the gift of God, but the work, the operation of God, a work with
power, such a faith as is an effect of the Fathers drawing? This if duly
observed, will go a great way to guide us in this inquiry, it will let us see^
that that believing (which is the mere product of natural powers) is not that
coming to Christ, to which the promise of life, and Salvation is annexed* Two
things men ordinarily deceive themselves with, as to this business of Faith.

1. Judging any kind of blind, and languid assent, to the proposition of the
Gospel to be that believing, to which the Holy Ghost in Scripture annexeth the
promise of Salvation, A great many know no more by believing, but their
agreement that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, that he was made man, and died
for us. All which, and much more the Devils believe, and yet tremble. I do not
think that an assent to the Proposition of the Gospel, be the assent what it
will, is that Faith which justifies. It is not the Proposition of the Gospel,
but the Person of the Mediator, that is the object of that Faith; some indeed
tell us, that Faith is an operative assent, and by that they have mended the
matter: but if the Person of the Mediator, not the Proposition of the Word be
the formal, and proper object of true Faith, no assent can be the justifying
act of Faith, for the Proposition must be the object of that. There are several
kinds of assent according to the light in which we see a Proposition. We assent
to things oft-times merely upon report and hearsay, so as the assent is a mere
humane Faith. Thus most Englishmen assent to this, that there was such a Person
as William the Conqueror. A thing they can see in no other light than that of
humane reports in History; of all other assents this is the weakest, and most
invaluable, and before we give it, there must appear to us a probability in the
thing; upon this account, none but those who judge themselves obliged to
believe what the Church says, and that those Books were written by the order
of the Church, believes or assenteth to the strange stories in the Popish
Legends, because their reason tells them the things are improbable, yea,
impossible, without a miraculous operation which they see no reason God should
work in such a case, nor will men give their assents in such cases, but where
they are not much concerned whether the thing be true or false, so as it is
equal to them to agree the thing or to deny it. 2. Men assent to things upon
the evidence of ratiocinations, they form conclusions from principles, and then
assent to them. Now in regard our reason is not infallible; this assent
likewise (though more strong than the other) yet is but saint and uncertain,
and alters as we see better reason for the contrary. 3. There is an assent
which is given to a Proposition upon the account of a divine revelation. Now
this assent is stronger or weaker, as the Revelation, is more fully, or
imperfectly, and incertainly agreed. A man by a natural power may assent to the
Proposition of the Gospel, as delivered to him by men: he that thus assenteth
does no more assent to what the Gospel says of Christ, than to what Histories
tell him of what was done by the Saxon or Norman Kings many hundred years ago.
Reason working upon its own principles shows us nothing of Christ. The
Scriptures are by all Christians generally looked upon as the Word of God, but
no man has any certain and firm persuasion that they are so, but he who is
persuaded of it by the Holy Spirit of God; all arguments from tradition and
reason, have their incertainties, and though they are useful to make it
probable to others, yet they do not produce a certainty of persuasion in our
own Souls; hence the assent to such Propositions as are only revealed in
Scripture, must also be faint and uncertain, and consequently not operative, or
very incertainly operative; so that although it may produce something of
practice, whiles the fit of assent is upon the Soul, yet it produces no
steady, certain constant practice; so as though it should be granted, that a
practical assent to the Proposition of the Gospel, be true justifying faith, to
which is annexed the pardon of sin, yet if by it we mean such an agreement of
our minds to the truth, as produces a certain, steady, constant or ordinary
practice and course of life, conformable to the propositions of truth which we
agree, as this will imply trusting, and relying on Christ for life and
salvation, so it is such as is the operation of God in the Soul, and that not
in a way of common providence (as our abilities* to speak or move are) but in a
way of special favor and working, for man's agreeing to the holy Scriptures to
be the Word of God, firmly and steadily, being the reason why he agrees the
truth of the propositions which are revealed in it alone, and that being the
special work of God in Souls that shall be saved, of necessity such also must
be the assent to the Propositions that are revealed in it, and which can be
seen by the Soul in no other light. So as indeed I do not think there is much
in it more than a strife about words, or at least a very great nicety, whether
true justifying Faith be a practical assent to the Propositions of the Gospel,
or a reliance on the Person of the Mediator, or rather both; for a practical
assent does necessarily infer a reliance on the Person of the Mediator:
Admitting that this is one Proposition of the Gospel, Acts 4. 12. That there is
no Salvation in any other, for there is no other name given under Heaven
amongst men, whereby we must be saved; and that the Soul in its practice of
holiness, has any Eye to the recompense of reward, it is impossible there
should be any practical assent (to use the term of some) that is, any assent to
the Proposition, that shall produce any truth, or constancy of practice,
without a reliance upon, and trusting to the Person of the Mediator; and this
must be the special work, and powerful operation of God in, and upon the Soul.
But now if men make any kind of languid, weak and uncertain assent to the
Gospel Faith, and think that they have true Faith, because they agree the truth
of the Propositions of Scripture, they may miserably deceive their own Souls; a
Man by a mere natural power may as well agree, that there was such a one as
Jesus of Nazareth once in the world, who went about doing good, exhorting men
to a good life, and was Crucified, etc. as that there was in England a William
the Conqueror, or any thing else that is to be found in other Books of
tolerable credit, and reputation in the World. Or if men think that they do
truly believe, because they agree many propositions of the Gospel, which are
evident in the light of Reason, they again deceive themselves, here may be
nothing of the operation of God in this faith. Nay if they agree the
Propositions of the Gospel, because they are revealed there, and in the mean
time do not agree the Scriptures to be the Word of God, but look upon them in
the same rank with human writings, or only by an human says agree them to be
the Word of God, because the Church has so delivered, and transmitted them,
here is all this while no thing of the special operation of God. Nor will this
agreement produce any steadiness and firmness of practice, commensurate to the
Revelation, but only commensurate to the nature of the Assent, which being not
fixed, and constant, nor it may be, not universal, but to some part only of the
revelation, must necessarily bring forth no more than a saint, partial, and
uncertain, practice. Hence it is that Hypocrites may do many things contained
in the law, and at one time be more warm than at other times. But if thy Assent
be the special operation, thou assentest to the whole revelation, because God
has fixed in thy Soul a persuasion that it is from him who cannot lie, it is
also steady and fixed; and tho some doubts may possibly incumber thee
sometimes, yet they hold not long, and thou firmly and generally (with
allowance for the frailty and infirmity of human nature, endeavourest to live
up to the whole of that duty, which the revelation imposes upon thee, which
thou can not do, without relying on Christ, and him alone for Salvation, and
having a respect to all the Commandments of God. And indeed, herein that
agreement or assent which is the special work of God in the Soul, differs from
that which is but a mere natural action. 1. In that it is more fixed, certain,
and universal; and this must be so, for our assent is according to our light,
we must first see, before we agree the truth of a proposition, now the light of
the holy Spirit is without doubt the clearest and brightest light. Our natural
reason gives us but a dim light, as to matters of Faith. 2. In that it lays a
stronger obligation to practice. Reason will tell us, that the more firmly we
believe the truth of Propositions, holding forth rewards and punishments
relating to our practice, the stronger we shall find our obligation to practice
in order to the obtaining such rewards, or avoiding such punishments. 3. In
that it lays an obligation to a more universal practice. The obligation to
practice rises no higher than the assent, so as if there be any duty to which
we do not agree, our assent obliges to no practice of that. Now the holy
Spirit persuades us of the truth of the whole revelation, and that in the
fullest and truest sense. Hence it is that the true believer is more warm and
universal in his obedience, than it is possible another should be, because his
assent unto the truth, is from a quite differing light, and a quite differing
work of God, the assent of the former proceeding but from a common work of God
in nature, the latter from a work of special grace by the Spirit of God upon
the Soul. I will not much contend with those who will have true Faith to be a
practical Assent to the Proposition of the Gospel, if they by Assent mean a
firm and steady Assent; and by practical, such an Assent as obliges strongly
to an universal practice of whatsoever is revealed as our Duty. 1. Because I
know a reliance upon Christ for eternal Salvation, must be the effect of such
an Assent. 2. Because I know there can be no reliance on Christ without such a
praevious Assent to the Proposition of the Gospel. 3. Because I know there can
be no such thing without the mighty Power of God upon the Soul. So that in this
sense the Soul must be drawn by the Father, before it come to Christ. Only let
none deceive themselves, (as to this point of true Believing) by fancying such
an Assent to the Doctrine of the Gospel, true Faith, wherein God has no
further concern, than as he influenceth acts of Humane Nature flowing from that
order of operations which he has set in all rational Souls. True Faith must be
more than this.

2. As to Faith men are also prone to cheat themselves by calling their Natural
presumption Faith; we say Faith lies in a resting, and reliance on Christ. Now
many will tell us they rest and rely on Christ, and yet it is no difficulty to
evince they do but presume and not believe. Resting and relying on Christ for
Salvation, must be the Father's drawing. Natural presumptions are merely from
our selves. Every man is willing to hope well for, and to prophecy good unto
himself. Hence living under the publication of the Gospel, and having heard of
an eternal Life and Salvation, and this to be had through Christ, and by
resting on him, many naturally cry, they rest on Christ, and trust in him, and
him alone. And our Savior lets us know, that men may die with such
confidences, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Now there is a resting and reliance on Christ,
which is the Operation of God, yea and the mighty work of God upon the Soul,
and this many a poor Soul finds that lives months, and years, under the Spirit
of bondage, before it can rest on Christ, and quietly commit it self unto him;
and there is a resting, which is no more than a natural hope, or confidence,
arising either from the Souls natural desire of good to it self, or from its
ignorance of the true grounds of a true resting and reliance: And indeed by
this may these two be distinguished and known asunder, That resting and
reliance upon Christ for any spiritual and eternal blessing, which is the
Operation of God, is alwa^es bottomed on a Promise, and testified by a life
suitable to the condition upon which that Promise is made. These two things are
always in it. 1. I say first it is founded upon a Promise; for all Grace, and
Eternal Life being the gift of God, it is as vain a thing for any to be
confident they shall have it, without God's revelation of his Will as to it
with reference to them; as it is for any man to pretend a confidence, and trust
in another for the making him rich with a great part of his Estate, when that
other never so declared his mind to him, or any one else. And 2. The Promises
being not made to persons by name, but to persons that do thus and thus, it is
altogether as unreasonable for any to pretend a rest and confidence in Christ,
for the collation of those spiritual blessings, as it had been for any
Commanders in the Jewish Army, having heard Saul 's declaration of his Will,
That whosoever kills Goliath, should have his Daughter to Wife, should have
promised himself Saul 's Daughter without incountring the Philistine. Now this
resting and relying on Christ, (which is the only true reliance) is so
difficult by reason of our former sins, and daily infirmities of humane nature,
and the lapses and backslidings we are guilty of, that no man thus comes to
Christ until he be drawn. Thus far I have showed you how far this discourse may
be useful to guide us in our enquiry whether we be drawn and come to Christ
yea, or no, directing you to distinguish true Faith, both from a faint and
languid assent, and from a natural presumption of our good Estate with
reference to Eternity.

2. But it may be further useful also to try your holiness. That also must be
the effect of Drawing Grace. There are two usual mistakes about holiness.

1. The first is when what we usually call Moral Virtue is called holiness.

2. When we mistake it for a formal running a round of Religious Duties.

I say first, When we mistake holiness, for what we usually call Moral Virtue,
or Moral Righteousness. I put in those words [we usually call] because I
perceive some modern Writers (possibly because pinched with their Arguments,
who have contended for something else besides Moral Virtue to be necessary to
salvation) have extended the notion of Moral Virtue far beyond what Aristotle
and the rest of the Philosophers learnt us to understand by that name; and do
not only bring Faith within the compass of it, but will pretend it to be
necessary to it, that the action to be done should be performed from a
Principle of Faith, and Love, and Obedience, and directed to the Glory of God
as their end. These acts and actings our Forefathers were wont to call Grace;
but to let us know that those in our days who have enlarged the acts of
Morality, mean no more, than what men may do, by nature, having no more than
the motives of the Gospel, and the assistances of the Spirit, common to all to
whom the Gospel is Preached, therefore they well call these things Moral
Virtues. As to Moral Virtue in the latter notion of it, it cannot be mistaken
for holiness, for it is so. It is in the antientest, and most proper notion of
it, that I am speaking to it. So Chastity, Sobriety, Temperance, Liberality,
Justice, are moral habits, and the acts of them are acts of Moral Virtue and
Righteousness; whether he that does them does them out of any Principle of
Faith, or Love, or Obedience, or with any respect to the Glory of God, yea or
no; but if any thinks this is holiness, he is wonderfully mistaken, for it is
essentially necessary to an act of holiness, that it should be done from a
Principle of Faith, the Soul being fully persuaded, that it is the Will of God,
and in Obedience to his Will, eying his command in our action. And 3. Proposing
to our selves the Honor and Glory of God for our end. So that though the same
acts be done, yet if they be done from other Principles, and to other ends,
they may be acts of Moral Virtue (that is, under the government, and conduct,
and guidance of reason) but no acts of holiness. Besides, there are many
actions which are our duties, in obedience to the Will of God, the
reasonableness of which is not to be concluded (nor ever was concluded by the
men of reason amongst the Heathens) from any other Principle than this, That it
is the highest reason that we should do what God commands us. So that to reduce
our duty as Christians, to the Precepts of what we have used to call Moral
Virtue, is partly to secure our selves from a great part of our duty, by that
Art, and partly to do what we do out of such Principles as God will never more
thank us for, than we will do our Servants, for doing what we would have them
do, but they do out of respect to themselves, without any regard to the
pleasing of, or obeying us. Now, though it be true, that acts of Moral Virtue
(that is conformable to natural reason) may be performed by men without any
special influence of the Holy Spirit: Yet without such a Drawing Influence the
Soul will neither do those acts, from any true Principle, or to any right end:
Nor yet do many things which are required of us (under the notion of holiness)
in order to eternal life. Besides, the holiness required of us is in all our
conversation, 2 Pet. 3. 11. Now it is observed of the greatest Moralists, that
they failed here, and indulged themselves in some things of immorality, yet
went for morally virtuous men, if they excelled in Justice, though they failed
in Temperance, Sobriety, and Chastity, etc. And indeed herein is the drawing of
Divine Grace with respect to holiness seen, and from hence to be judged. If the
Soul finds it self under a constant obligation to whatsoever God has
commanded, and that because God has commanded it, and that it might please
him, and do what is acceptable in his sight. This no Soul does from a mere
natural power; and though the renewed Soul be made willing, yet to keep on in
this course it stands in need of the daily excitings and quickenings, and
assistances of the Holy Spirit.

2. A second mistake which men may be deceived by, as to Holiness, is when they
take a formal performance of Religious duties to be it. Holiness lies in
Godliness, and Righteousness. And as men may mistake Righteousness toward men
for Holiness, so they may as easily mistake a Form of Godliness, which may
consist (as the Apostle teaches us) with a denial of the Power of it to be
Holiness. Godliness in the sense I am speaking to it, signifies the
performance of those acts of homage and worship, which God has required of us
to his more immediate Service and Glory. This lies in the performance of some
external actions of God immediately, according to the prescription of his
Divine Will, which respecting the manner, as well as the matter, all such
actions as are mere bodily labor, are indeed no Godliness, but mere formal
performances, and things so short of obedience to the Commands of God, that God
in Scripture is said not to require them, that is, not them alone, or them
performed in such a manner, as Isa. 1. 12. When you come to appear before me,
who has required this at your hands, to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain
Oblations; Incense is an abomination unto me; the New Moons, and Sabbaths, the
calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with, even the Solemn Meetings: Your New
Moons, and your appointed Feasts, my Soul hates; they are a trouble to me. God
had appointed all these things; he had commanded they should tread his Courts,
bring Oblations, offer Incense, keep New Moons, and Sabbaths; but all these
things ought to have been done out of love to God, with a Faith in Christ, and
with pure hearts; not being so performed, they were no Godliness, but mere
abomination unto God. The case with us under the Gospel is the same, though our
Acts of homage there prescribed be of another, more reasonable and spiritual
nature. God has required of us to pray, to praise, to hear his Word, to
partake of his Supper. He has also prescribed us the manner in which we ought
to do these acts; in Faith, in Obedience, with the intention of our minds,
attention of our thoughts, fervency of spirit. Separate the more external acts
from these, they are no better than formal performances, bodily exercises,
neither acceptable to God, nor profitable to our selves: If men will call these
Godliness, or Holiness, it is a great mistake. The external acts are indeed
such as men that live under the Gospel may be excited to perform, and may
perform without any special influence of Grace, by virtue of his natural powers
and abilities, and the common Grace of God not denied to any: But when they are
done, without due affections, and principles, and inward motions of the heart
correspondent to the nature of the actions, according to the revelation of the
Divine Will, they are no Holiness, but Hypocrisy; and thus they cannot be
performed without the assistance and influence of special Grace. Thus from this
notion of the necessity of Christ's drawing both with reference to our first
coming to Christ for life, and further following him, walking with him, and
running after him. Christians may be able to judge both concerning the Truth of
their Faith, and also of their Holiness. If either be true, they must be the
effect of Divine special Grace, and more than any can do from the powers of
Nature, even the best educated Nature, not renewed, changed and influenced by
special and distinguishing grace. I am fully of their mind who think that those
Souls, who are no further changed and reformed, or converted, than might be
from the power of Nature rationally improving Moral Principles, and Gospel
Motives and Arguments, cannot be saved: But yet I am so charitable, as to think
that many may be saved who think they have no other conversion than this; the
workings of the Spirit of God upon our Souls are so indiscernable and internal,
that we may possibly mistake them for the workings of merely our own powers and
faculties, under the advantages of the Gospel; but they must be more than such,
or else (as I have before said) man is the first Author of all spiritual good,
both with respect to action and fruition, to himself, and clearly his own
Savior, and must make himself to differ from another, and that by the highest,
and most spiritual difference, and one man's Soul must have different and
inequal virtues from the Soul of his Brother, whose Soul is of the same
species, and has the same faculties. But I have dwelt long enough upon this
branch of Application.

Let every one now by this Examine himself, whether the Faith that he thinks he
has, be a mere Assent to the Proposition of the Gospel, upon the Evidence of
it he has had from the Church, or from men, or a mere languid uncertain
Assent, from probable Arguments of Reason, or a mere presumption bottomed upon
no Promise. Or, whether it be a firm and fixed Assent to the Truths of the
Gospel understood by him, conjoined with a reliance upon the Person of the
Mediator, clearly revealed in the Gospel, as the only Savior of Man, and
producing an endeavor in all things to live up to the condition of the
Promise? Whether the Holiness which he thinks his Soul has arrived at, lies
in a mere Moral Righteousness, a forbearance of gross and scandalous courses of
sin, and a doing such acts of Justice and Charity, as a man may do from the
mere improvement and conduct of reason, and a mere Formality of Godliness, a
performance of such acts of homage, as God has prescribed, without respect to
the manner in which God has willed them to be performed.

If your pretended Faith and Holiness be no more, trust not to them as
Evidences that you are come to Christ; all this may be without any thing of
this drawing; your Faith is no more than that mentioned, Matthew. 7. 22. where
our Savior tells you that many (pretendedly trusting in, and relying upon him,
as may appear by what they said) should say to him in that day; Lord! Lord!
Have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils, and
in thy Name done many wonderful works? to whom he would say, I never knew you,
depart from me, you workers of iniquity. God had never promised Heaven and
Salvation, to a prophesying in his Name, nor to a casting out of Devils, so as
their confidence, or reliance on, or in Christ, was the growing up of a Rush
without Mire; a trusting without a ground, or bottom: Your Holiness and
Righteousness is no more than that of the Pharisee, who gloried, Luke 18. 11,
12. That he was not as other men were, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers; he
fasted twice a week, and gave Alms of all that he possessed. Our Savior says,
he went away not justified. And Matthew. 5. 20. Except your Righteousness exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you can never enter into the
Kingdom of God. Say to your selves severally, My Soul, thou must one day come
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and begging for admittance into Heaven,
thou would be loath to hear the Lord in that day say to thee, Depart from me,
I know thee not. My Soul, what have thou more to trust to than they had? Can
thou say any more than Lord! I am not as other men? I am no Swearer, no
Drunkard, no Reviler, no Extortioner, no Whoremonger; Lord, I fast often, I go
to prayers often, and to Church often, to hear the Word; if thou have no more
to say, the Pharisee had as much. The interest of a man's own body, or estate,
the examples of other men, the credit and applause of the world, may move a
reasonable Soul, under no other power than that of reason, nor other influence,
than that which all within the compass of the Church, where the Gospel is
Preached, may carry thee thus far, without any influence of powerful, special
Grace.

Use 3.
Further yet, this notion of Truth, may help to relieve many good Souls, who
are discouraged, either because they seem to themselves to stick in the New
Birth: Or, because they find in themselves a great weakness to spiritual
duties: Or, impotency in the resistance of their own intrinsic motions to sin,
or foreign temptations. As easy a thing as some make it to believe; many Souls
smitten of God, and truly afflicted under the sense of sin, find it one of the
most difficult things in the world, to give such a firm and steady Assent to
the Revelation of the Gospel, as will produce in their Souls any grounded
confidence, and resting on the Lord Jesus Christ as our Savior, and shall be
productive of such a change of heart and life as the Gospel requires. Hence,
though they be truly wounded in the sense of sin, and have taken up resolutions
through the Grace of God, to sin no more as they have done formerly; yet they
cannot tell how to bring their Souls to any fiducial adherence and rest on the
Lord Jesus Christ, but they are still full of doubts and fears concerning their
spiritual and eternal state; the guilt of their sins is upon their consciences,
and they pine away, in, and under it; but they are not able to reach out an
hand to the Promise in and through Christ; they have deep sights of their
misery, but they can see no hope, no mercy at all in God for them. Now to such
Souls as these, this is some relief to consider, That no man comes to the Son
unless the Father draws him. It is no wonder that thou who have formerly been
not a stranger only, but an enemy to God, can not at first come unto him,
without a powerful influence of Divine Grace; when as those who are brought
home to God, stand in need of a daily Divine Influence to enable them to walk
with him, and to run after him. This is not the weakness, or frowardness, or
badness of thine heart alone; it is the condition of every lapsed Soul. And
here the thinking Soul will come to feel the wound given it by the Fall of
Adam, and its own original corruption. No man has by nature more aptitude than
another to acts truly spiritual. You will say, this is very cold comfort. We
are sure, if we be without Christ, we are undone; and what if our hearts be no
worse than others were till they were made better by the Power of Divine Grace,
so long as that they are so bad as we cannot come to Christ for life? We have
been lying in this state at the Pool of Bethesda, under the Ordinances of God,
many months and years; others within the time have been rolled in; here we lie
still as weak as ever. I will but offer two things to the relief of a Soul thus
complaining.

1. That every Christian drawn to Christ, does not presently discern it. Faith,
is one thing, the sense of that Faith is another thing. Many a Child of Light
does not walk in the Light. I would hope charitably, that that Soul which
complains that it cannot believe, and seriously bemoans its impotency, does
believe; a serious desire to believe, is generally the fruit of believing. I
would say to the Soul that thus complains, Thou art awakened to consider an
Eternity, and that thy Soul is hastening toward an Eternity; yet thou do not
despair, thou have some hope: In what is thy hope? What do thou trust in,
with reference to thy Eternal Happiness? Such a Soul will easily see, that its
Moral Righteousness, or Formal Performance of Duties, are not the things it
hops in; Where then is thy hope, (those degrees of hope which keep thee out
of the Pit of despair,) fixed? Where can it be fixed but in Christ exhibited in
the Promises of the Gospel, so as thou rather complainest for want of sense,
than for want of (...)

2. If thou do but pray, and wait, thou shall see. Christ will make thee to
see, that he has drawn thy Soul unto himself. Never poor Soul perished under
thy circumstances, that is, heavy laden under the sense of sin, and weary of
its sinful courses, and sensible that it has no Righteousness wherein it can
stand before God, and panting and thirsting after the Lord and his
Righteousness. I have always thought that God would not be wanting to any as
to his special Grace, that had made the best improvement he could of common
Grace. But this case rises higher; God has begun his good work in thy Soul,
and he will perfect it; he has begun with thee in a way of special Grace, and
more shall be added; he has brought to the birth, and shall he not give
strength to bring forth? so as thou have nothing to do but to pray, to wait
upon God in his Ordinances, and to wait for God with patience.

Secondly, I hear others complaining, They would run after God, they would
follow the Lord fully; the Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak; they find
their corruptions, their temptations so strong, their strength against them so
small, that they wonder they hold out so long, and fear they shall one day
fall. They cannot find that they run after Christ; something of duty they do,
but with so much dullness and heaviness, as is far from running. Christian! be
of good comfort:

1. The Lord will draw thee; do what in thee lies, the Lord will draw thee.
Who (says Paul) shall deliver me from this body of death? He presently
subjoyns, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. The Spouse prays in
Faith, when she says, Draw me, and we will run after thee. If Abraham had
considered his own body, at that time dead (as to such acts) or the deadness of
Sarah's womb, he had never glorified God by a strong Faith in the Promise; Romans
3. 21. He considered none of these, but the Promise only, and concluded, that
what the Lord had promised, he was able to perform. Thou considerest how busy
the Devil is, and what he can do: How strong thy lusts are, how weak thou art,
and how little thou art able to do. But thou do not consider what a mighty
God can do; what he can do who has said, To him that has shall be given, and
he shall have in more abundance. Thou see a great Mountain of lusts and
corruptions, great Mountains of temptations, and thou art afraid: But what art
thou O great Mountain before the Lord's Zerubbabel? If it be the Lord's work,
who shall let him?

2. Consider, The Lord may sometimes not draw (...) as at other times, and our
running will bear a proportion to his drawing. The Mother will never leave the
little Child to go wholly alone, for fear it falls; she will always have an
hand upon it; but she may sometimes put forth more, sometimes less of the
strength of that hand. God never leaves us wholly to our selves; he knows we
cannot stand, or go without him; but he sometimes lets us feel more of his
strength, sometimes less.

3. Going slowly when God slackens his hand, is indeed running, that is,
equivalent to a going faster with a further influence. It is like the Widows
Mite, who has no more to put in. Like Hezekiah's chattering like a Crane. Like
the voice of David's weeping. Like the sorrowful sighings of the Prisoners
which God hears and accepts.

Sermon XXI.
Cant. 1. 4. Draw me, and we will run after thee.

Use 5.
IT is a great point that I am upon from the Petition of the Text Draw me, viz.
That the Soul must be drawn before it will move toward Christ, either by coming
to him, in its first conversion, or by running after him: I have been some time
upon it, I shall now shut up my discourse with some few words of exhortation,
which shall respect all Men and Women. 1. Those that are yet without Christ,
not come unto him. 2. Such as are come unto him, yet are under obligations to
run after him.

1. To the first I would speak two things. 1. Never think either of coming to
Christ, or running after him in your own natural strength. It is a rock which
many Souls dash, and are eternally spilt upon. They say not, there is no hope,
they have found the life of their hands, therefore they are not grieved. It is
one of the most dangerous deceits of a man's heart, for him to say he has his
Spiritual life in his own hands, to think that he has a power within himself,
and can turn to Christ, when he pleases, or to bless himself as in a good
condition, when indeed his condition is very bad. Let me a little show you the
mischief of this error.

1. If I could say no more, than that it is a false persuasion, yet that were
enough to defame it to every reasonable Soul, the Soul instead of having its
life, has no more than a lie in its right hand; the object of our
understanding is truth, falsehood is what it ought naturally to reject and
abhor. Men are but in an ill condition when they are forced to make lies their
refuge, and to hide themselves under falsehood, Is. 28. 15. What a sad state is
that Soul in, that is put to make a lie its refuge, and to hide itself from the
reflections of its conscience, under falsehood! His conscience tells him he
perishes for ever, if he abides in the State he is in, what relieves him? he
thinks he can repent, and believe, and turn to God when he lists, and so
goes on in his sinful courses, stops his Ears against the voice of the
Lords Charmers. Here is now a lie made the refuge of the Soul.

2. But Secondly, a further mischief lies here, That whereas the drawings of
Divine Grace do usually follow some means, and endeavors to be used on our
part. and that in time, this false persuasion, takes us off the timely use of
such means, and endeavors, upon the use of which God ordinarily comes in with
the further power of his Grace. Admit a thing necessary to be done, and so
allowed by us, yet if it be laborious, painful, or any way ungrateful as to the
means to be used in the doing of it, and it be a thing which we know, or
believe we can do when we will, we are never hasty to do it, but very apt to
defer and put it off from time to time, and to omit those means, the use of
which is not pleasing to our sense; whereas if we be convinced that the thing
is not in our own power, but requires the assistance of another, if we
apprehend it necessary for us, tho the means be unpleasing, yet we will not
neglect the use of them. For example, admit a man sick of some dangerous
disease, and he apprehends, that without the use of some skilful Physician he
cannot live, though he cannot come at this Physician without a laborious
journey, and knows the Physic will not please his pallat, yet a man will not
lose his opportunity, nor neglect taking Physic according to the Physicians
prescription; whereas if he apprehends his distemper such, as he knows at any
time how to remove, by some means in his own power, he is very prone to put off
the use of means from time to time, until possibly it be too late. This is the
case of a Soul, persuaded that it has its life in its own hands, a power in
itself when it pleases to repent, believe and turn to God; these things being
not pleasing to flesh and blood, the Soul is very prone to slight and neglect
the means, with which God uses to concur, giving the Soul a power to do these
things above what it has in itself, but now admit a Soul possessed of the
necessity of faith, repentance, and new obedience, in order to its eternal
happiness, and also to know that it cannot do these things without a powerful
influence of Divine Grace, which God uses not to give out in the neglect, but
in the use of those means of Grace, which he has appointed, especially if it
knows that the Spirit of God shall not always strive with man, it will neglect
no time, no use of means, but in the morning sow its Seed, and not suffer its
hand in the Evening to be ^lack, because it knows not which shall prosper,
this or that, with what means, or at what time God will concur, Isaiah 57. 10.
Thou said that thou had thy life in thy hands, therefore thou were not
grieved. The Jews had used all means to make piece, and leagues with other
Nations, and had at length obtained it, and thence concluded they had their
life in their hands; they were well enough, and safe enough, and therefore they
were not at all grieved for their sins against God, which was a means in order
to their true security. It is even thus with the Soul, did it lie under the
powerful conviction of this truth, That of itself it has no power to repent,
believe, or turn to God, it would then be troubled for its sad and miserable
estate, and look out for Salvation in and by Christ, waiting upon him in
ordinances, and by prayer crying to him to draw it unto himself, but so long as
it is possessed of an opinion of sufficiency in itself, it neglects the timely
use of such means as must be used in order to eternal Salvation by, and from
Christ, upon this score I conceive it was that Christ told the Pharisees, Mat.
21. 32. That Publicans and Harlots should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven
before them. The Pharisees said they had their life in their hands, they could
save themselves, they were Lords, and therefore they would not come to Christ;
the Apostle tells us that the Jews going about to establish their own
righteousness, submitted not themselves to the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3.

3. May it not be doubted whether God will ever draw that Soul that faneieth
that it stands in no need of his drawing? It is said of God, that he resists
the proud, and gives grace to the humble. What is Pride but an high, and undue
opinion of our selves? Whether it be upon the account of some gifts of common
Providence, such as Riches, Honors, etc. or common gifts of the Spirit, such
as knowledge, the gift of prayer, or prophesying, or (which indeed is the worst
of all) upon the opinion of some conceited righteousness in our selves, or some
spiritual power, and abilities we have, or judge our selves to have; the latter
is Spiritual Pride, nor is any thing more opposite to the truth, and Grace of
the Gospel; the whole design of the Gospel, is to exalt Christ as the Lord our
righteousness, and our strength, and our great duty is to accept him in that
notion, nor indeed can he be truly received in any other notion; now can it be
reasonably imagined, that he whose arm uses to bring Salvation; when he
looks and sees there is none to save, should bring Salvation to a Soul, that
apprehends it has no need at all of him, he has done enough for it, in giving
it a reasonable Soul, and the Preaching of the Gospel. These are now some of
those great Evils, that are consequential to this error imbibed by the Soul;
but you will say to me: what can a Man or Woman in his or her natural state do
in order to his being drawn by Divine Grace? To this I answer,

1. He may not oppose or set himself against the workings of this Divine Grace.

2. He may do some things that may be conducive.

1. In the first place do not resist the Grace of God, nor set your selves in
opposition to it; You will say then, can Grace be resisted, did not you tell us
it is powerful, and shall be obeyed?

I answer. I did tell you that Grace is powerful, and cannot be finally
resisted, but it may be a long time resisted and opposed. The holy Spirit, is
the most potent agent, and must at last overcome, but it may be vexed and
grieved. I know what some will say; what if I do resist, if I do oppose it, if
God has determined me to lise, and to Grace, as the means, it shall at last
overcome? I answer that is true, but yet it is no vain counsel to give any to
advise them to take heed of such resistings, and vexings of the Spirit of God,
as it is capable of, and that upon a threefold account.

1. Because he who thus resists the Holy Spirit, justifies God in his
condemnation, and not putting forth such a power of Grace as shall be effectual
of its Salvation; those who plead so highly for a power in man to what is
Spiritually good, lay a great stress upon their fancy, that if we do not allow
this, we make the destruction of a Sinner to be from God, not from himself, but
they do not consider two things. 1. That whatsoever destruction we derive from
Adam, is from our selves, for in Adam all died (says the Apostle.) God is
neither bound to restore unto us the Grace he once gave us, and we lost, nor
yet unjust in requiring of us the exercise of that power, which we once had of
his gift, and have lost through our own default (for the default of our first
Parent in whom we all sinned, and dyed was our own.) 2. That the resistance of
the holy Spirit in its more common Grace and operations is a sufficient
clearing of God in the condemnation of Sinners, though he does not give out his
effectual Grace; he has said, that to him that has shall be given. The sense
of which (tho Mat. 13. and in the parallel Text it may be to him that has any
thing of special distinguishing grace, shall be more given of the same nature
and kind yet) is plainly, Mat. 25. 29. (where it is used in the exposition of
the parable of the Talents) To him that improveth what he has, and may very
well be interpreted into a promise of further Grace to him that makes a good
improvement of common Grace. The justice of Gods judgment upon those of
Jerusalem was from this manifested to the world. That Christ would ofttimes
have gathered them as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, but they
would not. If a man must be ruined, yet surely he should not ruin himself.

2. Secondly, Tho if thou be one ordained to life, the Grace of God toward
thee shall not be finally resisted; yet thy resistances, and opposition may
make the new birth, much harder, and more full of pain to thee. It is a most
certain truth, that the foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows who
are his, and not one of those whom the Father has by his Eternal gift given to
Christ shall be lost, they may for a time oppose and resist the motions, and
knockings of his Spirit, but it shall at last overcome them, but the Soul in
its coming unto Christ, usually meets with the Spirit of bondage, making it to
fear before it receives the Spirit of adoption, teaching it to cry Abba
Father. Now thy opposition, and resistances to the Spirit of Grace may keep
thee much longer under the Spirit of bondage; and for this, I appeal to the
experiences of all those who have been brought home to Christ, whether they
have not found the oppositions and resistances which they have made, to the
knocks, and motions of the Holy Spirit, have not lain heavy upon them, before
they have been able to discern a gracious acceptance; whether when their faith
in Christ has got above their other sins, the follies, and vanities of their
youth, they have not found it stick here. They could hope in Christ, and in the
free and infinite Grace of God through him, were it not that they remember, how
often they refused the tenders of Grace, and put off the holy Spirit, knocking
at the door of their hearts. Now what know thou O Christian but that thou
art an elect vessel, one ordained to eternal life, and salvation, if so, thou
shall certainly be brought home to Christ, and be saved, notwithstanding thy
present resistance and opposition, but it may be as through fire, why should
thou make thy new birth more painful, and difficult?

3. Thirdly, When thy Soul is brought home to God (if ever thou see that
happy hour) it will while thou live he a grief of heart unto thee, to think
how long thou did oppose, and resist the Grace of God, bringing Salvation in
the tenders of it to thy Soul. The People of God, have their sad, and dark
hours, as well as their hours of light and comfort, they will tell you from
their own experience, that when they reflect a sad Eye upon their former ways,
they find nothing lying more sad and heavy upon their Souls, than their so long
resisting, and opposing the Grace of God, before they submitted to it, to all
their sins they have added this great iniquity, that when the Lord said to
them, yet Believe and you shall be saved, they to go on in their sinful
courses, put off the Spirit of God from day to day, and sent him sad away from
their Souls, and why should Christians make themselves matter of trouble and
sorrow hereafter, how graciously soever God will deal with their Souls? O
therefore let all that wish well to their own Souls, be so far from opposing,
or hindering the drawings of Divine Grace, as to do what in them lies in order
to the obtaining of them; you will say unto me, what is that, what can we do
either, as to the hindering or obtaining them?

1. First, As you may hinder these influences by omitting your attendance upon
hearing the word: so you may by your conscientious attendance upon it, do
something in order to the obtaining of it. I observe that the blind men in the
Gospel, observed, and placed themselves in Christ's walks, the way wherein he
was to go. He that conscientiously waits upon the preaching of the Word,
places himself in the way wherein Christ uses to go. He that walks to the
Alehouse, or to his worldly business, or abides in his House, when he should
walk to a Sermon, is out of Christ's walk, and as this is in his own power to
avoid, so by not avoiding, he hinders divine drawings. The Preaching of the
Word is the ordinance of God for the Salvation of the Elect, when Christ was
lifted up, he by this drew all those Gentiles that were converted to the faith
of Christ; you know in the drawing of a thing by a Cord, there is necessary, a
Cord to draw with, which must de fastened to the thing we would draw, when it is
fastened, he that draws must put to his strength, it is not the Cord that
draws, but the power and strength of the man's arm that uses the Cord. That
which is drawn here is the Soul of man, a poor dead Soul, that has in it no
principle of Spiritual life, and of itself cannot come to Christ. He that
draws is God, the holy Spirit of God, and that by the power of an everlasting
arm; but now the Cord is the word of God (so God has ordained) either some
terrible word of threatening, or some comfortable word of promise, some word of
God, is by the holy Spirit fastened upon the Soul, by this the Soul is drawn,
yet not by the force of the Word, but by the power of the Spirit making use of
the Word; now he who neglects the reading, or hearing of the word, hinders his
own drawing, he rejects and refuses the Cord, which though alone, it would
not draw the Soul, yet is the mean, the Cord in the hand of the Spirit, by
which ordinarily Souls are drawn that do come to Christ. On the other side
those Souls that are diligent, and careful to read and hear the Word of God,
where it is interpreted, and applied with most tendency to the conversion of
Souls, though he does nothing ultimately, and efficiently, yet he does much, in
a way of means in order to his drawing unto Christ. This is the first way.

2. As a man may hinder the drawings of God, by quenching the motions of the
holy Spirit, and giving a deaf ear to the knocks of it, or delaying its
obedience to them, suffering vain company, or worldly cares to choke the
motions of the Spirit, and wear out the impressions of the word: so he may
further them by favoring them, retaining such impressions, and whetting the
word upon his heart. There is scarce any person who is a constant attender upon
the Preaching of the word, but at some time ot other will find some discourse
more than ordinarily affecting him, and making some more than ordinary
impressions upon him, now if when a man finds this, he endeavors to stifle
this conviction, or wear off this impression, and to work his Soul out of the
trouble of it, he hereby opposes and resists the drawings of Divine Grace.
(...) the other side, if he withdraws himself, fits alone, meditateth upon what
he has heard, searches the Scriptures to see if it be according to what is
revealed there, and when worldly business would put it out of his thoughts, if
he endeavors again to bring it to his remembrance, and setcheth it again into
his thoughts, desiring it may have its perfect work. This man now does what in
him lies to promove divine drawings.

Thirdly, As a man or woman may hinder God's drawings, by walking contrary to
his or her Light: So they may promove them, by walking up to their Light and
Power. The Soul that is drawn to Christ is alive, and yet dead: Alive as a
natural rational Soul, dead as to God and Goodness. And this answers an
obvious and ordinary Objection, viz. What can a dead Soul do? The Answer is
easy, it can do nothing so far as it is dead; but though the natural man be
spiritually dead, yet considered as a man, a rational creature, he is alive;
and though he can do nothing that is spiritually good, because he is dead in
sin; yet he may do something that is morally, and rationally good, because he
is rationally alive, and under the power and conduct of reason in a great
measure. He has some Natural Light; he has a further revealed Light by and in
the Gospel; and though he has not a power to live up to all the Light which
the Gospel shows him; yet he has a power to sin against that Light, to which
he might walk up, and of which ^he might make a better improvement. It is very
possible, and too too ordinary for men when God draws one way, to suffer their
passions, their vile affections and lusts, to draw another; and in doing it, to
triumph over their reason. This is highly provocative of God. There is a great
question about the power and freedom of man's will by nature. Sober Divines
say, the unregenerate man has no power, no freedom to what is truly, and
spiritually good. If any power, or freedom may be allowed to the unrenewed
will* certainly it is most proper to assert it at such a time, when the Holy
Spirit moves most strongly, by its impulses and convictions. The unregenerate
man at such a time more than another has in his power to resist his lusts and
motions to sin, and give up himself to God; if he will now resist this Light,
and not to his power use this help, he thereby hinders God's drawings.
Suppose a man in a Pir, and weak, and not able to get out; some strength he
has while he lies still, to hold back, but none to raise himself upward, to
get out: When a Cord is fastened about him, if instead of yielding himself, he
holds back what he can; this man now hinders the charitable drawing that others
more strong would lend him.

Fourthly and lastly, Pray to God that he would draw you out of the horrible
Pit, and miry Clay. It is the Holy Spirit that draws; and Christ tells us,
that he gives the Holy Spirit to those that ask him. But I shall turn my
discourse to the Children of God, and show them what is their duty, upon the
consideration of this truth; That no Soul, unless drawn by God, either comes
to, or runs after Christ I shall open it in several particulars.

First, This Doctrine calls to all who apprehend themselves to be come to
Christ, to examine their Calling, whether it be such as amounts to a Divine
Drawing; whether there be any thing wrought in your Souls, which flesh and
blood could not reveal to you; any thing more than could be the effect of the
will of the flesh, or the will of man. I have before enlarged upon this Theme,
showing you, how you may know whether your Faith be a Faith of the operation of
God. The work of God upon your Souls with power. Whether what you take to be
Holiness, be the Sanctification of the Spirit. You have heard that there is an
Assent to the Gospel, which may be given upon mere humane testimony, or upon
probable Arguments of Reason; neither of which is true Faith; that there may be
a Moral Righteousness, and a formal course of performing Religious Duties;
neither of which amount to the Sanctification of the Spirit, or a running after
Christ upon his drawings. I shall here only add, that there are two or three
things which may draw men to some Reformation of life, though Christ draws
not.

1. The interests of men's bodily lives, and healths, and estates. Temperance,
Sobriety, Chastity, are Virtues, in the practice of which men are concerned, as
to these; and though indeed lusts have so far fermented in some debaucht
persons, that these interests will not draw them to such a Reformation, yet in
many who have not been tainted by a vicious Education, and in whom custom has
not begot a second nature, these concerns will draw much, as to which aactions
Grace comes not in, (I mean special Grace^) further than to direct men to do
them from a Principle of Faith, Love, and Obedience to the Will of God, and
with an aim at glorifying God.

2. The Examples of others, especially such as are our Superiors, whom we
honor or reverence, or our near friends and companions whom we love, may have
a great force upon us, that we may please them, or be like unto them, to do
many things. It is of great concern with whom we converse. Many persons in
Religion, write only by Copies, and do acts because they see others do them
whom they love, admire, or have in reverence. These Examples alone will not
only bring men to a conformity to them, in a civil conversation, but also to
forms of Religion and Worship.

3. The inter st^of men's credit and applause in the World will go a great way.
Saul begs of Samuel to honor him before the People. The Pharisees sought the
praise of men, rather than that of God; and indeed this is the general cause of
Hypocrisy. This happens more generally when Religion is in fashion and credit
with the world. I might instance in several other things, but these are
sufficient. Try therefore and examine your Souls, and rest not till you find
what may evidence to you, that you are indeed drawn by Christ.

Secondly, This Doctrine calls to all the People of God for Humility; indeed it
evidenceth Humility a necessary ingredient into Saintship. A proud Child of God
is a contradiction. Grace leaves the Soul nothing to boast in, nothing to be
proud of Is he come to Christ? He had never come, if the Father had not drawn
him: Does he run after him faster than another? he had never run, if he had not
been drawn. There were some in the Church of Corinth, who were puffed up, who
despised Paul, and thought of themselves above what they ought to think; they
were full, they were rich, they had need of nothing. Observe the Argument by
which the Apostle humbleththem, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who has made thee to differ from
another? Or, What have thou which thou have not received? And if thou have
received it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? Art thou
come to Christ? and is not thy neighbor? What follows from hence, but (as the
Apostle to the Romans says) that to thee God has been more good, to him more
severe. Have thou come of thy self, or in thy own strength? Christ hoth told
us; That no man comes to the Son, but he whom the Father draws. Every one as
he is learned and taught of the Father, comes unto the Son. He who is not
drawn, is the object of thy pity, and deserves thy prayers, thy good counsel
and exhortations, all the help thou can give him; but thou have no reason to
triumph, or boast, or glory over him; had not the Lord drawn thee, thou had
been in the same circumstances that he, as as much a stranger to Christ as he
is. It is grace, special grace which alone makes the difference betwixt thee
and him. Do thou find thy self more strong and able than another to resist a
motion to sin, whether from the lusts of thy own heart, or from the suggestions
of of the Devil, or from the World? Thou stand when another is overcome and
falls. Do thou find more ability to spiritual duties, more freedom and
liveliness in the performance of them? still all this is from grace: Without
Christ thou could do nothing; thou have no reason to glory, because what
thou have is received; what thou do is by grace, which thou have received. I
live (says Paul, Gul. 2. 20.) yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God. So as the
Child of God has nothing to glory in, nothing to boast and triumph over his
weaker Brother; for, if he differs, it is grace alone makes him to differ.

Thirdly, This notion calls upon the People of God to bless the Lord, if at
any time they find their hearts more enabled to run after God, Psalm. 18. 29. By
thee (says David) I have run, or I have broken through a Troop; and by my God
have I leaped over a wall. David owns there to God his Victory over his fleshly
enemies; but a Christian's Warfare is more spiritual, against Principalities
and Powers, against spiritual Enemies, mighty Temptations, strong Motions to
sin; does he at any time get a Victory against them? certainly he is obliged to
give God the glory, for it is by him that he breaks through the Troops of the
Prince of darkness. Has he difficult duties to perform, and has he found a
strength to perform them, still the glory is due unto God; for by him he
leapeth over the wall. It is an expression of David's, Psalm. 87. 7. All my
springs are in thee. Our spiritual life is maintained from many springs. A
spring of pardoning grace, because of our renewing guilt. A spring of renewing
and sanctifying grace, because of the frequent lustings of the flesh against
the Spirit, and our being brought so often into a captivity to the Law of our
members. Springs of strengthening, quickening, comforting grace, because of
accidents which weaken our strength, make us dull and heavy in the service of
God, and often to walk in the dark, and see no light. Now all our fresh springs
are in Christ; whither then but to God should we go with our homage, for any
influence of grace received? God laid it to the charge of the Israelites, Hos.
2. 8. that they did not know that he gave them their Corn, and Wine, and Oil,
and Silver, and Gold. Great evils followed this ignorance. 1. God had not that
glory which was due unto him for it. 2 They made an ill use of them, they
multiplied them for Baal. 3. They by this means provoked God to deprive them of
those mercies. Those who do not know, that is, do not believe that their fresh
springs of grace are from God, cannot give God the glory of them, nor will
think themselves so concerned, to use them for the honor and glory of God; the
not doing of which will provoke God^ to deprive them of them. I cannot
understand, how those who derive all their good motions from their own wills,
should understand themselves obliged further than to sacrifice to their own Net
and Yarn, and to applaud themselves instead of giving glory to God. What have
they to praise God for, saving only for making them reasonable creatures, and
so leaving them to the power and freedom of their own natural faculties?

Fourthly and lastly, This notion calls upon all the Children of God to eye
and to use Christ, as the fountain both of their spiritual life and strength.
Christ is the All in all to, and in all his Saints. He is the Lord their
Righteousness, that is, their All as to Justification: The Lord their strength,
that is, as to Sanctification, and in Heaven he will also be to them All in
All. They shall be ever with the Lord: that is their All in Heaven. But here is
our infirmity, that we do not eye Christ in this notion. Hence our doubts, and
fears, because of our guilt of sin, and imperfection in duty; hence our
despondencies as to the Promises, if our Souls be but a little spiritually
sick, we prophecy to our selves no less than spiritual death. We shall one day
die by the hand of our tempter, or by the power of our lusts. Here we do not
act like our Father Abraham; he did not consider the deadness of his own body,
nor the deadness of Sarah's womb; he staggered not at the Promise through
unbelief. We consider only the frame and temper of our own hearts, and what
they are able to produce; we consider not what God is able to perform, nor yet
his Promise, which ensureth his willingness, that he might be faithful. Fear
not (said God to his People) for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy
God, I will strengthen thee, and uphold thee with the hand of my Righteousness,
Isa. 41. 10. and v. 14. Fear not thou worm Jacob, and you men of Israel, for I
am thy Redeemer.

2. Use him as the fountain both of your life and strength. It is with the
spiritual life of the Soul, as with the natural life of the Body; both of them
are from God's breathings: The first is from the breathings of his more common
providence; the second from the breathings of his more special grace, and
spiritual influence: And in the like manner, as the former is also preserved,
and maintained by God upholding our faculties, and the virtues in our meat to
nourish, in our physic to heal us, and keeping off those accidents, which
would ruin and destroy us; use him therefore as the principle and fountain of
your life:

1. By frequent addresses and applications to him: Because our natural life is
from God: We are not excused from endeavoring to our utmost the preservation
of it, whether by the use of food or physic, o^ cautious avoiding what will be
noxious and pernicious to it, because the influence of God's blessing is not to
be expected in the omission and neglect of due means, but from the due use of
them, God concurreth with our endeavors, and use of means, though he puts
forth an influence in order to the effect, beyond the bare virtue of the means:
so as to our spiritual life, the necessity of Christ's influence in order to the
preserving, and upholding it, does not infer a needlesness of our use of such
means as he has instituted, in order to that end, it only teaches us not to
trust in the means alone, but to look beyond them unto Christ. Every gracious
Soul has in itself a principle of spiritual life, as every living Body has in
it a principle of natural life, but as the Soul in the Body of a man may be
obstructed in its operations, so the Soul may be clogged in its spiritual
operations, hindered by lusts, and corruptions, hindered by strong temptations
and motions to sin; these may make the Soul stumble and fall, they may make it
dull, heavy and inactive, weak, and sad, and dejected; here is need of Christ's
further drawings, in order to it we must cry unto him, we must lie in the way
in which he uses to meet Souls with such dispensations.

2. Keep up in your Souls a dependency upon Christ, without distrust and
unbelief; when you cannot live upon the sense of strengthening, quickening,
consolatory influences, yet live upon faith, as to them; God is never so much
honored as when he is trusted, when his Servants live a dependent life upon
him, for whatsoever he has promised. It speaks a great faith to live upon a
promise, when we cannot live by sight; a Christian should live by faith upon
Christ as to his spiritual influences, with reference to the Enemies of his
Soul, as David lived by Faith upon God, and his promises, and providence with
reference to his worldly Enemies, Psalm. 118. 10, 11, 12. All Nations (says he)
compassed me about, but in the name of the Lord I will destroy them: They
compassed me about, yea they compassed me about, but in the name of the Lord I
will destroy them. They compassed me about like Bees, they are quenched as the
fire of Thorns, for in the name of the Lord I will destroy them. If our
strength depends upon Christ's drawings, we have no reason to distrust because
of our own weakness, and have nothing to do but to do what in us lies,
depending upon Christ for his further supplies and influence.

Sermon XXII.
Canticles 1. 4. Draw me, and We will run after thee.

I Have done with the Spouse's Petition, Draw me. I now come to the Argument,
or her Promise, And we will run after thee. She begged her Beloved's drawing;
she promises her own running. From the Petition I observed; That the Soul must
be first drawn, before it will come to, or run after Christ. This I have
discoursed largely. I come now to the second Proposition I raised from these
words:

Prop. That the gracious Soul being first drawn, will run after Christ.

Till it be drawn, it will not, it cannot run; when once drawn, it will run.
This Proposition I shall open, prove, and apply. In the Explication I have only
the term running to open. I opened the term draw largely in my Discourse upon
the former Proposition, where I told you it signified, a powerful gracious
influence of the Holy Spirit upon the Soul, persuading, alluring, and
commanding the Soul's Obedience. It is an act both sweet, and powerful. Sweet,
for God draws with the Cords of Love, as he speaks, Jer. 31. 3. yet powerful,
for the Soul is made willing; the will is not forced, but melted, renewed, and
changed, and contrariwise inclined to what was before its inclination. So as my
meaning is, that when God has once, by the sweet and powerful influence of his
Spirit upon the Soul of a man, allured, persuaded* and commanded the Soul to
its duty, then it will run after him. The only question to be spoken to is,
what is meant by Running. When I opened the Text, I told you of several things
imported by this term, I shall now more largely discourse them

1. Running implies willingness to the motion. It implies motion, and so is
opposed to lying, or si^ting still. It is a saying of Augustine, Certum est nos
velle, quum volumus, agere quum agimur. It is (says he) certain, that we will,
when we are made willing, that we act, when we are acted, sed ille facit ut
velimus, it is God that makes us to be willing. He gives to will and to do.
Men may run, that are not originally willing, it is a mischief that they fear,
which makes them run, but yet even then they move willingly, though it be a
danger imminent upon them, which makes them so willing. But this motion is a
much sweeter motion, they are made willing first, and then they move out of
choice, willingly: until the Soul be renewed, and changed, it moves not at all
toward God, it may move to natural actions, from that principle of natural
life, of which it is possessed. It may move to moral actions, from that
principle of life which every reasonable Soul is possessed of. But it moves
not to any truly spiritual actions, because it wants a principle of Spiritual
life. But this being infused in regeneration, to will being given unto it, it
moves in the ways of God, and that from a principle within itself. You (says
the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 1.) has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and
sins. It moves not, as a mere Machine, or Instrument, from the power and force
of a foreign agent, but as a living creature, from itself, and a principle
within itself. Yet not without a divine influence, look as it is in natural
motions, though they flow from a a principle of life in a man, yet they are not
without an influence of more ordinary common providence, upholding our natural
faculties; hence the Apostle says of God, in him we live, move and have our
being: So it is as to our Spiritual motions, the Soul moves from the
principles of Spiritual life infused into it, from the principles of the new
creature, but yet not without the influence of the Spirit of Grace upon it,
upholding those habits of Grace, which are infused into the Soul, and exciting
it to, and assisting of it in Spiritual actions. Without me (says Christ) you
can do nothing. he does not say, without me you cannot do much, or you cannot
do great things, but you can do nothing. But yet to will is present with the
Soul, yea and to do, though it has no strength to do what it would. And as the
Soul has need of a daily influence of Grace, in its ordinary course of
Spiritual action, so it has need of more special and powerful influences, when
it meets with a work more difficult, for (says the Apostle) 2 Cor. 3. 5. We
are not sufficient to think one good thought as of our selves, for now our
sufficiency is from God. This is now Gratia co-operans, cooperating Grace, in
the exercises of which we are not mcerly passive, as in the reception of the
first Grace; as it was with the Israelites in their journey toward Canaan,
Numb. 9. 17. 18. etc. They kept pace with the Cloud, and with the Pillar of
fire, when the Cloud moved, they moved, when the Cloud stood still, they stood
still. At the Commandment of the Lord they journied, and at the Commandment of
the Lord they pitched, as long as the Cloud abode upon the Tabernacle, they
rested in their Tents. And when the Cloud tarried long, upon the Tabernacle
many days, then they -- journied not. So it is with such as are Israelites
indeed, in their spiritual motions toward the new Jerusalem, the City of God.
If the Grace of God assists not, they move not, and according to the degree of
its influence, they move more, or less. But yet they move, and willingly move,
though not without the cooperating and assisting Grace of God.

2. Secondly, Running implies strength in the motion, thus it is opposed to
creeping, or walking saintly. The weak man may creep, and go slowly, but he
cannot run. When the Lord draws, the Soul will not only move toward God, and
that freely and willingly, but it will move strongly; it will find strength
against sin, and strength unto duties, Job. 17. 9. The righteous man will hold
on in his way, and he that is of clean hanas shall grow stronger, and stronger.
God commands that we should love h m with all our strength, Luke 10. 27. When
the Lord draws the Soul, then it runs with all its strength, loves God
with a love that is stronger than the Grave; then it believes with a strong
says, and obeys with a perfect heart. While God was present with Sampson,
though they tied his Hair to a Beam, and shut up the Gates of the City, he
could carry away Beam and Gates, though he had no more then the jaw bone of an
Ass, he could with it slay a thousand men, when God was departed from him, he
could not get out of his Enemies hands, though he had no such opposition; when
a Soul finds the power and presence of Divine Grace, though it has strong
corruptions, and meet with strong Temptations, yet they are all nothing to it,
it easily over all becomes more than Conqueror. Peter at one time, at the
command of Christ, walks to him upon the Sea, at another time wanting the same
special assistance, is overcome by a silly Maid in the High Priests Hall; the
opposite Temptation was much the same in both cases, viz. from the sear of his
life, which was in as apparent danger from the Sea, as from the Enemies in the
Hall of the High Priest.

3. Running argues speed, so it is opposed to walking a footpace, or step by
step. When the Soul is by God drawn unto him, and wants not his cooperating
Grace drawing him after him, it will not only move toward God, and that with
strength, and courage, but it will move with nimbleness and readiness. As it is
with the body sometimes, though it has its usual strength, and be able to work
as usually, yet it is seized with a torpor, and laziness, there is a dullness,
and inactivity upon it: So it is with the Soul, its Spiritual distemper many
times, is not so much a weakness, as a spiritual deadness, dullness, and
inactivity, so as it wants a promptness, and readiness to its duty: It cannot
say with David, My heart is ready O God, my heart is ready, I will pray and
sing Praise. Running argues the absence of this ill temper. If the Lord draws
the Soul, it will not only serve him, but it will serve him with a ready mind,
and free Spirit; praise and duty will wait for God in the Soul; it will not
only walk, but run the ways of Gods Commandments. David has an expression to
this purpose, Psalm. 119. 60. I made have, and delayed not to keep thy
Commandments. Every Soul that loves God keeps the Commandments of God, it is
the test of our love to God. He that has my commandments, and keeps them
(says Christ, John 14 21.) he it is that loves me. But there is a great deal
of difference in men's keeping, and fulfilling the commandments of God. The
meanest, weakest Christian does in his measure keep the Lords commandments, all
the commandments of God, Psalm. 119. 6. Then (says David) shall I not be
ashamed, when I have a respect to all thy Commandments. He that has the least
of saving Grace, sets the law of the Lord in his Eye, and makes the word of God
a light to his feet, and a Lanthorn to his paths, and has a reverence and
regard to all the commandments of God, and To will is present with him, he
would walk perfectly with God, but in many things he does offend, through
weakness, and in many things through a dullness, and heaviness which sometimes
does affect, and afflict his Soul, he does not only want a strength to perform,
but he wants a life, and quickness of Spirit in what he does, but now if the
Lord draws, the Soul makes have and delayeth not to keep the Commandments of
God. Jacob himself had forgot the vow which he had made unto God, when he fled
from the face of his Brother Esau; God draws him, says unto him, Genesis 35. 1.
Arise go up to Bethel, make there an Altar to God, etc. then Jacob made have,
and delayed not, v. 2. When there is a suspension of this drawing Grace in its
cooperating, and concurring influences, the Soul moves heavily, like Pharaohs
Chariots; when the Wheels are taken off, it has a view of its duty, and lies
under convictions as to it, and it may be finds strength enough to the
performance of it, but wants a readiness of mind, and is ready when it has a
monition to duty from such as wish well to it, to say as he said to Paul, Go
thy way, when I am at leisure I will send for thee. Or tomorrow, or at such or
such a time I will do it; as the young man in the Gospel whom Christ bid follow
him, said, suffer me first to go and bury my dead; So sometimes the Soul is
ready to say, suffer me first to go, and do such or such a thing. So the Soul
is ready to delay and put off good motions, but when the Lord draws, then it
makes have and delayeth not to keep his Commandments. It longs for times of
duty. It is glad when they say unto it, Come, let us go up to the House of the
Lord, it says, when shall I come and appear before God? There is a time when
the Soul says, when will the Sabbath come, the hour of Prayer come, that I may
appear before God, and pour out my Soul before him? This is now when God
draws hard, when the Spirit of God comes upon the Soul, in a more than
ordinary influence: and there is a time when the Soul says, when will the
Sabbath he gone, the hour of duty be run out? This is when the Lord does not
draw in such a manner. The believing Soul like the flowers, opens or shuts, as
the Sun of righteousness shines more or less upon it. Let me again allude to
that Text, Psalm. 65. 1. Praise watteth for God in Zion. Praise is a rent due
from our Souls to God, we farm much mercy from the great Landlord of all good,
Praise is all the rent we pay. Now look as it is in the world, a bad tenant
never has his rent ready so it is with a bad Man, he lives upon mercy, and it
may be has liberal portions of mercy, but God never hears of him to pay his
acknowledgments. A good Tenant, if the times be good, has always his rent
ready for his Landlord, so as his rent waits for his Landlord: but if the
times be bad, even the best Tenants, though they have an heart to pay their
rent, yet may not have it to pay, their Landlords may wait for their rents; so
it is with the best Souls. If the Sun of righteousness shines out clearly upon
them, and the Spirit of Grace draws powerfully, Praise waits for God in
their Souls. If not, God may wait for his Praises. Hence David so often
prays. Quicken me according to thy word, Psalm. 119. 25. Quicken me in thy
way, v. 37. Quicken me in thy righteousness, v. 40.

I have now opened the term Run. The Proposition opened lies thus before you,
That the Soul of a Christian, once drawn not only by the motives and arguments
of the Gospel improved by the gifts of Gods Minister, but by the secret, and
powerful influence of the Spirit of God upon it, does no longer lie still (as
the Soul dead in sin) nor move from a foreign power put forth upon it, but
from an inward principle within itself, and that not weakly and impotently, but
with might and strength, and that not dully, and heavily, but with life,
freedom, speed, and cheerfulness, after God in the way of its duty, keeping the
Commandments of God with its whole heart; being first made willing it wills,
being first set on work, it works, yet not of itself merely nor principally.
I live (says the Apostle) yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life
which I now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God. I can do all things
(says the same Apostle to the Philippians) through Christ that strengthens
me, and without me you can do nothing, says Christ to his Disciples, Joh. 14.
3.

The truth of this further appears from Gods Peoples promises of running upon
Gods drawing, in that excellent 119 Psalm. you shall find many passages of this
tendency. v. 32. I will run the ways of thy Commandments, when thou shall
enlarge myheart. 33 Teach me O Lord the way of thy* Statutes, and I shall keep
it unto the end. v. 34. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law, yea I
shall observe it with my whole heart, v. 35. Make me to go in the paths of thy
Commandments. v. 36. Incline my heart to thy testimonies. The enlarging of the
heart, his prayer for giving him understanding, making him to go in the paths
of Gods Commandments, etc. are but all several phrases, expressive of the
drawing influences of Divine Grace, which are followed with the promises of
running, keeping Gods Commandments, yea, keeping them with his whole heart,
keeping them to the end. So v. 7. I will praise thee with uprightness of heart,
when I shall have learned thy righteous Judgments. So v. 41. Let thy mercies
come unto me, even thy salvation, v. 44. So shall I keep thy law continually.

What needs any further proof of this than what every good Christian has from
its own experience? Who is there that walks with God, that always finds the
same spiritual temper? that does not find, that he cannot at sometimes do as he
can, and does do at other times? Every good Christian finds the same willing at
all times. To will is always present with him; but who finds the same degree
of strength, the same readiness, and cheerfulness of Spirit in Gods service at
all times? Now from whence is this, if not from the inequal drawings of Divine
Grace? if the Soul be drawn strongly, then is it strong, if weakly, it moves
accordingly. Being drawn, then it runs. Being at first drawn to Christ, it
moves, being further drawn, it runs.

The reason of this lies. 1. Partly in the Souls renewed nature. 2. Partly in
the nature of special Divine Grace.

1. All motion is from a principle of life. Natural motion from a Natural life,
Spiritual motion from the Spiritual life, and the truly Spiritual motion is as
much an indication of a Spiritual life that principleth it, as the Natural
motion is an indication of that Natural life from which it flows, and the
Spiritual motion is as much the necessary effect of a principle of Spiritual
life, as the Natural motion is the necessary effect of a Natural life. So as
the Soul being once quickened by the quickening Spirit, cannot but move in its
Spiritual motions. But look as it is in the natural motions, some motion must
attend all natural life, yet it is more or less, more or less strong, or weak,
and there is a more or less cheerfulness, and readiness, attends the motion of
the natural body, as the faculties of the Soul that animates it, are more or
less upheld by the influence of Divine Providence, and the encumbrances of that
life are more kept off by the power of Divine Providence: So it is as to our
Spiritual life, there is in that Soul that is once drawn to Christ, and so
alive to God, a seed of God abiding, which is a constant principle of life, and
is always working, and moving to, and in its proper operations, but yet these
motions are more or less strong, free, and cheerful, according to the influence
of the holy Spirit of God, and the workings of it in the Soul, which being a
free agent, sometimes puts itself forth more, sometimes less, and according to
that are the Souls motions either more quick and cheerful, or more dull and
heavy, but being once drawn to Christ, it moves, and moves willingly from a
principle within itself, being made willing it wills, and chooses the things
that please God, though it must be further drawn before it runs. It requires
no more than a renewed sanctified heart to move for and toward God, but it
requires an enlarged heart, to run after God.

2. Secondly, It will yet further appear from the Nature of Divine Grace, in
its special saving operations. There are those who will acknowledge no Grace
but exciting Grace in the proposal of the Gospel, and pressing the Grace of it
by those gifts which God has for that end given to his Ministers, whatsoever
else is done in the Soul, they will have to flow from the power of man's will,
lest free to good or evil; but we say this is not enough, there must also be a
working Grace, applied to the Soul in conversion, and a co-working Grace, which
is necessary to the Soul after conversion. Now all special Grace, whether it be
operans, or cooperans, that which we call working, or that which we call
coworking, is effective; those who will own nothing but an exciting Grace,
allow it no proper effect upon the Soul, for if it be productive of an effect,
it is more than exciting. Now here indeed lies the difference betwixt common
and special Grace, betwixt the Grace that brings salvation, and that which
only proposes and offers Salvation. The first is always effective of its end,
the latter is never effective, but is determined in the exhibition and offer of
good, which man is left to his own freedom, and choice whether he will accept
yea or no, which being admitted, it is not possible but that the Soul once
drawn by it, must run, or rather will run, for now it moves from the inward
principle of a renewed nature, and if working special Grace be esfective, and
fails not in its operations upon the unrenewed Soul, it is much more
effective of its end in the Soul that is changed, and renewed where it is but
assistant to the renewed nature, so as the Soul being drawn, will run, First,
From that principle of spiritual life which is in the renewed nature always a
principle of some motion, though sometimes more, and sometimes less; and
Secondly, From the powerful assistance of that special Grace which God puts
forth upon the Soul in its renewed state, helping it over those mountains of
difficulties which sometimes it meets with, and removing those stumbling
blocks, which corruption, and the malignity of the world, or its grand
adversary, oft-times lays in its way. I have thus far opened the proposition,
I shall now apply it. First,

Use 1.
1. By way of Caution. Blindness is a great Mother of boldness and confidence,
and Love is the Mother of jealousy and suspicion, hence it is, that the natural
man knowing nothing of spiritual things, nor understanding the state of the
Soul by nature, nor the workings of God in the Soul, turning it from sin unto
God, seldom or never examineth, or questioneth his state. The knowing Christian
fullest of Love, for God, finds difficulty to satisfy himself as to his
Spiritual state. The first concludes himself sufsiciently drawn, because he
sits under the preaching of the Gospel, and finds sometimes some good motions,
and impressions, whether he obeys them or no, whether he be turned into the
likeness of the Gospel, yea or no. The other, though he does find his heart
renewed, and changed, tho he does find, that to will is present with him, yet
because he wants strength to perform, because he does not find at all times,
that promptness, and readiness of mind, that freedom, activity and cheerfulness
of Spirit, which he thinks he has sometimes found, and which he sees others
triumph, and rejoice in, questioneth whether he was drawn, yea or no. Now such
a Soul ought to distinguish,

1. Betwixt a being drawn to Christ, and a being drawn after Christ. It is
true, there is no Soul that is drawn to Christ, but shall be drawn after him,
but yet these are two things, both the acts of special, powerful Grace, but yet
in a different kind, and degree.

2. Secondly. Betwixt a real drawing after him, and a gradual drawing. I told
you before that all Divine drawing signifies a sweet, and powerful influence
of the Spirit upon the Soul, by which it is allured, changed, and melted into
that duty which the Soul owes to God in obedience to the Gospel; now as it is
in our drawing of a thing, or person to us, we may put forth more or less power
as we please: So in the divine drawings, though divine drawing be a mercy of
that nature, that it shall and will follow the Soul all the days of its life,
God will never depart from the Soul to which he is thus united, to do it good,
and he will put his fear into its heart, that it shall never depart from him;
yet he puts forth more or less of his power, according to the good pleasure of
his own will, and the conduct of his own infinite wisdom, and according also to
our behavior toward him; let me for the relief of such a Soul lay down three
conclusions.

1. First, I say there is no Soul by the Father drawn to Christ, but that Soul
is also, and shall be by the Spirit drawn after him. Upon the Souls being drawn
to Christ, there follows an Union between Christ and the Spirit of Christ,
and the Soul that is so drawn. Christ after that time is in the Soul, and the
Soul is in Christ, hence his Spirit is put into their hearts, and dwells in
them, a multitude of phrases of that nature are to be found in holy writ. It is
called an ingrasting into Christ. Now it is not possible, that the Soul should
be ingrasted into such a stock, but it must partake of the fatness of the
stock, and grow up in him, the seed of God abiding in the Soul, it cannot but
grow and spring up in it. Some Communion with Christ always follows this
union. So that unless the union with Christ could be wholly broken and
dissolved, its communion with Christ, cannot be wholly interrupted; interrupted
it may be, but I say not wholly interrupted. Secondly,

2. The least influence of special Grace keeps the Soul moving for, and toward
God, and in a willingness to sorve and obey him, and preserves it from a total
falling away. Papists say that we may fall away both totally, and finally,
Lutherans say we may fall away totally, but not finally, but we say, the
justified Soul can neither fall away totally, nor yet finally, if he could fall
away totally, the union betwixt Christ and the Soul, must be dissolved, or the
union remaining, the communion consequent to that union might be wholly
interrupted, neither of which can be.

3. But Thirdly, The holy Spirit dwelling in the Souls of Believers, and
working in them puts forth its power, sometimes more, sometimes less, as a
free agent, and according to the good pleasure of his own will, as is the
drawing, so is the running. Hence the Soul moves, sometimes with more,
sometimes with lesser strength, sometimes with more promptness, and readiness,
sometimes with less, as the holy Spirit is pleased more or less to exert and
put forth his power, in, and upon the Soul. Now from this discourse it
appears, that a Soul that finds that God has renewed, and changed it so
far, that to will is present with it, and it has an heart to do, though it
wants such a strength, such a freedom to, and cheerfulness in duty, as others
rejoice in, and itself has sometimes found, yet has no reason to conclude,
that it was never truly drawn to Christ, because as it apprehends it is not
drawn after him, all the evidence of which that it has, is because it does not
run as at other times; all this may be, yet the Soul may be truly drawn to him,
and also drawn after him, though not so powerfully as it may be it has felt
itself, at other times, or seen others drawn.

Use 2.
In the second place, This notion may inform us. That a running after Christ is
the duty of a Christian. The life of a Child of God is in Scripture, ordinarily
expressed under the notion of a walking with God, a phrase that some in this
age would scoff at, but one of the ancientest by which in Scripture a course of
holiness is expressed, Genesis 5. 24. Enoch walked with God, and was not; but now
if walking be taken in opposition to running, there is something more than
walking with God, the duty of a believer; even this running after Christ which
I have been describing to you. Hence it is also expressed under this notion. So
the Spouse here expresses it, we will run after thee. So David, I will run the
ways of thy Commandments. So St. Paul, so run that you may obtain, we are not
only under an obligation to serve God, but to serve him with all our might, all
our strength, to serve him with readiness, and freedom of Spirit; this is that
which elsewhere is called a growing in Grace, and corresponds with the
Israelites motion and pace to Jerusalem, mentioned, Psalm. 84. a going from
strength to strength. It is a long journey that we have to go, from the minimum
quodsic, the least degree of Grace, to the maximum quodsic, the fullness of
stature which is in Jesus Christ, and therefore we had need run; sinners run in
their sinful courses. Lusts get strength, and discover their activity daily,
men make have to be complete in sinning, to fill up the measure of their
iniquities. Men make have to be rich in the world, and shall the Children of
God make no have to be rich in Grace? David says, My Soul follows hard after
thee, Psalm. 63. 8, St. Paul tells us that he pressed forward toward the Mark,
Phil. 3. 14. Ah! where are those Souls of whom we can say they run after
Christ. How few are those Souls that follow hard after God, that go as fast as
they can, though it may be they cannot go as fast as they would.

1. How many are there in the world that appear to us as if they were moving
after God, but move merely as Machines and Ingines, they are rather moved from
some foreign principle without them, than move from any intrinsic principle;
all hypocrites, all formal professors do so, they follow Christ for the Loaves,
or are drawn from the consideration of their own credit and reputation, some
are drawn to some degrees of duty, from the reflections of their natural
conscience; this is now no running after God, they may do many things which God
requires, but it is from no internal principle.

2. How man are there that instead of running, halt? We dare not say that they
do not move at all, we hope their hearts are right, we hope they are the
Children of Jonathan, but they are lame of their feet, with one foot they seem
to go right, with another they fail, they are like Naaman the Syrian, who
pretended that he would serve God, even the God of Israel, only he desires that
the Lord would be merciful to him, as to his bowing down in the House of
Rimmon. They are neither uniform nor steady, and constant in their service of
God, they seem to run in public duties, but follow them into their Families
and Closets, there they halt. They appear like those that run in duties of more
external communion with God, but halt in duties of more secret, heart communion
with God. Nor are they constant; that of the Apostle to the Galatians is
applicable to them, Gal. 5. 7. You did run well, who hindered you? Heretofore
one would have thought them in a great zeal for God, but they are grown cold,
and remiss and are very careless of their conversations, these never truly ran,
though they appeared to others to have ran: at least they never ran so as to
obtain. It is said, Isaiah 40. 12. That they that wait upon the Lord, shall
renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings like the Eagle, they shall
run, and not be weary, walk and not faint.

3. How many more are there that seem to stand at a stay? We cannot say they
halt, that they are not uniform, or not constant, they are not to be accused of
any notorious lapses, or goings backward, but alas they are come yet but to a
little pitch in religion, their knowledge of the things of God is but little,
that of the Apostle, Heb. 5. 12. is applicable to them. Whereas for the time
they might have been teachers of others, they had need be themselves taught the
first principles of Religion, and must be spoken to as Babes in Christ, such as
had need of milk, and not of strong meat, and truly this is much the fault of
good People, they do not grow in the knowledge of Christ, we see something of
heat in them, in whom we want a great deal of light. Others seem to be
increased in light, but to be decayed in heat, and warmth for God; sure we are
we see a great decay of religion amongst Christians, or at least but a small
improvement, they have in profession seemed to be such as have walked with God
a long time, we do not see them running yet. It is true, some plants grow
downward in the root, when they do not grow upward into the air, so as their
growth is not so sensible, and difcernable. So it is possible there may be some
such Christians, who though their proficiency may not so much appear in their
outward performances, which requires a growth in gifts, and parts, yet they may
be grown more in faith and love, and hatred of sin, and resolution for God,
etc. and this is a good running, in Grace; they grow best who grow in the root,
not those who improve most, in leaves, and more exterior branches of Christian
profession. 2. If Christians cannot satisfy themselves that they run in any
sense, it would be enquired from whence they are hindered, whether from some
cause from within or from without. 1. A man may be hindered in his bodily
running by some inward obstructions, bodily decay, or weakness; this must be
cured or purged out; Christians ought to search whether they have no secret
lust, no love to the world, no greedy desire to be rich, nothing of sensuality
which weakens their Souls, and keeps them from this running after Christ. 2. As
a man may be kept from running from some external cause. So may a Christian
also be hindered in his spiritual race, from some ill company with which he is
linked, from some impressions of his grand adversary the Devil. From the
withdrawings of Divine Grace, those measures of it I mean which are necessary
to a Christians running, though not to the upholding of the spiritual life. If
a Christian be hindered from such ill company as he cannot avoid, or from some
temptations of Satan, or from such divine desertions, he is the object of our
pity, but not to be hastily censured or condemned, but in the mean time he
ought to lie under convictions of his duty to run, though it be his misery,
that at present he cannot run.

^ Br.
Secondly, We may from hence learn one great reason, Why many move not at all
after God; and also of that uneven pace which is discernable even in the best
of God's People.

The greater part of the World moves not after Christ at all. One Man runs
after his sensual satisfactions, anoher after sensible enjoyments, making have
to be rich, few after Christ^: What is the reason? The Scripture lays the
fault upon the immediate proximate cause, that is, Man's perverse will, he will
not come to Christ that he might live; but there is an higher cause, for no
more would any other Soul have done, if the Lord had not drawn it, and made it
partaker of his powerful, special Grace, had it pleased the Lord to have done
as much for those other Souls, they would have come, they would have run
likewise. But you will say then men's Damnation is from God, and is not caused
so much from their not running, as from God's not drawing. I have before spoken
to this Objection, but it comes again a cross me. I will add but a word, or
two, or rather repeat what I have already said in the case.

The Objection were indeed considerable, if, 1. God did not in some degree draw
every Soul to whom the Gospel is preached,

2. If the Sinner did to his utmost obey those drawings, and God yet denied his
further and more effectual Grace. But as I have before showed you, there is no
Soul that lives under the preaching of the Gospel, but is drawn, drawn by
Exhortations, Arguments, Promises of reward, etc. the proper Cords of a Man.
Nay, there are none amongst the Heathens, but are drawn by the Cords of common
gracious Providence, God (says the Apostle) leaves not them without witness.
Now though none of these Cords are sufficient to draw the Soul home to Christ,
yet they are sufficient with that power which is left in the will of Man, to
engage him to many acts of Reformation, and to the performance of many acts of
moral discipline; yea, and of Religion too, (that part of it, which lies in
Bodily exercise) if men will not do what they have a power to do, how shall
their destruction be from God, for denying them his special grace? Especially
when we say, That although the good use of common Grace meriteth nothing at the
hand of God, yet God does never deny his special Grace, but where common Grace
is first wilfully abused; and thus the destruction of Sinners lies at their
own Doors, not because that if they would they might repent, believe, and turn
to God, but because, that if they would, they might make such an use of the
common Grace of God, as in the use of it, God would not be wanting to them in
the giving them that further power to Spiritual acts, which they have not of
themselves. But now if we rise higher, and enquire, how some come to use common
Grace better than others, when all have an equal Natural power, to do those
acts of Moral discipline and of Religion also, which extend no further then to
a bodily labor; how it comes to pass, that some get leave of themselves, of
their Lusts and Passions to do them, others do not? We must say there is an
influence of God's Spirit of Grace more upon the one than the other inclining
them thereto; but so long as others have a Natural power thus far which they do
not use, God is acquitted of their Blood, and their Damnation is of themselves,
though his abounding grace be more seen as to others whom he does further
incline to a better use of common Grace, and their natural abilities; but of
this I have spoken before, and do now little more than repeat.

2. The same account must be given of the uneven pace which is discernable in
such as are Christians indeed. The running of God's own People is not alike,
though they have all the same renewed Nature, and inward principle of life, To
will is present with them all, yet they have not all an equal strength to
perform. Nor an equal life, liveliness, freedom, and cheerfulness in their
walkings with God, there may be much blame to be laid upon themselves, for not
using the Grace of God as they ought to do, not keeping their Watch as they
ought to keep it, but the Original cause is the want of Divine drawings, which
are sometimes withheld as a punishment to some loose and careless walking
sometimes, as the product of Divine Wisdom for the exercise of some habits of
Grace, which are not so well tried and exercised under the full influences of
divine grace upon them, as under the partial withdrawings of it.

There might be other uses made of this point, but they would be mostly such,
as were proper to the former Doctrine, and there enlarged upon. So as I shall
proceed no further in Application of this Discourse.

Serman XXIII.
Canticles 1. 4. Draw me, and We will run after thee.

YOu have heard the Spouses Petition opened, what she means, when she says to
her Beloved, Draw me; you have heard her Promise or Argument opened, We will
run after thee. She prays for drawing, she promises her running. Drawing was
the act of her beloved. Running was her own Act, though in force of his
drawing. But here is (as I before observed) an alteration of the Number, She
says, Draw me; She adds, We will run. She begs but for one, she promises
for more, she prays for her self, she promises for others. How is this?

1. I told you when I opened the words, that some by We understand, The Spouse
and the Spirit of God in conjunction. I, and thy Grace. This is a Sense hinted
by Genebrard and De Ponte upon the Text, and it may seem to have some color
from that of Christ, Without me you can do nothing, and that of Paul, Gal. 2.
20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live
in the Flesh; I live by the Faith of the Son of God. It is a great truth, that
when ever the Soul runs after Christ, the holy Spirit assists its motion; but
yet it is drawing, that is Christ's and his Spirits work, running is ours.
Grace works together with the Child of God, but it works by drawing, the Soul
works by running; it is not Christ or the Spirit of Christ that is in us, that
runs the way of God's Commandments, but it is the Soul of the Christian, in
and with the strength, and power of Christ. Grace is the Principle of our
Spiritual life, like the Spirit within Ezechiels Wheels, without which the
Wheels move not; but they are the Wheels that move. I cannot therefore agree
this sense.

2. Bernard has another Notion, She begs (says he) The sour part for her
self, the sweeter part for others, but this is an interpretation which to me
seems to have many faults. 1. It makes the drawing here prayed for, to be a
drawing by Afflictions, which are indeed the Lord's Cords, but such as he
seldom draws Souls to Christ by, not are they the proper matter of our
Prayer. Secondly, It turns the Promise into a Prayer, and makes the Sense to
be to this purpose, Lord for me, Draw me with the Cords of Affliction: Let
others run after thee; but I see no ground at all for such an Interpretation.
It is not others, but We, she includes her self. It is not, let others run,
but we will run.

3. Thirdly, If by the Spouse we here understand the Church speaking, The
Church being many yet make but one Body. So the Spouse prays for her whole
Body which is but one, and says properly, draw me, and then promises for
every part, Romans 12. 5. We being many are one Body; She prays for Grace, she
promises not only action, and obedience, but unity in her obedience and
action, God's Kingdom is not divided against its self, not different from it
self, especially in the Fundamentals of Faith, and Holiness. They are an Army
in order, and fighting together against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil;
but this still is more than I will run.

4. I rather choose another sense of this Promise. A promise of an endeavor to
cause others to run after Christ, or a Prophecy that others would run, so as
the sense should be this; Lord draw me, and I will endeavor to be a cause of
more than my own running after thee; others seeing, or hearing of thy Grace and
Goodness to me, shall also by my example be provoked to run after thee. In this
sense I shall carry it. The Proposition resulting from hence is this,

Prop. That God's sweet, and powerful drawing of one Soul, to, or after
himself, will be a means of causing others also to run after him.

God's drawing of John, 1 John 26. draws first two other Disciples, who when
they heard him, followed Jesus: and Andrew drew Simon Peter, v. 40, Christ's
drawing of Philip, was the occasion of Nathaniel 's running, v. 45. Philip
finds Nathaniel, and says unto him, We have found him of whom Moses in the
Law, and the Prophets did write. Christ draws the Woman of Samaria, John 4.
v. 28. She leaves her Water pot, and goes her way into the City, and says to
the men of the City, Come see a Man, which told me all things that I ever did,
is not this the Christ? Then they went out of the City, and came unto him, and
v. 41. Many more believed because of his own word.

There are two main grounds upon which the truth of this Proposition depends.
1. The first is the alluring nature of Divine Grace. 2. The Second is, The
exceeding Charity of every pious Soul. I will alittle enlarge upon them.

1. I say, first, Divine Grace in the effects of it is exceedingly attractive.
The love of God (says the Apostle) constrains; nor does it only constrain
the Soul in which it is shed abroad through the Holy Ghost, but it also
constrains others, at least to some inquiries after it. The Fathers kindness
to one Child makes every Child more studious to please him, and the Masters
kindness to one Servant, encourages others to their duty. We have not perfect
single Hearts, to act merely in compliance with a pree^pt, even Moses himself
had an eye to the recompense of reward. Nor are we only encouraged from the
prospect of a futur recompense, but we must also be encouraged, from some
promises, or hopes of present assistance. Solomon tells us, The Sluggard says,
there is a Lion in the way We are prone to fancy Lions, where indeed there are
none, The way of holiness is a plain and lightsome way, no rough nor dark way,
God has said, Waysaring men though fools, shall not err therein; but we know
not how to adventure, and indeed there are Lions and Mountains in the way. The
roaring Lion is in the way, who goes about continually seeking whom may he
devour, and we have Mountains of Lusts and Corruptions, as well as of Worldly
Temptations that are in our Mat. 11. 30.
way. Christ has told us, that his Yoke is easy, his burden is light. We
cannot understand it; Is it an easy thing to deny our selves, to take up the
Cross, and to follow Christ? To keep a steady even pace with God? The very
Thoughts of the difficulty of a Christians life, make many to turn away from
it, looking upon the Yoke of Christ, as a Yoke which no Flesh and Blood is able
to bear. But now the effects of Divine Grace upon one Soul here incourageth
many others. We are like Travelers, going toward the City of God, we meet with
Rivers over which we must pass, the River seems deep, and the Stream seems to
run swift, here our Hearts fail; but as it is with earthly Travelers in such a
case, if one ventures through, and gets safe on shore, then many follow: So
when we see some that were under our discouragments from entering upon the ways
of God, yet through Grace got into them, and finding them easy, and pleasant,
this is a great encouragement to others. I have known some who have long
stumbled at this Stone: Better never to know the way of Righteousness, never to
enter into a course of Profession, than having entered into it to fall Back;
that I shall do, I shall never be able to hold on in a course of Duty; I shall
never conquer such Corruptions, etc. Now when God draws but one Soul, others
are encouraged to run, Psalm. 40. v. 1, 2, 3. I waited (says David) patiently
for the Lord; he inclined to me, and heard my cry. He brought me up also out of
an horrible Pit, out of the miry Clay, and set my seet up-a Rock, and
established my goings, and he has put a new Song into my Mouth, even praise
unto our God. Many shall see it, and fear, and trust in the Lord. One blessed
Martyr, is upheld by God, and Burns cheerfully, his ashes set many others on
fire. From hence it is that the conversation of Christians is a Winning
conversation, and Christians are persuaded to walk, that others may be won by
them. There is nothing unlovely in the effects of special Grace. Serenity and
peace of Conscience, contentation in all Estates, Justice, and Charity toward
men, they are all the effects of Grace, and exceeding lovely in the Eyes of all
reasonable Creatures.

2. A second ground of this lies in that Charity, or good will toward men,
which is the steady effect of this grace; whosoever is taught of God to love
God, is also taught to love men; all men with a love of good will, though the
Saints only with a love of complacency or delight. Two things in pursuit of
this will be found the effects of true Saving grace, in every Soul that has
been made partaker of it.

1. First, Such a Soul will reveal the grace that it has received. 2. It will
excite, and quicken others to look after their share in the same grace.

1. First, A gracious Soul is always communicative. Grace, in the Soul, is
like new Wine in the Bottle, which must have vent, see David, Psalm. 66. 16.
Come, and hear all you that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for
my Soul. I cried unto him with my Mouth, and he was extolled by my Tongue.
Christ when he healed the lame Man in the Gospel bid him, that he should tell
no Man of it, yet he must go and publish it. He never when he heals a Soul,
says to it, Tell no Man of it, nay, he says the quite contrary. When thou art
converted (says he to Peter Strengthen thy Brethren, Luke 22. 32. Such a Soul
cannot hold its peace. Job could not eat his bodily morsels alone, but much
less can the Soul eat his Spiritual Morsels, and let none know of it. If the
Woman in the parable could not find her lost Groat, but she must call in her
Neighbors and spend it upon them, how shall a Man that discerns his lost Soul
to be found, his lost Peace, and strength, and liveliness to be recovered not
call his Neighbors, and tell them what God has done for him? Sorrow and joy
both fill the Heart, both pain it, the communication of either unto others in
some degree eases it. There are in the World Mysteries of other knowledge,
which Men have and do very studiously conceal, because the more are made
partakers of them, the worse it is for those who got the first knowledge, they
get the less; but it is otherwise as to Grace that is an inexhaustible
Fountain, all may have their fill of the Fountain of Living Waters, and the
Soul that makes first discovery of it to another loses nothing by the
discovery. If Abraham knows any thing of the mind of God, he will teach his
Family; therefore, God will not hide from Abraham, what he intends to do to
Sodom. Several reasons might be given, why grace will not lie hid in the Soul:
Such a Soul apprehends it self under some Obligation of duty, that of Christ to
Peter, when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren, must not be understood
as a special and particular precept. 2. The Joy of that Soul, that has any
evidence that it has tasted of of this grace, is such as cannot be concealed;
little Streams may be circumscribed by the Banks of the River; but great falls
and flows of Water, will overflow them. We cannot bite in great passions. Nor
can a greater joy fill the Soul, than that which arises from the sense of
God's special love, either in the first Collation of it upon, or the returns of
it unto the Soul.

3. Again this Soul knows, That much of God's praise arises from his Peoples
telling of his wondrous works; you shall in Scripture observe it as a constant
piece of God's Peoples thanksgiving, and what we are often called to for. Now
the good report which a pious Soul makes of Christ, has a great influence upon
others. If a Physicians Name be up, if but two or three Neighbors make a
report, what wonderful Cures he has done in, and for them, all in like
Circumstances will be running to him. See what David says, Psalm. 34. 2. My
Soul shall make her boast in the Lord, the humble shall hear thereof and be
glad. v. 6. This poor Man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of
all his Troubles. When a gracious Soul makes its boast in the Lord, relates
with joy and thankfulness, what God has done for it: The humble, that is,
those that are in poor, afflicted conditions, they hear of it, and are glad,
and are encouraged to go to God. They say, Here Is a poor Soul that cried, and
the Lord heard it, and saved it out of all its troubles. This is the first way,
by which Souls once drawn are a means to make others run, by making a good
report of God unto them. But this is not all.

2. Secondly, Such a Souls Charity extends further, viz. To an exciting,
exhorting, and quickening of others, to labor to be made partakers of the same
grace. Come (says the Woman of Samaria) and see the Man that has told me all
things that I ever did, Is not this the Christ? Come says the Soul, and taste
of that love which has so refreshed me; my Soul was as sad as yours. God has
comforted me; as dead as yours, The Lord has quickened me. I had once as much
prejudice against the ways of God as you; I once thought them as difficult: I
now delight in them. I find now the Yoke of Christ is casis, his burden is
light. Come, let us go up together to the Mountain of the Lora's House, he will
teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. I will show you in two or
three words, from whence it is that a Soul that has tasted the special grace
of God, will be so busy with others to bring them into the same circumstances
with it self.

1. It knows that it shall lose nothing by others running. Nature makes us
all in the first place to secure our own Interest, but that being first
secured, good nature obliges all Men to wish the best they can to others, and
the Moralists give it us for a Rule, That those kindnesses ought to be denied
to none which we can do them without any prejudice to our selves. There is no
Soul that has received any thing of the special grace of God, but knows
something of the value of it, and that no so great kindness can be done for
another, as to be an Instrument to bring men and Women acquainted with that
grace of God which brings Salvation, Acts 26. 29. I would to God (says Paul
to Agrippa) that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both
almost, and altogether such as I am, except these Bonds. This Soul knows,
that it should be never the poorer, if all others were enriched with the riches
of Grace. All Envy which makes us pine at the good of others is taken out of
the heart of a Child of God, (it is one of those lusts that are mortified in
it.)

2. Nay further, It knows that the more Souls it can be a means to bring to
Heaven, the more welcome it self shall be. Those who win Souls are wise, and
those who win many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars, for ever and
ever, Dan. 12. 3. It was Christ's work to bring many Sons unto Glory. It was
David's Language, and he spoke in the Person of Christ, I will declare thy Name
unto my Brethren, in the midst of the Congregation I will praise thee. The
Propagation of its Species, is one of the most perfect acts of the Creature. It
is a great piece of the perfection of a Christian, to propagate his Species.
The Romans designed rewards for the Father of such a number of Children; God
has prepared great rewards for those that are co-workers with him in bringing
Souls unto Christ.

3. Lastly, Such a Soul knows the Price of a Soul, and the sad condition of
those who want Christ either in the first, or further influences of his special
grace, and so does it out of mere pity and commiseration. None knows the misery
of a Christless Soul, so well as that Soul, that has been lost, and is now
found, has been dead, and is now alive. None so well knows the misery of that
poor Creature whose Conscience is upon a Rack, or whose Soul is under a Divine
desertion, crying out, Where is my God become? We never well understand the
misery of others, nor thoroughly pity them under any misery till our selves have
felt it. Nor on the other side do we ever understand the riches of Grace, the
consolations of the Spirit, or the Soul satisfaction which a Christian has in
God and in his ways, till we have in some measures had experience of them.
Hence it is that a natural man is so unconcerned, in the natural state of his
Relations, it is because his own Eyes are not open; he wants Faith, he does not
see the misery of a Soul that is without Christ, nor does he believe what God
has in his Word revealed as to the state of such Souls. But the Spiritual Man
whose Eyes God has opened, (knowing God's terrors) persuades with others to
get out of the horrible Pit; the believing Soul, giving a firm and steady
assent to what God has revealed in his Word about the Eternal State of Souls,
and the only way to happiness, cannot but Night and Day persuade with others
those especially in whom it is most nearly concerned, that they would be
reconciled to God, and flee from that Wrath which is to come.

1st. Use.
In the first place, This puts an argument into our Mouths to use with God,
when we go unto him for any influences of special grace. Say unto God, Draw me,
and we will run after thee. Tell him that his drawing thy Soul, will-not only
engage thee, but be a means also to make others to run after God. It was
David's argument, Psalm. 51. 12, 13. Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation,
and uphold me with thy free Spirit; then will I teach Transgressors thy way and
Sinners shall be converted unto thee. An Argument which he often made use of.
The humble shall hear thereof and be glad, Psalm. 34. 2. An Argument whose force
lies, in the concern of Gods glory. The glory of God is the great end of all
his actions, he does all that he does for his own glory, and he uses a great
argument with God that tells him, that if he does such a thing for him, there
will a great deal of glory by it accrue to his holy Name. God is glorified by
nothing more, than by our, and others running after him.

2d. Use.
Secondly, This discourse will let us see a difference between one who is a
Christian indeed, and one who is only a Christian in name. An Hypocrite would
seem to be something, but is nothing, he does nothing, he is inconcerned in the
good of others Souls, whereas, if he were a true Plant of righteousness, he
would cast his Seed. Prove. 10. 21. The Lips of the Righteous feed many. It is
an i^l sign that there is a truth of grace wanting in that Soul, in which are
found no endeavors to propagate the knowledge, and fear of God.

3d. Use.
But I shall shut up my Discourse upon this Argument with a word of
Exhortation, to all those who profess themselves to have received the special
grace of God; So to manage their conversation, that others by their examples,
or by their means may be provoked to run after Christ. Christ tells his
Disciples, Mat. 5. 13. That they were the Salt of the Earth: and v. 14. The
light of the World, a City set upon an Hill; that God had not lighted up a
light in their Souls to be hid, for no Man lights a Candle to put to it under
a Bushel (says he) but to be set on a Candlestick, that it might give light to
all them that are in the House. Upon this he foundeth an Exhortation, v. 16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. I see no reason to restrain those
Texts unto those that are the Ministers of the Gospel; they are true of all
true Christians, the Children of God in the World, are the Salt of the World,
and it is their duty to season others. They are the light of the World, and to
show light to the World; they are obliged so to live that being themselves
drawn, others also by their means may run after Christ. You will say to me how
shall this be? How should a Christian so live as to draw others to run after
Christ. I answer It will very much depend upon, 1. The Seriousness of his pious
behavior toward God. 2. The Humility and Inn cency, and quietness of his
behavior toward men. 3. His abounding in good works. 4. His Communicativeness
both of his Gifts, and of his Experiences. I will a little enlarge upon all
these.

1. I sav First, It will much depend upon the Evenness, and Seriousness of a
Christians pious behavior toward God. Religion is in it self a lovely thing,
and many who cannot get leave of themselves to be pious, and devout, yet are
constrained to commend it in others, where they see the Practitioners in it
serious, and even in their practice, for nothing is more odious even to common
Eyes, than to see men act a part in Religion; but for a Christian in praying to
pray, in hearing to hear, to be serious and in earnest in his acts of devotion,
so to demean himself, that he shall appear to others to mind what he is about,
to be fervent in Spirit while he is serving the Lord, is lovely in all men's
account; to see men gaping about the Church whiles they are pretending to pray,
sleeping, or talking when they are pretending to hear the Word of God, wins
none, but rather estrangeth the World from God and makes them think there is
nothing in Religion but a vain show: But to see a Christian serious, and
servent in prayer, diligent and attentive in hearing, hanging as it were upon
the Preachers Lips, as it is said of those who heard Christ, Luke 19. 48. (we
translate it they were very attentive to hear him, the Greek is they did hang
upon him) this makes People think there is something in Godliness: Especially
when men are even in their pious conversation, that their warmth in Piety, is
not by fits, but there are the same at all times, having to do with the same
God, and being in the same service of God.

2. A second thing upon which the inciting others to come to, and to run after
Christ, does much depend, is Christians behavior toward men; so three things
much commend the grace of God to the World.

1. Humility. Pride, and self exalting, are generally odious to all men, and
men (as it were by a natural instinct) conclude there is nothing of God in
those in whom they see much of Pride, discovered by an immoderate boasting,
uncharitable judging, and censuring, superciliousness, a scorn, and contempt of
others; but now where men have the advantage of the Word of God, which commands
men to deny themselves to be clothed with humility, in honor to prefer others
before themselves, to learn of Christ for he is meek, and lowly, etc. they are
much more confirmed in this; and any thing of pride in Christians does rather
estrange men from God and Christ, then cause them to run after him.

2. Innocence in Christians is another thing, which much commends the ways of
God to others. Christ commanded his Disciples to be wise as Serpents, innocent
as Doves. Paul exhorts the Philippians, 2. Phil. 15. to be blameless and
harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke. Most People have a natural Notion of
God that he is full of goodness, and does no Man harm; and those who are in any
measure acquainted with the Scriptures, observe that Christ's conversation on
Earth was an innocent, harmless conversation, the Apostle, Heb. 7. 26. calls
him, not only undefiled, and separate from Sinners, but holy, and harmless. Now
an innocent conversation implies righteousness, in all injustice there must be
harm done to others.

3. A third thing that makes an honest and winning Conversation toward men is
quietness and peaceableness in opposition to Tumultuousness, Sedition, and
qua^reling. The Apostle commands us to study to be Q^iet, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. I
need not enlarge upon this, Experience tells you how much a quietness, and
peaceableness of behavior obliges the World, and how much a contrary temper
disobligeth it from Men and Women professing to Religion and Godliness. God is
the God of Peace, and delights not in confusion.

3. A third thing upon which much depends, the winning and gaining of others to
run after Christ is abounding in good works. I here restrain the Notion of good
works, understanding by them acts of Mercy and Charity toward men. Our Savior
bids us make our selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, and by it
teaches us, that good works of this Nature, are not unprofitable as to our own
Souls, though they are no fit price to purchase Heaven with. But they are also
of great use to save the Souls of others, as they have a tendency to commend
the grace, and ways of God unto other men. On the other side, acts of
Oppression, Cruelty, and uncharitableness, have a great malignity, to estrange
Souls from Religion and Godliness. It is a sad story I have somewhere met with
upon the Cruelty showed by the Spaniards to the Indians upon their pretended
converting them to the Faith of the Gospel; A great Person of the Indians would
know whither the Souls of the Spaniards went when they died, to Heaven or to
Hell; and being told they went to Heaven, replied* Then he woula go to Hell.
Being it seems naturally persuaded that cruel, bloody, and uncharitable men
could never be happy in another life.

4. I will add a fourth thing (though not beforementioned) which experience
has constantly showed us to be of very great force, to draw others, viz. A
bold, and courageous Suffering for the Name of Christ. It has been a constant
Observation, that the Blood of Martyrs has been the seed of the Church. Men
naturally are inclined to think there is a great deal in that Religion, which
will make men so Valiant as to die in the defense and asserting of it. There is
yet one thing more upon which this much depends; that is,

5. A Christians communicativeness both of his gifts, and of his experiences.
1. Of his gifts, his knowledge and other gifts, by which he informs Christians
of the Truth, and persuades, and argues them out of their sinful courses. Come
(says David) I will teach you the sear of the Lord; O that there were more of
this in the World than there is! how few are those Christians that have either
grace or confidence enough to mind others of their conditions and to call upon
them to look after Eternity! We can call upon our Children and Friends to mind
their Worldly concerns, we are communicative euough to them of what we know,
which may help them as to them; but how little do we call upon them to strive
to enter in at the strait Gate, to make their Calling and Election sure. What
should the reason of this be? Is it unbelief, or is it carelessness? Is it
unbelief? do we not then believe an Immortal, Eternal state of Souls, into
which no Souls can come, but bv and through Christ as the way? It cannot be,
this is the Object of our Hope, it is the great thing we have in expectation;
if we had hope only in this Life, we were of all men most miserable. Are we
confident that our Children, our Friends, or Neighbors are in the road to this
blessed state? Certainly there are many of them of whom we can have no such
hopes. How are we then silent? if we know better things then they know, why do
we not instruct them? St. John says, He that has of this Worlds goods, and
sees his Brother in want and releives him not, how dwells the love of God in h
m? 1 Jo. 3. 17. What shall we say of those who have of the goods that relate to
another World, the Treasures of Spiritual knowledge and sees his Child, his
Friend in want, and (to his power) relieves him not, how dwells the love of
God, or of his Child's, or Friends Soul in him? Dalilah asked Sampson, how he
could say to her, that he loved her, when he kept his secrets from her, which
she was not concerned to know; but how can thou say, thou love thy
Yoke Fellow thy Child, thy Friend, and concealest from them what thou know
with reference to their Spiritual and Eternal good, and which it is as much
their concern to know as it is thine? I remember Christ does thus prove himself
his Disciples friend, John 15. 15. I have called you Friends, for all things
which I have heard of my Father, I have made known to you; that is, all things
which my Father has let me know, and which are of concern for you to know.
Thus Christ has discharged the Office of a Friend to our Souls, and should not
we do likewise? Do we know any thing concerns our near Friends Souls with
reference to their Eternals happiness, and do we conceal our knowledge from
them, how do we discharge the Office of Friends to them? how dwells either the
love of God, or the love of them in our Souls?

2. Nor is the communicativeness of our own Experiences, What we have seen, as
well as what we have heard, of less use, or less our duty. I know it is a thing
which profane Persons may mock at, but let them mock on, Wisdom shall be
justified of her Children. I am sure we meet with David and Paul, and others of
the Servants of God of whom we have a sacred Record very frequent in it. Come
says David, and I will tell you what God has done for my Soul. I know Men may
boast beyond their line, or measure, they may boast of experiences they never
had; experiences must be fulfillings of Promises. But certainly there can be
nothing as a mean more powerful to draw others to a running after Christ in the
ways of Holiness then the knowledge of what others have found, and experienced
in them. I am sure it was the practice of the Woman of Samaria, of Andrew and
Peter, and that with great success. O let every one of us who have in our
hearts any love for God, any zeal for the glory of God, any kindness for the
Souls of others, being our selves drawn, so behave our selves, that others,
allured by our examples, persuaded by our arguments may also run after Christ.
Let those that cannot as yet discern the Savor of his good Ointments be helped
to discern them at second hand, while our Lips feed many, and our Garments
smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia.

Sermon XXIV.
Cant. 1. 4. -- The King has brought me into his Chambers.

I Have done with the Spouses Petition, Draw me, and with the argument by which
she impleaded her Petition. She would then run after him, and of the alteration
of the number, in the promise, we will run, not I, but we. I come now to the
third thing which I took notice of in the verse which I called, The Spouses
attestation of her beloveds favor in the answer of her Petition. That is in
the words I have now read. The King has brought me (...) unto his in
Ward-Rooms (...) his Closet. His Chambers (so we translate it.) What is
necessary for the opening of the words, you have heard before.

It was but even now that we heard the Spouse praying, draw me; and promising
that if the Lord would hear, and answer her Prayers, both she and others would
run after him. How presently is her tone altered, and her prayer turned into
praise? Hence I observed;

Prop. That God is pleased sometimes to make a very quick return to his Peoples
Prayers. But before I handle this, I shall take a little notice of the name she
here gives to her Beloved, (...) the King. The word is the same, that is every
where used, to express the sole dominion of a Person over others; a term very
properly given to Christ, and that not only as he is God over all blessed for
ever, and so the Psalmist tells us, that his Throne is established in the
Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all; but in respect of his Mediatory
Kingdom, as he is the Lords King, whom he has set upon his holy Hill of Sion,
Psalm. 2. 6. to whom he has given the Heathen for his inheritance, and the
uttermost part of the Earth for his possession, v. 8. which Kingdom he does not
only exercise over all, in order to the gathering of his Church, subduing the
hearts of people unto himself, and then over his Church, gathered, by giving
laws to it, and setting Officers over it, but more particularly in the hearts
of all believers, in whom he rules by his Spirit. But why does the Spouse here
speak to her beloved or of hr beloved, in this lofty style, and not rather in
that familiar style which she generally uses in this Song? What if we should
say?

1. That in other places of this Divine Song, she is speaking to him, here she
is speaking of him. God is the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords; yet when we
pray unto him, we are licensed and commanded to say unto him, Our Father; when
she speaks of him to others, she uses another style, and says, the King;
though we are allowed an holy boldness in our accesses, and addresses to the
Throne of Grace, yet this is not exclusive of that holy fear and reverence
which we owe unto God as our King, we ought to remember, that he who is our
Beloved [our Father] is also our King.

2. What if we should say that this lofty compellation is used, to enhance the
favor that she had received? She was not admitted into ordinary Chambers, but
into Royal Chambers; the King has brought me into his Chambers. No words are
too big to express the singular favor of God to our Souls.

3. What (finally) if we should say that she changes her style to intimate the
persons who must expect signal favor from God, and to remember her self of her
duty, in consideration of such favors? I say first to intimate to us who those
Persons must be, that expect any singular favors from God; they must be such,
as apprehend and receive Christ, not for a Savior as a Priest only, but such
as own, and acknowledge him as a King, as their Lord to command, and to rule
over them, according to that promise, John 14. 21. He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he who loves me,
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self unto
him. It might also remember her of the duty she owed unto God, in consideration
of his favor to her, she resolves to own, and to acknowledge him, as her
Lord, her King. But these things being premised, I come to that Propesition
which I raised from the connection of these words, testifying, the Lords hearing
of her Prayers; the words are immediately annexed to her Petition. Whence I
observed,

Prop.
That it pleases God sometimes to make very quick returns to his Peoples
Prayers. That it is so, appears. 1. By the Lords answering his People sometimes
before they speak, or while they are speaking, Isaiah 65. 24. It shall come to
pass that before they call, I will answer, and while they are yet speaking, I
will hear. Nothing can be quicker then that, for God to take notice of what his
people have in their hearts to ask, and to give it, before they can form it by
their lips into words, or while they are speaking, to give an answer, you have
the first exemplified in David, Psalm. 32. 5. I said I will confess my
transgression unto the Lord, he had not confessed, he had only said in his
heart that he would confess his transgression to the Lord, and (says he) thou
sorgavest the inquity of my sin, you have an instance of the latter in Hannah,
the Wife of Elkanah, 1 Samuel 1. She was praying, her lips moved, but her voice
was not heard, yet the Lord heard her, and though the time must be fulfilled
before she could have a Son, yet 1 Samuel, 1. 18. It is said of her at present,
that she went away, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad. She had a
present answer of peace, her mind was quieted, her countenance was no more sad,
you have another instance in Daniel (to name no more,) Dan. 9. 20. Daniel with
the rest of the Jews had been in the captivity of Babylon, near 70 years, the
time was almost expired, as to which God had promised they should come out,
Daniel sets himself to pray, and you have a copy of his prayer from Dan. 9. v.
4. to v. 20. Observe now, v. 20. And while I was speaking, and praying, and
confessing my sin, and the sin of my People Israel, yea, v. 21. While I was
speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in a vision at the
beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me, about the time of the
evening oblation, and he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I
am now come forth to give thee skill, and understanding; at the beginning of
thy supplication the Commandment came forth, and I am come to show thee, for
thou art greatly beloved, etc. Here now the Lord made a very quick return to
Daniels prayer, while he was speaking, the Lord answered him,

But a return of prayers may be quick, though it be not thus quick, but after
the interval of some few months, days, or years; Abraham was thus answered as
to his Prayer mentioned, Genesis 17. and David glories in the assurance of this,
Psalm. 4. 3. The Lord will hear when I call upon him. But now, because on the
one hand this is a very desirable mercy, and many times the Souls of Gods
people are discouraged, and flagg in duty, because the vision is yet for an
appointed time; It will not be out of our way* to inquire, what prayers these
are that meet with so quick an audience from God, God does not this at all
times, nor for all persons, no, not for those who are most beloved of him.
David himself complains; Psalm. 22. 2. O my God, I cry in the day time, but
thou hear not, and in the night season, and am not silent. The Church
complains of some times, when God is angry with the prayers of his people,
Psalm. 80. 4 Gods own People sometimes shoot arrow after arrow, to find what
they shot first; hence you so often meet with it as a piece of the Saints
Prayer, Hear my prayer O God, give ear to my Supplications. Let us a little
enquire from whence this variety of Providence proceeds, as to this hearing,
and answering of prayers. God is the Lord that changes not, therefore we are
not consumed, we must therefore find the cause in the persons praying, or in
the prayers which makes this difference as to Gods answers. That so quick and
gracious answers may be obtained, something is necessary on the party praying:
Something with respect to the matter prayed for: Something as to the manner of
putting up the prayer.

1. As to the Person praying, 1. No Soul can expect such an answer, unless
persons in special favor with God; this the Angel told Daniel, Dan. 9. 23. At
the beginning of thy supplication, the commandment came forth, and I am come to
show thee, etc. for thou art greatly beloved. Ordinary subjects may have their
petitions answered, but they must be favorites, that have the Kings ear
presently; those Souls to whom God gives present answers of prayers are
ordinarily such as are beloved, greatly beloved. A good natured Mother may help
a Child that is another persons, being in any ill circumstances, and crying to
her aloud, and fiercely, but it is a sign the Child is her own, when her bowels
yern toward it as soon as it begins to cry, yet I find two instances at least
in Scripture of Gods present answering the cries of persons in no such state of
favor with God, Ahab and the King of Nineveh, 1 Kin. 21. 27, 28, 29. and Jonas
3. 4. But besides, that those instances relate merely to temporal mercies, and
such wherein not those Persons alone, but great bodies of people were
concerned, and in such cases, as nothing but a present answer could have done
them good, as to the thing wherein they were heard, Nineveh was within forty
days of ruin, and it was only a deferring of that judgment which God had
threatened, as to which they were heard, I say besides these things, it is one
thing what God may do out of the abundance of his goodness, and mercy, and
another thing, what they may with any confidence expect. It is most certain
that persons who are strangers, and enemies to God, and so under a threatening,
That although they make many prayers, God will not hear them; and of whom God
has said, that their sacrifices are abomination, cannot hope that the Lord
should answer, much less presently answer their prayers. 2. As to a present
answer of prayers, it is necessary not only that the persons praying be
believers, persons in favor with God, but that their prayers be prayers of
faith, that they exercise faith in their prayers, James 1. 5. If any of you
want wisdom; let him ask of God. -- But v. 6. Let him ask in faith, nothing
wavering, for he that wavereth, is like a wave of the Sea, driven of the wind,
and tossed, and James 5. 15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick; Prayers
for Persons sick, ordinarily require present answers, now says the Apostle,
the prayer which saves the sick* must be the prayer of faith. This is a point
not well understood, viz. how to pray in faith, and what exercise of faith is
required in prayer, I shall therefore shortly open it, and show you what
exercises of faith are necessary to that Soul, that would have his prayers at
all answered, at least who can expect a present answer.

1. Faith in prayer must respect Gods being and goodness. This the Apostle
informs us, Heb. 11. 6. He who comes unto God, must believe that God is, and
that he is a rewarder of them that seek him. That God is, and that he is able
to give what we ask of him; Believe you (says Christ to the blind man) that I
am able to do this? If God be, if he be God, he is able to do whatsoever we ask
of him. But this is not all, we must also believe the goodness of God; That he
is a rewarder of them that seek him: one who has said to the Children of Men,
seek ye my face, and who never said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye my face in
vain. This is the first act of faith in prayer, whosoever comes to seek God
for any mercy, must steadily agree to this, That God is, and is able to grant
the thing he asks of him, and that he is infinitely good, and a rewarder of
those Souls, that obey his will in that precept, seek ye my face.

2. Faith must respect that promise which God has made for that mercy, or good
thing which we come to God for. There is hardly any particular good thing, for
which God has not somewhere in his word made a particular promise; now this
promise is Gods bond which faith lays hold on, and prayer puts in suit, if we
want a particular promise, respecting the specifical mercy, yet there are
general promises, within the latitude of which those particular good things
fall, such as those, Psalm. 84. 11. He will give grace and glory, and no good
thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 34. 10. They that
seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing, Romans 8. 24. We know that all
things work together for them that love God, 1 Cor. 3. 22. 23. All things are
yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Now I say that he that prays
in faith, must have his Eye either upon some of these more general words, in
which God has promised all good things, or those particular promises, wherein
God has promised that specifical mercy, which he comes to ask of God, Mar. 11.
24, What things soever you desire when you pray, believe that you shall receive
them, and you shall have them. It is not only necessary that when we go unto
God in prayer, we should Eye him, as the fountain of power, so able to grant
what we ask of him, and as the fountain of goodness, so willing to relieve all
the streights, and supply all the necessities of poor creatures; but 3. As a
God of truth and faithfulness, that he believe that he shall receive what he
asks of God, and to this end he must see the good thing either generally, or
particularly promised.

3. There is yet a third act of faith necessary, which is a casting of our
Souls upon God in the promise, a trusting in him for the receipt of the thing we
have asked of him. James says, we must ask in faith nothing wavering, the Soul
must not doubt within itself, whether God hears, or will give in a gracious
answer, yea or no, but commit itself wholly to God, upon the credit of his
promise, believing that he who has promised, is able to perform, and trusting
in him for a performance. This is now praying in faith, and the truth is, all
other praying is but praying in formality, of which we can expect no more
profit then arises from a mere bodily labor. This, now is necessary with
reference to an answer, especially a quick and a present answer, on the part of
the person praying.

2. But something also is necessary to be observed, with respect to the matter
that we pray for.

1. It must be something which is truly and really good for us and of which we
stand in need. Our need of a thing, and the goodness of it for us, is not to be
measured from our sense, and apprehension, for we are often mistaken, and do
not keep what is good for our selves, and therefore must refer our selves to
the wisdom of God, who knows what things we have need of. It is true that
there are some things so perfectly, and absolutely good, as they can never be
evil, such are the pardon of our sins, the love, and favor of God, etc. But
there are other things that are not so, which at some time we may have a need
of, and they would be good to us, at another time we have no need of, but they
would be hurtful, and pernicious to us, and this is the reason why our
supplications for some things may be absolute, and peremptory, for other things
they ought to be limited, conditioned, and put up with a reference of our
selves to the will, and wisdom of God; God cannot give evil things unto his
Children, though they ask them never so importunately, never so frequently.
This our Savior has taught us, Luke 11. 11. 12. If a Son shall ask Bread of
any of you that is a Father, will he give him a stone, or if he ask a fish,
will he for a fish give him a Serpent. Or if he shall ask an Egg, will he offer
him a Scorpion? if therefore you being evil, know how to give good gifts to
your Children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to
them that ask him, Mat. 7. 11. it is, give good things to them that ask him. It
is most certain, that no one would ask things that are, or would be hurtful to
him, wittingly. Children through ignorance may, but if they do, their parents
that have more wisdom, will not give them such things. No more will our
Heavenly Father, who knows it is nothing but ignorance that causes us to ask
any thing of that nature. And this may help us to understand Gods
dispensations, and satisfy the people of God, though they have not all those
things they ask of God, if they be such things as are not absolutely, and
perfectly good, they may be such things as the Lord knows under our
circumstances, would be evil and pernicious to us, and we are answered by being
denied them, for though through our weakness and ignorance we asked them, as
believing them to be good, yet had we known them as indeed they were, we would
have prayed against them. The things we ask, must be good, and such things as
we stand in need of (indeed therein lies the nature of goodness) or they are no
matter of a promise, and consequently ought to be made no matter of prayer, nor
would be but for our infirmity and weakness, and consequently they may be
denied us, and we may never have an answer, by receiving the things which we
ask, but are answered, in having them denied to us.

2. What we ask must be according to the will of God, 1 John 5. 14. And this is
the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask anything according to the
will of God, he hears us. The Spirit makes intercession for us, according to
the will of God. Indeed this does very little differ from the other, for
whatsoever is good for us, is doubtless according to the will of God. It is
Gods will that no good thing should be withheld from them who live uprightly.
But there is yet something further that I shall add under this head, which is
necessary in order to the receiving of a present answer from God; If we would
have a present answer, we must ask for such things, not only as it is the will
of God we should have, but as it is according to the will of God we should have
at such a time as we ask, and under such circumstances as we then are Solomon
tells us, there is a time for all things. God has appointed times and
seasons for all his dispensations of providence, he had not only promised
Canaan to the seed of Abraham, but he had set the time, after four hundred and
thirty years; he had not only promised a deliverance, out of the Captivity of
Babylon, but he had also set the time seventy years. Hence, Daniel was
presently heard, when he prayed, the Text tells you; that he understood by
Books the number of the years, whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah
the Prophet, that he would accomplish 70 years in the desolations of
Jerusalem. Then he set his face to the Lord God, to seek by prayer and
supplications, with ^asting, etc. Dan. 9. 2, 3. and while he was speaking, God
gave him an answer. To Habakkuk it fell out otherwise, he put up a prayer to to
God, chapter 1. his answer was, chapter 3. v. 3. The Vision is yet for an appointed
time, but at the end it shall speak, it shall not lie, tho it tarry, wait for
it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. Had the believing Jews
prayed never so often, never so seriously, for the coming of the seed of
Abraham's out of Egypt, and going into Canaan before the four hundred years
were expired, they could have neither expected, nor received any present
answer, other than according to the tenor of that to Habakkuk; because, Genesis
15. 16, 17. Though God had promised Abraham, that he would give unto his Seed
the land of Canaan, yet he had also told him, that they should be strangers in
a land that was not theirs, and they should serve them, and they should afflict
them, 400 years -- but afterward they should come out with great substance,
and v. 16. In the fourth generation his Seed should come again into Canaan. All
things are seen by an Omniscient Eye, and ordered by an eternal thought. Now
where the believing prayer meets with an eternal thought, as to the time of the
mercy, there the answer is always present. See therefore how confidently the
Psalmist prays, Psalm. 202. 12. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion,
for the time to favor her, yea, the set time is come; when the time, the set
time for God to favor a Nation, or a particular Soul is come, then the answer
is always present. It is therefore the great wisdom of a Christian, before he
sets himself to pray, to inquire so far as he may, whether Gods set time for
the collation of the mercy is come.

Obj.
But will a good Christian say, How shall I ever find out this, how shall I
knows when Gods set time to favor his Church, or to favor my, or another
particular Soul is come? Times and seasons are not in our hands, nor within the
compass of our knowledge. The case indeed was plain as to the Jews, with
reference to their servitude in Egypt, and Captivity in Babylon. God had then
revealed it to, and by his Prophets, but we have no such revelations now
concerning Nations, or Churches, much less concerning particular Souls. It may
be my Soul is under the power of some violent and impetuous temptations, under
the pressure of some strong lusts (...) corruptions, in some dark hour of
desertion, I find (...) in the case in Holy Writ; these promises are sufficient
grounds for me to pray, but if my prayer must be suited to Gods will, as to the
time, how shall I ever know how to perform my duty, how shall I ever pray in
faith?

Ans.
1. As we say in our law; When in any contract for payment of any sum of money,
no particular time is expressed for the payment, the present time is to be
understood: So God having made promises to his people, which shall most
certainly in their Season be fulfilled, and having not expressed the particular
time when God will fulfill them to this, or that particular Soul: The Soul is
warranted at all times, to ask them of God, for we may certainly pray for any
thing which is not contrary to Gods revealed will.

2. But secondly, We knowing that God in his secret purpose, has determined
not only the beings, but the circumstances of all things, cannot infallibly
expect present answers of our prayers, by giving us the very things which we
ask of God. Suppose now a Christian under the power of some strong and
impetuous temptation, whether from his flesh, or from his grand adversary, he
may pray for deliverance from it, because God has promised an happy issue of
temptations, he may pray in faith, Eying Gods power, his goodness, his truth,
and faithfulness, and being fully persuaded that God will deliver him, nay, he
may pray for a speedy issue and deliverance (with submission to the will, and
wisdom of God;) you have it in the case of Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 9. When the Lord
had given him a thorn in his flesh to buffet him (what that thorn in the flesh
was, whether some impetuous motion to sin, from within, or without, we know
not, be it what it will, it was a great burden, a great affliction) Paul prays
to be delivered, and prays thrice, and no doubt prayed in faith, but his
desires met not with Gods set time, his answer was, My grace shall be
sufficient for thee. Suppose a Soul walking in the dark, and seeing no light,
it prays with David, when will thou comfort me; possibly God is not pleased,
yet to visit it with his consolation, yet its prayer is warranted from the
promise, God has promised us the manifestations of the Spirit, Joh. 14. 21. It
prays in faith, believing that God is able to do it, believing that he is
full of goodness, a rewarder of them that seek him, believing that it shall
receive even that particular mercy from God in Gods time; but it cannot pray in
faith, believing that it shall presently be comforted. Because as to this (...)
has no bottom, no promise to lay hold upon; but yet even as to this it may
pray in faith, having confidence in God, that if it be truly good for it, it
shall be presently answered.

Thirdly, When a Soul finds that Gods ends in the affliction are obtained,
and that it is in such a frame as God has required a people, or a soul to be,
to whom such promises are made, it may then conclude that Gods time, his set
time is come. Here are now two rules to guide an inquisitive Christian in the
knowledge of Gods set time, for the collation of any mercy which he has
promised, whether more public and national, or more private, or personal. 1.
When Gods ends in afflicting are obtained, and satisfied. We say that God and
nature do nothing in vain, indeed every rational agent propounds to himself an
end of all his or her actions. Brute Creatures, and such as are not endued with
reason, move and act for some end or other, but their end is set them by
another. But rational agents propound an end to themselves, and their ends
being obtained, their action cease. God is the highest rational agent, and
propounds to himself an end in all his actions, and his end is always good,
his supreme end is his own glory, that is the best end, and he cannot act for
one more ignoble, but his mediate ends, that is, by which he proposes to get
himself glory, they are several, you shall see much of them expressed in that
one text, Hosea 5. 15. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge
their offenses, and seek my face. In their affliction they will seek me early.
There are also other texts of Scripture, which let us know Gods ends in the
affliction of his people, such as those, Jer. 9. 7. I will melt them, and try
them; for how shall I do for the Daughter of my people? Zech. 13 9. And I will
bring the third part through the fire, and I will refine them as Silver is
refined, and will try them as Gold is tried, they shall call on my name, and I
will hear them, I will say it is my people, and they shall say, the Lord is my
God. From these Scriptures now appear three great ends, the obtaining of which,
he aims at, that thereby he might be glorified.

1. The first is a bringing them to the acknowledgment of their transgressions,
and an humbling of them in the apprehension of them. God by punishing us,
whether in our flesh, or with more internal troubles in our minds, brings our
iniquities to our remembrance, and says to us in every affliction, Know
therefore, and see that it is an evil and bitter thing that thou have done, in
that thou have departed from the living God, and that his fear has not been
within thee; and this is one thing which he aims at, to bring his people to
be vile, and low in their own Eyes, when this is done, Gods end is ordinarily
fulfilled. Hence you shall observe, that before Gods promise of a gracious
return to his People, Jer. 3. 14, 15. there is put in v. 13. Only acknowledge
thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God; so that
if our affliction has brought us to this acknowledgment of our iniquities, and
a lying low before God, it may give us encouragement to hope that Gods time,
his set time is come, for though he has not particularly told us the day, and
hour, when he will return unto his people, either in a way of special
providence, or in a way of special grace, yet he having annexed the promise of
his gracious returns to his peoples acknowledgment of their offenses, and
humbling themselves, he has effectually told them, that when that is done, is
the time when they may expect to seek his face, with a speedy success, and
gracious issues.

2. A second end which God aims at in the afflictions of his people, whether
by with holding some desired mercies from them, or making them to feel some
sensible smart, is the exciting of his Peoples Grace. This is plainly expressed
in the beforementioned text, Hos. 5. 15. I will return (says God) unto my
place, till they ackuowledge their offenses, and seek my face. There are two
gracious exercises which the Lord by affliction extiteth. 1. The first is the
grace of prayer. This is most properly signified, by the term seek my sace,
(though I know it is a phrase more comprehensive) yet that is most ordinarily
expressed by it; this is not only expressed in that text, but in many others.
Is any man afflicted (says James) let him pray, so Psalm. 50. 12. Call upon me
in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall praise me. Hence
it is an excellent sign that Gods appointed time to show mercy, either to a
people, or to a Soul is come, when the Lord pours out upon them the Spirit of
grace, and supplication, he more specially moves, and inciteth his people to
ask, when it is in his heart to give the mercy that they ask of him, and on the
other side, the restraining of prayer from God on our part, or the withholding
the Spirit of Prayer (on Gods part) is an ill sign that our mercy is yet afar
off. 2. A second exercise of grace, the exciting of which God aims at, is that
of faith. Zech. 13. 9. They shall say the Lord is my God; this is now when a
Soul for the mercy which it desires, is brought off all dependances upon the
creature, and brought to a sole Eying of, and dependency upon God; and this is
true, both as to more public and national mercies, and also as to more
private, and personal mercies. Israel were a great way off mercy, when they
trusted on the broken reeds of Ae^ypt and Assyria, instead of helping them,
they ran into their hands, and more wounded them, but they were very near mercy
when they said, Hos. 14. 3. Ashur shall not save us, neither will we ride upon
Horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our Gods,
for in thee the Fatherless finds mercy. Mark what God adds in the very next
words; I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely, for mine anger
is turned away, I will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the lilly,
and cast forth his roots, as Lebanon. Hence again it appears, that when
People, for the mercies they want and would ask of God, are brought off all
foreign dependencies, all creature confidence, and brought to a single, sole
confidence in God, this is an excellent sign, that the day is dawning upon
them, and the time come, which God has set in his eternal thoughts, wherein he
intends to show them favor.

3. A third end which God aims at, in, and by our afflictions, is, the
probation and trial of grace, I will melt them, and try them, Jer. 9. 7. I will
bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them, as Silver is
refined, and will try them as Gold is tried. Faith and Patience are those two
graces which are more eminently tried in an hour of affliction; you have them
both mentioned together, James 1. 2, 3. My Brethren count it all joy, when you
fall into diverse temptations, knowing this, that the trial of your faith
works patience, and again; let patience have its perfect work, and 1 Pet. 1.
6. You are in heaviness through manisold temptations, that the trial of your
says, being much more precious, then that of Gold that perishes, though it be
tried with fire, might be sound unto praise, honor, and glory, etc. by faith
here is meant a relieance, and dependence upon God, notwithstanding our trials,
Job expresses it well, Job 13. 15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.
Hence again, if a Soul finds that its affliction (be it of what nature it
will) has humbled it to Gods foot, made it quiet, and patient, resolving
meekly, and without repining, or murmuring to bear the indignation of God,
because he has laid it upon it, and that it has brought him to a reliance and
dependence upon God, though it does not see him, this (again) is an excellent
sign, that Gods set time is come.

2. A second rule to know Gods set time by, is this, When a people, or a
particular soul is wrought into such a frame, as the promise of mercy is made
unto. David says of God, Psalm. 20. 17. Thou have heard the desire of the
humble, thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear. Mark,
first God prepares the heart, then he causes his ear to hear; first, he
prepares the hearts of people to receive the mercy, then he gives out the
mercy; now how does God prepare the heart, but by working of it up into such a
frame, as he has promised the mercy upon, and unto?

1. He works the heart into a patient, meek, humble, submissive frame, he
hears the desire of the humble, as you have it in that text, but of this I
have spoken but now.

2. In the mountain of the Lord it shall be seen. We are then prepared for
mercy, when we know not how longer to uphold, and subsist without it, Isaiah
57. 16. I will not (says God) contend for ever, neither will I be always
wroth, for the Spirits would fail before me, and the Souls which I have made,
v. 18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him, and will lead him also, and
restore comforts unto him. When Peter cried out that he sank, then Christ lent
hhim is hand; when the Soul apprehends itself as it were at the last gasp, that
is often Gods time, for he will not suffer his peoples Spirits to fail, nor the
Souls which he has made.

3. In such dispensations of mercy to the People of God, as must depend upon
the destroying or removing of their Enemies; the exceeding wickedness of the
enemy, is a good sign that Gods set time is near, for the Salvation of his
people from them. I build this conclusion upon Gods Word to Abraham, Genesis 15.
16. where God gives this as the reason why the seed of Abraham should not till
after four hundred years, take a possession of the land of Canaan -- for the
iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full. The wicked have their day, and their
day is with reference to the people of God, the very power of darkness, but as
it is with the darkness of the night, they say it is darkest just before the
dawning of the day, so the darkness caused to the Church of God, by the
wickedness of the wicked, when it is at the thickest, is a good presage of
approaching light. So as though the day of the gteatest malice, oppression, and
wickedness of wicked men, be a very sad day, even the power of darkness, yetin
this it speaks well, that the salvation of Gods people is nevernearer.

4. Lastly, In regard the set times of our mercies are hidden from the best of
Gods people, in case they have not a present answer in kind, they must be
content if they have it in value. I pray observe this. God answers the
prayers of his people more ways then one, sometimes he answers them by
denying them, nor is this a way of answering to be despised, for whatsoever the
particular thing be, which a reasonable Soul desires, its general desire is
some good. Our reasonable natures will not suffer us to ask any thing which is
bad, if we so apprehend it, now such is the infirmity of our state, that we in
all circumstances do not know what is good for our selves. So that God often in
denying a particular desire of our Souls, answers the general desire of our
Souls, we ask what would do us hurt; God denies it, because he would do us
good, and not hurt. In this case if the Lord gives us an heart content to be
without the thing we ask, he abundantly answers our prayers, and gives us
the general and true desire of our Souls. God sometimes answers our prayers,
by giving us idem, the same thing which we ask, but this he never does, but
where he sees it is for our good, and that under our present circumstances;
sometimes he answers us by giving us tantundem, the value of the mercy,
though not the particular thing which we ask of God, thus he answered Paul as
to the thorn in his flesh, and this is a real answer, and with this every Child
of God ought to be fully satisfied, and contented.

But this is enough to have said to this point, how Christians may know whether
Gods time, his set time to favor his Church, or the Souls of his people is
come, a point of great concern in order to the satisfaction of Christians, why
they have not a present answer to their prayers, and to abate their
dissatisfaction, as to the inequal motions of Divine Providence in this answer
of prayers.

3. Lastly, Something is necessary with reference to the manner of our prayers,
if we would so pray as to receive a present answer. So two things are
necessary; 1. That we pray Believingly. 2. Fervently.

1. Believingly. I opened this before, under the first head, and therefore
shall say nothing to it here.

2. Fervently. That is that which alone I shall here speak to. This is much
mistaken, if it be thought to lie in the vehemence of our tone, and expression,
it lies much deeper in the intension of the mind, and the Souls secret
affection to, and in the duty. James tells us, chapter 5. v. 16. The effectual
servent prayer of the righteous avails much. The word is (...) which properly
signifies operative and working, and so working, as it produces the effect.
The Prophet speaking of God, Isaiah 41. 4. uses this expression, who has
wrought, and done it, the Septuagint translate the Hebrew word there by this
word, the Apostle uses it to express such a working, as that by which God
brings about his decrees, Ephesians. 1. 11. Who works all things according to the
counsel of his will; and again, he uses it to express the working of the Devil
in wicked men, whom he calls Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. In the
primitive times, those who were acted by the Devil, were called (...) because
of the great power, and force, which the evil Spirit put forth upon, and showed
in those miserable creatures that were possessed. Piscator upon the Text, Jam.
5. 16. translates it Ardens, the burning flaming prayer. Beza translateth it
Efficax, the efficacious prayer; (...) doubtless signifies that prayer, which
sets the whole Soul on work. There is a cold, dead, lazy prayer, where the
tongue only is set on work, or only the tongue, and the head, or the fancy; the
one to invent and compose matter, the other to utter it, but neither of these
is that fervent prayer which St. James speaks of, but that prayer which
sets the whole Soul in motion toward God, where not only the fancy and
imagination, and understanding are employed to invent and suggest matter, the
will to will it, but the affections (which indeed in a reasonable creature are
but the motions of the will toward its object) with the utmost intension to
desire it, to exercise an hope in God for it, etc. this is the fervent working
prayer mentioned by St. James, this prayer does much with God. Jacobs prayer
was such a prayer, Moses says he wrestled with God until the morning, he said
unto God. I will not let thee go, until thou blessest me, the Prophet expounds
it, Hosea 12. 4. He wept, and made supplications unto him; by this prayer he
had power over the Angel, and prevailed (as it is there in the words
immediately preceding) yea, and he had a present answer, God blessed him before
he parted with him as you read in his History. Such a prayer was Daniels, to
which he received also a present answer, Dan. 9. v. 3. I (says he) set my face
to the Lord God, to seek by Prayer and Supplications: with fasting, and
sackcloth, and ashes, such was Elijahs prayer, 1 Kings 18. 42. The text says.
He put his face betwixt his knees, a posture signifying the great intension of
his mind and spirit. It is a praying with strong cries and groans which cannot
be uttered, which is the Apostles phrase, Romans 8. 26. This praying comes up to
the first, and great commandment. Yhou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
Soul, and all thy strength. This is like the drawing the arrow to the head,
which sends it with more force to the mark; nor indeed is there a better sign
of a sudden answer, than when the Lord has thus prepared the heart. A man
seldom finds his Soul more then ordinarily fervent, and importunate with God
for a mercy, but when the Lord has determined suddenly to give it in to him.
Thus now I have showed you in what cases God ordinarily gives in speedy answers
to his peoples prayer. But God does not do this always. David himself
complains, Psalm. 22. 2. O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear
not, and in the night season, and am not silent. The Church cries out, Psalm.
80. 4. O Lord God of Hosts, how long will thou be angry with the prayers of thy
people? And again, he shuts out my prayer, Lam. 3. 8. What should be the
reason of these inequal dispensations from the hand of the same God, and
gracious Father? I answer;

1, Why may not God do it, that we may not track him in his ways? He will be
known to be a free agent. He will sometimes give present answer, that his
people may be confirmed in their faith, that God is a God hearing prayer. The
God, that never said to the seed of Jacob, seek my face in vain; he will not
always give a present answer, that we may not ascribe too much unto prayer,
nor will he always delay, that we may not ascribe too little to it. If God
should always give a present answer, we should ascribe too much to prayer, and
make an idol of a duty. That the Lord might secure his own glory, and be owned
as the God of our mercies, the object of our faith, and dependence, the free
fountain of all our good things, God is pleased, sometimes sooner, sometimes
later, to give in answer to his peoples prayer.

2. But there may be reason enough for it, fetched from the prayers themselves.
One prayer may be made more in faith than another, more fervent than another,
more fitted to Gods set time, for the bestowing of a mercy than another; it is
true nothing of these can render the prayer more meritorious, our prayers, take
them at the best, are too poor things to be the price of the least mercies,
when we have done all that we can, we are unprofitable servants; but where one
prayer is more conformable to the will of God than another, it may move God
further, and may obtain a more speedy answer from Gods hand.

3. Finally there may be some reason given on the account of the parties
praying. Some of Gods people may be greater favorites with God then others;
God loves all his Saints with an equal elective, and redeeming love, but there
may be differences as to the manifestations of his love. Samuel, and Moses,
Noah, Daniel, and Job are mentioned by the Prophets, as Persons that had a
mighty power with God above others. God therefore in the expression of his
anger against Israel says, if they stood before him, they should only save
their own Souls. God sent Abimelech to Abraham, and Jobs Friends to Job, to
pray for them, assuring them that those he would accept, God had a David whom
he calls the man according to Gods own heart, and Christ had a John, who was
called the beloved Disciple, all the Disciples were beloved, but he was loved
with a more special, signal love, this the Disciples knew, and therefore when
he had told them, that one of them should betray him, Simon Peter beckned to
John, that he should ask him of whom he spoke. Now it is no wonder if the
prayer of him who is highly beloved in some singular degree of favor with God,
should receive a quicker answer then another, this is but after the manner of
men. 2. The state of Gods people, may be such as will admit of no delay. If the
Lord does not come in with some present help, they must be lost and undone,
their Spirits must fail, and the Souls which he has made; now in such cases as
these, it is no wonder if the Lord gratifies his people with quicker answers,
and returns to their prayers; but who is he that can pretend to give a reason
of Gods differing dispensations of his grace? all that we can do in this case,
is but to show you that the ways of the Lord are reasonable, though the reason
of them be a depth past our finding out. We should not sufficiently adore, and
admire God, if we did perfectly understand him; but I shall add no more
doctrinally to this discourse, much of which, though it may look like something
of a digression, yet I hope it will not be altogether unprofitable.

Use 1.
This notion wonderfully commends the love of God to the Sons, and Daughters
of Men. There is not any one name of God, that more commends the love of God
to us, or which we have more reason to glory in than, that he is a God that
hears prayers. It is true God needs not our tongues, to tell him what we
have need of, he knows what things we need before we ask him, nor do our
prayers merit any favor, It is the goodness, the free goodness of God that
relieveth us in any straight, in any distress, but you know it is very natural
to us, when we are in any misery, in any distress, or straight, to cry for
help, and a wonderful relief to our thoughts, to know that our sighs, and
cries, and groans are not lost in the air; Oh! it is a sad, and uncomfortable
thing to cry, and to have none to help, none to deliver. What a comfortable
thing it is to cry in hope, nay, in confidence, for we have this confidence
(says the Apostle) that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears
us. Now that the great and mighty God, who needs not our supplications,
should lend an ear to them, and give us an assurance of his hearing, and
answering them, what a mighty thing is this to set up God high in our thoughts,
for the Majesty of Heaven to stoop to the worms of the Earth, when they but
turn up their heads to him? What a condescension is this? what an humbling of
the Divine Majesty? what a relief to poor creatures infirmities, to know, that
not a sigh, not a groan, not a prayer shall be lost? But this is yet something
beyond this; That the Lord should oft-times give a present answer, and prevent
our impatience by an answer so swift, as gives our Eyes no leave to fail
through a frustrated expectation; this is yet a great deal more. In receiving
our petitions, and promising us an answer, God shows himself a gracious King,
though we wait some time for an answer, but in his present answers he shows
himself a gracious Father, that is not patient that his Child should be one
hour in distress and misery. Nor is the love of our Heavenly Father alone
commended in this particular, but the love of Jesus Christ also is remarkably
commended, for it is through him that we have boldness to enter into the
holiest, by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has
consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh, and he is the
High Priest over the House of God. O let every quick return of prayers which
God makes to our Souls, bring us more in love with Christ, more into the
admiration of his love, and raise up our hearts more in thankfulness, for the
death, resurrection and intercession of Jesus Christ.

Use 2.
Secondly, How should this encourage us to prayer, and to such a performance of
that duty, as we may have a quick return, and answer. Prayer is not so slighty
a duty, as the most of people do make it, it ought not to be made such a formal
performance. It is one of our great privileges to have an access, a freedom of
access to the Throne of Grace, to ask of God such things as we stand in need
of; it is that which brings down the Protection, and influences of common
providence, and the influences of his special grace, it opens, and shuts
up Heaven. By prayer Elijah brought down rain and fire from Heaven; Samuels
Prayer brought thunder, and lightning. Hezekiahs prayer brought down an Angel,
that destroyed the Host of Sennacherib, it obtained a blessing for Jacob, and
turned his name into the name of Israel, because as a Prince he had power, and
prevailed with God; nay, it often brings down the mercy we want in a very short
time, while the Child of God is speaking, God answers, here am I. This should
make us value the duty of prayer, and not to think it a mere thing of course,
and turn it into a formality. And what you have heard concerning the nature of
that prayer, which is of such power and prevalency with God, should also mind
you to take heed how you pray. Prayer does not lie in a mere uttering, or
repeating of words expressive of our minds unto God, men may call this prayer,
but they will find it a bodily labor of a little efficacy, and avail with God;
it is true, you will hardly find any thing called Prayer in Scripture, where
words were not used, it seems to be something more then the secret desire of
the Soul; the desires of our Souls, expressed by the words of our lips, is what
is generally called prayer, in holy writs, but words without inward affections,
words not thrust out from the force of our internal desires and affections, are
the least thing in prayer, which lies not in the pouring forth of words, but
in the pourings out of our Souls before God. Labor Christians to understand
the nature of prayer, both as to the matter you should pray for, and as to the
right manner of the performance of it, you all know what you would have, what
you have need of, what is truly good for you under your present circumstances,
this you know not; some things are absolutely good, universally necessary, such
things as all Souls at all times have need of, such are pardon of sins,
sanctification, further grace to honor and glorify God in your circumstances,
and relations, an heart to honor and glorify God in whatsoever state and
condition you are; these and such like things you may beg importunately, and
absolutely, and that at all times. But there are other things which are not so
absolutely and universally good, but are good or evil, as they are well used,
or abused. These must be asked of God, with a submission to his will, and a
reference to his wisdom. It is of mighty concern for a Christian rightly to
understand the matter of prayer, what he may, or may not ask of God, what he
may ask absolutely, what but conditionally, and with limitation; an ignorance
of this may make Christians too bold, too importunate with God in asking some
things, and to sin by impatience, and murmuring, because they do not receive
presently what they ask, when as the reason is, because they ask amiss. James
tells those to whom he wrote, Jam. 4. 3. You ask, and receive not, because you
ask amiss; he instanceth but in one way wherein they asked amiss, that you
might consume it upon your lusts. That indeed is one way by which men may
miscarry in prayer, not directing their prayer to the honor and glory of God,
but merely to a self-satisfaction, and indeed taking the words in that sense,
as spending upon their lusts signifies a gratifying our selves, and giving our
selves a pleasure and satisfaction; so all asking amiss, will fall under it,
and such asking amiss is the cause of all our not receiving; no man can ask any
thing for the honor and glory of God, who does not ask according to the will
of God, God is glorified by the fulfilling of his will, and whosoever prays,
and the sum of his prayer is not, let the Lord be glorified, let the will of
the Lord be done, does but ask that he may consume upon his lust, and give
himself a satisfaction; now all this is asking amiss, which is the cause of our
not receiving. It is therefore I say of a very great concernment for a
Christian to know what he may pray for, what he may pray for absolutely, and
peremptorily, what but limitedly, and conditionally, with submission to the
Divine will, and with a reference to the Divine wisdom, how else is it
possible, that he should pray in faith? or how else will he be able to command
his Spirit into a due silence, and patience, if he does not presently receive
what he asks of God? Nay, the servency of a Soul in prayer does much depend
upon this knowledge; no prayer can be fervent, but the prayer of faith. No
prayer receives a present answer, but the prayer of faith. Study therefore
(Christian?) the due matter, and manner of prayer. There may be many prayers
put up, and yet God not hear, Isa. 1. 15. Though (says God) you spread forth
your hands, I will hide my Eyes from you, yea, when you make many prayers, I
will not hear, the reason there assigned is, because their hands were full of
blood, which amounts to that of David, If I regard iniquity in my heart, God
will not hear my Prayer, and to that of Solomon, The Sacrifice of the wicked is
an abomination unto the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his delight. He
that lifts up hands unto God, must lift up pure hands. But a man may lift up
pure hands, yet not be heard, David complains that he did so, Psalm. 22.
therefore the Apostle adds, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Holy hands without wrath or doubting,
for says James, chapter 1. v. 7. Let not him that wavereth, think that he shall
receive any thing of the Lord. Now it is impossible that a man should pray
without doubting, for any thing of which he is not fully persuaded that it is
the will of God that he should receive it, this therefore is of very great
concern, that a Soul should know that he asks according to the will of God, and
that must be when he knows that God has somewhere in Scripture promised it. Be
not therefore only much in prayer, but see that you do not ask amiss, that you
ask so, that you may receive, yea, that while you are speaking, God may give
you a gracious answer.

Use 3.
Thirdly. This Doctrine calls to you for an holy, and close walking with God. A
loose liver may receive some good things from God, as he is a God of
compassion, full of pity, and tender compassion, that hears even the young
Ravens when they cry unto him for their food, thus did Ahab, thus did the King
of Nineveth, and this was a ground for Simon Magus to pray, though he was in
the gall of bitterness, and the bonds of iniquity; but he can receive nothing
from God, as he is a God of truth and faithfulness, there is not in all the
Book of God, one promise made to a wicked man's prayer. God has said, though
they make many prayers, he will not hear them, Isaiah 1. 15. he has said, They
shall call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they
shall not find me, Prove. 1. 28. For Hypocrites he has said, Job 27. 9. Will
God hear his cry, when trouble comes upon him? but a close walking with God is
not only commendable to us upon this account, that our prayers may not be
wholly shut out from God, that we may not only in our distresses go to God as a
fountain of mercy, and goodness, as a God of pity, and tender compassion, but
as unto a God of truth and faithfulness, with an hope, and a confidence in him,
and an expectation upon him, and with an holy boldness: but also that we may
have a present answer, we are naturally hasty as to the supply of our wants*
and the satisfaction of our desires, hence we say, Bis dat qui cito dat, and
count that kindness double, which is done for us quickly. Now they are the
favorites of Heaven, that gain the quickest answers from God. There Is nothing
makes one Soul more the favorite of God then another, but a more ardent love
for God, and a more strict, and close walking with God. Let this engage us to
perfect holivess in the fear of the Lord. Study therefore the closest degrees
of fellowship, and communion with God, the strictest course of an holy
conversation. There is a great deal of difference even in good men's communion
with God, some are more upon the mountwith God then others are, more in holy
meditation and contemplation, more in secret duties, more in prayer, more in
watchfulness, more warm, and zealous for God, David had many worthies, but he
had a first three, to which the others did not come up, though they did
worthily. God has many Souls, that he loves, that are dear and precious in
his Eyes, but he has also his first threes, some that excel, and outrun
others; these are they that have most of Gods Ear, for tho the first grace be
not given, because men keep his Commandments, yet further grace, the
manifestations, and signal tokens of Divine love are given out (according to
the promise, Jo. 14. 21.) as men love, and keep the Commandments of God; you
therefore that would excel in the favor of God, that would have Gods ear fully
and presently open to your supplications, study to excel in holiness. Does a
poor Courtier in the Courts of Earthly Princes, bless himself in having the Ear
of his Prince, that if he has a Petition to put up unto his Prince, he can go
immediately into his presence, and have his Petition presently signed, whereas
the Petitions of others are rejected, or at least deferred, so as he is
constrained to wait months or years? And is this no privilege, no happiness at
all, that a poor Soul can immediately go unto the Lord of Heaven and Earth, to
him who is the Fountain of all grace and goodness, and if he wants any thing,
freely present his Petition to him, and have it signed presently, not let the
Lord go, until he has blessed him, when as a wicked man, tho he makes many
prayers, yet is not heard; yea, those that may have some interest in God, yet
walking more loosely, and more imperfectly, may cry a long time, and yet not be
answered, if we had nothing more then this to commend to us holiness in all
manner of conversation, and the strictest degrees of walking with God, yet this
certainly should be enough.

Use 4.
I shall add but one word more in application of this discourse. I put into the
Proposition, the term [sometimes] God does not always, but sometimes give in a
quick answer to his peoples prayers; Let not the people of God therefore think
it strange if they have not presently an answer to their prayers. God is not
always alike quick in his returns to the prayers of his people. He always
hears them, he will be certain to answer them, but he is not always equally
quick in the answer of them. This is many times the trouble of Souls that
belong to God; it was David's trouble, expressed, Psalm. 22. 2, 3. It was Asaphs
trouble, though God did at last hear him, as you read, v. 1. yet he had first
spoke, as in v. 7. 8, 9. Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be
favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for
evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious; has he in anger shut up his
tender mercies, yet because the not hearing of prayers is threatened as a
judgment, and punishment upon wicked men, and mentioned in holy writ, as the
reward of men's regarding iniquity in their hearts. This often causes a great
deal of trouble in the Spirits of Gods People. Let me therefore shut up this
discourse in advising alittle, what that man or woman should do, that lies at
least under some apprehensions, that God does not hear, or has not heard their
prayers, they cry in the day time, and are not silent in the night season, yet
God hears not.

1. In the first place. Let such a Christian examine whether it be not his own
mistake. Thou think God has not heard, nor answered thy prayers, art thou
not in a mistake? All answers of prayers are not discernable to our sense. It
may be God has answered thee by denying thee the particular thing that thou
askedst of him; thus he answered Paul, by denying him as to the thing he asked,
which was the taking the thorn out of his flesh. He better knows what we have
need of, then we our selves know it, the general desire of thy Soul was for
some good, thou did therefore desire health, riches, etc. because thou did
apprehend them suitable, and convenient, and so good for thee. God who knows
thy Soul, the frame and temper of it, he sees, that these things would be for
thy hurt, he therefore withholds them, and so in not answering answers
thee, in not answering thy particular request, he does answer the general
desire of thy Soul, and only corrects thy ignorance in thy request. 2. You
have heard that God sometimes answers by giving (though not the thing) yet
the value of the thing which thou ask, i. e. that which is every way as
suitable and convenient, and as profitable for thee, as that which thou did
desire. Has not God (according to thy prayer) removed thy affliction? yet,
has he supported thee under it? has he filled thee with inward consolations?
has he told thee (as he did Paul) that his grace should be sufficient for
thee? Do thou call this no answer? God answers the prayer of that Soul, to
whom he gives the full value of the thing it asks, though he does not give
the thing itself.

2. If thou can not find that God has answered thee, neither in kind, nor in
value, Review thy prayer, and see if thou can not find some failure in that,
for which God withholds his answer. I suppose thee a person reconciled to God
through the blood of Christ; other Souls either pray not at all, or if at all,
they make a mere formality of the duty, and put up prayers, as Children shoot
arrows, never regarding whither they fly, or what becomes of them, but even
in a good man's prayer there may be such failures as may give God a just cause
to withold an answer, without any breach of Gods truth, or faithfulness, thou
may not have prayed in faith, but too much doubting, thou may have prayed
for something, which thy wise Father saw was not good for thee, or at least not
good for thee under some present circumstances, under which thou art; if thou
find any thing of this nature, thy work is to correct thy prayers, if thou
would receive an answer.

3. If thou do not find this, if thou can not charge thy want of an answer
upon some defect or failure in thy prayers, nor yet find that God has answered
thee, either giving thee the thing which thou did ask of him, or the value of
it in a quiet and contented frame of Spirit in the want of it, or in the
supportations, or consolations of his Spirit, but thy Soul is yet unquiet and
impatient; it is thy duty yet to wait upon God, to chide down thy tumultuous,
and unquiet thoughts, all the risings up, and murmurings of thy Soul against
God, to adore, and to admire God where thou can not see, or understand him,
to acknowledge Gods goodness and holiness, though thou can not discern his
goodness as to thee in this particular. Thus did David, Psalm. 22. 3. after he
had complained, that he had cried in the day time, and the Lord did not hear,
and in the night season, and was not silent. v. 3. he says, But thou art holy,
O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel. This is most certainly our duty
under such providence as these are; we must not look in this life to
understand all Gods ways, and methods of providence, much less the reasons of
them, that is a piece of knowledge reserved for another world; all that we have
to do, is to observe, and study them, and where we cannot find them out, to
admire and adore them, and to wait upon him, that wrappeth up himself in thick
darkness, and hides his face from the House of Jacob. This waiting does not
only signify a passive quietness, silence, and patience, but an active doing
our duty. Waiting on the Lord, and keeping his way, are put together, Psalm. 37.
we ought not to leave off praying, because (in our apprehensions at least) our
prayers lie by without answer, much less to slacken our course of holiness, but
to resolve as the Church did for Zions sake, so for our own sake, not to hold
our peace; we have for this an excellent president in the example of the
Church, Psalm. 44. 17. All this is come upon us (says she) yet have we not
forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely in thy Covenant. Our heart is not turned
back, neither have our steps declined from thy way, though thou have sore
broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death?
then she concludes with prayer. v. 23, 24, 25, 26. Awake, why sleep thou? O
Lord! arise, cast us not off for ever, wherefore hidest thou thy face, and
forgettest our affliction, and oppression? For our Soul is bowed down to the
dust, our belly cleaves to the Earth. Arise for our help, and redeem us for
thy mercy sake.

Sermon XXV.
Cant. 1. 4. The King has brought me into his Chambers.

IF any asks who is this King whom the text speaks of; as the question
sounds like that, Psalm. 24. v. 8. Who is the King of glory? So the answer
must be much the same; The Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle,
the Lord of Hosts, he is the King of Glory. He is the King of Nations, for all
the Nations of the Earth are the work of his hands, and he has a Native
Lordship and dominion over them. He is the King upon the holy hill of Sion, the
King of Saints, they have chosen him, he rules in them, and reigns over
them, they have chosen him, he has subdued their hearts unto him, and has
chosen them for his peculiar people; this is the King of whom the Church, and
the believing Soul here speaks, and says; The King has brought me into his
Chambers. It is the same Person of whom she spoke, v. 2. Let him kiss me with
the kisses of his mouth. To whom she said, v. 3. Draw me, and we will run after
thee. There she spoke to him, as her beloved, here she speaks of him as a
King; there she prayed for something that she wanted, here she praises, and
gives thanks for something she had received. I have already taken notice of
the alteration of her style, of her so sudden giving thanks upon the quick
return God had made to her prayers. I come now to consider the mercy or good
thing she had received, which she expresses in the same metaphorical dialect,
which she uses throughout this Song. The King has brought me into his
Chambers; when I at first opened the whole verse, I endeavored to find out
what this mercy was, in the receipt of which the Spouse triumphs in this text.
I then considered Chambers, as places more lofty then others, and and of more
privacy and secrecy, and from thence concluded; that the Spouse by this phrase
signifies some special favors which she had received from God, some special,
and more near and intimate degrees of fellowship, and communion with God, into
which her beloved had taken her. The Proposition I offered from the words for
my further explication was this:

Prop.
That the Lord Jesus Christ has Chambers, in which he sometimes entertaineth
the Souls of his people. He has a favor for them all, Rooms in his House for
all the sizes of his people, but he has Chambers for some, or into which he
sometimes takes up the Souls of his Saints; the subject of my discourse will be
such special favors, as God shows to some Souls, or to the Souls of his
people at some times. This is evident in holy writ. Abraham was called the
Friend of God. Moses is called his Servant, emphatically. Moses my Servant is
dead. David, the man according to Gods own heart. Solomon was named by God
Jedidiah, a man beloved of God. There are four degrees in the love of God, as
it respects the Children of men.

1. He has a Philanthropy, or general love, which he shows toward all; He
leaves not the Heathen without witness. In him all men live, move, and have
their being, from him they have fruitful times and seasons, which fill their
bellies with food, their hearts with gladness, their bellies are filled with
his hid treasure. The patience of God leads them to repentance. The invisible
things of God, even his eternal power and Godhead are made known to them, by
his works of Creation, by the things which he has made.

2. He has a more special love for his Church. This is seen in his more
special providence, exercised toward his whole Church, which are more watched
over, and preserved by a common providence, then any other body of people are.
They have also the Oracles of God, the Ordinances of God, and means of grace,
and this latter is certainly an effect of the death of Christ.

3. He has yet a more special love for all those within his Church, who are
effectually called, whose hearts God has seized, and subdued to himself, they
are made partakes of more special grace, being called, justified, and
sanctified, and such who shall hereafter be most certainly glorified.

4. But there is yet another specialty of Divine love, even amongst those who
are made partakers of special saving graces, some are more specially favored
in this life, and shall be more eminently then others glorified, in that life
which is to come. These more special favors to the Saints, that are all made
partakers of the same saving grace, are the subject of my present enquiry.

1. Some here understand the mansions of glory, but they are forced to make an
Enallage of tenses to justify their interpretation, and to say, the King has,
is put for the King shall bring me, etc. Aquinas, Piscator, and some others
thus interpret the Spouse. The question about degrees of glory, is not well
agreed amongst Divines, there are great Divines on either side as to that
opinion; nor is it a small difficulty to open in what the glory of one Child of
God, when he comes in Heaven, shall excel another* When it is certain, that
they shall all see God, inherit his Kingdom, be satisfied with his likeness,
and there shall be no want to any Soul there, especially we being taught by our
Savior, that every labourer in the Vineyard shall have his penny. But yet it
is very probably judged by Divines, That in that firmament, as well as in that
which is lower, the stars shall differ one from another in glory, and that when
Christ told his Disciples, they should sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel, he by it expressed some greater degrees of glory, then
shall be the portion of his more common Disciples besides, that the Scriptures
speaking of God's rewarding all men according to their works, compared with the
disproportion which we see in the works of Believers, make it yet more
probable: So that I must confess my self very inclinable in this point, to be
of the mind of those Divines who think that in the Mansions of Glory, there
shall be Chambers, though I am not able to distinguish them from the lower
Rooms in those blessed Mansions. But yet I am not inclinable (supposing this)
to interpret the Spouse as speaking of them here, but rather judge her by this
phrase designing to express her felicity, not discerned by the Eye of Faith,
which is the Evidence of things not seen, but by the Eye of Sense, some special
favor now received from God; and I am therefore concerned further to enquire,
what these favors may be.

2. God has Chambers of special Providence. Some indeed understand that Text,
Isa. 26. 20. Come my people enter into the Chambers, and hide thy self;
concerning the Grave, because the righteous are taken away (as the Prophet
says) from the Evil to come: But others (and I think better) interpret it as
an invitation of God to his people in calamitous times to betake themselves
into the Chambers of his special providenee, the Psalmist says, Psalm. 91. 1.
He that dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall abide under the
shadow of his Wings. In this Chamber there are Closets, there is a special
providence that attends, and watches over the whole Church, as the whole
Nation of the Jews were under more special providence, than the Heathens, but
yet there is a more special providence attends the people of God who are so
indeed. Which is abundantly proved throughout the 91 Psalm, so Psalm. 34. 18.
The Eye of the Lord is upon those that fear him, and upon those that hope in
his mercy: To deliver their Souls from death, and to keep them alive in Famine.
But in regard the Spouse here speaks not of herself, as under any
circumstances of outward misery or affliction; I do not think this is her
meaning in this Text, these are not the Chambers, concerning which the Spouse
boasts, that the King had brought her into them, she is speaking here
doubtless of more spiritual inward dispensations.

3. God has his Chamber of Audience, where he receives, hears, and gives
answer to the prayers of his people. This is a near degree of the Souls
communion with God, and what God has promised them, Psalm. 34. 15. The Eyes of
the Lord are upon the righteous, and his Ears are open unto their cry. And
again, v. 17. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them
out of all their troubles. This is a favor which the Lord affords every
believer, the promises of hearing prayers belong to them all; but yet in this
Chamber there are Closets also, God sometimes grants a more speedy answer to
his pecples prayers, sometimes he delayeth, and seems to be angry with, and
to shut out his peoples supplications from him; but you know it was my whole
business in my last discourse to prove, and to give you some account of this,
which may very well supersede any larger discourse upon it, under this
Proposition. Abraham, Moses, and Daniel, and Job, were all entertained in these
Chambers, so are many of the Servants of God at this day, men mighty with God
in prayer, such Favorites in the Court of Heaven, that they have no more to do
then to form their Petitions, and to put them into the hands of Christ, and to
get upon their Watchtower with Habakkuk, and see what the Lord will answer.
God seems to have said unto them, as Ahasuerus said to Esther; What is thy
Petition (O my Child) and what is thy request? it shall be performed, even to
the half of my Kingdom Solomon was entertained by God in this Chamber, when the
Lord appeared unto him in Gibeon, and asked him, what shall I give thee? and
when after his prayer upon the dedication of his Temple, the Lord again
appeared to him, and said? I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place
for my self: a Soul may be said to be brought into this Chamber, either when it
finds that God has answered its prayers at any time; Or, 2. When, it before
it prays, ordinarily finds a persuasion within itself, that it shall be
answered, and so goes with boldness, and confidence to the throne of grace,
and pours out its self unto God without doubting.

4. God has Chambers, which I may call the Chambers of his special presence.
This being the thing which I conceive chiefly intended in this metaphorical
expression, I shall spend a little time in the explication of it. The Scripture
speaking much of Gods presence with, and absence from his people, his being
with them, or forsaking them, and departure from them; that you may in some
measure understand those phrases, Consider,

1. There is a presence of the Divine Essence, in all places, in respect of
which it is said, The Lord fills Heaven and Earth. In respect of this he is
never far from any of us, he is neither shut up in, nor shut out of any place,
nor is he more present in one place, then he is in another, according to that
barbarous verse. Enter, praesenter, Deus est and ubique potenter. God is every
where in respect of his being, essential presence, and power.

2. There is a presence of the Divine goodness; it is communicative goodness,
for there is an essential goodness which can never be separated from it,
wherever the divine being is, there is infinite goodness; but there is in God
not only a goodness of perfection, which is essential to God, and inseparable
from him, but a goodness of bounty and beneficence, which is nothing else but
the goodness of God affecting the creature, and flowing out upon the creature;
now this depends upon the will of God. He shows mercy where he will show
mercy. Thus God is said to be present, where he shows mercy and kindness, and
to be absent where he withholds his acts of kindness. Thus the Saints in
Heaven are said to be ever with the Lord in Heaven, because they shall be ever
under the fullest manifestations of his glory and goodness, and the damned are
said to depart from God, because they are never like more to see him, or feel
him in any manifestations of his mercy and goodness, the showing of mercy and
goodness is so natural to God, so much his proper work and delight, that he is
said to be wholly absent from them, to whom he will never more show kindness
and mercy. So as to this life, God is said to be present with a people, when he
shows them goodness, and mercy, to be departed, and to be absent from them*
when he withholds from them such dispensations, as they have formerly
enjoyed, and are suited and proper to their wants, or desires. Now these
mercies, or good things being such as are suited to the necessities of our
bodies here in this life, or of our Souls, the first of which we usually call
the good things of common providence. The latter, the good things of special
grace. God is said to be present with, or absent from his people, with respect
to the one, or to the other; with respect to the good things of common
providence, God is present with a people, when he goes forth with their
Armies, gives them peace, and plenty, success in business, prosperity in their
tradings and commerce; and on the other side, he is said to be absent from
them, and to be departed from them, when he goes not forth with their Armies,
but makes them to fall before their enemies, when he sends amongst them famine,
and pestilence, etc. Thus as to particular persons, as God is said to be
present with persons, when he upholdeth their Souls in life, their bodies in
health, when he blesses them in their businesses, and relations, and makes
the works of their hands to prosper; so he is said to have forsaken them, and
to be departed from them, when he leaves them to sicknesses, blasts them in
their Estates, etc. thus Gods presence, and being with his people, his absence,
forsaking of, and departing from a people, or person, are often taken in holy
writ. Thus God may be present with the very worst of men, thus he may be
absent, and depart from the very best of his people.

But then there is a presence of God with men and women, with respect to the
good things of special grace. Now these things again are such as are either
absolutely necessary to salvation; Or, 2. Such influences, as though they be
not absolutely necessary to the salvation of the Soul, yet do highly
accommodate the Soul in its way to Heaven. Of the first sort are the graces of
justification, and of Regeneration, and Sanctification; without these the Soul
can never enter into the Kingdom, as to these therefore God is always present
with, never absent from the Souls of any whom he has chosen, and called out of
darkness into light; in that sense the promise does, and ever shall hold true;
He will never leave his people, nor forsakethem. But now there are other
influences of grace, exceeding pleasant, and of high advantage, and
accommodation to the Soul in its way to Heaven, such are further degrees of
strength, and ability, further freedom, l^fe, and activity, and chearfulne^s in
the service of God, p^ace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost, these are
not absolutely necessary unto eternal life, and salvation, nor to the upholding
of spiritual life in the Soul, the want of them is only afflictive to the Soul,
and incumbers it in its spiritual life, without a total destruction of it; as
to these, God gives more or less to the Souls of his people, and to the same
Souls, more or less at one time then at another, and so is said to be present,
or absent from them, according to the greater or lesser degrees of these
influences which he vouchsafes unto them, and those Souls may be said to be
brought into the Lords Chambers, to whom he vouchsafes greater degrees of
these gracious influences, and those Souls may be said to be under desertions,
forsaken of God, to whom the Lord denies such degrees of these influences, as
either themselves have before enjoyed, or others do enjoy. As to these God is
very various in his dispensations, they being such dispensations, as God upon
the covenant of grace is left at liberty to dispense out to the Souls of his
people, or to withold from them according to his own good pleasure, and
wisdom, and which accordingly he does dispense out in pursuit of the design of
his own glory, and as according to his infinite knowledge and wisdom, he sees
will be most for the good of his people; when God dispenses out more of these,
he is said to be more present with the Souls of his people, when he more
withholds them, he is said to be absent, not that at any time he is wholly
absent from the Souls of his people, as to his gracious presence (for without
that they were able to do nothing) the seed of God abiding in the Soul, must be
upheld in its life, and cherished by the influence of the Sun of righteousness
upon the Soul; but as God, though he be always present in the world, by his
essential presence, yet does not always show forth his power in upholding, and
preserving this or that part of it, no not the same parts of it, which is the
reason of that sickness and mortality, with which some parts of it are affected
more than others, and the same parts of it are affected at some times more than
others. So as to spiritual influences, though he always vouchsafes such a
presence of his gracious influences, as shall keep up spiritual life in the
Soul, yet for further gradual influences (the want of which is yet consistent
with spiritual life in the Soul) the Lord grants, or with holds them,
according to his own will, guided by his infinite wisdom, with respect to the
great ends of his own glory, and his peoples good. And the Lords withdrawings
of this nature, are the cause of all the Souls sickness, and spiritual
distempers, upon this are the grievous complaints of the people of God, of the
strength of their corruptions, the violence of temptations, their deadness, and
inactivity to, and in the operations of the spiritual llfe, their heaviness,
sadness, and want of comfort. When the Lord grants out to any of the Souls of
his people more of these influences, then he may be said to bring them into his
Chambers; when they find more internal strength to the performance of their
duties, that their meditation of God is more sweet to them, they can believe
with less doubting, pray with more faith, more fervor, less distraction; when
they find more strength against motions to sin, more ability and courage to
suffer for the name of God, when they find their Souls more ready to, more
free, and cheerful in their duty, when they find more serenity, peace, and
comfort within, than they have formerly experienced, then may the Lord be said
to have brought them into his Chambers, the Chambers of his presence, when
these abate, and the Soul lives, and no more but lives, complaining that it is
without strength, ready to be overthrown by every motion of lust, by every
foreign temptation, that the thoughts of God are troublesome to it, it may be
terrible that it moves heavily, it does something of its duty, but it is rather
its task, and burden, than its pleasure and delight, its heart is sad, and
heavy, and dejected, in such cases as these. Now God is present with the Soul
that is his, for he dwells in it, but he entertaineth it as it were in his
low Rooms. Cubiculum (says Bernard upon the Text) est locus ubi vere quiescens
and quietus Deus cernitur. The Chamber is a place where the Soul sees God,
quiet, and at rest. Sometimes the Soul apprehends God as it were returned to
his place (to speak in the Prophets Dialect) as it were risen up from the Soul,
and returned to Heaven, only to be found there, by fasting, and weeping, and
earnest seeking after him; it apprehends God as angry, and not at rest in it;
sometimes it discerns him at rest in it, the Soul can say, Lo this is my God, I
have waited for him, I have waited for him, I will rejoice, and be glad in his
Salvation, then the Soul returns unto its rest, Psalm. 116. 7. Return unto thy
rest O my Soul (says David) for the Lord has dealt graciously with thee. When
God is at rest in the Soul, then is the Soul at rest within itself, then has
the King brought the Soul into his Chambers. David when he was under
apprehensions that the Lord sustained him, resolves to lay himself down in
peace, and sleep, Psalm. 4. 7. God had dealt graciously with him. These now are
the Kings Chambers, and what I conceive to be here chiefly intended.

5. Gregory has another notion of these Chambers. What (says he) should we
understand by these Chambers but the mysteries of holy contemplations? The
Astronomer indeed, that spends his time in the contemplation of the Stars,
chooses the roof of the House, or some lofty room, for his contemplation, and
we all choose the highest places of the House, for our prospects of things afar
off, and all contemplative Persons choose Chambers, as places of privacy for
their contemplations* When the Lord raises the Soul to further degrees of
spiritual-mindedness, and gives the Soul a power further to contemplate him in
his Divine Nature and goodness, then he may be said to have brought the Soul
into his Chambers. There is a time when the Soul remembers God, and is
troubled (thus it was with the Psalmist, Psalm. 77. 3.) Another time when the
meditation of God is sweet to the Soul (so it was with David, Psalm. 104. 34.)
when the Soul is able to meditate of God without distractions, or disturbance,
and can fit alone, and fancy that it sees even the Heavens open, and beholds
the glory of God, and its Redeemers arms open to receive it; and there is
another time, when it is not able to lift up an Eye to God, nor to behold him
with any pleasing aspect. When the Soul is in the former state, then the King
may be said to have brought the Soul into his Chambers, but this the observing
person will see sell under the aforementioned consideration.

Lastly, There are yet some other Chambers, into which God sometimes brings the
Souls of his people, in the description of which I will not enlarge, because
they are more peculiar Closets into which God has taken, and may (for ought I
know) yet take the Souls of some particular Servants of his, into which
believers in general cannot expect to be brought, they being such as God in all
times has been pleased, but to take some few of his people into, and generally
such, as he has designed to make some more public use of in the world; I may
call them Chambers of particular instruction. Before God had fully revealed his
will in the holy Scriptures, written for our instruction, and consolation. God
was pleased at sundry times, and in diverse manners (as the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 1. 1.) to speak unto the Fathers by the Prophets. Persons whom God
admitted to a more special degree of fellowship, and communion with him, and
sometimes more plainly, sometimes more typically, and darkly to instruct them
concerning his mind and will, both concerning what they were to do, and to
avoid, and concerning what God intended to do in the world, or some particular
place in it; into these Chambers he took Abraham, when he did not hide from him
what he intended to do to Sodom, and Moses, when he took him up into the Mount,
and there gave him his law, instructing him in his, mind and will, that he
might instruct the people under his charge, in these Chambers the Lord
entertained Samuel, Elijah, Elisha; Gad, and Nathan, and all the Seers, and
Prophets of whom you read in the Old Testament, and after them the blessed
Apostles, and some primitive Christians. But the bringing of any Souls now into
these Chambers, is no matter of our faith, and expectation; though we must not
limit the holy one of Israel, nor has (that we know) he any where as to this
limited himself; indeed as to one part of the revelation he has: None can
expect, nor have any new revelation of duty, for the holy Scriptures are a
perfect rule, and able to make the man of God wise to Salvation. But we may
have a fuller revelation of what is revealed, and thus doubtless, there is a
further discovery of duty in this, than in former ages, no new light of truth,
but a new light in our Souls to discern the revelations of the word. And
doubtless there may be to some particular Souls, some more revelations of what
God intends to do in the world, and as to his or their particular circumstances
than others have, they are things we cannot expect, hope or believe for, but
what some may receive, and for the trial of the truth of them, the issue must
be expected, and from that the truth of their revelations, and prophecies, must
be judged. And it seems by the answer of the Prophet Jeremy to Hananiah, that
under the old dispensation, this was a piece of the Judgment, Jer. 28. 8, 9.
The Prophets (says he) which have been before me, and thee of old, prophesied
both against many Countries, and against great Kingdoms, of War, and of
pestilence, the Prophet which prophesies of peace, when the word of the
Prophet shall come to pass, then shall the Prophet be known, that the Lord has
truly sent him. Yet they must doubtless at that time have had some other way to
discern a true Prophet from a false Prophet, how else could they have been
charged with sin, in not harkening to their voice, unless it were in such
things which they required them to do, or to avoid, in force of the law of God
given them by Moses, for though some of them wrought miracles, as Moses,
Elijah, Elisha, yet we read no such thing of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel,
etc. But whatever that way was, it is hidden from us, and though I dare not but
say that God may yet to some particular Servants of his, not only more fully
and clearly reveal what he has in his word revealed, so as they may more
clearly understand the Scriptures, and be more able to teach others, but also
reveal his mind and will as to future contingencies, with reference to Nations,
or Persons; yet I know no reason any has to expect, or pray for any such
Revelation; nor any others to believe it; but yet when the thing those Prophets
prophecy, comes to pass, then shall we know that the Lord has sent them. But
though these be special degrees of communion, special favors, which the Lord
may vouchsafe to some Souls, yet these are not certainly those Chambers, of
which the Spouse here speaks. I have before told you what I judge those to be.

Will any one that hears me, now say unto me, Why will the Lord thus please
to do? 1. Why will he bring any Souls into his Chambers; allow them a nearer
fellowship, and communion with him, then he will allow unto othe^s, and if he
will thus treat any, why not all? I shall add a few words to satisfy such Souls
as are so curious, and inquisitive; and then come to the practical application
of this discourse.

1. He will do it to some to manifest that he has a delight in the Sons of
men; the wise man thus speaks of Christ from all Eternity, as Rejoicing in
the habitable part of the Earth, and having his delights with the Sons of men.
Who can give a reason of love, and its motions in the creature? the affections
of some persons to others (as we daily see) are inaccountable things; we find
our own Souls, cleaving to some Neighbors, some Friends, and that we take a
greater delight, and complacency in seeing them, hearing them discourse, being
with them, and having them with us, then in others. Others can give no account
of it, nor see any reason for it, and it may be we our selves can give our
selves no great account of it, but so we do, though we know not why; and shall
any one think to call God to account, to know why he shows more favor to one
Soul, then to another? how comes God to be more a debtor to his Creature, then
man is to his Neighbor? what Man or Woman lives without their more intimate,
and special friends? What Prince (tho never so ingenuous, and good natured, and
kind to all his Subjects) is without his more particular, and special
favorites? Christ as God blessed for ever; before ever that he had assumed our
nature, he had a delight in the Sons of men, but upon his taking unto him our
nature, we cannot but apprehend him more specially inclined, he therefore took
our flesh, that he might be touched with the seeling of our infirmities, Heb.
2. 17. And in all things (says the Apostle) it behoved him to be made like
unto us, that he might be a merciful, and saithful High Priest. Christ thus
being not only engaged by the infinite goodness of the Divine Nature, to a
communication of his goodness; but also by his choice, and assumption of the
humane nature, engaged to a delight in the Sons of Men, though considering his
Majesty and greatness, it behoved him not to make every Soul a Favorite,
taking it up into the nearest degrees of communion, and fellowship with
himself; yet it behoved him to make choice of some Souls, to whom he will more
fully, and freely make known himself in the riches of his grace.

2. Secondly, He is concerned to it (...) point of faithfulness, because of his
promises. God has given us many great, and precious promises; some concerning
this life, some respecting that which is to come, we have promises of special
providence, special protection from dangers, support under them, deliverance
from them, promises of special grace, manifestative love, Joh. 14. 21. I will
love them, and manifest my self unto them, etc. promises of comfort, strength,
etc. Now these promises are not made good to every Soul, at all times, but it
is necessary (to uphold the Lords faithfulness) that they should be made good
to some Souls, and at some times; by this we know, that none of his words shall
fail, that his promises are in, and through Christ all of them, yea, and Amen.

3. By this the Lord also incourageth others to their duty. It is sad, that we
should not be willing to serve God for nothing, at least without sensible
reward; but so crossed is our duty to the grain of our flesh, so many are our
temptations, and discouragements, that even the most spiritual Souls must have
their encouragements to duty from sensible rewards, whiles we think that every
labourer in Gods Vineyard shall have his penny, we are apt to think, it is of
no avail for us to labor more then others. God is therefore pleased (though
one man's penny in glory may be brighter then another) to encourage us also
with sensible rewards in this life; one Christian shall have more freedom, and
liberty in his Spirit, then another, more quiet and peace in his Spirit then
another he shall find more strength unto his duty then another.

If any further ask why the Lord does not please to deal thus with all, who yet
truly love, and fear him; we cannot enter into Gods secrets, or pretend to give
an account of Gods motions. I shall only show you that it is reasonable, that
God should not so deal with all, but with some only, and that he should not at
all times deal alike with the same Souls.

1. In regard of our own incertainty, and mutability, and disproportion to
others; though we be made partakers of the same special saving grace that they
are, there is nothing more evident upon observation, then that some walk more
close with God, are more in prayer, more in reading, and hearing the Word of
God, more in spiritual contemplation, and meditation, more reserved from the
world, more watchful upon their own hearts and ways: nay, that the same
Christian has not always the same heart for God, nor does walk with God the
same pace, nor by the same steps. Now though the Lord does not distribute
rewards strictly, according to our merits, yet he distributeth punishments,
according to our demerits, and the withdrawing of these gradual influences,
being species of punishments, it is very reasonable that as our hearts, and
ways are uneven before God, so his ways in these dispensations should also be
uneven toward us, that in the darkness of our Spirits, we might sometimes read
the darkness of our loose, and sinful conversation. God thus punishes our
pride, our hypocrify, our neglect of duty, our wilful yielding to temptations,
to which we might have made a better opposition. And upon the withdrawing of
these influences, we have all just reason to search, and try our own hearts,
and to reflect upon our own ways, to search out (if we can) the cause, why when
others are in the Mount with God, we are still kept in the valley, while they
are in the Chambers, we are kept in the lower Rooms, this is certain, that
though possibly the punishment of sin be not always the next cause, moving God
to such dispensations, yet we have always reason to suspect it, having our
Souls never so free from sin, but we may find enough to justify God in them.

2. It may be reasonable that God should thus deal with us, that we might know
(as I told you in handling the other Doctrine) that his grace is free, and he a
free agent in the dispensation of it. Not only first grace, but further grace
also in God is free; indeed else it could not be grace, we should never
understand the freeness of grace, if it were equally dispensed. We in our
little manifestations of our love to our fellow creatures, challenge to our
selves a liberty, and think our selves free to show it where we will. God
certainly must in justice be allowed the same, which we should not be brought
to see and acknowledge, if we saw God treating all his Servants, and at all
times to the same rate, and in the same degree.

3. It may be the mind of God to make a trial of his peoples grace, to draw
forth some habits into acts, which would not be so exercised, if some of his
people were not under different dispensations, and the same Souls sometimes
variously exercised. The Soul that is with the Lord in his Chambers, is more a
receiver from God, then a giver to him. It gives him the exercise of its says,
in its reflex act, which indeed is not very properly an act of faith. It
offers up unto God, the sacrifice of joy, of praise, and thanksgiving, it
follows here in the next words; we will be glad, and rejoice in thee. It may
exercise its love of complacency, and delight in God. But all this while, where
is the exercise of the Souls panting, and breathing after God, of its faith of
adherence unto, and dependence upon God? of its hope in God, and patient
expectation of, and waiting for God? where is the exercise of its patience, and
submission to God under severer providence? It is reasonable that God should
see all those blessed habits which he has infused into the Soul; drawn forth
into act.

4. The good Judas asked Christ, John 14. 22. Lord, how is it that thou will
manifest thy self to us, and not to the world. Christ told him, because they
loved him more, and kept his Commandments better. There is the same reason to
be assigned, why Christ will manifest himself to some of his Saints, more then
to others, because at some times the love of his people more manifests itself
to him by a stricter keeping of his Commandments, and the love of some good men
is greater for God. Now to encourage men (as I before said) to perfect holiness
in his fear, though he will give them all glory, yet some shall in this life
have Gods goodness made to pass before them, more then others, that others may
see what it is to be much with God.

5. Lastly, God often does it for the good of others. And indeed this generally
is the reason of that more special communion with God, which some have, more
then others, as to the Revelation of his mind and will unto them; thus God
would not hide from Abraham, the thing which he had to do against Sodom,
because Abraham had a Family to instruct; God takes Moses up into the Mount,
and reveals his mind, and will unto him, that he might teach the People over
whom God had set him his Statutes, and Judgments; the same reason is to be
given of Gods special communications to the Prophets under the Old, and the
Apostles under the New Testament, and doubtless the same reason is to be
assigned for Gods more full revelation of his mind and will already revealed in
the Scripture, to his faithful Servants in the Ministry, who generally know
more of the sense of Scriptures, and the mind, and will of God revealed in them
then other Christians do, because God designeth that the Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, and the people should enquire at them; and there is the
same reason to be given for some more then ordinary influences of grace upon
some Christians Souls. See 2 Cor. 1. 4. Blessed be God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comforts, who
comfort us in all tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them, which
are in any trouble by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.
God has made us one for another, and in the dispensings out of his own gifts,
and graces, he has respect unto the serviceableness both of Ministers, and
others, one to another.

But this is sufficient for the Doctrinal part of this discourse.

Sermon XXVI.
Cant. 1. 4. The King has brought me into his Chambers.

YOU have heard the Proposition raised from these words; God has Chambers, in
which he sometimes entertains the Souls of his people. As there are specialties
of common Providence, so there are specialties of special and distinguishing
grace He takes some of those who love, and fear him, into nearer degrees of
fellowship and communion with him, then he does others. Man will claim himself
a prerogative in this; the Parent will be more fond of, more kind to one Child
then another, though he owns them both as his Children, and will give to them
both a portion. The Prince who has a tender love for all his Subjects, yet
will be allowed his favorites.

Use 1.
Let us not then accuse God in such dispensations of partiality, or injustice,
let us not murmur that we have lesser shares in his manifestative love. This is
a thing we are very prone to. Christ taught it us in the Parable of the
Prodigal, Luke 15. The Son that was always at home with the Father. v. 28, 29.
was angry, and would not go into his Fathers House, no not though his Father
entreated him, because the Father had killed a satted Calf to entertain his
Prodigal Brother returning; our Savior doubtless intended in that parable to
check the Jews envy at the kindness Christ was about to show to the Gentiles,
or did at that time show to Harlots, to Publicans, and Sinners; but it reaches
further, we shall find all our hearts too prone to this, to repine at the
further manifestations of the love of God to others Souls, then unto ours. If I
do not misconceive him, David seems in this to have failed, Psalm. 22. 2, 3, 4.
O my God (says he) I cry in the day time, but thou hear not, and in the
night season, and am not silent. But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the
praises of Israel. Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou did
deliver them, they trusted in thee, and were not confounded, but I am a Worm,
and no Man, a reproach of Men, and despised of the People, etc. To silence this
corruption so exceedingly natural to us, let me offer a few things to thy
thoughts.

1. The first shall be the Lords Prerogative, to show mercy where he will show
mercy. This our Savior hints me in the Parable of the Laborers sent into the
Vineyard, Mat. 20. 15. when those who had wrought all the day, received their
penny, in proportion to those who had wrought but a few hours, they complained,
the Master of the Vineyard says to them. May I not do with my own what I
please? All influxes of grace are Gods own. It is a prerogative that every one
of us claims for himself, to dispose of his love, (especially some degrees of
it) as we please; why should we deny that to God, which every one of us
claims to himself? The Prince will not allow the Subject to dispose of his
favor, no more will the Father allow it to his Child; why should we think God
is not at the same liberty? especially considering*

2. That God by it does us no wrong. You have this in the same Text, Friend, I
do thee no wrong, Mat. 20. 15. This now depends upon this hypothesis, that
the grace of God cannot be merited by any; he that has the greatest
manifestations of Divine love, has them freely, and he who has the least
discoveries of it, has what he has freely, without any preceding merit in
himself. If God will let one of his Children walk in the light of his
countenance, and another to walk in the dark, and see no light, if he will
treat one in Chambers, another in a low, and more common Room, yet he does not
wrong to any. There is no injustice in the case; in appearance to us, he
shows indeed more severity to the one, and more goodness to the other, but he
is unjust to neither, because neither has merited any thing that he receives.

3. God has with held from thee nothing for which he agreed with thee. This is
a third thing which the Master of the Vineyard told those laborers that
repined, because they had not more then those who had labored less, Mat. 20.
15. Did I not (says he) agree with thee for a penny? we can lay claim to
nothing of another, but either upon the plea of a Native right; thus the Child
lays claim to his Patrimonial Estate, as heir at law; or upon the account of
purchase, by virtue of some compact or agreement, or some valuable
consideration given him for it; we can lay no claim to the Grace of God, as our
Patrimonial right, as Heirs to it, we are indeed called Heirs, but it is by
adoption; nor upon the account of any valuable consideration given; who has
given first to God, and it shall be repaid to him again? All the claim we can
lay to any thing either of Grace, or Glory, is upon the account of a Covenant
that God has made with us, or with Christ on our behalf, and by us accepted,
when we come to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. The question is, what God
has agreed with us for, he has agreed with us for a Kingdom. Fear not little
Flock (says Christ) it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom. He that
believes on me, is not condemned (says our Savior) he is passed from death to
life. He has agreed with us for all that grace, and mercy which is necessary
to bring us to this Kingdom. That he will give us a clean heart, and a new
heart, that we shall be kept by the power of God through faith to salvation.
But where has the Lord agreed with the Souls of any of his people for equal
measures of his manifestative love? Nay, plainly, God in the Covenant of his
Grace has reserved himself a liberty to chastife, and afflict his people,
either for the probation of Grace, or for the punishment of sin, and this is
one species of affliction, by which God does both try the faith and patience,
and also correct the errors, and miscarriages of the best of his people. But
you will say, is not manifestative love promised? I answer it is, but so are
not the measures of it, nor yet the particular time for the discovery of it. 2.
It is but the matter of a conditional promise, John 14 21. He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he that loves me,
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self unto
him. Psalm. 50. 21. -- To him that orders his conversation aright, I will show
the Salvation of God. The promises of Eternal life, and Salvation, are made to
Faith, and holiness, without which (both which) none shall see God, but not to
degrees of the one, or of the other, a weak faith may bring a Soul to Heaven,
so will an upright and sincere heart, though encumbered with many lustings of
the flesh against the Spirit; but the case is otherwise as to some degrees of
the manifestative love of God, which much depend both upon degrees of faith,
and degrees of holiness also. Our Savior has determined doubts, and fears,
indications of little faith, and reason will determine them inconsistent with
much joy, peace, and comfort in the Soul; that holiness in some good degree is
necessary to our peace, will appear to any Soul, that considers, that nothing
but sin will break our peace with God. So that if thou be not conscious to
thy self, that thy faith is as strong as others, and thy ways as perfect before
God as theirs, thou have no reason to expect the same manifestations of Divine
love; No; tho thou be one who truly believe, and truly love, and fear
God, God has agreed with every believer for eternal life and salvation, for
pardon of sin, and a clean heart, and the upholding of him by his power unto
salvation: But he has not agreed with every such Soul for the same measures of
peace and comfort, the same degrees of his manifestative love, he has reserved
himself a liberty to reward those with these more special favors, who walk
most closely, and exactly with him in their conversations. Those therefore who
find their Souls under temptations, to repine at God, for doing more for others
then for them, should do well to reflect upon themselves, and to consider
whether the faith of those others be not more strong, and their walking with
God more close and exact then theirs; if it be, they are not to wonder that
their Souls are more highly favored, and more treated in Gods Chambers.

2. But Secondly, There being no merit in any thing we do or suffer, at Gods
command, why should we think God obliged thus to reward the highest degrees of
faith or holiness? What if God will hear one believers prayers sooner then
another, what if he will give one such Soul more peace then another, who shall
say unto him what do thou, or why am I thus, and others are otherwise? we
certainly ought to allow the freest, and most sovereign agent, what privilege
we every one claim for our selves, with reference to our Children, Servants,
Friends, whiles every of us receives more then we deserve, what reason have we
to repine, because others have more then we.

4. I beseech you consider whether this fruit flows not from a root of Pride.
Why should my Eye be evil, because another is good? Why should I repine,
because God is kinder (as I think) to another Soul, then to me, if I did not
secretly think that I had deserved as much, and as well as those, if not
better? The humble Soul looks upon itself as meriting nothing, and therefore
prizeth every influence of Divine love. The Dogs eat the crumbs, said the poor
Woman. I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof (says the
Centurion) therefore speak the word only. Now if this be thy root of thy
complaint, be assured, there is not a more bitter one in all the wilderness of
nature. There is no Soul at further distance from obtaining at the hand of God,
then that Soul that challenges God as a debtor to his Creature, if thy Soul
says, as Haman, to whom should the King more delight to honor then me, thou
art like enough to meet with as great disappointment as he did; God sets
himself to pull down the Soul, that exalts itself above measure. God will keep
Souls swelled with this tumor, with Thorns in their flesh for their buffetings,
it is enough if they find his grace sufficient for them.

5. If it does not argue this, yet it speaks a discontent at, and
dissatisfaction with Gods methods in the conduct, and government of thy Soul,
in order to that end to which he has appointed thee. This frame of spirit is
sinful enough, it is indeed a branch that grows out of the root of pride;
Gods general promise is, that he will withold no good thing from them that
live uprightly, and that all things shall work together for the good of them
that love God; but we must leave the judgment of good to the wisdom of God, who
knows what is good for us, while we repine at Gods dispensations, we either
show our distrust, and unbelief in these promises, or assume the judgment of
good to our selves, paramount to the judgment of God. No sin more provokes God
then this of murmuring, and repining. It was the great sin of the Israelites,
which at last provoked God to swear in his wrath they should never enter into
his rest. Let us therefore learn thankfully to acknowledge what grace we have
received, and with silence, and patience to wait for what further
manifestations of it we desire, and judge our Souls to stand in need of.

2. Br. Inft.
2. Has the King of glory, whom we serve Chambers, wherein he treats the
Souls of his Subjects, not only Mansions, but Chambers, further degrees of
gracious influxes, and manifestations. Let us then learn from hence; That no
man serves God in any degrees of service for nothing; some indeed shall have
greater degrees of reward then others, none shall serve him for nothing, there
is a reward for every righteous Soul. He that serves God in truth and
sincerity, though with a great deal of weakness and imperfection, though he
comes into his Service at the last hour, yet he shall have his penny, he shall
have Heaven and Glory. If any will come in to Gods Service in the morning, and
work in the heat of the day, and labor for God more abundantly, he shall not
lose his reward; nay, he shall be rewarded according to his work, as there are
degrees of active working Grace, so there are degrees of manifestative love,
and this by the way.

1. It is a great encouragement to those that are young, to turn into the ways
of the Lord betimes. Josiah, and Timothy, and Enoch, were all of them such as
began early to walk with God. Of Josiah it is said, Chron. 2. 34. That when he
was but eight years old, he began to seek after the God of David his Father,
what special favor he had from God, his story will tell you; he was early
taken into the Chambers of glory, and while he was upon the Earth, God treated
him in his Chambers, he would not in his days bring the intended evil upon
Judah. Enoch walked with God, the Text says he was not, for God took him.
Timothy was a great Favorite, used as a great instrument for God, and
doubtless these three, and so those others who have early given up themselves
to God, and continued to the end, will hereafter be found in some degrees of
glory above others.

2. It is a great encouragement to men and women to put out themselves mightily
for God, to love the Lord (according to the tenor of the first, and great
Commandment) with all their Soul, and all their strength, and all their might,
God has degrees of love to reward degrees of holiness and service, and though
possibly there may be some rare instances, wherein the wisdom of God (as
unsearchable) is to be adored, and not to be found out, and we may see some,
who appear to us more exemplary in holiness then others, yet clouded under
darker dispensations, walking in the dark, and seeing no light, yet ordinarily
it is otherwise, those who walk most in the light of holiness, have more of the
light of Gods countenance, enjoy most peace, and have most manifestations of
Gods special love; and this now lets us see what a difference there is betwixt
the service of God, and the service of the Devil, or the service of the world,
many a one serves the world, and gets little, and those that make themselves
least drudges to it get most of it; he that serves the Devil in serving
corruption, the more he toils in that service, the more torment he has. But
the more a man serves God, the more peace, the more inward rest and sweetness
he has.

3. This discourse may give some relief to such Christians whose hearts are
right with God, but yet their seize are not proportionable to others. The
King has not brought them into his Chambers, indeed the fault of this may be
in our selves, and where it is so, we have reason to blame our selves, and to
sit down in silence, and endeavor for the time to come to mend our pace in the
ways of holiness; there are Stairs, by which Christians usually ascend into
these Chambers, come up (I mean) into this near degree of communion with God,
if we will not do what in us lies to climb up those steps which God has made
for us, by which we may ascend into these Chambers, we must blame our selves,
if we abide below: But this is not always the cause, in some cases we must
have recourse to Gods prerogative, and must rest in this. Even so O Father,
because it pleases thee. Some Souls are dignified with a special communion,
and familiarity with God, so was Abraham, Moses, David, yet possibly if we look
into the records we have of their lives, we shall find more blots in some of
them, then in some others, who we do not read were taken up into such eminent
degrees of favor. We cannot give just reasons, and accounts of all Gods acts
of Grace, it is enough that God wills them. In the mean time, if we find but a
good hope through grace, an heart changed, and cleaving to God, if we can say
with Peter, Lord thou that know all things, know that we love thee,
though we cannot boast of such special providence as others, nor of such
visions of peace, nor of so quick an hearing of our prayers, tho we dare not
pretend to be such favorites of Heaven, yet let us not be discouraged,
possibly as to us the Lords time is not yet come, possibly it never will come,
God is a great Sovereign, and unquestionably free as to these things, he knows
what is best for us, he will deny no good thing to us We may say of the whole
Family of God, as the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon's, 1 Kings 10. 8. Happy are
thy Men, happy are these thy Servants, which stand continually before thee, and
hear thy wisdom. There are some of Gods Servants, that as to these enjoyments
are more happy then others, but there are none but are happy, none but have
reason for ever to admire the difference which God has made betwixt them, and
others; to admire what God has done for their Souls, bringing them out of the
horrible Pit, if they have not, if they cannot see reason to rejoice in such a
prospect of Heaven as othershave, yet they have reason to rejoice in an equal
deliverance from Hell.

Use 4.
I will shut up this discourse with two words of exhortation. 1. The first
directed to those who can say with the Spouse, The King has brought us into
his Chambers. 2. The second to those who walk with God, but have not yet
arrived at this. Are there any who can speak the language of the Spouse, and
glory in this* not only that they are brought home to Christ, but that the King
has brought them into his Chambers, the Lord has dignified them with some
special favors, and manifested himself more to them then unto others, the
following words of this Text will let them know what is their duty. I will
(says the Spouse) be glad, and rejoice in thee, and remember thy loves more
then Wine. 1. Be glad, and rejoice in God; we are often called to for this
rejoicing in the Lord, Psalm. 33. 1. Psalm. 97. 12. Phil. 3. 1. 4. 4. and in many
other Texts. Such is the portion of Gods Children, such their state, and
condition, that they have a continual cause of rejoicing, and giving of thanks;
be they under what circumstances they can, there is ground enough for them in
all things to give thanks, but they are more eminently obliged to it, when they
are under the highest manifestations of Divine Love. This rejoicing in the Lord
is (I conceive) opposed, both to a carnal joy in sensual objects, and also to a
rejoicing merely in that ease, and satisfaction, which the good thing gives
us, for which we rejoice. As now, suppose a rich man gives a poor man 20 s. it
is one thing for the poor man to rejoice in the gift, as suited to to ^his
necessitous circumstances, another thing to rejoice in the love and favor of
the giver. This is now the duty of the spiritual man; he ought not only under
the manifestations of divine love, to rejoice in the Lord, more then in all the
world, and all the affluences, and contentments of it, which is expressed in
the next phrase, we will remember thy loves more then Wine, and is commensurate
to what David says, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me,
for thou shall thereby make my heart more glad then in the day when their Corn
and Wine increased* I say this is not enough for a Soul thus dignified, he
ought more to rejoice in the favor of God showed him, in these specialties of
his favor, then in the ease, and sati^faction, which the mercy received gives
unto his Soul, And herein lies the purity of the spiritual man's joy, nor is
his joy genuine, and perfect till it come to this pitch.

2. The second phrase in the Text, expressive of this dignified Souls duty is,
We will remember thy loves more then Wine. The term remember is taken in
Scripture in a great latitude, and expressive both of all that affection which
is due to the remembrance of the object, and of all that practical duty which
is consequent to it. I shall touch a little upon both these, and that very
shortly, for I shall, God willing, speak to both these expressions in order
more fully.

1. Remember Christ's loves, with the remembrance of the heart. I shall instance
but in one fruit of this, and that is faith, Remember his loves, so as for them
to trust in God more, and to cast the care of thy Soul in an hour of distress,
the better upon him, upon consideration of thy past and present experience. We
are too ready, both to forget our sorrows, and to forget our comforts, to
forget our sorrows, by giving our selves a liberty to the same sins for which
we have smarted, and to forget our comforts, by giving liberty to the same
dejections, and despondencies again, after the experiences of Gods favor.

2. Remember Christ's loves practically, so as to make them obligations upon
your Souls, to a close walking with God. See the example of David, Psalm. 116.
1, 9, 12, 18. But I shall speak all this over again, when I come to handle the
next words, and shall therefore add no more.

2^ Br.
My second Branch of this Exhortation shall respect those whom God has not
thus far dignified; the Lord has (as they hope) admitted them into his family,
but he has not yet brought them into his Chambers. Some communion with God
they hope they have, and an heart that pants after a more full, and near
communion with him, but this they have not yet attained to, they walk in the
dark, and see no light, the Lord gives them an heart to pray, but they cannot
glory in such a full, and quick return of prayers as others have; they have not
that inward joy and peace, which as to some Souls is consequential to
believing; the question is now, what they should do, what their duty is, under
their present circumstances. I will open it in two particulars.

1. Certainly they ought not to despond, and be dejected, and conclude against
themselves, as if they had no share in the love of God, much less to repine,
and murmur against God. Against murmuring I offered you some considerations
under the first branch of application. Against condemning your selves, or
concluding against the goodness of your spiritual state, I shall offer
something now. There is no ground at all for any such conclusion from these
providence. The Child's right to the Father is not to be determined from the
portion, much less from any particular expression of the Fathers affection, if
the Child be begotten by the Father, if owned by him as his Child, this is
enough, tho some other Child may have more smiles, and some particular
expressions of kindness which it wants. If a Christian has any evidence,
that he is born again, not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of the will of God, born again of the Spirit, by the incorruptible Seed of
the Word, this is enough to entitle him to a Sonship, if he has received the
Lord Jesus Christ, this John 1. 12. gives him a right to be called the Child of
God, and this new birth is discoverable by the new features in the Souls face,
the Souls assimilation to God in holiness. If these things be found, it is a
most unreasonable conclusion to conclude against thy Sonship, for want of some
special favors bestowed upon others, and not upon thee; so as there is no
ground for thy reprobating thy self upon this account, and concluding against
thy spiritual state, because of thy want of some degrees of spiritual
privileges by others enjoyed; nor have thou more ground to despond, and to
deject thy self, as if thou never should attain what thou have not as yet
attained. David sets us a rare example in this case, Psalm. 42. 5. Why art thou
cast down O my Soul, why art thou disquieted within me, hope thou in God, for I
shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance. The longest night has a
morning following, there commonly is a circulation in Divine Providence, and as
to the Soul of man, day, and night, Summer, and Winter, follow one another, as
by a Covenant, he that does not grieve willingly, nor willingly afflict the
Children of men, will not be always crushing the Prisoners of the Earth, nor
suffer the Souls which he has made to fail before him.

2. Br.
2. As thy condition will prompt thee to endeavor to amend it, and to make the
case of thy Soul more easy; so I would have thee look upon it as thy duty. St.
Paul had not attained, but he forgetting what was behind, pressed forward to
what was before, unto the price of the high calling. It is the state of our
Souls, that we are not perfect, neither as to action, nor as to fruition, but
it is all our duty to strive after perfection, both after a perfection with
respect to action, which the Apostle calls a perfecting holiness in the fear of
the Lord, and a perfection as to fruition, as to the enioyment of God, you have
heard that the King of Glory has Chambers, in which he entertaineth some of
his peoples Souls, admitting them to a fuller, further, and sweeter enjoyment
of himself then others have. Let therefore no Christian sit down fully
satisfied, till he get up into these Chambers I have showed you a Christian
ought to be so far satisfied, as if God pleases to chain him for a time in a
lower room (my meaning is to lay a necessity upon him to live beneath these
Mountains) not to repine and murmur against God, not to conclude against his
spiritual state, and interest in God, not to despond, and defect himself, and
conclude that, because it is now dark, it shall never be light with him, but
yet he ought not to be so far satisfied, as not to look after higher degrees of
enjoyment of, and communion with God. There are all the arguments imaginable to
be pleaded in this case. Whether from profit, or pleasure, or honor, etc. But
those are so obvious, that I shall but wast time to enlarge upon them. Every
Soul that has any spiritual sense, will acknowledge the desirableness of this.
But will some Souls say, what shall we do, that we may attain them. I have but
four things to offer in this case, with which I will conclude.

1. Study to abound in active grace. The grace I am speaking of is that grace
wherein man is partly passive. Active grace is that by which we are enabled to
our duty in obedience to the will of God; the Stairs by which Souls ascend to
the Kings Chambers, mentioned in the Text (as I have interpreted it) are the
steps of universal holiness, which the Apostle calls, an holiness in all manner
of conversation. The promise of Gods showing his Salvation, Psalm. 50. 21. is
made to him that orders his conversation aright, and the promise of Gods
manisesting himself to his peoples Souls, is made to them that love Christ, and
keep his Commandments. It is true, God sometimes uses his prerogative, and
hides his face from the most pious, and holy Souls, for a time, and shuts
out their supplications from him, you have instances in holy writ, as well as
in our daily converse, but it is past all controversy, that those enjoy most of
God who walk most with God, and the closest walking is the most sweet and
comfortable walking. Study therefore to excel in holiness; that is the first.

2. Behave thy self well in the lower Rooms. Look to thy self, while God keeps
thee in a dark condition, that thou do not add to thine own Chains, and
lengthen the hours of thy darkness; affliction is Gods School, by which he fits
us for consolation. Do thou ask me what I mean by behaving thy self well? I
answer short. 1, Being watchful, and striving against sin, those corruptions
especially, which thou shall discern most busy in such an hour, such as
murmuring, unbelief, impatience, etc. 2. Keeping up thy hope and says in God,
so did David (as I showed you) Psalm. 42. 5. Blessed are they says our Savior,
who have not seen, and yet believed. 3. Humbly acknowledging thine iniquities,
thy unworthiness to receive the least mercy, or look of grace from God. 4.
Panting and thirsting after fuller degrees of communion with God; thus David,
Psalm. 63. 1, 2. My Soul longs, my flesh thirsts for thee, to see thy power,
and thy glory, etc.

3. Abstract thy self as much as thou can from the world. You shall observe
that the Servants of God have chosen Mountains places of solitude, and removed
from the noise of the world, when they designed any acts of more special
communion with God, so Christ often went into a Mountain to pray. And God often
chose such places more specially to communicate his mind to his people. It was
in the Mount God talked with Moses, face to face, as a man talks with his
friend. Divines have observed that those Persons who have enjoyed most of God,
have been, such as have been (I will not say most, but) much in contemplation,
which brought contemplation afterward into a superstition, and a contemplative
life to be cried up beyond all sense or reason.

4. Lastly, Be much in prayer.

But I have spoke enough upon this argument.

Sermon XXVII.
Canticles 1. 4. We will be glad, and rejoice in thee. We will remember thy
loves more then Wine. The upright love thee.

I Am now come to the Fourth thing considerable in this Second Petition of the
Spouse. I have done with the Petition, Draw me. 2. With the Argument by which
she enforced her Petition; We will run after thee. 3. With the Spouse's
Attestation of the quick acceptance of her Petition: The King has brought me
into his Chambers. I have only to consider the Effect that this Love had upon
her, that is expressed in the words I have now read. We will be glad, and rejoice
in thee,; we will remember thy Loves more than Wine. I have opened the words
before: We, I and all Believers, we who being many are yet one body, united by
one Spirit, Members under the Government of one Head; we who have tasted and
experienced thy goodness* will be glad. The word in the Hebrew (...), is
expressive of the largest dilatation of the heart upon union with its object.
It is used, Isa. 65. v. 19. Prove. 24. 23. Psalm. 21. 1. Psalm. 2. 11. and 13. 11.
Zech. 9. 9. [and rejoice in thee.] The word again here used, is often used in
the Old Testament, Exodus 4. 14. Jer. 31. 13, etc. I shall not undertake to
justify the Critical distinction some make betwixt these two words, as if one
were restrained to the more inward motion of the heart, the other more
expressive of the more external gestures, or actions, signifying that affection
[in thee] in Christ, as the principal object, and in the significations of thy
love to us. The Proposition is shortly this.

Prop.
Jesus Christ, and the manifestations of his love to believers Souls,
particularly in answering prayers, are the singular objects of their joy, and
rejoicing. In order both to the explication and confirmation of this
Proposition, I will guide you a little into the understanding of the nature of
Joy, 2. Consider how Christ can be the object of the believers joy, and is more
the object of his joy, then of another man's. 3. How he is the special singular
object of their joy.

Take joy considered in itself, it is but a natural plant, a power God has
given to every reasonable Soul, the object of it is some good, to which it is
in some degree united, and it is greater or lesser, according to the nature of
the good, or the degree of the apprehension. There is in all joy, satisfaction,
and rest, and something of music, or melody.

1. There is in all joy a Soul satisfying suln ss, desire speaks some emptiness
in the Soul, and is the Souls motion in order to a satisfaction, the like might
be said of hope, but all joy, speaks a Soul satisfaction, according to the
measure of the joy, the rejoicing Soul has always in it a fullness, and a
pleasing fullness; that is the first thing in the nature of it.

2. There is in all joy a rest that quieteth the Soul; the desiring, thirsty,
hoping Soul is still in motion, being in the pursuit of something which it has
not attained, but the rejoicing Soul is at rest; David in the hour of his joy
says, Return unto thy rest, O my Soul! For God has dealt graciously with
thee. That is a second thing in joy.

3. There is in all joy something of music and melody, hence that phrase of
leaping for joy, hence singing and shouting, are the natural expressions of
joy; thus joy may be described to be a natural power, or inclination of the
Soul, by which having more perfectly, or imperfectly obtained an union with the
object which it desired, or hoped for, it is in proportion satisfied, and well
pleased, at rest, and keeps as it were a festival within it self.

Two things are required to make an adequate object of this joy. 1. The thing
must be good. 2. We must have some apprehension both of the goodness of it, and
our union with, and interest in it. 1. The object that our Souls rejoice in,
must be something which either is good, or which at least we apprehend to be
so, the nature of good lies in a suitableness and convenience of a thing for
us, and whatsoever we apprehend suited to any of our wants, or convenient for
us in any of our circumstances that we call good, and whatsoever we apprehend
under that notion, whether it indeed be so or no, we love, and if we want it,
we desire it, if we apprehend it probable to be our portion, we hope for it, if
we have it, or apprehend we have it, we delight, and take a complacency, and
rejoice in it. 2. So that secondly, to make an adequate object of our joy.
There must be some apprehended union betwixt our Souls, and the object we
rejoice in. For although we can love, and take a secret complacency in an
object which appears to us as good, yet it is propriety in it that causes
our joy and rejoycings. Thus far now I have only considered, and discoursed of
joy, philosophically, as it is a natural affection, working upon its proper
object.

Let us now consider it as a grace, or sanctified affection. Grace does not
plant new powers in the Soul of man, it only turns the natural powers to their
proper objects.

Our Savior tells us, there is none good but God, God is the Summum Bonum, the
first, and chiefest good, nor is any thing good, but what deriveth from him.
Christ is good, supremely good, as in him there is found, what is suited to the
greatest wants and emptinesses, that the nature of man is exposed, and subject
to. And that the believer more valueth Christ then another man, arises only,
1. From his different apprehension. 2. From his different relation to him and
interest in him.

1. From the different apprehensions of good which the believer has, from
those which are in other men. I told you before, that the nature of good lies
in the suitableness, or convenience of a thing to our wants and emptinesses.
Man is a creature made up of two essential parts, the Body and the Soul, that
which suiteth the one, or the other we call good. The Soul is considerable,
with respect to a present, or future state, the first is that which alone the
most men are sensible of, or concerned for. We have a threefold perception of
an object, according to which we judge of the goodness, or badness of it.

1. The first is by the Eye of sense, according to which we judge that good
which gratifieth the exterior senses, this of all is the most unmanly judgment
of it, thus the man of pleasure judges those things good, which gratify his
eyes, ears, taste, sinell or touch, and indeed this is the judgment of the
greatest part of the world, when they say, who will show us any good? this is
all they understand by it, who will gratify our sensitive appetites? These are
the things they desire, delight, and rejoice in, these men rejoice in nothing,
but in pleasures, profits, or honors, such things as either serve the lust of
the Eye, or the lust of Flesh, or the pride of life.

2. A second Eye by which we discern good, and accordingly judge of it is the
Eye of Reason, God has endued man with a reasonable Soul, which has several
powers and faculties, amongst the rest, the understanding, by which I
understand that power in man, by which he apprehends things, and the reason
of them, and takes the impression of notions, that which is suited to this we
call good, and upon a much truer notion then the other.

Hence is some men's thirst, and desire of knowledge, and knowledge is as sweet
to them, as Wine is to the Drunkard, they discern an excellency in the mind,
and Soul, above what is, or can be in the fleshly part of a man, and delight
more in understanding, then the voluptuous man does in pleasure, or the worldly
man in wealth, that is their good, for which they contemn pleasures, and all
sensual satisfactions.

3. Our third way of apprehending good, is by the Eye of says, which the
Apostle tells us is the evidence of things not seen. There are some whom God
has so far enlightened by the revelation of his will, as they do not only know
that they have bodies, and a sensitive part, which requires satisfaction to
its several cravings, and a more noble part, which is the mind, capable of
understanding things, and the reasons, and causes of them, but Souls (an
immortal part) capable of the favor of God, of an union and communion with
him, they know that the happiness of man can lie in nothing beneath the favor
of God, nothing beneath an union and communion with him, they have read it in
the Word of God to which God has wrought in their hearts a firm and full
assent, that no man comes to the Fathers but by Christ. There is no other name
given under Heaven, no other way by which they can arrive at a true peace and
happiness, either in this life, or in that which is to come. And from hence it
is, that all their desires are after Christ, all their hope in him, and he
becomes their chief joy.

2. A second reason of their rejoicing in Christ more then other men's, lies in
their different relation to him, and interest in him, or apprehensions at least
of that relation, and interest. I told you before, that although an apprehended
good be the object of our love, before we enjoy it, the Soul cannot but take
some pleasure, and complacency in what he apprehends under that notion, yet
while the Soul comes to have some relation to it, some propriety and interest
in it, though it may move toward it by desire, and hope, yet it comes not to a
joy, and rejoicing in it, till it comes to have some apprehension, that it has
obtained it. You may see this in other things; suppose a man of the world to
fancy a great estate, or a great degree of honor and di^nity to be good, or
that an ingenious Child fancieth the like of knowledge, both the one and the
other may desire these things at a distance; the man of the world may wish he
had such an Estate, and the Scholar may wish he had such degrees of learning
and knowledge; but till the one and the other have attained what they desire in
some degree, they cannot rejoice in it, neither is their mind satisfied, nor at
rest. It is the same case as to a spiritual man. He is enlightened to see he
has a Soul of a further capacity, then the most men understand their Souls to
be, that he has some further wants, then the most understand that they have,
he believes the Scriptures, and understands that he wants peace, and
reconciliation with God, he understands that there shall be a Resurrection, a
day of Judgment, and that he must one day be in an happy, or in a miserable
eternity, so as he wants the security of a better life, when this life shall be
at an end, upon this account he may be pleased with the thoughts of Christ; as
he by whom these good things alone can be obtained, he may desire Christ, he
may hope in him, but till he comes to apprehend that he has obtained a part,
and interest in him, it is impossible he should rejoice in him, and according
to his apprehensions of his interest, so is his joy, and rejoicing in Christ.
There must be some union betwixt the Soul, and its object, before there can be
any joy and rejoicing.

1. There is an union of contemplation. We cannot so much as contemplate a
desirable object, but our Soul must have some union with it, and there will a
proportionable joy attend this; indeed this will be of all other the weakest in
degree, because this is the lowest degree of union imaginable. Thus a man may
rejoice in the contemplation of a door of salvation opened to Mankind by
Christ, before he has made any use of it at all to enter in thereat. Thus the
Angels at the Birth of Christ proclaimed glad tidings, and joy to all people.

2. There is an union of hope, when the Soul does not only contemplate some
great and eminent good, but apprehends it attainable by itself, tho not
without some difficulty; as this union of the Soul with its object, now is
closer, and fuller then the other, so the joy that resulteth from it, must
necessarily be more: hence in Scripture you read of the rejoicing of hope,
which the Apostle would have believers keep firm.

3. There is an union of sensible possession, or (which is the fame) of faith,
and full persuasion, which makes things unseen visible to us, and as this of
all other, is the most full, and perfect union, so it causes the most full,
and perfect joy, it most satisfies the Soul, and brings it most to its rest,
and causes the greatest triumph, and festival in the Soul, even a peace which
is past all understanding.

There is no believer but has obtained one of the two latter unions with
Christ: No unbeliever that has obtained more then the former. An unbeliever
may have heard, that Christ came into the world to save Sinners, to seek, and
to save that which is lost, and may have a proportionable joy, but alas, how
little must it be, while he neither feeth a need of him, nor yet can have any
apprehension, that he has any share or interest in him? It can be no more then
as the rejoicing of an understanding man, to hear that an able Physician is
come into the Country, before he is sensible of any need he has of him, or
has had any experience of his skill, and ability.

But there is no true believer, but either hopes in his mercy, or has some
assurance of his love; and from hence it is. 1. That the true believer alone
can rejoice, truly rejoice in Christ. 2. That one believer rejoices in him
above what another can.

I say, the true believer alone can rejoice in Christ, for he alone is sensible
of that goodness, and excellency that is in him, and he alone is apprehensive
of any relation, that he has to him, or any interest in him; others are
without Christ, he alone can say, my Lord, and my Savior. And hence I say it
is that one believer can rejoice in Christ more than another, because one man's
apprehension of his part and interest in Christ, may be more full than
another. One has but the apprehension of a good hope, the other may have a
full persuasion. But though there may be a great difference in the degrees of
believers joy, yet they concur all in their object. Christ is the object, the
singular object of all their joy.

After this discourse; I need not enlarge in telling you how Christ becomes
their object of joy, not merely considered, as God blessed for ever, nor merely
considered as Mediator betwixt God and Man, and the Savior of lost Sinners, if
he were not so, they could not rejoice in him, but neither does his being so
give them any cause of rejoicing; but in the notion in which he is mentioned
all along this Song. i. e. considered as their Bridegroom, as united unto them,
and having a particular favor, and relation to their Souls. For though good
considered abstractly, may be the object of our love, desire, and hope, yet
only good united to us is the object of joy, yea, and good apprehended by us as
our portion; and according to the degree both of our union with the good, and
apprehension of that union, so will our joy be.

And hence again, the most perfect joy of believers, must necessarily be in
their glorified estate, hence Heaven is called Out Masters joy, for as our
union with God and Christ will be there most full, and perfect, so our
apprehension of it will be most clear, and not interrupted. But that is not the
theme of my present discourse, I am speaking of the object of believers joy in
this life, not in that which shall be in that life which is to come, when their
joy will be unspeakable, and full of glory.

I added in the Proposition, that Christ is the singular object of their joy.
We will (says the Spouse) be glad, and rejoice in thee; this is ^ru^, both
exclusively, and inclusively. 1. Exclusively.

1. He will r^joyce in nothing inconsistent with the fruition of Christ. There
is a ^^m^al rejoicing in the satisfaction of men's lusts; this is the joy of an
Epicure; the Drunkard shouts for new Wine. And you read of some whose rejoicing
was to devour the poor, Hab. 3. 14. I told you before that Joy is nothing else
but the satisfaction that the Soul has, and the rest which the Soul takes with
the Triumph which it makes in its union with that Object which it judges good.
Now the gratifying of lusts, and pleasing the senses, and the concupiscible, or
irascible appetite, being that which low-born Souls have chosen as their good;
their rejoicing in this satisfaction is natural to them. This Joy is but for a
moment, Job 20. 5. and shall one day be turned into heaviness; Jam. 4. 9. This
mirth, this laughter is madness, as Solomon speaks, Eccles. 2. 2. like the
crackling of Thorns under a Pot, Eccles. 7. 6. Sorrow, says Solomon, is better
than it, for those that thus laugh, shall weep, Luke 6. 25. The Soul that loves
Christ cannot rejoice with this Joy. Charity rejoices not in evil, 1 Cor. 13.
This is inconsistent with the enjoyment of Christ, and of his favor, with that
self denial, which is necessary to those that will be his Disciples, with that
taking up of the Cross, which is another Law of his Discipleship.

2. It is exclusive of rejoicing in any thing without him. Though Christ, and
his Love and Favor, be the believing Soul's supreme good, the One thing which
he desires, yet there are other things which he may and does account good in
their order. God has not forbidden a man to rejoice in the Wife of his youth,
and in the Children which God has given him; nor in those providential
dispensations, by which he accommodateth the lives of his people, and makes
them more sweet and happy; but the believing Soul cannot rejoice in these
things, unless at the same time he sees reason also to rejoice in Christ. Men
of the world can rejoice in full Barns, and Coffers, though in the mean time
they have no sense, no hope of the pardon of their sins, and reconciliation
with God; the reason is, because they have set up these things as their chief
good, and are not affected with the concerns of their Souls, as they relate to
Eternity: But neither can the Believer partake of these Joys: The Soul can
neither rejoyee in any enjoyment exclusive of its chief good, nor yet in any
thing in the absence of its chief good: A believing Soul in any measure
satisfied concerning the Love of God to it, can rejoice in the Wife of his
bosom, in the Children which God has given him, in the accommodations with
which God has blessed him as to the sweetning of this life, but without some
assurance, or some good hope at least (through grace) that Christ is his, and
he has the favor of God in and through his blood; he can rejoice in none of
these things. It was a peevish expression of Haman, Esth. 5. 11, 12, 13. When
he told his friends of the glory of his riches, the multitude of his Children,
and all the things wherein the King had promoted him, and how he had advanced
him above the Princes and Servants of the King; and how that Esther had invited
him, and none but him and the King to the Banquet which she had prepared; and
added, All this avails me nothing so long as I see Mordecay the Jew sitting
in the King's gate. Envy slays the fool (says Solomon.) But every pious
Soul, when he thinks how God has blessed him with a loving Wife, sweet and
dutiful Children, a plentiful Estate, yet says, All this avails me nothing,
so long as I suspect, and fear, that I have no part or Interest in Christ.
There be (says David) many who will say, Who will show us any good? Lord, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon me; thou have put gladness into my
heart, more than in the time that their Corn and Wine increased.

3. The Joy of the Soul in Christ is such, that it can rejoice in him alone. It
is the expression of the Prophet Habakkuk, chapter 3. v. 17, 18. Although the
Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall there be fruit in the Vine, the
labor of the Olive shall sail, and the Fields shall yield no meat; the Flock
shall be cut off from the sold, and there shall be no Herd in the stalls, yet I
will rejoice in the Lord, and I will joy in the God of my Salvation. The
believing Soul can rejoice in nothing without Christ, and it can rejoice in
Christ when it has nothing more to rejoice in. Let a gracious Soul have but
the sense of God's Love in Christ to his Soul, he can say to all the world as
Esau (though not upon such a consideration) said to his Brother Jacob, I have
enough my Brother, I have enough, keep what thou haft unto thy self. Am I
justified and regenerated? have I peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ?
have I the pardon of my sin, and a righteousness wherein I can stand before
God? it is enough. If the Lord will not give me Bread to eat, nor Children to
continue my name; if I die Childless, so I do not die Christless, it is enough.
If I have not Rags to cloth me, nor an Estate to leave Portions to six, and
also to seven, yet I have said to the Lord, Thou art my Portion, it is enough.
Hence arises a good Christian's contentment in all Estates. I have learned
(says Paul) in all estates to be content, content to want, content to abound,
content to have little or much as the Lord pleases. If the Lord will take away
such a man's Children, Estate, etc. he says with Job, The Lord has given, and
the Lord has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord. If I have my part in
Christ (says he) I have yet enough. Omnia mea mecum porto, I have my All, as
the Philosopher is reported to have said, when his City was on fire, and his
Neighbors reflected on him going out, and carrying nothing along with him, nor
concerning himself for the share of Estate he had in it. If the Believer
considers his body, he sees a crazy constitution, diseases growing upon him;
if he looks into his Family, and sees it empty of Children; if into his
Grounds, and sees them bring forth nothing but Weeds, and Thistles; if into
his Stalls, and sees them empty of Cattle; yet if he looks into his Soul, and
finds any evidences of the Love of Christ, he can rejoice in them; this must be
understood, when he sees himself stripped naked, not by his own wicked hands,
but (as Job was) by the effective Providence of God, for the loss of the things
of this life, the good things of the common Providence of God, caused by our
own sinful hands, and miscarriages, oft-times hinder this Joy, as they make it
difficult to us to see the Love of God in and under them.

4. And lastly, This Soul rejoices in Christ, Primarily, Emphatically,
Supremely. The Child of God is a parta ker of flesh and blood, and has a
sensitive appetite, which when gratified, necessarily causes a joy
proportionate to the good which it receives; hence he rejoices in the good
things of common Providence, as well as another man, but not as much as another
man, not upon the same account that another man does. Christ is the Believer's
chief Joy; and as his title to the good things of this life differs from the
title of another, so his joy in them differs from the joy of another. All men
may have a natural, legal title to the good things of this life; Dominion and
Title is not founded in grace, but it is mended by grace. Another man derives
from God as the Lord of the whole Earth, who by his common Providence
distributeth portions to the Sons of men, as he pleases, but the believer does
not only derive from God, as the supreme Lord, but from Christ; all is yours,
and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods (says the Apostle) so that while he
rejoiceth in the gifts of common Providence, he rejoiceth in Christ, because he
rejoices in these things as coming from the hand of a Father, reconciled to
him by the blood of Christ; he rejoiceth in the good things of this life, as
the loving Wife reioiceth in some present made her by her Husband, not so much
in the fineness, or costliness of it (though that may also please her humor) as
in the kindness, and love of her Husband showed in giving it her. So the
believer more rejoices in the goodness of God shown to him in any
dispensation of Providence, then in the thing which God has given him or her;
and he supremely rejoiceth in Christ, whiles he rejoiceth in a lower comfort.
Let me show you this in the instance of Hannah, whose story you have, 1 Samuel
chapter 1, 2. She was the Wife of Elkanah, she had no Children, and was
passionately desirous of the blessing of Children, an affection common to all
(of that sex especially) and for which there was some more special reason in
that Age and Nation, partly because of the promise of a numerous issue to
Abraham, so as the Women that were Barren, looked upon themselves as hardly the
genuine Children of Abraham, at least not sharers in his blessing; partly,
because they knew the Messiah was to be born of a Jewish Woman, and every
Childbearing Woman might have an expectation to be his Mother. Under this
great affliction she applies her self to God by prayer (the Key of the Womb is
one of those Keys which the Jewish Doctors say God keeps in his hand) God
hears her prayer, she conceives, and brings forth Samuel, as in the first
Chapter, she names him Samuel, to testify her joy in receiving him as an answer
of her Prayer, upon which she dedicates him to the Lord, 1 Samuel 1. 28. So in
the second Chapter she sings a Song of praise; mark the phrase of it, 1 Samuel 2.
1. Mine heart rejoices in the Lord, my Horn is exalted in the Lord. Her Child
was the next object of her joy, but how does she rejoice in him; the primary
object of her joy was the Lord, her great joy in Samuel was as God, by giving
him to her, showed her his love, and that he had not shut out her supplications
from him. She rejoiced in God, Supremely, in Samuel Subordinately; in God
Emphatically, in her Child more remissly. Thus does a good Christian rejoice in
Christ, thus is he the singular object of a believers joy. David calls God
the gladness of his joy, (we translate it his exceeding joy) Psalm. 43. 4. The
Prophet Isaiah faith, Isaiah 29. 19. The meek shall increase their joy in the
Lord, and the poor amongst men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. Yet the
proximate cause was, v. 20, Because the terrible one was brought to naught, and
the scorner consumed, and all those that watched for iniquity cut off. Hence
Christ commands his Disciples not to rejoice in this, that the Devils were
subject to them, but that their names were written in the Book of Life;
Doubtless the subjection of Devils to them was true matter of joy; ah! but it
was no primary object, no supreme object of their joy;; no otherwise the object
of their joy, then as it was an evidence of Gods favor. It is a great piece of
the Spiritual man's art, to rejoice in God, while he rejoiceth in the creature,
to make Christ the gladness of his joy (as the Psalmist expresses it;) now
this motion of a pious Soul will appear to be natural, supposing him to be
first enlightened to discern, and to be fully persuaded, that the love of Christ
to the Soul is the greatest good the rational Soul is capable of; this will
appear to you, if you will but consider these three or four things.

1. That the presence and e^joyment of some good, of which the Soul stands in
need, and in the pursuit of which it is, is the true and natural cause of the
motion of that affection which we call joy. This is evident both to sense and
reason; we rejoice not in evil, but in good, not in an absent, but in a present
good, in the sense, and manifestation, and apprehension of it.

2. That the loves of God and Jesus Christ, are the greatest goods in the
world, and therefore the presence, and sensible manifestations of them, are the
enjoyments and manifestations of the supreme good. The very light of nature
showed the Heathen, that the happiness of man lay in his union with the
greatest good, thus far they were agreed by their common reason, though they
could not so well agree what that chief good was, and nothing hindered them from
agreeing this truth, but their want of true knowledge of God and Christ, and of
the possibility of a poor creatures, having an union with him, or any kind of
enjoyment of him, or understanding the need their Souls stood of the loves of
Christ, for agreeing that the happiness of man lay in an union with the supreme
good, they wanted but the revelation we have of man's wants, and the possibility
of this blessed union with, and fruition of God, but they must have agreed this
truth.

3. It is but natural to the Soul to rejoice more in the obtaining of a greater
good, then in the obtaining of what is lesser, and to rejoice most in a good,
most comprehensive of other particular goods, though it wants those
particular good things. Who is there who does not naturally more rejoice in the
getting of five hundred pounds, than of five? because the five hundred pound is
a greater good then five; who does not more rejoice in a great stock of money by
him, then in a great quantity of Bread, or a great Wardrobe of Clothes? the
reason is, because Money is comprehensive of these, he that has Money, can buy
Bread and Cloths.

4 Lastly, It is but natural to us to rejoice in nothing, which we apprehend
incompetent with that good wherein our chief happiness does lie: Nor in the
having of any thing which we enjoy, whiles we want that which we look at most
of all. Rachel was a good Woman, Jacob was her Husband, to whom she was
exceeding dear, he had a plentiful estate, it is hard to say what good she
wanted, save Children only, that blessing her heart was upon, Jacob, was
nothing, his estate nothing to her; she goes to her Husband, and cries, Give me
Children, or else I die. Now admit a believing Soul to be firmly persuaded,
that it must live for ever, either in eternal happiness, or in eternal misery,
and again to be persuaded, That it can never live in eternal happiness, without
an union with Christ, without his love manifested to it in the pardon of its
sins, and the imputation of his righteousness, admit the Soul to be fired in
the pursuit of these things as its chief good; how is it possible that it
should rejoice in any thing incompetent with it, or that it should rejoice in
any thing with an equal joy, as it rejoiceth in this? Hence it follows, that
Christ must be the singular object of the believing Souls joy.

1. Because it is impossible the Soul should rejoice in what is incompetent
with the sruition and enjoyment of what it rightly judges its chief good. Such
are all sensual prohibited satisfactions.

2. Because it is impossible it should rejoice in what it judges a lesser
good, more then in what it judges a greater, and transcendent to it.

3. Because it knows Christ and his loves are comprehensive of all other
good, for if he has given us Christ (says the Apostle) shall he not also with
him give us all things?

Thus I have opened, and showed you the reason of the Proposition, why the Soul
rejoices in Christ. I added, and in the manifestations of his love,
particularly, in hearing and answering its prayers; I shall give you some
reasons of that, and then apply the whole discourse. But, etc.

Sermon XXVIII.
Cant. 1. 4. We will be glad, and rejoice in thee.

I Am yet handling the Proposition at first laid down. I showed you the last
day how Christ is the singular object of the Spouses joy. I added then; and the
manifestations of his love, especially in hearing and answering our prayers.
Indeed Christ is no otherwise the object of our joy, then in the manifestations
of his love. All joy requires some sensible manifestation, or experience. The
personal excellencies of Christ, make him the object of our love, whom (says
the Apostle) having not seen, yet we love Love asks for nothing but amiableness
in its object, no more does desire (which is the first born of love) but joy
requires propriety and union, Christ manifested to the Soul, can alone be the
object of joy, but I added, especially in hearing, and answering Prayer; that
was the case here; the Spouse had prayed, draw me, and we will run after thee,
-- she presently triumphs in the hearing of her Prayers, and then adds, we
will be glad, and rejoice in thee. I might have also added, prayers put up
particularly for spiritual mercies. We shall all along in Scripture find this
made a great matter of joy in the hearts of Gods people, take the instances of
Hannah and David. Hannah had been, 1 Samuel 1. praying unto God for a Child, the
Lord answered, see how she rejoiceth, 1 Samuel 2. 1. Hannah prayed and said, My
heart rejoiceth in the Lord, mine Horn is exalted in the Lord, my mouth is
enlarged over mine Enemies, because I rejoice in thy salvation, Concerning
David we have many instances, Psalm. 31. 21. Blessed be the Lord, for he has
showed me his mavelous kindness in a strong City. v. 22. Thou heardst the
voice of my supplication, when I cried unto thee, Psalm. 3. 4. I cried unto the
Lord with my voice, and he heard me from his holy place; in this he rejoiceth,
and triumphs, v. 6, 8. Psalm. 6. 8. The Lord has heard the voice of my
weeping, the Lord has heard my supplication, he will receive my prayer. So
again, Psalm. 18. 6. and again, Psalm. 28. 6. Blessed be the Lord, because he
has heard the voice of my supplications, so Psalm. 116. 1. But there needs no
Scripture in the case, the experience of every Soul makes it good; it is
natural to every man.

1. Because in all answers of Prayer, there must be a soul satisfaction upon
some union with the object, which it desired. Joy is nothing else but the
triumph of the Soul upon its union with the object which it desired. Prayer is
nothing else but the Souls desire expressed with its voice. The answer of
Prayers must be the Souls satisfaction in the obtaining of its desires, this
satisfaction arises from its union with its object, upon which joy is but a
proper, and natural result, and consequent.

2. In all answers of Prayer, there is an owning of the Soul by God. As the
Soul by Prayer owneth God, acknowledging him the Fountain of that goodness,
which it beggeth; so God in answering Prayer acknowledges the Soul, Joh. 9.
31. We know that God hears not sinners, but if any man be a Worshipper of
God, and does his will, him he hears. All giving in of things prayed for,
does not speak the answer of prayers. God may hear and relieve, the cry of the
miserable, when he does not answer the prayer of the righteous. I have before
hinted to you, that there is an answer of our cries, which flows from Gods
common providence, as he is a God of pity, and tender compassions, and there is
an answer of Prayers, which comes from God, as a God of truth and faithfulness,
how to distinguish these two, I may possibly show you in the application in
some measure, it is the latter answer, not the former, which is Gods owning and
acknowledgment of the Soul, as one for whom he has a favor.

3. There is yet one thing more in the answer of prayers, last mentioned, which
to every thinking Christian is matter of great joy. That it is that which
speaks the Soul to be beloved of God in Christ, and to have Christ for his
Advocate, and Intercessor at the Throne of Grace. It is in him that all the
promises are Yea, and Amen. It is in his name that the believer asks, and it
is he that does the thing desired, according to the promise, John 14. 13.
Whatsoever you shall ask, that I will do, that the Father may be glorified in
the Son, and because the thing is confirmed, the promise is doubled. v. 14. If
you shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. I shall add no more to the
Doctrinal part of my discourse.

Use 1.
This notion (in the first place) distinguishes the Child of God from all Men
and Women in the World. He is the only man, that is glad, and rejoiceth in
Christ, the only person that can say of Christ, he is his chief joy.

1. There are many that rejoice in their sensual satisfactions. There is a man
that shoute^h by reason of Wine, Psalm. 78. 65. their Vivere est Bibere, the
pleasing of their Senses, their Palate, and Eyes, and Ears, is the greatest
good they know, after this their Souls move by desires, and in the satisfaction
of them they rejoice, their mirth is madness, and their laughter what does it?
this of all other is the most sordid joy, a rejoicing in iniquity, yet this is
the chief joy of many poor creatures.

2. To others the World is their chief joy. Their heart rejoices in their
labor, as the wise man speaks, Eccl. 2. 10. they look on all the work that
their hands have wrought, and on the labor they have labored to do, and they
rejoice; the gladness of their heart arises from the increase of their Corn,
and Wine, and Oil, and they know no better things to rejoice in. For this
rejoicing in Christ, in the sense of his love, and the pardon of their sins,
and the hopes of the glory of God; alas! how few understand any thing of it? I
have often had occasion to tell you, that the spiritual state of a man or
woman, is not so much to be determined from his understanding, and the notions
there, men and women may have great degrees of knowledge, and yet have
unsanctified hearts, nor from their external actions. An hypocrite may do many
things, and the best of Gods people in many things offend; as from the motions
of his will, and affections: He chooses the things that please God. To will is
present with me says Paul, and consequent to this are the workings of the
offections. Thus a Christian is known by the objects of his love and hatred,
his hope and fear, his desire and j^y. The last is what I have to do with in
this place. Joy is one of the fruits* one of the fairest fruits of the holy
Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. will any say to me, how shall I know my state by the
workings of this affection? the answer is in the Text, the believer rej^yceth
in Christ; the Apostle tells us that those that are the true circumc^sion,
worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3 3. A believer
is not a Stoic, as to the things of the World, he lives in it, and has need
of the things of it, but Christ is his chief joy, or the head of his joy, as
David says of Jerusalem, Psalm. 137. v. 6. But you will say, how shall we know
this, whether Christ be our chief joy? I answer,

1. Thou will not, thou can not rejoice in any course of sin, which is
contrary unto Christ. St. Paul tells us, That he delighted in the law of God
after the inward man; he could not glory in a total freedom from sin, he
complains that he was sometime brought into Captivity to the law of his
Members, Romans 7. 22. But he did not rejoice in iniquity. Wicked men sport
themselves against God. Against whom do you sport your selves, Isa. 57. 4
Solomon tells us, That it is a sport to a fool to do mischief, and tells us of
one who deceives his Neighbor, and says, am I not in sport? his joy is
either in the satisfaction of his concupiscible appetite; thus St. Peter tells
us of some, That they count it pleasure to riot in the day time, 2 Pet. 2. 13.
or in the satisfaction of his irascible appetite; thus some sport themselves in
doing, or beholding mischief, they rejoice at the destruction of him that
hates them, which was a thing Job purges himself from, Job 31. 29. or at the
destruction of those that they hate, they rejoice to do evil, Prove. 2. 15. Yea,
and to see evil done, as Edom rejoiced when the Jews were carried into
captivity. But now the Child of God can be a sharer in none of those joys.
These joys are incompetent with a rejoicing in Jesus Christ, these men rejoice
in those things which crucified Christ. I cannot say but a good man under some
great temptation may feel some tickling pleasure in sin, and the satisfaction
of his appetite through ignorance, or passion, but he can have no fixed joy in
any thing of that nature. As a wicked man may have some fit of sorrow for sin,
so a good man may have some fits of pleasure, and delight in sin, but neither
of them will be constant^ and abiding; a good man's pleasure in sin, is but a
fit of sensuality, a wicked man's trouble for fin is but a fit of distaste. It is
a good sign that he or she rejoiceth in God, and in Christ, that can find no
sensual satisfaction to rejoice in.

Secondly, It is a sign that Soul truly rejoices in the Lord Jesus Christ,
that can rejoice in no sensible enjoyment, without the sense of God's love in,
and through him. The unquietness and dissatisfaction of the Soul, in the midst
of all its sensible comforts, if at any time it wants the sense of God's love,
and the pardon, of its sins, in and through Christ, will much evidence Christ
to be the Head of his Joy, or his chief Joy. There are few Souls in this life,
whose days are without clouds; sometimes they walk in the light, sometimes in
the dark, and see no light; now for a Soul under the fullest affluence of
created comforts, to be able to rejoice in nothing, in the absence of the sense
of Christ's love, is an excellent sign. Abraham, Genesis 15. 2. when God bid him
ask him what he should give him, replyeth, Lord, what can thou give me so
long as I go childless? This now argued that a Child was the chief of his
desires, and the chief Joy which he had in prospect. Abraham had a plentiful
Estate, a beloved Wife, but his dissatisfaction, for want of an Heir, spoke a
Child to be his chief Joy, an object which his heart was ready more to rejoice
in, than in all that he had besides it. When the Soul is at this pass, that it
can say, Lord, thou have given me an Husband, or a Wife and Children, and I
acknowledge thy goodness in them; thou have given me a plentiful Estate, and I
desire to bless thy Name for that; but Lord, what can thou give me? what
can thou do for me? so long as I want the sense of thy love in Christ, all
these things are nothing to me, whiles I have this dissatisfaction; though it
will not speak the Soul at this time actually rejoicing in Christ, yet it will
speak Christ to be its chief Joy.

Thirdly, It is a sign that Christ is the chief Joy of the Soul, if it can
rejoice in Christ alone, when there is no fruit in the Vines, when the
Fig Tree does not blossom, and the labor of the Olives fails (as Habakkuk
expresses it) that is, when all sensible external satisfactions fail. That
Soul which has not chosen Christ for his portion, will hardly be content with
Christ alone. Mephibosheth declared that Davia's return in peace to Hicrus^lem,
was his chief Joy, when upon David's saying, Thou and Ziba divide the Lands, he
calmly replied, 2 Samuel 19. 30. Yea, let him take all, for as much as my Lord
the King is returned to his House in Peace. It is said of the Primitive
Martyrs, Heb. 10. 34. That they endured with joy the spoiling of their goods,
knowing that they had in Heaven a far more enduring substance. Our hearts may
be ready to deceive us in this point, when we only put a case to our Souls, and
the thing appears at a distance. It may be therefore we may come to a nearer
judgment, what our Souls would do in such a case, by observing the frame and
temper of our Spirits, and what their support is, under smaller losses, and
deprivations of more external comforts. There is none of us but at some time or
other, suffer something from the hand of God immediately, or from the hands of
men. We lose possibly a dear relation, or a part of our estates, supposing now
that at this time thou have no apprehensions of the wrath of God, no fears as
to the pardon of thy sins, and thy interest in Christ, how is thy Spirit under
such providence? can thou look above them, and yet rejoice, that thy Christ
is not taken from thee? if you should see a Woman in the loss of a Child or
Children, yet lifting up herself above her sorrows, and blessing God, that it
is not her Husband, he is yet alive, you would easily conclude, that her
Husband was her chief joy, though she had some pleasure, some satisfaction in
her Child, yet her Husband was the head of her joy.

4. Lastly, Can thou joy in Christ Supremely? not in thy mercies so much as
in the God of thy mercies, and in thy mercies only as thou see the favor,
and goodness of God in them; you read, Luke 10. 17. that after Christ had sent
out the 70, they after some time returned, and made this report to him. Lord,
even the Devils are subject unto us through thy name. Christ tells them, v, 19.
Behold I give you power to tread on Serpents, and Scorpions, over all the power
of the Enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you, notwithstanding in this
rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoice, because
your names are written in Heaven. God says thus to many of his people, Behold
I give you comfortable Wives, towardly, and dutiful Children, plentiful
Estates, success in your tradings, and worldly businesses. I set an hedge of
providence about you, whatsoever you take in hand does prosper. Notwithstanding
rejoice not in this, let not this be the great matter of your content and
satisfaction. But rejoice in this, that I have given you my Son, and through
him, the pardon of your sins, and favor with me, an evidence, that your names
are written in the Book of Life. He that can do this, makes Christ the head of
his joy. And if you can do this,

1. You will be more troubled at the fears, or apprehensions of the loss of
Christ's love, then at the fears or apprehensions of the loss of any external
satisfactions whatsoever.

2. You will be rather willing to part with all, then to do any thing that may
hazard your loss of Gods favor. Thus the Martyrs showed that Christ was their
supreme joy.

Use ^.
Let us labor to find this evidence of grace in our Souls, to bring up our
hearts to be glad, and to rejoice in Christ in that manner as I have opened to
you, and particularly to rejoice in the answer of our prayers. I will enlarge
upon both these branches a little.

Br. 1.
Let us be unquiet in our spirits until we find that our hearts are brought to
this, to rejoice in Christ solely and supremely; to rejoice in him as our
righteousness, as our strength, as our portion, as our All in all. I told you
before that the Apostle, Phil. 3. thus describes a true Christian, one that
was of the true Circumcision: (The Jews he calls there the Concision) but says
he, We are the Circumcision, who rejoice in Christ Jesus: He speaks there of
a rejoicing in him as our Righteousness, as he from whose perfect Righteousness
alone, the Soul expects Salvation. This is in opposition to a rejoicing in
any Birth-priviledges, or Church Priviledges, or any Works of our own, as
things that will serve us in any stead without a part in Christ, when we shall
another day come and appear before God's Judgment Seat. O study thus to rejoice
in Christ, as he who has trodden the Winepress of his Fathers wrath alone, and
in his body upon the Cross suffered whatsoever was due to the Justice of God
for the sins of Believers, as he who alone has fulfilled the Law for us, and
in whom alone we are complete. This is our duty, but this is not what I am here
chiefly speaking to.

2. Rejoice in Christ as your portion, as your All; make him your chief Joy. I
would press this great Exhortation by some few Arguments, and then give you
some Counsels in the case.

1. Consider how vain and transitory the objects of all other Joy are. There
are but three things that I know we have to rejoice in; or at least all things
of that nature will fall under three Heads. They are either sensual
satisfactions; these are the objects of the voluptuous debauched Souls Joy: Or
secondly, Sensible E^joyments; these are the objects of the worldling's Joy: Or
thirdly, Spiritual blessings in Christ; these are the objects of the Believer's
Joy. Let me a little show you the vanity and transitory nature of the two
former. One man rejoices in the satisfactions of his sensual appetite, in the
pleasure of his Eye, and Ear, and Palate, and Flesh: Shall not these things be
the torments of the Soul to Eternity For what think you shall any Soul perish
for ever, if not for having pleasure in riot, in drunkenness, in
lasciviousness, or in other sordid satisfactions? are these any more then
brutish satisfactions beneath the rational Soul? will these things last for
ever? will there not a time come, when you shall say you have no pleasure in
them; nay, does not the pleasure of them perish with the using, and go out like
a Candle, leaving a stench behind it, leaving some sour reflections upon the
conscience, which the little tickling of pleasure which they afforded, no way
compensateth. O vain man! to make those things his chief business, satisfaction
and joy, which will bring the greatest bitterness in the latter end? You
compass your selves about with sparks, this you shall have at the Lords hand,
you shall one day lie down in sorrow. For the more civil, and reclaimed sort of
men, whose chief joy is in the increase of their Corn, and Wine, and Oil; how
vain, how transitory is this Joy? whilst thou have them, what necessities of
thy Soul do they suit? will they give thee peace when thou art under any
disturbance of mind? will they fit thee for, or advantage thee in any spiritual
operation? of what advantage can they be to thee as to another life, when as
thou come to die? when thou die, leave them all behind thee, and write upon
them, Whose shall these things be? Nay, may thou not outlive all the
comfort and satisfaction which thou have in them? Or, may not they in a moment,
by a Fire, by a Thief, by an Oppressor, be taken out of thy sight? Are they not
Gourds, that come up in a night, and serve a little to shadow us from the
heats, and shelter us from the storms that we meet with in this life; and may
go down in a night, and leave us as much as any other exposed to the storms of
this world? Are these things fit for the chief Joy of a reasonable Soul, a
spiritual and immortal being that is under an Ordination to an eternal
Existence, and professes to know, and to believe so much? On the other side,
is the Believer's Joy, who rejoices in Christ, so misplaced? Cannot he give
the Soul the pardon of sin, and sense of that pardon, which produces that
peace which is past all understanding? Cannot he give the Soul a righteousness
wherein the Soul shall another day stand before God, and not appear naked?
Cannot he give Eternal Life? and does he not do it to whomsoever he pleases?
and will he give so great things, and not food convenient for us? Or, shall not
he that gives the Soul Christ, with him also give it all things?

2. Consider how vainly thou hopest to enter hereafter into the Lord's Joy, who
have not rejoiced in him (...) Can thou imagine, that Christ will be rest and
(...) Soul in Heaven, when thy Soul has taken no pleasure nor delight in him
here. But you will say, what need these words? need any Soul be persuaded to
rejoice in Christ, if it were a thing in his own power? and if it be not, to
what purpose are we so persuaded and entreated to it? To this I answer:

It is true, it is not in thy power to rejoice in Christ. We cannot rejoice in
any thing, be it never so good, unless we have a property and interest in it,
and have some sense and apprehension of that interest, so that it is no more in
our power, to rejoice in Christ, than to give our selves an interest and part
in him, and a sense and apprehension of that interest, both of which are the
gift of God. But yet we may do something in the use of the common grace of God,
given to all of us who sit under the Gospel, in order to our having a part and
interest in him.

1. We may read the Scriptures, and hear the Word of God, and mediate upon what
we read and hear, in order to our conviction of that infinite excellency that
is in Christ, and his suitableness to the state, and necessity of our Souls. We
must see a goodness and an excellency in him, before we shall love him, desire
him, or delight in him; this goodness, this excellency is revealed to us in the
Word of God; this we must believe, or we shall never lie under such a
conviction. It is God that must give us a power to believe it, but we may read
the Word, and hear it opened and applied, in order to this; God (as I have
before told you) concurring ordinarily with his special grace, with our use of
that common grace which he affords us.

2. We may study and meditate upon the vanity of sensual joy, or joying merely
in sensible things, and how unfit they are to be the chief Joy of our Souls.

3. We may thirdly, Cry to God to give us our part in Christ; thoroughly to
persuade our hearts of our absolute need of him, and of that transcendent
goodness and excellency that is in him. O that men would but do what lies in
their power to do, and not complain they can do nothing, because they can
indeed do nothing efficaciously without God's special grace, as to any truly
spiritual acts.

Br. 2.
Secondly, I would speak to those who have an interest in Christ, that they
would labor to grow in this grace, to be more glad, and more to rejoice in
Christ. It is a duty often called for in Scripture, and I (...) regarded. I
speak now upon advantage, to you that understand you have Souls under an
ordination to an eternal Existence, that know the state of the Soul by nature,
and have tasted also how good the Lord is; to you, to whom Christ is precious,
and whom you will easily acknowledge your chief Joy; I am calling to you, but
for the exercise of an habit, with which God has indeed endued you, the
exerting of a power with which God has blessed you, the using of a right which
God has given you There are amongst others two great causes why Christians do
not so rejoice in Christ as they ought to do.

1. The first is, Their giving too much way to unbelief and despondency. Though
we cannot increase our own Faith without special grace assisting, yet we may
promove our unbelief, favoring our despondency, and cherishing our doubts, and
giving way to our groundless fears, and forgetting the Covenant of Grace, not
saying often enough to our Souls, Why art thou cast down O my Soul! etc.

2. The second is, Their too much carnality or worldliness. Where almost is the
man to be found that cannot rejoice in his worldly Affluences, although he
wants the sense of the Love of God in Christ? or, that if he were tried, would
not find it an hard matter to rejoice in God, if the Fig Tree did not blossom,
and there were no fruit on the Vine? How ready are we to rejoice in our
creature comforts when we have them, more than in the Love of Christ to our
Souls? whence is this but from our too much savouring, minding, and living upon
Earth, and earthly things?

Br. 3.
Is the hearing of Prayers such a matter of joy to a gracious man? how should
this engage us, 1. So to pray, that we may receive an answer of them from the
Lord? 2. To look after our Prayers, and the answers of them, that the sense of
such an answer may excite our joy in Christ? As to the first, I have spoken so
fully to it under the first Doctrine I handled from this Text, that I shall not
need again to enlarge upon it here. I shall only enlarge upon the second.

Foolish Children that shoot Arrows, and never look after them, lose that
pleasure and content in their game, which those have who observe what becomes
of their Arrows and how near they come to the mark to which they are directed
and levelled. Formal Christians who send up Prayers to Heaven, and never look
after them, never consider whether the Lord answers them yea or no, lose that
pleasure and satisfaction which the Soul has that watches his Prayers; and
with David, when early in the morning he has directed his Prayers to God (as
Psalm. 5. 3.) looks up. You read of the Prophet Habakkuk, when, chap. 1. he
had been putting up his Prayer to God, he resolves, chap. 2. v. 1. to stand
upon his watch, and to set himself upon the Tower, watching to see what God
would say unto him. Here now comes in a considerable question, viz.

How a Christian shall know whether God has heard and answered his prayers yea
or no? The difficulty lies upon two things: 1. Upon God's different ways of
answering. 2. In regard we may receive the good things we receive from God,
merely from him as a God full of pity, and tender compassion, seeing, and
pitying the misery and needs of his creatures (as our Savior says, He hears
the young Ravens when they cry unto him;) Not as from a God in Christ
reconciled, and hearing us upon the account of his Truth, and Promise, and the
Intercession of Christ. Now the answer of those Prayers only, which are
answered upon the account of Christ, and testifications of the Love of God in
Christ can bring the Soul to a gladness and rejoicing in Christ upon that
occasion and motive. As to the first,

1. I see no reason for a Soul that has been importunate with God for some
good thing, which it has not yet received, if it finds it self satisfied under
the want of it, and content to submit to the Will of God in the denial of it,
and to resign up it self to his good pleasure as to the collation of it upon
him: I say, in such cases as these, I see no reason for a Christian to question
whether this answer be from God, as a God of Truth and Faithfulness, fulfilling
his promise to the Soul. His promise to his people is to withold from them no
good thing, that is, nothing which shall be truly and really good for them,
considered in their circumstances: Now where a sensible good is withheld, and
denied, that a real good may be bestowed, and the Soul is also brought to see
its own mistake in the desire of that sensible good, and to acquiesce in the
good pleasure of God, in not giving it; nay, to acknowledge, that it is better
for it not to have it, and is quiet, and satisfied; certainly this is one of
the clearest answers of our prayers, and no Soul ought to question but this is
a return of prayers. Let us put a case. Suppose a Christian lying under the
power of some mortal disease, under which he has often prayed, that if it were
possible, God would make the bitter Cup of Death to pass from him: Still he or
she grows weaker and weaker, worse and worse, as to his or her bodily state;
but they find within themselves a further contentedness with the good pleasure
of God, a power to glory in their tribulation, and to rejoice in the hopes of
that glory of God to which its affliction is bringing it; a desire, not to be
unclothed merely, and free from its pain, but clothed upon, that mortality
might be swallowed up in life. What reason now has a Christian to suspect
whether this be in answer to its prayers, and slowing from God as a God of
Truth fulfilling his Word; seeing (as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5. 5.) He that
has wrought us for the self same thing is God, who has also given us the
earnest of the Spirit. It is a good thing here that is given the Soul; it is
given it by God; it is he who has wrought the heart into this frame. It is
given in upon, and after earnest prayer; and though it be not the very thing in
specie, which we asked, yet it is in value more, abundantly compensating the
things we asked, and finally, the thing which we did ask, we asked with
submission to the Will and Wisdom of God; so that as to these kinds of answers,
I take the case to be clear.

2. As to the giving in of such spiritual mercies as we have begged of God, in
their kind, whether they be peace of Conscience, strength against temptations,
power against corruptions, sensible consolations, more freedom and liveliness
unto, and in duty, there is as little reason to doubt, because they are the
very good things we a knight. 2. Of such a spiritual nature, as God does not use to
give them to Souls that are strangers to him. 3. The matter of promises: The
only thing that I can fancy why a Christian should make a doubt here, is,
because they may be consequent to the removal of some bodily distempers, whose
influence upon the mind, might cause those troubles, that weakness or dullness,
such as Melancholy, etc. But has God no hand in bringing or removing such
bodily causes? if he has (as certainly there is no evil in our bodies more
than in our Cities, which he has not done) why may not God both afflict us as
to our spirits, by sending such distempers upon our bodies, and also remove the
former, which are the effect, by the removal of the latter, which he has made
to be the cause. So that admit these things consequent to the removal of some
bodily distemper, yet they are the effect of God, and may be, and ought to be
looked upon as the answer of our prayers.

3. The greatest difficulty of judgment in this case is as to those things
which are but (...), the things which concern this life, which God gives to
the righteous as well as the wicked, to the sinner crying unto him, as well as
unto his Children: How a Christian shall discern that God when he gives him in
these mercies, gives them in as a God of Truth and Faithfulness, remembering his
promise to his Servants; nor indeed is this Judgment very easy to the most
discerning Christian. Something I shall say in the case, whether what will be
satisfactory or no I cannot tell.

1. If they have been given in after prayer made with a Spirit indifferent (not
too importunate I mean for the receiving of them we may hope well. We may
observe in Scripture, that sometimes common good things have been wrung out of
the hands of God by too much impatience, and importunity, which have never
proved blessings. Such were the Quails, Number. 11. 31, 32, 33. the Text says,
while the flesh was yet between their teeth, e're it was chewed, the wrath of
the Lord was kindled against the People. Such was the first King given to the
Israelites (even Saul) the Prophet says, Hosea 13. 11. I gave thee a King in
mine anger. But when a Christian begs of God any good thing, without too much
impatience, and importunity, with an indifferency of Spirit, resigning up
himself to the will of God, as to the receiving of it, and God after such a
prayer gives in the mercy, I know not why we should not conclude it an answer
of prayer. This I think was the case of Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. She was indeed
grieved, and troubled, because God had denied to her the blessing of a Child,
in this trouble she prays in a solemn manner, we read not of any anger in her
Spirit against God, any impatience, or sinful importunity, but she prays as a
Woman of a troubled Spirit, the Lord gives her a Child, it was but a mercy of a
common nature, wicked Women have Children as well as others; but it is given in
after a solemn prayer, she looks upon the Child as begged of God. For this
Child (says she) I prayed, and the Lord has given me my Petition which I
asked of him.

2. I shall add but one thing more, viz. When together with the good thing,
there is an heart given to the person to improve, and make use of it for the
honor, and glory of God. James lets us know that God never gives us in mercies
in answer to our prayers, and as evidences of his love and faithfulness, that
we might consume them upon our lusts, when he tells those to whom he wrote,
James 4 5. You ask and receive not, because you ask amiss, that you may consume
it upon your lusts; when God gives us in an outward mercy, if he gives it us
in performance of his promise, and in token of his love, and favor, he
together with it gives in an heart inclined, and ready to make use of it for
the honor, and glory of his name. This is also exemplified in the case of
Hannah, in the text beforementioned, 1 Samuel 1. 27, 28. For this Child, says
she, I prayed, the Lord has given me my Petition which I asked of him,
therefore also I have lent him to the Lord, as long as he lives, he shall be
lent unto the Lord. In the margent of your larger Bibles, you will see it may
be read; He whom I have obtained by Petition, shall be returned to the Lord.
You have another no less famous instance of it in David, Psalm. 116. v. 1. I
love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and supplications. The Lord has
heard his voice. v. 1. He had inclined his ear unto him. v. 2. The Lord had
dealt* graciously with him. v. 7. He had delivered his Soul from death, his
Eyes from tears, and his feet from falling. Now mark the product of this. He
loved the Lord, because of it. v. 2. He resolves to call upon the Lord so long
as he lived. v. 9. To walk before the Lord in the land of the living. v. 13. To
take the cup of salvation, and to call upon the name of the Lord. v. 14. To pay
his vows. v. 16. To be the Lords Servant. v. 17. To offer the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving, etc. Now where upon prayer for a more common mercy, suppose life,
health, riches, success in business, we find that the Lord has given us both
the thing which we asked of God, and an heart to honor God with it, and to
make a due improvement of it, we have there no reason to doubt, but that it is
given us in answer to our prayers, and in testification of his faithfulness and
love toward us. This now is of great concern to us, in order to our gladness,
and joy in him upon the receiving an answer of our prayers; for how shall we
rejoice in him, upon any such occasion, unless we discern our good things
coming from him. This I think is enough to have spoken to this question, and
upon this whole argument. I shall now proceed (as God gives me opportunity) to
the other effect this mercy had upon the Spouse, We will remember thy loves
more than Wine. But of this hereafter.

Sermon XXIX.
Cant. 1. 4. -- We will remember thy Loves more than Wine.

YOU heard in my last discourse the first effect, that the Beloveds favor,
showed to his Spouse, in the quick return he made to her prayers, and the royal
favor he had bestowed upon her, in bringing her into his Chambers, admitting
her to some more special, and intimate degrees of communion with himself, had
upon her; it put gladness into her heart, and brought her up to an exulting and
rejoicing in him. Joy is but a passion, cito fit, cito perit, that does not
last always, it is like a Land-flood, that is sometimes up, but will in a
short time abate. Ordinary Joys do so. But the Spouse resolves to keep up here,
and to this end she says, She will remember the Loves of Christ, and give them
a memorial suited to their excellency. We will (says she) remember them more
than Wine, or (which is the same in the Hebrew dialect) Before Wine. I shall
immediately close with the Proposition.

Prop. The Soul that has once received the grace of Christ, will remember his
Loves more than Wine.

In the handling of it, I shall keep to my usual method of Explication,
Confirmation, and Application. In the Explication I shall inquire what is here
meant by Christ's Loves; 2. What is meant by Wine; 3. What by Remembering the
Loves of Christ more than Wine.

We met with the same word, v. 2. the Septuagint translate it (...), and
according to them the Vulgar Latin, Vbera tua, thy Breasts; that which causes
the different reading is the cognation of that word which signifies Love, with
that which signifies a Breast (the difference is only in the points) the
matter is not hard to compound; for those that will have it translated Breasts,
agree in the sense, thy Loves; all the difference is, we contend, the word in
its original signification primarily so signifies; they say it so signifies
only in a figure. By Christ's Loves, she doubtless means the manifestation of
his Love, which she calls Loves, because of the variety of them: But of these
I have had occasion heretofore once and again to discourse. The term Wine I
have also before opened. We all know that in its primary and literal
signification, it signifies the Juice of the Grape; certainly this is much too
low a signification for this place: It has besides this a figurative sense in
Scripture, and so it is either taken Synecdochically. Thus Bread and Wine in
Scripture does often signify all things necessary for our food and
subsistence; or Metaphorically, for whatsoever is sweet and delicate; and this
I take to be the genuine sense of the words. We will remember thy Loves more
than all wordly enjoyments, how necessary or pleasant soever. I am aware of
some other senses, which some Interpreters put upon this phrase, but I take
them to be forced and strained. This seems without more ado to be the plain
and unconstrained sense of the words. But having before opened these two terms,
that which I have principally to attend, is the opening of that term Remember.

1. Remembering properly signifies a reflex act of our understanding, by which
the former impressions which we have received either of notions, or things, is
revived, and brought again to our minds and thoughts, whatsoever we receive
either by our exterior senses, or by our common sense or any other way, makes
an impression upon us; now this impression, through the coming in of a variety
of other objects, is apt to wear out, and die in our Souls, when the thoughts,
or notion of them revives, and is repeated upon our Souls, then are we said to
remember the things. In this sense it is a mere natural Act.

2. It is an usual observation of Divines, that words of sense used in holy
Writ, do not signify the bare acts of those senses which are expressed by
them, but those affections which are excited by such acts in our Souls, and
those effects which those acts do ordinarily produce in our actions and
conversation. And so this term Remember is often used in holy Writ. When
Solomon calls to the young man to Remember his Creator in the days of his
youth, he intends not only the act of his memory and understanding, that he
should call to mind that he had a Creator, and what a one he was, but that he
should rmember to love him, and to fear, and obey him; to pay him the homage
that was due to him, Eccles. 12. 1. When the people of God in Scripture prayed.
that the Lord would remember his tender mercies, Psalm. 25. 6. And David prays,
that the Lord would remember him, and all his afflictions, Psalm. 132. 1. and
that the Lord would remember his Word unto his Servant: He prays that the Lord
would show him the goodness that he had promised, and suit his dispensations of
providence to his afflicted state in proportionable succors. So when God's
People promise to remember him, the promise is not of a bare act of the memory
and understanding, but of the several powers and faculties of the Soul, usually
set on work by such a notion and remembrance of things of that nature, so as
the remembrance of the Loves of Christ signifies several things.

1. The keeping the expressions and manifestations of his Love upon our
thoughts, or retrieving the thoughts of it, if they have slipped us, or the
impressions of it have been in any measure worn out. Thus remembering, is
opposed to forgetting. To the practice of any duty incumbent upon us, is not
only required our notion or knowledge of the thing as our duty, but the
presence of it in our thoughts at the time when it is to be done by us; for,
let us know it never so well, if we do not think of it, in the season when it
is to be performed, we shall not do it. Now, says the Spouse, We will remember
thy Loves, that is, we will keep a fresh scent and impression of them; the
savor of what thou have done for my Soul, shall not go off my Soul. This is
the duty of every good man and woman; it is in it self an homage to God; God
has given us a power of remembering, and thus we give unto God the homage of
that power of our Souls. Our memory is as the chest of our Souls, which God
has given us not only to lock up worldly things or notions in, but to lock up
in them spiritual notions and impressions. Two ways we serve God with our
memories, 1. When we use them to retain spiritual notions, to keep up the
Knowledge of God, and the things of God in us, 2. When we use them as
repositories for the works of God, for the retaining in our minds what God has
done for us. 2. As it is in it self an homage to God, the homage of that power
in us which we call the memory; so it is the Mother of all our other homage: we
must remember a thing past, before we can be afresh affected with it; before in
the sense of it we can do any thing, which such a dispensation calls to us
for.

2. It implies a meditation and pondering upon the Loves of Christ. David
promises unto God not only a meditation of his Law, and Word, his Statutes and
Precepts, Psalm. 119. 148. 15 but also of his Works, Psalm. 77. 12. 143. 5. The
Works of God are either more public and general, or more private and personal.
There are Works of God without us, such are his Works of Creation and
Providence; works of Go d upon us and within us, such are all his works of
special grace: They are either such as are ab^ding (in their effects at least)
or transient; the latter are the objects properly of our memories; the other
are the objects of our contemplation and admiration. Now, as we cannot remember
any thing but we must think upon it; so the remembrance of any object makes
way for further meditation upon it; the Spouse promising to remember Christ's
Loves, promises not only the revival of them in her thoughts, but the seeding
of her thoughts with them, the fixing of her heart upon them.

3. It implies suitable affections; the exciting of such inward affections in
the Soul, as the remembrance of so sweet and obliging objects are proper to
excite. Such as love to God, further thirstings and breathings after God, a
suitable hope and confidence in God. Unbelief in Scripture is called a not
remembering, because forgetfulness is one cause of unbelief, Psalm. 78. 42. v.
41. They turned back, and tempted God, and limited the holy one of Israel,
there was their unbelief. v. 42. they remembered not his hand, nor the day when
he delivered them from the Enemy. So Mat. 16. 9, 10. Christ calls his Disciples
men of little faith, for reasoning with themselves, because they had brought no
bread in a distrust of his power, and goodness in providing for them, v. 9. 10.
Do you not understand, nor remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and
how many Baskets full you took up. Our Savior there charge their unbelief
upon their not remembering the former works of God. No man does rightly remember
the loves of Christ, but he who is suitably affected with them, and whose Soul
moves toward God, as one that remembers his love.

4. Lastly, Remembering implies a suitable practice. Thus it is often used in
Holy Writ. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, is the same with
Serve, and Obey thy Creator, and Remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day, is the
same with be diligent and make it thy busines^ to sanctify the Sabbath Day. So
then the sense of the Proposition is plainly this.

Those Souls which have once tasted how good the Lord is, and have had any
experiences of his special saving grace, will, and ought to be careful to
preserve the savor of it upon their hearts, to think, and med^tate upon them,
to be suitably affected toward God, according to the nature, and degrees of
them, and accordingly to manage their conversations, that men may see that they
value them above all the pleasures and profits of this world.

Thus did Asaph, Psalm. 77. v. 10. I will remember the years of the right hand
of the most high, I will remember the works of the Lord, surely I will remember
thy wonders of old, I will meditate also of thy works, and talk of all thy
wondrous doings. these were the ancient works of God in kindness to his people,
as you will find, v. 14. 15, 16. My mouth (says David) Psalm. 63. 6. shall
praise thee with joyful lips, when I remember thee upon my Bed, and meditate on
thee in the night watches, because thou have been my help. So Psalm. 143. 5. I
remember the days of old, I meditate on all thy works, I muse on the work of
thy hands. You will find the people of God in Holy Writ, much in these
resolutions to remember the works of God.

1. There is great reason for our remembrance of the loves of Christ more then
Wine. 1. Because they really are much better than Wine. Every man's Soul does
naturally desire good, good and evil are the two things which make impressions
upon the mind of man, evil leaves an impression of fear, and sorrow, and anger.
Good makes an impression of love, joy, delight, and as are the degrees of the
one and the other, so are the impressions made by them. Great evils make deep
furrows in our Souls, and leave great impressions upon our minds, minute evils
leave lesser impressions; so things that are good in the highest degree* leave
impressions of joy, and delight, suitable to the nature of that good which is
in them. The manifestations of the love of Christ to the Soul are the greatest
goods, and therefore should make the greatest impressions upon us. They are
goods, not suited to the Souls irregular passions, but to its greatest wants.
Health, peace, success in business, are things we call good, but their goodness
lies only in a suitableness they have to the wants of our outward man, what
are any of these things to the Soul? the loves of Christ are suited to the
wants of the Soul, and that not only considered as a reasonable being (so
knowledge, and learning are also suited to the Souls wants, and all
improvements of reason, or means in order to it) but to the wants of the Soul
considered as an immortal being capable of an eternal happiness. Nothing more
becomes a reasonable Soul, then to put a due rate and value upon things and to
prefer what is truly preferrible.

2. This is one great reason of the Lords works, That he might be remembered
for, and by them. God indeed in his gracious influences aims at the supply of
the Soul, as to what it needs, but he has an higher end then this, viz. his
own glory, the glory of his goodness, truth, and faithfulness, Psalm. 111. 4. He
has made his wonderful works to be remembered. It is a complement we sometime^
use with our Friends, when we make them presents, and give them gifts, we say
we do it, that they might have something to remember us by. God in the
dispensations of his grace and mercy, is often in Scripture said, to remember
his Covenant, his word, his holy promise, and he expects that when we receive
any such favors, we should remember his loves, and remember our Covenants and
Vows, so as that M^n or Woman that does not remember the loves of Christ, does
not answer Gods ends in the manifestations of his love to us, nor the
expectation which God upon that account has upon us. I shall apply this
discourse,

Use 1.
1. By reflecting upon the most of Christians for their not living up to this
duty. 2. By persuading to the revived practice of it. Do the most of Christians
(such I mean as are so called) remember the loves of Christ more then Wine?
What means ^hen the most of peoples never looking after a particular share, or
interest in them. The love of Christ (considered in itself) is nothing else but
his good will to the Children of Men, this was evidenced in his not taking upon
him the nature of Angels, but the nature of the Seed of Abraham, in his dying
upon the Cross for us, the publication of his Gospel to us, the committing of
the word of reconciliation to his Ministers, who are sent out as the
Ambassadors of Christ, entreating men to be reconciled unto God. Do men
remember this love more then Wine, who reject this counsel of God for their
salvation, who trample this blood under foot, and do despite to the covenant
of Grace, and all this, for what comes under no better notion than this of
Wine, either things pleasant, or things profitable, either the satisfaction of
their lusts, or the filling of their Coffers. The world is full, either of such
as are excessive drinkers of Wine, or Merchants for it, but how thin is it of
such as have any remembrance of Christ's love? who as the Apostle tells us, died
to redeem us from our vain conversation, 1* Pet. 1. 18. For we were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold from our vain conversation
-- but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish; who can
be said to remember Christ's love more then Wine, that lives in those sins which
crucified him, who was the Lord of life? Yet is not this the course of the most
Men and Women, who never think of their dying Savior, to restrain them in
their drunkennesses, debaucheries, in their greatest excesses of Riot? Nay, how
many are there that seldom take the love of Christ into their thoughts, the
love of their cups, and of their Harlots, has made Christ's loves to be utterly
forgotten by their Souls; for how can they say that they remember Christ's loves
above their lusts, that will not quench one lust for his sake, they in whom the
remembrance of Christ's death will not extinguish one vile affection, one spark
of pleasing lust, will not the most of men, and women, yea, such, in whose ears
the loves of Christ are published every Lords day, be found perishing for
preferring the very lees, and dregs of Wine, before the loves of Christ? I mean
for preferring the basest, and most sordid kind of pleasures, and satisfactions
of the flesh (for such are those pleasures which are no more than the
gratifying of the sensitive appetite.)

2. Do not most men's discourses and practice betray them to remember Wine, I
mean their profitable things before the loves of Christ? How much is the world,
and the things of the world, the discourse of all companies upon all occasions;
how few are the discourses concerning Christ, and what he has done for us? an
hours discourse of Christ's loves in a Pulpit upon the Lords day, is thought
proportionable to six days discourse about our earthly occasions; do we not
even grudge the Lord a seventh part of our time for the remembrances of his
loves? the Lords day is a day to call to remembrance Christ's loves. It was the
day of his resurrection, by which he completed man's redemption, the Ministers
work is to help us in our remembrance of his loves. We have besides our
attendance upon the public ministry, a private duty this day incumbent upon
us, viz. To remember him who died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification. I beseech you consider whether your remembrings of Christ's loves
upon the Sabbath day, bear any proportion to your remembrance of your worldly
interests other days. I mean not for the proportion of time spent in the one
and the other; God has indulged our infirmity in that, he has set apart a
seventh day only to himself; but examine this, whether you remember the loves
of Christ on the Lords day, as you remember your worldly concerns on any of the
other six days; do the loves of Christ come into your thoughts, as much on the
week day, as the world comes into your thoughts on the Lords days? I sear there
is none of us all can say, that in this thing our hearts are clean; I hope I
speak to many who remember the loves of Christ, and will never suffer his dying
love to go off their thoughts. But when we come to these comparative
examinations, to enquire whether we remember his loves, more then we remember
our sensual, or sensible objects; ah, how short do we come of the duty of
Christians, yea, of what our selves will own, and consess to be our duty? Happy
is that man that does not condemn himself, even in the thing which he allows
to be his duty.

Use. 2.
But I had rather spend my time in persuading my self, and you to our duty,
which according to my explication of the text and this propositionwill lie much
in two things 1. In a full and perfect remembrance of the Loves of Christ. 2.
In a remembrance of them proportionable to that degree of goodness and
excellency in them. I say, first in a Scriptual remembrance a full and perfect
remembrance of the Loves of Christ. I am afraid that we satisfy our selves too
much in a Notional formal remembrance of Christ's Loves and so please our
selves, in hearing the Gospel read, opened, and applied to our Souls, in a
formal keeping of the Lords day (the day which God has set apart for us to
call to our minds all the acts of our redemption completed in his
resurrection) some Churches aware of Peoples awkness to this Spiritual duty,
have thought fit to appoint other days for a more solemn remembrance of his
incarnation, and death. Nor have I any thing to say against any Christians that
will set apart any Special times to remember any Loves of Christ (though I do
not know that Christ has left any power to his Church to impose particular
times of this nature.) But alas! this is the least part of our duty in the
remembrance of his Love. We may have a day to remember it in (we have such a
day every week*) we may have helps to remember it by. The holy Scriptures, the
Ministers of the Gospel that Preach Christ to their People are such helps. But
if in these days, if with these helps, we do not set our selves to meditate of
the Loves of Christ, to turn our thoughts from other things, to the
contemplation of, and meditation upon the Love of a Christ incarnate, the Love
of a Christ dying, and riseing again from the dead, if we do not study to get
our hearts affected suitably to such Love, with love, faith, hope, etc. we do
not so live as a People that remember Christ died for our Sins, declining
whatsoever is contrary to his will, and Law in the Gospel, do what in us lies
to promove his honor and Glory, we are so far from Satisfying our Duty by this
formal remembrance of his Love, that we are the greatest forgetters of his
Love. The Jews who never owned him as their Redeemer, the Heathen who never
heard of his name, nor of what he was or did for Sinners can in no propriety of
Speech be said to forget his Loves. The Christian only, the loose Christian,
the formal Christian, he who hears every day of the dying Love of Christ, yet
goes on to defy him, to crucify him afresh, and to put him to open shame, or he
who every Lords day hears the sound of the Loves of Christ, and reads of it,
yet never meditates upon it, never suffers his soul by contemplation to pierce
into the heights, or sound the depths of it, whose heart is never truly
affected with it so as he has any Love kindled in his soul toward Christ, no
breathings after him, who exercises no faith, no hope in him; he that lives
not in his measure up to it, leaving his vain conversation, worshipping God in
the Spirit, rejoicing in him, living up in a close obedience to his Law; this
is the man that forgets the Loves of Christ. But yet if there be a Soul that
has experienced the Loves of Christ in a particular application to it self,
that has given it self a liberty to the flesh, and walked in a contrary course
to what the Law of Christ requires, this Soul yet more forgets his Loves,
because he had a deeper impression of them upon his heart; the Love of Christ
made an impression only upon the others Ears, but it has entered into this
man's Soul. He is the greatest forgetter of his Love. You shall observe in holy
Writ, that all sin is expressed under the notion of forgetting God, Psalm. 50. 22.
and in a multitude of other Texts, and this not only because a forgetting of
God is the cause of all the Violations of his Law, which we could not violate,
if we remembered God as we ought to do; but because indeed all sin in God's
account is an actual' forgetting of him, God accounts us to know, to remember
no more than we are affected with, and live up unto. Therefore Christians, let
us make it our business not only to call to mind the Loves of Christ, but to
remember them in that sense which God calls a remembrance of them.

2. Let us not satisfy our selves with a bare remembrance of his Loves, but
labor to remember them more than Wine; more than the most sweet and pleasant,
the most gainful and profitable things which this world affords. Think that you
hear Christ speaking in your Ears, in the language in which he once spoke to
Peter, setting all the pleasant and gainful things in the world before you, and
then saying to you, Christians! Love you me more than these? Let me show you
the reasonableness of this.

1. Consider, if thou can not say so, Thou do not answer the Loves of
Christ in any degree. I am now speaking to such as are Christians not in name
and profession only, but in deed and in truth. Such a one may suppose all the
fallen Angels, under Christ's Eye, even those Legions in the Air, and in the
bottomless Pit, Creatures in their Original more perfect and glorious than man,
but fallen from their first Integrity, and think he hears Christ saying to
him, Poor Soul! I have loved thee more than all these. I died not for these, I
died for thee; I took not upon me the Nature of Angels, but the Nature of the
seed of Abraham.

2. He may suppose all the Heathen Nations under Christ's Eye. The great
Emperors of Turkey, Persia, China, and other parts of the world, with the
millions of Souls under their jurisdiction, and think that he hears Christ
again saying to him, Poor Soul! I have loved thee more than these. Thou hear
my Gospel Read and Preached every Lord's Day; have thou not seen? have thou not
heard? These great Nations of the world, and all the great Rulers of them,
never heard the joyful sound; I was never Preached in their Streets; they were
never wooed, never entreated to come to me that they might have life. I have
loved thee more than these. Further yet, thou may fancy all the profane
men, all the sensual and carnal men, all Hypocrites, all unregenerate men,
whose hearts are yet locked up under unbelief, under Christ's and thy Eye; and
suppose that thou hear thy great Lord and Savior saying to thee, Poor
Christian! I have loved thee more than all these. They are yet wallowing in
their native blood, as thou were before I passed by thee in my time of love,
and said unto thee live; they are yet Children of wrath, in an hourly danger of
having it come upon them to the utmost; I have plucked thee out of Sodom: Thy
heart by nature was as hard as theirs, as much prejudiced against thy own
salvation; I have made thee to differ. I have loved thee more than all these.
May I rise one step higher to commend the Love of Christ to thy remembrance,
thou may fancy all that glory which Christ had with his Father from before
the beginning of the world; all the blessed company of Heaven; all the riches
of Christ's glory and felicity, before his and thy Eye, and fancy that thou
hear Christ say to thee, My poor creature, I have in a sense, and for a time
loved thee more than these: I left my Father's Throne, and right Hand, him whom
I was always before, brought up with him, I left all to come down from Heaven
to Earth, to take thy flesh, to be born of a Virgin, and to be laid in a
Manger, to live a poor and contemned life in the world, to die a shameful and
ignominious death, and all this to purchase for thee Eternal Life and
Salvation, and to redeem thee from thy vain conversation. Have I not loved thee
more than these? What does the Apostle say less than this, when he says, 2
Cor. 8. 9. You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was
rich, yet for your sake he became poor, that you through his poverty might be
made rich. In what degree then can thou be said to answer the Loves of
Christ, if when there is set before thee no more than the pleasures of sin
which are but for a season, the profits and enjoyments of this life, which thou
can have no more than a Lease for Life of; if thou can not say, Yea Lord,
thou that know all things, know that I remember thy Love more than these.
Either this intoxicating Wine of sinful lusts and pleasures, how gratifying
soever they be to my fleshly appetite: or this pleasant and gainful Wine of
worldly Riches, Estate, Honor, Preferment, etc. Oh that Christians would think
of this!

2. The second Consideration is yet more dreadful, viz. He is not worthy of the
Loves of Christ, who does not remember them more than Wine. What Christ
sometimes said of Love, is as true concerning this remembrance of his Loves,
which is an act of Love, Matthew. 10. 37. He that loves Father or Mother more
than me, is not worthy of me; and he that loves Son d^ Daughter more than me,
is not worthy of me. And what he says there of natural Relations, is doubtless
as true concerning sensible Enjoyments in this world* Riches and Honors, etc.
which are objects of your love, much beneath reasonable creatures in nearest
relation to u^. It is certainly as true, That man or woman that remembers any
sensible Enjoyment, and is more affected with it, than the Loves of Christ, is
not worthy of his Loves. Certainly nothing more becomes us who pretend to be
creatures endued with reason, than to value things according to their measure,
and their true and just valuation. You will say he is not worthy of a Jewel of
great price, that valueth a Pebble before it. And by the way, this will be
enough to convince us all, that we are saved by Grace, and have what Love we
have from Christ freely. For who is not guilty of a great Error in this
particular. We think of sensible things more than of the Loves of Christ; they
are more the objects of our meditations, the subjects of our discourses, and
the marks of our actions. It is well for us that our Salvation does not depend
upon the perfection of our gracious acts, and that we have another
Righteousness, than that of our own to appear in before God. That when our
Consciences check us in this particular, and tell us that we do not remember
Christ's Loves more than Wine; yet the Gospel relieveth us, by telling us that
he was made of God for us Righteousness, and we can remember that this Christ
(whose Loves we should remember after a better manner than we do) is the Lord
our Righteousness, an High Priest that can have compassion on our infirmities,
he in whom we are complete. But yet neither will this relieve us, unless we
humble our selves before God for our failures in this particular. Fly to him
for pardon, and endeavor even in this thing to perfect holiness; and that
brings me to the last thing I have to do, viz. To offer you my Advice in
order to the bringing up of your hearts to this just valuation and remembrance
of these Loves of Christ.

1. Labor to understand them. We can meditate upon nothing, but what we have
some notion of, we can remember nothing but what we have had some notion of.
There are the loves of God, and the loves of Christ, indeed the loves of
Christ, are the loves of him who thought it no robbery to be equal with the
Father, who is God over all, blessed for ever; but by the loves of Christ, I
mean the kindness which flows to us, from Christ as God-man, united in one
Person as our Mediator. There is a love and kindness which flows to us from
the providence of God, working either more generally, and extending to all, or
more specially toward some. There is also a love and kindness, which flows
from Christ as our Redeemer, Mediator, Savior. Both these loves are to be
remembered, but the latter more especially are called the loves of Christ;
understand the loves of God in the effluxes of his good providence. More
especially understand the loves of Christ as the Savior of Man: there are also
some of these more common to others, some more special to some. Of the first
sort are the Gospel, and the publication of it to us; of the latter sort are
those effects of grace which are wrought in us, in the justification of our
Souls, the change of our hearts, the renovation of our natures, the
strengthenings, quicknings, and consolations of the Spirit of Christ. Labor to
understand all your good things, as coming from the hand of God, and to
understand the kindness of God in them, see your good things as mercies, as
Divine gifts, and then study them;

1. In the suitableness of them to your States. In this lies the nature of all
good; from this must be judged the degrees and measures of good that are in
every grateful thing.

2. In the freeness of them; Freeness is indeed of the nature of grace; take
away freeness, and you take away the nature of grace, which must flow freely
without any merit in the creature, or it is no more grace but debt; no more
love but justice. If you understand not Christ's Loves, it is impossible you
should duly remember them.

2. Labor for to find the experience of the Loves of Christ, in the best, and
most salvifi^k manifestations. There is a love of God seen in giving us our
Wine) for it is God that gives us our Corn, Hos. 2. 11.
and Wine, and Oil, and multiplies our Silver and Gold. We must look for higher
things then these, or else it is impossible we should remember them more then
these. The best manifestations of love must be discerned in the giving us those
things which more suit our state, and are suitable to greater wants. Neither
shall we effectually remember these, till we find we have a propriety in them.
You will upon experience in all things find, that it is propriety which gives
us the sweetness in any good thing. Supposs a brave and noble House or Estate,
we may look upon it, and admire it, and it may please us, but it is propriety
in such an estate that must make it sweet, and pleasant to us. We may have a
kind of love for a Prince, of whom we hear, that he is just and merciful, and
endowed with many other qualities acceptable to humane nature, but we shall not
much delight in him, nor remember his love, until our selves have in some
measure tasted, and experienced it, an interest, and property in the love of
another, that is it which gives it an impression upon our Souls; God has
commended his love to the world, in sending Christ to die for sinners, Christ
has commended his love to them, in coming into the world, and dying for them,
not for all, but for those that shall believe in him; men may talk of this love
of Christ, and use their Rhetoric a little about it, in the magnifying of it,
but till their own Souls come to be washed with this blood, till they come to
have their iniquities forgiven, and their sins covered, it is not to be
expected that his love should affect them much, or sink any thing deep into
their Souls, so as to be revived by any effectual remembrance.

3. Would you remember the loves of Christ as you ought to do, more then Wine,
Set then your selves, sometimes for soliloquy, and meditation. When the Sound
of the Gofpel passes into our ears, we receive a little of it, but transient
things affect not much, nor leave any great impressions upon us. Meditation
upon a Subject is the Souls standing, and dwelling upon it, it is like the
digestion of our food, there is nothing can be conceived, a more rational means
to affect the Soul with any thing; or to make it fit for the memory to reflect
upon, then meditation. One great reason why we remember the loves of Christ no
better, nor more, is because we are not at leisure; our heads are so
unreasonably full of wordly cares, and employments, the cares of the world so
choke, and fill up our thoughts, that we have no leisure to meditate, or stand
upon the thoughts of Christ's loves, or any spiritual objects. Would Christians
allow themselves more time to fix their thoughts upon spiritual objects, to
pierce into the depths of divine love, to consider what Christ has done for
them in particular, they would better remember them.

4. Take heed of any wilful sinnings against his love. Sinning (as I told you
before) is usually set out in Scripture, under the notion of a forgetting God,
and forgetting his loves, Psalm. 78. 11. Psalm. 106. 13, 21. the committing of
sin frequently, is like the continual dropping of water upon a thing, which
washes, and wears out impressions upon it. Besides it is natural to us, not
to desire, or to be willing to remember the kindness of a friend, whose
kindness we have abused. Sin puts the taste of Christ's love out of the Soul. A
remembrance of Christ's love, so as to be in any measure duly affected with it,
is incompetent with wilful and presumptuous sinning. None but the holy, and
heavenly Soul remembers the loves of Christ.

5. Lastly, Wait upon God in ordinances, in hearing the Word, in the Holy
Sacrament of his Supper. The ordinances of the Gospel are not only means of
grace, but great helps to Christians memory, as to Christ's loves; we preach a
Christ crucified, there his loves come to our ears, in the Supper you have a
representation of a Christ crucified, there his loves, his dying love is set
before your Eyes, both are helps to the mind of that man or woman, who desires
to feed his thoughts upon the loves of Christ. But to shut up all, Pray, that
is a general prescription in order to the obtaining of any mercy from the hand
of God; amongst other blessed effects of the holy Spirit of God, promised by
Christ to his Disciples, this was one, John 14. 26. He shall bring to your
remembrance the things which you have heard of me, it is the influence of the
Spirit of grace, that quickneth, and inableth us to bring Christ's love to our
remembrance, our Savior has taught us how to obtain this blessed
remembrancer, Luke 11. 13. He gives his holy Spirit to them that ask him.

Sermon XXX.
Cant. 1. 4. The Upright love thee. Or Heb. Vprightnesses love thee.

STill it is the Spouse that speaks. She had prayed, Draw me, and promised,
that being drawn, both she and others would run after Christ. She had received
a gracious answer to her prayer. The King had brought her into his Chambers. In
this she has Triumphed, We will be glad, and rejoice in thee. For this she
has covenanted that she would remember the Loves of her Beloved, more then all
the pleasant, or profitable things in the world, Which she expresses under the
Metaphorical notion of Wine. Now lest any should say to her, Why so fond (O
thou fairest amongst women?) to justify her self in this rapture of Joy, this
extacy of love she may be conceived to add these words. The upright love thee,
or as the Hebrew is, Uprightnesses love thee the words may be variously rendered
with consistency enough to the Grammar of the Hebrew text.

1. Uprightnesses [or right things] love thee. The Same word is used Psalm. 17.
2. Thine eyes shall behold right things (...) comes from (...) to be right, or
to appear so. The word is used in the form that it is here, Psalm. 9. 9. He
shall judge the World in righteousness and the People (...) in uprightnesses.
It is used Prove. 1. 3. Is. 33. 15. Prove. 2. 9. Psalm. 75. 2. If we expound the
phrase (as it is literally) according to the abstract, Righteousnesses, or
Right things, the Question will be whether it should be read as in the
Nominative case, Uprightnesses love thee, or as in the Oblique case (which the
Heb. prefix seems to import) In Uprightnesses they love thee, accordingly the
sense will be very different, for if we read it, as in the Nominative case, the
import of it seems to be, to set out the Excellency of her beloved as he who
was the very seat of all excellent things, in whom did all fullness dwell, even
the fullness of the Godhead, all righteousness, all Equity, whatsoever is good.
If we read it as in the Ablative case (as the prefix in the Hebrew seems to
guide us) The import of it seems to be to express to us the nature of the
Saints love to God, which is not in word, or in tongue only, but in deed, and
in truth, in uprightnesses, that is (as Buxtorf expounds it) Rectissime,
fortiter, most entirely, intensely sincerely, thus I say it denotes the truth,
and reality of the believing Souls love to Christ.

2. But our translators have thought fit to translate it otherwise conceiving
the abstract here put for the concrete, Uprightnesses, for upright men
possessed of uprightness, this is very usual in the Hebrew dialect, and indeed
in most languages; so the sense is this: Do not wonder, that I love Christ, and
am so affected, with the enjoyment of him, there is never an upright Soul in
the world but loves him, all upright Souls love him; Thus the Proposition is
plain.

Propos. Upright Souls love Christ. To this I shall Speak in my ordinary method
by Explication, Confirmation, and Application. Under the first, I shall give
you the true notion of Uprightness and an upright soul, and show you in what
sense the Proposition is true.

The Question may well be propounded, Who is the upright, who is the righteous
man? For the Psalmist tells us, and the Apostle, Romans 3. confirms it, There
is none righteous, no not one, and although God at first made man upright
Eccles. 7. 29. Yet the world is so warped, by men seeking out to themselves
inventions, that the prophet Micah, 7. 2. Tells us, there is none upright
amongst men. To resolve this difficulty, I shall first give you two or three
distinctions concerning righteousness, or uprightness, without which we shall
hardly understand the true notion of an upright man.

1. There is an uprightness of heart. Psalm. 32. 11. Shout for joy all you
upright in heart; so Psalm. 94. 11. Judgment shall return unto righteousness,
and all the upright in heart shall follow it. And there is an uprightness of
way or conversation Prove. 29. 27. The upright in his way is an abomination; so^
Psalm. 37. 14. The wicked man seeks to slay such as be of upright
conversation. Indeed it is true, there is no man, who is upright in his heart,
but he will also be upright in his way, for the upright directs his way,
Prove. 21. 29. but there is a seeming uprightness of way, when the heart is not
upright with God. Prove. 14. 12. There is a way which seems right unto a man,
but the end thereof are the ways of death. The Proposition must be understood
of such as are upright not in their way only seemingly, but both in heart and
in way.

2. Secondly there is a Legal, and there is an Evangelical righteousness or
uprightness. The legal righteousness, or uprightness lies in a full and
perfect conformity to the Law of God. In this sense it is as true, That there
is none righteous, no not one, none upright amongst men, as that there is none
who lives, and sins not against God, for the least Fly makes this box of
ointment to stink; all Sin is crookedness, and the least crookedness spoileth
this rightness. But then there is an Evangelical righteousness, and
uprightness, and thus every Soul, that is justified by grace through the
imputation of Christ's righteousness is a righteous Soul; and every Soul that is
Sanctified and renewed, the bent of which is toward God, and whose heart is
sincere before God, is an upright and righteous Soul. In this Sense, the
upright heart is the Sincere heart. Thus David says of himself, I was upright
before him, 2 Samuel 22. 24. And God says of Job, He is a perfect, and an
upright man. The Proposition must be understood of the latter, he that is
Evangelically righteous, or upright; for there are none of the former upon the
Earth, none that are legally righteous.

3. Thirdly. As there are degrees of Sanctification, so there are degrees of
uprightness. The text seems to speak of the highest degrees, Uprightnesses. It
is very ordinary with the Hebrew to express the Superlative degree, by the
plural number; besides this is Signified by putting the Abstract for the
Concrete, we usually call men notoriously vile and wicked, by the Abstract
names of vice, and persons eminently good and virtuous, by the Abstract Names
of virtue and goodness. Those that are highest in grace, and who do most excel
in holiness are fullest of love to Christ. Love teaches every Child of God,
the weakest babe in grace to cry after Christ, and the grown Christian to
delight in him, and to walk up and down in his name. Every righteous, every
upright Soul loves Christ, and that with a true, sincere love, though not in
an equal degree, she (says our Savior) who has much forgiven will love much.
Having premised these distinctions, let me a little further inquire into the
true Notion of these upright men, upright by this Evangelical rectitude.

In short they are such as are justified, and Sanctified, made righteous
through Christ's righteousness imputed to them, and holy, through the
Sanctification of his Spirit. 1. Such as are justified. This is the first thing
requisite to an upright, right man, let the unjustified Soul, be what it will,
do what it can, it cannot be upright, either in heart or way. Suppose a stick
naturally crooked, you may pare it and paint, and color it, and cover its
crookedness alittle, but until it has been in the fire, and bended right, it
will be crooked still; the natural man, the Soul not justified by grace, not
washed with the blood of Christ may be pared by education, and brought off from
some flagitious, and enormous practices, he may be colored, and painted over
by some acts of moral virtue, and some formal performances of religious duties,
but still in Gods Eye the Soul is a crooked Soul, until the Lord has made it
right, till it be justified by faith. 2. To this uprightness is required not
only justification, or the removal of the Souls guilt, and imputation of a
righteousness, a perfect righteousness, but the sanctification of the heart,
God never sanctifies any, whom he does not justify, hence no Soul can be said
to be an upright Soul, that is not justified, nor does the Lord at any time
justify a Soul, but he at the same time also renews, and sanctifies it;
hence the upright Soul must be a renewed, Sanctified Soul. But yet in regard
our regeneration, and sanctification, is not as to degrees perfect, (though as
to parts Divines say it is, that is, the whole man is renewed) it may be yet
worthy to be inquired from what degrees of Regeneration, and Sanctification, a
man may be denominated an upright man; the rectitude of any thing is to be
judged from its conformity to some rule. The rule of man's uprightness is the
Lords Statutes, which are right, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 19. 8. holy, and
spiritual, and just, and good, Romans 7. Thy judgments are right, says David,
Psalm. 119. 75. 128. It is said so of nothing else, so as from a conformity to
this rule, must rightness, or uprightness be judged. And thus,

1. There is an uprightness of judgment, when the Soul judges according to
truth, both concerning notions, and practices, when it judges aright
concerning truth, and is not warped by error, and when it judges aright
concerning the ways of God, then the Soul is upright, with respect to the
understanding and judgment.

2. There is an uprightness of the whole Soul, with respect to the scope and
bent of it, when the heart of man does not stand inclined, and bent to sin, but
the Soul can say with David, I hate vain thoughts; but thy law do I love, I
hate every false way, etc. The man that in all his actions, designeth, and
intends the honor and glory of God, and obedience to his will, though in
many things he comes short, and offends, yet this man is an upright man, his
end, and general scope is right.

3. There is an uprightness of will; in this the uprightness of a man's
intention discovers itself, when to will is present with the Soul, as St.
Paul says, Romans 7. Though he wants a strength to perform; the man or woman
in heart wills the honor and glory of God, and this not by fits, but
steadily, and certainly, and is really unwilling to do any thing by which God
may be dishonored, though through ignorance he may offend, and through a
natural impotency, not being able to love the Lord with all his heart, and
strength, yea, and through moral impotency, and a mixed infirmity, through the
great power of temptations, whether from the seduction of lust, or the violent
motions, and impressions of Satan.

4. There is an uprightness of action, which lies in a true, and sincere
endeavor to do the will of God, and by this both the uprightness of intention,
and will also is to be judged. This is the upright man, though he may stumble
and fall, and often does fail (who lives, and sins not against God?) And as
these holy dispositions are found in the Soul in more remiss, or intense
degrees, so the Soul is more or less upright, and the man deserves this
honorable denomination less or more. These now are the Souls that love Christ.

To love any object, whether person, or thing, signifies to take a delight,
and complacency in it. Whether in the thoughts of it (if absent) as the Apostle
says, whom we having not seen, yet love, or in the contemplation, and fruition
in converse, and communion with it, if more present.

This Praedicate concerning the upright, that they love Christ, is to be
understood exclusively, and inclusively, concerning the Person of Christ, and
whatsoever bears his image, and superscription.

1. Exclusively, these, and none but these love him. Others may talk of loving
Christ, but it is but a talk and pretense, they love but in word, and tongue
only, not in deed, and truth, there is something else, either lust or the
world, something or other that has more of their affection, more of their
heart then Christ has.

2. Inclusively. These, and all these love Christ, there is not an upright Soul
in the world but loves Christ, and takes a pleasure and complacency in him, and
prefers him before his chief joy.

3. They love the person of Christ. He is in their Eyes altogether desires, the
chiefest of ten thousand. there is nothing in the world so sweet, and pleasant
to their thoughts, as to think of Jesus of Nazareth, him that was incarnate of
the Virgin, that died upon the cross for sinners; all their contemplations, and
meditations of him, are exceeding sweet, and their hearts exercised about them
melt in them.

4. They love whatsoever bears the image, and superscription of Christ. The
Gospel, that gives them the history of Christ, and reveals to them his will,
the ordinances of Christ, in which the loves of Christ are set forth,
represented, opened, applied to the Souls of people. The members of Christ,
even every Soul in which they can but see aliquid Christ^ (as Bucer speaks) any
thing of the features of Christ. This is enough to have spoken for the
explication of the Proposition. For the proof of it,

1. Look into the Word of God, see if you can find an instance either of an
upright man, who did not love Christ, or of an bypocrite, or unregenerate man
that did love him. Abraham believed, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness, he was one that walked with God, and was perfect, that is,
upright, he loved Christ. Our Lord says of him, Abraham saw my day and
rejoiced. Simon, and Anna, and Peter, and Mary Magd^lene, all were upright
Persons, they all loved Christ. On the other side there is not so much as one
instance of an unjustified, unregenerate Soul, that had any real love for
Christ, no not when they saw him here in the flesh. It is said of the young
Pharisee, who came to our Savior, Mat. 19. that when Christ saw him, he loved
him, but he had no love for Christ, for when he bid him go sell all that he
had, and he should have treasures in Heaven, it is said he went away sorrowful,
for he had great possessions. Judas followed Christ, and so did the
Capernaites, but Judas carried the bag, and the Capernaites followed him for
the loaves. None of them loved Christ in sincerity and truth. We need no other
instances then what our own age affords us. But we need no Scripture in this
case. Reason will evince the necessary truth of this Proposition, if we
consider, that all love is founded, either, 1. In the apprehended goodness and
excellency of the object beloved: Or, 2. In some similitude, and likeness, etc.
Or ^loweth, 3. From some instinct, of which we can give no very just account. I
will begin with the last first.

1. Love to another often proceeds from some inaccountable instinct; we see
this very ordinary amongst us, the heart of a woman cleaves to a man, or of a
man to a woman, ^o the heart of one friend is knit to another, and we are able
to give our selves no great account of it, the man loves the woman, to whom he
had a former aversion, and the woman loves, and chooses the man for her
Husband, that she did never think of, and they can give themselves no account
of the change which they find in themselves, this is undoubtedly a providential
instinct or influence, of which we can give no account. The Souls love to
Christ, also flows from an instinct of God, an influence of special grace,
for certainly if we must be taught of God, to love one another, to love the
brethren, whom we have seen, and daily do see, and much that is lovely in them,
we have much more need to be taught of God to love Christ, whom we have not
seen, and whose excellency, and amiableness, is only matter of faith to us.
Hence it appears, that no unrenewed, no unsanctified heart, none but the
upright Soul can possibly love the Lord Jesus Christ, for this love is no
natural habit, no man by nature loves Christ, nor is it any acquired habit,
but an infused habit, and indeed a piece of regeneration.

2. Love to an object is founded in an apprehension of some goodness and
excellency in that object, we cannot love any object, that appears to us
evil, or unlovely. Now none but the renewed, and regenerate Soul can possibly
see any goodness and excellency in Christ, for it is spiritually discerned,
besides, the reason of love in us to any object, is not so much the abstracted
goodness, and excellency of the object, as its relative goodness unto us; now
none but the Soul that is justified, and regenerate Soul has in any thing
tasted of the love of God, or has found him in any degree good as to it.

3. Lastly, Whereas love is founded in likeness, in some similitude of nature,
or disposition, and qualities, there is such a dissimilitude between a natural
man, whether he be one that is profane and flagitious, or merely moral, and
formal, and hypocritica^, that this Soul cannot love the Lord Jesus Christ, who
is holy, and harmless, and separate from sinners; and the very same reasons
make it necessary for every Soul to love Christ, for every such Soul is
renewed, and regenerate, and taught of God to love the Lord Jesus Christ, every
such Soul is beloved of him, and under some apprehensions, and experience of
the love of God in Christ unto it; every such Soul (finally) has the Image of
God renewed in it, in righteousness and holiness, and by grace wrought up into
a conformity to Christ, and the more upright the Soul is, the more is the image
of God renewed in it, the more it has tasted the special love of Christ, the
more it has received of the potent influences of Divine Grace, hence it must
needs love Christ more. I now come to the application.

Use 1.
In the first place, This may let us know, That Christ is a most excelling
object, and the non-adherence of our hearts to him, is a piece of the natural
crookedness, and defection of the Soul of man. The goodness or excellency of an
object is not to be determined from a vulgar judgment. Learning is an excellent
thing, the foolish ignorant person does not so judge it, nor look after it,
this detracts nothing from the excellency of it. Wise men value it. It has no
enemies but the ignorant man. Now the judgment of the best and wiser part of
the world, their value, and prizing of it, is enough to commend it, though
fools hate knowledge. So the upright man's loving Christ, is a sufficient
evidence of the transcendent goodness, and excellency that is in him, tho the
loose, and profane man, the formal, hypocritical man has no love at all for
him. There are thousands in the world (in the Christian world) whose
conversations testify, that they can see no beauty, no excellency in Christ at
all, to them he grows up as a root out of a dry ground, in their Eyes he has
no beauty, no comeliness at all. They stand, and admire what sweetness Gods
people have in their meditations, and contemplations of him, what is that
sometimes makes them so sick of love for him, so breaking with longings after
him (as holy David expresses it.) The business is not what fools judge of
Wisdom in the mean time, Wisdom is justified of her Children. It is enough that
the upright love him. The upright men, are the best men in the world. But you
will say, were there such a beauty, such an excellency in Christ, why should
not every rational man enquire after him, and love him? The answer is easy.
Because his beauty, his excellency is not obvious to the Eye of sense, or to
the Eye of reason, working from its own principles, but only to the Eye of
faith, and that of reason, working upon revealed principles. The goodness and
excellency of Christ considered as Mediator, does not lie in a suitableness to
our bodily wants, no nor to the wants of our Souls, considered only as rational
and spiritual Beings; but in his suitableness to our Souls considered as
lapsed, and fallen from the happy state wherein they were at first created, and
by that fall exposed to the wrath of God, here, and hereafter. Now this is
revealed only in Holy Writ, and is to be discerned only by the Eye of faith. So
as those who do not by a firm and steady assent, agree to the revelation of the
word, cannot possibly see any excellency in Christ as a Savior, and Mediator
between God and Man.

Use. 2.
Secondly, Every gracious Soul is from this Proposition justified in all their
pangs of love for, and toward Christ, and in all their actions, and sufferings
in evidence of this love. That there is such a thing as a spiritual love
sickness is evident to all those who know any thing of the ways of God with the
Soul, or the motions of the Soul toward God: Let persons of atheistical, and
profane hearts mock so long as they please; no Soul that I know of, expresses
more of this nature, then his who is styled by God, the man according to Gods
own heart, Psalm. 119. 20. My heart breaks with the longings, which it has to
thy judgments at all times, Psalm. 42. 1. As the Heart pants after the
Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee O God, my Soul thirsts for God,
for the living God, Psalm. 63. 1. My Soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs
for thee. Our Savior I am sure blesses those who hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, Mat. 5. (what work would the unhallowed wits of our Age have
made with such metaphors as these in their Books of drollery, etc.) they are
all expressive of those pangs of love that sometimes affect good Christians in
the several states of their Souls, and besides these more inward motions, the
Souls of good Christians cannot but express their love, by a zeal for his
glory, a love to his institutions, a regard to all his commandments, and durst
not do many things (as to which their Neighbors find no difficulty) because
they love the Lord Jesus Christ, who has said, If you love me, keep my
Commandments. For Christ, that they may show their love by their obedience unto
him, they are ready to suffer the loss of all things, yea, and do count them
but dung, that they may win Christ; for this the men of the world mock them,
let them mock on; The upright love him. I remember in the story of David, we
read, 2 Samuel 6. 20. That Michal, his Wife (the Daughter of Saul) mocked him,
for his dancing before the Ark in a linen Ephod. How glorious (says she) was
the King of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day, in the Eyes of the
handmaids of his Servants, as one of the vain fellows, shamelesly uncovereth
himself. The holy man gives her a very smart answer; says he, It was before
the Lord, which chose me before thy Father, to appoint me to be a ruler over
the people of the Lord, over Israel, therefore will I play before the Lord. And
I will yet be more vile then thus, etc. Whiles carnal men mock at the secret
sighings, and groanings of Gods people, at their frequency, and strictness at,
in, or to religious duties, and call it all whining, and canting, and what
comes next to the end of their lewd Tongues, the Child of God is justified in
this, that the upright love Christ, and all these their expressions of love are
for, and toward him who has chosen their Souls to Eternal life, and the use
of all means which he has made necessary in order to that Salvation, and who
(for ought yet appears) has passed over the Souls of these Scoffers, and
left them to perish in their gainsayings. When chapter 5. of this Song, the Spouse
charge the Daughters of Jerusalem, that if they found her beloved, they
should tell him she was sick of love: They reply; What is thy beloved more then
another beloved, O thou fairest among Women, what is thy beloved more then
another beloved, that thou do so charge us? Cant. 5. 8. 9. See into what an
elogy of her beloved, she breaks out to the end of that Chap. My beloved (says
she) is white and reddy, the chiefest of ten thousand, etc. when the men of the
world see a gracious Soul panting, sighting, and breathing after Christ* they
are ready to speak to the same sense, tho in ruder language, what is the
beloved of this Soul, more then another beloved; what makes these people so
full of prayers, and tears, so full of duty, so fond of the ordinances of
Christ? This justifies such Souls in all their pantings after Christ, in all
the passions of their Souls for him, The upright love him.

Thirdly. From hence Christians may take measures of themselves, and make up a
judgment of their Souls, whether they be upright Souls, yea, or no, very much
lies upon this, many are the promises that in Holy Writ we shall find made to
upright Souls. Perfection of degrees is our mark, but what in this life we
cannot attain unto, all perfection we are capable of, is uprightness, this may
be attained, we are therefore highly concerned to inquire upon our uprightness.
By this we shall know it; The Soul that truly loves Christ, that is an upright
Soul, so as that which we have to examine, is the truth of our love to Christ.
This inquiry also is considerable in respect of the Apostolical Anathema, 1
Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha. It is a great point, how a Christian shall certainly know his
spiritual state? he shall know it by his uprightness? how shall he know his
uprightness? that is to be known by his love to Christ. But will some say, is
not this as hard to be discerned as any thing else? I answer; surely no. If it
be no hard thing for a man to know whether he loves such a woman, or a woman to
know that she loves such a man, or for any to know they love such a friend,
such a companion, why should it be so hard for a Soul to know whether it loves
Christ or no? love will work much in the same manner toward all its objects,
and though the visibility, and sensibility of some objects, may draw out more
of our passion, and excesses of affection, yet the reality and truth of our
love may certainly be as well discerned rewards a spiritual, and invisible
object as to one, that is more the object of our exterior senses, let us
therefore try those measures, and see how we will make up our judgment of the
truth of our love to a fellow creature; what is that which we call love, but
the delight, and complacency, and satisfaction of the Soul in an object
beloved, declared by the pantings and breathings of the heart after it, when
absent, for an union, or reunion with it, the acquiescence and meltings of the
heart upon it, when present, and an union with it is obtained, or apprehended;
the Souls intercourse and communion with it, and free communications of its
self unto it, its kindness to every person or thing, to whom, or which the
object beloved, has any relation, its patient, and pleasing bearing his
reproofs, its readiness to go, or run, or do any thing at the will, and command
of such a person, its standing up in the defense of him or her, its rising up
against any that would do them injury, or that it hears speak reproachfully, or
diminutively of him. It Is readiness to suffer any thing for his sake, etc.
Surely by some or all these notes we may try our love to Christ, and be as
certain of it, as we can be of the sincerity of our love to any fellow
creature; let me therefore desire you to propound these few questions to your
selves.

1. How far is Christ the object of thy thoughts? We say, (...) amor ibi
oculus, where love is, there the Eye will be; the reason of that is, because
our thoughts are much employed about the object of our love, where our treasure
is (says our Savior) there will our hearts be also, the Psalmist therefore
speaking of the wicked man who has no love for God, says, God is not in all
his thoughts. Psalm. 10. 4. So long as we live in the world, the things of it
are so much, and so continually the objects of our senses, that it is not to be
expected, but that our thoughts should in a great measure be exercised about
the things of it, so that I would not put the issue upon that, whether the
world or Christ have most of our thoughts? but certainly Christ will be much in
the thoughts of that Soul in whom the love of Christ is, Te veniente die, te
decedente canebat (says the Poet of the lover) the Soul that loves Christ,
will think of him in the evening when he lies down, and in the morning when he
rises up, and David had his waking thoughts in the night season with God. God
will not have all of the best man's thoughts, because he is but flesh, and has
some thoughts to take about what he shall eat, and drink, and put on, but God
will have much of his thoughts. Christ will be much in the thoughts of that
Soul that truly loves him. Secondly.

2. How are the motions of thy Soul after an absent Christ? Christ as to his
person is always absent, that the Heavens must contain till the end of the
World, but he is or may be graciously present in his institutions, and with
respect to his gracious influences, and with respect to both these he is often,
or may be absent; the first makes up the desertion of a Church, when it is
general, or a particular person, when it is only the affliction of a particular
Soul in some cases, and by some severer providence kept from the ordinances of
God; the second is, the particular desertion of a gracious Soul, not as to
necessary, but as to gradual influences; now how is thy Soul affected to Christ
absent, when thou can not enjoy the Ordinances of Christ, as thou have
formerly enjoyed them? You see the heart and affection of David in this cafe,
in diverse Psalms, particularly Psalm. 42. Psalm. 63. Psalm. 84. what breathings,
what longings, what impatience does he there express? So when thou suspectest
his absence as to the particular special influences of his grace, how does thy
heart move toward him? does it move as the heart of the Spouse moved in the
third and 5th Chapters of this admirable Song, Seeking him, sighing after him,
enquiring of all like to inform thee, how thou might recover thy lost peace,
being restless till thou have recovered it? This is a sign of love.

3. How is thy heart affected in any presence or enjoyment of Christ? What
pleasure, what delight and complacency has thy Soul in the institutions of
Christ, in the manifestations of his love to thy Soul. See the instance of the
Spouse as to this, Can. 3. 4. I found him whom my Soul loves, I held him, and
would not let him go, until I had brought him into my Mothers House, and into
the Chamber of her that conceived me. v. 5. 1 charge you O you Daughters of
Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds of the field, that you stir not up,
nor awake my love, until he please. A rejoicing in the signs of his love, being
glad, and resolving not again to part with him, a fear of offending him, and
care to please him, are all of them signs of a love to the Lord Jesus Christ.

4. A freedom of converse, and communion with him, also speaks love. Christ
proves himself his Disciples friend, because he had made known to them
whatsoever he had received from the Father, Joh. 15. 15. Dalilab challenged
Sampson for want of love to her, because he had concealed his secrets from her.
The withholding of prayer from God, the want of frequency, freedom, and
boldness in prayer, speaks want of love to Christ in the Soul; frequency,
freedom, and boldness, holy boldness speaks a Soul full of love to Christ.

5. What affections have thou to those things and persons, that have a relation
to Christ, that bear his image and superscription, the Word and Ordinances of
God, the Ministers and People of God; by this you shall know your love to
Christ. Again --

6. How can thou bear the reproofs of Christ? Our nature does not love
reproof, we must love those very well, from whom we take reproof quietly. Let
the righteous smite me (says David) it shall be as an excellent Oil, which
shall not break my head When a Christian can bear the verbal reproofs of
Christ's Word, and Ministers, and the real reproofs and chastenings of his rod
It is a sign of love.

7. What zeal have thou for the honor and glory of Christ? Can thou not hear
him reproached, but that his reproaches fall on thee, thy blood rises, and thy
heart is troubled? It is an argument of little love for God or Christ, when we
can patiently hear them abused, and dishonored, Psalm. 69. 9. The zeal of thine
house (says David) has eaten me up, and the reproaches of them that
reproached thee, are fallen on me.

8. I must not forget that of our Savior, If you love me, keep my
Commandments. No Soul can so much as pretend to a love to Christ, that makes no
conscience of keeping the Commandments of Christ.

9. The Soul, lastly, that has a love for Christ, will suffer any thing for
his sake, it will rather suffer the loss of all things, then the loss of
Christ's favor. By these and such like questions, and notes as these, it will
be no hard matter for a Soul to judge of its love to Christ, and by that it
will be able to judge, and determine concerning its uprightness.

Use. 3.
In the last place does every Soul that is upright love Christ, and are the
degrees of the Souls uprightness according to the degrees of the Souls love,
How do we then all stand concerned to love Christ? In order to it,

1. The Soul must be dispossessed of other loves inconsistent, and incompetent
with the love of Christ. Such is the love of all lust of any thing that is
contrary to the will of God. Such is the excessive and immoderate love of the
world. Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world (says John, 1.
Joh. 2. 25.) If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him;
in like manner we may say, If any man love the world, the love of Jesus Christ
is not in him.

2. Do what in thee lies to persuade thy self of the suitableness of Christ to
the sta^e, and needs of thy Soul; we love nothing but what appears good, that
is some way suitable to, and convenient for us. All we can do as to this, is to
read the Scriptures, which alone give a true account of the state of Souls: To
hear them opened, and applied to our consciences by able and faithful
Ministers, to meditate upon what we read, and hear. Christ must appear to our
Souls an amiable object before we can love him.

3. Lastly, Pray for the Spirit of Grace; both effectually to discover Christ's
loveliness to you, and also to draw out your hearts to love him, if we must be
taught of God to love our Brethren, whom we have seen, we must much more be
taught of God to love Jesus Christ whom we have not seen. Those that think man
has a power in his own will to love God, do not consider that we have not a
power, in and of our selves (as we often find upon experience) to love a
creature, whom yet it were our great interest to love. O pray, pray without
ceasing, that you may love the Lord Jesus Christ remember, that the upright
love him, there is no upright Soul in the World but loves him. 2. Thus thou
shall show thy self to be upright. Nothing more discovers an upright heart,
then a sincere Love to Christ. Now of how great moment it is for a Christian to
discern his uprightness, I need not tell you. I shall conclude with a bare
naming of some Scriptures containing promises made to uprightness, leaving them
to you at your leisure to meditate upon them. Psalm. 7. 10. The Lord saves the
upright in heart, Gods Righteousness belongs to the upright in heart, Psalm.
36. 10. The End of the upright man is Peace, Psalm. 37. v. 37. Gladness
belongs to the upright in heart, Psalm. 97. v. 11. The Generation of the
upright shall be blessed, Psalm. 112. v. 2. Light shall arise upon them in
obscurity, v. 4. They shall dwell in Gods presence, Psalm. 140. 13. They shall
dwell in the land, Prove. 2. 21. The way of the Lord is strength unto them,
Prove. 10. 29. The integrity of the upright shall guide him, Prove. 11. 3. His
Righteousness shall deliver him. v. 6. The upright in the way are the Lords
delight, v. 20. Righteousness keeps him that is upright in the way, but
wickedness overthrows the Sinner, Prove. 13* 6.

Sermon XXXI.
Cant. 1. 5. I am black but comely O you Daughter of Jerusalem, as the t^nts
of Kedar, as the Curtains of Solomon.
v. 6. Look not upon me because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon
me, my Mothers Children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the
Vineyards, but my own Vineyard I have not kept.

IT is the Spouse in this excellent Song of Love that yet Speaks, Twice we have
heard her Speaking to her Beloved. Once, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth, begging some distinguishing token of his Special love: Her heart
suggesting to her, that her beloved, was far more ready to embrace her, then
she was to run after him. She spoke a Second time, Draw me, and we will run
after thee, begging the sweet and powerful influences of divine grace, Here
now she interrupteth her applications to her beloved, with an Apostrophe to her
companions (whom she here calls The Daughters of Jerusalem.) The verse
contains a modest apology which the makes for her self. In which are
considerable,

1. The persons to whom she makes it, here styled, The Daughters of Jerusalem.

2. The Apology it self. I am black (says she) as the tents of Kedar, as the
Curtains of Solomon, etc.

In the latter is considerable, 1. The thing which she apologizeth for: That is
her Blackness, which she confesses, I am black (says she) and illustrateth,
as the teints of Kedar etc.

2. The arguments of her Apology, or head from whence it is drawn. They are
four or five.

1. The mixture of comeliness with her blackness. I am black but comely.

2. The Influence of heaven upon her. The Sun (says she) has looked upon me.

3. The oppositions she had met with on earth. My mothers children were angry
with me.

4. Her worldly diversions and employments. They made me the Keeper of the
Vineyards.

5. Her own neglect. But my own I have not kept.

Finally. She pleads with them that they would not look upon her because she
was black.

But what needed this Apology? who faulted the Spouses blackness? who
questioned her comeliness? This is not expressed in the letter of the Text but
easily understood. Patet quod dett axer ant ei nigredinem improper antes. It is
apparent, says Bernard, that they did detract from her, charging her with
blackness. Neither did the true Church of Christ, nor any truly believing Soul
ever want those that reproached them. The man according to Gods own heart,
heard some telling him, There was no help for him, in God. We must therefore
Suppose our Spouse to have heard some saying to her to this purpose. Can thou
think that Christ who is the fairest of ten thousand, should kiss the with the
kisses of his mouth? Thee? That art by nature an Ethiopian, and by thy renewing
actual Sins, have made thy self much more black and ugly. Surely when the King
of glory humbles himself to make love to his Subjects, he will choose one much
fairer then thou art. Did Aaron and Miriam, wonder at, and reproach, Moses,
because he had married an Ethiopian Number. 12. 1. And should not Christ be the
wonderment of the whole creation, if he should love one so black as thou art?
Whispers to this sense, a believer often hears from the Devil, from the men
of the world, and from his own heart also. Solomon Personating the true Church,
and every true believer, fancieth the voice of these Spiritual adversaries in
his Ears, nor is there any Child of God but hears it at some time, or other.
The spouse therefore preoccupieth this objection by this Apostrophe. O you
daughters of Jerusalem, I am black but comely like the tents of Kedar, like
the Curtains of Solomon.

You daughters of Hierusalem] Jerusalem is an Hebrew word, and signifies, The
Vision of Peace, or They shall see Peace; it is to be considered in its
Political, Ecclesiastical, and Typical notion.

1. In its Political Notion, it signifies the Metropolis or chief City of
Judea; a City supposed to have been builded by Melchizedeck, and by him called
Salem, he is called the King of Salem, Genesis 14. 8. Heb. 7. 1. 2. Salem in
Scripture is put for Herusalem. In Salem is God known, Psalm. 76. 2. It was
afterward for some hundreds of years in the possession of the Canaanites.
Adonizedek was the King of it, Josh. 10, 3. who was conquered, and slain by
Joshua, Josh. 10. 26. the Jebusites afterward lived there in common with the
Benjamites who did not drive them out, Jud. 1. 21. David smo^e these Jebusites,
2 Samuel 5. 7, 8. and took the strong hold of Zion, and made it his City. It was
situated amongst the Mountains; hence you read of the mountains being round
about Jerusalem Psalm. 125. 2. Yet the habitable part of it was in the Valley,
Jer 21. 13. Now if we take Jerusalem in this notion here, the Daughters of
Jerusalem are the Inhabitants of this famous City.

2. But there is an Ecclesiastical Notion of it so it signifiyeth the Jewish
Church: Jerusalem was the place where the Temple stood, where was the most
folemn Worship of God; thither all the males of the Israelites went up thrice a
year to Worship God. There lived the High Priest; in that place alone (in their
settled state) they were to Sacrifice. Hence Zion (a City contiguous to this
City) the City of David, and Jerusalem are often in Scripture put for the
Jewish Church; hence the Psalmist praying for the prosperity, and restoration
of the Church of the Jews, Prays in this aialect; Build thou up the walls of
Jerusalem. So Psalm. 102. verse 23. to declare the name of the Lord in Sion,
and his praise in Jerusalem. that is, in the Jewish Church. In this sense, the
Daughters of Jerusalem are the members of the Jewish Church.

3. But there is yet a further Typical Notion of it. So it signifies the
Church of God both that part which is in Heaven Triumphant, called the mother
of us all which is called the New Jerusalem Rev. 3. 12. chapter 21. verse. 2, etc.
or that part of it which under the Gospel is still militant on earth, Zech. 8.
22. Thus the Daughters of Jerusalem, are the Members of the visible Church.
you may take it in either notion; either thus, O my neighbors, you people
amongst whom I dwell, or O you that are members of the same Church of God with
me; Brethren are too ready to censure and upbraid one another, Aaron, and
Miriam spoke against Moses, Number 12. 2. David complains that he was an alien
to his mother's Children, Psalm. 69. 8. and in the next words, the Spouse says,
my mothers Children were angry with me. To these she says, I am black but
comely; how the Church of God, or the particular Souls in it are Black, I shall
have occasion more fully to show you hereafter. Every one will understand, she
speaks in a figure and intends not the black color of the flesh, but some
condition fitly enough represented and expressed by a blackness of color, [But
comely] There is no contradiction in that, There is a comeliness in some
blackness. The Black Eye is comely, so is the black marble. But I reserve a
further and larger discourse, concerning the spouses blackness, and comeliness,
till I come to the Propositions of Doctrine I intend to discourse from the
words, but what is the meaning of the follow phrase.

As the tents of Kedar: as the Curtains of Solomon.] They are certainly two
similitudes which the Spouse brings elegantly to set forth what she had said,
either concerning her blackness, or concerning her beauty and comeliness. Only
the question is, whether the sense be this; I am black like the tents of Kedar,
and like the Curtains of Solomon: but I am also (like them) comely also: Or
thus, I am, I confess, black, like the Tents of Kedar: but I am also comely
like the Curtains of Solomon. The letter pleases me best because we read
nothing of any black Curtains, that Solomon made for the Temple, and it is most
likely he kept the colors of the Curtains of the Tabernacle which were Blue,
Purple and Scarlet. Redar was one of the Sons of Ishmael as you read Genesis 25.
13. It is probable that he did build some, City in Arabia which (as was very
usual) he called after his own name. We shall read that in the Prophecy of
Isaiah against Arabia, Isaiah 21. 17. he has this expression, The mighty men
of the Children of Kedar shall be deminished. And in the Prophecy of the
Gentiles coming in to Christ, Isaiah 60. 7. All the flocks of Kedar, shall be
gathered unto thee, and the Rams of Nebujoth. You read of it also Jer. 2. 20.
and Jer 49. 28. and Zech. 27. 21. Arabia and all the Princes of Kedar. Keder
then was either a City or a Province of Arabia which was a very hot Country,
they had at that time generally no such fixed houses, nor such ways of
covering their habitations as we have: They did generally live in Tents, which
were moveable places of habitation, these were ordinarily covered with the
Skins of beasts which they killed for their uses. That kind of covering as you
know in Countries where the Sun is very hot, is apt to tan into a very
loathsome, and unlovely color* To these the Spouse compares her self. I am
black like the tents of Kedar.

Like the Curtains of Solomon.] This I take to relate to the latter part of the
Spouses words. Solomon made Curtains for the Temple, and it is very likely they
were made in Proportion to those which were made (by Gods Prescription) for the
Tabernacle, Exodus 36. 8. of fine twined Linen, Blue, Purple, and Scarlet, with
Cherubims of cunning works; the Spouse compares her self to these for
comeliness.

Look not upon me because I am black.] That is, you Daughters of Jerusalem,
look not upon me. The Chaldee Paraphrast makes this the voice of the Jewish
Church speaking to the Heathens thus: O you Heathen Nations! do not despsse me
because I have made my self blacker then you by doing after your deeds,
Worshipping the Sun, Moon, and all the host of Heaven; false Prophets, have
made me to err after your ways by which means the wrath of the Lord is poured
out upon me. The reason of this interpretation is their dream that they are the
only Church of God in the World. But the text is not to be so restrained. The
true Church of Christ, or the truly believing Soul here speaks unto any others:
That they would not look asquint upon her because she was black; Ne torvum
intueamini, nec velut per contemptum despiciatis, (so Mercer glosseth upon the
words) do not look upon me with an Eye of despite, scorn or, contempt. As the
Leviat han beholds all things Job 41. 34. (so Mr. Ainsworth interprets it)
or as he adds, not with a rejoicing pleased or Satisfied Eye, according to
that, Obadiah v. 12. Edom should not have Looked upon the affliction of his
brethren. Or not with an astonishing, admiring look: As the Apostle commands
us not to think it strange concerning the fiery trial, and 1. Thessal. 2. 3.
that none should be moved by the Churches afflictions, knowing that God had
appointed them thereunto. The English Annotators add, not with a partial eye,
beholding my blackness and not my comeliness; no nor yet with a dull de^jected,
or despendent Eye; Nor yet so as to take a Copy from me for your imitation. Do
not thus look upon me, because I am black.

(...) There is a little difference in the form of the word from the word as
used before (...). It is the observation of some critical Interpreters, that
this change of the form of the word, makes a diminution in the sense. So as it
should be read, because I am something black a little black, duskish, subnigra,
fusca (thus Arias Montanus translates it.) Nun^ se corrigit (says Genebrard)
here she corrects her self. She had said before she was black. Now she
alters her phrase and speaks to this sense; I am indeed something brown, but
not so black as you take me to be; thus I said critical Interpreters in the
Hebr. carry it. Mercer also and Mr. Ainsworth, and our English Annotators take
some notice of it. And Mr. Ainsworth quotes a text where another word much of
the same form is translated, something red. We have now probably the sense of
the words. O you that are the People of God, do not look upon me with a
scornful abominating Eye, to flee from me, and avoid me: Nor yet to take out a
Sinful Copy from me: you men of the world, do not scorn, do not clap your hands
at me, do not stand amazed, because you see me full of trouble, and affliction,
do not look upon me on one side partially; I am indeed something black, but not
coal black, not wholly black.

The Sun has looked upon me.] The Arabic version reads it, The Sun has
declined me, but Avenarius tells us, the Hebrew word (...) signifies to look
wistly and directly upon an Object; in that first Conjugation it is used but
thrice in holy Writ, Job 20 9. The Eye also that saw him shall see him no more.
Job. 28. 7. There is a path, which the Vultures Eye has not seen. The third is
this text. So as the ordinary reading is not to be declined. But concerning the
Sun mentioned in this text there is a great Variety amongst Interpreters.

1. some understand bY the Sun here the Sun of Righteousness, the Lord Jesus
Christ who is so called Malachy 4. 2. and according to this sense, I find
Delrio giving a singular sense of these words which he calls the Tropological
sense. As if these words were not brought in by the spouse as a reason of her
blackness but only as a reason why they should not despise her by reason of her
blackness. Tho I am black, (says she) yet the Sun of righteousness, the Lord
Jesus Christ has looked on me and has clothed me with his Righteousness,
therefore you ought not to despise me. There is a great truth in this. If we
can Charitably judge concerning any soul that God has received it, if we see
any Person so living, so aright ordering his conversation, that we cannot but
think he or she is one whom the Lord loves, and who is accepted of him, we
ought not to despise them, because we see them gu^ley of some failings, or
although we find them made black through a pressure of trials and afflictions. But
this seems not to be the sense of the words. 2. Others understanding by Sun
here, the Sun of Righteousness make another improvement of the Notion. Christ,
[The Sun of Righteousness] has looked upon me, and I am become black, that is,
Vile in my own Eyes: This is truth, the more the Lord looks upon any Soul the
more mean and low and vile it is in its own Eyes. When our Lord looked upon
Peter he went out, and wept bitterly. Isaiah cries out. Woe is me! I am a man
of unclean lips, and I dwell amongst a People of unclean lips, for my Eyes have
seen the King, the Lord of hosts. The more the Lord looks upon any Soul, or
the more a Soul looks up to and upon God, the more vile it judges its self;
but tho this be true, yet I cannot judge it the truth of this place, where I
take the Spouse to be apologizing for her blackness in her outward appearance
to others; tho it be also true, That Exercises of repentance, and mortification
do not commend Souls to the Eye of the world, tho they highly commend them unto
God. Bernard has yet a 3d improvement of this notion -- Ejus amore lang^eo.
God by casting an Eye upon my Soul, has so drawn out my heart after him, that
I faint, and am broken with longings for and after him; this makes me so
unlovely, and black in your Eyes. I find both these last mentioned notions in
Bernard. Thus the Souls blackness, had only been occasioned accidentally from
the Sun's looking upon her.

2. I find that some by the Sun (in the Text) understand the fruits of the
Spirit; such as zeal which inflameth the Soul where it is, and as it were burns
it up, as it is written, The zeal of thy house has Eaten me up: Brotherly Love
which teaches the Soul to weep with those that weep, from which arises what
the world miscalleth a blackness.

3. But I find the generality of Interpreters by the Sun (in the Text)
understanding Persecutions and Afflictions. Delrio and Bernard (after the
mentioning some other notions) yet fix upon this as the most probable sense of
this phrase, and we have in the Gospels a Text of Scripture which justifies
this Metaphorical acception of the term. It is that, Ma^th. 13. 6. in the
Parable of the sower. In the parable our Savior tells them that the seed
which sell upon the Stony ground, when the Sun was up, was scorched, which he
interprets v. 21. when Tribulation, or persecution arises because of the
word, they fall away. In this sense I shall fix; so the sense is this:

It is true, I am black, but be not offended, do not contemn, or despise me for
it; it is no native blackness, it is but accidental to me: it is not internal,
but external, that which makes me thus black in your Eyes is, those Affl
ctions, and persecutions, which I have met with in, and from the world. The
exceeding heat of that sornace of affliction, into which the Providence of God
has cast me, has scorched me: and that is it which makes me appear so black
in your Eyes. It follows:

My Mothers Children were angry with me.] The Chaldee Paraphrast all along
taking the Church of the Jews to be the Spouse here mentioned, by Mothers
Children here understands the Heathen, who were the Children of her mother Eve,
tempting, and seducing them to their Idolatryes. The thing is true of that
Church very often by the Heathen seduced to their Idolatrys; but I find amongst
Interpreters, two other senses much more large, and probable.

1. Some by Mothers Children understand those l^sts and Corruptions, which lie
in the womb of our Souls. Together with the habits of grace. Thus Paul
complains of the flesh lusting against the Spirit, and of a law in his
m^mbers, rebelling against the law of his mind.

2. others (more probably) understand such as are presumptive members of the
same visible Church. The true members of the Church can be no others then such
as are ordained unto Life, such as are truly Sanctified through the
Sanctification of the Spirit. But there are many others who from their external
profession are presumptive members of it, so may be called our Mothers
Children, tho not the Children of our Heavenly Father; such are all false
brethren, all hypocrites glorying in an External profession, and mere outward
appearance. Such as these are ordinarily angry with such as are the true Spouse
of Christ* David complained long since that he was become a stranger to his
brethren, an alien to his Mothers Children; the Apostle, Acts 20. 30.
foretells to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus that there should arise of
themselves, men speaking perverse things to draw many disciples after them; you
may read at large in the Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, how
the primitive Churches of Christ were troubled with them, and Paul, in his
Epistles to Timothy, foretells that latter times should be more troubled with
such as should resist the truth, as Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses. It was
Bernards Observation, long since and more lately noted by Genebrard upon my
text that she does not call them Brethren, but only her Mothers Children, not
her Fathers, for they were of their Father the Devil, his works they did. Many
such there now are and will be in the Church to the End of the World, who have
only a titular relation to Christ, no real relation. This now is a Second cause
which the Spouse assigns of her blackness. There were many false brethren in
her communion who had falsely represented, and reported her and made her appear
far more unlovely in the sight of others than indeed she was; this I take to be
the most proper sense of this phrase.

They made me the keeper of the Vineyards.] The Chaldee Paraphrast by the
Vineyards here understands the Idolatry and Superstition of the Heathen, to
which the true members of the Jewish Church were tempted by the Heathen their
Neighbors, and the false brethren they had amongst themselves. Hypocrites, and
formal professors are very prone to admit the Superstitions of men in the
Worship of God. The Pharisees in our Saviors time laid heavy burdens of humane
traditions upon others, Mat. 23. 4. Into this sense Mercer and Ainsworth
interpret the text, observing that it is their Vineyards; their Vineyards
opposed to her own Vineyard, seems to imply the false Worship, Rites, and
Ceremonies of d^bauched and apostatized Churches.

There is yet another sense of the words hinted by Delrio and Genebrard. It is
this, They entangled me in secular affairs, so made me neglect the things which
were Spiritual and of much higher concernment to me. This now is a third cause,
which the Spouse assigns of her blackness: 1. She had before told us she was
Scorched with afflictions and persecutions. The Sun had looked upon her. 2. She
had been betrayed, by her own lusts, and by false brethren, and seduced her to
intertain their corruptions, to keep their Vineyards, now she tells us That her
secular diversions, did also much contribute to her darkness, she had been made
to serve in the brick-kilns of the world. Keeping of Vineyards was a great deal
of the labor of those Countries a painful and laborious employment; therefore
you read, 2 Kings. 25. 12. upon the King of Babylons conquest of Judea that the
Captain of the guard left of the poor of the land to be Vine-dressers and
husbandmen; and those who in the parable had been laboring in the Vineyard
tell the Lord of the Vineyard, they had born the burden and heat of the day.

My own Vineyard I have not kept.] Here now the Spouse assigns a fourth cause
of her blackness. The question here is, what is meant by her own Vineyard? It
is manifestly to be understood of something which the Lord had committed to her
to keep, considering the Church as the Spouse. The Oracles of God were
committed to the Church of the Jews (as the Apostle tells us, Romans 3. 2. and
the Church is called, The pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. Paul tell
us. 1 Timothy 1. 11. that the glorious Gospel of the blessed God was committed to
his trust, and tells Timothy the Ministry was committed to his trust. St.
Paul calls it his Gospel upon this account, Romans 26. 25. and says they were
put in trust with the Gospel, that is, the Custody and Ministration of it. And
St. Paul commands Timothy to commit the things which he had heard of him,
amongst many witnesses to faithful men, who should be able to teach others.
That general term of the Gospel signifies both the Propositions of the Truth,
and Doctrine of Faith contained in the new Testament and also those excellent
rules which are to be found in it, relating both to the Worship of God, and the
Government of the Church of Christ, and the dispensation and administration of
it. This Gospel as to the Ministration of it was by Christ committed, first to
the Apostles, to be by them transmitted to faithful and able men, as to the
keeping of it to the whole Church. The Church of Sardis, Rev. 3. 8. is
commended, for keeping Christ's word, and not denying his name. This undoubtedly
is the Churches Vineyard. The Province which God has betrusted to her to keep.
But every particular Soul has a Vineyard too. And what is its Vineyard but its
immortal Soul, and the particular trust which God has committed to it, with
relation both to its self and others? What is the keeping of this Vineyard, but
a Christians observance of the duties incumbent upon him, with reference to his
more general, or more particular calling? So that understanding by the Spouse
the particular Christian, she complains here of her own voluntary neglect,
and carelessness as to her own Soul, suffering the weeds of lusts and
corruptions to grow up, and to prevail, according to that of Solomon, I passed
by the Vineyard of him who was vaid of understanding, and to, it was overgrown
with thorns: Nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone-wall thereof
was broken down, Prove. 24. 30, 31. This now is the fourth cause which the
Spouse here assigns of her blackness; thus I have given you the best account
I have been able of the sense of these words, which if you take them as the
words of the Church (the collective Spouse of Christ) sound thus:

O you that are my Brethren (members of other Churches) you that are my
Neighbors, the men of the World. I must confess I am something black, yet not
wholly black, not inwardly black, not without some comeliness, I may be a
little black, yet let not me be the object of your contempt, despite or scorn,
let not my blackness make you decline, be afraid, or ashamed of the ways of
God; let it not cause you to err as I have erred. I have been under great
temptations, long, and sharp trials of persecution, these have a little tanned
me, and made me to look something unlovely; I have had some Neighbors, and
false Brethren, who have allured, inti^ed, and betrayed me, my Enemies have
imposed upon me a superstitious Worship, superst^tious Rites and Ceremonies,
and have prevailed with me something to comply with them. Nor am I as to my
self to be wholly excused, I must own that through my own voluntary omission,
and neglect, I have not kept the Truths, and Ordinances of Worship, nor any of
the Laws of God concerning me, so as I ought to have done, or might have done.

If we take the words as the words of the particular believing Soul, they sound
thus.

O my Brethren! I am I confess black, but let not my blackness cause you to
tr^umph over me, nor yet for my sake to decline the holy ways of God. I have
been under many sore and great temptations, in great heats of affliction; the
Sun has looked upon me, others have too much seduced me, and I have been
misled by them, I have been too much entangled in secular concerns, so as I
have been too negligent as to the concerns of my own Soul. From the words thus
opened, several Propositions may be raised, of which I shall discourse in their
order. I shall only name them at this time.

Prop. 1.
That even the Spouse of Christ on this side of Heaven, has her blacknesses,
which will expose her to the reproach and obloquy of her Brethren, and the men
of the world.

Prop. 2.
Though the Spouse of Christ be black, yet she is also comely.

Prop. 3.
As the Spouse of Christ ought to know that she is black, so she also ought to
understand she is comely.

Prop. 4.
As the Spouse of Christ ought to own, and acknowledge her infirmity, and
desormities, so it is also her duty at sometimes to own, and acknowledge her
beauty, and graces, and to justify her self against those who would upbraid her
for her blackness.

Prop 5.
It is our duty to take heed how we look upon the Spouses blackness.

Prop. 6.
Affliction, and persecution from the world, will make the Church, and people
of God look black, especially in the Eyes of the men of the world.

Prop. 7.
Corruptions within, and false Brethren in the bosom of the Church, will make
both the Church, and the particular Soul appear black.

Prop. 8.
Great intanglements in worldly affairs, will make Gods people look black.

Prop. 9.
The yieldings of a Church, or of particular Souls, to impositions of false and
corrupt worship, are a great cause of their appearing blackness.

Prop. 10.
Nothing makes a Church, or particular Soul so black as their own neglect in
keeping their own Vineyards, the trust which God has betrusted them with. I
shall speak something to all, or the most of these in their order hereafter.

Sermon XXXII.
Cant. 1. 5. I am black but comely: O you Daughters of Jerusalem, as the Tents
of Kedar, as the Curtains of Solomon.

I Shall now begin a larger discourse upon those Propositions which I did but
name the last time after my explication of this, and the next verses. I will
join the two first, and handle them severally, then apply them jointly.

Prop. 1.
The Spouse of Christ on this side of Heaven, has her blackness, exposing her
to the reproach and obloquy of others, but she is also comely, and therefore
ought not to be looked upon, because she is black.

My business in the handling of this Proposition will chiefly lie in these two
things.

1. First, Showing you wherein lies the Spouses blackness, exposing her to the
obloquy of others.

2. Secondly, Showing you wherein her comeliness lies. The confirmation I
shall mix with the explication. By the Spouse here I have all along understood,
the believing Soul, and the Church of Christ, which is a body made up of these
as its Members, they have both their blackness, for which they are exposed to
the obloquy of others.

1. First, Sins, and Corruptions make them black. The best of men, are but as
white Swans, with black feet, they have in them a body of death, a law in their
members rebelling against the law of their mind, the flesh lusting against the
Spirit, and they are many times brought into a captivity to the law of their
members, and though these motions to sin be ordinarily suppressed, yet they
sometimes break out. The Pride of one, and the ssionate anger and wrath of
another, and other lusts in others often break out unseemly, and make even the
best of Gods People appear black, the habituated Sinner is all black, there is
in him no whiteness, no comeliness at all. The glorified Saint is all white,
there is in him no blackness at all. The militant Saint, is partly white, and
in part black. All sin is black. Christ therefore in justification makes the
Soul white through his blood, Rev. 7. 14. They are made white in the blood of
the Lamb. In regeneration they are made white; cleansed through the washing of
water, Ephesians. 5. 21. Hence, Christ tells his Disciples, except I wash you, you
can never be made clean; they are clean, but yet had need wash their seet, John
13. 10. If there be in us any thing of faith, yet there is also much of
unbelief; who lives, and sins not? the righteous man falls seven times in
a day, and who can tell how often he offends? and though indeed the lust and
corruption, that is in a good man's heart, does not commonly break out into
scandalous acts, which standers by take notice of, yet sometimes they do. Lot
and Noah were both overtaken with Wine, David was overco^e by the stranger that
came to his House. Peter denied his Master. Solomon, Asa, Jehosaphat, all the
good Kings of Judah had their great Errors, which are as black spots upon their
memories to this day. And besides the blot which these eruptions of corruption
leave upon the particular Souls, they leave also a blackness in the Church,
which is made up of them. Besides that, there is no Church but has in it some
of unsanctified hearts, who as Jude tells us, are spots in our feasts of
charity, and where they prevail in number, they bring in also another blackness
upon the Church, by admission of corruptions, in Doctrine, Worship, and
Discipline, etc.

2. Particular Souls are also black through acts of mortification. The people
of God live a dying life; I die daily (says Paul) they keep under their
Bodies, that they may keep them in subjection to their Spirits. Now though
there is nothing makes a Soul to look more white, and beautiful in the Eyes of
God, yet nothing makes them appear more black and unlovely in the Eyes of the
world. The world looks upon Christians chastising themselves with fasting, and
tears, in their dejections, and humiliations, as very black, but this is indeed
no real, but an appearing blackness, to such as understand no loveliness in any
thing but sensuality.

3. The People of God are often black through afflictions. Job speaking of
affliction says, Job 30. 30. My skin is black upon me, and my bones are burnt
with heat. Hence the afflicted faces are said to gather blackness, Joel 1. 6.
Nahum 2. 10. The skin of the Church in the hour of her affliction, is said to
have been as black as a Raven, Lam. 5. 10. and it is said of the afflicted
Nazarites, Lam. 4. 8. That their visage was more black then a Coal. So that you
see Affliction is every where in Scripture called Blackness. Now there is no
Child of God in this life exempted from afflictions, such as are from the hand
of God immediately, of which nature are desertions, terrors, and Soul troubles
of several sorts, bodily distempers, etc. or from Satan more immediately, of
which nature are temptations. Or from the world, in persecutions, and injuries
by it done unto them, and the Spouse seems to have a particular respect to
these, for she adds, my Mothers Children were angry with me. And as the
particular Soul is subject to these blacknesses, so is the Church.

1. Through a mixture of ill members, such as (to use Judes phrase) are spots
in the Churches feasts of charity. Such no Church of God has been free from in
any age, some that are corrupt in their tenets, and principles, others that are
so in their conversations. God denominates his Church from the sincere, and
better part of it, but the world always denominates it from the worser part,
and cries -- Crimine ab uno disce omnes, they are all alike, hence there is no
man causes the name of God to be so reproached, and evil spoken of, as persons
professing to religion, and membership in Churches, and living loosely,
o^growing corrupt in their Doctrines, and Principles.

2. The Church becomes black, Through the admission of corruption in Doctrine,
Worship, or Discipline. All deviation from the Divine Rule (where it is a
sufficient rule in the case) is the blackness of any Church; it is a wonderful
thing to observe how prone the heart of man is to this. Though the Church of
the Jews had a more infallible rule, and more plain in this case, then any
other Church can pretend to. Yet I cannot find that ever the Worship of God
continued in it in purity fourscore years. The longest was the time of David
and Solomon, who each of them reigned forty years, but in the latter part of
Solomon's time, it admitted of much corruption, there was a great toleration of
Idolatry (as you read in the story) and you shall observe in the whole History
of that Church, in how few Kings Reigns, the high places, and the groves were
taken away, and when they were taken away in one Kings Reign, how soon they
grew in fashion again in the next, though there were no sins for which the Jews
so severely smarted, nor against which the wrath of God was more severely
declared by the Prophets God sent amongst them. If (in the New Testament) you
look over the Epistles wrote to the Church of Corinth, and Galatia, and the
seven Churches of Asia, you will again find the same thing; it is true, every
deviation from truth, or from the purity of Worship, or discipline, will not
unchurch a Church, the Lord hates putting away; concerning Idolatry, I know
not what to say, that is a Spiritual Adultery, and every where in Scripture is
called Whoredom, and going a Whoring, and as divorce was lawful in case of
carnal adultery, so possibly it may be presumed as to spiritual adultery, that
God has said to a People Lo-ammi, you are not my people who are lapsed to
idolatry: but for other failings, tho the Lord likes them not, but has
something against every Church that admits any corruptions of this nature, yet
they are but spots and blemishes, and how far a separation from such a Church
may be lawful, or is sinful, is a great question. I think a total separation is
not. But that is not my task at present to discourse.

3. The Church also may be black through persecutions. The afflicted state of
the Church is called a lying amongst the pots, Psalm. 68. 13. Probably there may
be a time toward the end of the World, when the true Church of Christ may
enjoy some tranquillity, and enjoy a more serene, quiet, and fixed state then
it has yet enjoyed, or does at this day enjoy, when it shall not be so
encumbered by the Cross, and those tribulations, by which Christians have
hitherto entered into the Kingdom of God; there have been some both more ancient
and modern Divines, who have inclined to think, that yet before the end of the
World, Christ shall reign upon the Earth a thousand years, but whether that
time which we call the day of Judgment, shall last so long, or those thousand
years shall be a space of time preceding the last judgment, whether those
Scriptures which are usually interpreted in favor of that opinion, signifying
Christ's being heve in Person, or only a quiet, and more tranquil estate of the
Church, are questions which I shall not undertake to determine. But as the
history of the Gospel Church hitherto justifies, that it has been a state of
affliction, and blackness; so most Divines are pretty well agreed, that we are
not to expect any other, until those thousand years do begin, so as in this
respect we must look to see the Church of Christ black, however white she be
upon other accounts. Now thus the Spouse is black, not in Gods Eyes, who
judges not according to outward appearance, but according to the heart, and in
his judgment of men counts none the worse, for what happens to them from
the World, or from the Devil, and though he cannot look upon iniquity in the
best so as to approve of it, yet does he not judge of them according to their
failings, but gives an allowance both for their infirmimities, and
temptations, upon which account he calls to us to behold the patience of Job,
though Job had his fits of frowardness, and impatience, and often calls his
Spouse fair, and undefiled, though she has many defilements. But.

1. The Spouse upon these accounts is black in her own Eyes. 2. In the Eyes of
others.

1. In her own Eyes she is black; two things make her so. 1. Her Humility. 2.
Her Love jealousy. The Child of God is always vile in his own Eyes, and has a
very low and mean opinion of himself, and therefore condemns himself for
every motion, and prevailing of corruption. I am a worm (says David) and no
man, a reproach of men, and despised of the people, Psalm. 22. 6. O wretched man
that I am, (says St. Paul) who shall deliver me from this body of death, Romans
7. in another place he calls himself the greatest of sinners, and the least
of Saints. Woe is me (says the Prophet) I am a man of unclean lips; the sense
of former sins makes them call themselves black. I am (says Paul) not meet to
be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of Christ. The sense of
present corruptions also makes them so judge; Iniquities (says David) prevail
against me. Hence is the ordinary dialect of pious Souls. There was never any
had such unbelieving hearts, such proud, dead, false, and hypocritical hearts
as ours are. Those who are most eminently comely in the Eyes of Christ, are
usually most black in their own Eyes. 2. Their Love-jealousy is another cause.
Their love for God is so great, that they suspect every frown of Providence, as
speaking God out of favor with them for their sins. Hence it often proves as
great a matter of difficulty to persuade the Child of God, that God has any
favor for him, as it is to persuade a sinner that God has any displeasure to
him.

2. Secondly (which possibly is here chiefly intended) She is black in the Eyes
of others. The World deals by the Disciples of Christ, as it dealt with him
(nor is it reasonable to expect that the Disciple should be above his Master,
or the Servant above his Lord) they saw Christ despised and rejected of men, a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs, they hid their faces from him, and
esteemed him not. The men of the world see the people of God, men of sorrows,
and acquainted with griefs, they despise them, and esteem them not, yea, for
the most part their business is to blacken them, loading them with reproach and
calumny, and laying to their charge things which they know not, and all this
through an implacable enmity, put betwixt the seed of the Woman, and the seed
of the Serpent, or because they see themselves condemned by the more righteous
conversation of such as fear God. Nay it often so falls out, that the People of
God are black in the Eyes of their Brethren, through mistakes, as Eli mistook
Hannah, or through envy or prejudice, etc. But this is enough to have spoken
concerning the Spouses blackness.

2. Let me now come to show you how, and in what sense she is comely. 1. She
has a comeliness besides her blackness. 2. In some of her blackness there is a
comeliness.

1. The Spouse is not wholly black, besides her blackness she has a great
beauty, and comeliness. Every believer has something of unbelief in him, but
he is not an unbeliever, he has a truth of faith in him, there is his
comeliness. Paul had a law in his members, that was his blackness, but he had
also a law of his mind, that was his comeliness. All sin and lust is blackness
all gracious habits are the Souls beauty and comeliness. The unbeliever, the
natural man is wholly black, the godly man is not so, there is a mixture in his
Soul, he is come into Canaan, tho some Canaanites yet dwell in the Land, the
faith, and love, and obedience of a good man, his pantings, and breathings
after God, his complacency, delight, and rejoicing in God, these are all his
comeliness. The Church of God may have spots in her assemblies, these are her
blackness, but she keeps up her assembl^es, and has the Ordinances of God in
them, that is her comeliness, she may have several hypocrites, mere seeming
professors, these are her spots, from these is her blackness, but she has many
that love the Lord Jesus Christ in truth and sincerity, these are her
comeliness; she may-suffer some erroneous principles to be published in her,
that is her blackness but she keeps the foundation doctrines of faith and
holiness pure, and incorrupt; that is her comeliness.

2. In much of her blackness there is a beauty, and a comeliness. It is
Bernards note, whatsoever is black is not therefore uncomely. The Eye is black,
yet comely. Marble is black, but yet it is comely. Christ is black but yet he
was comely. Look upon him (says that devout man,) clothed with rags, blew
with Stripes, daubed with his Enemies Spittle, pale with death, you will say he
was black, but yet he was comely, yea the Chiefest of ten thousand. The
Apostles saw him comely when upon the mountain they beheld his glory at his
transfiguration. Nay in his blackness there was comeliness, to see him under all
this becoming obedient to his Fathers will, even unto death, the bitter death
upon the Cross, working out the redemption and Salvation of all those whom the
Father had given him; this was comely. When the word was made flesh and dwelt
amongst us (says St. John) we beheld his glory as the glory of the only
begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth. Look upon the Child of God, as
daubed, and besmeared with the filth and obloquy which the men of the World
cast upon him: Scorched with Afflictions, followed with dark, and hellish
temptations; so indeed he looks black in our carnal Eyes but in other
respects he is comely, even in this blackness.

1. As by these afflictions Christ is magnified in his body, and he is made
conformable unto Christ, and filling up what is lacking in the sufferings of
Christ: So he is comely. All conformity to Christ is beauty, Paul desired no
more then that he might know him, and the power of his resurrection and the
fellowship of his sufferings, and be made comformable unto his death, Philip.
3. 11. This is what our Savior told his disciples, John 15. to comfort them
under the Worlds hatred which he knew would make them to appear black, If the
World hates you it hated me first. The suffering child of God looks black,
but as Christ is by his sufferings magnified in his body as he is by his
sufferings made more like to Christ, so he is comely.

2. Secondly. As a believers afflictions perfect him for glory, so even in his
blackness there is a comeliness. The Captain of our Salvation was made perfect
(as the Apostle tells us) through suffering Heb. 2. 10. and so must the
Soldiers under this Captain be made perfect, for by much tribulation they also
must enter into the Kingdom of God. By this (says the Lord, speaking of the
Afflictions of Jacob) shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and all the fruit
shall be to take away Sin. Afflictions to the Church and People of God, are but
as the furnace for the Silver, and the refining pot for the Gold, like
polishing Irons to the Stone, and the File to the Steel.

3. Finally. There is a comeliness in this blackness, as Afflictions give the
Spouse advantage, and opportunities for the more noble and perspicuous
exercises of their graces. Faith never shines so much as in a dark place, and
state; now for a season (says Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 7.) You are in heaviness
through manifold temptations (their was their blackness) but it follows, That
the trial of your faith being much more precious then that of Gold which
perishes, might be found unto praise, honor, and glory. There now was a
comeliness in their blackness; though he kills me (says Job) yet will I
trust in him, there again was comeliness in blackness. Patience is another
grace, the time for the exercise, of which is a time of afflictions, and
trials; it is a feature in the face of a Child of God hardly discernable, but
in a day of adversity, when we fall under severer Providence, then is the time
for Patience to have its perfect work. If you look upon the Child of God as
lying amongst the pots, under the reproach, and obloquy, and rage, and injuries
of a vile and wicked generation, who fly at the image of God wherever they see
it, out of that perfect hatred they have to God, so indeed he looks black. But
now see him under this, owning the righteousness and goodness of God, kissing
the Word of God, saying concerning his Enemies, Let them alone, perhaps God
has bidden them curse, and will requite me with blessing for all the cursings
wherewith they have cursed me, or with Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18. saying; It is the
Lord, let him do unto me what seems good unto him, or with Stephen, praying
for his Enemies, and saying, Father! forgive them! they know not what they do;
so he appears comely. Look upon the Child of God, under the withdrawings of
divine influences from him, when we hear him crying out, My God, my God! why
have thou forsaken me? he appears to us black, but if we see him under such
withdrawings, resolving to trust in God, not to depart from his integrity, nor
to forget the Lords precepts, nor deal falsely in his Covenant, but still
adhering to God, and his ways, and following him with fervent and importunate
prayers, so again he appears comely. In short;

1. The Spouse of Christ is comely in the Eyes of the generality of the Saints,
and People of God. There may be some grains of envy, and passion in the hearts
of the best of Gods people, which may cause some misinterpretation of their
brethren, as Joshuah envied for Moses his sake, when Eldad, and Medad
prophesied in the Camp, Number. 11. 29. and the Disciples of John were jealous for
their Master; and by mistakes they may be judged black, as Hannah was by Eli.
But by the generality of the Saints, all such as are partakers of the Divine
Nature, they will be judged comely, notwithstanding their low and afflicted
condition, and notwithstanding that partial blackness which appears in them.

2. They are comely in Christ's Eyes; and alas how small a thing to the Child of
God is it to be judged of man's judgment? Bernard thus glosseth upon the words;
Nigra vestro, formosa Divino Angelicoque judicio, I am black in your judgment,
but fair in the judgment of God, and of the Angels. The Spouse is black in the
Worlds Eyes, but exceeding comely in Christ's Eyes. The Spouse speaks to her
beloved, Can. 4. 7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee. He
replieth to her, v. 10. How fair is thy love, my Sister, my Spouse. v. 11. Thy
lips (O my Spouse) drop as the Honeycomb, Honey and Milk are under thy tongue,
and the smell of thy Garments is like the smell of Lebanon. Would you be
confirmed in this, and understand whence it is that Christ judges his Spouse
so comely? I will show you in a few particulars.

1. Because he loves her. Love never calls its object black, but always
imprinteth a loveliness in its object beloved; the blackest woman is fair in
her Husbands Eye, love with men covers a multitude of faults, and
infirmities, it overlooks blackness and lameness, and crookedness, and any
external deformity, it calls black things white, crooked things straight, and
lame things perfect. Christ loves every Spouse of his with a dear and most
tender love. But yet this is our infirmity. Christ cannot call any comely, who
indeed is not so, the Spouse must be comely, before he can judge, or call her
so.

2. Therefore she must needs be comely in the Eyes of Christ, because he has
made her so, by putting his comeliness upon her* Ezekiel. 16. 14. Thy beauty was
perfect through my comeliness which I had put upon thee (says the Lord God.)
No Child of God is comely in his or her own comeliness, but in Christ's
comeliness put upon him or her. Now this is twofold. 1. His perfect
Righteousness. 2. His holy and blessed Spirit.

1. His perfect Righteousness. Thus the Soul is comely by imputation. All
unrighteousness is blackness, and uncomeliness in the Eyes of God, for the
righteous Lord loves righteousness, and it is impossible that the Lord should
look upon any Soul as comely, but that Soul whom he looks upon as righteous.
Christ was of old prophesied of, under the notion of the Lord our
righteousness, and the Apostle tells us he was made of God, Wisdom,
Righteousness. etc. This righteousness of Christ lay in his perfect obedience
to the whole law of God, and his suffering the curse of the law due to us for
our transgression of it; it being the act of another, we could not have any
interest in it, but by a gracious imputation, or reckoning it to us, and by
this gracious act, upon our faith by apprehending it, it becomes ours, so we
are said to be justified by his faith, Romans 5. 1. yet by his blood, as v. 9,
and yet by grace, Titus 3. 7. It was an act of grace in God to accept the
performance of another for us, the act and satisfaction of the surety, for the
satisfaction, and acts of the principals, yet a satisfaction must be given; for
God, Romans 3. 25. set forth Christ as a propitiation through faith in his blood,
to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins -- That he might be just
while he became the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. So that upon
every Souls believing in Jesus Christ, who justifies the ungodly. God becomes
its justifier, and the Soul stands as righteous in the fight of God, through
Gods imputation of righteousness to it without works, and not imputing sin (as
the Apostle expounds the whole business of justification, Romans 4. 5, 8.) Thus
now every believing Soul becomes a righteous Soul in the Eye of God, through
the righteousness of Christ put upon it. This is indeed what some modern wits
laugh at. But as we say in other cases, let them laugh that win; so every
serious Soul will think it has cause of rejoicing, if it has thus won Christ
to use the Apostles expression, Phil. 3. 8. which he expounds in the very
next words. v. 9. And be found in him, not having my own righteousness which is
of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith; and I would have all that love their own Souls, look
to be one of that circumcision, which the Apostle speaks of in that Chapter.
v. 3. Which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh. Some trust in Chariots (faith the Psalmist) some in
Horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God, Psalm. 20. 7. (I do
but allude to that Text. There are some that trust to a righteousness of other
Saints (so do the Papists) some trust in a righteousness of their own, so do
they also amongst others, some trust to the mere free grace of God, without any
regard to a perfect righteousness, but we will trust alone in Jesus Christ, and
in his righteousness. I fear what follows in the Psalmist. v. 8. will be found
true in the day of Judgment. Those will be brought down and fall, but those
that trust in the Lord Jesus Christ, and his righteousness, will rise and stand
upright. Those that trust in the good works of other Saints, will find at that
day, they will have none to spare, there will not be enough for themselves, and
much less to lend to others (as the wife Virgins told the foolish Virgins in
the Parable wanting O^l, and offering to borrow of them;) and those who trust
to a righteousness of their own, will find that they do but trust to a Spiders
webb, and which has these two qualities analogous to a Spiders web: 1. That it
is a thing spun out of their own bowels. 2. That the least touch of it sweeps
it away, it is what upon examination, when judgment is laid to the line, and
this righteousness to the plummet, will be found to be no such thing as will
cover the Souls nakedness, a bed too short for a Soul to stretch it self in
Gods sight upon. They say the great Cardinal Bellarmine dying, confessed that
it was safest to trust to the merits of the Lord Jesus Christ; whether he said
so or no, I am sure it will be found so. There is an original blackness, which
cleaves to every Soul, the not belief of which is possibly the foundation
error as to this great point. 1. A blackness of imputation. The Apostle tells
us, that in Adam all died; we were all in the loins of that our first Parent,
what he lost he lost for us, we in him plucked a fruit of the Tree of forbidden
fruit, and so loft that Original Righteousness in which God at first made man,
and became black, and unrighteous. 2. An inherent blackness, for having lost
the image of the heavenly, we were born with the Image of the Earthly, which
lay in a Native aversion from God, and a Native proneness, and aptitude to sin
against God. This is seen in our native ignorance, and blindness, stubborness,
and perverseness, in our naturally vile affections turbulent, and impetuous
passions, things very far from the Image of God; and hence we are all by nature
(says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 3.) Children of Wrath. To say nothing of those
actual sins, which are consequent to this native blackness, all our thoughts,
words, and deeds, contrary to the law of God: Divines think the natural
blackness of the Soul is well set out by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 16. Thy birth is of
the land of Canaan, thy Father was an Amorite, thy Mother an Hittite. In the
day wherein thou were born, thy Navel was not cut, neither were thou washed in
water to supple thee, thou were not salted at all, nor swadled at all, none Eye
pitied thee to do any of these things for thee, but thou were cast out in the
open field, to the loathing of thy person, in the day wherein thou were born.
All this while here is no appearance of any thing but filthiness, and
blackness. Now how comes this black, and most filthy creature to be made
clean, and comely. see v. 6. I said unto thee while thou were in thy blood,
live. (There is what we call effectual calling.) v. 7. I have caused thee to
multiply -- and thou art increased, and waxed great, and come to excellent
Ornaments. v. 8. When I passed by thee, it was a time of Love, yea, I spread my
skirt over thee, and I covered thy nakedness, yea, I swear unto thee, and
entered into a covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine. Then washed I thee
with water, (there the Spouses blackness began first to wear off) yea, I
thoroughly washed thy blood off thee, and I anointed thee with Oil. (the
Psalmist tells us, Oil makes the face to shine.) I clothed thee also. v. 14.
And thy renown went forth among the Nations for thy beauty, for it was persect
through my comeliness put upon thee says the Lord thy God. God there under the
similitude of a wretched new born Infant, and the care of a Parent for it,
sets out the woeful state of the Jews, and Gods care for them, and as Divines
judge, the wretched state of every Soul by nature, till washed by Christ's
blood, and made comely, by Christ's comeliness, is also by that similitude
excellently expressed, but it is plain enough from other texts, that our
comeliness of righteousness, that righteousness wherein we must stand righteous
before God, is put upon us by Christ, and his comeliness, though by imputation,
made ours.

2. Christ makes us righteous, by putting his Spirit into us. Hence he
promises to put his Spirit into his people, and you read of the holy Spirit
dwelling in believers, and working in them. This is the comeliness of
Regeneration and Sanctification, which is called the Sanctification of the
Spirit, the Spirit of Christ in us, whose fruits Gal. 5. 22. are love, joy,
meekness, etc. Indeed whatsoever renders a soul comely and beautiful in the
eye of reason; upon the union of which holy Spirit with the soul, the soul
becomes a new creature, old things are passed away, and all things are become
new. In the same hour wherein Christ says to the soul I will, be thou clean he
also says I will, be thou pure, and holy, an habitation for God through the
Spirit, undefiled in the heart and in the way. This is also metaphorically set
out by the same Prophet Ezekiel 16. 10, 11, 12. I decked thee also with
ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain about thy neck, and
I put a jewel upon thy forehead, and earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful
crown upon thy head. What do all these metaphorical expressions signify, but
the various habits of grace, with which Christ adorneth the new creature, in
the day of its new birth, in the day when he removes from it the guilt of its
iniquity, he does not only wash, and cleanse it with his blood from the guilt
of its Sin, but he renews and sanctifies it, and furnishes it with all
habits of grace. This is also Christ's comeliness, for as the fullness of the
Godhead dwelt in him bodily, so himself received the Spirit without measure
that he might measure it out by measures to his people, and they might of his
fullness receive grace for grace. The holy Spirit is the Spirit of Christ, and
all its operations are his; Christ tells his Spouse in this Song that she had
ravished his heart with the chains about her neck, but there is not a jewel in
those chains, but comes out of Christ's cabinet, he gives those chains with
which himself is ravished, though these divine powers, and habits be his, yet
being once given and by us produced into Acts they are truly and inherently
ours: Our Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness Joy, etc. Our stock of grace upon
which our souls live, yet not without the daily influence of Christ and
assistance of his spirit; and this stock is capable of augmentation, or
diminution, as it pleases God to let out upon us or to withdraw from us, and
as we more or less improve it, tho indeed Christ has a constant inspection
upon his Spouses treasury and will take care that it shall never so fail, but
there shall be a seed of God abiding in the soul continually, and the grace of
Regeneration in it shall be like a spring of water whose waters fail not. This
now is the Spouses real beauty, and comeliness, which makes her inwardly comely,
tho she be externally black, comely in Christ's eyes, and comely, in the eyes of
judicious Christians, tho black in the Worlds eyes who judge from external
accidents, or in the eyes of less judicious Christians, either judging from
outward accidents, or particular acts or from some corrupt passion in
themselves.

3. They must be comely in Christ's eyes, because he judges not of comeliness
from the outward appearance, nor yet from single spots and defects, but
according to the heart, the scope and intention of that: and from the more
constant tenor of the Souls actions. The speaking of a few words to this, will
prevent an objection: How Christ can judge a soul comely, that is yet full of
spots, infirmities and defects, for even the best of men sins seven times a
day, and who can tell how often he offends? I say Christ judges not from the
outward appearance, man judges so, but God judges from the heart, he looks
at the inward man how that is; nor does he there judge from every particular
motion, any more then from any particular act in our conversation, but from the
sincerity and uprightness of the heart. If there be a willing mind it is
accepted. The World judges from the outward appearance, and indeed that is one
disadvantage with reference to the World that the spouse of Christ is under,
she is Nigra extrinsecus, formosa, intrinsecus. Black outwardly but comely
inwardly. The Kings Daughter, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 45. is all glorious
within. A good Christian is like a Merchants warehouse, which is full of rich
wares and commodities tho little appears without: The hypocrite is l^ke a
Pedlars stall, where all is exposed, and perhaps much more then the pretended
owner is worth. There is a double judgment of the comeliness of Virgins; the
one is sensual, from the lines, and color of the face, the Symmetry of parts,
the other is rational from the complexion of the soul; Knowledge, Ingenuity,
Modesty, Sobriety etc. Those who judge the former way may be deceived, that
which the Vulgar calls beauty, is deceitful, and vain, and fading, the person
that is possessed of it is very often unlovely enough, through a crooked, and
froward disposition, and badness of humor; the latter makes the true
judgment; men judge of the comeliness and beauty of persons, merely from the
visage, and outside, so the children of God, are by them judged unlovely, and
black as Ravens. If they see the Church or Child of God tossed with tempests
and affl^cted, groaning under the sense of sin, they presently judge them
according to the outward appearance black, Christ looks upon the heart, the
bent and scope of that, its sincerity, and uprightness, its purity and
holiness. The World again judges of men by single acts, (tho Philosophy
teaches us, that from them none is to be denominated either virtuous, or
vicious.) God does not so, which is remarkable in the two famous instances of
Job and David. Job you know had great fits of impatience, yet says God, Behold
the patience of Job. David was a man of very great failings; his defiling of
Bathsheba, his murder of Uria, his numbering of the People, were three (to name
no more) yet God does not only mention him, as a man whose heart was perfect,
a man according to Gods own heart; But in all the following story of the Kings
of Judah God mentions him as a Pattern, telling us, that such a one did walk
according to David, or such a one did not do according as David had done. The
Apostle also tells us, that we have an high Priest that can have compassion on
our Infirmities, upon the ignorant, and those that are out of the way. All
which makes it appear that Christ's judgment of the Beauty and comeliness of
persons is not from single acts, but from a constant and general course of life
and conversation. Now every true believer sets his heart to seek the Lord, and
to walk before God with a true and perfect heart, and tho he fails in many
particulars, yet the Lord overlooketh them and judges of the Soul, only from
its ^^ope and intention, and the general course of his actions, hence it is
that the spouse of Christ tho in some respects she be black, and in the Worlds
eyes she appears black, yet in truth, and in the Judgment of Jesus Christ she
is comely.

Sermon XXXIII.
Canticles 1. 5. I am black but comely (O you daughters of Jerusalem) as the
tents of Kedar, as the Curtains of Solomon.

My business in this exercise, is but to apply my last discourse. Where, I
showed you how, and in what sense the Spouse of Christ is Black and yet comely;
black in her own eyes, in the worlds eyes, and sometimes so in the eyes of her
weaker Brethren, but comely in Christ's eyes, and in the eyes of her more
judicious Brethren. Having a great comeliness, in some of her blackness, and a
comeliness besides her blacknes: Black through remaining Just, and corruption,
through Afflictions, and persecutions: But comely hrough an imputed
righteousness, and through the habits of grace with which God has adorned her.
I come now to apply that discourse; and First,

We may from hence gather the true notion of a child of God, and understand how
he stands distinguished from one that is a natural man, and yet an unbeliever.
The true notion of a child of God is this: He is one who is imperfectly
perfect. Black but comely, you shall observe in Scripture, that perfection is
both predicated and denied concerning the People of God; Not as if I had
attained, or were already perfect says Paul Phil. 3. 12. We are commanded to
strive after perfection, to endeavor to perfect holiness in the fear of the
Lord, but it is a mark which no man hitteth, Heaven is the only place, where
just Souls are made perfect, both as to their fruitions, and as to their
Actions. A thing is then said to be perfect, and so a person, when there is
nothing wanting to it, or him, nothing that can be added, and in this sense no
man can be said to be perfect: on the other side we are not only commanded to
study perfection, but it is said of many in holy Writ that they were perfect.
Noah was a just and perfect man Genesis 6. 9. Job was perfect and upright, Job 1.
1. Paul says he spoke wisdom amongst them that are perfect. 1 Cor. 3. 6. Phil.
3. 15. Let us as many as be perfect. A Christian is perfect in the same sense
that he is comely. In short there is a threefold perfection may be predicated
of a Christian.

1. A Perfection of Justification. In this sense every believer is comely
through Christ's righteousness put upon him and reckoned to him and he is
perfect, for the state of justification is a state that admits not of degrees,
thus we are (as the Apostle speaks to the Colossions complete in Christ.

2. There is a Perfection of Regeneration and Sanctification. this is
threefold. 1. Of degrees; thus none is perfect, no not one; none lives and
Sins not against God, there is something to be added to the best man's habits
and Acts of Grace. 2. Of Parts; thus again every believer is perfect,
Sanctified, (as the Apostle speaks) in body, and mind, and spirit, the man is
made a new creature, all the faculties, and powers of his Soul are renewed and
Sanctified. 3. Of scope, design and intention. This is uprightness, this is
called perfectness because God upon the covenant of grace accepts the Soul
upon the account of Christ as if it had fulfilled the whole Law of God. Romans 8.
3, 4. What the Law could not do, in that it was weak through our flesh, God
sending his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin (or by a Sacrifice
for sin) condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. God
accounts the righteousness of the Law fulfilled, by those who walk after the
Spirit, tho personally it is not, because Christ condemned sin in the flesh.
Thus Noah is said to be a perfect man, Genesis 6. 9. and Job a perfect man and
upright; this is expounded v. 8. one that fears God and escheweth Evil. For
in the strict sense of perfection; Job says chap. 9. v. 20. If he justified
himself his own mouth should condemn him, if he should say he were perfect that
should prove him perverse.

3. There is a comparative perfection in this sense the Apostle says 1 Cor. 3.
6. That he spoke wisdom amongst them that were perfect, and Phil. 3 15. Let us
as many as be perfect be thus minded that is, as many of us as are
comparatively perfect, whose seize as to knowledge and faith are higher
than others. The State of the Saints is in no other sense a State of
perfection. So as I say they are imperfectly perfect which is the same with
that of the Text, Black but comely. And this sufficiently distinguishes the
believer from the unbeliever whether the profane person or the hypocrite. The
unbeliever may say he is black, but he cannot say he is comely. What beauty can
there be in any Soul not reconciled to God? they are all blackness, all
deformity. It is true there is a great deal of difference in these men, some of
them are black and filthy in the eyes of the rational, and more orderly part of
the World, such is the Atheist, the profane Curser and Swearer, the Blasphemer,
the Drunkard, the Thief, the Oppressor, the unrighteous, and intemperate man,
these are the fots of the Earth, the spots of the World, the shame, and
reproach of the Nation, or City in which they live, Beasts walking in humane
shapes. But there are many others who have much beauty in them in the eyes of
the World, and humane reason, yet are not comely in the eyes of Christ. If a
man be Sober, and Temperate, Just, and Righteous, Kind, and Charitable, tho he
lives not up to the strict rule of the Gospel, and the Commandments of God,
yet living up to the conduct of humane reason, and the advantages of humane
society (which the others infect, and destroy) the World counts him a very
good man, full of beauty, and comeliness, applaudeth, commends, and courts him.
But now the Lord Christ, not judging according to the outward appearance, but
according to the heart, seeing in this man's heart, no love of God constraining
him to these acts, nothing of the fear of God awing this man's Soul unto his
duty; God I say seeing him in these actions, neither acting from a persuasion
that this is the will of God, nor from a belief of the Promises or of the
Threatenings, nor from an Obedience to the Precepts of God, but merely from
Politic, and rational principles, from self ends, and interests, that he may
appear to men to be good, and seeking in these actions the praise of men, not
of God. Or merely under the conduct of reason commanding their passions, in
order to their more comfortable being in this World, and a more honorable and
acceptable converse with the best men in it. God I say seeing this, judges
these morally virtuous men black; we that are Parents to Children, and Masters
(...) Servants, tho we cannot judge of their hearts, yet can distinguish
betwixt actions which they do upon, and in obedience to our command, and what
they do not at our command, nor out of obedience to us, tho they be things
which done please us, being what we would have had done. God who knows the
heart will much more do so. I remember our Savior, Matthew. 23. 23. pronounces
a woe, to the Scribes, and Pharisees; for (faith he) you pay Tithe of Mint, and
Annis and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment
mercy, and faith, these things ought you to have done and not to have left the
other undone. Christ judges the comeliness of a Soul, not merely from its
external acts, but from that faith in the Precepts, Promises, and Threatenings
of the Word, from that love, fear, and obedience to God, which ought to have
principled those acts, and if they had been so, would have made those acts more
intense, certain, steady, and uniform, if these be wanting, the Life-colours
are wanting to the Picture. Other things make but up the Skeleton of the duty,
and are but as a draught of the lines of the Face without the Life-colours
which seldom have much beauty in them, and the Soul, notwithstanding all this
fair and splendid outside is in his eyes but as a painted Sepulcher within
which is nothing but a stench, and rottenness, and the bones of dead men. So
that no Soul that is without Faith, without the fear and love of God, and that
acts not out of obedience to Christ in what it does, but is black, wholly
black in the Lords eyes, how fair soever in its own eyes, or the eyes of the
men of the world; and what Augustine said of old of the best, and most virtuous
actions of the Heathens is true of the best actions of these titular
Christians, they are but Splendida Peccata, Splendid Sinnings. Thus now I say
the true Christian stands distinguished from unbelievers of all sizes
whatsoever, none of them are comely, but wholly black in the eyes of Christ,
because they have none of his comeliness put upon them. The glorified Saint is
altogether whitehe has not only washed his garments in the Blood of the Lamb,
but he is also delivered from the infirmities of humane nature, from the Sin
that easily besetts him, the weight that presses him down, the war in his
members from the lustings of the flesh against the Spirit, the law of his
members so often rebelling against the law of his mind, and bringing him into a
captivity often times to the law of Sin, and is now presented before Christ
without spot or wrinkle. This is the felicity of his State.

The Apostle says that we are now the Sons of God, but it does not yet appear
what we shall be. Sin here makes us black, affliction and sorrow make us
appear more black then we are, the translated Soul neither sins nor yet
suffers, or sorroweth any more; the state of the Child of God differs from
these, because he is black, it differs from the state of the unbeliever in
this life, because he is not only black but also comely; hence you may
understand the error of those who dream of a state of perfection which the
People of God, may and do attain in this life; some go very high in blasphemy,
telleng us that we are Christed and Godded, and that the believer is as
spotless as Christ, etc. The Apostle indeed tells us, we are made partakers of
the Divine Nature, but it is one thing to be made partakers of, another thing
to be transformed into the Divine Nature. Christ is the chief of ten thousand,
altogether desires, there is no spot no blemish in him. The best of Gods people
is black as well as comely; black through inherent corruption, and
unrighteousness, tho comely in respect of imputed righteousness, and inherent
habits of grace and holiness. The Apostle tells us that, by one man's
disobedience many were made Sinners, and that we are all by nature, children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. Those who would have Christ to die for every man, being
pinched with that question, What did Christ then purchase for those that shall
never be saved? some of them answer, he purchased for all a total freedom from
Adams Sin, I know no line in Scripture to justify that; it was after Christ had
dyed that the Apostle tells us we are all by nature children of wrath, but he
that can fancy that he lives, and sins not against God, and so is not black
through actual sin, does yet more foully deceive himself, certainly, he must
not look into the perfect law of God, or else is not able to distinguish white
from black. If he looked into the divine law he would quickly with Saint Paul
see that the law is Holy, and Spiritual, and Just, and Good, and that the best
of men is but carnal sold under Sin. Let not then any glory in a fancyed
perfection, it is but a glorying in appearance, not in reality. All that the
Spouse gloryeth in is, that she was not altogether black. It is a true saying
of Mr. Calvin, that it is the greatest piece of our perfection to be sensible
of our imperfections. As vain is the glorying also of them who glory in an
exemption from afflictions, that this Sun has not looked upon them, afflictions
have not scorched them, as they have scorched others, the Apostle tells us,
that if we be without chastening then are we*Bastards, and not Sons. It is not
our glory to be free from them, but to endure them, not to be wholly exempted
from them, but under them to exercise our faith and patience, and to glorify
God in the Fires. The motto of a Child of God is Black but Comely, black
through remaining lusts, and coruptions; comely through imputed righteousness
and inherent habits of grace and holiness. Black through Affliction, and
Persecution, Comely in, and under them, glorifying God in the Fires, by the
exercises of Faith and Patience.

Use. 1.
From hence every inquisitive Christian, may take just measures of himself, he
is not to judge of himself by his blackness, whether it be the blackness of
renewing sin, and corruption: or the blackness of Affliction and Worldly
Opposition, and Persecutions. Let him examine himself,

1. Whether he has not a mixture of grace with corruption. Sin in dominion is
not indeed consistent with grace, but Sin in being is; there are Twins which
struggle one with another in every good Soul. Every Christian will find he has
a flesh to be crucified, members to be mortified, and a law in his members,
some impetuous motions of lust, at some times, but let him examine whether he
does not find also a Spiritual part, and a law in his mind; the flesh indeed
lusts against the Spirit, that is a Christians blackness, but do thou not
also find, the Spirit lusting against thy flesh? that is thy comeliness. A true
Christian is not to judge himself from the freedom of his Soul from sin, but
from the war and combat of his Soul with sin. He in the Gospel that said, I
believe, Lord help my unbelief, expressed the lively Image of every true
Christian. So does St. Paul more largely, Romans 7. 18, 19, 20. For I know in me,
that is, in my flesh, there dwells no good thing, for to will is present with
me, but kow to perform that which is good I find not. For the good that I would
I do not, but the evil which I would not that I do; now if I do that which I
would not it is no more I that do it, but sin, that dwells in me: I find then
a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me, for I delight in the
law of God after the inward man.

2. Let him Secondly examine himself, whether there be not a comeliness in him,
in, and under his blackness of Affliction and worldly opposition. A wicked man
may be black through affliction, but his blackness is like the blackness of a
coal, which is a dead color and has no beauty in it. The Child of God is also
black from the same cause, but his is like the blackness of a polished marble,
which has a great beauty and comeliness in it, The trial of his faith in his
afflictions appears more precious, then that of gold that perishes, his love
to God then appears, by his panting after him, and firm adherence of Soul
unto him, his meekness, his patience, all shine forth under his afflictions.
The demeanor of People under afflictions, will much discover whose they are.

3. Thirdly, The comeliness of the Spouse of Christ is not a comeliness without
blackness, but a comeliness norwithstanding blackness: That is to say, It is
not a Native, but an adventitious, and Superinduced comeliness, nor adventitious
from any good dispositions, or any acts or endeavors of our own singly, but a
gracious imputation and infusion. The imputation of Christ's righteousness, the
infusion of gracious habits, a comeliness arising from Christ's comeliness put
upon the Soul. So as tho the poor creature has been guilty before God, and
iniquity yet does sometimes prevail against it, the righteousness of Christ
being reckoned to him for righteousness, and his heart being renewed, and
Sanctified through the Spirit of Christ, and the bent of it being set right for
God, notwithstanding his blackness, the Lord does judge him comely and
beautiful, overlooking his blackness by reason of sin, and infirmity.

4. Lastly, Every Child of God will own, and be truly sensible of his
blackness. I am black says the Spouse. The hypocrite boasts of his
whiteness; come, (says Jehu to Jonadab) and see my zeal for the Lord God of
hosts. God, I thank thee (says the Pharisee) I am not as other men are,
Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican, I fast twice in the
week, I give tithes of all that I possess, Luke 18. 11, 12. he owneth nothing
in himself but whiteness, and aversates all blackness; yet v. 14. he went away
to his house not justified. Hypocrites are hardly persuaded to own in
themselves any blackness. The Children of God, are as hardly persuaded to own
any beauty, or comeliness in themselves, I gave you before the Instances of
David and of Paul. The reason is because the hypocrite trusts to a Spiders web,
a righteousness from himself spun out of his own Bowels and he is concerned to
justify his integrity, and to make it as whole as he can; again, all that he
does is to be seen of men, and therefore he must set the best face of his
actions that he can, the Child of God seeks for no such things in himself,
but despairing in himself he flies to the righteousness of Christ, and freely
confesses, and owneth his own nakedness, that he might be clothed with that
righteousness; again, the Child of God seeks not the praise of men, nor his
own honor and glory, but seeks the praise of God, and the honor and glory
of Christ alone.

Use. 3.
Thirdly, This notion affords a great relief to the People of God against
their own dejections, and despondencies; 2. Satan's temptations; and 3. The
worlds upbraidings.

1. Against his own despondencyes, and dejections. A Child of God living under
the power of that Precept, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your solves, prous your selves
whether you be in the faith or u^; is often looking into his own heart, and can
seldom please himself with the prospect. He sees in his own heart much of
Unbelief, much of Vani^y much of Hypocrisy always some lust or other, a body of
death remaining in him, iniquity prevailing against him, he sins 7 times
every day, and he sees it every night and often times as much out of heart, much
dejected, crying out, Unclean, Unclean, I am black, woefully black, no better
then a painted hypocrite, I make a fair show to the World, and deceive some of
my brethten, but alas they do not see that luft, and vanity, that pride, and
passion, that folly and hypocrisy which I can with half an Eye discorn in my
own Soul, surely I deceive myself, I have no portion in God, no relation to
Christ, I cannot be his Spouse. Christian be of good Cheer! thou art black, but
art thou not also comely? When a Child of God has found out the best of
himself all his comfort will be found to lie in that one text, Romans 8. v. 1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus who walk not after
the flesh but after the Spirit. He can neither look into his own heart, and see
his inward thoughts, and the motions there, nor consider his tongue, and the
issues of that, nor compare the best of his actions with the Divine rule, but
he feeth himself by all condemned, and finds nothing to relieve him in is
dark thoughts but in Christ's imputed righteousness, and that there no is
condemnation to them that are in Christ. And that is enough, provided that he
has this evidence of his being in Christ, That he walks not after the flesh
but after the Spirit.

2. It affords the same relief against the most desperate temptations of our
grand adversary the Devil. Satan we say first tempts to Sin, and then he
makes advantage of our hearkening to his temptations to tempt us to further
sins, and those of a more heinous, and horrid nature, to despair of Gods mercy,
to destroy our selves, etc. He first attempteth to make the Soul black by
moving it to sinful acts, then his next work is to persuade the Soul, that God
will never pardon such a sinner, Christ can never Love such an Ethiopian. Hence
those strong and violent impressions upon Souls under the power of temptations.
God is an holy God, of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, he can never set his
heart upon such a polluted vile wretch as I am; I have been guilty of thousands
of willful Omissions of duty, and Commissions contrary to my duty, possibly
some particular sin or sins lie as an heavy load upon the poor creatures
conscience. The Spouse here has furnished such a Soul with an answer to the
tempter. The Spouse of Christ is black, but yet comely. Let then such a Soul
thus answer these suggestions of the tempter, O thou Prince of darkness, it is
true, I have been a grievous sinner, and as such Christ cannot Love me, so far
forth as I am black I am unlovely, but I am not wholly black, Christ cannot
Love my sins, but he can pardon my sin and Love my Soul. The Lord has been
graciously pleased to pardon my sins upon my repentance and my acceptance of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and receiving him as my Savior; he has said to me
while I was in my blood, live, he has fixed his Love upon me who was by birth
an Ethiopian, he has hung a Chain about my neck; I am black but I am comely. I
have met with a story of a Minister, who going to visit and pray with a poor
creature^ possessed by the Devil, the Devil thought to have stopped his mouth, by
objecting to him some sins committed by him in his youth. The holy man
answered, confessing the charge, but Satan says he, upon my repentance Christ,
has since that washed me with his blood. Another story I have met with of a
worthy Person, who lying upon his sick bed, and being alone, one opens the
door, and comes in, in the habit of a Scrivener, with a Pen, and Inkhorn and
Paper, andsetting himself down at the table in the Chapter, called the sick man
by name, and told him he was sent from God to take account of him, of all the
sins he had done for which he must presently go and answer to God before his
Judgment seat. The good man, rightly apprehending that it was the Devil, had
assumed an habit to tempt, and distrub him, bid him go on, and write first,
Genesis 3. 15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.
Upon which the evil Spirit presently disappeared. (Speaking only from my memory
I may forget some circumstances, but this is the substance of the story.) What
the Devil in these cases did by a more audible voice he does yet every day by
impressions made more secretly upon the Spirits of some or other that fear God.
For tho conscience will of it self often bring sin to remembrance, and reflect
sins upon the Soul committed long before, yet they are some times reflected
with such violence, and degrees of terror, and attended with such strong
motions, and solicitations to despair of Divine mercy, and to self murder,
that it is but reasonable to judge, there is more in them then the ordinary
workings of conscience. In such a dark hour as this, it will be a great relief
to a Soul to think that the Spouse of Christ is black, but comely. Does the
Devil then object thy blackness, whether by reason of past, or present sins, in
bar to thy trust and confidence in God, for the forgiveness of them through the
blood of Christ? Reply to him, Satan, I have been black, I confess it, I am
black, but I am comely also, having my Garments washed, and rouled in the blood
of the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the World. I am as the Tents of
Kedar, they are black, but I am also as the Curtains of Solomon, they are
exceeding beautiful.

3. It also relieveth a Christian under Persecutions, and afflictions, and
against the Worlds upbraidings, because of them. The Barbarians concluded Paul
a Murderer, because they saw a Viper cleaving to his hand, and the men of the
World are very prone to judge, and condemn the People of God for what happens
to them in this life, they see the blackness of Gods Peoples visages under
affliction, and persecution, but the love of God in chastening them, that they
might not be condemned with the World, the exercises of their faith, and trial
of it, and its appearing more precious then that of Gold, their patience, and
its perfect wor^; h^se are things in which their comeliness appears in, and
under afflictions; these are things which they do not see. Gods People are also
ready to conclude against themselves, because of their trials, but there is no
just reason for it; afflictions are but a blackness of the skin, the Child of
God may, notwithstanding them, be within exceeding beautiful, and comely. The
tents of Kedar, though they had black and unlovely coverings and outsides, yet
within might be filled with Spices and Riches.

Use. 3.
I shall shut up this discourse with some few words of exhortation to that
duty, which this notion of truth calls to us for.

1. It calls to all the People of God for humility, a mean and low opinion of
themselves; beauty is often a great temptation to Pride, whether it be natural
or artificial. The Daughters of Sion were haughty, and walked with stretched
forth Necks, and wanton Eyes, Isaiah 3. 16. Spiritual beauty gives no advantage
to a Soul, to think of it self above what it ought to think. In all reason we
should have been some cause to our selves of that whereof we glory, we should
have some propriety in it; and there should be in it some perfection. The
comeliness of Gods People is neither natural, nor any acquest of their own.
There are three things which may keep the most comely of Gods Children humble.

First, The consideration of their former blackness. Let but any of them look
back to the rock out of which they are hewn, and to the hole of the Pit, out
of which they were dug, and they will see no reason to be exalted above
measure; their Father was a Syrian, their birth was of the land of Canaan,
their Father was an Amorite, their Mother an Hittite, and in the day wherein
they were born, they were cast out to the loathing of their persons, not
salted, not swadled at all. Nor was this all, there is none of them but had
their conversation in times past, according to the Prince of the power of the
Air, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, Children of Wrath by
nature. etc, There is none of them but has reason to pray, that the Lord would
not remember the sins of their youth against them, and to beg of God that for
them, he would not write against them bitter things, nor make them to possess
their years of vanity. None of them but before Christ's comeliness, was put upon
them, had been guilty of sin enough to make them to walk softly all the days of
their lives.

Secondly, The consideration of their present blackness is enough, though they
are comely, yet they are black still, they have a body of death, a law of their
members, the lustings of the flesh against the Spirit, sins that easily beset
them, weights that often press them down; the beauty of the best of Gods People
is but like the beauty of the Moon, which is full of spots, has a dark part,
and often suffers great Eclipses, and all whose light is borrowed. He observes
not his own heart that does not see enough in the imperfect, and extravagant
motions of it, to keep him humble.

Thirdly, The third is the consideration from whence he deriveth his beauty. If
men and women would but debate a little with their own reason, they would see
no reason to be proud of a comeliness arising from any external Ornament; it is
something beneath a Reasonable Being, to be beholden to a Stone (Jewels are no
more) or a little Earth (such are Gold and Silver) a Plant, or a Fly, or a
Silkworm, or a Sheep* a little Wool, or Flax, for that which should commend him
or it No artificial beauty is our own, and so a thing not to be gloried in. All
the comeliness of a Child of God is a derived comeliness. His blackness is his
own, his comeliness is from another, it is Christ that has made him to differ,
he has received his beauty, and therefore ought not to glory, as if he had not
received it.

Br. 2.
And this in the second place ought to mind them of their duty of thankfulness,
and admiration of ^he love of Christ. When (says David) I consider the
Heavens, the work of thy hands, the Moon and the Start which thou have
ordained, what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man, that
thou visitest him? Yet David in that Psalm is speaking of no more then Gods
more common mercies of Creation, and Providence, but what greater reason has a
Child of God to cry out, Lord; what is man, that thou should remember him?
Lord! What was I, that thou should remember me, and fix thy love, and put thy
comeliness upon me? I was by nature an Ethiopian, and have contracted much more
blackness, by my conversation in the world; now that the Lord should make us
comely through his comeliness, that he should fix his love upon any of our
Souls, and put any of his Chains about our Necks? What manner of love was this?
To which of the Angels said he at any time, a^ Zech. 16. 8. When I passed by
thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time was a time of love, and I spread my
skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness, yea, I swear unto thee, and entered
into a covenant of life with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine?
Or as Jer. 3. v. 14. Turn O backsliding Children (says the Lord) for I am
married unto you? To which of them has he at any time said, my Love, my Dove,
my Undefiled? We had none of us either Beauty or Portion, Christ has given us
both. Admire the height, and depth of Divine Love, and consider what an
ingratitude it would be, if any of us should now like Israel, Ezekiel. 16. 15.
Trust in your own beauty, and play the Harlot^* and pour out fornications on
every one that passes by. Bestow our hearts, our love, and affections upon any
objects contrary to him, beneath, and besides him; whether it be not reasonable
that we should be wholly to him, and for him, who are wholly from him, and are
nothing but what we are in him.

Br. 3.
Thirdly. This notion calls to the people of God, not to be overmuch
disqu^eted, and dejected. It is one thing to walk humbly, (that is our duty)
another thing to walk dejectedly (that is our infirmity;) we have no reason to
be proud, because we are black, nor yet to despond, and be dejected; because in
Christ's Eyes if we be upright, if we prepare, and fix our hearts to seek the
Lord, we are comely. We have no reason, because of our blackness, to glory in
our selves, but we have reason to rejoice, and to glory in our comeliness,
which though indeed Christ's comeliness, yet being pu^upon us, becomes ours. A
believer has therefore has nothing to do, but to see that his interest in
Christ be clear, and to see to wash his feet, and he is clean every whit. We
have reason to consider our ways, to reflect upon our infirmities, to be
humbled for our failings, and to walk humbly at all times, in the sense of
them, but still to encourage our selves in the Lord our righteousness, to hope
in God, and rejoice in Christ, tho we have no confidence in the flesh, either
in any privileges of our birth, or in any works of our own.

Br. 4.
Lastly, This Doctrine calls upon all not to look upon the Spouse of Christ,
because she is black. They are the words of our Spouse, following in the next
verse, but the proper application of what she says in this verse, the use
which she desires her Brethren to make of this her imperfect and black state.
Something (God willing*) shall be spoken hereafter more largely for the
explication of those wo^d^, then the streightness of my time will now allow. I
shall therefore reserve the fuller explication of this duty, until I come to
the next verse, and shall give you but a short taste and specimen of what I
shall then more fully enlarge upon.

1. We ought not to look upon the Spouse of Christ in these circumstances with
a supercilious, scornful, and censorious Eye. The Eye is the O^gan of the body,
by which the Soul first takes the cognisa^ce of a thing, and is suitably
affected; there are two false rules by which we judge of persons. 1. When we
judge of them by particular actions. 2, When we judge of them by external
ac^idents; the first of them indeed is more proper then the latter, because
they are the fruit of the Soul, the other are foreign, and adventitious;
neither of them are a safe rule of Judgment; not the former, because none is to
be denominated from single, and particular acts, and this the Philosopher will
teach us, and indeed if this rule of judgment should be true, what judgment
must have passed upon Lot, Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Job, David, P^te^, all the
most eminent* Servants of God, whose names are upon Sacred Record, they were
all guilty of irregular acts. Not the latter, for it is not that which is
accidental to a man, but that which proceeds from him that defiles a man.
Take therefore heed of a censorious scornful Eye, when you look upon the People
of God in their blackness, consider, that you also may be tempted, that
although you now stand, yet you may fall.

2. Look not upon her with a pleased, and satisfied Eye. The Eye is that Organ
of the Booy, which gives the Soul delight, content, pleasure, and satisfaction
in the object, Psalm. 92. v. 11. Mine Eye also shall see my desire upon mine
Enemies. We have naughty, and corrupt hearts, ready to take a secret delight
and pleasure in the slips and failings of our Brethren, let this be far from
you, either to rejoice in the real blackness (the failings, and miscarriages)
of any, whose general conversation is not unworthy of the Gospel, or to rejoice
in any of their afflictions, we are to weep with those that weep, not to
rejoice, when we see our Brethren weep. The first rejoicing is opposite to your
duty, with respect to the honor of God, which suffers by others sins as well
as our own. The second is eminently contrary to that love, and fellow-feeling,
and compassion which we owe unto our Brethren.

Thirdly, look not upon them, so as to take out a copy for your imitation.
Rocks stand up in the Sea, and lights stand upon the Land, to give Ships notice
of Rocks and Sands, not that Mariners should run upon them, but that they may
avoid them. for this end also are the failings and sins of Gods People Recorded
in Holy Writ. When you see a Child of God black, either through some sinful
failing, or through some sharp trial of affliction, look upon him as wistly as
you will, to move your pity, your Bowels of compassion, and tears, to excite in
you the Spirit of Prayer, and supplication on his behalf, to quicken you to use
all means in your power to help him up, and to restore him in the Spirit of
meekness, but take heed of copying out his failings. But I shall speak more
fully to these things hereafter, when I come to the next verse.

Sermon XXXIV.
Cant. 1. 5. I am black but comely: O you Daughters of Jerusalem, as the Tents
of Kedar, as the Curtains of Solomon.

YOU have heard me discoursing the first and second Propositions which I
observed from this Text, I shall now discourse the third, and fourth, (for I
shall handle them together, as I did the 2 former.) Take them thus.

P^op.
As it is the duty of the believer to confess, own, and acknowledge his or her
failings, and infirmities, so he ought also at other times to own, and
acknowledge his graces, and beauties.

You see here are two Propositions. 1. Godly Men, and Women will, and ought at
sometimes to acknowledge their corruptions, blackness and infirmities. 2. That
they ought also at other times, to own and acknowledge their graces, and
beauty. The Spouse does both in one breath, I am (says she) black, but comely.
The handling of this Proposition will lead me to the discoursing of 2
Questions, or Cases of Conscience. I begin with the first.

Qu. In what cases, how, and to whom a conscientious Man or Woman is bound to
confess his or her sins?

Ans. 1. Upon all occasions, and at all times, he is bound to confess all his
sins unto God. Not that the Divine knowledge can be bettered by such a
confession, for he who knows what things we have need of before we ask them,
knows what sins we are guilty of before we confess them, but it is a piece of
homage we owe unto God, and a duty which his revealed will has made, and
declared a medium in order to our obtaining of mercy and forgiveness, 1 John 1.
9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins.
There was of old a confession required before the bringing of the Trespass
Offering, Number. 5. 6. Consonant to this you will find the practice of all the
Servants of God. I said I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, Psalm. 32.
5. Thus you read of the more public Confessions of Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah.
This is on all hands granted as a duty out of question, and to be extended to
all, and all manner of sins, especially in secret Prayer, where no sins ought
to be hidden from the Lord, those we know, and remember ought to be confessed
more particularly, others more generally.

2. There are diverse cases wherein a Christian is obliged to confess his sins
unto his Brethren, or to such as God has set over him as his Guides. They may
all be reduced to three heads, Where 1. The glory of God: Or, 2. The good of
his neighbor: Or, 3. The good, or peace of his own Soul, may be promoved, or
advantaged by such a confession. I will mention 4 more special cases, in which
all, or some of these may be concerned.

1. Where a Christian has stumbled upon the same stone, and fallen, and by
reason of such fall may be under temptations to cast away his confidence in
God, and despair of Divine Mercy. In such a case as this, my Brothers peace and
spiritual good may probably be promoved by telling him, that even also my foot
slipped, but yet through Grace I was recovered. In this sense I understand
David, confessing his sins, Psalm. 51. 13. and praying for the restoring of Gods
Salvation. Then (says he) I will teach transgressors thy way, and sinners
shall be converted unto thee. I will tell others what a great sinner I have
been, and how, notwithstanding the multitude, and greatness of my sins, I found
favor with thee, and this shall encourage them to confess their sins, and
humble their Souls before thee, and implore also thy mercy and favor. Thus
Christ bids Peter, Luke 22. 32. When he was converted, strengthen his Brethren.
When thou art converted in that Text, is as much, as when thou art recovered
from thy fall, how should he strengthen his Brethren, but by confessing his
fall, and Gods goodness in recovering him, by telling our Brethren, that our
circumstances were the same with theirs, and how the Lord showed us mercy, we
both direct them what to do, we help their faith, and confidence in God, and
strengthen them in their addresses, and applications to the Throne of Grace.

2. Where any man discerns that his Brethren are prone to think of him above
what they ought to think; this is that which made Paul forbear his glorying, 2
Cor. 12. 6. Lest (says he) any man should think of me above what he sees me
to be, and doubtless, this was that which made that great Apostle, though he
sometimes magnified his Office, and the Grace of God bestowed upon him, yet
also so often to vilify himself, as 1 Timothy 1. 13. Who was before a blasphemer, a
persecutor, injurious, but obtained mercy, less then the least of all Saints,
Ephesians. 3. 8. One born out of due time; doubtless this ought to be carefully
avoided by us, we ought to take heed, that Gods glory be not given unto us, and
his Grace obscured, or eclipsed, by men's having us in admiration. In such a
case a true believer will not be ashamed more then Paul, to own his own sins
and blackness.

3. A third case is, Where a Christian sees, that without bringing a scandal
upon the Gospel, he may by owning, and confessing his sins unto men, advance
the glory of Gods Free Grace, and make God to be more admired, and adored in
the emanations of it. Free Grace is that which has made the Child of God what
he is, and is therefore the admirable object in the believers Eye, and where a
Christian sees an opportunity to predicate that, and advance it in the Eyes of
any, he will not lose it, nor stick at the shaming, and dishonouring himself,
so God may have his glory from that shaming of himself. Now because Free Grace
is never more magnified, then when a multitude of sins are forgiven, and a
great sinner is received to favor, a good Christian (observing circumstances)
where they will fit this end, will not spare this acknowledgment, though it
tends to his own shame, and dishonor. So that God may be glorified, he is
content to take shame to himself. I say observing circumstances, and indeed the
chief circumstance to be observed, is the reputation of Religion. He will
therefore decline it in the presence of profane and ungodly men, who would make
an ill use of such discourse, to blaspheme the good, and holy ways of God. Thus
David refrained from good talk whiles the wicked were in sight, Psa. 39. v. 1,
2. Confession of our sins one to another called for, Jam. 5. 16, 17. is one of
those holy things which must not be cast before Dogs, one of those Pearls,
which must not be thrown before Swine. Thus you shall observe in St. Paul, that
in that part of his Epistles, where he writes with reference to the Saints, he
opens himself, and lays himself naked, but where he speaks of himself
with relation to the false Apostles, there he magnifieth his Office.

4. A fourth case is, where a Child of God can probably judge, that by his
confession of his sin, and owning of his blackness before men, he may be
advantaged by their counsels, or by their prayers. There are two ways by which
a Christian may be advantaged by the confession of his sins unto men. 1. With
respect to the obtaining of his pardon. 2. With respect to his peace, or the
obtaining a sense of his pardon.

1. I say with respect to his obtaining pardon. Not that it is in the power of
man to pardon sin, he only can discharge a debt, to whom it is owing. Sin is a
debt to the justice of God, and who but God can remit this debt? It is not in
the power of Pope, or Priest, or Minister, to pardon sins, or grant absolution
to any, but declaratively, he can indeed declare the will of God, to pardon the
sins of those that truly repent, and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, but that
is all the Minister can do in the remission of sin, the Act is Gods, the
Ministers absolution is valid or invalid as the Person does, or does not truly
repent, and truly believe. But yet I say the confession of sins, not only to
Ministers, but to private Christians, may be of great use and effect* in order
to the obtaining of our pardon, by virtue of that promise, 1 John 5. 16. If a
man see his Brother sin a sin, which is not unto death, he shall ask, and give
him life who has not sinned unto death. Now unless we know that our Brother
has sinned, how shall we ask for him, and unless we have seen him, how shall
we know it, without his own confession of it us.

2. But secondly, It must also be of great advantage to us with respect to our
peace, or sense of pardon, and that is not only (as the other) by obtaining
their prayers for us, but also by obtaining their advice and counsel, thus
oft-times a Christians owning, and confessing some particular sins, either to a
judicious and faithful Minister, or to some judicious, and well experienced
Christians, proves a great ease, and relief to his mind, by their speaking of
some word in season, or by some seasonable advice, and counsel. Now in such a
case as this a Christian may be under the same obligation to confess his sins
unto men, that every one is to do what is of most proper Spiritual advantage to
his Soul.

3. Lastly. There are some cases wherein a Child of God will own his blackness
even before the world.

1 When he cannot conceal it without denying the truth. A Christian is not
bound to proclaim his Sin to the men of the world when it may tend to the
reproach, and blaspheming of the name of God, but if the case be so, that he
has failed in their sight, and they come to the knowledge of it, and charge
him with it, they must not tell a lie to cover their own shame. When Tamar,
Genesis 38. 25. sent to her Father in law the Signet, and Bracelets, and Staff,
with that message. By the man whose these are I am with Child. Discern I pray
thee, whose are th^se. Judah, acknowledged them, and said she has been more
righteous than I.

2. When the sin is known, and is an eminent injury to our Neighbor. In case
of all injuries to men, which are capable of reparation, and satisfaction,
satisfaction is necessary in order to Gods pardon, if we be able to make it,
but not confession in all cases. As now suppose a Servant has stolen from his
Master, during his service with him, and his Master be one that is an Enemy to
Religion, and Godliness; afterward God changes this Servants heart, he is
certainly bound to his ability to make his Master reparation, and full
satisfaction, but I do not know that he is bound to come to confess it unto
him, who probably would make no other use of it, then to reproach, and
blaspheme the name of God, and that way, and course of Religion, in which he is
engaged. But in case the thing be known, then confession even to man may be our
duty, to take shame to our own Souls, and give glory unto God.

3. Lastly, a Child of God will confess his sin even before Men of the World,
where he sees a probable opportunity to do other sinners good by it. And this
most commonly happens when men have been companions in sin, one to, and with
another. When men have been companions one to another, in Drunkenness, These,
Sabbathbreaking, or any other course of sinning. A good man may sometimes
probably judge that his owni^g and confessing with tears, to his old
Companions, his fellowship with them in sinning, may probably invite them to a
fellowship with him, in a consideration of his or their ways, in a sense of,
and godly sorrow for their sins, and if he has any such hopes, any such
prospect, he will confess his blackness even to them. Thus I find some Divines
interpreting that, Jam. 5. 15. Confess your sins one to another. That those who
have been colleagues, and companions in sin one to another, should confess and
bewail their sins each to other, tho I must confess I rather think that Text is
to be understood of intimate, serious Christians, confessing their sins freely
one to another, in order to the obtaining of the benefit of each others
prayers, because of what follows, And pray one for another.

These now are those cases and times, in and under which, the Spouse of Christ
will confess and acknowledge that she is black, black through the prevailings
of sin and corruption.

Of this Confession of sins we have plentiful instances in Scripture, both of
such as were more public, and such as were more p^ivate; it is brought as one
argument to prove the Holy Scriptures to be no humane Writings, but the Word of
God, and that holy men wrote, as they were inspired by God, that they have
published their own failings, and made their own sins to stand upon Record to
Posterity, which is not the way of ordinary Writers, who commonly write for
their own honor and praise. Besides the Scripture instances, we have it in the
daily practice of Gods people, not only in their daily prayers they put up to
Almighty God; but in their more private converses, with Ministers, and with
fellow Christians, which are very full of these confessions, and abasements of
themselves.

This freedom of Gods People in owning, and acknowledging their blackness,
proceeds from several causes. 1. The Souls humiliation before it be brought
home to Christ. The Soul being enlightened by the Spirit of Grace, sees the
vileness, and filthiness of its own heart to that degree, that it is ashamed,
and thinks that it cannot abase itself enough in the sight of God, and from
this disposition of the Soul to abhor, loath, and shame itself, proceeds this
freedom, and willingness in the Soul upon all occasions (with respect had to
Christian prudence) to vilify itself by the confession of its own blackness and
infirmity.

2. It proceeds also from the habit of humility given to, and wrought in the
heart of every believer; this is one of the perfections of the new Creature, it
differs from the other little more then as the d^sposition from the habit.
This teaches the Soul at all times a mean and low opinion of itself. The
Hypocrite is always proud, and looks upon all his gifts, and good actions with
a multiplying glass, which makes them appear more then they are, and greater
then they are. The humble Soul looks upon all as less. In me (says Paul) there
dwells no good thing? Hence he can hardly be heard to say any thing but in
diminution, and defamation of himself.

3. It proceeds also from this Souls more perfect understanding the mark of
perfection. He knows better then another, what God requires of him, what
degrees of faith, love, zeal, holiness, this makes him a better judge of his
own imperfections, and more ready to confess, and bewail them. The Hypocrite
and natural man understands not the breadth of the Divine Law, what faith,
what holiness God requires of him, he is proud, knowing nothing (as the
Apostle speaks of some, 1 Timothy 6. 4.) not only his Pride, prompting him to
exalt himself, but his ignorance, knowing nothing as he ought to know it, is
the cause of his want of freedom to this duty. It is with such a man, as it is
with a Sophister in the University. A little knowledge that he has, puffs
him up; he thinks he knows all things. But when he comes to be Master of Arts,
to have looked into Books a little more, and to understand the compass of
learning a little better, then he complains of his ignorance, and the small
portion of knowledge which he has. So the man that has but a mean and
imperfect knowledge of the will of God, he is proud, and thinks he knows
all things; but when God comes to open his Eyes, and to let him see the
mysteries of Divine knowledge, he sees more duty then he saw before, and
consequently more sin, and more defects in his own Soul: There is a vast
difference betwixt that knowledge of duty and sin, which is in the heart of a
Child of God under the illumination of the Spirit of Grace, and that which is
in a Soul not under that special illumination.

4. Again a Christians often compuring himself with others, and judging himself
by their measures, is often a great cause of this. The natural man ordinarily
chooses companions like unto himself, and judges of himself by their measures,
seeing himself (as the Pharisee, Luke 18.) to exceed the Drunkard in
temperance, and sobriety. The Extortioner in justice, and mercy, the Adulterer
in chastity. The Atheist in a formality of dutiness (a form of godliness; he
sees no blackness in himself to confess, he is Captain of his Form. But now
the converted Soul being come to be a companion of those that fear the Lord, he
sets before himself the examples of the Saints of God in Holy Writ, and of
those that are yet in the world, that excel in virtue. In the Scripture he
reads of the faith of holy Abraham, who believed in hope against hope, not
staggering at the promise through unbelies, the patience of Job, who when he
had lost all his Estate, all his Children, yet did not speak inadvisedly with
his lips, nor charge God foolishly, he reads of David's exceeding love, and
delight for, and in the law of the Lord. When he looks amongst his new
Companions, he sees in one Christian more tenderness of heart, in another more
faith, in a third more zeal, and activity for God then he can find in himself;
hence he cries out of his blackness and bewaileth his coming so short of
others.

5. Again he lives in a daily sense of his wants and defects; My sin says
David, is ever before me, and so his tongue does but express the inward sense,
and apprehensions of his Soul.

6. Lastly, as all such Souls will be sensible of their defects, and wants, so
they are continually desirous of an healing of their wounds and a Supply and
relief. Which they know confession is the way to obtain. As for confession unto
God, the Wise man has told us Prove. 28* 13. That he that covers his sins
shall not prosper: but who so confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy.
David tells us, Psalm. 32. 3. That when he kept silence, his bones waxed old,
through his roaring, all the day, For (says he) Day and night thine hand was
heavy upon me, my moisture is turned into the drought of Summer. What remedy
did he find? v. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, I said, I will confess my
trangressions unto the Lord and thou forgavest the iniquity of my Sin. Nor was
this a particular favor to David but what others may expect upon the like
application to God v. 6. For this shall every one that is Godly pray unto thee
in a time when thou may be found, surely in the floods of great waters they
shall not come nigh unto him. A Godly man knows, that as the hiding of his
disease from the Physician, and his wounds from the Surgeon is not the way
to be cured, or healed, so neither is the hiding of the nakedness of his Soul
from God, the way to have it covered; for although in this there be a difference,
that our spiritual Physician knows our diseases without our discovery of them
to him, which the earthly Physician does not, yet God notwithstanding his
knowledge, requiring our acknowledgment, makes the case the same. And the
reason is much the same for the confessing of our sins especially in some cases
to a faithful Minister, or to private Christians. God sent Abraham to Abimelech
Genesis 20. 7. For (faith he) he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee and thou
shall live. Genes^ 20. v. 7 and he sent Jobs friend to Job, Job 42. v. 7. --
and (says he) my servant Job shall pray for you, for him I will accept.

Use 1.
This in the first place lets us see the difference between a Child of God and
one who is but a formal hypocrite An hypocrite generally sees nothing but
whiteness in himself. Jehu can see, and call Jonadab to see his zeal for the
Lord God, but he can see nothing of his own self ends in all that he did. The
Church of Laodicea said, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing, tho at the same time she was wretched, miserable, blind and naked. On
the other side Paul complained that he was the least of the Apostles, not
worthy to be called an Apostle, etc. Yet so false are our hearts that there may
be hypocrisy even in our confessions of our sin, and blackness, whether to God
or to man, we must therefore take heed, both to our design and end in these
confessions, and also to the truth and manner of them. The hypocrite never
confesses his blackness, but in hopes, that for his confession he shall be
reputed white, and the praise of men is all that he seeks after. Hence. 2. he
does it without any serious sense of the sin which he confesses, or heart
contrition for it. A confession of sins which is but a bare recitation, and
Enumeration of them, is not that confession which God requires or accepts.

Use. 2.
Secondly. This calls to us all for the practice of this duty. I have showed
you that there is a threefold confession of our sin which is our duty. 1. A
confession unto God. 2. Unto the faithful Ministers and Servants of God. 3.
Unto the men of the World. The first is our duty at all times, and under all
circumstances and we have nothing to regard as to that, but knowing the matter
of confession, keeping a watch upon our hearts, and ways that we may know our
errors and the plague of our own hearts, that we do it in such a manner as God
has directed, and prescribed; confession must not be the mere Sacrifice of the
Calves of our lips, but the Sacrifice of a broken, and contrite heart. But this
is not that of the Text, where the Spouse is not speaking to God, but to the
daughters of Jerusalem, it is to them the Spouse faith, I am black. In what
cases this confession to men is our duty, I have largely showed you, as also
what advantage may arise from it, both with reference to Gods glory, and the
good of our own, and others Souls. I shall only offer you some few directions
for the more advantageous performance of it.

1. There is a great deal of prudence to be used in the choice of that friend
to whom thou do thus unbosom thy self. 1. Conceal not thy self from that
able and faithful Minister of Christ, whom thou have entrusted with the charge
of thy Soul. I am very far from pleading for that auricular confession in the
Ear of the Priest, which the Papists make such a stir about. Amongst other
supernumerary Sacraments which they have added to those 2 which alone were
instituted by Christ, they have one which they call the Sacrament of Penance.
In order to which they require in Lent especially, but at other times also a
circumstantiated confession of all men and women's particular sins, which being
so confessed to the Priest (who is therefore called their confessor) he
appoints them a penance to be done for them, and so absolveth them from the
guilt of them (as they pretend.) As we know of no Satisfaction to be given for
sin, but what is given by the death of Christ (excepting only in cases of wrong
done unto men capable of reparation;) Nor of any power in any to forgive sins
but only in God, only the Minister may declare what God has done or will do in
cafe of our true repentance and faith: so we know of no incumbent duty upon any
Christian to make a particular confession of sin to the Priest, and only judge
such particular confession necessary in some particular cases, for the
disburthening, and easing of Christians consciences, pressed under the guilt of
some particular sins, and in such a case an able and faithful Minister of
Christ is doubtless the most proper Person to make confession to, both because
as by his office he is both an Interpreter of the mind, and will of God, and to
pray for the People, so he is or ought to be one of a thousand, like Saul,
taller then his Brethren by the head, and shoulders in knowledge and gifts of
greater knowledge and judgment in the things of God, and so more able to
minister a word in season. It is sad that it cannot be said of all, they are
so, but it is to be presumed, that the same wisdom which teaches every man and
woman, to commit the business of his bodily health, to the ablest and most
faithful Physician he can choose, and the concern of his Estate, to the most
able and faithful Lawyer he can, will also direct a Christian to commit the far
more weighty concerns of his Soul, to the most able and faithful Minister that
he can; nor ought any Christian to be more abridged in his liberty with
reference to the latter of far more concernment, then with referenceto the
former of far more minute concernment to him, But I say a good Christian having
made choice of such a Person he is undoubtedly the fittest Person to confess
our sins unto, when they lie heavy upon our conscience and we cannot recover
our Peace, and that with respect to both the ends of such confession, whether
Prayers for us or Counsel and advice, and that both with respect to the
abilityes of such a person, which cannot but be presumed greater in order to
the revealing the mind, and will of God to us, and so giving us advice and
counsel, and with reference to his Office, he being one whom God has set over
us, and gifted with reference unto us. But set aside the case of a disturbed
conscience, not able otherwise to gain peace, or some particular cases, upon
which cases of conscience, and perplexing questions may arise too hard for a
private Christian to answer without some help, I see no need of any particular
Confession unto Ministers more then others.

2. As to more private Christians. I have also showed you several cases wherein
some particular Confessions of sin may be highly expedient, if not necessary.
It must be the care of a good Christian so to manage this duty, that he may
attain the ends which he aims at in it, without dashing upon such Rocks, as
every good, and prudent Christian ought to avoid. To that end,

1. Christians ought to use so much wisdom as may protect their profession from
reproach and scandal, and which may prejudice the repu^e either of themselves,
or others walking in the holy ways Prop.
of God. The honor of the Gospel, and profession of it is a great thing, and
though we must not commit the least sin, that any such good may come of i^, yet
whatsoever prudence we can use to prevent any thing of this nature, is
doubtless our duty. This evil arises from the needless publication of the
sinful failings of professors. He that has sinned openly, ought to be rebuked
openly, and openly to confess his sin, that the Church of God offended by his
fall, may be satisfied in the truth of his repentance, and recovery out of the
snare of the Devil, but where the sin is of another nature, and has been
committed secretly, there is not only no need of such a public confession, but
it may be of a greater mischief, and ill consequence, then good, by reason of a
wicked world, which watches for Gods Peoples haltings, to reproach profession,
and the holy name of God. Though therefore in such cases private Confession,
even of more private sins, may be necessary and expedient, yet it ought to be
managed with prudence, as to the manner, that is, in the best consistency with
the end to which it is directed, and for the avoiding such things as may tend
to the dishonor of God, and disadvantage of the more public interest and
cause of God, and therefore much wisdom is to be used in the choice of a friend
in this case, for though Solomon has advised us, Pro. 25. 9 To debate our case
with our Neighbor, yet in the next words he has added, discover not thy
secret to another, thereby informing us that Neighbor in that Text is not to
be expounded in that latitude, as in the Parable, concerning him who fell
amongst Thieves. Every one, no not every good man is to be trusted with the
Secrets of Souls. Considering the end of this action, and the great thing that
is to be avoided in the performance of it, Three things seem requisite in the
choice of a private Christian, to whom a prudent Christian may thus unbosom
himself. 1. Silence and Secrecy. 2. Knowledge and Wisdom. 3. One of whom we may
presume that he has some more then ordinary interest in God.

1. I say, first, Silence and Secrecy. Your ordinary experience tells you,
that even amongst good men, some have a much better command, and government of
their tongue then others, and as it is observable that such fall into more
errors themselves, then others, for in a multitude of words there wants not
sin; so such persons are least to be trusted with the Secrets of Souls.

2. Secondly, he that confesses his faults to another, does it, in order to
his advice, and counsel, this makes knowledge, and spiritual wisdom, requisite
in the person whom we choose to unbosom our selves in this manner unto; every
man who has knowledge enough to guide his own Soul in the ways of God, yet
has not knowledge, judgment, or experience enough to give spiritual advice and
counsel to his Brother.

3. If this Confession be made in order to obtaining the benefit of prayers,
the same wisdom will direct us to make choice of such as we can reasonably
judge to be persons likely to prevail with God in prayer; there are some that
are more mighty in the Scriptures, more exercised in the ways of God then
others* these are most fit for advice, and counsel. There are some that are
more exercised in prayer then others, and more prevailing with God, these are
fittest to hear our Confessions in order to our advantage by their prayers, and
these generally are such as walk most uprightly, and closely with God. The Lord
hears not sinners but if any man be a Worshipper of God, and does his will,
him he hears, John 9. 31. The prayer of the upright (says Solomon) is his
delight.

Direct. 2.
Secondly, As there is a great deal of prudence to be observed in the choice of
Persons, to whom we own and acknowledge our blackness, so there is a great deal
of piety, and charity to be showed in the manner of the doing of it. That which
of charity is to be shown in it, is to do it where the Soul of our Brother may
be advantaged by the performance of it. That of piety, which is to be showed in
its Eyes,

1. In a right sixing of our end, which ought to be the glory of God, the
general end of all our actions. When Joshua exhorted Achan to confess his sin.
My Son (says he) confess, and give glory unto God; you read in Scripture of a
confession of the Lords name, a confession of truth, and a confession of sin.
The glory of God is the end of all (that is the praedication of his glory, for
that is all the way we have to glorify God.) A man by confession of his sins,
either unto God, or men, may give glory to God, for in confeffing himself a
sinner, he owned the Lords Power, and Sovereignty over him, the Holiness, and
Righteousness of his Law, and his patience, long-suffering, and goodness, that
he is not cut off, and thrown into Hell, and indeed there is no confession of
sin our duty, where this end cannot be attained some way or other, God does not
delight in the shame, and confusion of our faces, but he does delight in the
exalting of his own name, and in the praedication of his own praise and glory.

2. Secondly, Piety is concerned in the manner of the action. So it must be
done with tenderness of heart, brokenness, and contrition of Spirit; indeed
without this, the enumeration, and recital of our sins is but either a glorying
in sin, or at best but a formaltty, and shell of duty. A glorying in sin, is
but a glorying in our shame, and what will be far from the Soul of a Child of
God. A formality of duty is but hypocrisy. It is a great vanity for any Soul to
think, that God should be pleased with a mere empty noise of words, which are
not expressive of any inward disposition of the heart, in which he has
declared himself pleased. Words in prayer, and confession of sins, are our
duty, but they must be such words as are thrust out of our lips, by the force
of the inward affections of our hearts. If a man confesses his sin unto God,
either publicly or privately, this is requisite. Therefore you shall observe
that the main thing which God requires, is our humbling our selves; that
signifies the affection of the heart. A man cannot humble himself by the words
of his lips, without the inward shame, and brokenness of his Soul. The same
thing is necessary in our confessions unto men. Under the old law there was
Oil, and Frankincense to be poured upon the Meat Offering Lev. 2. 2. and
several other Offerings as you will read in that Book, but upon the Sin
Offering there was no Oil nor Frankincense, to be put, Lev. 5. 11. Oil
signified Gladness, hence you read that they used it when they would make their
Face to Shine; and you read of the Oil of Gladness; the Confession of Sin under
the Gospel is a Sin Offering to God, and must not be offered, without a suitable
sense and Sorrow of Heart. This is a requisite in all Confessions of Sin.

Lastly, We ought with the acknowledgment of our Blackness, whether to God, or
Man, to join also the acknowledgment of our Comeliness, so far as God has made
any discovery of it to our Souls: we ought not indeed, to Glory beyond our line
and measure, but we ought not to conceal what God has done for our Souls. In
this both the Glory and Honor of God, and the good, and encouragement of our
dejected and disconsolate Brethren are both concerned; nor can we imagine, that
we should be more concerned, to discover our own vileness and naughtiness, then
Gods Grace and Mercy. But of this I shall speak more fully, in my handling the
Second part of the Proposition.

Sermon XXXV.
Canticles 1. 5. I am Black, but Comely, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, etc.

I Come now to the second part of the Proposition I raised from these words, I
had no more time in my last discourse then to handle the former.

Prop. There are times, when Christians are bound to own their graces, and to
declare what God has done for their Souls.

There are such times, when good Christians must not only say they are Black,
but also own that they are Comely. That this is a duty, appears from the
practice of the Servants of God in holy Writ. Psalm. 66. 16. Come and hear all
ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my Soul. And indeed
what are most of the Psalms of David but declarations of this nature, to say
nothing of Paul's speeches before Festus and Agrippa, etc. But whatsoever I
intended for the proof of it, I shall bring under the explication, applying it
to the particular cases. The Question is,

Qu. When, and in what cases, are Christians concerned, to own, acknowledge, and
declare unto others their grace, and what God has done for their Souls.

As I said of the other piece of a Christians duty, so I shall say of this. It
is their duty 1. To own and acknowledge it to God; 2. To the Church of God; 3.
To the Men of the World sometimes.

1. To God. This is their unquestionable duty at all times, and you shall find
it the frequent practice of the Servants of God in Scripture. If we have any
Comeliness, it is Christ's Comeliness put upon us, and it is but reasonable that
God should have the acknowledgment of it to his Honor and Glory. But of this
there is no question, neither is this the acknowledgment of the Text, she is
here speaking not unto God, but to the Daughters of Jerusalem. It is our duty
also in some cases to own our Comeliness through grace unto men.

2. To the Church of Christ, and to particular Christians. 1. To the Church,
and that in two cases. 1. Upon our Admission into it. 2. Upon our Readmission,
and restoring to the Privileges of it. We find in the first Plantation of
Churches of the Gospel, there was ordinarily such a confession and
acknowledgment. It is said Mat. 3. That those who were Baptized of John were
Baptized in Jordan, confessing their Sins, Matthew. 3. 6. After Christ's Ascension
into Heaven, we read of the three thousand Souls, added to the Church, that
they were first pricked at the Heart, and said to Peter and to the rest of the
Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? and in Acts 8. 36. when the
Eunuch said to Philip, Here is Water, what does hinder me to be baptized?
Philip answers, if thou believe with all thine heart thou may, and he
answered, and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. In those
first admissions into the Gospel Church, it is plain, that Confession of Sin,
and Profession of a Faith in Christ, were required as necessary, and previous
to Baptism, by which Persons were admitted into a fellowship with the Church of
God. But although the first admission into Gospel Churches were only of Grown
Persons, able to make Confessions of their Sins, and a Profession of their
faith in Christ, which were always done upon such admissions: yet the Children
of such persons so Baptized have been always taken to be within the Covenant
and so Members of the Church also, but whether complete Members or no, has
been a question, and indeed generally denied, and something further required of
them before they have been taken into a full Communion with the Church in the
Ordinance of the Supper. For that being an Ordinance of the Gospel, which is a
Seal of the Righteousness of Faith (as was said of Circumcision with reference
to Abraham, Romans 4. 11.) It is but reasonable to conclude that none have a
right unto it but such as are made Partakers of that Righteousness of Faith,
those that by an eye of Faith can discern the Lords Body, by an hand of Faith
lay hold upon Christ under those sensible signs, and representations, and that
by Faith can Eat the Flesh and Drink the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, while
with the Mouths of their Bodies they Eat the Bread and Drink the Wine. Hence
the Apostle commands us to examine our selves and so to Eat of that Bread, and
Drink of that Cup, and tells us that whosoever Earteth the Flesh and Drinks the
Blood of the Lord unworthily, Eats and Drinks Judgment unto himself: and
hence it is that some evidence both of Knowledge, and Regeneration is judged
necessary to such as have a full Communion in this Ordinance with the Church of
Christ. The best evidence whereof is undoubtedly an holy conversation; That a
verbal declaration in this case is absolutely necessary, I cannot say, which
may be made in hypocrisy, and it made signifies nothing, if not confirmed by
an holy Life; where it can be made in truth, and with freedom of Spirit it is
doubtless exceeding satisfactory, both to the Ministers of Christ, who are
Stewards of the Ministries of God, of whom it is required that they should be
faithful, (distributing their Masters goods according to their Masters order)
and to the Members of the Church with which they are joined. But I by no means
think that it ought to be insisted on, as to many Christians who may be under
fears, and doubts, and despondencies, but evidence the change of their hearts
by a holiness of life. Thus far I have a little digressed to give you my
judgment in this point. By which you may se how little the difference in this
case is betwixt Brethren, would they calmly listen to hear and to understand
one another and not judge each other not heard.

2. Upon our readmission, or restoring to the Church of God. The judicial
separation of Scandalous persons from the Church, is a sufficient evidence,
that no persons unholy in their lives ought to be admitted into a communion
with it, and that they are no more then presumptive members of it, or if you
will, visible members, that is, such as in outward appearance are so, but when
by any open action, they discover the contrary, they ought to be separated from
it, and not restored without repentance, of which repentance indeed, (it being
the change of the heart) we are no infallible judges, having no rule of
judgment, but being forced to trust to the sincerity of Profession, joined with
a visibly reformed Conversation. The Church of Christ in all ages, so far as we
may trust any account we have had of it, has required both. 1. A verbal
declaration, of what God has done for the offending party, working in him or
her a Godly shame and sorrow, and besides this the evidence of a reformed life,
to which purpose, there was a great severity used in the Primitive Church, in
case of persons lapsed before they would again receive them into a full
communion with them, they would in the case of some Sins have the evidence of a
changed heart, from a reformed Life. For 3, 5, 7, 10, 20. Years according to
the degree of the Scandal and Offense. Indeed in latter Ages, as Popery
prevailed upon the World, this discipline degenerated into a strange formality
of auricular Confession, setting penances, and a present absolution without any
thing more then a perfunctory verbal confession. But from the beginning it was
not so, neither ought to be so now. When any person, by any apostasy or lapse*
declares, (so far as the Church can judge) either that at first he was no true
member of the Church, (however by an error admitted to it) or that at least the
Church has no reason to judge otherwise so as he be separated from its
Communion, he ought not to be restored without such an evidence as may satisfy
the Church, that he is one fit to be in full Communion with it, and this
evidence can be no other way, then by a verbal declaration, or by an holy and
reformed conversation. I think it ought to be by both. Thus, St Paul in the
case of the incestuous Person, whom he had ordered to be cast out of the
Church, 1 Cor. 5. orders the restoring of him, but not till he had evidenced
his sorrow, and that to such a degree, as St. Paul was afraid he should be
swallowed up with over much sorrow. 2 Cor. 2, 7. and v. 11. Lest Satan should
get an advantage. These are the two cases in which I conceive Christians ought
to make no difficulty to acknowledge their Spiritual Comeliness to the Church of
God, of which they are Members. I have been a little larger in speaking to
them, in regard of the questions which have arisen in these times, that I might
tell you my judgment as to them, and do what in me lies to the healing of
breaches amongst Brethren, with reference to them, that if possible we might
rightly understand one another, and recover the Unity of the Spirit in the bond
of Peace.

But besides this more open acknowledgment of what God has done for us, in
order to our more comfortable Communion with the Church of Christ, and
participation of all Ordinances of the Gospel with them: I do conceive there
are also some cases wherein such a Declaration, or owning of what God has done
for us, to particular Christians is our duty: and that,

1. In case of some particular Scandal. Suppose a Christian has taken some
particular offense, at some Scandalous actions or behavior of mine, before God
wrought a change in my Heart or afterward, and can hardly be satisfied that I
am now a disciple, but is afraid of fellowship and communion with me in this
case, it is doubtless my duty if I know of it, to satisfy him, by declaring to
him, what God has since that time done for my Soul. Thus you read of Paul,
Acts 9. 26. Paul you know was a Persecutor, in the beginning of that Chapter,
you read of his Fury against the Christians, when he came to Jerusalem v. 26.
he essaied to join himself to the Disciples, but, they were all afraid of him,
and believed not that he was a Disciple, v. 27. Barnabas took him, and brought
him to the Apostles, and declared how he had seen the Lord in the way, and how
he had spoken to him. Paul had declared it to Barnabas, and doubtless (tho it
be not recorded) made a following Declaration himself. Certainly of this there
can be no doubt what ever the Scandal be.

But Secondly, Certainly it is our duty so often, and in any case, as and where
we can probably judge that such a Declaration may conduce to the Glory of God,
or to the good of other Souls, either in bringing them to God, or exciting them
to bless God on our behalf, or to trust in God and in Christ by our example.
The relating, declaring, and telling abroad Gods Wondrous Works is one way by
which we Praise and Glorify God, as appears in all the Thanksgivings, and Songs
of Praise, which we find in holy Writ, now certainly the Declaration of Gods
wonderful Works in the Soul is of a high, and great concern to the Glory of
God, as his wonderful works of common Providence in the World, and ought no
more to be concealed, nor shall we find in holy Writ that they were. Come
(says David) and I will tell you what God has done for my Soul, Psalm. 66. 16,
17. I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue. And
possibly you shall find the book of Psalms as full of expressions of this, as
any other nature. How free in this case is Paul? I live (says he) yet not I,
but Christ lives in me, and the Life which I now live in the flesh, I live by
the faith of the Son of God, 1. Cor. 15. 9, 10. I am the least of the Apostles,
that am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of
God. But by the grace of God, I am what I am, and his grace which was bestowed
on me was not in vain, But I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I,
but the grace of God which was with me. So, Tim. 1. 13. Who was before a
Blasphemer a persecutor, injurious. But I obtained mercy -- v. 14. And the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, was exceeding abundant by says in Lovewhich is
in Christ Jesus. So in many other texts.

3. Lastly, There is a time when a Christian will be obliged to acknowledge his
grace, and Spiritual comeliness before the men of the World. That is, when the
World scandalizeth his profession. This Interpreters judge was the case here,
the daughters of Jerusalem reproached the Spouse for her blackness. Thus Saint
Paul, then whom none ever spoke in a more vilifying dialect then himself of
himself, yet at other times he magnified his Office, 2 Cor. 12. 11. I am (says
he) become a fool in glorying, you have compelled me, for I ought to have been
commended by you, for in nothing am I behind the chiefest of the Apostles, tho
I be nothing, Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought amongst you in all
patience in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds. So 2 Cor. 11. 25. For I
suppose I was not a whit behind the chiesest of the Apostles, but though I be
rude in Speech, yet not in knowledge, but we have been thoroughly made manifest
first amongst you in all things. When the Corinthians sought a proof of Christ
in him, 2 Cor. 13. 3. he tells them v. 4. For we are also weak in him, but we
shall live with him, by the power of God toward you, v. 6. I trust you shall
know that we are no reprobates.

From this discourse may easily be gathered the reasonableness of this duty.
There are four things that call to us for it, and make it our duty.

1. The first is the honor and glory of God. This is the great end of all our
actions, for this cause we were born, for this cause we came into the World, I
have before told you, that we have no other way to glorify God but by the
predication, or speaking of his greatness, or goodness, or some other of his
attributes, and by our holy life and conversation in obedience to his will: Now
of all Gods attributes, there is none wherein he more delights then in
showing mercy, and whosoever tells of Gods acts of grace does eminently glorify
God, for the riches of his grace and goodness, are discovered in Christ, and as
in his giving of Christ for poor lost sinners, so in the application of that
purchased redemption to the Souls of his poor creatures. Bless the Lord! O my
Soul (says David) Psalm. 103. v. 1, 2, 3. and all that is within me bless his
holy name. Blessthe Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits, who
forgiveth all thy iniquities and heals all thy diseases.

2. The Second reason is the good of our Brother. Next our immediate magnifying
and glorifying of God there is nothing more our duty, then the consulting the
good of our Brethren, and he is highly serviceable to God, who is any way
serviceable to the Souls of others, either in winning them to God, or
advantaging them in their walking with God. The Souls of Christians have often
great advantages by hearing what God has done for the Souls of others in their
circumstances. It incourageth them to make their applications to God, to hope,
and trust in his mercy to wait until he will be pleased in like manner to be
gracious to them. David Psalm. 69. 32. makes this as an argument, with which he
pleads with God for mercy for his Soul. He promises first, v. 30. That he
would praise the Lord with a song and magnify him with thanksgiving. then he
adds v. 32. The humble shall see this, and be gladand your hearts shall live
that seek God, for the Lord hears the poor, and despises not his Prisoners.
By the humble is to be understood (as in many other Texts of Scripture) Persons
in low, mean and afflicted conditions. It much conduces to the raising up of
the Spirits of a man, under torments of bodily pain and affliction, if one
comes and tells him, I was in the same condition, and had the same pain, yet I
by such and such applications recovered, and it is of no less usefulness, to
one of a poor, and broken Spirit, for one to come to him, under his doubts and
fears, and despondency because of the guilt of sin, when another Christian
comes to him, and tells him, I also was a blasphemer, a drunkard, an injurious
Person, yet I obtained mercy. I bless God my doubts are resolved, my fears
scattered, and I am enabled through grace to hope in the free gerace and mercy
of God through the Lord Jesus Christ. Where now such an opportunity as this is
(which is not very frequent) there the good of our Brother calls to us for such
a declaration, what God has done for our Souls.

3. A third reason is the duty of a Christian so far as he may to avoid Scandal
and Offense. Offenses and mutual dissatisfactions one in another, destroy all
the freedom, and sweetness of Christians communion each with other, and it is
our duty so to walk as to give no offense, to Jews or Gentiles, much less to
the Church of God 2. Cor 20. 32. There are two ways by which offense is given.

1. By doing some actions as to which we are at a perfect liberty by which we
cause our Brother to sin against God: As to these the Apostle cautioneth
Christians very largely both in his Epistle to the Romans and to the
Corinthians: But these kind of offenses are not obviated by Christians
declarations of what God has done for their Souls, as to the influences of
saving grace: but rather by the declaration of his knowledge, and forbearing
such actions, as he has a liberty to, but no necessity that presses him to
the doing of them, at least till his Brother be Satisfied in the lawfulness of
them.

2. By some Scandalous actions; these indeed are Scandala data, Scandals that
are given and such sores as a Christian ought by all means in his power to
endeavor healing of, and whether such things have been done before, or after a
change wrought in our hearts, it is our duty to do what in us lies to remove
the Scandal of them, which I know not how it can at first be done, without some
declaration to the party, or Church offended, what God has done for us, what a
change he has wrought in us, until by a contrary conversation (which is a work
of time and the best evidence) we can make it more really to appear to them.

4. Lastly. The Credit of our professions some times calls to us for it; and
this is the reason of the performance of this duty with reference to the men of
the World, who seek all advantages to reproach the good and right ways of the
Lord. But this is enough to have spoken doctrinally upon this argument.

Use. 1.
From hence (in the first place) we may observe. That a Child of God may know
that he, or she is comely. Indeed this is not the lot of every Child of God, at
all times, and for them that do know it, there are degrees of their knowledge.
Some have a more, some a less certain knowledge, but I say a good Christian may
know it. The Papists indeed make all a Christians faith to be languid, and
uncertain, but Paul was persuaded, that nothing should separate him from the
Love of God. The Spouse knew she was sick of Love, and here, that although she was
black, yet she was also comely, tho as the tents of Kedar, yet as the Curtains
of Solomon also. Peter knew that he loved his Master, so as he durst appeal to
him, and say. Thou that know all things know that I Love thee; and St.
John giving us rules how we might know that we are translated from death to
Life, supposed that it might be known, and if it had not been possible surely
Peter would not have quickened us to the use of all diligence to make our
calling and election sure. That every good Christian does not certainly know
his Spiritual Estate, is unquestionable; That he who does know it this day, may
fall into doubts and fears concerning it, is also certain: But it is as plain
in Scripture, that a Christian may walk in the sense and view of his own
sincerity, and uprightness, he may know it by the more special influence of the
holy Spirit, which witnesses with our Spirits, that we are the Children of
God, and this is of all other, the most certain and comfortable knowledge. He
may also know it, by the more ordinary influence of the Spirit of grace,
supporting the Soul, in the view of its own habits of grace. And certainly a
good Christian is highly concerned to labor after this knowledge, as for the
Quiet, Peace and Satisfaction of his own Spirit so for the glory of God, the
good of others, and the upholding of our selves against the calumnies, and
reproaches of evil men: How shall a Christian, that is full of fears, and
continually doubting, whether God has done any thing for his Soul or no, ever
give God the honor and glory of what he has done for him, and wrought in him.
A sad, and dejected Spirit can never walk thankfully and praise God, for what
he has done for him: how shall such a Soul be serviceable to his Brother in
distress! The Apostle advises working with our hands that we may have
something to give to those that need, and tells us, It is more noble to give
then to receive; the despondent, doubting Christian is always a receiver he
cannot be a giver of advice and counsel, to others, How shall such a Christian
bear up against the suggestions of the Devil, or against the reproaches,
Scandals, and calumnies of the men of the World: Upon all these and many more
accounts, Christians are highly concerned, to look for such evidences as may
Satisfy them that although they have been black, and are black through the
frequent renewings of corruption, yet they are comely through grace. If any ask
what they should do that they may know, I know no better way, then the studying
the perfection of the new creature to perfect holiness in the Lords fear; for
tho it be true that we may be deceived in our judgments of the true features of
the new creature, yet it is also true that the true testimony of the Spirit, is
in concurrence with the witness of our Spirits and where there is a faileur of
that Testimony there can be no certainty of the other.

Use. 2.
We may learn from hence that it is not the sole work of a Christian to be
complaining of himself, and loading himself with accusations, and charges of
blackness. Solomon says, there s a time for all things; A time to weep and a
time to laugh a time to mourn, and a time to dance. Eccles. 3. 2. 4. I would
have Christians to consider their season. There is a time for him to consider
his blackness and to weep for it; And there is also a time for him to own and
acknowledge his comeliness. There is a time for him to sit alone, and keep
silence and put his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope; But he ought
also to find a time to lift up his head, to bless God that he lives, tho yet it
is not he, but the grace of God in him, to acknowledge that by Grace he is what
he is, and that the grace of God has not been bestowed on him in vain. The
time for the former, should be the time of his Solitude, chiefly when he
sits alone before God. Except in some other particular cases which I
instanced in while I was handling the former part of this Proposition. God is
indeed honored by our humiliations, confessions of sin, shamings of our own
Souls: but not so much as by the predication of the riches of his grace.
Thankfulness, and rejocing in the Lord, and in his Salvation, are great pieces
of duty. The weeping, dejected Christian does not so much predicate the Lords
glory, nor so much commend the ways of God to men, as the rejoicing, cheerful
Christian, provided his rejoicing be not carnal, and sensual, but Spiritual and
in the Lord. That is the conversation, which most commends God, and his ways,
and most inviteth Souls into a walking in them.

Use. 3.
Suffer therefore a word of Exhortation and with that I shall shut up this
discourse, it must be to a declaration of what God has done for your Souls. A
declaration of it (I mean) where God calls to you for it. When that is may
easily be concluded from my former discourse. It is always your duty unto God,
when you are alone in your Closets, (...) never unseasonable. It is (as you
have heard) oft-times yo^^ duty to do it unto men, to the Church of whichyou
are Memberts, to particular Christians whoare your Companions, sometimes before
the world. Fou r thingsare usually pleaded as hindrances of it. 1. Christians
uncertainty. 2. Modesty. 3. Pride. 4. Novelty of such a practice. 1. I will
endeavor to show you the vanity of these pleas in bar to this duty. 2. I shall
give you some directions in order to the performance of it, with which I shall
conclude this discourse.

1. The first plea is Christians own incertainty, and this is indeed a great
plea, for no man ought to boast beyond his line, or to arrogate that to
himself, which he does not find in himself, we ought therefore to labor to
bring our Souls to a certainty, and the doubting Christian has this advantage,
that the greatest certainty is that which follows doubting but though it may
be thou have not an infallible certainty, yet possibly thou have a moral
certainty, though not a certainty free from all doubts, and fears, yet not
encumbered with strong doubts, and tormenting fears, though not an assurance,
yet a good hope through grace, yea, such an hope as shall not make ashamed.
Thou may declare how it is with thy Soul, though thou can not declare what
is not in thy Soul. I am not pressing any Christian to arrogate to himself,
what there is no ground for, but only to own in himself, what God has wrought
in him, and for him. Fears, and doubts, though they always argue a weakness in
faith, yet they ordinarily argue a truth of grace, and faith, it may be,
because of thy clouds, and doubts, thou can see no beauty and comeliness in
thy self, yet others may see a great beauty and comeliness in thee.

2. A second plea is Modesty, a virtue which excellently becomes the Children
of God, who are called Virgins. It is the duty of the Children of God, not to
think of themselves above what they ought to think, it is pity that so comely
an habit should be turned into sin, and that Christians under pretense of
avoiding Pride, and Ostentation, should run upon another Rock, and neglect a
duty of so much tendency as I have showed this to be, to the glory of God, and
the good of others. Let me therefore examine this a little strictly. Pride
(says the Philosopher) is a vice by which we judge our selves worthy of more
honor then indeed we are, and slight, or despise others who indeed have, or
whom at least we judge to have (...) of this, or that perfection then we have.
The Schoolmen tell us there are three ways by which we may discover this sinful
tumor, or swelling in an opinion of our selves.

1 Aqu. 228. in 62. art. 4.
When we judge those good things to be from our selves, which we indeed have
but from above.

2 When we boast our selves to have some good, or some measures of good, and
perfection which we have not.

3 When we slight, and despise others whom we judge to come short of our
perfections. They likewise prescribe a threefold remedy for this distemper. 1.
The consideration of our native weakness and infirmity. 2. The consideration of
the infinite greatness, and perfection of God. 3. The consideration of our own
gifts and graces, in the shortness, and imperfections of them. In short
therefore, there is no need to fear the discovery of any Pride in the
acknowledgment of what God has done for us, provided,

1. That we do not play the Hypocrites, boasting beyond our line, of what we
never experienced, what God never wrought in us. The proud man arrogateth more
to himself, then does belong unto him.

2. Provided, that thou do entitle God to all that thou have of good in
thee. It is truly said by the Schoolmen. Cum aliquis aestimate bonum quod habet
ab alio, ac si haberet a seipso, fertur per consequens appetitus ejus supra
modum in propriam excellentiam: That is; If a man judges that, that good which
he has from another, proceeds from himself, his desire is immoderately
carried out after his own excellency, and this is Pride. They are therefore
highly concerned to look to themselves as to this, that attribute so much to
the power of man's will, without any influence of special, and distinguishing
grace; you shall observe how careful St. Paul was against this upon all
occasions, where he mentions his grace. I live (says he) but yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by
faith in the Son of God. I was a Persecutor, a Blasphemer, Injurious, but I
obtained mercy, and the grace of the Lord was exceedingly abundant in me, with
faith, and love, which is in Christ Jesus. I am the least of the Apostles, not
worthy to be called an Apostle -- But by the Grace of God I am what I am. It is
no pride to acknowledge what God has given us, and done for us, but to
arrogate it to our selves, as done by our own power, this is pride.

3. Provided (3dly,) That thou do not despise the day of small things in the
Souls of others: Scorning, contemning, and despising those, for whom God has
done, or we think that he has done less then he has done for us. This will
speak Pride, the proud Soul as he always arrogateth too much to himself, so he
always gives too little to his Brother, and haughtily over-looketh what he
has, so that his Brother always seems low, and vile in his Eyes.

4. Lastly, Provided, That with the acknowledgment of thy perfections, and
graces, thou conjoynest an admiration of Gods goodness, an acknowledgment of
thy unworthiness, and of thy sinful failings, and imperfections. Thus you see
the Spouse does in this Text. I am black (says she) but comely. So did Paul in
the places I before quoted.

3. A third Bar to this is Novelty. This can only be pleaded with reference to
our acknowledgments to the Church, or the Officers of it, with respect to our
either being admitted into a full communion with it in all Ordinances, or being
restored to it after some lapse for the more private practice of it to our
Brethren, it is as old as David, as may be seen from Psalm. 66. v. 16, 17. As to
the former, it was from the beginning certainly thus. None were admitted into
the Gospel Church without a profession of repentance, and faith in Christ. None
after a lapse or Apostasy was restored to the Church without it. Indeed through
the corruption of times, both the one and the other practice, has degenerated
into a mere formality, and now it seems new to us. But as it is but a
reduction of an Apostolical, and Primitive Practice, so there certainly is
nothing more reasonable, both for the comfort of the particular Soul, from whom
this declaration is desired, and for the satisfaction of the Minister of
Christ, who is but a Steward of the mysteries of Christ, and ought to be
faithful, and also for the mutual satisfaction of such as are to be Members of
the same Body.

4. But lastly, (whatever is pretended) it is much to be feared that Pride is
the true hinderance of this Christian, and Spiritual duty. 1. Either we think
it beneath us to discourse of spiritual things, and to acknowledge all to the
free grace of God: Or,

2. We think we come short of some perfections which others have attained, and
we are ashamed to let others know how short we are. But O that Christians would
grow more familiar with spiritual things. We think that it is a piece of
Charity if we hear of a Neighbor that is full of pain, or very sick ofsuch
adistemper as we have formerly labored under, to goand tell him how we were,
what we did, what effect and issue it had, but we find an awkness to relate to
fellow Christians, how we lay laboring under the guilt of sin, and
perplexities of conscience, and burdens of temptations, and what our
applications to God were, and what relief we found from his free grace and
mercy. But in the performance of this, as well as other duties, there may be
miscarriages. Let me therefore conclude with offering some directions for the
better management of this duty. They shall be three.

1. Take heed to the principle moving thee to such actions. That must be love
to God (the principle of all religious actions, without which we do nothing
acceptably, this is determined by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 1, 2. It is love that
is the fulfilling of the law, and indeed we can no otherwise in any point
fulfill it. Take heed that self-love be not the principle, if by it thou seek
thy honor and praise; self love only principleth thee, but if thou do it,
that God may have the glory of his Grace, that the Souls of others may be
profited, and advantaged. That offenses may be prevented, or removed. That the
dirt may be wiped off, which the world throws upon profession. In these cases
the love of God is thy principle.

2. Take heed to the manner of thy doing it. As to that I shall only hint 2
things.

1. See that God has all the glory. It is lawful for thee to boast of the
Grace of God, but you must be sure to boast in the Lord, and in all thy
acknowledgments of any spiritual good, thou ought to sing with David, Psalm
115. 1. Not unot us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be given the Glory,
for thy mercy, and for thy truth sake.

2. Do it with all the greatest lowliness, and humility of mind and expression
that thou art able, so as nonw may for what thou have received of grace, think
of thee above what he ought to think* Paul forbear to speak what he could have
spoke, after his rapture into the third Heavens, 2 Cor. 12. 6. Lest (as he
says) any should think of me above that which he sees in me, or that he
hears of me. We are to have a care of the corruptions of others hearts, as
well as our own.

3. Look to the simplicity of thy heart in the end of thy action. This will
indeed be much regulated from the principle; if the principle be true, the end
will be so. A man can do nothing out of a true principle of love to God, but
his end will be the honor, and glory of God; if the principle be self-love,
the end will be our own honor, praise, and applause, to have the reputation of
a religious man in the world, and to appear to be what indeed we are not. Now
if thy end be the honor and glory of God, you have heard, that is no other way
attainable, but either by the predication of his goodness, or by the doing of
his will, either in the doing good to others, or the preventing of scandals and
offenses, or upholding the credit, and reputation of Religion, etc. But of all
these things I have discoursed more fully before.

Sermon XXXVI.
Cant. 1. 6. Look not upon me because I am black, etc.

I Have done with the four first Propositions, which I observed in these two
verses. I come to the fifth from those words, Look not upon me because I am
black. Where the Spouse (or rather the Holy Ghost by her) does not forbid all
looking upon the Spouse (whether we understand the Church, or the particular
believing Soul (in the day of her blackness, but some particular lookings. And
this is very usual in Scripture to deliver Propositions generally, which yet
must be understood in a limited, and restrained sense, of which a multitude of
instances might be given, Mat. 18. 3. Except you ^e converted, and become as
little Children, (that is, in some things as little Children) you cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. So where Christ says; my Doctrine is not mine, the
meaning is, not mine alone; and again, If I give testimony of my self; that is,
if I alone gave testimony of my self, my testimony is not true. So often in
precepts, and exhortations, when thou make a feast (says our Savior, Luke
14. 12.) call not thy Friends, or thy Brethren, or thy Kindred; that is, not
them alone. There is nothing more ordinary in the phrase of Scripture, and
particularly in exhortations, or prohibitions. So here when she says, Look not
upon me, her meaning is not to dissuade all intuition, and beholding her in her
blackness, but to caution us how to look upon her; hence the Proposition was:

Prop.
It is our duty to take heed how we look upon the Church, or the particular
Child of God, because they are black.

What the blackness of the Church, or of the particular Soul is, I have
heretofore largely discoursed. Both of them are black through Afflictions, and
black through Corruptions; the Corruptions of particular Souls are personal,
the Corruptions of the Church are the Corruptions of the body collective,
through the mixture of undue, and corrupt Teachers, or Members, the reception
of false and erroneous Doctrine, idolatrous, or superstitious Worship, or
Rites, etc. In some sense we may not be able to avoid looking upon them, as
looking signifies no more then the casting of our Eyes upon obvious objects
that are before us. In some sense it is our duty to look upon them, to pity and
compassionate them, and contribute what we are able toward their help, and
recovery. But in other senses it is our sin to look upon them. The business as
to which I am to instruct you under this Proposition, is how truly to divide
betwixt our duty, and our sin in this case.

The Eyes are the windows of the Soul, through which most of our affections,
and passions show themselves. Pride discovers itself by the Eye, hence you
read of a Generation, whose Eyes are l^f^y, Prove. 30. 13. and David says of
himself, O Lord, mine heart is not haughty, nor my Eyes lofty, Psalm. 131. 1.
Love and wantonness discovers itself by the Eye. Hence Peter tells us of Eyes
full of Adultery, and Job tells us, he had made a covenant with his Eyes, that
he would not look upon a Maid. Covetousness, and immoderate desires discover
themselves by the Eye, Prove. 27. 29. The Eyes of man are never satisfied. The
joy, pleasure, and satisfaction of the Soul, are discerned by the Eye. Mine
Eyes also shall see my desire on my Enemies, Psalm. 92. 11. Hope looks through
the Eye; hence David expresses his hope in God, by the action of his Eyes,
Mine Eyes are toward the Lord, Psalm. 25. 15. and in many other Texts. Pity,
sorrow and compassion are discovered, and expressed by the Eye. The Eyes for
sorrow wax dim, and run down with tears. The outward man moves according to
the bent, and inclination of the will and affections; as a man's will stands
bent, and his affections are inclined, so he moves, so he acts, and this
will of man, and his affections discovering themselves by the Eye. The motions
of that are made use of in Scripture to express the several affections, and
inclinations of the Soul of man. The Spouse in this Text must not be understood
to caution the Daughters of Jerusalem against the natural motions of their
Eyes, with reference to her. But,

1. Against those unkind affections toward her, which were not suitable to her
state and condition.

2. Against those unkind effects, and actions, which ordinarily follow such
affections.

I put in those words [unkind] and [unsuitable] because there are affections,
and actions, which are our duties toward the Spouse in the day of her
blackness. This will lead me to discourse two points under this Proposition.

1. The du^y of Christians toward the Church of Christ, black with
Afflictions, or through sinful mixtures and corruptions; and toward particular
Christians under aff^^ctions, or lapses.

2. How Christians may sin in their behaviors toward one, or the other, under
such circumstances.

First, Let me speak as to what is a Christians duty in the ease; that I shall
resolve in this general position, That it is a Christians duty so far to look
upon the Church, and the particular Christian in the day of their blackness, as
they may be thereby affected with that due compassion which they owe unto their
Brethren, and quickened to those acts which brotherly love, and compassion
calteth to them for. Thus not to look upon the Spouse, because she is black, is
our sin. So that the duty of a Christian here lies in two or three things.

1. In a sympathy, or fellow feeling of a Churches, or Christians burdens, and
misery. The Eye naturally affects the heart, according to the nature of the
object which it sees. Nature itself teaches a sympathy betwixt members of the
same body. No one member can be afflicted, or pained, but the whole body
feels it, and has some sense of it. The Apostle has compared the Church
(the Body of Christ) to the Body natural, for the order of the Parts and
Members, the several offices of the Members, the mutual subserviency of one
Member to another, and that sympathy which should be found betwixt the Members.
Hence we are commanded by the Apostle, to rejoice with those who rejoice, and
to weep with those that weep, and Paul says of himself, who is weak, and I am
not weak, who is offended, and I burn not? and again we are commanded to
remember those who are in bonds, as if we were bound with them, and those that
suffer adversity, as being our selves in the Body. So that, 1. The precept of
God obliges us to it, who having made his people all one Body has made them
also Members each of other. 2. Their relation calls to them for it. It seems
to be the law of nature upon all near relations, for it is not only where (as
in natural Bodies) the natural union is made by Nerves, and Sinews, but where
love has made an union, as in the union betwixt Parents, and Children,
Husbands, and Wives, etc. Nor is this to be extended only to such cases where
the person beloved feels a burden, or misery, but where they lie under it,
though they be not sensible of it, what Husband, or Wife is not affected with
the affliction of their correlate in an Apoplexy, or under some distempers, of
which themselves possibly have iittle or no sense. So will every good Christian
be affected at the case of his Brother fallen, tho he possibly has not that
due sense of his own fall, which he should have, and at the case of the Church,
under its blackness, though possibly the Rulers, or generality of the Members,
be not so sensible of their own corruptions, and deviations, and to look upon
the Spouse of Christ in her blackness, with a mournful, pitying and
compassionate Eye, is very much the duty of every good Christian, and what we
find the constant, and religious practice of the People of God at all times.

2. We may so far look upon the Spouses blackness, as our sight of it may
inform us better, or quicken us to seek God on her behalf. It is our duty to
pray for one another, James 5. 15. Confess your faults one to another, and pray
one for another. They are put together, and the first seems to be mentioned
as a means in order to the other. How can I plead for a Church, or a particular
Child of God, if I know nothing of their state? how can I know it, if I may not
look upon it? It is a divine indulgence granted by God to his People, that they
shall not be heard only praying for themselves, but for their Brethren also, 1
John 5. 16. If any man see his Brother sin a sin, which is not unto death, he
shall ask, and he shall give them life for them who sin not unto death. All a
Christians sins in their own nature are mortal, and unto death. The Papists err
in their distinction of sins into such as are mortal, and such as are venial,
but no sin is mortal, in that sense as it signifies, what cannot be forgiven
(saving only the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, mentioned by our Savior,)
and in respect of Gods gracious Ordination, no Child of God sins, or can sin
unto death. Now where the sin is not unto death, God has promised us, on the
behalf of our Brethren, that if we see them sinning, and pray for them, their
sins shall be forgiven them. Now if they may not look upon them in any sense,
or to any purpose, how should they pray for them? And thus it is highly the
duty of Gods People to look both upon the Church, and the People of God,
because of their blackness through affliction. Is any man afflicted (says
James 5. 14.) let him pray, and let them send for the Elders of the Church, and
let them pray over them -- and the prayer of the faithful shall save the sick,
and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he has committed sin, it shall be
forgiven him. In this sense it is so far from being Christians sin, that it is
their duty to look upon the Spouse, because she is black.

3. Lastly, It is Christians duty to look upon the Spouse, because she is
black* so far as to enable us in any measure to the purging out their
corruptions. A good Christian ought so far to consider the corruptions of a
Church, as in his place to endeavor its reformation; and consequently it
cannot be his duty to have communion with her in those things wherein she
deviateth from the rule of her Lord. It is true, the effectual Authoritative
Reformation of a National Church, belongs to the Rulers, if they be
Christians, as appears by all the instances of the Old Testament, concerning
the Kings of Judah, and such a Reformation of a particular Church or
Congregation, belongs to the Officers of Christ in it, but every private
Christian has his part, viz. to inform such, in whom the power is, to bear a
testimony against such corruptions, and not to have fellowship with the Church
in such things. I cannot grant that all Corruptions, in the Doctrine, Worship,
or Discipline of a Church, are a sufficient cause to conclude it no true
Church* and wholly to withdraw himself from the communion of it. But I doubt
not to say, that it is my duty to withdraw Communion from a Church in such
acts, as without sin I cannot have communion with it; but of this more by and
by. The case is the same in the case of a lapsed Brother, I am bound to
admonish him, to tell him of his offense, and if he will not hear me to take
two or three with me. If he will not hear them to tell the Church, that he
might be separated from the Communion of it. The Apostle has directed us, If
our Brother be overtaken with a fault, to restore him in the Spirit of
meekness, Gal. 6. 1. Now in order to the performance of this, I may, yea, it is
my duty to look upon my Brother when he is black, for the Lord who has willed
the end, must be understood to have also willed the means, that are necessary
to that end.

Let me in the next place show you what kind of looking on the Spouse in her
blackness is sinful; this I shall more largely open in several particulars.

1. First, We ought not to look upon them with a censorious, and condemning
Eye. Neither for their seeming blackness through Affl^ctions, nor yet for their
real blackness through coorruption, either breaking out of a Christians heart,
or appearing in a Church. Judge not (says our Savior, Luke 6. 37.) and you
shall not be judged, condemn not, and you shall not be condemned. He that
judges the truth of a Christians Grace, or of a Churches state, from the more
external providence of God, either toward the one, or toward the other, does
not consider what has been the lot of the Church, and People of God, ever
since God had a Church, or a Believer upon the Earth; nor what the Scripture
speaks concerning such providence. He that condemns, and casts off a
Church as no true Church, for some particular Corruptions, and undue mixtures,
does not consider the state of the Jewish Church, which yet God owned, and
Christ owned, by having communion with the Assemblies of it in those things
which were of his Fathers institution in it: nor yet the state of the Church at
Rome, and that in Galatia, and Corinth, all which had their Corruptions, and
undue mixtures, yet are owned by God and Christ as true Churches. Where indeed
Idolatry is owned in the Doctrine of a Church, and ordinarily practiced in the
Worship of a Church, or established as the Worship of it, I cannot well tell
what to say, I do not find that Idolatry was ever established as the Worship of
the Church of God in Judah, tho I find it several times tolerated, and during
some wicked Princes, reigns practiced amongst them, but not universally, nor so
steddily, but a succeeding Prince quickly revived the true Worship of God, and
destroyed the Idols. Idolatry seems to be that sin which unchurc^e h a Church,
and makes a People not to be owned by God as his People, but that a Church
should be condemned as no true Church, where this is not found, is more then I
can find in Holy Writ, tho there may be in a Church not so far corrupted, a
great many corruptions, in which it may be a Christians duty not to join with
them; where Christ is owned, and the truths of God necessary to be known, and
believed in order to salvation, are owned and published, and the main acts of
Divine Worship are performed, there is some comeliness. So far a particular
Christian, though we see some particular failings in him, and such as may
justify the separation of him from a Church, as a suspected Leper, yet we ought
to take heed of looking upon him with too censorious an Eye, to restore him in
the Spirit of meekness, lest we also be tempted.

2. We ought not to look upon them with a glad, and satisfied Eye. It is
inhumane to rejoice in the afflictions of any, but irreligious to rejoice in
the afflictions of any belonging to God. This was the sin of the Edomites, for
which God so severely threatened them by Obadiah, v. 12. of his Prophecy; Thou
should not have looked on in the day of thy Brother, in the day that he
became a stranger, neither should thou have rejoiced over the Children of
Judah, and to the same purpose, Ezekiel. 35. 15. As thou did rejoice at the
inheritance of the House of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I do unto
thee, thou shall be desolate, and v. 14. When the whole Earth rejoices, I will
make thee desolate. I fear there is too much of this ill humor in the world,
such an hatred to those that fear God, and those Churches which walk most
strictly up to the rule of the Gospel, as produces a joy and rejoicing, when
we hear that any evil betideth them. We ought to be very careful of our selves,
as to this, this is very far from weeping with those that weep; but much less
ought we to be glad, and rejoice in the sinful falls of professors, and
miscarriages of such as have had a repute for religion and godliness. Nothing
is more against Piety and Charity. The honor, and glory of God is as much
concerned in the sins of others, as it is in our own sins, and we ought no more
to glory in the shame of others, then in our own shame. There is a double
rejoicing in the sins of others. The first is a rejoicing of wantonness, when
men out of a mere idle wanton humor can please themselves, and others with
discourses of Men's and Women's failings. The second is a rejoicing of envy, and
malice, when men envy good men their honor, and repute in the world, and
therefore watch for their halting (as Jeremiah 20. v. 10.) and rejoice when
they are fallen. All rejo^cing in iniquity, all looking upon others to that
end, or of which, that is an effect, is highly sinful, as being against Piety,
a rejoicing in Gods dishonor, and against Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 6, a rejoicing
in an evil befallen to thy Brother. Take heed therefore of this looking upon
the Spouse, and this is too too frequent, and no more then has always been in
the world, which always lay in wickedness, and from Abels time was always
filled with malice against them that loved and feared God, David deprecates it,
Psalm 35. 19. Let not those that are mine Enemies wrongfully rejoice over me,
neither let them wink with the Eye that hate me without a cause. v. 21. They
opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, Aha, our Eye has seen it.
And David prays bitterly against such a generation; Let them be desolate for
a reward of their shame, that say unto me Aha, Aha; and so again, Psalm. 70. v.
3. Ham rejoiced in his Fathers nakedness, how dreadfully did the Lord revenge
it upon him and his Posterity, according to the prophetical Curse of his
Father? G^n. 9. 25, 26. I have, not without trembling, seen People make sport
at the natural defects of Persons, so reproaching God in his works of nature,
and providence, whereas they ought rather to bless God upon such sights, who
might have made them like unto such imperfect Creatures. Not without more
trembling sometimes seen, and heard men rejoice, and make themselves sport with
the moral defects, and profancness of others, their Oaths, and Curses, and
Drunkenness, and ribauldry, whereas they ought rather to mourn for the
dishonor of God, and that such things might be taken away from persons who
call themselves Christians; it argues a very corrupt Soul to rejoice in the
sins of any, but to be pleased to rejoice, and be glad at the stumblings, and
falls of Persons that make a profession of Godliness, is yet more sinful,
because God by such sins has more dishonor, and such rejoicing can proceed
from no other root, but that of hatred to God, and envy and malice. Thirdly,

3. We ought not to look upon the Spouse, because she is black, with a scornful
and despising Eye. The Psalmist complains, Psalm. 123. v. 4. Our Soul is
exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the
contempt of the proud, And Psalm. 79. 4. We are become a reproach to our
Neighbors, a scorn and derision to those who are round about us. So Psalm. 44.
14. Thou make us a reproach to our Neighbors, a scorn and a derision to
those that are round about us. The occasion of scorn is blacknes^, either
caused through affliction, or through temptations, and fallings by the
prevalence of corruptions. Job complained, Job 16. 20. That his friends scorned
him, while his Eyes poured out tears unto God, The Church in her blackness was
thus despised, Lam. 1. 8. so was Christ himself, Is. 53. 3. But how far is this
from the duty of Christians? where is the scorners Brotherly love and
compassion? how does he forget that himself also is in the body, and may be
tempted? Affliction is what may befall the best of men, and who can scorn and
despise a Christian fallen through infirmity, and temptation, that considers
how David and Peter fell, and that himself stands by Grace, and that the
reason of his standing, is because God keeps off from him the like
temptations that others meet with?

4. It is our duty not so to look upon the Spouse in the day of her blackness,
as because of it to be scared from her company, to shun, and avoid her, and to
withdraw our selves from her, either from advising, and counselling her in
order to her cleansing, or doing what in us lies in order to it. Solomon
says, A friend loves at all times, and a Brother is born for adversity. If
there were no obligation upon us from any religious bond, or relation, yet our
participation of the same common humane nature ought to oblige us to pity,
counsel, advise, and what we can to help Persons in distress; but Religion lays
yet an higher tie upon us, as it obliges more specially to love the Church,
and to love the Brethren, and to be Friends to those that are Christ's Friends;
now a Friend loves at all times. Our Savior in the Parable of him that fell
amongst Thieves, Luke 20. 31. determines him no Neighbor, that seeing the man
stripped of his raiment, and wounded, and half dead, came and only looked on
him, and passed on the other side; much less can such a one call himself a
friend. God by Obadiah tells the Edomites, v. 11. of their standing on the
other side, when the strangers carried the Jews away into captivity. Nor are we
only obliged to this in case of the Spouses blackness through affliction, but
through sin also, and corruption, and that both in the case of the particular
Christian, and of the Church of God; let me a little enlarge upon this because
I fear there is too much failing of Christians upon this account.

1. In the case of the particular Christian. It is true there may be such
faileurs of particular persons as may oblige conscientious Christians to shun
an intimacy with them; I have written to you, says the Apostle, 1. Cor 5. 11.
not to keep company, if any man be called a Brother, be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with
such a one no not to Eat^; 2. Thessal. 3. 14. If any man obey not our Word by
this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed. But observe the next words, yet count him not as an Enemy, but
admonish him as a Brother. I ought not wholly to withdraw my self from that man
who may have so fallen, as it may be my sin to have an intimacy of fellowship
and communion with him: I ought not to count him as an Enemy, whom yet I may
not make my intimate, and bosom friend, but what I can do, by counsel and
advice, by reproofs and admonitions in order to his recovery, I am bound not to
neglect so as I ought not wholly to withdraw my self from him.

2. In the case of a Church, black through corruption, the admission of undue
mixtures of members, of erroneous doctrine, Sup^rstitious rites, etc. it is
undoubtedly our duty not to defile our selves by communion with her in those
things wherein her blackness appears. But it is also our duty not so to
withdraw from it, as to lend it none of our help; There is indeed a time when
God says of a Church, Wherefore come out from amongst them, and be you
separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive
you, and will be a father unto you, and yo^ shall be my Sons and daughters,
says the Lord God Almighty. God said so to the Jews when Jeroboam set up the
Calves at Dan and Bethel. The honest Priests and Levites resorted to Judah out
of all their coasts, leaving their suburbs, and possessions, and after them out
of all the tribes of Israel, such as set their hearts to seek the Lord God of
Israel, came to Jerusalem to Sacrifice to the Lord God of their Fathers, 2.
Chron. 11. 16. But where God has not said to a People, you are not my People,
where Idolatry is not crept into the Worship of a Church, nor such errors in
Doctrine, as destroy the foundations of faith and repentance, tho it may be the
duty of Christians, not to be so blind as not to see manifest errors and
corruptions, and to mourn for them, yet it is also their duty not so to look
upon them, as wholly to shun communion with such a Church, so far as Christ
owns it and to put themselves out of the obligations of charity and brotherly
Love, or to think themselves discharged from such obligations; all the
diseases, and wounds of Churches are not incurable, and we ought so far as we
can to attend, and endeavor the cure of them. It is indeed a sad case, when a
Church is so far corrupted as to its officers and members, as a Christian can
see no hope of a reduction of it to the divine rule, but certainly a great deal
of waiting and patience in this case is our duty, tho that a Christian can be
obliged all the days of his life, to keep in the communion of a Church, in
which he cannot enjoy all the Ordinances of the Gospel according to the will of
Christ is more then I know. But it is one thing to Satisfy our own consciences,
as to the purity of acts of Worship, and communion, another thing wholly to
reject, cast off, and condemn such Churches in which we cannot see such a
purity. It is apparent, that in and after our Saviors time, the Church of the
Jews had woeful mixtures, and were corrupted both in Doctrine and in Worship
and in discipline, indeed little in it was right. The whole Ceremonial Worship
was abolished by the death of Christ. He pulled down that partition wall
betwixt the Gentiles and the Jews, and abolished the law contained in
Ordinances; yet observe the Apostles practice, tho they kept their private
meetings of the Christians, yet they also went into the Temple and into the
Synagogues; and Acts 19. v. 8. When Paul came to Ephesus, he went into the
Jewish Synagogues and spoke there for 3 Months, disputing and persuading, the
things belonging to the Kingdom of God. But when diverse were hardened, and
believed not, but spoke evil of that way before the multitude, then indeed he
departed from them, and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the School
of one Tyrannus. If the foundation Doctrines of the Gospel be any where denied
or blasphemed, the ways of God reproached in any Church, and those that walk in
them, reviled, and persecuted, or Idolatry admitted, set up and encouraged; in
all these cases, we may presume Christ has forsaken a Church, and we may go
after him. In other cases we ought only so far to look upon her, because she is
black, as not to colly and defile our selves by any communion with her, in what
things in her are irregular, andout of order, being so far Separate as not to
touch the uncleanthing.

5. Fifthly. We should not look upon the Spouses blackness so as to be moved
thereby either to think or speak ill of Religion, or the good ways of God, or
to depart our selves from them. I know of no Religion whose principles teach
debauchery. Much less does that which is pure, and undefiled before God. We
must therefore carefully distinguish betwixt the Vices, and faileurs of
Persons, and the faults of principles and the way of Religion. So as it is a
most unrighteous thing for any Person to entertain ill thoughts of Religion or
to speak Evil of it for the errors failings, or miscarriages of those who
profess it. Yet how ordinary a thing is this in the world! how common is the
unreasonable clamor of such as hate God -- Crimine ab uno, Disce omnes; They
are all alike. You see what their religion teaches them. Indeed upon the
account of this, it is that the sins of Professors are so heinous. When God by
the Prophet had let David know he had pardoned his sins, yet he threatens him
with a severe punishment because he had given occasion to the Enemies of God to
blaspheme, Saint Paul writes to the Thessalonians, 1. Th^ssal. 3. 3. That none
should be moved by his afflicti ons, for God had appointed him, his Church, his
People thereunto. I would speak to you for one thing more. That none should be
Scandalized and offended at the ways of God for the breakings out of
corruptions, in particular Persons owning and professing Religion, for there
never were any so white but they had some black Spots.

6. Lastly. We ought least of all to look upon the Spouses blackness, so as to
be coll^ed by it to copy it out for our practice, or plead it in justifi^ation
of our selves. The use we should make of the failings and sins of professors
should be, that while we stand, we should take heed lest we fall. The failings
of Christians ought to be for our caution, not for our imitation. And to this
end Christians should not only consider David, sins, but David's punishment
also, his broken bones, his watering his couch with tears, the sword never
departing from his house, the difficulty he expresses in his penitential
Psalms to recover the sense of Gods Love, his hard work of repentance and they
will see little encouragement to sin after David's copy. Nor yet after Peter's if
they consider how bitterly he wept after his fall, before he recovered the kind
look of his Master. This is enough to have spoken Doctrinally, as to this point
indeed the whole discoursehath been practical I may therefore be very short in
the application.

Use. 1.
In the first place I desire from this discourse that we may all observe both
the Excellency of the Divine rule, and the crookedness of the heart of man. How
much sin is committed in the World? How many indecencies may be observed in the
conversations of men, of Christians, from their undue looking upon the Spouse
of Christ because she is black? What a comely society would the society of
Christians be, would they bear one another burdens, and every one have a
fellow feeling of each others miseries, and afflictions? And would look no
further on the blackness of Professors, then to inform, and direct them how to
apply themselves to God on their behalf, or to them, or any others any way in
order to their help and cure; if Christians would not look upon the Church or
each other in afflictions or under any lapses, with a censorious Eye to condemn
one another, but with a charitable Eye hoping the best and helping toward it.
Not with a glad and rejoicing Eye, but with a mourning and weeping Eye, being
grieved for the afflictions each of other and much more grieved, for the
breaking out of one another lusts and corruptions. Not with a Scornful Eye,
but with an humble Eye, pitying one another under the hand of God upon them, or
bewailing the frailty and infirmity of humane nature Not shunning and avoiding
one another Societeis, but keeping to the Divine Rule, so far keeping company
with the worst of our brethren, as our company may serve them for any good, to
their souls, I say were it possible to reduce the whole society of Christians
to this order, how beautiful a society would it be? This is our rule, if any
walk not up to it, let not religion suffer for their passions and uncharitable
behavior.

But ah! how many fall under a severe reproof, if what you have heard in this
discourse be ture, and the duty of all such as profess themselves to be the
disciples of Christ. How many censorious Christians and rash judgers have we,
that will not consider that the finest gold must have some grains of allowance
how many that will undertake to determine the state of Souls from external
providence that happen to them, and from particular acts and miscarriages. How
glad are a great many in the world when they can but hear a report of the
failings of Persons owning Religion? That say report, and we will report it and
watch for their haltings, saying peradventure he will be enticed. How many that
sit in the seat of the scornful; despising one another for their afflictions,
because themselves are at ease. How many of Gods People may repeat those words
of the Psalmist, Psalm. 123. 4. Our Soul is exceedingly filled with the
scornings of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud. How
little tenderness is to be found amongst Christians, toward lapsed brethren,
how little care to restore such as are overtaken with faults in the Spirit of
meekness? Is this not to look upon the Spouse because she is black. How ready
are Christians to shake off all fellowship and communion with Churches and
particular Christians for some partial blackness? And how ready are others for
the failings of professors to reproach even Religion it self, and to take up
prejudices against the right ways of God? How ready are others to copy out the
sinful miscarriages of Christians, and to justify themselves from them.
Certainly these things ought not to be. Oh that all you who are Daughters of
Jerusalem, who profess to Religion, as you do not come behind in many other
things that are good, so that you would not come behind in this: The many
errors of Christians in this one piece of duty, the due and right behavior of
themselves toward Churches, and particular Souls. Let us know that it is a
great piece of Christians perfection, that whereunto the most have not as yet
attained; remember, it is a great piece of your duty to be pressing after it. I
shall but mind you of three things which if they will not prevail with you I
know not what to add.

1. The concern in it of the glory of God. In the obedience of his will, for it
is what he has (as I have showed you) commanded, the winning of Souls: Which
may be more estranged, and alienated from God, by an undue behavior, and much
reduced by a just and Christian behavior, and the upholding the credit, and
reputation of religion, and godliness.

2. Secondly. The concern of your brothers good is not little; by this thou
shall show that brotherly Love which is so commended in the Gospel; how can
thou say thou love thy Brother* whiles thou watchest for his halting, and art
glad, and rejoicest when thou see^^ him fallen, that scornest and despisest him
because he is low, and mean, and afflicted, or because thou observest his foot
to have slipped. Where is thy pity? Where is thy compassion in the case.

3. Finally, thy own concern is not small in the case. Upon this argument the
Apostle to the Hebrews persuades a remembering of such as are in bonds, and
adversity. Heb. 13. 3 considering that we also are in the body. And upon this
argument he also persuades tenderness to persons black through faults, Gal. 6.
2. considering thy self lest thou also be tempted. What man is there that may
not be afflicted and tossed with tempests as much as any others are? What man
is there that may not be overpowered at some time or other by his corruptions,
or Satan's temptations? Now observe that of our Savior, Luke 6. 37, 38. Judge
not, and you shall not be judged, condemn not and you shall not be condemned --
For with the same measure that you meet withal, it shall be measured to you
again. In these cases the Law of Nature holds, which Christ has also
Ganonized in his Gospel. Whatsoever you would that others should do to you, do
you the same to them.

Sermon XXXVII.
Canticles 1. 6. -- Because the Sun has looked upon me.

I am come now to the sixth Proposition I observed from these words, which the
Spouse gives as one reason of her blackness. By the Sun I told you, I
understood the scorchings of Afflictions, and Persecutions; hence observed,

Prop.
That in this life the Spouse of Christ (whether we by it understand the true
Church, or the particular believing Soul) is exposed to afflictions, and
persecutions which, make her black.

The Proposition asserts the Lot of the People of God in this world, that is to
be afflicted, and persecuted, to have the Sun look upon them; this sense I put
upon this metaphor, having our Savior my guide, Mat. 13. 6. 21. 2. It shows
the ill effect, or influence which these Persecutions have upon the People of
God, sometimes, that is, to make her black, or at least to appear so to humane
Eyes. In the handling of this Proposition I shall,

1. Show you, That Afflictions, and Persecutions are usually the lot of the
Spouse of Christ while she is in this world.

2. Whence it is, that this is its hard fate to have the Sun to look upon her.

3. What collying, or blackning qualities there are in afflictions, which
affect the Spouse.

4. Whence it is, that because of these Afflictions, and Persecutions, the
Spouse of Christ is judged sometimes black, when indeed she is not so. Then I
shall apply the whole discourse.

Concerning Afflictions in general, I shall speak little, they are the common
lot of mankind, nor is the Child of God more exempted from them then another. I
shall therefore rather bend my discourse to such kind of afflictions as are the
more peculiar afflictions of the Gospel, and affect the Spouse of Christ, and
these are those which we call Persecutions; of these our Savior interprets,
the Sun being up, Mat. 13. 6. v. 21. These are such injuries as are done to the
Church and People of God, sor the Words sake, for Righteousness sake, for
Christ's sake, which are the several phrases by which these kinds of affliction
are expressed, Mat. 13. 21. Mat. 5. v. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 14. Any sufferings
undergone of choice, rather then we will defile our conscience with sin. It is
true, the Etymology of the word will not give us this sense of it, but verba
valent secundum usum. It is the usage of words, that must give us the sense of
them, and this you will find is the sense of this term, both in Holy Writ, and
all Ecclesiastical usage. Nor does it alter the case, if men be made sufferers
truly upon this account, whether they suffer according to an humane law, or
not, for if an ^umane law would have purged such acts from unrighteousness, and
cleansed them from the guilt of Persecution; the Jews had been cleared, who
said upon their Crucifying of Christ, we have a law, and by that law he ought
to die; and all the Martyrs who have suffered since his time for his names sake
(excepting such as had died in Massacres, and by Assassinations had died as
fools died, for they generally died in the execution of some laws, first made
by such as thirsted after their blood. Nor is it to be limited only to capital
punishments. Amongst the noble Army of Martyrs reckoned up, Heb. 11. 36. Some
had trial of cruel mo^kings -- of bonds, and imprisonments -- some wandered
about in Sheepskins, and Goat skins, -- in deserts, and Mountains, and in
Dens, and Caves of the Earth, and Paul calls Ishmaels mocking of Isaac a
Persecution, Gal. 4. 29. and as then (says the Apostle) he that was born after
the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now.
Now that this has been the lot of the People of God in all ages, is so evident
both from the whole story of Scripture, and all Ecclesiastical history, that I
need not be large in the proof of it. He that casts his Eye upon Adams Family
(when that contained all the Church God had in the world) will find there a
Cain rising up against Abel, and slaying him, because he offered up a more
excellent Sacrifice. In Abraham's Family he that was born after the Flesh,
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit. Esau persecuteth Jacob, the
Egyptians oppress the Israelites, there was a continual feud betwixt Judah,
where the true Church was, and Israel after they had Apostatised. David in many
Psalms tells you how he was continually opposed, and maligned. What the holy
Prophets of the Lord suffered for declaring the truth, you may read at large in
the Books of the Kings and Chronicles, what Jeremiah, Daniel, Amos, the three
Children suffered, you may read at large in the Prophets. If you come to the
New Testament, you find John Baptist beheaded, Christ Crucified, Stephen
stoned, James killed with the Sword, Paul variously suffering, and all for
righteousness sake.

2. It may be more worth our inquiry, whence these storms arose, which our
Savior foretold, and were begun with him, but grew greater presently after his
death, and troubled the Church for 300 years together; the root of them was
doubtless the worlds hatred, this our Savior has learned us, and in some
measure armed his people against it, John 15. 8. If the world hate you, you
know it hated me* before it hated you. If you were of the world, the world
would love his own. But because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hates you. God has put an enmity
betwixt the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent; Christ and his
Seed, the Devil and his Children, but in regard we must not so understand that
Text, Genesis 3. 15. as if God infused those evil habits of malice, and envy, and
hatred of God, and goodness, but only that God would infuse such Spiritual,
gracious habits into the Souls of his People, as through that native malice,
envy, and corruption, which is in the hearts of such as God pleases not to
change by his special grace, would provoke such an enmity in them; we must
inquire into the root, and grounds of that hatred, which produces this enmity
and hostility, and that is, 1. Their natural aversion to all piety and
goodness: And 2. That Pride which is in their hearts, which suffers them not
to be patient of the preference of godly men in the favor of God, nor of being
excelled by them before men in such a conversation, as their lusts will not
suffer them to lead, much less to be condemned by their Doctrines, and
reproofs* hence they both hate such as will reprove them, either in the Gate,
or from the Pulpit, and because the Ministers of Christ are those to whose
Office especially the latter belongs, hence they have in all times been made
the buts and objects of their fury.

But though these afflictions come immediately, and proximately from men, yet
they are also the appointments of God, the counsels of God, executed by his
permissive Providence, not restraining the malice, and lusts of wicked men's
hearts, but suffering them to exert, and put it forth; the same account must be
given of this sort, as of other sorts of Gods afflictive dispensations: 1. The
punishment of his peoples sins. 2. The trial, exercise, and manifestations of
his peoples graces.

1. The punishment of his peoples sins, and this is for the most part evident
in such Persecutions as fall upon whole Churches, I say for the most part, it
is rare that God lets loose Enemies upon a settled Church to disturb its quiet,
till it has losts its first love, and admitted sinful mixtures. Thus it fell
out to the famous Churches of Asia, to whom the Epistles were written in the
Revelations, and it may be the obvious decays of Religion in the Primitive
Churches, were no small cause of the Persecutions which vexed, and destroyed
them for three hundred years together.

2. The trial, exercise, and manifestation of his peoples graces, was also
another cause; this we are often told in the Epistles of the Apostles, nor did
the Church of Christ receive a small augmentation, and increase by the courage,
and constancy, the faith, and patience of the Martyrs.

3. Lastly, God also by this means obtains another end, viz. Wicked men's
filling up the measures of their iniquities. That upon them might come (as our
Savior speaks) all the righteous blood that has been shed by their
Forefathers. But all this is a digression from the principal thing in the
Proposition, which is to show you how these blacken the Spouse of Christ: That
is, either, 1. Really by drawing out corruption: Or, 2. Appearingly in the Eyes
of the world.

1. Afflictions often really blacken the Spouse of Christ, as they draw out
that latent Corruption which is in their Hearts. This is true both concerning
the Church, and concerning the particular Soul. 1. As to the Church, which is
by our Savior compared to a Field of Wheat, in which are Tares as well as
Wheat, and to a Net, which within the swallow of it has bad as well as good
fish. Now Persecution makes a great discovery of Hypocrites, they that received
the Seed into stony ground, having no root in themselves, fall away, enduring
but a while, and when Tribulation, or Persecution arises, for the Word are
immediately offended; the Dragons Tail, Revel. 12. 4. drew down the third part
of the Stars of Heaven, and did cast them down to the Earth. Thus it is seen in
all Persecutions, they always discover a great number of Hypocrites, and false
Brethren, yea, and often many of Gods People at first shrink, and fall under
the greatness of the temptation; so you know it sell out as to Peter in the
High Priests Hall, and so it has been with many of such as have at last dyed
in the testimony of the truths of God. These things make the Church black, when
the Sun looks upon it, though in the issue the melting of the Church proves
the purifying of it, and making it exceeding white, as you know it is with many
things purified by fire, though the fire makes them at last more bright, and
pure, yet at first till their dross be cleansed, they look more black, so it is
with the Church of God in the day of its fiery trial. So it is also as to
Particular Christians. Tribulation in them at last works Patience, and
Patience Experience. and Experience Hope. Even such an hope as will not make
ashamed, but this is after some exercise therein. Hence says the Apostle,
Heb. 12. 11. Now no chastening for the present, see^oth to be joyous, but
grievous. Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby. How black did holy Job
look, Chap. 3. When he Cursed the day of his birth. Who afterward being
exercised with a long affliction came out white. Till by Tribulation the Soul
comes to be humbled, and tamed to the will of God, and to have his will melted
into a resignation to the will of God, till his faith, and patience come to be
both tried, and to have their perfect work. Tribulation, and Persecution makes
the Spouse really black, like the Person that has taken Physic to purge out
some ill humors, so long as his Physic is working, and struggling with the
peccant humors, he is sicker, and appears worse then before he took it.

2. But secondly. Tho Persecution and Tribulation may at first make the Spouse
really black; yet they make her appear much more black then she is in the Eyes
of the world, and the generality of men and women in it, of which a various
account may be given, I will instance but in two or three things.

1. The first is the impressions which the calumnies, and slanders of Enemies
thrown upon the Church, and upon believers, have upon many people. There is
nothing more ordinary, then when the Enemies of God are in their highest rage
against his People, to have their mouths fullest of obloquy and slander against
them. Thus David complains, Psalm. 35. 11. that in the day of his ealamity,
False witnesses did rise up against him, and laid to his charge things that he
knew not. The men of the world, whose malice, and hatred, prompteth them to
injurious actions against innocent persons, conceive themselves obliged to
defend themselves against the common reason of the world, which teaches them
to cry out against such acts of violence, with raising lies, and slanders
concerning such as they so oppress, and persecute, he that is any thing
acquainted with the Psalms of David, or other parts of Holy Writ, will find
that what we see in the age we live in, was but the old practice of wicked and
profane Persons, ashamed to own the true cause of their hatred, and malice. It
was Matchiavels maxim, Fortiter calumniare, aliquid adhaerebit, lay loud
enough (though never so false) upon thy adversaries, something will stick to
them, and indeed it is hardly imaginable but it should.

2. A second reason of this judgment is, because the most of men judge of
blackness, and comeliness by a mere sensual Eye. The life of the Spouse is an
hidden life, her beauty is an hidden beauty. The world does not consider the
afflictions of Gods People Spiritually, as they are the tokens of Divine Love
(for whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every Child whom he
receives) nor as they purge away the Souls dross, and take away its Tin, as
they melt it, and try it, and give faith a perfect exercise, and patience a
perfect work, nor are they able to discern the Souls exercises of faith and
patience, of humility, and meekness, and quiet submission to the will of God.
The afflicted Spouse may not only be exceeding beautiful in the Eyes of Christ,
but in the Eyes of the Saints and People of God in their affliction, and
tribulation, and the generality of men yet see no beauty and comeliness in
them, because their beauty is spiritually discerned; all that is external, is
blackuess, and unloveliness, they are only glorious within.

3. The generality of men and women in the world judge of the love and hatred
of God, by what is before men in this life. The beauty of the Spouse of Christ
lies in two things. 1. In her acceptance with God. 2. In her habits of grace,
and the exercise of them, both these are hidden from the Eyes of the world,
they see not the internal frame of a believers Soul (as I but now told you) and
as their habits of grace are hidden things (the world knows us not, faith
John) so their state of favor, and acceptance with God is an hidden thing
also; they cannot understand how God should love him or her, against whom he
suffers men to prevail to such a degree, so that the wicked devours the men
that are more righteous then they; they judge of Gods love, and hatred to
Souls, by what in this life happens to them. The Apostles phrases, 2 Cor. 4. 8,
9. are all riddles to them; we are troubled, says he, on every side, but not
distressed, we are perplexed, but not in despair, persecuted, but not forsaken,
cast down, but not destroyed; I have done with the Doctrinal part of my
discourse.

Use 1.
Is this the lot of the Spouse of Christ, to be Sunburned with afflictions, and
persecutions? Is it their lot to be afflicted, and will afflictions make them
black, and appear more black then possibly they are, what then is our duty?

1. In the first place, it is certainly our duty to expect afflictions of this
nature, and to expect such usage under them, as the people of God before us
have constantly met with. Our Savior Christ having given to his hearers the
law of his Discipleship, Lu. 14. v. 27. And whosoever does not bear his cross,
and come after me, cannot be my Disciple; adds further. v. 28. 29, 30, 31.
For which of you intending to build a Tower, sits not down first, and
counts the cost, whether he has sufficient to finish it, left happily after
he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all begin to mock
him, saying this man began to build, and was not able to finish? Or what King
going to make war against another Ring, sits not down first, and consulteth
whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him, that comes against him with
twenty thousand. Or else while the other is yet afar off, he sends an
Embassage, and desires conditions of peace? Our Savior Christ by those two
similitudes, teaches us all the duty of a pre-consideration, a thinking before
hand what may afterward happen to us in the profession of religion, and the
owning of him, and the profession of the Gospel. It is certainly a true saying,
Mala inopinata graviora, the less prospect we have of evils, the more
inexpected they come upon us, the more heavy they prove to us; unthought of
evils are always most intolerable, because we are least prepared for them. Let
every good Christian therefore live in view of those Afflictions which the
Apostle calls the Afflictions of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 8. Either because they
constantly, or most ordinarily follow the profession of it, or because indeed
it is unreasonable to think that any person should either adhere to the
propositions of truth contained in it, or live up to the rule of life, which
the Gospel prescribes, and be free from them. If (says our Savior, John 15.
18.) The world hates you, you know it hated me before it hated you, and v. 20.
Remember the word that I said unto you, the Servant is not greater then the
Lord, if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. These things
(says our Savior, John 16. 1. 2, 3.) I have spoken unto you that you should
not be offended, they shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea, the time
comes, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God good service.
It is a most unreasonable thing for men to meet with more pleasing things, and
prosperity, in the profession of Religion, then the Author of that Religion, or
any of his Disciples ever met with, or then he has told us we should meet with
in the profession of it, who knew all things; or that we should expect more
tranquillity in the profession of Religion, then the nature of that profession,
considered together with the ignorance, and corruption of the world, does
promise the professors of it. It is true there is nothing in the nature and
profession of the Christian Religion, considered singly, and apart by itself,
that is unlovely, or disobliging to any; it is a Religion full of good will
toward men. But considering this Religion, together with the corruption of the
world, there is much in it, which he that looks but with a rational Eye, will
see that the world is never like to bear better then it has hitherto done* it
tieth a man up to believe Propositions according to the revelations of the
Word. To live a life according to the rule of the word. To worship God
according to the prescriptions of the Word, in all things, it calls a man to
the Law, and to the Testimony. It obliges every man in his place to bear a
testimony against whatsoever is contrary to the strict rule of the Word. Now
whosoever considers either the ignorance of the world, which knows not the Son
of God, nor him that sent him, nor what is the revealed will of God, or the
sensuality of the world, how mad upon their lusts the most of Men and Women
are: Or the Pride of the world, which makes men impatient, either of a verbal
reproof, by doctrine and admonitions, or real reproof, by a quite contrary
conversation, more pleasing to God, and acceptable to, and beautiful in the
sight of men: Or the affectation of dominion over the conscience, which a
multitude are possessed of, and their impatience at good Christians not owning,
and submitting to their dictates, and saying as they say, and doing as they do,
can hardly imagine how those that will live godly in Christ Jesus, should live
any long time in the world without persecution. Now the expectation of those
searchings, and Sunburnings, will have various good effects upon the Soul.

1. It will put the Soul upon preparing for them. He that lives in the
expectation of trials, will be oft-times putting the case to himself, if such a
trial should be, what should I do? My Soul would thou stand to, or desert the
profession of thy faith? would thou keep close to God, or depart from him? we
should be laying up something in store against an evil day.

2. Expected trials (as I before told you) are always lighter, and more
tolerable, and endured with more courage, and patience. We are not so frighted
with evils, which we see at distances, and view in the approaches they make to
us. Nothing more weakneth a Soul in the bearing of an evil, as a sudden
surprisal, like an Apoplexy to the body, it at once stops those passages by
which the Spirits should discover, and exert themselves.

Br. 2.
Secondly, This Doctrine calls to Christians for patience, and that both under
Persecution, and Afflictions, and under the censures, and obloquies of the
world, because of them. Expectation of trials is a previous duty in order to
our preparation for them. Patience is a present duty, when the Christian is
fallen under them. It is indeed the work of the day; that very grace, which in
the hour of tribulation should have its perfect work, it lies partly in a
quiet submission to the good will and pleasure of God, because he has laid it
upon us, an holding our peace, because it is the Lords doing, partly in a quiet
waiting for God in the fulfilling of his promises made to his People under such
circumstances. There are two things that call for our patience under
afflictions. 1. The smart of the Affliction, for no affliction is joyous, but
grievous. 2. The reproach of the world under it, this often doubleth the
affliction and makes it more grievous, and intolerable. Now consider how many
things have occurred in this discourse, which may excite our patience under
both these.

1. This is the lot of the People of God. There is none of them but the Sun at
one time or other works upon. The Apostle exhorts the Thessalonians, 1 These.
3. 3. That no man should be moved by their Afflictions, for (faith he) your
selves know that we are appointed thereunto. There is a great deal in that
saying to quiet the Spirits of Christians under the burdens of trials. 1. God
has laid those burdens upon them. I held my peace (says David) because it
was thy doing. It is the Lord (said that good man) let him do what soever he
pleases. Perhaps (says David) God has bidden him curse. It is a mighty thing
to silence the Spirit of a Christian, when he can see the hand of God in it. 2.
It is the Lords appointment. What has befallen us in pursuance of an eternal
counsel; this speaks the trial eventually necessary, it speaks it also good
for his People, for he has not appointed us unto wrath, nor to any means of
that tendency. Nor is it thy lot alone, but the lot of all those who will live
godlily in Christ Jesus. The Apostles themselves were appointed thereunto, and
wherein are we better, then our Fathers, or our Brethren?

2. You have likewise heard why God has appointed our lot to be Trials, and
Afflictions, for the punishment of our sins, and for the trial, and exercise of
our Graces; this also calls for patience. Why should a living man complain? a
man for the punishment of his iniquity? We have much less reason to be
disturbed at the trial, and exercise of our graces.

3. You have heard upon what mistakes it is that the World accounts the
Christian black by reason of Afflictions, because they judge of their
complexions by a mere sensual Eye, and from a mere erroneous judgment. We have
therefore no reason to be disquieted, because of it. But indeed the main use we
should Use 3.
make of this point, should be for Caution; and that in two particulars.

1. That afflictions may not blacken us. 2. That we do not judge others black,
because of them. 1. Will afflictions blacken the Spouse of Christ? Let us take
heed that they have not this ill influence upon us. We have heard that they no
otherwise make us black then as they are occasions to draw out our lusts and
corruptions. This is that which we are more especially to watch upon. In
afflictive providence, God tries us, and Satan and the world also try, and
tempt us. God tries our faith, our patience, our submission to his will,
whether we will deny our selves, and take up the Cross and follow him. The
Devil, and the men of the World, which are the Devils instruments, try us,
whether we will desert our profession, deny the Lord that bought us, forsake
the ways of God, and embrace a present World. If upon Gods trial his ends be
obtained, then are we by our afflictions purified, and made white, if the Devil
and his instruments prevail upon us, then are we by our afflictions made black.
This is the thing we are to take heed of Job 2. 3. after that God had taken
away Jobs Estate, and Children, he says to Satan, Have thou considered my
Servant Job, that there is none like him in all the Earth, a perfect, and an
upright man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil, and still he holds
fast his integrity, although thou movest me against him to destroy him without
a cause. How white there did Job appear after his afflictions?

But I shall not enlarge my discourse to afflictions in the general, but limit
it to such afflictions as are more peculiar to the Spouse of Christ, and which
I have had a more special reference to in my former discourse, viz.
Persecutions, or sufferings for our adherence to the truths of the Gospel, and
the good ways of God. Let us take heed that we be not made black by afflictions
of this nature, which we shall be, if by them we be moved from our good opinion
of the ways of God, from our profession, or practice of them; there is no
sinner more black then the Apostate. See 2 Pet, 2. 20. 21. For if after they
have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord, and
Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the
latter end is worse with them than the beginning. For it is better sor them not
to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn
from the Holy Commandment delivered unto them. Indeed failings in a time of
Persecution are caused from a double cause. Sometimes merely from the fear of
life, or some great danger that will befall to men, if they adhere to their
former profession; failings of this nature make a Soul look black, but many
such recover themselves, and the Lord who can have compassion upon our
insirmities, pities them, and recovers them out of the snare of the Devil; this
is a blackness we ought to avoid, by putting on the whole Armor of God, that
we may be able to stand in the day of the Lords Battle. But there is another
defection, which is occasioned by Persecutions, and Afflictions of this nature:
That is, when men out of a greater love to other ways in a time of trial,
renounce the truths of God they have formerly owned, and forsake the ways of
God, in which they have formerly walked; to these now Persecutions, and
Afflictions of this nature, are but a slight occasion of their defection and
Apostasy, and this eminent difference you will find betwixt the others, and
these: The others, though they may be prevailed withal to warp, and start
aside, because of the greatness of the temptation (it was Peter's case in the
High Priests Hall) yet will never be prevailed with to speak evil of, and to
revile the truths of God which they have owned, nor the ways of God, in which
they have formerly walked, and others yet walk. The others being prevailed upon
to their Apostasy merely from the lusts of their hearts, and the greater love
they have always had, (tho like Hypocrites they have concealed it) to looser
principles, and a looser way of living, take themselves concerned to reproach
their former ways, and those who yet walk in them. This is a dreadful
blackness, not a tincture upon the face only, but a tincture of the heart,
which by occasion of Persecution for the Gospel, breaks out into the more
exterior conversation. To enforce this caution, I shall only mention three
things.

1. That this is the affection only of the stony ground, Mat. 13. 6, 21. It is
a certain sign, that those never received the Seed of the Word into honest, and
good hearts, that they never had any root in themselves who when tribulation,
and persecution arises, because of the word, by and by they are offended. He
that receives the truth, in the Love of it cannot so easily abandon the
profession of it, 1 John. 2. 19. They went out from us, they were not of us,
for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, but
they went out that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.
The day of Persecution and tribulation for the Gospel sake is the day of the
manifestation and discovery of hypocrites. I do not think that all shrinking in
a time of persecution is a note of hypocrisy, there is a shrinking through fear
in the time of great temptation (so Peter shrank.) But for men to make a
defection, out of a principle of lust and greater Love to other ways, and to
reproach and speak Evil of the ways of God (which by the way is a certain
indication of such a defection) this speaks the man or woman to be no better
then an hypocrite nor ever to have been other, tho, to serve his lusts, he
disguised himself with a mask of holiness, and Religion.

2. Secondly consider, That no sinner so reproacheth the good and holy ways of
God as such a sinner does. He tells the World that he has tried them, that
there is nothing in them, that nothing but the ignorance and prejudices of his
education and youth led him into them, that the ways of sin and profaneness, of
Formality, and Superstition are better, and therefore he is at last grown wiser
then to take such pains to go to heaven. If I would pick out a wretch out of
the whole herd of sinners to reproach God, to blaspheme the Gospel and the ways
of holiness, I would pick out onethat had been formerly a professor, and had
turned away from his profession this wretch pretends from experience to
justify what others do but loosely discourse.

3. Thirdly no sinners must expect a more dreadful Vengeance. The reason is
evident, because none sin against more light. There is no man who has made a
profession, and lived in any practice of Religion, but knows that there is no
iniquity in it, nothing but what suteth the common reason of mankind not
debauched through lust, and that those who in any measure live up to the
profession of the Gospel, are (if sober heathens were to be judges) the best of
men, with respect to all duty which the light of Nature teaches toward the
Divine Being, and all good offices toward men. I say there is none who has
made any profession but knows this, and in all his Evil speaking of them does
not sin like an heathen, nor like a profane man who speaks ill of the things
he knows not, but speaks contrary to the dictate of his own conscience. I
would not have this understood of those who are made black, through these
afflictions, from the temporary prevailing of a strong temptation, these with
P^ter (tho they fall) yet go out and weep bitterly and are recovered, and made
stronger by their fall, but of those others before mentioned to whom Affliction
and Persecution are but the external occasions to draw out the lusts of their
hearts which waited but for an opportunity to discover its self.

2. Finally to shut up this discourse let this caution us from Judging the
Spouse of Christ black because the Sun has looked upon her. You have heard
that this is but the Worlds judgment, not according to any measures of truth,
or righteousness. To this End,

1. Root your selves in this truth, That none can judge of Gods Love or hatred
from what happens to him in this life. It is Solomon's Maxim, and a great
truth, God governs the World according to the just Economy of his Providence
with respects unto his own wife Ends; and no spiritual judgment can be made of
the state of any, from those administrations, oft-times he makes Princes to go
on foot, when servants ride on horse back, and the wicked to devour those that
are more righteous then they.

2. Look under the vail of Religious Persons in the day of their afflictions.
The Vail may be black, and yet the face White. You may possibly see the People
of God glorifying him in the Fires, eminent faith adherence to God constancy,
patience shining forth in the People of God in the hour of their trials. you
may possibly hear Paul and Silas, singing praises unto God at midnight, and the
Apostles going away from their place of punishment rejoicing that the Lord has
thought them worthy to suffer for the name of Jesus Christ; and here a Job
resolving that, Tho the Lord slays him, yet he will trust in him. These
things speak a Lilly tho amongst thorns.

Sermon XXXVIII.
Cant. 1. 6. -- My mothers Children were angry with me.

I am now come to the 2d cause, which the Spouse of Christ here assigns of
her appearing blackness. The Anger of her Mothers Children. My Mothers Children
(says she) were angry with me. (...) which the Septuagint translateth (...)
They fought in me, or they fought against me. In my explication* of the verse I
told you that some by Mothers Children understand those lusts and corruptions,
which are members of that body of death, which yet remain in the best of Gods
People; those members mentioned by the Apostle Col. 3. 5. which we have while
we live upon the Earth for our exercise to mortify, these lie in the womb of
the same Soul, together with our habits of grace; these are those which the
Apostle calls the flesh, which lusts against the Spirit, These cause that war
in our members mentioned, James 4. 1. they war against the Soul. 1. Pet. 2. 11.
Others 2. understand by the Mothers Children mentioned in the text, False
brethren, such members of the Church as are indeed the Children of the Church,
our visible Mother, but not the Children of our heavenly Father. Tho in my own
judgment I rather incline to the latter as the sense of the Text, yet I shall
give that deference to those worthy Interpreters that have mentioned the
former, that (there being a truth in that) I shall take both senses into the
Proposition which I shall law down thus.

Prop*
The conflict which particular believers have with their own inbred lusts and
corruptions, and which the Church has with false brethren, will often make
them appear black to the Eye of the World.

Here are two propositions wrapped up together.

1. That true Christians will have conflicts with their own lusts and
corruptions, and the true members of the Church with such as are false brethren.

2. That both the particular Christians, and the Church of Christ in these
conflicts will appear black.

1. True Christians will have conflicts with their lusts, and corruptions. This
is so great a truth that this Spiritual conflict is a note of the truth of
grace in the Soul. It is indeed as wars use to be, sometimes hotter, sometimes
cooler and more remiss, and the Soul is in it sometimes more, sometimes less a
conqueror, as God will please to afford the Soul more or less of his strength,
but it is always something. When God did bring the Israelites into Canaan, he
was not pleased at once to drive them cut, but by little and little, Exodus 23.
28, 29. neither were they faultless, for many of the Tribes did not drive them
out; Judah could not drive them out, Judge. 1. 19. It is said of several of the
other Tribes that they did not drive them out. Upon which God resolves that he
would not drive them out; but they should be as thorns in their sides. God in
bringing Souls out of a state of nature, into a state of grace, does not wholly
drive out lust and corruption, he brings sin out of its Dominion, Rom, 6. 13.
So as it reigns not in the mortal Bodies of the Saints; sin like the tree in
Nebuchadnezzars vision, Dan. 4. 14. is hewed down, many of its branches are cut
off, and its leaves, and its fruit is scattered, and the Soul is got from under
it, but yet the stump of its roots are in the Earth, tho bound with a band of
Iron and Brass, kept under by the law of the Christians mind, that he gets
no dominion, the Soul is not under the power of it. Now as there was a
continual war betwixt the Canaanites left in the land, and the Israelites, so
there is a continual war and spiritual combat, betwixt those (...) these
passions of sin, these lustings of the flesh, and the Spiritual part of the
Spiritual man. Paul does excellently describe this conflict, Romans 7. 21. I find
then a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me, for I delight
in the law of God, as to my inward man. But I see another law in my members
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law
of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me*
etc. Saint Paul sets forth himself there as a man in a battle, and sometimes
taken Prisoner. So again* Gal, 5. ^7. For the (...) Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contr ary, the one to the other. And indeed in
the last words lies the reason of this war, and conflict. It is of the nature
of contraries to expel one another, not to endure one another in the same
subject, but to be in a continual combat till the one, or the other has got
the Victory. Grace in Scripture is compared to light, sin to darkness, light
and darkness mutually expel one another, so does Grace and lust. Now both
these being in the Soul of the regenerate man, who is but Sanctified in part,
and neither of them being lazy and inactive, but active, and operative
principles, there must be this conflict which I have mentioned, this war in our
members, which makes the People of God look black.

2. And as it fares with individual Christians, with respect to their lusts,
and corruptions: so it also fares with the Collective Spouse, the Church of
Christ, with respect to false Brethren, who are the presumptive, but not the
true members of it. 1. such will be in the Church while it is upon the Earth.
2. And these will be angry with the true members of it.

1. while the Church is upon the Earth, it will be like a field of Wheat which
has tares in it; the Gospel and the preaching of it is like a drag-net which
draws unto the Church, as its shore Fish, both good and bad, there will come
a time, when the Lord will take his fan, and thoroughly purge his floor, but
that will be in the day of judgment; if we look upon Gods ancient Church, the
Congregation of Israel, there was a Jannes, and a Jambnes, that resisted Moses,
a Corah, Dathan, and Abiram that rose up against Moses and Aaron, many false
Prophets to mislead People and many more false hearts, that were easily misled;
the Chaldee Paraphrast expounds the term in the Text of false Prophets, Ahab
and Jezebel had 300 of them at a time, a great number of the People, were ready
upon all occasions to relapse into Idolatry, and Superstition, as they had any
Princes, that would either tolerate or encourage it; Jeremiah and Micaiah, and
Amos and Elijah, and all the true Prophets of the Lord found that their Mothers
Children, were angry with them, so did those that were good People amongst
them, the Priests were a snare upon Mizpeh, and a net spread upon Tabor, to
hinder the People from attending the true Worship of God. Look upon the Church
of Christ: In Christ's little company there was a Judas, a Son of perdition, and
amongst the multitudes that followed him, there were many that followed him but
for the loaves. In the primitive times, there was a Demas, an Hymeneus and a
Philetus a Simon Magus. Many false Apostles that opposed Paul, and the Apostle
to Timothy Prophesies that there shall not be a lesser plenty of them in the
latter days.

1. Nor can it be reasonably expected otherwise considering 1. Gods
appointment, for the exercise of such as be real and true Saints. 1. Cor. 11.
19. There must be (says the Apostle) heresies amongst you, that those who are
approved may be made manifest. False brethren discover themselves, either by
the broaching of false doctrine, to corrupt the faith of Christians. Or by
bringing in undue Rites, Ceremonies and Superstitions, to corrupt the Worship
of God. Or by a looseness of conversation, discovering the want of the Love,
and fear of God in their hearts. Now the Lord has appointed such a
Constitution of his Church, that these shall be tolerated in it, that those who
are approved may be made manifest; contraries near one another best discover
themselves.

2. Secondly, Man is tied up to a judgment according to outward appearance. God
alone judges the heart and according to the reality of things. Even Christ
himself tho as God he was Omniscient and needed not that any should tell him
what is in the heart of man, yet when he appeared in the head of his Church
here upon the Earth, and acted as the chief Minister in and of it, he admitted
a Judas into his first society of that nature, teaching us in our admissions of
members, whether by Baptism or other wise, to content our selves with a
visibility, and outward appearance; there must be a difference betwixt the
Church visible, and invisible, the Church Militant and Triumphant.

2. But as these are contrary in their Principles, and in their Ends; so they
must and will be contrary in their actions, and they will be angry with the
true, and more sincere Professors of the Gospel. Thus it has been in all ages
and periods of the Church, thus it is and will be. Cain was a false Brother in
the Church in Adams Family, he roseg* up against his brother Abel and slew him,
because he offered up a better Sacrifice, and God had more respect unto him
then he had unto Cain. Ishmael was a false Brother in Abraham's Family, Esau, in
Isaac, the Scripture tells you of the ill agreement betwixt Isaacs and Ishmael;
Jacob and Esau. The whole story of the Church of the Jews recorded in
Scripture, and of the Church of Christ recorded in the New Testament, is a
proof of this opposition, so is the whole story of the Church, since the
Apostles time, and what need we any further proof then what we have at this
day? nor can any thing else be rationally expected, whether we consider the
falseness of such Persons hearts to God, and the interest of God, or the Pride
of their hearts. Or the looseness of such men's principles.

1. The hearts of all such are false to God, and the interest of God. The love
of God is the thing which does distinguish a sincere Christian from an
Hypocrite; the Hypocrite loves God in Word, and in Tongue only, the other
loves him in Deed, and in Truth. There is no faithfulness in an Hypocrites
heart, his heart is not right with God; the true Christian is sincere for God,
and serious, and right down in his actings, for the honor and glory of God.
The other does but mock and dissemble, and pursues private interests of his
own, he sees that profession serves his design and interest. Observe in any
other thing, where two, or more are joined in the prosecution of a design, and
one of them is serious, and right down, and plainly pursues his end, but the
other runs along with the business for some other ends, or upon some
otherdesigns, but is not real in his scope, intention, and actions for the
obtaining the end which he pretends to; he whose heart is right for the work,
has no greater enemythen he who is joined with him seemingly in the pursuit of
it. This is the case here, all those who are visible Members of the Church of
God, are appearingly coupled in a design for the honor and glory of God. It is
the whole business of the Church of God, which is the only body of People upon
the Earth, which God has called and chosen for that purpose, for the
predication of his name, In this Church there are some who do it from a single
and right heart, truly intending the honor and glory of God as their end;
there are others, who are under an engagement to do it as much as the others,
but their hearts are not right with God, do not stand toward that work, but
drive some self end of private honor, credit and applause, these men may do
some things night, but they never walk with God fully; as I remember it was
said of Amaziah, one of the Kings of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. He did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart, so it may be
said of these, it may be they may do many things, which as to the matter of
them are right in the sight of the Lord, but they never do them with a perfect
heart, so as there can never be a good harmony betwixt, them and such whose
hearts are more sincere and perfect. The Hypocrite will never be heartily
pleased with the sincere Christian.

2. Especially considering the Pride that is in the heart of every Hypocrite.
Though the Hypocrite does not himself love to do much for God in the denial of
himself, nor will further serve the Lord, then he can by the service of God
serve himself, yet he is too proud to be patient of being outdone by any; this
was the ground of that opposition which Cain gave his Brother Abel, this made
him so wroth, and his countenance to fall, because the Lord had respect to
Abel, and to his offering, but unto Cain and his offering, he had no respect,
Genesis 4. 4. 5. Sincere Godly Christians will be doing their utmost for God,
spending much of their time, and strength in communion with God, they will be
much in praying, much in hearing the Word, strict in their walking, ready to
exhort, to reprove, and admonish such as walk disorderly, and not as becomes
the Gospel. Hypocrites and false Brethren are no more able to bear this, then
they are able to obtain of themselves to do like them. Hence are their censures
of them, as Persons that are righteous overmuch, needlessly strict, and severe,
hence their envy, and reproaches, and their watchings for their haltings, and
taking all advantages to blazon their infirmities, and to make them as odious,
and to look as black as they can.

3. Another reason of it lies in the looseness of their principles, both their
principles of Doctrine and Faith, and their practical principles, directing
their lives and conversations. False brethren are always looser in one or both
these sorts of principles, then the sincere Christian is. The study of the
Hypocrite is to form his faith, and to interpret the law of God into a
consistency with his lusts, that he may keep his lusts, and yet protect himself
from the checks, and reverberations of his conscience, and flatter himself with
hopes of Eternal Salvation, and also keep up his credit, and reputation with
the world. The sincere Christian has no other design then to form his faith,
according to the revelations of truth in the Word, and his conversation to the
rule of life in the Word of God, the Word is a lamp to his feet, and a lanthorn
to his paths, and from that he dares not start; when the false Prophets told
Micajah, that the Prophets had all with one mouth prophesied good to Ahab, and
suited his humor. Micajah answers them. As the Lord lives, whatsoever the
Lord bids me speak, that will I speak. The same is the language of every true
Christian; whatsoever Propositions of truth I find spoken by Holy Men that were
inspired by God in his Word, that, and nothing but that shall be an article of
my faith. What way soe^^r God has prescribed me in his Word to Worship him in,
and by, that will I do, neither adding thereunto, nor yet diminishing
therefrom, whatsoever rules God has given me for the order of his Church, to
them I will adhere; whatsoever laws God has given me to guide my conversation,
to the observation of them I will keep; thus he is in all things tied up to a
divine rule. But now the false Professor has looser principles. He dare allow
the judgment of his own natural reason in determining of truth, as the object
of his faith, and of the Traditions, and Practice, and Precepts of men, as the
rule of his Worship, and the will of men as to the order, and government of the
Church and from one of these three causes; most ordinarily proceeds that
opposition which is given to the strict Servants of God from the anger of their
Mothers Children. I come to the second Member of the Proposition.

2. This opposition is one great cause of the Spouses appearing black. Both the
opposition which the particular Christian has from his own impetuous lusts,
and motions to sin, and which that part of the Church, which is alone the
Spouse of Christ, has from false Brethren, and the opposition given her by
them, are a great cause of the Churches blackness, or appearing blackness.

The grounds of it are, 1. Partly that trouble, and sadness which usually
attends those conflicts in the Spirits of Christians. The time of War is a time
of sadness in that part of the world which is the seat of it, and the hour of
this Spiritual War and Conflict is a sad time in the Soul. Paul cries out, O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? Hence are
Christians sad, and heavy walkings, which the World counts blackness. 2.
Partly from the prevailings of sin sometimes in the Soul. David complained
under the Old Testament that Iniquities prevailed against him, and Paul
complains under the New Testament, not only of a War, but of a Victory in
some Skirmishes, that the law of his Members got against the law of his Mind,
so that he was brought into a captivity to the law of Sin, which was in his
Members, Romans 7. 23 Now sin is that which makes the Soul really black, and
where any of the People of God in the view of the world so discoloureth
himself, the world needs no provocation to call them black. The Eye that is
directed by a Soul full of malice, envy, and hatred, spies the least
miscarriages in the Soul that is hated, and aggravates them with the highest
aggravations.

And as this is true concerning that opposition which the particular Soul
finds from its inbred lusts and corruptions, that makes the believer black,
so it is as true, that the opposition which that part of the Church, which is
the true Spouse of Christ, meets with from false Brethren, will make the Church
appear black. This will appear from the several unlovely consequences of such
opposition.

1. From hence are Errors, and Heresies, Schisms, and Contentions in the Church
of Christ; of these you read in the Episties to the Romans, Carinthians,
Galatians, then which nothing make a Church appear more black in the Eyes of
the World, and they are more especially the reproaches of the Church of Christ,
by how much the Gospel, which is their rule, in which they are instructed, and
to the rules of which they profess a submission, is a Gospel of peace, and
Christ Jesus, which is their head, and the Author of the Gospel, is the Prince
of Peace. Errors rise up in the Church from men of corrupt principles. The
Apostle tells us of perverse disputing^ by men of corrupt minds, 1 Timothy 6. 5.
and 2 Timothy 3. 8. you have it again, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning
the Faith. Hence also are Schisms and Contentions. Only by Pride says Solomon
comes contention. The cause of (...) is generally some corruption in Churches,
and deviation from that Order which Christ has set, and established, which
that part of the Church, which keeps close to the Word as its rule, cannot bear
with. Indeed sometimes they are caused from men's corrupt principles, as to the
faith, and love of prehemin^^ce, their rashness* and want of Judgment; how far
Christians ought to preserve unity, but I say generally they are caused by such
as are ^^lse Brethren, who if they be not those who divide, yet are those who
give the cause of the division.

2. From hence are ^^srepresentations of the Servants of God, (...)
Phar^^^^ical generation, that say unto others, stand far from us, we are (...)
then you, such as would be too pure* and righteous ov^^ much, that make a show
of more then indeed th^y^ard, Hypocrites, Precisions, that are over-nice, etc.
Such kind of charges, and imputations as these, proceed ordinarily from Mothers
Children, sa^e Professors, and Brethren, such as have a form of Godliness, and
deny the power of it, such as are M^mbers o^ the Church, but their hearts are
not perfect with God.

3. From hence (Thirdly) are the faileurs of some sincerer (...) of God, (...)
too far to the corruptions of others (too many instances of which we have had.)
The opposition which Christians have met with, having been a continual dropping
upon them, and overpowered them, to do many things against the dictates of
their own consciences, thus losing their beauty, it is no great wonder if they
appear black. Indeed from hence almost are all those things which render
Christians, and Churches black. I now come to the application.

Use 1.
Let not then Christians think it strange if their habits of grace find
opposition from within, and the actings of their grace meet with opposition
from without. There is no Child of God, but finds upon experience that his
Mothers Children are angry with him, his flesh is many times lusting against
the Spirit, and he finds a War in his Members. As Rebekah was troubled,
because she found Twins struggling together in her Womb, so is many a good
Christian, when as indeed there is no greater note of Grace, then this Combat
of the Flesh and the Spirit; if thou had not two parties within, there would
be none of these conflicts, the unregenerate man has nothing of them, he has
motions to sin, but no contrary habits to oppose, no lustings of the Spirit
against the Flesh, such a man may indeed from natural light, and the
obligation, under which the law of nature lays him, sometimes resist motions
to more gross, and flagitious sins, but this combat is rare, and in very rare
cases, and those such, where the law of nature is offended, or his honor, and
reputation, and profit, and advantage is concerned, as to his avoiding of them;
nor is the Battle ever very hot. The true Christian has a double principle,
the one natural; this inclines, and moves him to sin* the other supernatural,
and infused. Both these principles are active, and operative, and these
spiritual conflicts must be expected, the discovery of the truth of Grace in
thy Soul does much depend upon thy behavior in the Spiritual Fight, and thy
managery of it; if thou find this conflict, if thou maintainest it with thy
might, if thou criest unto God for help and strength, if ordinarily thou be
a conqueror: Thy opposition is so far from being an evidence against thee,
that it is a great evidence for thee.

Nor let good Christians wonder if the exercise of their grace meets with
opposition from without, and that from their Mothers Children too. As there are
two parties in every gracious heart, so there are, and ever were two Parties in
the Church of God. There were some, and those the greater number, on whose
behalf Paul says, he could wish himself accursed from Christ, they were his
Brethren, and not only his Kinsmen according to the Flesh, but Israelites, to
whom belonged the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of
the Law, and the Service of God, and the promises, yet Romans 9. 6. they were not
Israel, though they were of Israel, neither were they all Children, because
they were the Seed of Abraham, v. 8. They which are the Children of the flesh,
are not the Children of the promise. God in one place promises to make his
Seed as the Stars of Heaven, Gen 22. 17. in another place, Genesis 13. 16. As the
Dust of the Earth. He had a Starry Seed; these were a great number, for he was
the Father of the Faithful, the Father of Believers, the Father of all Holy Men
that do the works of Abraham. He had also a dusty Seed; this was greater, thus
it is said he should be the Father of many Nations, and he was the Father of
the whole Jewish Nation, the o^^y visible Church God had for many years upon
the Earth, but these (says the Apostle) are not all Children: It Is the same
case with the Church under the New Testament, it is made up partly of
presumptive equivocal Members, partly of real univocal Members, such as glory
not in appearance only, but in reality, that are not as Jews* only outwardly,
nor of that circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but they are Jews
inwardly, Christians indeed, and that circumcision which is of the heart in the
Spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of Men, but of God. There is
a Baptism in the name of Christ, and a Baptism into Christ, a Baptism with
Water, and a Baptism with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, all that are Baptized
with a Ministerial Baptism with Water, are not Baptized with the Spiritual
Baptism of Regeneration. These two parties in the Church never did, never will
agree, there is in them a different Seed, they are acted from different
principles, and they act to quite different ends: Let not therefore good
Christians wonder, and think it strange if they find still that their Mothers
Children are angry with them; it is no more then ever was the lot of the true
Spouse of Christ, and will be her lot until Christ shall come, and with his Fan
thoroughly purge his floor. Nor do you wonder if these things make you appear b
ack. The Papists think they make us appear very black, when they can tell us of
Errors, and Heresies, Factions, Divisions, and Schisms amongst us, and indeed
it is a reproach to us, they are spots, and blemishes in the Assemblies of
Protestants; But, 1. Are they then so well agreed amongst themselves? what mean
then the differences betwixt their Dominicans and Franciscans; to say nothing
of their other Orders? What means their Secular Priests and Jesuits so
bespattering one another in their Books? Though it is very probable that if
Protestants could dispense with their consciences, to withold from the People
the sight and knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, the rule both of their faith
and life, so as they know no more to differ about then their Priests tell them;
or to set up a Judge of all controversies, that should be infallible, and from
whose decrees none must vary? And finally to set up an Inquisition, to force
all men's Obedience to the decrees of that infallible Judge, under pain of
death; I say could Protestants in these things dispense with their consciences,
to take such methods for unity, they might probably arrive at as great, if not
a greater unity then they can glory in, who have been so far from it, that
themselves reckon 30, or 32 Schisms, and those of that nature, as according to
their principles destroy all unity, for so many times (some of which lasted a
great many years too) they have been at a loss for to find the true visible
head of the Church We know that the Apostolical and purest Churches that ever
Christ had upon the Earth, had some that were indeed Mothers Children, Members
of the visible Church, but no Children of our Heavenly Father, and that these
have constantly been angry with, and given opposition to those that have been
the true, and sincere Members of the Church, and have brought in Errors, and
caused Schisms and Heresies. So as we are not to wonder if the things that have
been still, are whiles the state of the Church is yet militant, we are not
indeed to cause them, or be the Authors or Abettors of them, but neither are we
to be discouraged, or condemn Churches for them, who may be comely, though they
have something of this blackness thus caused.

I shall shut up this discourse with a few words of Exhortation. 1. To all such
as own themselves Christians, and glory in the name of the Sons and Daughters
of the Church. That they would answer that name and relation, and not be a
cause of the Spouses blackness, or appearing blackness. There are two ways by
which we may be so: 1. By a loose and scandalous conversation. 2. By being
angry with our Brethren. By the first we make the Spouse black. By the second
we cause her to be reproached, and called, and counted black.

1. Take heed of a loose and scandalous conversation. This makes you spots in
the Assemblies of Christians, and declares you to be but presumptive Members.
Can a man be a Member of Christ, and a Member of a Harlot? Christ's Companion,
and a Pot companion? A Disciple of Christ, who has commanded us not to swear
falsely, idly, or profanely, and yet being a common Swearer, and Curter, and
Blasphemer? Only let your conversation (says the Apostle) he as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. Loose livers are the blots of any Church, the Church is a
body of called ones, now you are not called to uncleanness, or profaneness, but
unto purity, and holiness. It is for your sake that the name of Christ, and the
body of Christ is evil spoken of. Consider, that though it be the way of God to
denominate his Church a part meliori, from the better part of it, and
therefore he calls the Church those that are called, and sanctified in Christ
Jesus, (though they all be not so that are Members of the visible Church) yet
it is the way of the World, out of their hatred both to Christ, and all that
have relation to him, to denominate them a part deteriori, from the worser
part, and to call all, Professors of Religion by the name that belongs only
to the worser part of them. But this is not so proper an application of this
Proposition, which speaks of the anger of false Brethren as the cause of the
Spouses blackness.

2. Therefore let me speak to you, whose corruptions will not allow you to be
so strict in your walking with God as others are, whether in matters of
Worship, or your more ordinary conversation, yet not to be angry with those who
desire to walk more closely with God then you think needful, and in some things
dare not give themselves that liberty which you dare allow your selves. I will
offer three things to your consideration, which may help you to abate your
wrath.

1. Consider first, How little reason there is for you to be offended? You all
profess to be going the same journey, aiming at the same end, you all profess
to be going toward the new Jerusalem, Your dispute is only about the nearest
way, you are satisfied, that this way of worshipping God, this course of
Religion will bring you to your journies end, others cannot be so satisfied,
but take a straiter way, what reason is there here for thy wrath, who think
a broader will bring thee as well to thy Journies end? how does his walking
more strictly prejudice thee? Thou think thou do enough in the Service of
God, another thinks he can never do too much, never do enough, and therefore he
hears more, and reads more, and prays oftener; wherein art thou hereby
prejudiced? Have thou not rather cause to bless God for the good example of
others, and to examine thy own ways, and why another should not take up with
those measures in duty, with which another cannot be satisfied? Thou think
that in the Worship of God, thou may be guided and limited by the precepts,
and practices, and traditions of other men: others considering that it is but
reasonable, (Worship being an Homage which the Soul pays to God) that God
should prescribe his own Homage, and considering that God has declared himself
to be a jealous God, and affixed the declaration of this his jealousy to the
second Commandment, which concerns his external Worship, and that in the
whole course of Scripture, the revelations of Gods wrath appear more against
sins relating to the Worship of God, then any other sins, they dare not in the
matters of Divine Worship deviate from the Divine Rule; wherein art thou by
this prejudiced? What reason is there for thine anger. Surely they walk most
safely, that finding the Holy Scriptures a perfect rule, able to furnish a man
to every good work, keep close to that, and dare not in practice admit any
thing but what they find there commanded or practiced. Thou ownest the Holy
Scriptures as thy rule? Why art thou offended that another keeps closer to it
then thou do?

2. Consider you are a great cause of the Spouses appearing black. She is
reproached for the contentious divisions, and Schisms that are in it; who are
the cause of them? those that keep to the rule of Gods Word, or those that
depart from it? Surely the whiteness, and purity of any Church lies in its
adherence to the Divine Rule, the more a particular Christian, or any society
of Christians, keep close to the pattern which Christ and his Apostles have set
them, and to the rule which God has given them, the more pure, the more white
and comely they are, Their deviation from it is their blackness, so are those
contentions, and divisions which arise in the Church, because of those
deviations; it is a dreadful text, 1 Cor. 3. 17. If any man defile the Temple
of God, him shall God destroy. The Apostle is there speaking with reference to
the Bodies of Professors, which he had called the Temple of God. But it is as
true concerning the Church of God, that is the Temple of God, this is
destroyed, or defiled, for the word may be translated by either of these words.
God (says the Apostle) will destroy him; who are they that defile the Church,
and indeed destroy it, but those that are the cause of scandals in it, either
of its being black, or of its appearing black unto the World?

3. Lastly, Let the words of our Savior sink into your hearts, Mat. 18. 7, Woe
unto the World, because of offenses, for it must needs be that offenses must
come: but woe to that man by whom the offense ^ometh. Luke repeating that
passage, chapter 17. v. 1. adds, v. 2. It were better for him that a millstone
were hung about his neck, and he cast into the Sea, then that he should offend
one of these little ones. Whosoever considers the Church as the only body of
People in the World, by whom God is spontaneously glorified, and how God has
expressed his favor and love to it, must dread the laying a foundation for
those scandals which arise in it, and are thrown upon it, from which it
appears black.

Lastly, You that are the sincerer part of the Church, and have heard that you
must expect that your Mothers Children should be angry with you; that there
should be some bad fish in the drag-net with the good, some Tares in Christ's
Field of Wheat, some that will be spots in your Assemblies, and that these, if
they do not make you black, yet will make you appear black; what remains, but
that you take care that neither the lusts of your own hearts, which are (in a
sense) your Mothers Children, make you black, nor the opposition that you will
meet with from such as are false Brethren, make you appear more black then
indeed you are. This care of yours must be showed, 1. In a watchfulness against
your motions to sin, especially such sins as are your proper lusts, the sins
which do most easily beset you. 2. In a mortifying of your Members. 3. In a
care that you be not unwarrantably disturbed, and unduly disquieted, because of
the opposition which you find srom the law of your Members. 4. In a maintaining
the Spiritual Combat, etc. 5. In an innocent, and inoffensive carriage in your
stations, that those who would speak evil of you, as evil doers, may see your
good works, and glorify your heavenly Father, for so (says the Apostle, 1 Pet.
2. 15.) is the will of God, that with well doing, you may put to silence the
ignorance of foolishmen, in avoiding unnecessary divisions and separations, we
ought to walk with all that own the name of Christ as far as the Shoes of the
Gospel will carry us, where we cannot walk with any who call themselves
Christians, and walk with Christ, that is, keep to the rule and law, which he
has given us, there we must part, and the offense lies on their parts who
give the cause of it, but otherwise we ought to keep Unity. Finally in a
peaceable and quiet departing from them with whom we cannot agree, I know all
this will not avoid the unreasonable anger of some of our Mothers Children, but
by doing this, we shall remove the stumbling stone, and rock of offense from
our own doors, they will be those by whom offenses come, and the woe pronounced
by our Savior will belong to them.

Sermon XXXIX.
Cant. 1. 6. They made me the Keeper of the Vineyards

THE Spouse is yet apologizing for her Blackness, of which she assigns four
Causes. 1. Her afflictions: The Sun (says she) has looked upon me. 2. Her
opposition both from within and without: My mothers Children were angry with
me. These I have discoursed, and come now to the third Cause assigned by her,
expressed in these words; They made me the Keeper of the Vineyards: They, that
is, my Mothers Children (before mentioned) made me the Keeper of the Vineyards.
In my Explication of the Text, I hinted a double sense of the words; the one
literal, the other metaphorical. In the former it signified her intanglement in
secular affairs. Keeping the Vineyards is a secular employment, a mean
employment, and a laborious employment. Thence you read that the General of the
Assyrian Army, 2 King. 25. 12. left of the poor of the Land to be the Dressers
of the Vineyards; and those in the Parable who had labored in the Vineyard,
told their Lord, that they had born the heat of the day. Thus the sense is, I
have been too much entangled in secular affairs; that has been the cause of my
blackness. 2. Others understand the term Vineyard in a metaphorical sense. God
uses the term to signify his Church, Isa. 5. 1, 2, 3. As God has a Vineyard,
so Idolaters and superstitious persons had their Vineyards. Most Heathen
Nations having some notions of a God, have had some Worship of a Deity, and
wanting the guidance of holy Writ, grew vain in their own imaginations; hence
came Idolatry and Superstition; the Israelites, having lived many years in
Egypt, and in their passage through the Wilderness, conversing with the
Moabites, and Midianites, and not driving out all the Canaanites out of the
promised Land, by converse with them, learned to know, and to serve their gods,
as you shall read in their whole story, in the Books of Kings and Chronicles;
there being a corrupt as well as a sincerer part, in the Jewish Church, the
corrupter part, imposed upon the whole, the Idolatrous and Superstitious
Worship, and Rites of these Nations. This is the sense into which the Chaldee
Paraphrast interprets these words. I am not apt to think this the sense, but
more incline to the former; yet^^ shall not wholly pass it over, partly because
the Chaldee Paraphrast is a very ancient Interpreter; and partly because that
sense carries a truth in it. Hence arise two Propositions.

Prop. 1. That a submission to false Worship, and Superstitious Rites in the
Service of God, will make the Spouse of Christ appear black.

Prop. 2. That great entanglements in secular affairs, will make the Spouse of
Christ black.

I shall speak shortly to the first, and more largely to the second, which I
rather think to be the sense. The Church of God has three things committed to
her trust; the Doctrine of the Gospel; the Ordinances of Worship: The Rules of
Discipline. The admission of corruption in any of these, makes a Church black,
as it is a breach of trust, and a deviation from the Divine Rule. This is
sufficiently proved by the message Christ sent to the seven Churches of Asia.
He let the Church of Ephesus know, that he had something against her, because
she had left her first love, Rev. 2. 4. v. 13. He reflecteth upon the Church of
Pergamus, because she had those in her, who held the Doctrine of Balaam, and of
the Nicolaitans, v. 20. He reflecteth on the Church of Thyatira, for suffering
the woman Jezabel to seduce the Servants of God, to commit fornication, and to
eat things offered to Idols. Nor is any thing plainer in the whole story of the
Jewish Church, than that the admission of corruption in the Worship and Order
of that Church, was that which made it black and defiled, and look unlovely in
the Eyes of God, and was at last the cause of its ruin and destruction. But
because Christians may not so distinctly understand either wherein the Nature
of Worship lies, or wherein the difference lies betwixt that which is true,
and false, I shall in a few Conclusions lay down what I conceive to be truth in
this case, and then pass on to the handling of the Proposition arising from the
other sense of the words.

1. Worship is an homage performed to God immediately, in consideration of his
Excellency. This is Aquinas's, and other of the Schoolmens notion about
Worship, and it is a very good one.

2. This homage is either the homage of the outward, or inward man. The homage
of the inward man lies in the exercises of our Faith, Love, Fear, the exercise
of our thoughts upon God, admiring him, etc. But that which the Scripture
calls Worship most ordinarily, is some external acts testifying that inward
homage, and submission of the heart.

3. These acts are either such as the Light of Nature directs, and the Law of
Nature obliges us unto, or such as God has prescribed us in his Word. Worship
being in the general nature of it, nothing but an external homage done to God,
in testification of the inward, and more secret homage and subjection of our
Soul. It is the most reasonable thing imaginable, that God should prescribe it;
this he has done as the God of Nature, imprinting a Law in our hearts,
obliging us to call upon him for good things we want, and to praise him for
good things received, partly in his holy Writ. There is no natural Worship, but
is also instituted, but there is much instituted Worship, which the Light of
Nature does not show, nor the Law of Nature oblige us to, such as Reading the
Scriptures, hearing the Word Preached, communicating in the holy Sacraments.

4. External acts of Worship, that depend merely upon Institution, must be
either instituted by Christ, or by our own wills, or the wills of others, Col.
2. 23. there is a Will Worship mentioned.

5. All true Divine Worship must have a Divine Institution. Whatsoever is
pretended as an immediate act of homage to the Divine Being, and is not
directed by Nature, and directed also, and confirmed and regulated by the
Revelation of the Divine Will in the Word of God, is what we call False
Worship, or Will Worship. As the first Commandment directs our homage to God,
as the alone true Object, so the second directs the manner of it, to be
according to his revealed Will; for certainly that Commandment must not be
interpreted as merely prohibiting the Worship of God by, or before a graven
Image, or the similitude of a thing, on purpose set before us, either as
representative of the Divine Being, or as a Medium by which we worship God, but
as prohibiting all other Modes, Acts and Methods which have no more of a Divine
Institution than that has, only that one instance is given, and under it the
other included. So that a graven Image is but species pro genere, and those
that worship God before a painted Image, or any other way which God has not
prescribed, are also transgressors of that second Commandment. Hence it is
observable, that God directed the Jews not only every Act by which an homage
was paid to him, but also every Rite and Ceremony, and it was guilt enough for
the Jews in his Worship to do that which he commanded them not. Uzziah must not
offer Incense, nor Saul Sacrifice, nor Nadab and Abihu make use of ordinary
fire, nor Uzzah carry the Ark upon a Cart, nor touch it. The same we conceive
to be the will of God in the New Testament, God being a Spirit, and to be
worshipped by us in Spirit and in Truth, as well as by the Jews; and it seems
the most reasonable thing imaginable, 1. Considering that our Worship in its
self is a pitiful thing, infinitely disproportioned to the perfection and
excellency of God, so as it deriveth all its value from the Divine Institution.
2. And being an homage done to God, it is most reasonable that God himself
should direct what he will accept. 3. Nor is it to be imagined, had God left
man in the case to his own conduct and direction, how vain and various man
would have been. 4. Besides, it is not reasonable to think that the holy
Scriptures should be a less perfect Rule in matters of Worship, than it is in
matters of Doctrine, or that concern our ordinary course of conversation, or
that acts of Worship, as to which it appears in all the Scripture, that God
had a special jealousy, and in which we are said to draw nigh to God, should
be none of those good works, as to which the holy Scriptures are sufficient to
furnish every good man.

6. Divine Worship being an humane act, and that of the most noble nature, as
it must have such circumstances as are necessary to all humane acts, (such are
Time and Place;) so it is reasonable that it should have such circumstances as
suit such acts, so as they may be performed in such manner as the Light of
Nature, and common guise and custom of Countries shall not determine, sordid,
filthy, or indecent, and such as may render it useful, and more profitable and
advantageous, and answering to their ends, which circumstances, being necessary
to the acts as humane acts; or at least plainly expedient, to avoid the
indecent and sordid performance of the acts, or for the more profit and
advantage of the acts, and such as in regard of the variety of Countries, the
Customs and Usages of them, etc. could not be determined by the Word of God,
must be determined by the Governors of Churches, Nations, or Kingdoms, but
still with respect to the general ends of the action. But for any things used
in the Worship of God, neither directed by Nature, nor yet by holy Writ, and
appropriated to the Worship of God, as a Religious act, out of a respect to the
excellency of the Divine Being, and as an homage to it, I cannot see how they
can be lawful, they must have something of the nature of Worship in them, and
having so, they ought to have a Divine Institution, without which I cannot see
how they should avoid the guilt of Idolatry, or Superstition, which differ
thus. If the faileur respect the Object, either terminatively, where the
creature is made the term and ultimate Object, as in Ahab's Idolatry, and the
Papists Adoration of the Bread in the Eucharist, or mediately, as in Jeroboam's
case, and the Jews, relating to the golden Calf, or Micab's; all which
worshipped the true God, though by an Image, and using an Image as a mean of
their Worship (as the Papists now do in their Veneration of their Images) This
is Idolatry, called in Scripture Whoredom, spiritual Whoredom; and as Adultery
in marriage, so this is the highest sin can be committed in Worship, and which
God has more severely punished at all times, than any other sins People have
been guilty of. If the faileur respect the Acts, or the manner; if it be only
internal, it is Hypocrisy, if in the external Acts or Manner, it is
Superstition, (such are the Papists Salt Oil, Cream, Spittle, superadded to the
Institution for Baptism, and an hundred other Rites and Ceremonies used in all
parts of their Worship.)

7. It is very observable, that from the beginning of the Church there has
been a strange Itch in men, to be adding and mixing their own fancies,
inventions, and Will Worship with the true Worship of God. God gave unto Moses
the particular Rule, and Law of his Worship; he communicated it to the People.
David added to it, but no more than God by his Spirit directed, as appears, 1 Chronicles. 28. 19. All this, said David, the Lord made me to understand by his hand
upon me, in writing. If you would know what that was, v. 12, 13. The Pattern of
all that he had by the Spirit, of the Courts of the House of the Lord, and of
all the Chambers round about, of the Treasuries of the House of God, and of the
Treasuries of the dedicate things also for the courses of the Priests and
Levites, and for all the work of the Service of the House of the Lord: Texts of
Scripture which they are not aware of, who bring in David as an instance of a
Prince, who added new Acts, or Modes, or Rites and Ceremonies in the Worship of
God. David ordered no more than the Lord had made him to understand in writing,
by his Spirit, and by his hand upon him. One would think that men's common
reason should judge it safest to keep to the Divine Rule, and that it should be
the easiest thing. But so vain has man been in all Ages, that you shall find
they could never content themselves with that Rule, but as if they had had a
mind to pull down the Vengeance of God upon them, they were continually
devising new ways and methods, after the example of other Nations, and copying
out their Idolatries and Superstitions. The Jews must make a golden Calf in
imitation of the Egyptians, then they fall in with the Idols of the Moabites.
Micah must have an Image. Jeroboam must set up Calves at Dan and Bethel. In
short, this was the constant vanity of the Jews to all reasonable men's just
admiration. Christ left us a perfect Rule for Worship under the New Testament.
But how soon was the Primitive Church, in matter of Worship, turned aside from
the simplicity of the Gospel. It kept Doctrine in good degrees of Purity, for
five hundred years after Christ, but the Purity of Worship was abated in many
places within less than three hundred years, and every Age still grew worse and
worse, till the Pope got into the Saddle, and then that Pope was no body who
could not think upon one trifle or other to be added to the Rituals of Worship:
Till the Popish Worship came up to be what it is at this day, a mixture of
Paganish, Jewish, and Christian Rites. And it is a very hard thing for any who
reads the Gospel, and observes Christ's Rules, and the Apostles Practice and
Rules for Worship and Ordinances, to find any thing amongst them which has
upon it Christ and the Apostles Stamp and Impression.

8. In all times this has been a temptation to sincere Professors, and many
both Ministers and People, individual Believers and Churches, to deviate from
the Divine Rule. Either the Commands of Superiors have prevailed, (as in
Jeroboam's time) it is laid to the charge of the Israelites, Hos. 5. 11. That
they willingly followed the Commandment. (It is like some not very willingly
neither, but the more of their will was in it, the greater the guilt was, and
they are chiefly blamed) so Micah 6. 16. The Statutes of Omri are kept. Or else
the Example of their Leaders in Church or State have had the force of a Law
upon them: Or the gaudry or specious pretenses made for things introduced, have
had a force upon them. Many things having as (the Apostle says) a show of
Wisdom, and Will worship, and a neglecting of the body.

8. And lastly, When these things have happened, they have been the blackness
and pollution of those Souls, and those Churches that have been so far
prevailed upon. Black and white in this case must be determined and adjudged
from a strict adherence to, or a deviation from the Divine Rule. Those that are
brought over to such compliances, have discolored themselves more or less,
according to the degree wherein they have offended. They have kept others
Vineyards, but their own they have not kept. The trust which their Lord and
Master committed to them, as to the Ordinances of Worship, they have not kept.
1. These things bring a blackness and unloveliness upon the Soul, or upon a
Church in the Eyes of God, and of Jesus Christ. He may not presently give them
a Bill of Divorce, and say unto them, they are not his People, but he looks
upon them with an ill Eye, as a speckled Bird, Jer. 12. 9. Mine Inheritance
(says God) is become unto me as a speckled Bird; they kept something of Divine
impressions and institutions, but they were speckled; they had some colors
fetched from the Moabites, and Ammonites, and Philistines, etc. It is his will
that those who worship him, should worship him according to his will, in
Spirit, and in Truth (such the Father seeks to worship him) now these things
spoil the truth of Divine Worship (which must be measured from a Divine
Institution:) And they spoil the spirituality of it, reducing Carnal
Ordinances, and setting them up instead of the Spiritual Worship of God. Such
indeed the Jews had for a time, as you read, Heb. 9. 10. but they were to hold
no longer, than until the time of Reformation. The Gospelworship was to be
exclusive, not only of Ordinances that were typical, prefiguring a better and
most excellent Sacrifice and Service, which were fulfilled the Antitypes being
come, but it was also exclusive of Carnal Ordinances, such as were pleasing and
gratifying to the flesh and outward man. The Worship of God according to
Christ's Institution, was to be more reasonable, plain and spiritual. 2. Nay,
Errors in the matters of the Worship of God, do not only defile, and make the
Soul guilty, but exceeding guilty. Errors of Worship look like controulments
of the Divine Wisdom, who sent his Son, and his Apostles to establish a Rule of
Worship. These additaments speak the Established Rule imperfect, for otherwise
they must be idle and superfluous, nothing of which nature is to be admitted in
so grave and sacred an action. The Assertion of the Divine Rule as not perfect
in the matter of Worship, reflecteth upon our Savior either as not knowing
what it is that in worship would be most acceptable to his Father, or as not
faithful in the House of God. Or finally, as carelessly leaving things of that
nature to the wills and fancies of men, as whose wildness even from the
beginning of the world to that time, had showed it self in nothing more. But
besides, how can we better measure the greatness of any guilt, than by the
Revelations of God's will and wrath against it, and in reference to it. If you
observe the Old Testament throughout from the time of the Israelites coming out
of Egypt, to their coming out of Babylon, you fhall find the will of God fully
revealed against no one sin, or kind of sin like this of corruption, and
faileurs in the matter of his Worship, so as such Souls must needs be black in
the Eyes of Christ, because guilty, and that not in an ordinary degree.

2. Hence also these things have made them black in the Eyes of the sincerer
part of Christians. Thus doubtless were the Israelites in Jeroboam's time, not
only to the men of Judah, who adhered to the true Worship of God, and the
sincerer part of the Ten Tribes, who left them, and came to Jerusalem to
worship: But the generality of the Israelites in Ahab's times, in the sight of
Elijah, and those seven thousand whom God told Elijah, he had at that time in
Israel, who had not bowed their knee to Baal, nor kissed him with their lips.

Use
The Use of this will be very short; only warning us to be very tender in this
point; very careful of having to do with these Vineyards. It is inconsistent
with the keeping of our own, the things which God has committed to our trust.
It renders Churches, and particular Souls also black. It is an abatement to our
beauty and comeliness. These things are spots in our beauty, shadows to our
glory. Nothing more offends the Eyes of the Divine Glory; nothing more
provokes the Lord to jealousy. To those who consideringly read the History of
the Jewish Church recorded in the Old Testament, nothing need be added upon
this Argument. I come now to the second sense of these words, to which I told
you I more inclined to. From whence the Proposition is this;

Prop. That great intanglements in secular affairs will make the Spouse of
Christ to appear black.

Demas did once appear white; twice you have an honorable mention of him, Col.
4. 14. Luke the beloved Physician, and Demas salute you. He is reckoned amongst
Paul's fellow laborers, Philemon, v. 24. but the world made him black, 2 Timothy
4. 10. Demas (says the Apostle) has forsaken us, and embraced the present
world. Martha was doubtless white, in her Lord's Eyes, yet being cumbred about
many things, she appeared something black. Mary had chosen the better part,
Luke 38. 40, 41. The Apostles left their Nets when they followed Christ: When
therefore one asked leave of our Savior before he followed him, to go and bury
his dead; Christ replied, Let the dead bury the dead, follow thou me. You know
the excuses those made, Matthew. 22. that were invited to the Marriage Feast; one
had bought a Farm, another had bought five yoke of Oxen. Our Savior has
determined, Matthew. 6. 24. No man can serve two Masters, but either he will
cleave to the one, and neglect the other; or neglect the one, and be
overcareful for the other. What need we any Scripture in the case; show me that
man or woman that is entangled in a multitude of worldly affairs, and has not
lost something of his beauty (if he or she ever had any) as to the power and
practice of Religion and Holiness. But it will be demonstratively clear to us,
if we consider either how much of our time the world will take up, or how much
of our strength and spirits, how it will distract and divide us; how much it
will allure and entice us, or to how many scandals it will expose us. Of all
these I shall speak a word or two.

1. I say first, if we consider how much of our time worldly occasions take up.
All humane actions require time as well as place. There is no religious action,
but requires time, and the more time is spent in our worldly employments, the
less must, or can be spent in religious duties, the more our intanglements are
in secular affairs, the less time we must spend in the acts of our more
immediate homage to God; Alas, how little time has he who is much employed in
the world, for reading, hearing, praying, for any religious service, and this
is the ordinary plea that men make for the nonperformance of them, they have
no time to read the Scriptures, or to pray in their Families, or to instruct
them, or to hear the Word, or to employ their thoughts upon spiritual things.
Solomon says of the covetous man, that the multitude of his riches will not
let him sleep. It may be said of others, the multitude of their businesses will
not let them pray, or keep up any course of Religion in their Families, it
suffers but a few to spend the Lords Sabbath as they ought to do, they are so
far from sparing God any of their own time, that they are more ready to steal
his time, though it be but one day of seven.

2. Secondly, Worldly businesses do not only take up much of our time, but also
much of (...) spirits and strength, God does not only require our love, and
such acts of homage in testification of our love as he has prescribed, but
also that we should love him, and do those acts with all our hearts, with all
our might, and strength; and excess of worldly labor, and business, wastes our
Spirits, takes away that might, and strength which we fhould spend in the
service of God. Ah what heartless, lifeless prayers, and religious duties are
performed by men and women taken up with an undue proportion of secular
employments?

3. Thirdly, They fill the head with a multitude of distractions, 1 Cor. 7. 35.
The Apostle upon this account, v. 34. commends a single life to those to whom
God had given that gift, for, says he, The unmarried Woman cares for the
things of the Lord, that she may be holy, both in Body and Spirit: but the
married Woman cares for the things of the World, that she may please her
Husband. And this (says he) I speak to you for your own profit, not that I
might cast a snare upon you, but for that which is comely, and that you may
attend upon the Lord, without distraction. Distractions in religious services,
though they appear not to the world, yet really are the blackness of the Soul,
and it is our duty (as much as in us lies) to serve the Lord with the greatest
attention of our thoughts, and with as few distractions as we can; now the more
we are encumbered with secular affairs, the greater we shall find our
distractions in the service of God. For, as it is upon the ringing of a Bell,
though the man's hand be off the Rope, and the Bell begins to be still, yet for
some time we shall discern a din in the sides of the Bell, caused from its
former motion and agitation: So will every observing Christian find, that when
his hand is off his secular business, yet his head will for some time be
working upon it; and this more especially shows a preparation of heart
necessary for those in particular, who are much employed in worldly business,
before they draw nigh to God in the Solemn Duties of his Worship, that the
noise of their secular affairs may be out of their heads, and they may serve
the Lord without distractions, and not be like to the People, whom God
complains of, Ezekiel. 33. 31. They said come, and let us go and hear the Word
of the Lord. And (says God) they come unto thee as the People comes, and sit
before thee as my People, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them;
for with their mouths they show much love, but their heart goes after their
covetousness. Christ (in the Parable of the Sower) compares some hearers of
the Word to the ground that received the Seed amongst Thorns, the cares of the
world, and the deceitfulness of riches choked the Word, and made it become
unfruitful. It is a great blackness of a Christian, not to have his heart with
God in Religious Services, so as the Lord (as the Prophet expresses it) is
nigh in his mouth, and far from his reins, and it is a blackness that will
cover the face of every man and woman that converseth too much with the world.
Paul therefore rightly advises the Corinthians, that they should use the world
in a careless manner, that those that rejoiced in the affluences of it, should
be as if they rejoiced not, and those that bought, as if they possessed not,
and those that used the world, as not abusing it. But (says he) I would have
you without carefulness, 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31, 32.

4. Worldly employments have often an ill influence upon Christians, to entice,
and allure them to sin, not only by omissions of duty, but by the commissions
of things which are contrary to their duty, there is a sensible sweetness in
worldly enjoyments, and those are the product of worldly business and
employment. The Devil baiteth all his Hooks with some piece of the World or
other. Some with the sensibly sweet part of it, some with the gay, and splendid
part of it, some with the richer, and more profitable part of it. It is an hard
thing for Christians to keep Vineyards, and not drink some of that intoxicating
Wine which is the fruit of them. When Samuel gave up his account as a Judge, in
1 Samuel 12. 3. Behold (says he) here I am, witness against me before the Lord
-- whose Ox have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or whom have I defrauded,
whom have I oppressed, or of whose hand have I received any bribe? Paul in like
manner thus acquitteth himself to the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20. 33. I have
coveted no Man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel. But show me the Man or Woman that
has been much encumbered with worldly affairs, and can say; I have coveted no
Man's House, or Land, or Silver, or Gold; or that can say; To whom have I told a
lie for my gain, or said it has cost me so much, when indeed it did not? Or
whom have I done injustice to in a bargain? Commonly the best of the Market
which such Christians have, is that of Zacheus, Luke 19. If I have taken any
thing from any man by unjust dealings, I restore him fourfold.

5. Lastly, A too great encumbrance with the world, leaves a blot upon
Christians in the common repute of the world, if they escape real blots from
it. Holy Men in the Greek are called (...) that is, men who are not Earthly,
and the world expects it of such as profess to Religion and Godliness, that
they should be persons looking for better Houses then those made of Clay, even
an House in the Heavens not made with hands, and for a better Country, and a
more enduring substance. Hence a too great pursuit of the world becomes a
greater blot to Persons professing to an heavenly conversation, then unto
others. Our conversation is in Heaven (says the Apostle) (...), our trading
and business is in Heaven. I shall only add two or three words for application
of this discourse.

Use 1.
This in the first place, gives us all an opportunity to bewail the
disadvantage we have all received from the fall of Adam. It was a curse which
upon the fall fell upon all the Posterity of Adam, Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of
thy face thou shall eat thy Bread, till thou return to the ground. I do not
think that if man had continued in innocence, he should have lived idly, but
Mercers opinion is very probable, his labor should rather have been for
delight, then for necessity, or rather, his labor should not have been so
great, as now it is; the Thorns and Thistles which the ground now naturally
brings forth, and in the prevention, and extirpation of which the labor of the
Husbandman is so much, were clearly the effect of the curse upon the Earth,
Genesis 3. 18. a livelihood for the Sons of Men had doubtless been got at a
cheaper rate, with lesser labor, and man had been at a great deal more
liberty, and leisure for a communion with God, and have had more time for his
immortal Soul, then his worldly occasions will now permit, or allow. This may
be a profitable meditation for the poorer sort of Christians, whom the need of
Bread for themselves, and the want of a just provision for their Families,
restrain from spending so much time in communion with God as they would, to sit
down, and think of the woeful effect, and fruit of the sin of Adam, that first
sin of man, which reduced the Sons and Daughters of men to these miserable
necessities.

Use 2.
Secondly, Observe from hence, what an advantage those have, whom the liberal
hand of Divine Providence has delivered from such a miserable servitude to
secular affairs. If they will make themselves slaves, and drudges to the World,
they may, but the Providence of God has not put them upon any necessity so to
do. God has given them Estates to live upon, Servants to toil for them. I will
but offer two things to the consideration of these.

1. How inexcusable will you be if you do not keep your own Vineyards well?
Your own Vineyards are your Souls, those immortal Substances, ordained to an
Eternity, ennobled with Reason, and many gifts and faculties, by which, if you
will, you may bring forth much fruit to the honor and glory of God; if now you
be not found mighty in the Scriptures, much in reading, hearing, prayer, close
in your walking with God, etc. You cannot plead that you want leisure: A
morning and evening Service God under the Law required, and in the same
proportion doubtless under the Gospel, though not by way of Sacrifice properly
so called. I observe of David and Daniel, that they prayed thrice in a day,
Psalm 55. 17. Evening, and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud
(says David.) Of Daniel we read, Dan. 6. 10. that he kneeled three times a
day, and prayed, and gave thanks unto God, as he did before-time. They were
both great men, and at more leisure than ordinary Jews. they considered this;
and as God had doubled their portions, so they thought it reasonable in some
measure to proportion their duties to their circumstances.

2. Secondly, Consider how little you will have to say, if you so far entangle
your selves in the world, as it becomes a snare to your Souls. Who pitieth him
that is burned, who for mere wantonness puts his finger in the fire? Has God
given us food and raiment? Jacob begged no more. The Apostle commands us, if
we have so much, to be therewith content. It is an excellent Exhortation which
the Apostle has given, and those are especially capable to receive to whom God
has given a plenty in this world, Heb, 13. 4. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with those things which you have, for God has
said, I will never leave nor forsake you.

Use 3.
Let this caution us all (in the last place) to take heed how we keep
Vineyards; how we make our selves drudges and slaves to secular employments.
Take heed of such a Service to the world as is inconsistent with that duty and
service which you owe unto God. You cannot serve two Masters, you cannot serve
God and Mammon. Suffer me to allude to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10. I
wrote (says he) to you an Epistle, not to keep company with Fornicators, yet
not altogether with the Fornicaters of this world, or with the Covetous, or the
Extortioners, or the Idolaters, for then you must go out of the world; But now
I have wrote to you, not to keep company, if any Brother, etc. I do but allude
to the Text. Brethren, I have this day been speaking to you to have a care of
meddling with the world, because it wastes your time, spends your spirits,
distracts your thoughts, allureth and inticeth you to the too much love of it,
because it will be a blot upon your Profession, yet I would not be understood,
as if I had been persuading you to the lives of lazy Monks, and Nuns, and
Hermites; if you will have nothing to do with the world, you must not live in
it. God has commanded us in the sweat of our face to eat our bread. The
Apostle bids, that those who would not labor, should not eat, and has told
us, that he would have us to labor with our hands, that we might have
something to give to those that want, and has told us, that he who provideth
not for his family is worse than an Infidel, and has denied the Faith. Only
take heed how you converse with it, that you be not by it defiled, that it
takes not up too much of your time, nor wastes too much of your spirits and
strength; that it leads you not into temptation, distracteth not your hearts
in holy duties. Keep thy foot when thou go into the House of God; look to
your thoughts and affections, when you draw nigh unto God in holy services and
duties; use the world so, as thou may have time for Religious duties in thy
family, and may not by thy worldly concerns, be distracted in them. I would
speak to you in this case, as Paul does in the case of servitude to men, and of
Marriage. Are you by the Providence of God loosed from the world? seek not to
be bound to it. Do your necessities call, and for the present bind you to it?
Till God by favorable Providence loosen you from it, do not loosen your selves
by idleness and laziness. It is possible thou may be God's freeman, while
thy necessities bind thee to worldly business. I confess thou have an hard
task, but (says the Apostle) Let every man in the Calling wherein, and whereto
he is called, abide therein with God. Mark that last term, not without God, not
in a neglect of his duty to God, but with God. Labor to have manum in clavo,
oculos in coelo, to be in thy heart, thoughts and affections with God, whiles
thou art employed in thy lower business and concerns in this life.

Sermon XL.
Canticles 1. 6. -- But my own Vineyard I have not kept.

THe Spouse (by which I understand the Church of Christ, and every particular
believing Soul that is a true member of it) is yet apologizing for her
blackness, or appearing blackness, from the causes of it, three of which she
has already assigned. 1. Her afflictions, or persecutions. The Sun has looked
upon me. 2. Her opposition from false Brethren. My Mothers Children were angry
with me. 3. Her submission to Idolatrous or Superstitious Rites. Or her too
great intanglements in secular affairs. They made me (says she) the keeper of
their Vineyards. She comes now to a fourth; Her own too much neligence. My own
Vineyard I have not kept.

1. The Spouse had hitherto not much charged her self, she had charged her
blackness upon her afflictions and Persecutions, and upon the opposition she
had met with from false Brethren, and upon her intanglement in Secular affairs,
but was there no fault in her self; here now she comes to lay much of the blame
upon her self? My own Vineyard (faith she) I have not kept. Gods dispensations
of Providence to me (says she) have been some cause of my blackness: The
opposition I have met with from false Brethren have yet been a greater cause,
but the truth is (says she) notwithstanding both these, had not the fault been
my own, I had not been so black. I might have kept my Vineyard better then I
have done. The truly gracious, and humble Soul will not as to its failings
excuse it self wholly. It may charge something upon foreign causes out of its
self, either from God or Satan or men, but will not discharge its own naughty
and corrupt heart. The hypocrite charge God, and the Devil and men highly,
but seldom charge himself, or if at all very faintly. The reason lies in the
pride of his heart which will not suffer it to stoop so low as to give God
glory, or to take any shame to its self.

2. Secondly, Observe what words they are which these words immediately follow,
They made me the keeper of the Vineyards, but my own Vineyard I have not kept.
The Soul that is too much abroad is ordinarily too little at home, he or she
that must have an Oar in every ones Boat seldom has his own Boat well
governed; Such a Soul is like the gadding housewife, whose own house rarely is
well looked after. This happens especially when the Soul is much abroad about
secular concerns; the Soul though it be of a Spiritual nature, yet is very
capable of being laden with, and mired in thick Clay. No Soul is so careless of
things of an Eternal concern, as those Souls which are most careful and
sollicitous about things transitory, and perishing. There is a kind of
inconsistency betwixt the business of the world, and the business of Heaven,
the prefent world, and that which is to come, Nor is any Church so neglective
of the Vineyard, with which God has betrusted it, as that Church that has
bowed down to impositions of false worship. But I shall not largely discourse
either of these points, though there be a good foundation in the text for it.
There are vet two other.

3. Thirdly, It is the Spouse that here complains, saying, My own Vineyard I
have not kept. Hence observe, Even Gods own People are to ready to neglect the
Vineyard with which God has betrusted them.

4. Fourthly, In that she assigns this as one, and that no small cause of her
blackness, observe,

Prop. The Churches, or particular Christians negligence in keeping of their
own Vineyard, is one main cause of their appearing blackness. This includes
the other, I shall therefore discourse them together; I shall handle this by
inquiring,

1. What is the Spouses own Vineyard. 2. Wherein the keeping of this Vineyard
does lie; 3. I shall show you, That even the Spouse of Christ is a^t to neglect
her own Vineyard. 4. I shall show you what the Ordinary causes of this
negligence are. 5. Then I shall show you how this does cause her to appear
black. After which I shall make some application of the discourse.

1. Qu. 1.
There is no man that lives, be he believer or unbeliever, but were he
sensible of it, has a Vineyard committed to him by God to keep; It is his
Soul: Nor is this interpretation of the Metaphor without some foundation in
holy Writ, The Lord expressing the sinful works of the Jews says, Deuteronomy. 32.
32. Their Vine is of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah. Their grapes are
grapes of g^ll, and their clusters are bitter: Their Wine is the poison of
Dragons, and the cruel venom of Asps. Works, you know are the fruit of the Soul
as Wine, and Grapes, are the fruits of the Vine. As God when he first created
man trusted him with a garden to keep, so he never breaths into man the breath
of life, so as he becomes a living Soul, but he gives him a Soul to till,
cultivate and take care of. The Soul of man, is a Soil naturally prone to bring
forth weeds, briars and thorns, yet capable also to admit plantations of grace
and virtue (for grace grows not naturally in the Soul more then the Vine does
in the Vineyard;) I might show you many other particulars, by which this sense
of the Metaphor might be justified but I forbear that discourse.

2. Secondly, You may here by Vineyard understand whatsoever God has committed
to a man's trust to be kept, maintained, and looked after by him. Now all this,
considering man singly, and personally, is summed up in two things; The
profession of faith; and the Profession of holiness. 1. A profession of faith,
both of the Doctrine of faith, and of the grace or habit of says. It lies
upon a Christian to keep both. 2. The profession of holiness (which is indeed
but the practice of faith, for that works by Love and the fruits of holiness)
must proceed from the root of faith. This is every Christians Vineyard and
indeed the Vineyard of his Soul, is not kept without the keeping of these.
Hence David glories, that he kept the ways of the Lord, Psalm. 18. 21. Paul
kept the faith, 2 Timothy 4. 7. David kept the Lords testimonies, his Law, his
Precepts, his Word, Psalm. 11. 9. 22, 55, 56, 67. The Church of Philadelphia is
commended for keeping the Lords Word, Revel. 3. 8. The word of his patience, v.
20. This is the Vineyard of every Christian according to the more public or
private station which he has in the Church of God.

2. The Church of Christ has a Vineyard also. Indeed the Church is her self
compared to a Vineyard, Isa. 5. and in the parable of him who let out his
Vineyards to husbandmen (but in that sense Christ is himself the Keeper of it;)
Only he lets it out to husbandmen, intrusting certain Officers of his own
appointment with the managery of the affairs of it, but himself has such a
Superintendency upon it, and so keeps it, that the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. The Church has a Vineyard to keep; what is this Vineyard,
but the Doctrine of faith? The Ordinances of our great Lord for worship, and
for discipline: These are the Churches Vineyard. Paul speaking of the Church of
the Jews, says, that unto them were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2.
Paul says, the dispensation of the Gospel was committed unto him, 1 Cor. 9 17.
The word of reconciliation is said to be committed to the Ministers of the
Gospel, 2 Cor. 1. 19. The Gospel was committed to Paul's trust, 1 Timothy 1. 11.
Hence Timothy is spoken to to keep that which was committed to his trust, 1 Timothy 6. 20. The Church is therefore called, The pillar, and ground of truth,
and is fitly compared to the Ark in which was laid up the Pot of Manna,
signifying the word and truths of God. The two Tables containing the Laws for
Worship, and our more ordinary conversation, and the rod of Aaron signifying
the Government and discipline of the Church. The rules for these are laid up in
the Church being part of those Oracles of God which are committed to it. It is
a task which God has laid upon his Church to keep this Vineyard.

Qu. 2.
What it is to keep it we may easily gather from an understanding what it is to
keep a Vineyard or nursery, or garden, etc. It signifies the keeping it clean
from Weeds which would hinder the growth and flourishing of the plants, and
return the place into its former incultivated state and condition. To keep it
with digging, planting, manuring, dressing, and cultivating, that it may yield
that fruit, and profit to the Owner which he expects from it, and for which he
at first planted it. Hence then may easily be concluded what it is both for a
particular Christian, and for a Church to keep its own Vineyard. The whole
business lies in these 2 things.

1. It signifies a Christians keeping of his Soul from Errors, and from lusts,
and corruptions. All motions and inclinations to sin, are the Souls Weeds, and
what the Souls of the best of men are too prone to, its natural fruit; and Quod
Sponte prodit laeti^^ prodit, naturally Weeds grow faster then induced plants.
A particular Christians care in keeping the Vineyard of his Soul lies in
keeping his understanding and judgment untainted with Error as to Doctrine, in
keeping his will from closing with motions to sin, whether from within, or
without, and his conscience sprinkled from Evil works. So for the Church of
Christ, her keeping her Vineyard lies in preserving in all her members a purity
of Doctrine in opposition to the impurity of corrupt opinions, and errors: A
purity of Worship in opposition to all Superstition and Will Worship, and a
purity of discipline.

2. Secondly, it implies the Souls filling and furnishing it self with
knowledge and Spiritual habits the plants which the Lord would have to stand,
and to grow in all parts of his inheritance, and in every Soul that pretends
any relation unto him. As the Gardener, who is entrusted with the keeping of
any of your Gardens does not keep them as he ought, unless beside the weeding
of them, and purging them of Weeds and nettles, he also furnishes them with
useful plants and herbs, and keeps them duly cut and pruned, etc. So neither
does that man or woman keep the Vineyard of his own Soul, that does not take
care to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, and in
all other good, and virtuous habits. So as to the Church, that Church does not
keep its own Vineyard, that does not besides purging itself of errors, and
scandals, take care also that the truths of God be duly preached, and
published, and the Ordinances of God purely administered. This is now for the
Spouse to keep, or not to keep her own Vineyard, now I say the Spouse of
Christ, whether the Individual Spouse (which is every truly gracious Soul) or
the collective Spouse Which is the Church of God is very prone to neglect the
keeping of its own Vineyard.

Qu. 3.
This needs no other Evidence, then the experience of all Christians and all
Churches, and that in all ages.

1. I say first the Experience of particular Christians, for who lives, and
sins not against God? The righteous falls 7 times in a day; now though it
be true, that many of the sins of Gods people are sins of pure infirmity;
Either through ignorance or impotency, to resist the temptation, yet both this
ignorance and impotency are often occasioned through a neglect, or not
improvement of the means of knowledge and better information, and through our
not preparing our selves to the Spiritual fight, putting on the whole Armor of
God as we ought to have done; Avoiding occasions to Sin, abstaining from the
appearances of Evil, and giving no advantage to the adversary; all which are
our duties and enjoined us by the Apostle.

2. Nor Secondly either is there, or ever was any Church of God upon the Earth,
that kept its own Vineyard as it ought to have done. The Church of the Jews was
the only Church God had upon the Earth until the time of John the Baptist.
Whosoever reads their story, in the Books of Moses, the Books of Kings and
Chronicles, or in the Writings of the Prophets, will find that they did not
keep their own Vineyard. Never had any Church a trust more clearly committed to
them, they could have no long disputes about any thing of the revealed will of
God, if any question did arise they had an infallible rule, Deuteronomy. 17. for the
determination of it; yet (as I told you before) as the ten Tribes made a total
defection after the reigns of David and Solomon, both whose reigns made up but
80 years in the latter part of which, (in Solomon's time,) toward the latter
end of his Reign; they also admitted very great corruptions) so in the Kingdom
of Judah they lost what was committed to their trust many times and seldom kept
it 60 years together in any degrees of purity. So that in Josiahs time the Book
of the law was thrown about and hid in the rubbish, and found by the repairers
of the house of the Lord, as you find in the story of the Book of the Kings.
Now that this was their most wilful neglect, appears by their frequent
reductions though not perfect, to the Divine rule. When Asa, Jehosaphat,
Hezekiah, Joash, Josiah, attempted it, and the plain revelation which they had
of the will of God, both from the letter of the law, their way for decision of
doubts about it, and the Prophets which God favored them with, all the while
that Kingdom remained. After that Church was destroyed, and the Christian
Church set up, all the Apostolical Epistles give a proof of the proneness of
Churches to neglect the keeping of their own Vineyards, and of the Lords
Watchmen to sleep while the Enemy sowed tares. The same is also Evidenced by
all Ecclesiastical history, and from the History of all modern Churches, their
Deviations in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, etc. testify it.

Qu. 4.
Nor is the reason of this aptness in us to neglect the keeping of our own
Vineyards, hard to be assigned.

1. The first is the laboriousness of the work, and the crosness of it to the
genius of Flesh and blood. For a Christian to keep his heart with all diligence
is no easy work, it lies much in a Christians denial of himself, taking up the
Cross, mortifying his members, as to which, our flesh incessantly cries in the
language of Peter, Master, spare thy self. So that he who does it rows (as we
say) both against wind and tide. It requires much knowledge and judgment to
keep a man's self unspotted from errors, but a great degree of self denial for
any man to keep himself unspotted from the pollution of the World through lust;
upon this account it is that our Savior compares the way ^o heaven to a
narrow way, a strait gate. And tells us that it is as easy for a Camel to go
through the Eye of a Needle as for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.
Our work is compared by our Savior to a cutting off the right hand, and
plucking out of a right Eye. In works of great labor, and difficnlty, we are
very prone (you know) to be remiss, and negligent.

2. But this is not all; The native corruption and inclination in man's heart to
deviate from the holy and right ways of God is a great cause. I must confess
that as to the Churches keeping its Vineyard I cannot apprehend such a
difficulty in it. As to truth a man indeed cannot believe what he lists, but
the Church notwithstanding this may keep the Doctrine of says; if particular
Persons that are otherwise persuaded, in some points then the rest of the
Church is, would but learn what the Apostle directs in that case; Have thou
says? have it to thy self, Romans 14. and not think themselves obliged to
publish to the disturbance of a Church what is their own particular opinion. As
to Ordinances relating to Worship and Government, what difficulty can there be
in keeping strictly to the Divine rule and doing that alone which Gods Word
requires? the questions concerning that would be very few, if men did not lay
hold upon some general passages, and apply them to their own fancies. Were men
but fixed in this to adhere to the Divine rule without diminishing it, or
without adding to it, unless in cases where such additions are apparently
necessary, certainly this were all to be required in order to the Churches
keeping its own Vineyard as to the Ordinances committed to it. But the
corruption of man's heart, inclining him to interpret the will of God in a
consistency to his own reason, makes all the difficulty in the Churches keeping
the Doctrine of faith. And the wild humor that has always possessed men to
Worship God according to their own fancies, and to create decencies, and
matters of order, according to their own pleasure, and to conform their Altars
to that of Damascus, has been all along in the story of the Church, the cause
of the Churches neglecting to keeps its proper Vineyard.

3. Thirdly, It is much caused from the mixture of the world in our
conversation. This is true both as to the neglect of the particular Christian,
and as to the neglect of the Church also. As to the particular Christian; we
are but flesh, and have senses to be gratified with pleasures, profits, honor,
etc. as well as with the supply of our necessities: We live in, and converse
with the world, which is full of objects, that gratify our sensitive appetite
in these things; these are continual temptations to us to remit at least the
care of our own souls, and to neglect our own Vineyards. The Church also while
it is militant here on Earth, and considered as Visible, has in it a great
mixture of the world, though not of the Pagen world, (there must be a
profession of Christ in all the Members of the Visible Church) yet, of that
world which lies in wickedness, and it is this mixture of Hypocrites, with
such as are the sincere Servants of God, that causes the Church's neglect of
its Vineyard. All the remissness in a Church of its care as to the Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline of Christ, proceeds from this mixture of persons, who
are no more than Visible, with such as are sincere, and true Members of the
Church of Christ.

4. A fourth cause of this neglect, is men's foolish presumptions, that they are
well enough. The work of every particular Person in keeping the Vineyard of his
own Soul, is so contrary to the grain of flesh, and blood, that not only the
natural man, but even the Sanctified man (in regard of that corruption which is
yet in him) is ready to take up with short measures of it, and to think his
Vineyard is well enough kept when indeed it is not; men are loath to be
righteous over much, and are very apt to think that a little is enough. We are
very apt to think that we do enough duty, and consider not the mark which we
are to press after, the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. It is
something natural to us to think we may not only do, but over-do what God
requires of us, when alas! when we have done all we can we are unprofitable
servants, servants, so that what we do is but our duty, unprofitable servants,
so that what we do comes much short of our duty. Perfection is what we are all
bound to aim at and strive after, but withal it is what no man attaineth; not
as though I had already attained, or were already perfect (says the Apostle.)
You know in works that are not naturally pleasing to us we are well pleased to
think we have done enough. Thus it is in the business of Religion, and
holiness, they are things which please not flesh and blood; so as we are well
pleased when we can Satisfy our selves, and think that we need do no more nor
go any further, and as it is with particular Christians so it is with Churches,
all which have not Pastors, and Governors according to Gods own heart, nor are
all the members of them, members of Christ. Now those who are not so are no
great lovers of, nor zealous for the perfection of purity, but can take up with
measures short of those which Christ has made, and given. Hence is that
neglect of the keeping their own Vineyards which is but too obvious in all
Churches; and hence are those obvious declinations in that duty which men owe
to God, and in the purity of Churches every Age is still declining, and growing
worse then the former, whiles a party in the Church still studyeth more and
more to wriggle their neck out of the yoke of Christ, and to get rid of some
ungrateful things to flesh and blood, which a former Age retained. For as no
particular Person at first runs up to the highest degree of wickedness, so
seldom does any Church at first Apostatize, to that degree, but gradually
declineth.

Qu. 5.
None shall need to enquire, whence it is that this Neglect of our own
Vineyards, makes us to appear thus black, who but considers that this
Neglect is contrary to the Divine rule, which obliges us to keep our hearts
with all diligence, Prove. 423. to strive after perfection, and to go on unto
it: and also obliges all Churches, to keep that which is committed to their
trust, to keep the Lords Word, etc. There is no medium in this case betwixt
black and white. The Whiteness, beauty and glory of a Christian lies in his
holding fast of his profession, both of faith and holiness, his keeping close
to the divine rule, and here in also lies the whiteness, and beauty of those
assemblyes of Christians which we call Churches and the more, or less, both of
a Christians, and of a Churches beauty, and whiteness lies in his, or their
more or less conformity to the divine rule, which being granted, their neglect
of this must necessarily render them black and make them to appear so to others.

Use 1.
This discourse may in the first place let us see, the weakness of our faith,
in our different apprehensions of our worldly, and spiritual concernments.
Certainly had we the same persuasions, that we have Souls, as that we have
Bodies, as quick apprehensions of the danger of our Souls miscarriage, as we
have of our bodily dangers; had we but a firm persuasion of the excellency of
our Souls, above our Bodies we should have an equal, if not a greater care, to
keep this Vineyard of our immortal Soul, as we have to keep our Bodies; but
have we so? It is true there are some in the World, that are lazy, and slothful
as to their outward concerns, they will rather steal, or beg, then work, but
these are but few in comparison of others, God has given men a body to look
after, with what diligence does he keep that? he rises up early, lies down
late, and eats the bread of carefulness, and all this for the keeping of his
body, but for this Vineyard of the Soul of man, how few are they that look
after it? how little is the diligence that is used in keeping of that? who
attends the health of his Soul with that diligence that he attends his
bodily health? or the maintenance and food of his Soul, with the same diligence
that he attends his bodily food and sustenance? or the adorning of his Soul,
with the same care and diligence that he attends the adorning of his body?
What does this argue? does it not speak either that men have no great opinion
that they have immortal Souls, or that they have no great opinion of the price,
and value of them, or that they do not think there is so much care necessary
for the keeping of them?

Use 2.
We may observe from hence, upon what the blackness of particular Souls, and
Churches, is principally to be charged. There may be some blame to be laid upon
foreign causes. Temptations from the World and the Devil, but the greatest
blame must be laid upon our selves. Did we keep our watch so strictly as we
might keep it, Temptations could have no such power upon us as they have, the
Devil and the world can do no more then strike fire, the tinder that receives
it must be in our own box; when the Prince of the World came to Christ, he
could do nothing against him, because he found nothing in him. If the Devil
found nothing in our Souls he could do nothing against them but only disturb
them. The like may be said for the corruptions of Churches; If the husbandmen
did not sleep the Enemy could not sow so many tares. All corruptions, in the
Doctrine of faith, in matters of Worship and discipline, have crept in by the
Officers of Churches not keeping their own Vineyards. The man of sin, the
Western Antichrist, had never so hacknyed the Western Churches, if they had not
like Issachar Couched under the burden, and bowed their necks down to the Yoke.

Use 3.
I shall shut up this discourse with a few Words of Exhortation to all to keep
their own Vineyards. I shall not here speak to the duty of husbandmen
(Spiritual husbandmen) to keep the Vineyard of the Church; it were a Proper
discourse from the Doctrine, but I am not in a proper auditory. And besides
would every particular Christian but keep the Vineyard of his own Soul, the
care of Magistrates, and Ministers who are the keepers of Christ's Vineyard
might be less. Christians woeful remissness, and neglect in keeping the more
particular Vineyards of their own Souls, is that which makes the work of the
keepers of the more public Vineyard of the Church so difficult and almost
unpracticable to them. Let me therefore only lay a little stress here, as we
say, if every man would sweep his own door the street would be clean: So it is
true if every one would look to the Vineyard of his own particular Soul, or his
particular family, the Church of God would be clean, for that is made up but of
particular families, and particular Souls. When these Vineyards are kept, the
more public Vineyard which is made up of these must also be kept. Wherein the
keeping of our Vineyards lies you have heard, viz. 1. In the keeping of it
clear of weeds and noxious plants. 2. In the cultivation, and manuring such
plants as are fit for it. In these two things lies the keeping of Gardens and
Vineyards amongst men: in these two things lies the keeping of our Vineyards
in a metaphorical and more spiritual sense, you whom God has trusted with the
care of others, have a larger Vineyard then those that are solute. The Wife is
a part of the Husbands Vineyard, Children are their parents Vineyard, Servants
are their Masters Vineyard. Every man's family is his Vineyard. If any be single
his Soul is his Vineyard. The keeping of your Vineyards lies in a keeping of
them free from Scandal, not suffering sin upon any that stand in any relation
to you; we ought not to do it as to our neighbor, much less as to any that are
our neighbors in thenearest and strictest sense, and who stand in nearest
concernment to us. David resolved to walk within his house with a perfect heart
-- that the faithful in the land should dwell with him, and that he that walked
in a perfect way should serve him, that he that wrought deceit should not dwell
within his house, he that tells lies should not abide in his sight, Psalm.
101. 2, 7, 8. Abraham commanded his Children, and his household after him, to
keep the way of the Lord, to do justice, and judgment, Genesis 18. 19. For you
that have only the Vineyards of your own Souls to keep, neglect them not; I
will press this upon you with 2 considerations which I shall recommend to you.

1. The first shall be, The value of the Vineyards with which God has
betrusted to you. The Vineyards are Souls, either your own Souls, or the Souls
of others, or both. Which way soever you consider a Soul, whether as a
Spiritual being, or as a reasonable being, endued with noble faculties, or as
an immortal being that cannot perish with the body, as that part of man, which
bears the most lively impress of the image of God, as that which was
purchased by the blood of Christ, and which is the habitation of God through
the Spirit in which the holy Spirit may dwell, that which is ordained to an
Eternity either of happiness or misery; which way soever you look upon your own
Souls, or the Souls of those who are committed to your trusts, they are noble
Vineyards. Reason teaches us to take the best care of our best and most
excellent things, I have thought it often a most unreasonable vanity of some
Gentlemen, to take a great deal more care of the managery, of an horse or hawk
then of their Sons. It is every whit as great, if not a much greater vanity, to
take a greater care of the bodies, and outward concerns of their relations,
then of their Souls. What can be laid in balance with a Soul which will not be
found too light for it? what shall be offered in exchange for it, and not
rejected as of too low a consideration? Of what value think you that must be
which was bought with the blood of him who was the Son of God? Consider of what
value the profession of your faith, and the practice of holiness is; your faith
is called precious faith, and of holiness, it is said that without it none
shall see the Lord.

2. Secondly. Consider who it is that has betrusted you with Ezekiel. 18. 4.
them. Behold (says God) All Souls are mine, It is God that has given unto us
the trust of our own Souls and the trusts of others Souls for all Souls are
originally Gods. He breaths the Soul into the body of a man, he puts Souls into
men's families, I beseech you consider here these particulars: 1. That every
Person of reputation and honor valueth a trust, and thinks it beneath a man,
not to discharge a trust he undertakes with some degrees of faithfulness. We
see in our daily experience, that as men naturally Love to be trusted, so they
have a kind of natural religion, for the keeping and discharging of it. This is
what makes men conscientious as to the wills of Persons that are dead. All
Souls are trusts, our particular Souls are trusts, the Souls of our relations
are trusts to us. The property of all Souls is Gods, the trust of them is in
us, I wish this were but well thought on; the wicked men mentioned by the
Psalmist said, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12. 4. men
think that they may do what they will with what they have a full propriety in.
This is a great cause of men's neglect of their Souls, they dream too much of an
absolute property they have in them, they say, their Souls are their own. Who
is Lord over them? would men consider their Souls a little more as trusts they
would take a stricter care of them. 2. Tho we naturally value all trusts, yet
such as our Superiors or near friends commit to us we yet value more. A dread
of our Superiors makes us to value and take care of what they have committed
to our trust a love to our friends makes us value theirs; our Souls, and the
Souls of those that are in relation to us, are a trust committed to us by the
Lord of the whole Earth by Christ who has dyed for us. So that here is both
the relation of a Superior and of a friend in the case, obliging us to take a
due care for the keeping of our Vineyards. 3. The more eyes we have upon us,
observing how we manage our trust, the more careful we are (ordinarily) as to
the managery of it. This is a trust as to which God who has entrusted us, has
an Eye to us how we discharge it; this needs no great proof, whosoever believes
Gods Omnisciency, and considers the observing Eye which God keeps upon all
men, and all their actions, so as they are all written in a Book, must know and
believe this. Lastly the more accountable we are for any trust, the more we
take our selves obliged to keep it with all diligence. The trust of every man's
Soul is a trust for which he must account, Romans 14. 12. So then every one of us
shall give an account of himself unto God we must give an account to him who is
ready to judge both the quick and the dead, 1 Pet. 4 5. of what must we give an
account, but of our Souls? their Elicit and Imperate acts, the Apostle tells us
that it is the duty of Pastors and Governors of Churches, to watch for Souls
because they must give an account. Certainly it is as much the duty of every
particular Christian to watch over his own Soul, because his Soul is a trust,
of which he must give an account to him that is ready to come to judge both the
quick and the dead. Nor are we only to give an account of our Souls, but of the
Souls committed to our charge. This the Apostle tells us plainly, Heb. 13.
17. as to those who are Governors, and Pastors of Churches, and God told it
Ezechiel, Ezech. 3. 18. Son of man (says he) I have made thee a watchman to
the house of Israel -- v. 18. When I say unto the wicked thou shall surely die,
and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his
wicked way, to save his Life, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity,
but his blood will I require at thy hand. (This is that which made Chrysostom
think that there were but a few Ministers that would be saved.) But it is as
true concerning Superiors in other relations; God never brings a wife into
the bosom of any husband, nor adds a Child or Servant to any family, but he
says to the husband of that wife, to the Parent of that Child or those
Children, to the Master of those Servants, All Souls are mine. The Souls of
these Persons I commit to thy trust, if thou do not warn them from sinful
courses, if thou do not walk toward them as a man of knowledge, and bring
them up in the nurture, and admonition of the Lord, they shall die in their
ignorance, in their iniquity, but their Souls will I require at thy hand. A
consideration which if duly weighed by the Sons of men, would awaken men to
another kind of Government of their families, and another kind of instruction
of them then I fear is ordinarily to be found in families.

2. I shall add but one thing more; The better any man keeps the Vineyard of
his own Soul, or the Vineyard of his family, the more fruit he shall reap from
it. His Vintage will be the better, there is little fruit to be expected from a
neglected Vine. Our Vineyards, those I mean of our own Souls and the Souls of
others under our trust, do not only bring forth fruit to the honor and Glory
of God but unto our selves, and that very considerable, 1. In our peace of
Conscience here in this Life. 2. In that glory which is the object of our
future hopes. The fruit of righteousness is peace and quietness, and assurance
for ever. Keep your Vineyards, that you may drink the sweet fruit and wine
thereof, that joy, and peace which is the fruit of believing, and of an holy
life and conversation. This will be very pleasant to us while we live, much
more, when we come to die. Lord Remember (says Ezekiah upon his sick bed) how
I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. Conscience checks
us for nothing, but the neglect of some Vineyard or other, which the Lord has
entrusted us with. 2. Your glory hereafter will be the more. I know there is a
question in Divinity whether there shall be any degrees of glory? It is hard to
show you wherein the glory of one Saint shall excel another, but I think it is
plain enough that there shall be differences of glory in Saints that shall be
glorified, and if so, doubtless those that have best kept their own Vineyards,
shall have the largest penny. And those that have best discharged their trusts
to the Souls of others, shall have the larger share in glory. He that wins
Souls is wise. And the Prophet Daniel tells us that those who turn many to
righteousness shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever.

Sermon XLI.
Cant. 1. 7, 8. Tell me (O thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest, where
thou make thy flocks to rest at Noon, for why should I be as one that turns
aside by the flocks of thy Companions.

If thou know not, O thou fairest amongst Women, go thy way forth by the
footsteps of the Flocks, and feed thy Kids, beside the Shepherds Tents.

IT is the Spouse who yet continues her speech to her Beloved. She has spoken
once to him, desiring some tokens of his special and distinguishing love, v. 2.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. She has spoken a second time to
him, desiring strength from him to run after him. She now puts up a third
petition, v. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest, where
thou make thy flocks to rest at noon, for why should I be as one that turns
aside by the flocks of thy companions. To which her beloved replyeth, v. 8. If
thou know not (O thou fairest amongst Women) go thy way by the footsteps of
the flocks, and feed thy Kids by the Shepherds Tents. The words easily fall
into two parts:

1. The Spouses Petition to her Beloved. Tell me O thou whom my Soul loves,
etc. v. 7.

2. Her Beloveds answer, v. 8. If thou know not (O thou fairest amongst
Women, etc.)

In the Spouses Petition is considerable. 1. Her compellation. O thou whom my
Soulloveth. 2. Her Petition. Tell me where thou feedest, where thou make thy
flocks to rest at noon. 3. Her argument. For why should I be as one who turns
aside by the flocks of thy companions. In the answer is also considerable,

1. His compellation. O thou fairest amongst Women.

2. His particular direction, and information of her, in two things. If thou
know not, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock. 2. Feed thy Kids
by the Shepherds Tents.

O thou whom my Soul loves or has loved.] The Chaldee Paraphrast would have
us believe, that this seventh verse was Moses his Petition to God, when he was
about to die, for direction from him, how the People should be governed, when
he should be gone, and how they should dwell amongst the Heathen, whose laws
would be more grievous to the sincere part of them, then the Sun is to the
Traveller at noon day, and asking, why she should live amongst the Edomites,
and Moabites, who made Idols the companions of the true God, and v. 8. the same
Paraphrast makes this to be the Lords answer, telling his Prophet Moses, that
if they would not live under the power of the Heathen, they must walk in his
Commandments, and be obedient to the guides he had set over them. But doubtless
this is a strained sense, proceeding from the overgreat fondness of that
Interpreter, to apply all that is said in this Song, to the Jewish Church.
There are others who according to their different notions of these betwixt whom
this Dialogue is instituted, carry these words in other senses, you know the
sense which I have all along followed, is that of those (and they are the most,
and the best) who make it a Dialogue betwixt the believing Soul, or the Church,
and the Lord Jesus Christ. It is then the believing Soul that speaks in this
language of a lover, O thou whom my Soul loves. Christ is the primary object
of the believers love, a believer loves him, and none else, in a degree to be
compared with him, or with a love any thing like that love, wherewith she
loves him. But if she loves him, must she tell him so? Modesty makes the
Virgin ordinarily to conceal her passion; sinful modesty oft-times makes her
that is a spiritual Virgin to conceal her love to Christ. She that may, while
she is doubting her own sincerity, conceal her love to Christ, will not conceal
it, when she lives in any view of it, and can say with Peter, Lord, thou that
know all things, know that I love thee. Nor when she is to use it as an
argument to obtain any favor from him. Nor when she is doubting of his love to
her (how unreasonably soever.) Nor is the Virgin that is too modest to publish
her love to the world, so modest as not to own it to him whom she has resolved
upon, and chosen for her Husband. Bernard has, I think too critical a note
upon these words; mark (says he) she does not say whom I love, but whom my
Soul loves; Spiritualem designans dilectionem, intimating a spiritual love.
But yet it is well noted by the learned Mercer, that the phrase signifies more
then if she had said. Omy Beloved; it is as much as if she had said, In quem
omnes meos affectus effudi (says Beza) upon whom I have bestowed my whole
heart.

Tell me where thou feedest, where thou make thy flocks to rest at Noon.]
Thus she expresses the thing that she would have under a metaphorical
expression, the sense of which we are to enquire; keeping of Sheep, and Goats,
was a very ancient, and in those times a noble employment. Abel was the first
Shepherd you read of, Genesis 4. 2. Rachel was a keeper of Sheep, Genesis 29. 6. So
was Jacob, and David (as you know) before he came to be King over Israel, God
called him from the Sheepfold. Christ takes unto himself the notion of a
Shepherd, he calls himself the good Shepherd, John 10. 1, 2. etc. It was
prophesied of him, that he should feed his flock like a Shepherd, Isaiah 45.
11. and his death was prophesied of, under the notion of smiting the Shepherd,
Zech. 13. 7. Mat. 26. 11. The Apostle calls him the great Shepherd, and the
chief Shepherd. In this dialect here, the Spouse speaks to him. It was not
unusual for the Heathens to discourse matters of carnal, and sensual love, as
transactions between Shepherds, and some whom they loved. The Holy Ghost does
the same here, he by Solomon discourses this matter of Spiritual and Divine
love, as a transaction betwixt a Shepherd, and one who dearly loved him. But
what would she have? she would know where he fed, that is, where he fed his
flocks, where he made them to rest at noon; the noon (as you know) is the
hottest time of the day, and so by the noon I find some understanding a time of
affliction. To this I find Mercer, and Beza inclining. Beza thinks that the
Church here beggeth to know how Christ would have his Church governed, and
ordered in the midst of temptations, and persecutions, and beggeth for
Christ's fullest, and clearest manifestations of himself to her at such a time
(so says Bernard,) Mercer thinks it is as much as if she had said. Lord I am
burnt with the Sun; show me that shadow, in, and with which thou usest to
refresh thy Saints in the hour of affliction. There is a promise made to the
Church, Isaiah 49. 10. They shall not hanger nor thirst, neither shall the
heat, or the Sun smite them, for he that has mercy on them, shall lead them,
even by the springs of waters shall he guide them. Now the Spouse here (in the
opinion of these Interpreters) begs to know these shadows, where the flocks
rested at noon.

I must confess I more incline to another sense. The noon was the hottest time
of the day, and as in our Country, where the power of the Sun is nothing so
much as in those hot Countries, Cattle seek shadows, and resting places, where
they are a little free from the heat of the weather; so they were wont to drive
their flocks of Sheep into such shadowy places, where both the Shepherd, and
the Sheep were more quiet and at rest, which time was the most free time of the
day for the Shepherd, when any might more freely discourse him, according to
that of the Poet, Fauste precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra ruminet,
antiquos paulum recitemus amores. So that the Spouse desires to know where he
fed, where he made his flocks to rest at noon, That is, where she might have
the most free, and uninterrupted communion with him.

For why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy
companions.] She here implies, that without her Lords direction, she was like
enough to turn aside: She beggeth she might not so turn aside. The word in the
Hebrew is (...) we translate it, as one turning aside, or that turns aside,
and so Pagnine interprets it. Arias Montanus translates it, sicut operiens
se, as one that covers her self, and indeed so the Hebrew word most commonly
signifies. Now this covering themselves, was either in token of shame, or of
sorrow, or modesty. Mourners were wont to cover their faces, Ezech. 24. 17.
Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thy head upon
thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips. It was also a
token of shame. Harlots were wont to cover themselves, Genesis 38. 14. It was also
done as a token, or signification of modesty, so you read of Rebeccah, Genesis 24.
65. when she heard of Isaac, his coming toward her, she hasted, and took a
vail, and covered her self; this custom of Virgins covering themselves, was of
long use in the Church of God, so that Tertullian, who lived 2 or 300 years
after Christ, has a particular Book to persuade the upholding of that custom,
which it should seem then began to be disused. Our Translators interpret the
word, turn aside. The cause of the difference lies in the doubtfulness, whether
the Hebrew root be (...) or (...) the first signifies to turn aside; the
second to cover. Hence also arises the difference of Interpreters about the
next term.

By the flocks of thy Companions.] Those who interpret the former word turn
aside, understand by Companions, Idolaters, and Superstitious persons; who
indeed make themselves the companions of Christ, or rather make their Idols his
companions; some interpret it of Heretics. Idolaters make their Idols Christ's
Companions, by giving that Homage to them, which is due to him alone. Thus the
Papists do to their Images, and Crucifixes, to Saints, and Angels. Heretics
make their leaders Christ's Companions, making them the guides of their faith
and practice, which is an Homage due unto Christ alone. Indeed Christ has
properly no Companion, consider him as to his Divine Nature. He is, and there
is none besides him, nor has he any Companion as our Mediator, and
Interc^ssor. He trod the Winepress alone, neither was any of the People with
him, he had no Companion either in his Kingly, Prophetical, or Priestly Office.
But he has some who call themselves his Companions, and arrogate to themselves
that title, nay, which others sinfully make his Companions. Beza thinks these
are here meant.

2. But secondly, Christ has some, who though they are not strictly his
Companions, yet he graciously so calls them, being (as the Apostle says) not
ashamed to call them Brethren, of these I should choose to understand the text,
(and though I am very tender of differing from the received translation of a
Church in any matter of moment) should be more inclined, as I said before, to
translate the former term, one covered. So the sense is, For why should I be
amongst thy People as a Mourner, or as one that is an Harlot, with whom thou will have no communion. or fellowship? Why should I walk as one covered, either
as a Mourner, or as a Strumpet, amongst thy People, whom thou have so far
owned, as to declare thy self not ashamed to call them Brethren, or Companions?
This I take to be the sense of the Petition;

O thou whom my Soul loves above all other objects whatsoever, who art my
Shepherd, let me know where, and how I may enjoy communion with thee, how I
may have fellowship with thee in a time of trouble and affliction, and when I
may have the nearest, fullest, and most uninterrupted communion with thee, for
why should I, for want of thy presence, be under a constant temptation to turn
aside from a true fellowship and communion with thee to the Synagogues, and
Assemblies of Idolaters. Or why should I walk amongst thy People, either as a
Mourner, or as an Harlot, whom thou have cast off, or divorced.

To this now, her Beloved answers [O thou fairest amongst Women] it is an
Hebraeisme, a way they have to express the superlative degree, so Luke 1. 28.
42, Thou art blessed amongst Women, that is, very much, very highly blessed. So
the Lion is said to be strong among Beasts, Prove, 30. 30. that is, the
strongest Beast. It is no more then in our dialect. O thou that art fairest, to
whose Beauty in my Eyes no others Beauty is to be compared.

If thou know not] the Hebrew is (...) the Septuagint translate it, (...) if
thou do not know thy self, the vulgar Latin, Aethiopick, Syriack, and Arabic
Translators, and indeed most ancient Interpreters that I meet with follow the
Septuagint, and translate it, If thou know not thy self. Hence Bernard (upon
the place) runs into a large discourse concerning Christians ignorance of
themselves, and the profitableness of our knowledge of our selves, according to
the ancient Precept of the wise man amongst the Heathen, (...). But undoubtedly
though this be a great truth, yet it is nothing to the sense of this text,
where (...) is a Pleonasme, as both Tremellius, Mercer, and Mariana, (three
Interpreters very learned, and critical in the Hebrew Dialect, do all agree) so
as we translate it truly, according to our Idiom, If thou know, tho in the
Hebrew it be, If thou know to, or for thy self. It follows,

Go thy way by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy flocks by the
Shepherds Tents.] These words now contain her beloveds direction, if she were
at a loss, what to do in a time of streights, or how to enjoy the most full and
free communion with him, she must go her way by the footsteps of the flock.
Interpreters vary in the sense of these words, according to their different
notion of the former. If thou know not. Those that will not allow (...) to
be Paragogical, or Pleonastical, but will interpret them, If thou know not
thy self, and so make the whole to be a rebuke, or chiding of the Spouse, for
her ignorance, or pride, will have the flocks here to be the flocks of
Idolaters, and Heretics, and by the Kids here understand her own vain
imaginations, and make this speech to be the language of an angry God, giving
up a People in wrath (according to that of the Apostle) to strong delusions to
believe a lie, for their wilful ignorance and non-improvement of the means of
grace. This is the sense put upon the words by Hierome, Gregory, Bernard,
Aquinas, Lyra, and others. And there is a truth in this, when a people continue
in the bosom of a Church, under the means of grace, ignorant, proud, and
unprofitable, God often in wrath gives them over to Seducers, and leaves them
to the vanities, and delusions of their own hearts (a Judgment of all others
most formidable.) But certainly this is not the sense of the words. Delrio
(though a Papist) differs from them, and gives us a good reason, telling us, if
that had been our Lords meaning, he would never in the same breath have called
her the fairest among Women. Therefore Tremellius, both the English, and Dutch
Annotators, Deodate, Piscator, Mariana, and others, understand here by the
footsteps of the flock, and by the Shepherds Tents, the Precepts, and Examples
of Moses and Aaron, the Prophets, and the Apostles, and the purer Church of
God, and by the Kids mentioned, they understand particular Souls. So that the
sense of the words is this.

Thou believing Soul, who in my Eyes art more beautiful, and lovely, then any
other Soul in the world, if thou be in any thing ignorant of my will, and
where to meet me, and how to enjoy fellowship and communion with me, do not
stray from the rule of my word, nor vary from the examples of those whom I gave
for Shepherds to my People, keep close to them, to their Doctrine, and to my
Ordinances administered by them. There thou shall find me. There I rest at noon.
These two verses thus opened, afford us several Propositions of Doctrine, as
matter of further discourse.

Prop. 1. Christ is he, and only he whom the believing Soul loves.

Prop. 2. Though there may be a time when such a Soul may conceal, and disown
its love to Christ, yet there will be a time when it will break forth, and she
will acknowledge it.

Prop. 3. A gracious Soul, desires nothing more then a quiet, full, and sweet
communion with Christ.

Prop. 4. Christ has shades where he rests, and feeds his flock, under the
greatest, and most scorching Afflictions.

Prop. 5. Though a pious Soul never slighteth a communion with Christ, yet she
never prizeth it at an higher rate, then in an hour of greatest trials, and
temptations.

Prop. 6. Gods People will, (especially in times of trial, and great
temptation) be prone to fall into sin, and error, to the scandal of their
profession.

Prop. 7. Sin and Scandal, are the two great things which a gracious Soulfears.

Prop. 8. The Believing Soul, is of all other Souls the most beautiful in
Christ's Eyes.

Prop. 9. The Beauty of this Soul is not perfect, it may in some things be
ignorant.

Prop. 10. The surest way for a Soul to get a perfect instruction in the things
that concern its spiritual good, and to keep, and to enjoy communion with
Christ, is to feed its self by the Tents of Christ's Shepherds, and to live
according to the examples and directions of his holy Servants, recorded in Holy
Writ.

I begin with the first, of which I shall speak but briefly.

Prop. 1. Jesus Christ is he whom the Soul loves with a singular love.

I put in the term singular, because (as I told you) the phrase imports it.
Love is nothing else but the adhaesion, or cleaving of the Soul to an object,
out of a goodness and suitableness which it has discerned in it, with a
complacency which the Soul takes in it, which is such, as if the Soul wants
it, it desires it; if it enjoys it, it is glad, and rejoices in it; which
being first considered, it follows; that look how many objects as there are,
that have in them any goodness, or suitableness to our state, so many objects
of our love there are in the world. And 2. That look how much goodness and
suitableness to us we apprehend in one object more than in another, so much we
love one thing more than another; or one person more than another. 2. There is
also a love that flows from Union and Relation, of which we are not able to
give a perfect account; the Parent loves the Child, and the Husband loves the
Wife, and the Wife the Husband, not always out of Judgment. The Husband
discerning in the Wife a suitableness to him, is not always the cause of love:
Nor is the Child's love to the Mother or Father always rational, flowing from
an apprehension of the suitableness of the Parent to it, but rather from an
impetus of nature, an unaccountable complacency in those whom God has made
correlates, caused by the God of Nature, who has made them one flesh; who so
deliberately considers this, will easily understand a double reason of the
Believers Love to Christ.

1. The first is, That Union which is betwixt the believing Soul, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, which is wrought by Faith; this produces this second Union,
which is that of Love. By Faith Christ is united to the Soul, and becomes a
member of his body, and that is followed by this Union of Love: The Soul in the
same hour wherein it is united by Faith to Christ, being taught of God to love
the Lord Jesus Christ. It Is a piece of its Regeneration, which continually
follows Justification, and is indeed coaevous with it; so that as in the
natural Union, the same day the man becomes a Father, or the Woman a Mother,
there is a new Emanation of affection and love; the Man or Woman that before
knew nothing of the heart of a Parent, now begins to feel it, and in the moral
Union betwixt the Husband and Wife, the same day that they are married to each
other, there flows a reciprocal Affection each to other, so as they then
begin to know the heart of an Husband and a Wife, of which they knew little or
nothing before: So it is upon the Spiritual Union; as the God of Nature
influenceth the Souls of persons, whom he has given one to another in natural
and moral Relations, ordinarily for a reciprocal usefulness one to another: So
the God of Grace influenceth the Soul put into a spiritual Relation to Christ:
That the Believer upon his Union with Christ, does find his heart cleaving to,
and taking a complacency in the Lord Jesus Christ, and begins thus to know the
heart of a Believer. And look as it is in the moral Relation betwixt the Wife
and the Husband, though the Man may have heard such reports of the virtues and
excellencies of the Woman before he has married her, as has enforced from him
a complacency in her, yet this bears no proportion to that delight and
complacency he takes in her when she is once married to him. So, although a
Soul upon the large discourses he has heard of Christ, and of his love to
Mankind, and what he has done, and is ready to do for the Souls of men, may
have some good thoughts of him, and some kind of complacency in his thoughts of
him, yet there is a vast difference betwixt this, and that complacency which
the Soul takes in Christ, when it is once by Faith united to him, and amongst
other habits of grace has that of Love to God infused into his Soul, according
to that, Romans 5. 5. The Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost, which is given unto us. I know there is a Dispute raised by some,
whether the natural man's love to God, differs from the Believer's love to
God specifically, or only gradually. I do not think that these spiritual habits
fall under those logical measures; I am sure it is a love flowing quite from
another cause. The natural man's love is no more than a natural Plant
cultivated by reason; the other's is a fruit of the Spirit; so as they differ
further than gradually; but whether we should call it specifically, or no, or
want a Logical term to express the difference, I shall not think it worth my
time to enquire.

2. A second Reason of the Believer's love, and so great and singular love to
Christ, flows from his Experimental discerning of that admirable suitableness
that is in Christ to his Soul, and the exceeding love which he has shown to
him. 1. A Believer has another kind of persuasion of the Love of Christ, and
the excellency that is in him, than it is possible another should have. 1. A
persuasion flowing from Faith; And 2. Confirmed by Experience. I say, first
flowing from Faith. We know a thing by Sense, Reason or Revelation; the
Excellency of Christ falls not under the demonstration of Sense. Reason
indeed working upon Principles of Revelation, I mean concluding from the
Revelation of holy Writ, will show even a natural man, much goodness, much
excellency in Christ. But this Knowledge is very far from that certainty which
Faith begets in the Soul, which is a certainty against which the Soul has
nothing to oppose ordinarily. Faith is an Evidence, and the strongest Evidence
to the Soul of what it does not see by the Eye of Sense, and sees very
imperfectly by the Eye of Reason. 2. A Believer's Knowledge is confirmed by
Experience; as he has heard from the Word of God; so he has seen in the
dispensations of God to his Soul. His Soul is sprinkled with the Blood of
Christ; it was lost, it is now found: It lay under the guilt of sin, and
through Christ's satisfaction it is acquitted. Though every Believer has not a
full persuasion of this, yet he has a good hope through grace, and this cannot
but kindle in his Soul a vehement flame of love to Christ. Bless the Lord O my
Soul (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 103. 3, 4. and all that is within me bless his
holy Name. Who forgiveth all thine iniquity, who heals all thy diseases, who
redeemeth thy life from destruction. Nor has he only some experience of the
suitableness of Christ to his Soul, considered as a lost undone Soul; but he
has as firm a persuasion of Christ's readiness, as well as ability to supply
all his wants, to hear all his prayers, to supply all its necessities, to bless
it with all spiritual blessings; there is no Soul that lives in such a view as
a Believing Soul, of its daily renewing sins, and so standing in need of daily
repeated acts of pardon, daily renewings of spiritual strength, etc. It knows
it is in the power of none to help it, but Christ alone, he alone sits at
the right hand of God to make Intercession for the Soul; he is he alone who can
be its Advocate at the Throne of Grace. It is the Spirit of Christ through
which he must mortify the deeds of the body, and who must strengthen it with
might, to all the operations of the spiritual life. It is so natural to the
Soul to love those that love it, that our Savior says, if you do it, what
reward have you? The Soul thus apprehending Christ, its love toward him
proceeds in a natural order, and rises higher as it knows that the love
which he has showed it, and does show it, is the greatest love: For greater
love than this can no man show, than that a man should die for his friend;
Christ has died for it while it was an Enemy. We (says the Apostle) being
Enemies to God, were reconciled unto him through the death of his Son. The evil
from which he delivered it, was the greatest evil. The reason why the natural
man loves not Christ, is because though he has indeed heard much of Christ,
and of his love to the Sons of men, yet he believes not, or gives only a
faint and careless Assent unto what he reads and hears concerning him: He
has experienced nothing concerning the evil of sin, nor feels any need of
pardon, and so cannot possibly discern or apprehend that goodness and
excellency that is in Christ, nor that suitableness to a Soul's state, that a
Believer is apprehensive of. And in regard the wants of the body are no way to
be compared with the wants of the Soul, and the wants of the Soul cannot be
supplied from any (except only Ministerially) but from Christ alone, the Soul
must necessarily love Christ with a singular love, and all other things in
subordination unto him, so as they must stand in no competition for the Soul's
Affection with him, much less can such a Soul love any thing that offers it
self in opposition to him. I might enlarge fuurther, in giving you Reasons for
such a Soul's singular love to Christ; but I have touched upon this Argument
before, and these are the two main Reasons of their singular love unto him.
Their pourings out of their whole hearts, their entire Affections into his
bosom. I shall only add a short Application of this Discourse.

Use ^
Let us all by this try our selves, whether we be the Spouse of Christ, yea or
no, that is, whether we be true believers, yea, or no, and true Members of the
Church of Christ; by this we shall know it: If we can look up to Heaven, and
say unto Christ, O thou whom my Soul loves. There are many who go into the
number of those who make up the visible Church, who are not the Spouse of
Christ, or at least shall not be of the number of those hereafter, who shall
make up the Lambs Wife, mentioned, Rev. 21. 9. They are not that Spouse
mentioned, Rev. 19. 7. To whom it is granted that she shall be arrayed in fine
linen, clean and white, or of those blessed ones, who shall be called to the
Marriage Supper of the Lamb. The contract betwixt the Soul and Christ is made
in secret. In that contract (as in others) Christ consents to receive the Soul,
and the Soul consents to receive Christ, The former of these indeed is
sufficiently in the general declared in the more general call, and invitation
of the Gospel, wherein Christ calls to all to whom the Gospel is preached, to
come unto him, promising that he will receive them, and that he will by no
means cast them away, yet he has not there spoken this to any particular
person by name, only in general, to all those who are weary, and heavy laden,
and who come unto him, and the Soul is often at a loss, in determining
concerning the truth of its own acts, in coming to, and receiving of Christ
tendered in the Gospel. On the other side the presumptuous man is like the
foolish young man in the world, that thinks that every young woman who smileth
on him, or speaks kindly to him, will presently take him for her Husband, and
concludes good to himself from every smile of providence, but to satisfy the
true Christian, and to convince others of their folly, let every Soul know,
that there is no Soul can take any comfort of this nature, but that Soul only
that can truly say unto Christ, O thou whom my Soul loves, and certainly would
men, and women be true to themselves, they might from hence determine their
Spiritual state. But yet, as there is a common affection, which a woman may
have for many men, none of which she intends to make her Husband, and she may
do many common acts of kindness for them, so there is a common love, which a
man may have for Christ, and many common actions which they may do in his
service; the question therefore is, how a man or woman may know, whether he or
she may with confidence look up to Heaven, and say, O thou whom my Soul loves!
Let me add a word or two upon this argument here, though I have before spoken
much to it.

1. I desire you to observe in the first place, that the Spouse speaks here
in the singular number, O thou whom my Soul loves, so must every Soul do that
loves Christ in truth; a divided Soul is always faulry. That Soul which has
any thing in Heaven or Earth to be compared with Christ, does not love him. It
is true that love is a diffusive affection, and may respect several objects,
but note these two things.

1. These objects must be only diverse, not contrary. Contraries naturally
expel one another, there is nothing but sin and last that is contrary to
Christ; you cannot (says our Savior) love God and Mammon, he that says to
any lust, O thou whom my Soul loves! cannot in truth say so unto Christ. How
many in the world by their fondness upon their lusts, show their want of love
to Christ?

2. Conjugal love admits neither parity, nor priority. The Wife that loves
her Husband as she ought to love him, must neither love any other before him,
or better then other, nor yet in a proportion equal with him; she must love him
before, and above all things. Our Savior has determined this in saying, He
that loves Father or Mother, or Brother, or Sister more then me, is not worthy
of me, and he that loves Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me.

2. Soul-love will be known also by Soul-longings. Love teaches the Soul to
long after, 1. Union with the object beloved. 2. A sense of reciprocal love. 3.
Communion with the object beloved. If thy Soul loves the Lord Jesus Christ, it
will be seen in thy longings after him in the hour of his apprehended adsence,
or after such degrees of his presence, as thou have not yet attained, and after
a sense of his reciprocal love; the Soul that truly loves, is impatient till it
discerns itself mutually beloved, it will also long after communion with
Christ; you read David's temper as to this, Psalm. 84. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. 42. 1.
Psalm. 63. 1. Alas how few are there whose pulses beat with any strength for
God?

3. Love (thirdly) is discovered by a complacency, delight, and satisfaction,
in the presence of the object beloved, according to the degree of its presence.
As it longs for its object when absent; so it rejoices and melts in the
embraces of it when present. What satisfaction has thy Soul in an Ordinance,
or Duty, in which thou have seen the power and glory of God, the presence of
Christ in his Ordinance?

4. Love again is seen by the Soul's sorrow for a departed Christ. The loving
Wife weepeth when she for any time parts with her Husband, and is solitary
when he is gone. Mary's love to Christ was discerned by her weeping, because
she knew not where they had laid him. And the Jews cried out, when they saw
Christ weeping over the grave of Lazarus; Behold how he loved him! The
dispensations of Christ to the Soul sometimes are very dark; he seems to be
gone, and as it were buried out of the Soul's sight, how beats thy heart at
such a time? art thou afflicted? or art thou not?

5. If thy Soul loves the Lord Jesus Christ, it will be seen by thy anger a!
any thing, whether in, or from thy self, or others, which grieveth or offends
him. Love (to its power) will suffer no injury to the Beloved The Wife will not
her self abuse her Husband, nor (to her power) will she suffer any other; if
unwarily, ignorantly, or in a passion at any time she has done it, she is
angry at her self for it; and if others do it, she is ready to seek a revenge
upon them. What indignation! what revenge! (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7. 11.)
is produced by godly sorrow, which is the effect of love.

6. If thy Soul loves Christ, thou will reveal all the Secrets of thy Soul to
him; he shall know all thy griefs, all thy desires and wants; thou will be much
in prayer, much in secret prayer. Dalilah charged Sampson for want of love to
her, because he had concealed his secrets from her. Christ (on the contrary)
justifies his love to his Disciples, Joh. 15. 15. by his telling them all he
had heard of his Father.

7. If Christ be he whom the Soul loves, the Soul will be much in the
meditation of him. Whatsoever is the object of our Love, is much in our
thoughts. O how I love thy Law (says David,) Psalm. 119. 97, 99. it is my
meditation night and day. What room in thy thoughts has Christ, and the things
of Christ?

8. The Soul that is full of love, is like the Fountain which is full, and must
overflow. If we love any persons, we are often talking of them, upon all
occasions talking for them, and very often (as we can get opportunities)
talking with them. What are thy discourses of Christ to others? How do thou
use thy Tongue in discoursing for Christ, when there is need? What discourses
have thou with Christ in prayer?

9. Soul-love is like the Sun, that cannot shine upon the Glass of the house,
but its refracted Beams will pierce through, and show themselves upon the walls,
the floor, the pavements. A love to Christ will look through him, and show it
self upon every thing that has relation to him, his People, his Ministers, his
Word and Ordinances, Psalm. 16. 2, 3. O my Soul, thou have said unto the Lord,
thou art my Lord, my goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are
in the Earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight.

10. And lastly; If you love Christ with your Souls, you will keep his
Commandments; yea if it be to sacrifice an Isaac, to pluck out a right Eye, or
cut off a right Hand: This is our Savior's mark, Joh. 14. 15. Obedience is the
first and most genuine fruit of Love; and if it be such as shall speak a true
Love in the Soul to Christ, it must be 1. Internal, as well as external. 2.
Universal, not partial. 3. Constant, and not only for a fit.

But of these things I have spoken before, and therefore shall not enlarge, etc.

Sermon XLII.
Canticles 1. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest, where
thou make thy flocks to rest at Noon.

I have done with the first Proposition I observed from these Words from the
compellation (O thou whom my Soul loves) viz. That Christ is he, and the only
he whom the believing Soul loves; there was a 2d which I also observed from
that; viz. That as there is a time when such a Soul will conceal its Love to
Christ, and will not be brought to own its Love to him: So there is a time when
it will own and acknowledge it. This now would lead me to a discourse of those
times, when a believer is free to own, and acknowledge its grace, particularly,
its love to Christ; And those times when it finds a difficulty and will not
be brought to do it. But I remember, I handled that point, when I discoursed
the forgoing words I am black but comely. I shall therefore here pass it over,
and come to the matter of the petition or thing wherein she desires to be
instructed. viz. Where he fed [his flock;] Where he made his flocks to rest at
Noon. In the explication of the terms of the Text. I considered the Noon time,

1. As the time when Shepherds having driven their flocks into some shady
places to lie down, and rest, were themselves most at leisure and one might
have the most private, free, and full communion with them with the least
interruptions, At other times of the day, till night again comes, the Shepherd
must have a constant Eye upon his flock. According to which sense, the phrase
is expressive of believing Souls desires of all occasions, and opportunities,
when it may have the most private, free, and full communion with Christ, with
the least interruptions.

2. Secondly, As the time, when the Sun shines out hottest; So it may be
understood of the Churches Noon, or the Believers Noon. When they were most
scorched with Trials, and Persecutions, So there are 3 Propositions which I
before observed. The first of which I shall begin with.

Prop. That a believing Soul is very covetous of such occasions and
opportunities, when it may enjoy the most private, free, and full communion
with Christ, with the least interruptions.

Whiles the Shepherd is driving his flock to their pastures he is in motion,
one may exchange some few words with him, but he cannot have much serious
discourse with him, when he comes to his feeding place, still his Eye must be
after his flock, which in their feeding may be prone to straggle, but at Noon,
when his flocks are in the shadow, that is the fairest opportunity of converse
with the Shepherd. It is true it is the infirmity of our humane natures, that
we cannot at the same time duly attend two different things, God is not under
the Law of it, God cannot be so taken up with one business of providence, as to
neglect another because of it. But while Christ is set out to us under
imperfect, and infirm comparisons, he is set out as one compassed about with
our infirmities. And certain it is that our communion with him in this life,
admits of many interruptions on our part, and there are times, and places
wherein a good Christian may and does enjoy a more perfect, free, and full
communion with his God, then he does, or can do, at other times and places.

The Spouse here desires to know, the times, places, and opportunities of most
free, full and perfect communion with God, and this I say is the object of
every believing Souls desire.

As to times of this nature they are easily discerned, by considering what
those things are which most interrupt and hinder our communion with God: those
are either, 1. Worldly cares, businesses and distractions: or 2. Temptations,
whether from the stirrings of lusts in our own heart (for every man says James
is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own lust, and enticed.) Or from his
Grand adversary the Devil. So that times of freest communion with God, are
times, when we are likely to be most free from the encumbrances of the World,
or the ^^^lestations of our own lusts, or Satan's Suggestions. As to the two
latter, there are indeed no times as to which which we can promise our selves
an absolute immunity. As to the former there are two times. The morning or the
night season. 2. The Sabbath day.

1. The morning or night season. That is a time for rest, and when the greatest
part of the World are at their natural rest, hence you shall observe that the
Servants of God have often made choice of these times for their more private
and free communion with God. Psalm. 5. 3. My voice shall thou hear in the
morning, in the morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up,
Psalm. 59. 16. I will sing aloud of thy mercy in the morning Psalm. 63. 1. O God
thou art my God, early will I seek thee, v. 6. When I remember thee on my bed,
and meditate on the in the night watches. Times of least business, in the World
and greatest silence, from the noises and businesses of the World, are the
times for freest communion with God, not that God is not as ready to hear our
Prayers, and to communicate himself at other times, but because the Souls of
Gods People, are not so free in themselves, for whereas the life of our
communion with God lies in the attention of our thoughts, and fervency of our
Spirits. And the latter of these has also a great dependence on the former, it
is impossible for us to keep our thoughts so intent upon our duty, when the
noises, and businesses of the World distract us, as when we have nothing of
that nature from the World to disturb or divert us.

2. The Sabbath day is likewise such another time, and so are other times which
we have voluntarily set apart for the Solemn seeking of God, but the former
especially. For tho the Law of the Lord for the Sanctification of the Sabbath,
has not such an influence upon the World, as were highly to be desired, yet in
the places (especially) where we live, it has some influence so that the most
of men and women cease from all servile labor and there is a great silence in
the World that day in comparison of other days: and that law takes a great
hold upon the hearts of all such as truly fear God, so as none of them durst
engage themselves in wordly businesses as on other days: and tho this be not
the case as to such solemn days as Christians set apart for religious duties,
yet we having laid our selves under a private law, tho the time at first was
our own, and we needed not to have dedicated it to the Lord, yet having done
it, we think our selves justly to be more engaged, and concerned to lay the
World out of our sight and thoughts, and and this doubtless much commends the
practice of Christians in setting some times of this nature apart for the
solemn service of God.

As to places under the Gospel we have no such place as the Temple at
Jerusalem, none to which any such promise is made, our Rule is, Every where to
Worship the Father: Every where to list up pure hands. But yet though there be
no particular place, concerning which we have a command, more then another, in
it to make our addresses to God, nor any to which any promise is made, nor
concerning which it can be said God has in it more Manifested himself to
People seeking him, yet there are two sort of places in which we have more
advantage then in others, for a communion with God: 1. Places of Solitude, 2.
Places where 2 or 3 meet together or a greater number of Gods People so meet to
pray, or in any manner to Worship God.

1. The first give us advantage by freeing us from the noises, business and
distractions of the World; hence you read of Jsaac's going into the field, for
meditation, and our Savior's going so often up to a mountain for Prayer, Mar.
6. 46. Matthew. 14. 23.

2. The second gives us advantage, as from the promise of God made to the
assemblies of his People, so from the influence that the Affections of pious
Souls in holy duties have, one upon another, of which it is an hard thing to
give an account, but it is no more then I believe any good Christian will find
upon his or her experience, that their hearts are otherwise affected, when they
are in a society of serious Christians praying to God, or performing any acts
of Worship, then when they are alone. Hence it is that you find serious
Christians, so covetous of opportunities to withdraw into their closets, or
when they may join with other serious and conscientious Christians in more
public Worship.

If any shall (for the further explication of this notion) ask me, from whence
a more full, free, and uninterrupted communion with God is to be adjudged and
determined; I answer shortly, I have before told you, That all communion speaks
a mutual or reciprocal communication of two or more each to other. God
communicates himself to the Soul in his influences of grace, the Soul
communicates it self to God, in the actings and exercises of its gracious
habits, so as the fullness, freedom and more near communion with God is to be
judged from several things.

1. First from the attention of the Souls thoughts in the duty. A Soul has
more or less communion with God in a duty, as his thoughts more or less deviate
and wander from the thing he is about. When there is a mere bodily service
performed either by the lips, or knee, or Eye, the duty is but a mere
formality, the Soul has no communion with God in it, in Praying the man does
not Pray, nor in hearing hear, nor in singing sing. As to this the best of Gods
People must cry, God be merciful to us sinners, so that the degree of
perfection attainable in this life as to this thing is but comparative, some
may have more of this attention then others, or more at one time then at
another, but none is perfect in this thing. Only the pious Soul as in other
things, so in this thing, is striving after perfection, pressing forward
toward the mark, and daily humbling himself for his imperfection, and flying
to Christ's intercession and advocation, and exercising faith on his more
perfect righteousness.

A second thing wherein a fuller communion with God (on the Souls part) lies,
is, fervency of Spirit, this chiefly respects the duties of Prayer, and
Praise. The effectual Prayer must be servent, (...) a Prayer which sets the
whole Soul on work, and while we sing, we must make melody in our hearts to the
Lord, Ephesians. 5. 19. Prayer is often times in Scripture expressed under the notion
of crying, wrestling with God, pouring out of the heart before the Lord, Psalm.
142. 2. Psalm. 62. 8. David calls this a pressing hard after God, Psalm. 63. 8.
some think it is a metaphor from hounds pursuing their game in view.

3. A third thing is a Freedom of Spirit. This is (as I take it) that which
David calls largeness of heart, Psalm. 119. v, 32. I will run the way of thy
commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. There is no good man but
finds his heart more free to duty, and in duty at one time then at another;
there is a straitness of heart which at some times is the great grievance, and
encumbrance of pious Souls, it is caused sometimes from immoderate sorrow,
sometimes from fear sometimes from one cause, sometimes from another, but what
ever the cause be, it certainly abates the Souls communion with God, at least
its communications of it self to God. And by consequence, a freedom of Spirit,
a readiness of heart to duty, with a liberty not of tongue only but of Spirit
also (for without the latter, the former is but hypocrisy) advantageth, and
promoveth the Souls communion with God.

4. A fourth thing which makes the Souls communion with God more full is, An
ability more strongly to exercise its says upon God without doubting, whether
it be in a stronger adherence or more firm persuasion.

5. On Gods part the Souls communion is more full, when it receives from God
more influences of grace testifying his acceptance of the Souls addresses unto
him, or filling it with the sensible manifestations of his love, or inabling it
more fully to communicate it self unto God, that it can be more attent in its
thoughts, more fervent in Spirit, more free to, and in its performances, or
exercise its faith more powerfully and strongly. This I conceive to be enough
to have spoken in the explication of the Proposition, hinting you both wherein
this more full, and free communion with God, is discernable, and also what
those times or places are where, and when it may most ordinarily, and probably
be obtained, which I conceive is the thing which the Spouse in the text
expresses her desire toward, and which she begs that her beloved would
instruct her as to.

That this is the desire of every good Christian, appears,

1. From its deprecation of those things which would hinder it, and avoiding
them so far as it can. Those things that hinder it are, 1. Intestine lusts and
motions to sin, Vanity of thoughts, etc. 2. Diabolical Suggestions. Now there
are no two things which the pious Soul more deprecateth then these two: Worldly
distractions. Observe David how he bewailed his dwelling in Meshek; And having
his habitation in the tents of Kedar and how bitterly in three several Psalms
he bewails his being banished from Jerusalem, Psalm 42. Psalm. 84. Psalm. 63. So
Psalm. 120. v. 5. How sadly does St. Paul bewail his body of death Romans 7. 24.

2. From its thirstings after times, and opportunities of communion with God;
of which also you have instances in all the Psalms before mentioned, Psalm. 86.
11. He prays for an heart united to fear the Lords name, Psalm. 86. 11. And
rejoiceth in a fixed heart, Psalm. 57. 7. Psalm. 208. v. 1.

Reason.
Nor indeed can it possibly be otherwise as will appear to any Soul that
understands what communion with God is. That which is the object of any
rational Souls desire, must come under the notion of good, and so appear, and
the more goodness, or sutableness to a Souls necessities is in any object, and
appears to the Soul, the stronger must be the Souls motions to, and toward it.
Now there is nothing in the World, can possibly appear to a pious Soul to have
that degree of goodness in it, that an Union and communion with God has, they
being things suited to the Souls highest wants. Our communion with God, is the
great testimony of our union with him, and that Soul that has no evidence of a
communion with God, will find it self at as great a loss to evidence its union
with him. Besides, good is generally valued, and adjudged, either by profit or
pleasure. The pious Soul knows, that the more full, or free, and less
interrupted its communion with God is, the more sweet, and pleasant it is;
duties are more our tasks, and burdens, then our delight and pleasure, when the
Soul has but a broken interrupted, and distracted communion with him. And as
to profit nothing can be more considerable to the Soul, considering that the
peace of the Soul, and the increase of its grace, are both much advantaged by
it. David cries out, Psalm. 73. v. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. The desire of God upon
Earth (mentioned by the Psalmist) must be a desire of fellowship, and communion
with God, which being in it self desirable, the more the Soul has of it, the
more full, and free, and less interrupted that communion is, the more still it
must be the object of every pious Souls desire.

Use 1.
This (in the first place) will show us a certain difference, betwixt the Child
of God, and an hypocrite. The profane man despises communion with God, and
looks upon all discourses concerning union and communion with Christ as mere
canting. The hypocrite pretends to something of communion with God, but any
slight degrees of it, any acts by which he can but fancy he has any such
communion, serve his turn, and satisfy him. A formal hypocrite possibly cannot
stop the mouth of his natural conscience, nor save his reputation with the
World without the performance of some duties, which God has instituted,
wherein the People of God have a communion with God, he must sometimes pray,
and hear a Sermon, but whether his heart be united to God in Prayer, whether he
attends to the Words of the Prayer, whether he finds any fervency of Spirit or
any freedom of Spirit to, or in the duty, whether his Soul performs it with
any exercise of faith in God; these are things he looks not after, neither are
they the objects of his desires or endeavors.

Use 2.
Hence therefore conscientious Christians may take some just measures of
themselves. A Christian indeed is not to be judged from his praying or hearing,
but from his hungring and thirsting after a communion with God in the duties he
performs unto him and after such a communion with God, as I have been
describing unto you; and if there be such desires in your Souls, they will be
evidenced.

1. By the trouble of your Souls when you find you come short of it. Desire
(not obtained) as well as hope deferred, will make the heart sick, no true
Christian but at some times, will find his thoughts more wandering, his
Affections more cold, his Spirit more straightened, his Faith more languid; to
find this and not to be concerned for it, or troubled at it, is a very ill
evidence against the Soul, that it has no such desires as I have been
discoursing of.

2. Secondly, Such desires will be attended with endeavors to avoid whatsoever
may hinder such a communion with God. Real desires are always attended with
proportionable endeavors. He that desires a more free, and full communion with
his friend, will go out of a crowd of company, where he knows he cannot enjoy
it. He that desires such a communion with Christ will find some time to get out
of the crowds of Worldly business and company, where he knows he cannot have it.

3. And Lastly, The truth of such desires will be evidenced by the use of all
probable means that may conduce to it.

Use 3.
He vainly pretends to desire a thing who will use no means within his reach,
and power to obtain it. And that brings me in the last place to a Word of
exhortation to the use of such means. For though it must be by an influence, a
great influence of grace, that any Soul comes up to this, yet that is to be
obtained by the use of due means on our part.

I shall briefly hint some probable means of this nature.

1. Make Religion as much your business as you can. I know it cannot be all our
business while we are in the world. But the more it is our business the more
our communion with God will be. When a Boy is first bound Apprentice, he
knows not how to keep his mind to his business, it is much running after his
idle diversions and recreations, but when he has once been habituated to his
work, by degrees he grows more serious, and fixed. So will the Soul as to its
great business of communion with God.

2. Prepare your hearts to seek the Lord, by prayer, by sequestring your selves
sometime from your secular concerns. There lies much in this, for want of it,
we are much accessory to our own distractions; and that interrupted broken
communion with God, of which we complain.

3. Use your endeavors to lift up your hearts to God in duties, and to keep
off such things as would hinder it. Frown upon your hindrances. If a man
frowns upon one that would come to disturb him in any serious discourse with
his friend, he must be very impudent that should continue such interruptions,
or repeat them.

4. Lastly. Beg of God to make up what thou can not do.

Hitherto I have only discoursed a notion of my own as to the Sense of my Text.
I told you that the generality of Interpreters take notice of the Noon as the
hottest time of the day, when the Sun emits its most direct beams, and so by it
understand a time of Affliction and trial, for which interpretation, they have
that of our Savior Math. 13. 6. 21. This will afford us two notions, the one
more employed, the other more plainly expressed. I shall speak something only
to the first of them at this time.

Prop. That Christ has feeding, and resting places, and shades, wherewith, and
wherein to refresh his Saints in the most scorching times of trial and
affliction.

I shall only open the Proposition by showing you what these shades, these
feeding and resting places are, and then shortly apply my discourse. As to the
first I shall instance only in three particulars. David in his 23 Psalm. makes
use of this very Metaphor, The Lord (says he) is my Shepherd, v. 2. He makes
me to lie down in green pastures, he leads me besides the still Waters. It is
the work of a Shepherd, to find out green pastures for his flock in the day
time and a secure fold for them at night, yea and a fitting shadow for them at
noon. Christ does so for his little flock to whom it is his his Fathers and his
will to give a Kingdom. There shall be no want of those that fear him. In the
day time of their lives, he feeds, and protects them by his providence, he
nourishes them by his ordinances, and daily influences of grace. In the night
of death, he folds their Bodies in the grave, their Souls in Abraham's bosom; It
is the work of a Shepherd, to provide and look out pasture for his sheep when
that ordinary pasture is burnt up like a wilderness; It is our great Shepherds
work, to provide feeding, and resting places, when either public trials,
afflictions, and persecutions debar them of their ordinary subsistence upon
common providence, or ordinary and more public dispensations of public
ordinances, and institutions, the common food of their Souls. But you will say
to me, what are these shadows from the heat, these feeding, and resting places
which Christ has provided, wherein to feed and rest his flock at such a Noon?

1. First he feeds them upon the promises, either more general, or more
specially suited to their particular trials. Jeremiah says, Jer. 15. 16. I
found thy words and did eat them and they were the joy and rejoicing of my
heart Jeremy possibly there speaks of the word of Prophecy which was as
welcome to him as his meat. But what was the word of Prophecy but the
revelation of the will of God to him, which when it was foretelling some
judgment to come upon the People is more ordinarily called, The Burden of the
Lord? The Believing Soul also in the Noon time of his Affliction and trial,
finds the word of the Lord, this he digesteth by faith, and they become the joy
and rejoicing of his heart. By these things men live (said Hezekiah) some
understand his affliction: Others the promises of God made to him in the day of
his Affliction. The carnal heart understands not this food, it is to him all
one with feeding upon the air. The promises are only yea and Amen in Christ;
they are as show bread of which none but the Royal Priesthood can eat, when
the Child of God has nothing else to eat, he will yet feed upon a promise. I
had perished (says David) in my affliction if thy word had not been my delight,
Psalm. 119. v. 92. Latimer is said to have made his last meal upon that promise,
1 Cor. 10. 13. Faithful is God, who will not suffer us to be tempted above what
we are able. It is also reported of one Mr. Midgely a Minister in Yorkshire,
that being under horrid temptations to destroy himself, and going once to the
water side with design to do it, carrying in his pocket the New Testament; he
paused a while to read a little and happily fell upon that text, Mat. 1. 28.
29. Come unto me all you that are weary, and heavy laden and I will ease you;
upon the reading of which he said to himself (or to God rather) say thou so?
I will not then drown my self yet. The large field of the promises, is one of
those green pastures; Where Christ at Noon feeds his flock, and makes them
to rest. It is a feeding place which is at all times green, the promises
contain the Sure mercies of God. He that lives upon mere Sensible enjoyments,
feeds but upon Grass and Flowers. The Grass will wither, and Flowers will
fade. But the word of the Lord abides for Ever, and there are some promises or
others, which suit the Soul in all its states, and circumstances of Trial and
affliction.

2. Secondly, Christ sometimes feeds his flock at noon, upon Special
Providence. And these are also of several sorts, either of Protection from the
Evil, or Sustentation in, and under trouble or deliverances out of trouble
sometimes when thousands, and ten thousands fall on their right, and left hand.
The Plague shall not come nigh their dwellings, according to the promise, Psalm.
91. v. 7. In a time of famine, Corn shall be fetched out of Egypt for Jacobs
Family, the Prophet shall be fed by a raven, or the multiplying of the little
meal in the widows barrel, and the little Oil in the cruse. Sometimes they
shall by some miraculous, or at least inexpected ways, and means be delivered
out of trouble, so were the three Children in the fiery furnace; Daniel, in the
den of Lions; of these there are multitudes of instances in Ecclesiastical
History.

3. Thirdly, He sometimes feeds his People by Special influences, either of
strengthening or comforting grace. In the multitude of my perplexing thoughts
(says David) thy comforts delight my Soul, Psalm. 34. v. 19. As the sufferings
of Christ abound in us, (says the Apostle) so our consolations abound by
Christ, 2 Corinthians. 1. 5. He will (says Job) put strength into me. Hence the
Servants of God are enabled to rejoice in tribulation; and under sicknesses,
have professed that they were never better, and in great trials have rejoiced
with a joy unspeakable; Rejoicing in tribulation flows not from the
Tribulation. For no affliction is joyous, but grievous, but from the influences
of God upon the Soul in, and under its tribulation. Some one or other of these
ways, and means Christ feeds his flock in a time of Trial, and makes them
to rest in the Noon time of Trials, and afflictions. I proceed to the
application of this discourse.

Use 1.
This in the first place commends the love of Christ to his little flock.
They say the Devil leaves the Witch when she is once in Gaol, or upon trial for
her life, how true that is I cannot tell; but certain it is that his Servants
have no great help from him in an hour of straits, and adversity; and this
indeed speaks no love, which never so much or so clearly shines as through a
Cloud of sad Providence. Solomon tells us that a friend is made for an hour of
adversity. But herein is the Love of Christ manifested to those that have
relation to him, my Soul (says Mary, Luke 1. 4647.) does magnify the Lord, and
my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, for he has regarded the low estate
of his handmaiden. Christ regards the low estate of his People, he leaves
them not when they are in distress, Isaiah 43. 1, 2. Fear not, for I have
redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; when thou passest through the
waters I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee, when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt neither shall
the flame kindle upon thee: For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel
thy Savior. This lets us see the wonderful difference betwixt the state and
condition of believers, and unbelievers. The world has no places where to make
their flocks to rest at Noon. The Devil takes no care for his flock at such a
time. Other men may seem to do well enough so long as they have rest and ease,
and prosperity. But what will they do in the day of their visitation? God takes
another care for his People; when David can encourage himself in nothing else,
he can encourage himself in his God. When the Fig Tree does not blossom, and
there is no fruit in the vine, when the fields yield no meat, and the flock are
cut off from the fold, and there is no herd in the stall, yet even then they
can rejoice in the Lord and be glad in the God of their Salvation, Habak. 3.
17, 18, 19. Under his shades we shall live (says the Afflicted Church, Lam. 4.
20. I state under his shadow with great delight, says the Spouse, Cant. 2. 3.
There are many promises which God has made to his People to be their hiding
place, their rock, their Covert, their shadow from the storm, and from the
tempest. To which I refer you.

Use 2.
In the next place; What cause of rejoicing and lifting up of the head is here
to the People of God, whether such as lie under the present pressures of Trials
or Afflictions, or such as have these storms in prospect, though they be not
already fallen upon them. Is the noon of Trials and Afflictions come upon any
of you? Has the Lord taken away those gourds which heretofore were a shade to
you, your health, friends, estate, your outward comforts, of what kind soever?
yet be of good cheer, God is only changing your Souls Pastures: Hitherto you
have lived more immediately upon the creature, you shall only now live more
immediately upon God; hitherto you have lived by sight, God is now calling you
to live by Faith; hitherto your great Shepherd has fed you in the fields of
sensible comforts and enjoyments, things that are seen, he is now calling you
to live upon things that are invisible, but every way as sufficient for the
support and sustenance of the Soul; he that has fed thee in the morning, will
not leave thee at noon time, Psalm. 37. v. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good,
and so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed. David says,
He never saw the righteous forsaken. The Believer shall be fed, either with
that bread which the world knows, and calls so, or with that bread which
the world knows, and calls so, or with that bread which the world knows
not of. There is a revolution of time, a vicissitude of Providence, but there
is no change of the Word and Promises of God. Verily they shall be fed. There
shall be no want to those that fear the Lord. A noon may come, but Christ has
a shadow, a feeding, a resting place for his flocks at noon. That God who has
kept thee in health, will also keep thee in sickness. He that has hitherto
kept thee from the malice of a most malicious world, will keep thee under the
pressures of their malice: Only take care to Trust in the Lord, and to do good.
Is not this thy case? Have thou the storm only in prospect, but it is not yet
fallen upon thee; and art thou only tormented with the fears of what is likely
to come upon thee? oft-times slavish fear proves a great evil, and an evil in
prospect, is greater than when it is fallen upon a person. Let this encourage
you to hear that Christ has shades for his People at noon. God has said, I
will never leave you nor forsake you. Let me only commend one Promise to you;
it is made to the Church, and to every Believer as a Member of it; it is that,
Isa. 4. 5, 6. And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion,
and upon her Assemblies a cloud, and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming
fire by night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense, and there shall be a
Tabernacle in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a
covert from Storm and from Rain.

I will shut up this Discourse with a word or two of Exhortation.

Use 3.
First; To such as are yet none of the Inhabitants of Mount Zion: None of
those, I mean, who are the true Members of the Church of Christ: Those who have
no title, or are able to make out no title to the dwelling-places upon Mount
Zion, or any of them; what a motive should this be to all such to endeavor
what in them lies, to get into Christ's little Flock. A noon must come.
Possibly it is now morning with you, and you are more careless; but man is born
to trouble, and it is as natural to humane nature, as it is for sparks to fly
upward, as Job tells us. The Children of God in respect to the world's hatred,
are more exposed to others; but there is none who lives and shall not see
death; none that lives but must look to be in deaths often, of one nature or
another. It is certainly the highest prudence to be prepared for all Assayes.
Thou have no way for this but to get an interest in Christ. Whilst thou art an
Egyptian, thou can not look for the Privileges of one that is an Inhabitant
in Goshen. Do thou ask me how can this be? How should I who am a Goat be
transformed into a Sheep? Our Savior answers thee, Except a man be born again,
he cannot see the Kingdom of God; he can be none of that little Flock to whom
it is God's will to give that Kingdom. Regeneration, a new Birth, from the holy
Spirit, can only make this Spiritual Metamorphosis. Thy work in order to it,
lies only in some external actions, such as refraining what thou can from
sin, waiting upon God in Ordinances, calling upon God in Prayer, not resisting
the motions of his holy Spirit.

2d Branch. Secondly; This Discourse ought to quicken such as are of the Flock
of Christ in all their Noons of Affliction and Trial, to betake themselves to
Christ's shades, to the places where Christ uses to feed, and to make his
Flocks to rest at Noon. What those shades are, I have showed you; our work is
to betake our selves unto them. It is natural to us when we are pursued to look
for a covert, for some refuge or shelter, where we may hide our selves till the
storm be passed over, and to flee to such places where we think that we may be
secure. There is no true shelter but in Christ's shades. Let us then inquire
what is the duty of a good Christian in an evil day, that he may bring his Soul
to a rest and quiet.

1. The first and great thing is, to look out our Evidences, to make out our
title to, and interest in the Lord Jesus Christ. We must entitle our selves to
the great Shepherd of our Souls, as our Shepherd, before we can expect that he
should in a scorching time make us to lie down in green Pastures, and lead us
besides the still waters, and encourage our selves as David, Psalm. 23. 4.
Though I walk through the shadow of death, I shall fear none evil, for thou
art with me; thy Rod and thy Staff comfort me.

2. That done, a Christian's next work is, to look out the Promises which God
has made, either such as are more general, and respect his People under any
Trial, or such as are more special, and relate to the People under any Trial,
or such as are more special, and relate to the People of God under such
particular pressures of Affliction that they lie under. The Book of holy
Scriptures is a great Storehouse, there is scarce any condition of Christians
to which some Promises are not suited. It is of great use for a Christian to
know, and understand, and be acquainted with the Promises: They are as the
Jointure to the Wife, all that she has to live upon; only with this
difference, the Woman lives not upon the Jointure which her earthly Husband
has made her, till he be dead. Christ died once, he dies no more, but ever
lives; but the Promises are what the Soul lives upon, when God seems as dead,
withdrawing himself from the support and protection of his People. A good
Christian ought not therefore to be a stranger to them.

3. It is the duty of a Christian to betake himself to these shades; to eye the
Promises, to commit himself unto them, to hope in them; these are acts and
exercises of Faith. Come my People (says God by his Prophet Isaiah,) Enter
into the Chambers, and hide thy self for a little time, till the indignation be
overpast. Our coming is by Faith, committing our selves unto God, and trusting
in him, 1 Pet. 4. 19. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of
God, commit the keeping of their Souls unto him in well doing, as unto a
faithful Creator. Christ is the primary object of our Faith, the Promises are
the proximate objects. In such a time therefore let every good Christian call
the Promises to his mind, whet them upon his Soul, offer his Soul to them, call
upon it to trust in them.

4. It is the duty of a Christian at such a time to wait upon God with
patience. God ought to be trusted in regard of his Truth and Faithfulness, his
Power and Goodness. He ought to be waited upon in regard of his Majesty, and
Greatness, and Wisdom. The Promises are oft-times made in general, for help,
deliverance, strength, and the like, without specifying the particular way and
method which God will use, and without limitations of time; He that believes
makes not have.

5. There must be a close walking with God, though we be sore broken in the
place of Dragons, and covered with the shadow of death, yet we must not forget
the Name of our God; our heart must not turn back from him; we must not deal
falsely in our Covenant with him, nor suffer our steps to decline from his way,
Psalm. 44. The Promise, Psalm. 37. 4. that we shall dwell in the Land, and be
certainly fed, is prefaced with a Precept, to trust in the Lord, and to do
good. And the advice of the Apostle Peter is to commit our Souls in well doing
unto God, as to a faithful Creator.

6. Lastly, Prayer must be added, the promises are Gods bonds, by which he has
made himself a Debtor to his Creature. Prayer is an action of ours, by which we
put these bonds in suit.

Sermon XLIII.
Cant. 1. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest, where
thou make thy flocks to rest at Noon; for why should I be like one of them
that turns aside by the flocks of thy Companions.

I Am still upon the Spouses third Petition to her Beloved. Tell me (O thou
whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou make thy flocks to rest
at noon. Methinks I could say with Peter, when he was with his Master upon the
Mount of Transfiguration. It is good for us to be here; let us build here two
Tabernacles, one for the Spouse, another for her Beloved. What she would have
in this Petition clouded with Metaphors, I have more fully before opened,
either a more full communion with Christ, most free from interruptions: Or his
more special influence upon her in her hours of affliction, and persecution. I
have spoke something already to it in both these senses. I have but one thing
to add, before I come to the words, which are the reason of her Petition, that
is from the form of the words, considered as a prayer, so expressive both of
her wants, and desires a supply. The Proposition I shall shortly speak to is
this.

Prop. That though a Believer at all times fees a need of the presence, and
influence of the grace of Christ: yet more especially in the time of
afflictions and trials.

Return unto me, for I am married unto you (says the Lord) was Gods language
of old to his ancient Spouse, the People of the Jews. The Apostle largely
pursues the same metaphor, Ephesians. 5. 32. This is a great mystery, I speak
concerning Christ and the Church, so he concludes his discourse; the Wife
desires her Husbands presence at all times. God has made the Woman the weaker
sex, and the Wife stands in daily need of her Husband, (whom God has made her
head) to guide, and conduct her, she is not only as a Vine for fruitfulness,
but for weakness and dependency also; so is every believing Soul, it has
always need of that promise, I will never leave you nor forsake you. But as
the Wife has more especial need of the Influence, and assistance of her
Husband, in times, and matters of difficulty and distress: so has the
believing Soul, so that he at all times prays with David, Psalm. 27. 9. Hide
not thy face from me, put not away thy Servant in anger, thou have been my
help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my Salvation. The Child of God
knows what will follow at any time, if the Sun of Righteousness does not
shine upon him, all his protection, strength, life, healing is in the shadow of
his Wings. But yet I say he or she sees a more especial need of his presence
and influence, in the noon of sharp Trials, and Afflictions. Hence you shall
observe, that though the Servants of God have kept their daily courses of
prayer, yet at such times they have used themselves to more solemn addresses,
and applications to God, of which you have plentiful instances in Scriptures,
in the solemn fasts, and prayers put up to God in such times, and their more
special Petitions, put up with reference to such times, and dispensations of
Providence. Hence David cries out, Psalm. 22. 11. Be not far from me, for
trouble is near, for there is none to help me, and again, v. 19. Be not thou
far from me O God, make have to help me; so again, Psalm. 35. 22. It was a time
of great outward straights with David, as you may see by reading all the former
part of that Psalm, v. 22. This (says he) thou have seen O God, keep not
silence, O Lord be not thou far from me; so Psalm, 38. 21, 22. Psalm. 71. 12.
Every Christians experience is a full proof of this, so as the Proposition
needs no further proof, only let me show you the reason of it.

Reason.
The great Reason is, Because we are all of us more prone to live by sight,
then by faith. The Apostle says, we live by faith, not by sight. He tells you
what he himself, and other Christians then did, and what all good Christians
should do. The just (says the Prophet) shall live by faith. But through our
infirmity we do live more by sight, then we do by faith. It is a lesson very
hard to flesh and blood, could we live more by faith, there would be these two
consequents to such a life.

1. In the day of our sensible contentments, we should live more upon the word,
and promises of God, then upon any sensible comforts and enjoyments. But it is
hard for us to have a staff lent us, and not to lean upon it, so when it
breaks, we come to see our errors, and see more need of the influences of
Divine Grace at such, then at other times.

2. We should see as much in God, and in Christ to uphold, and maintain our
selves in an evil day, as at any other times, for the promises are the same,
and Christ in whom all the promises are yea, and Amen, is the same, and Gods
all sufficiency is the same, he is at all times the God that changes not. This
being premised as the great and original cause, we may conceive some further,
and more particular reasons.

2. Because in this Noon, all creature comforts fail: yea, and in some
afflictions, sensible spiritual comforts sometimes fail also. In trials that
are more external, such as bodily afflictions, persecutions, etc. outward
comforts fail; when the Sun shines upon our Tabernacles, and the rod of God is
not upon us, we are then ready to forget God, when Jeshurun waxed fat, he
kicked up the heel, when these outward consolations are taken away, then the
Soul begins to see, that it stands in need of some other supports. If the
Affliction be some divine desertion, then the sensible consolations of the Holy
Spirit fail also, what Davia said in his prosperity, Psalm. 30. 6. I shall never
be moved, we are all of us too prone to say in the day of our prosperity, but
as it fared him with, v. 7. so it fares with us, when the Lord hides his face
we are troubled. It is too natural even to the best of men not to know the God
of our mercies, in the day of our mercies. It was Isreal's sin, Hosea 2. 8. For
she did not know that I gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil. We do not so duly
attend to that which we profess to know, that our Soul strength, and Soul
comforts are from the Lord, and hence it is, that in the day when they are
withdrawn, we see a more special need of the presence, and influence of Christ
upon us. It is the unhappiness, and infirmity of humane nature, that we seldom
either understand our mercies, or the Author and Fountain of them, till we come
to want them, while we have health, and peace, and liberty, while we have
inward strength and quiet, we neither understand the value of these mercies,
nor Eye God as we should do, as the Author of them, but in the noon time of our
trials, and afflictions, whether more immediately from God, in bodily
afflictions, or divine desertions, or more immediately from men, then we both
understand the value of our mercies, and also what need we have of the presence
of God with us, and the influences of God upon us. At other times we live very
much upon our more sensible enjoyments, now we have not them to live upon, and
so see a more need of a God, and a Christ to live upon.

3. Ordinarily at such a time. Our lusts, and corruptions move very
impetuously. A man never so well knows the lusts, and corruptions of his own
heart, as in an evil day. Natura vexata prodit S^ipsam. Anger a man (we say)
and you will see his temper, when God by his providence vexes a poor creature
as others will see something, so he will see more what lusts, and corruptions
are in his heart. The Devil knew this well enough, when he replied to God
commending his servant Job, Put forth now thine hand and touch him, and he will
eurse thee to thy face. Now as every good Soul keeps a watch upon his heart
and observes the motions of sin and lust in his Soul, so he never sees more
of the need of the presence and influence of God upon his Soul, then when
Iniquities prevail against him. When Paul cries out of the body of death, he
presently cries out, O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me?

4. Lastly, His Grand Adversary the Devil is never more busy then at such a
time. Times of afflictions are not only times of divine temptations, when God
proves, and tries his People whether they will adhere, and keep close to him,
but of Diabolical Suggestions and temptations also. When the Devil is making
trial whether he can pluck a Soul out of Christ's hand, and out of his Fathers
hand. The Psalmist calls the Devil The fowler and he knows hard weather is the
best time for his purpose, he first gets a commission against Job to take away
all that he had, saving his life only and then his Wife comes, and persuadeth
him to curse God and dye, and he follows him with many other Suggestions, and
temptations. This was the reason of Saint Paul's writing to the Church of
Corinth to restore the incestuous Person who by his order was cast out of their
communion, lest says he, he should be swallowed up of too much grief; and
Satan should have advantage against him, for we are not ignorant of his
devices. We are never so sensible what need we have of our friends, as when our
enemies appear most busy, most strong, and active. Hence it is that although a
believer sees a need of the presence and influence of Christ at all times, yet
he never sees so great a need of him as in a time of great and sharp trials,
and afflictions, when trouble is hard at hand. I shall shut up this discourse
with a Word or two of exhortation shortly.

Use.
This should engage all of us so to behave our selves toward our Lord in the
morning of our prosperity that we may not want his presence, and influence, in
the noon of our trials, afflictions, and adversity. It is a mighty folly in any
of us to live, as we had no Prospect of the ordinary, or necessary
contingencies of humane life. Prudence quasi providence, Solomon says, The
wise man has his Eyes in his head. And these Eyes are employed in looking
forward, as well as round about him at the present. It is a great folly in a
man to spend, as if it were not possible he should ever come to want, or to
live as if he should never see death. The wise man lives in a constant view of
what may be, or what is likely to be, and in some kind of provision for it. It
were mighty madness for any in a morning (though it be never so cool) to
conclude it would never be Noon or Night. Man is born to trouble (says Job) as
the sparks fly upward. Good men seem to be more particularly designed for it,
if not from the appointment of God, who has ordered their portion in another
life, yet from that hatred and enmity which the world has to them, and to the
ways wherein they walk.

It is therefore an high point of wisdom in all men to have them in prospect,
and be preparing for them; this can be done no better way than by taking heed
to our conversations in times of health, peace and liberty. We must not think
to abuse, or to live in the neglect and contempt of a friend, in the time of
our prosperity and liberty, and to have him at our beck, ready to help us in
the time of our straits and adversity. God had often delievered the Jews in
their distresses, when they cried unto him, Judge. 10. 6. They did evil^again in
the sight of the Lord, and served Balaam and Ashtaroth, the gods of Syria and
Moab, v. 7. God sold them into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands
of the Children of Ammon. V. 10. They again cried unto the Lord; observe what
answer God gave them, v. 11, 12. Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and
from the Amorites, from the Children of Ammon, and from the Philistines? The
Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Moabites did oppress you, and you
cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hands, yet you have forsaken me,
and served other gods; Wherefore I will deliver you no more; Go, and cry unto
the gods which you have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your
tribulation. If as we have a need of the presence and influence of Christ at
all times, so we shall have a more special apprehension of that need in any
time of affliction and distress, we stand highly concerned to take heed how we
carry our selves to him in the time of our health, peace, liberty, prosperity.
As we use him in the days of our health, peace, and liberty, so we shall find
him in the days of our sickness, distress, or other adversity: So as
considering our subjections to trials and afflictions, here is a potent
Argument to persuade our keeping close to the Laws of Christ while we are at
liberty. But I shall add no more to my discourse upon this Proposition; and
have done with the Spouse's Petition, and come to that Argument by which she
presses this Petition, -- For why should I be as one who turns aside by the
flocks of thy Companions? When I opened the words, I noted to you, That the 70
Interpreters, Montanus, and some others, translate the words as one that
covers her self. (...), so the Dutch Annotators; Junius and Tremellius, as
one that stretches out a Tent, by the flocks of thy Companions. The Syriack,
and the Ethiopick Versions, and the Vulg. Lat. who is also followed by Pagnine,
translate it, as one that wandreth, or one that turns aside.

The Radical word is (...), which primarily signifies to cover, in a secondary
sense to wander or turn aside. I before noted, that covering denoted three
things amongst the Eastern Nations. 1. Modesty. Virgins therefore went veiled
into the company of men especially. 2. Shame. Harlots therefore covered
themselves, as you read, Genesis 38. 14. 3. Sorrow, Ezekiel. 24. 17. So as the sense
of the words seems to be this.

Why should I that am married to thee, be taken for one not married to thee, or
for one that goes on whoring from thee? or for one that is a mourner, through
great grief and heaviness?

Or if you take it in the second sense, she plainly hints her aptness to wander
without the conduct and guidance of the Lord Jesus Christ, and accordingly she
deprecateth it. By wandering or turning aside, must be understood a deviation
from the statutes and Commandments of God. By that term [the flocks of thy
Companions] I told you some understanding Idolaters, some, Heretics, the
Idolater makes his Idol Christ's Companion, giving it the same worship that is
due to him. The heretic makes some creature, his leader, Christ's Companion,
taking his Instruction from him. But I told you I should rather understand it
of true Christians, whom the Apostle says Christ is not ashamed to call
Brethren, but yet the former sense being embraced by grave, and reverend
Authors, I shall not pass it over without a few words relating to it. Observe
then,

1. Here are two things which the Spouse seems to fear, and so deprecateth,
Sin, and Scandal; Sin especially those two great Sins of Idolatry and Heresy.
Scandal lest she should be any ways a reproach to the Gospel, and give occasion
to any to speak evil of the ways of God, and to reproach the Gospel.

2. The Spouse in this reason that she gives for her Petition, does suggest,
that without the influence and support of her Lord, she should never be able in
an hour of great temptation, to make straight steps to her feet, and to keep
her self upright, she should be ready to wander and turn aside.

3. That which the Spouse expresses, is an earnest desire to be kept from sin,
and from scandal: She does therefore use this as an Argument to plead with her
Lord for his presence and influence, that she might not sin against the Lord,
nor being overcome with temptations, or swallowed up with grief, become a
scandal to her Profession. Here are two things which offer themselves as matter
for my Discourse.

1. The insufficiency of a. Soul to avoid sin and scandal, without the presence
and influence of Christ upon it. This the Spouse owneth and acknowledges. It
is as much as if she should say, Lord, if thou do not help and assist me in
the Noon of my trials and afflictions, if thou do not show me, where at such
times thou feedest thy flocks, and make them to rest at Noon, I shall wander,
I shall turn aside by the flocks of those that are set up for thy Companions; I
shall go a whoring from thee, and upon that account walk as one covered for
shame, amongst those who are thy People. But this is a subject which I have
before handled, when I discoursed upon those words; Draw me, and we will run
after thee.

2. The second thing is, The two great objects of a believing Soul's fear, are
sin and scandal. Why should I wander, or turn aside, or walk as one covered for
shame, like an Harlot? All these senses speak her fear of sin. Or, why should I
walk as a mourner, covered and dejected? or as an unbeliever, one that is not
married to thee? Those senses of the words express her fear of scandal.

Prop. That sin, and Scandal are the two great objects, of the believing Souls
fear.

What sin is I need not spend many Words to tell you. The Apostle gives you the
full notion of it when he calls it (...), A Nonconformity to the divine law,
which notion comprehends original sin, which lies in the absence of the
divine Image, and the ill complexion of the Soul resulting from it, and actual
sin, which is well described by Augustine to be, every thought, Word, and deed
which is contrary to the holy Law of God. Sin is often in Scripture set out
under the notion of erring, wandering, going astray, and that depends upon
another Metaphor we often meet with in Scripture, comparing a course of
holiness unto a way, with relation to which sin (which is a deviation from
holiness) is expressed by the notions of erring, wandering, going astray,
turning aside, etc. The Precepts of God are expressed also under the notion of
a rule and a guide; hence sin is called a crooked way. Now all sin is the
object of the believers fear but not all alike. For as there is a difference in
the guilt of sin, so there will be a difference in the Souls fear, it will most
tremble at those sins which render it most obnoxious to the wrath of God, of
which nature Idolatry is; and indeed the guilt of it much lies here, that in
that sin the creature is made the companion of God, and the Worship due unto
God alone is either given unto it or shared betwixt God and it. The notion of
Scandal is not so obvious, I shall therefore enlarge a little in my discourse
on that. The Words Scandal and Scandalize are hardly found in any Profane
Authors; the Scripture therefore must open that term to us. A Scandal properly
and strictly, is something laid in a man's way at which one is prone to stumble,
and fall, the Word which the Septuagint translate by this Word we translate a
stumbling block, Levit. 19. 14. Thou shall not put a stumbling block before the
blind. The Hebrew Word is by our translators rendered offense, 1 Samuel 25. 31.
This is all we can get from the Etymology of the Word, it signifies any thing
at which another stumbles, and falls, thence it is applied to such things as
are to others occasions of sin which is the stumbling, and falling of the Soul;
so Aquinas I think rightly describes Scandals to be any Words, or actions of
ours by which others have an occasion of ruin; That is sinning which is the
Spiritual ruin of a man, or woman. In this sense man only can be Scandalized,
he cannot be tempted to evil. But two ways a Scandal may reflect upon God.

1. As by our carriages his glory may be prejudiced amongst men, his name
blasphemed, his ways reproached, and these actions which produce such effects
we call Scandals.

2. As others by our carriages may be induced to sin against God. So that
Scandals may be committed two ways. When we so behave our selves as we cause
the Master which we serve, the Gospel which we profess, or the way wherein we
walk to be evil spoken of; or that others by our example are enticed to sin.
Scandals are ordinarily divided, into such as are not only taken but given
also: and such as are merely taken but not given.

1. The latter is what is called Seandalum Pharisaeorum. The scandal of the
Pharisees because they were so offended at our Savior. This is when men are
offended at us and speak evil of us or of the ways of God for our sake, though
we do nothing but what is our duty, and we must not omit for the offense of any
Persons. These are now only passive Scandals, Scandals taken, and not given,
and the guilt lies not upon those who do the actions but upon those who are
troubled that others are more righteous then they, and will do what they judge
God requires of them, without regard to the pleasing or displeasing of any.
These are not the Scandals which a good man fears.

2. But then there is an active Scandal or a Scandal given, and this may be two
ways.

1. By any open sinful actions. Thus we call open sinning Scandalous sinning.
Because it gives a just offense to all good People, and because it of its own
nature tends to cause the name of God to be blasphemed, and the Gospel, and
ways of God to be reproached, and evil spoken of, and is an inducement to
others also to sin against God.

2. It is also committed by an ill use of our liberty, in things where Gods Law
has left us our liberty, when we will do actions, which although we think we
may do, yet others think are unlawful, and our doing of them may either cause
them that have another opinion to reproach us and our profession, or induce
them doubting concerning the lawfulness of them, yet to do them because they
see us whom they look upon as stronger, doing of them, thus we abuse our
liberty by choosing that action by which our Brother is offended, grieved or
made weak, now these Scandals are such as next to our personal plain sinnings
ought to be the object of all good Christians fear.

I must confess as to these last mentioned Scandals, by actions, in which I
judge God has left me in his Law a full and perfect liberty, but others have
not the same apprehensions so as my taking one part may cause in other
Christians, hard thoughts or hard speeches concerning me. Or if not so, yet my
example may induce them though they doubt, yet to adventure upon the same
actions, and sin against God, (for he that doubts is damned if he eats,
that which another who doubts not may freely eat.) I say as to such Scandals
there is a very hard question in Divinity, viz. what is a Christians duty,
suppose him pressed by a Superiors command on the one side, if he does not do
it he disobeyeth his Superiors in a thing which he confesses not to be
forbidden by the Word God, and so seems to sin against the Precept of
obedience to them. On the other side he sees, that if he does the thing, he
shall not only grieve many good Christians who think the thing lawful, but
possibly cause them to intertain hard thoughts of him, or to speak hardly of
him: or if not so, yet (which is worse) to do the same thing though they doubt
of the lawfulness. Nay further it may be that the command of Superiors in the
case may be attended with penalties which may ruin a man and his family. What
is to be done here is an hard case: That it is not our duty to obey Superiors
in all things is out of question: that we ought to obey them in things of which
we are strongly persuaded that they are unlawful, whether they be so or no, is
what no weighed Divine will say; whether this be not, though not Originally,
yet with respect to circumstances a thing unlawful, so as it is not just matter
of a Superiors Precept, that is the question. On the other side: That St. Paul
said he would never eat flesh while the World stood rather then make his
brother to offend, 1 Cor. 8. 13. I observe, St. Paul does not say I will eat no
meat, but no flesh while the World stands; flesh is but one Species of meat,
he might eat other things, and support his life. And as to that Species of
meat, it must doubtless be restrained by the former discourse: which is of meat
that had been set before Idols: This he determines unlawful, 1 Cor. 20.
doubtless it is unlawful for a man to starve himself rather then offend his
Brother. St. Paul speaks of a thing if not unlawful, yet as to which he was at
a full liberty; he could forbear it without any remarkable prejudice to
himself. Besides, the Scandal in the case is but a contingency, he is not sure
his Brother will be made to offend by his example or action. The case is a very
hard case, but I shall spend no more Words about it, that being not the Scandal
which comes within the compass of my text: But either such Scandal as arises
from actions plainly sinful, or at least actions, that have no such
circumstances. Whether we interpret covered, as an harlot was covered, or as a
mourner was covered, both such Scandals are the just fears of all good
Christians.

1. Sin is the object of every good Christians fear upon many accounts. As it
defiles the Soul and takes away its beauty, and comeliness, as it rendereth
the Soul guilty and obnoxious to the wrath of God: As it Spoileth the Souls
peace, and causes sour reflections of conscience. As it hazardeth the Souls
Salvation. As indeed it is the cause of that evil, all that evil that can
befall a man, especially considering that every good Christian knows this,
and in one degree or other has felt it so as it needs no more then its own
former experience to confirm it, and can have no fruit, no pleasure, in those
things for which it has formerly so trembled, and of which it has been, and
is still ashamed. He that loves the Lord hates evil, Psalm. 97. 10. David hated
the works of them that turned aside, Psalm. 101. 3. Now whatsoever is the object
of our hatred when it comes near us, and we see a probability of being
surprised with it we naturally fear.

2. As to scandal: If it be given by any sinful action of ours, it is doubtless
sin, and to be feared equally with any other sin, it being but the aggravation
of a sinful act. The case is also the same, if it be caused through an ill use
of our liberty, in a case where we have a perfect liberty, though the act be
not in it self sinful, yet the circumstance makes it so. The reason is, because
in things of an indifferent nature we are tied up to general Rules, and are
obliged to do that which shall be most, 1. For the glory of God. 2. For the
good of others. 3. Which will give least offense to Jew or Gentile. Those
golden Rules given us by the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 10. 31, 32, 33. There are three
great Reasons why every good Christian will as much fear scandal, as any other
more plain downright sinning.

1. The concern of the glory of God; that is an end we must aim at in all our
actions, whether Natural, Moral, or Religious. The glory of God is as much
prejudiced by the sin of another, as by my own sin; so that in all scandals the
honor of God is wounded two ways; 1. By my own sin, who ought not so to have
used the liberty which his Word left me. 2. By the others sinning occasioned by
my sin. David's Eyes ran down with Rivers of water, because others did not keep
the Law of God.

2. The concern of his Brothers Soul, which is destroyed by his sin. For thy
meat (says the Apostle) destroy not thy Brother, for whom Christ died. God
makes it a mark of hatred of our Brother, not to reprove him, nor to suffer sin
upon him; how much greater hatred must it speak in us to give him Exemplum
malae rei aedificantes in gehennam (as Tertullian somewhere describes scandal)
to set him an example contributing to his destruction. Love will not lay a
stumbling block in the path of the blind. How can any man say, he loves his
Brother, that does not not lay a stumbling block before his Brother, to make
his body to stumble and fall, but to make his Soul to fall?

3. The concern of the peace and quietness of his own Soul is in it too. He
that is of any tenderness of Conscience, will find no peace in the doing of any
thing which reflecteth any dishonor upon God, or tends to destroy his
Brother for whom Christ died.

Use 1.
We may learn from hence, that the fear of sin and scandal, are no ill signs in
any Souls in whom they are found. It is a noble and Divine temper to be afraid
of sinning against God. The best of men in the Old Testament are ordinarily
described under the notion of men fearing God. No man can fear God but the man
that fears sin; whether he fears the Lord, and his power, and greatness,
with a more servile fear, or fears the Lord and his goodness, which is a more
filial and ingenuous fear, one of the first fruits, or prime evidences of it,
is a fear of sinning against God; and that man who fears not sin, fears not
God. It is true, there may be an excess of this fear, through our infirmity
ignorance, and mistake; a man may have a timorated Conscience, and be sometimes
afraid where no fear is, and this often happens in Persons under the power,
and prevailing of Melancholy, which darkeneth a man's reason. In such a case it
is rather the effect of a natural disease, than the genuine and proper motion
of a reasonable Soul. A man also free from that distemper, through ignorance
and infirmity may be afraid of actions as sinful, which indeed are not so; but
this is an error on the right hand. It is much better in this case to fear too
much, than too little; to forbear many lawful actions for fear of sinning
against God in them, when the weak Conscience is not fully satisfied, then to
run on adventurously, when the Conscience doubts. Let others despise and mock
at Persons, as those that would be too precise and pure, that durst not do some
actions as to which others make no difficulty; nay, it may be think them their
duty. My Soul shall, I hope, always reverence those in whom I discern an
uniform fear of sin. If men indeed strain at Gnats, and swallow Camels; pretend
a Conscience in some things, but regard not the dictates of it in other things,
this is Hypocrisy; this is but a pretended fear. But if you see Christians in
all their other ways strict and conscientious, taking heed to their ways,
though I may think that in some things they fear too much, and scruple what I
do not scruple, nor see any sin in, yet I hope I shall always reverence such
Persons. I may be mistaken as well as they, and who has made me more
infallible than they are? It is a noble temper to be afraid of sinning against
God, and so consequently to be afraid of scandal, not only of doing acts that
are openly sinful, but of doing such actions which we think we cannot do
without grieving, offending, and making to stumble and fall those for whom
Christ died. If Christ had such a value for Souls, as for the Redemption of
them, to come down from Heaven to Earth, and to die upon the Cross, certainly
they should not be so cheap in my sight; as for the good of them, I will not
forbear the least thing which I may as well forbear as do. It is possible that
Religious People may fear scandal too much: They may in some particulars be
afraid of their duty, for fear of offending Brethren; they may lay too great a
stress upon a scandal of grief: But these are very pardonable things in
comparison of men's neither fearing God nor men, and running on in courses of
actions, without regarding the offense of God or of men. Every good man will in
your City be wary of leaving ladders in streets, or heaps of muck, or any pits
uncovered, from whence Persons in the dark may receive any mischief, and this
is but in conformity to the ancient Law of God, which commanded the Jews to lay
no stumbling blocks in the way of the blind: Have we charity for our neighbors
Bodies, and have we none for their Souls? Are we tender of making them wound,
or break a bodily limb, and have we no regard to the making them wound the
honor and glory of God, and the peace of their own Souls, and to hazard their
own eternal Salvation? If men had any drams of true Brotherly Love, they would
at least forbear actions, as to which they have a perfect liberty, with which
they know any number of f^ber Persons will be offended. This I speak as to
things in which they have a perfect liberty. For what things I apprehend that I
ought to do as my duty toward God, or to forbear upon that account, I can
neither do the one, nor forbear the other, to avoid offending others, the
reason is, because Charity (as we say) ought to begin at home; every man or
woman is obliged in the first place to attend, and look after the Peace and
eternal Salvation of his own Soul.

Obj. But you will say to me, What shall we do in cases where we are under the
command of Superiors, to do things which yet we see we cannot do, but we shall
give occasion of offense to Christians not so well satisfied as we are?

Sol. I told you before, that I apprehend this a very hard case. The Law of God
obliges me to obey my Superiors; it also commands me to give no offense, to
lay no stumbling block before my Brother, and this Law concerns Superiors as
well as Inferiors. As I ought not to do any such actions which probably may
give occasion to my Brother to sin; so no Superiors ought to command me to do
any such things: Superiors therefore unquestionably sin, in making any such
things the matters of their command. But admit they will not do their duty,
still the question is, what is mine?

I do not think the command of a Superior in this case can take hold of my
conscience, my reason is, because his command in this case is contrary to the
command of God who has commanded him as well as me to give no offense, to lay
no stumbling block in the way of his Brother. If he sins in the matter of
his command I cannot sin in withholding my active obedience, that is certain.
But if he will not be sensible of his duty, nor only command, but command under
penalties that I though originally at liberty must do the thing, or ruin my
self and family, this much narroweth the case. Here now the question lies:
Whether in a matter, as to which I have originally a perfect liberty, and so
judge but through the iniquity of a Superiors command, must either do or
forbear this or that action or ruin my self and family: and on the other side,
if I do do it, or do forbear it, I see I shall not only grieve my Brother, but
cause him to sin probably, what is my duty? Whether ought the contingency of my
Brothers stumbling, and sinning by my example, to rule me and cause me rather
to choose the loss of all. I must confess I do here a little hesitate. My reason
is, because my Brothers fall is not necessitated by my action, he ought to live
by rule not by example, to follow me no further then I follow Christ, to allow
me to live by my own faith, while yet he lives and walks by his own faith. That
may be lawful to me, which to him is not lawful because he doubts, and cannot
see with my eyes. Oh! how happy would the World be, if Superiors would only
press things which they apprehend necessary by a divine Precept (I mean in
relation to the things of God, for in civil things Superiors are more absolute
Judges) and if in any thing they mistake and apprehend things such which indeed
are not, they would be very tender (for that can be but in very few cases) and
if private Persons, would learn not to judge others but in things where they
see them act apertly, and plainly against the will of God, and not arrogate
infallibility to themselves, and others would learn not to be too positive upon
their own apprehensions, nor make others practice their rule, but to live by
their own faith. But this is but a digression; I say, It is a good thing to
fear sin, and to fear Scandal.

Use 2.
I shall shut up this discourse with an Exhortation to Christians, to make sin,
and Scandal the objects of their fear I shall not need to enlarge much upon the
first, it being the confessed duty of every one that owneth the name of a
Christian, or any relation to Jesus Christ. He that fears not what is plainly
sinful fears God in no sense, he neither fears the Lord and his greatness,
nor yet the Lord, and his goodness I shall only tell you that he who fears
sin, fears the occasions, and appearances of it. But I shall rather press the
exhortation with reference to Scandal, calling upon you to take heed of any
actions,

1. Which may draw out the lusts and corruptions, of other men's hearts to
entertain any hard thoughts, or use any hard speeches concerning Profession,
and Religion. Now these are in the first place, 1. All actions that are openly
sinful; this was that which stuck to David, when he had committed those two
great sins of Adultery with Bathsheba, and the murder of Uriah, and God had
declared his pardoning him these sins, nevertheless says he, because thou have
made the Enemies of God to Blaspheme, the Child shall dye, the Sword shall
never depart from thy house. The honor and glory of God is a tender thing, and
it is a dreadful thing for Christians to give a cause for the name of God to be
evilly spoken of.

2. But 2dly good Christians are not only concerned to take heed of such
actions, as are acts of plain impiety and unrighteousness. But of such
behavior, and such acts, as should make Religion and religious Persons appear
unlovely, to the World; let me instance in three or four things.

1. Take heed either of an over sad, and pensive, or of an over light, and
cheerful behavior. The sober and serious Christian, that knows his times to
laugh, and times to weep, and decent measures to be observed in both, is the
only man that honors Religion. He that walks covered, by the flocks of
Christ's companions, covered as a mourner, or covered as if he were not married
to Christ, or covered as an harlot, whose face is always full of shame and his
Eyes always full of tears, does not honor Religion; let a Christian betwixt
God and his Soul alone, cover himself with as much shame as he will, and let
his Eyes run down with tears in his closet, but take heed of dishonouring
Profession by a continual drooping, and sadness. That Christian that is over
merry, and jolly offends on the other hand, and as much Scandalizeth
Profession. Can thou be merry, can thou play foolish Soul who sinnedst to
day? (says our English Poet) we sin too much to be over frolic. Both these
extremes are to be avoided.

2. Take heed of a rash tongue. I know none more Scandalize Religion and
Godliness, than such whose Tongues must be always running, and who give
themselves a liberty to say, Quidlibet de quolibet, any thing of any Persons,
who say, report and we will report it. Hence James accounts the Government of
the tongue to the perfection of Religion. The tongue is a little member, says
James, Jam. 2. 5 but it kindles great fires, it is a World of iniquity, an
unruly evil, full of deadly Poison; I know nothing by which Religion is more
Scandalized, then by the ungoverned tongues of Professors.

3. Take heed of being busy bodies in other men's matters. They who must have
an Oar in every Boat, besides that they never row their own Boat well, shall be
sure to have every body quarrelling with them. You shall observe that the
Scripture never gives a busy body a good character. He reckons them as Persons
that walk disorderly, 2 These. 3. 11. He joyneth them with idle Persons, 2 Timothy
5. 13. He commands men to take heed of suffering upon this score, 1 Pet. 4. 15.

3. And lastly; Good Christians ought to take heed of those actions or
carriages, which although themselves judge lawful, (and possibly they are so)
yet are generally offensive to Christians, and the most serious Christians,
especially in those Churches and places in which God has cast their lot. All
see not with the same Eyes, and we ought to have regard to the Souls of others,
and to a Peace with others. Hence some things may be lawful for us in one
place, and under some circumstances, which are unlawful in other places, and
under other circumstances. Now such things may either concern Religious duties,
as to the Acts of which, though all be agreed, yet they may not as to
circumstances. Where thou have a perfect Liberty, it is thy duty to forbear
such circumstances, as, though thou think lawful, yet thou feast will be
grievous aad offensive to others. 2. As to our Civil behavior in matters of
habits and dresses. It may be thou think the things in themselves lawful,
others think them unlawful. Why should thou walk like one covered by the
flock of Christ's Companions? Why should thou for an indifferent thing,
bring thy self under the hard thoughts of any number of serious Christians. The
things themselves in thy apprehension are lawful, and it is also lawful for
thee to decline them; why should thou not choose the less offensive part? You
may learn from 1 Cor. 11. that Christians in such things as these are to have a
great respect to the common guise and custom of places, and especially to the
common guise and custom to such as themselves in those places. God forbad the
Jews the very habits of Heathens. I believe good Christians as much prohibited
the habits of profane Persons, so far as they are distinct from those of the
generality of sober Christians: So in matters of Pastime and Recreation: For
Games depending upon mere Lot and Chance. What though Judicious Divines do not
all determine them unlawful, yet some do, others, and many conscientious
Christians, doubt concerning them; possibly thou do not; if thou doubtest,
thou art bound to forbear them, to take the safer part; but admit thou do not
doubt, yet in places where any considerable number of conscientious Christians
doubt, thou art bound to forbear; why should thy Liberty be condemned by other
men's Consciences? Why should thou walk covered by the flocks of Christ's
Companions? I shall shut up this Discourse with the words of the Apostle, Phil.
4. 8. Finally Brethren, Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.

Sermon XLIV.
Cant. 1. 8. If thou know not (O thou fairest amongst Women) Go thy way
forth by the footsteps of the Flock, and feed thy Kidds besides the Shepherds
Tents.

I Have done with the Spouse's Petition, and am come to her Beloved's Answer.
In which I have observed three things.

1. A friendly Compellation; O thou fairest amongst Women!

2. A Supposition that she might be ignorant of some things relating to
communion with him -- If thou know not.

3. A Direction in this case: Go thy way by the footsteps of the Flocks, etc.
Hence three Propositions are obvious.

Prop. 1. That of all Souls, the truly believing Soul is the most beautiful
Soul in the Eyes of Christ.

Prop. 2. That the beauty of this Soul is not perfect. This Soul may be in some
things ignorant, and at a loss how to maintain communion with God at some times.

Prop. 3. That the surest way for a gracious Soul to get a perfect Instruction
in those things which concern its spiritual good, and to keep and enjoy its
communion with Christ, is to feed it self by the Tents of his Shepherds, and to
live according to the Precepts of his Word, and the Examples of his Church
there recorded.

I shall begin with the first.

Prop. 1. That of all Souls, the Believer is the most beautiful Soul in the
Eyes of Christ.

I will inquire a little into the Nature of the Believing Soul's Beauty: Then I
shall give you some Reasons of it; and lastly, Make some Application.

1. It is not a corporeal visible Beauty, but spiritual and invisible. When we
speak of Beauty, we ordinarily understand a symmetry of bodily parts, with a
due mixture of the colors of flesh and blood commending it self to the carnal
Eye. This is that of which Solomon says, Favor is deceitful; Beauty is vain,
but none I hope will have so gross a conception of the Soul's Beauty in the
Eyes of Christ, who sees not as man sees, and judges not from any outward
appearance. The King's Daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. This
Beauty lies in the Soul's symmetry to, and with the Divine Law, in a due
proportion of virtues and gracious habits in the Soul's conformity to God the
pattern of Perfection. The Heathens, by the Light of Nature, could see that the
inward Beauty was the true Beauty. It is reported of Diogenes, that meeting
with a young man who was exceeding comely, but very vicious, he cried out, O
quam bona domus, and malus hospes! What a brave house is here, and how bad an
inhabitant it has! It is what may be said of a great many comely men and women
in the world: O what brave houses has the God of Nature made, but what ill
Tenants has the Devil thrust into them? Within there dwells nothing but Pride,
Ignorance, Lust Vanity, and other Inmates of corruption. Our Savior has
fitted them with a name, they are Painted Sepulchers. The Spouse's Beauty is
spiritual, her Ornaments are the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible (as the Apostle speaks,) 1 Pet. 3. 4. And as corporeal Beauty
lies in the due proportion of the parts of the body one to another, yet this
alone will not make a Beauty, without a due proportion of colors, and a good
Air of the countenance: So this Spiritual Beauty lies in the proportion of the
Soul and its several powers and faculties to the Divine Rule, its Symmetry with
the Divine Nature; yet this will not do without the grace of Justification,
that grace which does gratum facere, render the Soul acceptable in the sight of
God. Hence this Beauty is not obvious to our senses. The World (says the
Apostle) knows us not. It is a Spiritual Beauty, so as flesh and blood
discerns it not; whereas we see things by the Eye of Sense, Reason or
Revelation. Corporeal Beauty is discerned by a carnal Eye; the object bears a
due proportion to the Organ: Yea, there is an inward Beauty, which even the Eye
of a natural man may discern; it lies in the proportion which the mind of the
man or woman bears to the Rule of Virtue, and the Principles of Reason. Thus
a man may see more Beauty and Loveliness in one that is Learned and knowing,
than in one that is ignorant; in one that is just, chaste, sober, temperate,
than in a beastly Drunkard, a sottish unclean Adulterer, an unjust and
unrighteous man, etc. But the Beauty of a Child of God lies deeper, and more
remote from a carnal man's apprehension, in the Souls Symmetry with the pure,
and holy nature of God. the proportions of his Soul to the pattern of a
disciple of Christ as his lineaments are drawn in holy Writ. This the natural
Eye sees not, the Spiritual man alone discerns, nor does he at all times
discern it in ano there, Eli could not see Hannahs beauty, but thought it had
been only a little color which too much wine had brought into her face. The
Subject of this beauty is the heart, Christ sees, and knows that hence,
though a Child of God does appear fair to his Brother, yet to Christ more fair,
even the fairest amongst Women.

2. Secondly, It is not a Native but an adventitious beauty, you (says the
Apostle) has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2. 1.
Children of wrath by nature even as others, v. 3. By nature there is none
righteous, no not one, none that understands, nor seeks after God, the
Philosopher spoke like a Philosopher when he determined the Soul to be
naturally as white Paper or tabula rasa. The Divine must speak otherwise there
is in man a want justitiae debitae inesse, a want of that image of God in which
lies the Souls beauty; He was created in honor, but he is become like the
Beast that perishes, he has lost the image of the heavenly, Behold (says
David, Psalm. 51.) I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother bring me
forth. What can be clean (says Job) that is born of a Woman? Or how can that
which is clean come forth from that which is unclean. The vicious inclinations
of Children is matter of demonstration, till they be in some measure corrected,
by the precepts and instructions, and government of those that are set over
them, and by moral discipline, which yet does not cultivate and adorn them
sufficiently to render them beautiful in the Eyes of Christ.

3. Thirdly, it is not an Artificial but created beauty. The beauty of the
Civil person, that either from the precepts or examples of his governors or
his ingenuous education, has imbibed Principles of Moral Discipline is indeed
no native beauty, but it is an artificial beauty, as to which God has had no
hand but that of his common Providence, but the Spouse's beauty is a created
beauty, wholly Gods work in the Soul, creating faith in it, uniting it to
Christ, changing its heart, giving it new habits, new qualities, and
inclinations. Thou were comely, says God, Ezech. 16. 14. through my comeliness
put upon thee. Corporteal beauty is the work of God in nature, and it is hardly
in the power of man to contribute any thing toward that. The Painter
dissembleth a beauty but gives no real beauty; the Tailor dissembleth a
Symmetry of parts but cannot give it. But Spiritual beauty is much more the
gift of God, that is, a Gift of Special grace. Art may make a woman that is not
beautiful appear so, but it cannot make one to be beautiful that is not so.
Good works do little more to the Saints beauty in the Eyes of Christ then
hansome clothes, or linen does toward the beauty of the body. If the body be
comely, and beautiful, hansome fashioned clothes or linen may indeed set it
off, but if the body has no true symmetry of parts, all that good clothes do
is to hide deformity, and to make the body that is not comely yet appear so
unto others. If the Soul of a man or woman be truly beautiful through an
imputed righteousness and inherent grace, good works much set forth this beauty
to the world, and are also acceptable unto God. But works only Morally good,
that is, such things as God has commanded, can never make a Spiritual
Ethiopian fair, nor the Soul that is naturally crooked, straight. The Romish
Tailors, and Painters, labor in vain to make Souls beautiful by prescription
of good works, not flowing from a true faith in Jesus Christ; indeed the truly
beautiful Soul will maintain good works for necessary uses, and not be seen in
any part of the world, or in any station in it, but clothed with them, the
Kings Daughter though all glorious within, yet must have her garments also
smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, but these are not her only beauty in the
Eyes of her beloved, she still cries out, O Lord, my righteousness is all as a
menstruous cloth, as an unclean thing. I am altogether in my self, as a filthy
and unclean thing.

4. The beauty of the Child of God is not only Adherent but also Inherent,
Justification is his beauty, this I call adherent, he is in a state of favor
with God, and has a right to be called his Child. Regener at ion is his
inherent beauty, and makes not only a change in his state, but in his nature
and temper. Justification makes an alteration in the Souls state, and relation
to God, before that it was an enemy, now a Child, it cannot be properly said to
be any thing inherent in us, rather adherent to us, without it the Soul cannot
be comely in the Eyes of Christ; those who in John's vision were seen clothed in
white, were such as were washed in the blood of the lamb. Let the Virtues of
men's Souls be never so eminent, their actions never so splendid, yet while they
are not justified, they cannot be fair in the Eyes of Christ, who judges not
according to the outward appearance, but according to the heart. But yet this
is not all the Spouse's beauty; In the same moment wherein by justifying the
sinner, God makes a change in his state, he also makes a change in his heart;
this cannot be alone, neither is it causative of the other. Those are
wonderfully vain that charge us with asserting, that God can be pleased with an
unholy Soul or that any such Soul is fair and lovely in the Eyes of that God,
who is of purer Eyes, then that he can behold any iniquity. This is what
Protestants do affirm; That God reckons the righteousness, or comeliness of
Christ unto to the Soul, and so makes us comely, and in the same moment gives
his Spirit to it, to renew and sanctify it, and dwell in it, and that both
these make up the Spiritual beauty and comeliness, but God does not accept our
Persons upon the latter, but upon the former account; yet we say, This
conformity of the heart to the will of God wrought by regeneration, is a great
part of the Souls comeliness. Thou have (says Christ) ravished my heart, my
Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished mine heart with one of the Chains about
thy neck, Cant. 4. 9. This we also further say, That although this inherent
beauty, be not that for which Christ accepts the Person of a Child of God,
yet God is well pleased with it, and it does much increase Gods manifestative
love toward a Person, John 14. 21.

5. Fifthly, The beauty of the Child of God is a desirable beauty desirable to
God. Indeed all beauty is desirable; this is to God desirable. You must
understand it safely. All desire in the creature speaks some want and
indigences, in God it only speaks complacence, Psalm. 45. 4. So shall the King
desire thy beauty, the meaning is no more then be well pleased with thy Beauty.
God is well pleased with their Souls and his will moves toward them, and the
enjoyment of them, not to fill up any vacuity or emptiness in himself, but to
fill up their emptinesses with the sulness of himself who fills all in all.
Thus the Schoolmen say truly, That though the creature works, and moves to
supply his own indigence, yet God never moves nor works but to communicate
his own perfection and fullness.

6. The beauty of the Child of God is a never fading beauty. Corporeal beauty
is vain, age, sickness, contagious diseases, many accidents, either greatly
abate, or destroy this. This Spiritual beauty, though it may abate, yet shall
never sail; It is one of Gods gifts to the Soul which are without repentance,
It is caused from the seed of God which abides in the Soul. The appearance of
it to the world may abate, but its beauty cannot wholly fail and perish. It is
as the air of the Soul resulting from its state of Justification, which
alters not, and from the infused habits of Regeneration which cannot dye.

7. Lastly, It is not apersect beauty. The adherent beauty of Gods People is
perfect, the Soul that is justified from the guilt of one sin is justified from
the guilt of all sins. God never forgives in part (if we understand by
forgiving, remitting the obligation sin lays us under to Eternal death.) But
the inherent beauty of the Children of God is imperfect, we know in part, and
love in part; sincerity is all we can glory in, all our perfection as to that.
The habits of grace infused in Regeneration are capable of increase and
augmentation, nor will any be perfect in them till he comes to dye: No nor then
neither, for though the actings of some grace proportioned to our indigent
mortal state will then cease (and so in that sense may be said to be perfected)
yet Love and delight in God, habits of Grace which we shall carry with us into,
and exercise in another world shall be made perfect there. But in the exercises
of our habits of grace the best of Gods People are much more imperfect, laying
many a black parch upon a fair face, which the pure God sees, and can
distinguish from Beauty spots. Though for them he will not cast his people off.

Thus far I have showed you the nature of the Spouses beauty. I shall now show
you whence it is, that such a Soul in the Eyes of Christ is the fairest amongst
Women. This will appear but reasonable if we consider,

That their beauty is Christ's workmanship. I told you before that it is not an
artificial beauty, nor natural, but created and superinduced upon the Soul; The
holy Scripture calls man Gods Generation, Acts 17. 29. and borrows the
expression from an Heathen Poet, (...) they saw that by the light of Nature.
The Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 2. 10. That we are Gods workmanship created to good
works, which God had before ordained, that we should walk in them, God, had
ordained it Christ wrought it. Whatsoever of good a Child of God has in him it
is all from God, he is begotten of God, John 1. 13. We are created by him to
good works, and he works in us to will and do. Are we justified, and is that
any part of our beauty? We are justified by his grace, washed in his blood.
Except I wash you (says Christ) you have no part in me. It is natural to us
all to account any thing best, and fairest, to which our selves have
contributed any thing as a cause. The Father and Mother value their own Child
above any others: The man of art takes most delight in his own workmanship. God
can do nothing, but what is truly, and highly good, and he cannot but be most
pleased in his own work.

2. Secondly, The beauty of the Child of God is Christ's beauty, and lies in
the Souls assimilation, or being made like unto Christ. Is he justified? It is
by the imputation of his righteousness. Is he regenerated? It is through his
Spirit and by his regeneration, the image of God, and Christ is renewed in him
in Knowledge, righteousness and holiness, the like mind is in him that was in
Christ. Likeness is the Mother of Love, and all Love flows from some likeness
or conceived likeness in the object beloved. Christ cannot but love that Soul
that is made partaker of the Divine nature, and renewed according to his image,
and made like unto himself. The believer was predestined to be conform to the
Image of the Son, and by Faith and Regeneration he is made conform, renewed
according to the image of God, (according to the Apostles phrase.) If Jacob
knew his sons coat again, and the sight of it was enough to set the Fathers
bowels on yerning, Christ will doubtless know his own robes, and cannot but
account that Soul most beautiful, that is adorned with and dressed in them.

Use 1.
This in the first place may serve to convince us of the truth of what John
tells us, 1. John 5. 19. That the whole world lies in wickedness. For these
Souls whom Christ judges and calls the fairest amongst Women: The most
lovely and beautiful Souls, are those who in the Eyes of the generality in the
world are counted the most unlovely, despicable, and contemptible Persons in
nature in so much that Godly men and women may take up the words of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 9. concerning himself and those of his own order, 1 Cor. 4.
9. We think, that God has set as forth as it were appointed unto death, for we
are made a spectacle to the world, to angels and to men. We are fools for
Christ's sake, profane, lewd men they are wise, we are weak, they are strong,
they are honorable, we are despised; the People of God, in the present age, in
all former ages are they who hunger, and thirst, who are naked and buffeted,
and have no certain dwelling place, yet they labor, working with their hands,
being reviled they bless, being persecuted they suffer it, being defamed they
entreat, yet are they made as the filth of the world, as the offscouring of
all Nations even to this day. Thus it was under the Old Testament, the prophet
complained in his time, Isa. 59. 15. That truth failed, and he who departed
from evil made himself a prey, but he adds, and the Lord saw it, and it
displeased him that there was no judgment. It was so under the New Testament;
who was more despised, and rejected of men then Christ? Who was more reviled,
contemned, abused both in words and deeds then John the Baptist, Christ, and
his blessed Apostles, and all the Primitive Christians? Christ foretold his
disciples, that the world should hate them, that they should speak of them all
manner of Evil, persecute them, turn them out of their Synagogues, etc. It is
so in our times, if there be in any places Persons fearing God, and working
righteousness, Persons that make a conscience of their ways, that fear an
Oath, that durst not drink, and swear, and curse, and blaspheme the living God,
as others do, that make conscience of their worshipping God, and are a little
more strict and frequent in it then others are. These are the Persons against
whom the world spits all their venom, against whom their hands are lifted up,
men may meet together to drink, and revel, to hear lewd and profane Songs, and
Plays, but not to pray, not to consider and exhort one another to love, and to
good works; what is this an Evidence of but that the world lies in wickedness?
Christ judges pious Souls, the fairest Souls, these are they sor whom he died.
Whom he calls his Sister, his Spouse, the fairest Souls in the creation; these
are those Souls, whom the World sets up as marks to shoot all their invenomed
arrows, bitter words against, to offer all affronts, and indignities unto.
Shall not the Lord visit for these things? Shall he not be avenged on such a
generation? Shall a gallant in the World, draw his Sword upon the man that
affronts his Paramour, or Mistress, a wanton Woman that he has espoused, or to
whom his heart cleaves, and shall the Lord bear these affronts, these injuries
offered to Souls that are more precious in the Eyes of their Lord then all the
world is beside? Hear what the Lord said by his prophet as to that ancient
People of his, Isa. 43. 2, 3. I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel,
thy Savior, I gave Egypt for thy ransom: Ethiopia and Seba for thee. Since
thou were precious in my sight thou have been honorable, and I have loved
thee, therefore will I give men for thee, and People for thy life. Was this
spoken for the Jews only think we, or did this concern the profane part of the
Jews, or those only that feared the Lord, walked in his commandments, and
worshipped him in Spirit and in truth? That it was not to be understood with
reference to or upon the account of the lewd, and profane part of the Jewish
Nation is evident, by Gods declared detestation of them by the same prophet,
and by others of his Prophets. If it were spoken with reference to such as
feared God, and walked in his commandments, and kept close to the rule of
Worship which he had given them, it holds good still to all Souls that fall
under that Character. They are precious in Gods fight, honorable, he has
loved them, the holy one of Israel is their Savior, and the worlds hatred of
them, profane men's reviling, contemning, abusing them, is but a continued
Evidence, that the world knows them not, and speaks evil of, and does evil
to things and Persons they know not: Or that it lies in wickedness, in a vile
and wicked Error of judgment, judging those vile, and base, whom God judges
precious and honorable, and those worthy of hatred, whom he loves, and though
the Lord may for a time suffer his good and righteous Servants to be thus
reviled, thus treated, thus abused, by lewd and ungodly men, for the trial of
their faith, and for the exercise of their patience, and that some of the blood
of his Saints may be poured into the cup of wicked men's sins, that the cup of
their iniquities may be full, and they may fill up their measures of sinning,
That upon them may come all the righteous blood of his People, which has been
shed, yet be assured, the Lord will not suffer it always, but awake as one out
of sleep, and plead the cause of his People, and give Egypt for their ransom
and Ethiopia and Seba, and they will find at last, that God will give men for
them, and People for their lives. Possibly some will say to us, but how shall
we know these whom Christ calls the fairest amongst women, if we knew them, we
should give a a due respect to them. It is true the Apostle says, The world
knows us not. Nor can they perfectly know them, for the Kings Daughter is
glorious within, says the Psalmist. But yet our Savior tells you, Math. 7.
16. By their fruits you shall know them, do men gather grapes of Thorns; or
Figs of Thistles? even so every good tree, brings forth good fruit, but a
corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. Will you know what is good fruit? see
Gal. 5. 22. The fruit of the Spirit, is love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against these there is no
law; No law of God. Add to this, Phil. 3. 3. We are the circumcision, which
Worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Jesus Christ, and have no confidence
in the flesh; these are the true Jews, that are such inwardly, in the heart,
and in the Spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of
God. See you therefore any man, or woman, or any party of men and women in the
World, who disclaiming any confidence in the flesh, any privileges of birth,
or Church State, or the merits of any works they have done, or can do, place
their hope for Salvation in Jesus Christ alone, trust in him, rejoice in him
and Worship God in the Spirit, (tho it may be not with those external rites,
and Ceremonies that you do, nor under the same circumstances, yet) heartily
Worship God, according to the rules which God has given them, that Love God,
and have a love to all men, though more especially to those that fear God, and
desire to live in Peace (as much as in them lies) with all men, that are gentle
and meek, not giving way to rude, and boisterous Passions, that are good in
their behaviors, temperate, no drunkards, no unclean Persons, but squaring
their lives by the rule of reason, because it is also the law of God. Let me
tell you, that against these there is no law. No law of God, which is the
regula regulans the rule by which all the rules, and laws of men must be
guided, or they are nullities and no rules at all. These are those whom that
God, whom you own as your Creator, and the great Lord of Heaven and Earth, that
Christ, whom you call your Redeemer, your Savior, and who most certainly shall
be your Judge, and give unto you at the last according to what you have done in
the flesh, calls the fairest amongst women, the most beautiful and lovely Souls
in the whole creation, judge you, whether you ought not so also to call, so to
account them, so to deal with them. These are the best men and women in your
Cities, Parishes, etc. Take ^reed of using hard Speeches concerning them, God
will for them execute Judgment as well as for ungodly deeds, much more take
heed of any hard actions against them; he that touches them, touches the
apple of Gods Eye, Zech. 2. 8. Deuteronomy. 32. 10. They have prayed with David, Psalm.
17. 8. Keep me as the apple of thine Eye. God has said concerning them, Zech.
2. 8. He that touches them touches the apple of his Eye. Be wise now
therefore O ye Princes, be instructed, O you men of the Earth, whether great or
small, be assured Christ will revenge his Spouses quarrels, even the quarrels
of all those whom he judges the fairest amongst women. Let none think to cover
their malice against Religion, and Godliness, under pretenses of executing
humane Laws; the Apostle says against such is no law, no law that will be
justified by the law of God, no law that will justify either the lawgivers in
making it, or the Executors in execution of it, 1 Timothy 1. 9. The law is not made
for a righteous man, but for the lawless, and disobedient, for the ungodly, and
for sinners, for unholy, and profane, for Murderers of Fathers, and Murderers
of Mothers, for Whoremongers, for those who defile themselves with mankind, for
Man-Stealers, for Liars, for perjured Persons, and other things contrary to
sound Doctrine. The law [that is, the law of God] [is not made for them] that
is, to punish, afflict, torment them, it is made for them to live according to
the rule of it. It is made to protect them. For rulers are not a terror to good
works but the evil, Romans 13. 3. And all Magistrates ought to be Ministers of God
to Christians for good, Romans 13. 4. Now all humane laws must be either in
affirmance of the law of God, and to force that, or in civil things left to
their power, as they shall judge to be most for the public Peace, or necessary
to uphold Nations, and Polities. O therefore take heed what you do, lest you be
found fighters against God. Much less let any think to cover their malice with
pretenses, that the Persons they run upon with such a rage are hypocrites.
Hypocrisy can be but in the heart when there is no contradiction in the
conversation, that man is no judge of. But is it not possible to reconcile (at
least) some part of the men of the World to those to whom the Lord Jesus Christ
has given such a Character? Is he not a better Judge then men are? Will you
make your selves believe for a cloak for your rage) that these men are not what
they pretend to be? I would ask you but one question, are they not more
righteous then you? Are they not more in reading the Word, Hearing, Prayer,
Fasting, and are not these things duties commanded in that Word, which you own
to be your rule, and to be holy, just and good? are they not stricter in the
observation of Sabbaths? (Which is so great a piece of Religion that the
Prophet expresses a great part of it, under that notion, Isa. 56. 4, 6.) Into
their hearts you cannot look, but their Words are audible, do not they fear an
Oath more? Do they swear and curse, and Blaspheme like you or many others? do
they exceed Heathens, Dii omnes deaeque te perdant; by their Dammees, do they
rail and revile, and lie like other men? Do they drink, and whore, steal and
murder, gripe and oppress? is not the contrary to this the beauty of a Soul in
the Eye of humane reason? You have therefore no reason to judge them none of
those whom Christ calls the fairest amongst women, you must own they are fairer
then you, or any of your converse, and stamp. You must find some in the World
that are better then your selves, or they must be the most comely and beautiful
Souls. Sirs I beseech you consider, how much it becomes a man as a man to
judge according to truth? And what can be a better standard then the judgment
of Christ. O let not the People of God be vile in your Eyes who are so highly
esteemed by him who is your Lord and Master, and by whom you pretend to hope to
be saved. But to shut up this discourse; You that will not conform your
judgment to the Judgment of Christ concerning such People, and behave your
selves toward them accordingly, shall certainly be forced to submit to his
Judgment spoken of, Jude 14. and 15.

2d Branch. I would willingly improve this notion a little further, not only
to reconcile, your judgments to the judgment of Christ concerning the People of
God, but to reconcile you also to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the ways of
God, The effecting of the former, (if I could do it) though it might produce
some more quiet and peace in the World and reduce men to the rule of reason,
yet as to your own Souls (if that be all) all the effect it would have would be
to save you from a deeper place in Hell. It is not a good opinion of Gods
People, or a peaceable or kind behavior to them, will bring any man to Heaven.
I could wish that all who hear me this day (to use Saint Paul's words to
Agrippa) were as the People of God are, (excepting that reproach and obloquy
which they suffer, those bonds, and imprisonments to which they are exposed)
that they also would come into the number of those whom the Lord judges the
best Souls in the World, the fairest amongst women.

1. Is it nothing to you to come into this reputation? Lewd, profane, debaucht
Persons, let their quality in the World be what it will, in Scripture come
under the notions of Children of Belial, Vain Persons. What an object of desire
does corporeal beauty appear to the World? What will not a vain woman do to get
it, to preserve it, to dissemble it, what time, what money she spends to set it
out? What care she takes, if as to it she be under any defects, to hide them,
to correct them, etc. Quantum est in rebus inane? All this it may be is spent
in painting a Sepulcher, a rotten post. Possibly look into this Masquerade,
there is nothing but what is rational filthiness, and deformity. An
understanding void of any valuable knowledge. A Perverse and stubborn will
against what is rationally good, beastly affections, her Soul it may be is full
of lasciviousness, Pride, Malice, Envy: All unlovely things, Turbulent
Passions. Is Spiritual beauty worth nothing? Shall Heathens judge a Soul that
is knowing, subdued to the rule of reason, chaste, good, just, sober, meek,
modest, beautiful, and worth a thousand Souls otherwise disposed, and
qualified; and shall Christians judge otherwise? shall they think Soul-beauty
not valuable? Or shall they not judge it worth any thing, to be comely with
Christ's comeliness, and in the Eyes of an all seeing, heart searching God, to
be without spot or wrinkle; consider Sirs, how much this is beneath the name or
profession of Christians, how we are condemned by wanton gallants desiring
corporeal beauty, and Heathens, valuing the rational beauty of the mind which
commends it self to all rational minds before they be debauched.

2. Consider what it is to have the King of Kings to desire, and to predicate
our beauty, Psalm. 45. 11. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty. The
King, this King is God whose throne is for ever, and ever, and whose Scepter is
a righteous Scepter, v. 6. Beauty is in it self attractive but who is there
that will not covet a beauty, that a King should desire? But what are all the
Kings of the Earth, compared with him who is the King of glory? So shall the
King (says the Psalmist desire thy beauty: How great a thing is this for the
great God to have a desire to the Sons of men and a delight in them? And
further for this King to predicate our beauty, as the Lord does in the Text,
and did concerning Job, Job 2. v. 3. And the Lord said unto Satan, have thou
considered my Servant Job, that there is none like him in all the Earth, a
perfect, and an upright man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil, and
still he holds fast his integrity, though thou movedst me against him to
destroy him without cause. For this great King to desire a Souls beauty,
signifies to be the Spouse of Christ, to be in favor with God in this life,
and it promises an eternal communion with God in glory, in the life which is
to come, when the Marriage of the Lamb shall be consummate, and the Bride the
Lambs Wife, shall follow him wheresoever he goes.

3. Lastly consider, The consequent of not being of the number of those, whom
Christ here calls the fairest amongst Women. Amongst men their is a medium
betwixt men's looking upon a woman as the fairest, and such a one whose beauty
they desire; and being abominable, and odious in their Eyes. But as to Christ
there is no medium betwixt these two. The unbelieving and the abominable are
put together, Rev. 21. 8. A man may not love a woman so well as to make her his
Wife, and yet have a kindness for her, not hate, and abhor her. The case is not
so betwixt God, and the Soul. He or she whose beauty the Lord does not desire,
is by God hated and abhorred, that Soul is abominable in his fight. The
abominable, Rev. 21. 8. shall have their part in the lake which burns with
fire and brimstone, which is the Second death. These arguments are enough to
those who believe there is an Heaven, and an Hell, who believe there is a God,
and a Christ and that all mankind are under the favor, or disfavour of this
great and terrible God. To persuade them to get into the number of these whom
God judges the fairest amongst women. Will any say to me but what can we
contribute toward it? Love is a free thing. It is true Love is free, and the
Love of none amongst the creatures is or can be so free as the Love of God who
is the freest Agent; but yet hearken to the direction of the Psalmist who
doubtless is an infallible guide in this matter, Psalm. 45. v. 10. Hearken O
Daughter, and consider, and incline thine Ear: forget also thine own People and
thy Fathers house. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty. What is our
Fathers house, but the house of old Adam? What are our own People, but our own
sinful courses? our old sinful company? How shall we forget them but by
hearkening to the Counsels of God, considering our state and condition what we
are? Whither we are hastening, what will become of us in the latter end? Giving
and inclining our Ears, to what? To the reproofs, corrections, admonitions,
instructions, of Gods Word, to the knockings and motions of his blessed Spirit,
so shall the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, desire
and greatly desire your beauty. To those who what ever they are called, and go
for in the World, are Atheists in heart, and believe nothing which the
Scripture says of Heaven, or Hell, and a World to come, nothing of God, or
Christ, nothing that I or any other can say will be enough God, must persuade
Japhet to come and dwell in the tents of Sem.

3d Branch. I shall shut up this discourse with two or three Words of
Exhortation to such as this blessed Bridegroom dignifieth with this honorable
compellation of the fairest amongst women.

1. First let every such Soul be in some measure reconciled to itself. There is
a great difference betwixt Christ's apprehension of many a pious Soul, and its
own apprehension of it self. There is none so high in the Eyes of Christ, none
often times so low in its own Eyes, as the believing Soul is. Paul calls himself
the greatest of sinners, and the least of Saints. David calls himself a worm,
and no man, Psalm. 22. Yea and I shall by and by show you that low and mean
apprehensions of our selves are a great part of our duty, much of our beauty.
Yet there may be an extreme in these apprehensions. If these apprehensions
hinder our faith in Christ, our cheerful and comfortable walking before God,
our cheerful looking up to God and calling him Father, and coming with boldness
to the throne of grace, they are so far from a Christians duty, that they are
his sinful failings. It is too ordinary amongst Christians, to take so much
shame to themselves that they know not how to give glory to God, the glory of
their being what they are (to use Saint Paul's phrase.) Thou have Christian,
many failings and infirmities, thou see much naughtiness, and corruption in
thine heart. What then? though thou be not the fairest amongst the glorious
Angels and glorified Saints; Yet thou may be one of the fairest amongst
women, the glorified Saints have no spot, in their garments, no ill lineaments
in their faces, thou have some, but so have all that are on this side of the
blessed mansions. Thy spots may be no more then the spots of Gods Children and
if they be not thou may be one of the fairest amongst women.

2. Let every believing Soul learn hence to be humble. That they are the
fairest, some of the fairest amongst Souls yet on this side Heaven, this indeed
is matter of glorying, and rejoicing. But then to consider, that this is not
their native complexion, but an adventitious beauty, that it is not an
artificial but a created beauty. This though it does not take away all
glorying, all boasting from them, yet it rest^^^ineth them in their boasting
and glorying to make their boast, and to glory only in the Lord, if they look
to the rock out of which they were hewed, to the hole of the Pit from which
they were dug, they will find they derived not their beauty from thence,
they were in the quarry as unlovely rude stones as any others; it is the Lord
that has hewed them out, that has polished them and of grace has
superinduced that beauty upon them wherein they glory, and if they have
received their beauty they have no reason to glory as if they had not received
it. I say he that considers this, and that now at the best he is not without
spots, his beauty is not perfect, at least that part of his beauty which is
inherent in him is not perfect, this will show a thinking. Christian eternal
cause to walk softly toward men, and humbly as well as thankfully toward God.
Grace leaves no room for, gives no advantage unto pride; hence though a
believer most excels all other Souls, yet he ordinarily least excels them
in his own apprehensions.

3. Let this engage every believer to high admiring thoughts of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Christ in this Text calls his Spouse the fairest amongst women; you
will find she requiteth him, Chap. 5. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the
chiefest amongst ten thousand. And certainly we have all the reason imaginable
constraining us to this admiration of Christ, we were by birth Ethiopians, Our
Father was a Syrian, consider us in our selves, as separate from Christ's
comeliness put upon us. We are altogether black, he is all glory, all beauty,
altogether desires (as the Spouse expresses it) Christ is to be admired of all
them that believe, we should never think of Christ, but with admiring thoughts,
never solemnly discourse of him but in forms of admiration. If Christ can see
so much beauty in us who are poor creatures, poor worms of the Earth, who have
no beauty but what he has put upon us, and into us, certainly we must be very
blind if we can see no beauty, no loveliness, nothing to be desired in him, who
is the bright Image of his Fathers glory, and the express Image of his Person,
whom all the Angels, adore, and admire, and in whom the Soul of the everlasting
Father rests, and is well pleased, and who is his great delight.

4. Lastly, Has Christ styled the believing Soul the fairest amongst women?
How do all such Souls stand concerned to preserve their beauty? Your beauty is
your holiness, the favor of God, your acceptableness to him and his love
toward you. The state of Justification indeed cannot be lost, the seed of God
does, and shall abide in the Soul. But yet your luster may be lost, his
manifestative love to you may be withdrawn, your honor in the World may be
lost. You may walk like one covered, besides the flocks of those who are the
companions of Christ. Is the vain woman so curiously careful to preserve her
beauty, that she will spare any time, any money for it? will she avoid any thing
that may be a stain in it? How shall she rise up in Judgment against the loose
careless, and negligent Christian, that does not through the Spirit mortify the
deeds of the body, that does not wash himself continually in the tears of
repentance and beg the daily imputation of Christ's righteousness to cover his
new appearing nakedness? That in his converse with the World, does not set a
strict watch over his heart, at the doors of his lips upon all his converse
with men, left he should receive any impression from the dirty World, in which
he lives, which may be a blot upon his beauty, in the Eyes of an holy God or in
the Eyes of holy men. But I have spoken enough to this Proposition raised from
the compellation, O thou fairest amongst women.

Sermon XLV.
Cant. 1. 8. If thou know not (O thou fairest amongst Women) Go thy way
forth by the footsteps of the Flock, and feed thy Kids by the Shepherds Tents.

MY business in my last exercise was to show you the nature of her beauty, whom
the blessed lover here calls the fairest amongst Women. I shall at this time
show you a Spot in her beauty from the Supposition in the Text, If thou know
not. It is true that Suppositions neither in holy Writ, nor in our Idiom, do
not always contain positions of undoubted truth. Sometimes things that are
impossible, or absurd, and false, are supposed in order to the forming of a
true conclusion. But in the Text it is certain that it does. Our Lord in saying
If thou know not, Supposes, that the Spouse might not know, and therefore
he directs her in the latter part of the Text. It is certain, that the term
know in Scripture does not always signify the comprehending the thing spoken
of in our understanding, it sometimes signifies to approve, sometimes, to
attend to what we know, sometimes to Experience. I take here the first and most
natural signification of the term to be the Sense. If If thou know not, that
is, if thou be ignorant. If thou be at a loss. At a loss for what? I told
you that to perfect the Sense we must supply something from the foregoing verse
from the matter of the Spouses Petition. She had desired him to tell her where
he fed his flock, where he made them to rest at noon. Where she might have the
best, freest, and least interrupted fellowship and communion with him,
especially in a time of great distress, and affliction. To this he answers, O
thou fairest amongst Women? If thou know not (that is) if thou know not
where I feed my flocks, nor where I make them to rest at noon. Go thy way, etc.
The words might lead me to a more general discourse of the imperfection of a
believers state in this life, Or to a more particular discourse concerning
those grains of ignorance which may be allowed a gracious Soul. But as the
first is too general, so the latter is too hard a task until the world, be
better agreed then it yet is, about the number of fundamental truths, necessary
to be known, and believed in order to Eternal life, and Salvation. Besides I
think my Text considered as an answer to the preceding petition, guides me to
another thing. The Spouses request was, to be instructed how she might enjoy, a
full and free communion with her Lord especially in a time of trial and
distress with reference to this petition; her Lord answers her, If thou
know not; Supposing she might as to this at some times be ignorant, and at a
loss; The Proposition is plain:

Prop. That even the best of Gods People (the fairest amongst Women) may
sometimes be at a great loss where, and how to maintain their desired communion
with Christ.

I shall open the Proposition in three conclusions. Then confirm and apply it.

1. The Souls communion with Christ lies in their reciprocal communications of
themselves each to other. All communion is made up of a mutual communication of
two or more Persons. I have discoursed the nature of communion largely in some
of my former discourses and therefore shall say little of it now. Only I say
all communion lies in a mutual and reciprocal communication. Thus two friends
have communion each with other by frequent meetings together, mutual
discourses, and communications of the Secrets of each others hearts, one to
another. The Subjects in this communion are Souls clothed with bodies, and
their communion is bodily. But now the Soul considered with Christ, as its
correlate in this communion, are Spirits, and their communion is more
Spiritual. The Soul performs its part in it by the secret exercise of the
powers God has given it upon Christ as the object. By Spiritual Meditations,
the exercise of faith, love, hope, desire, joy and delight, etc. By giving up
its will to his will, assenting to what he dictateth in his word, consenting to
what he there commands, etc. Christ communicates himself to the Soul by the
secret influences of his Spirit, opening and inlightening the understanding,
bowing, and inclining the will, influencing the affections, convincing,
strengthening, quickening, comforting the Soul. Indeed there is a more external
communion with God, but separated from this it signifies nothing to the Souls
advantage; so we are said to have communion with God, in reading, and hearing
his word, praying, receiving the Sacraments, the Soul has in these no further
fellowship and communion with God, then it in them exercises these more inward
powers in more external acts by the advantage of the bodily members; so far as
it pours out itself to God, in prayer by the words of the lips, or opens its
heart to God in hearing the word, receives it with faith and love, and
meekness, etc. So far and no further, has the Soul in these duties any
communion with God. Nor does God communicate himself to the Soul that is not
made to believe and obey what it hears further then to let it know his will
with the advantage of such arguments as his Ministers are enabled to use by
virtue of those gifts which he has given them to fit them for their
ministration.

2. There can be no union between Christ, and that Soul, with whom Christ has
not a constant communion, communion is the Daughter of union, according to the
nature of the union. Wherever communion wholly cease, the union is dissolved.
Indeed where the communion is voluntary (not from a natural cause) there may be
great differences in the degrees of it, but wholly interrupted it cannot be;
hence God and Christ have a constant communion with the believing Soul, this is
by the Spirit of God given to them, and dwelling, and working in them, and the
seed of God abiding in them. Our union with Christ is preserved by the same
means by which it was at first made, which was by Gods first communication of
his power and goodness to the Soul, and the Souls communication of itself by
faith to him. Thus the Union was first made between God, and the Soul, thus it
is, and must be maintained, and upheld. The reason why we say the Soul once in
a state of grace cannot fall from it, either finally, or totally, is not from
the ability, and certainty of their own wills, however renewed, and sanctified,
but from the more constant, and certain influences of the Spirit of Grace,
which is given to the Soul, dwells in it, and works in it; Christ has not
only promised to come to them that love him, and keep his Commandments, but to
make his abode with him, hence the union between Christ, and the Soul, is not
only compared to the moral union between the Husband and Wife, Ephesians. 5. 30. but
to the natural union between the Vine and the Branches, John 15. 1. betwixt
which (while they remain united) there is a constant communication, and in very
deed did not the Soul of a believer daily receive divine influences and
communications, it must wither, and die as naturally, as the Branch does, when
the union is broken betwixt it and the Vine, and this our Savior teaches us,
John 15. 4. As the Branch cannot bring forth fruit, unless it abides in the
Vine, so no more can you, except you abide in me.

3. Although the Souls communion with Christ can never be wholly interrupted,
and broken, yet it may be more of less, and sometimes indiscerned by the Soul.
I say it may be more or less. God may more, or less communicate himself to the
Soul, as to his influences of strengthening, quickening, comforting grace, and
the Soul that moves from these principles, may be able, more or less to
communicate itself to God in the exercises of meditation, faith, joy, and
delight in God. Nay, sometimes Gods influences may be so secret, and
indiscernable, that the Soul may cry out as one forsaken of God, and a stranger
to him. This has so plentiful an evidence in Holy Writ, as the truth of it
cannot be disputed. We find David, Psalm. 22. 1. crying out, My God! my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words
of my roaring, and the Psalmist, Psalm. 77 3. I remembered God, and was troubled.
v. 4. -- I am so troubled, that I cannot speak. v. 7. Will the Lord cast off
for ever? And will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever?
Does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has he
in anger shut up his tender mercies? There are many instances of this nature in
the Psalms, we have an instance in this Song, Cant. 5. 1, 2. By night upon my
Bed, I sought him whom my Soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not. v. 2.
I will rise now, and go about the City, in the streets, and in the broad
places, I will seek him whom my Soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not.
v. 3. The Watchmen that go about the City, found me, to whom I said, saw ye him
whom my Soul loves. So Cant. 5. 5. I rose up to open to my Beloved, and my
Hands dropped with Myrrh, and my Fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh upon the
Handles of the lock, I opened to my Beloved, but he had withdrawn himself, and
was gone, my Soul failed when he spoke, I sought him, but I could not find him,
I called him, but he gave me no answer. What do all these metaphorical
expressions purport? but this, that there are times when the Soul finds a
difficulty to maintain, or discern its communion with God.

Sometimes God does not as at other times breath upon, and communicate himself
to the Souls, even of the best of his people, the faileur seems to be on Gods
part, for some just cause, the Soul finds some freedom to impart, and
communicate its self to God, but finds not Gods assistances, influences, and
communications of himself to it, as it desires, and as it has experienced
from God at other times; this looks like the case of the Spouse in those two
places of this Song before mentioned.

Sometimes again the Soul easily discerns the faileur in itself, it cannot
meditate upon God. It remembers God, and is troubled, it cannot pray with any
fervor, nor exercise faith with any boldness; this seems to be the case of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 77. That the thing is so evident, let me therefore rather spend
time to search out the reasons of such a dispensation on Gods part, and
affliction on ours.

1. Oh Gods part we usually call such a dispensation a desertion, so as the
cause of it is the withdrawing of some divine influences from the Soul. It was
truly said of Augustine, Deus non deserit etiamsi deserere videatur. Though God
seems to forsake, yet he never wholly forsakes any Soul to whom he is
united, it is the withdrawing only of some sensible manifestations of his love.
All divine desertions are either founded in Divine Justice, or in the Divine
Wisdom, so as the account which can be given of any such dispensation on Gods
part, must fall under one of those two heads.

1. When it is founded in Justice, it always is for the punishment of sin. For
though God upon the Covenant of Grace has reserved no liberty to himself
eternally to forsake his people, no nor yet totally, yet he has reserved to
himself a liberty for temporary afflictions of them; you have (as to this
particular) a fair copy of the Covenant of grace, Psalm. 89. 26. 27, etc. The
Covenant of Grace was made with Christ from Eternity, the tenor of it was
revealed variously, to Adam upon the Fall, to Noah, to Abraham, to David; in
that Psalm you have the revelation of it to David, v. 20. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26. He shall cry unto me; thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my
Salvation. Also I will make him my first born, higher then the Kings of the
Earth. v. 28. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my Covenant shall
stand fast with him. His Seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his
Throne as the days of Heaven. As this Covenant was made with Abraham and his
Seed, I am thy God, and the God of thy Seed, Genesis 17. So in the further
revelation of it to David, it is declared to relate to him and his Seed. Now
follows v. 30. If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments,
if they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments: That is, if they sin
against me, (for all those phrases do but express sin) then v. 32. Will I visit
their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless
my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness
to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my lips. God you see has reserved to himself upon his Covenant of Grace with
his People, a liberty to visit their transgression with the Rod; and their
iniquity with stripes, but no liberty utterlyto take away his loving kindness
from them: Afflictions (which are there called a visitation with rods and
stripes) either respect the outward, or the inward man: Those which relate to
the outward man, are diseases, pains, persecutions, etc. Those which relate to
the inward man, are desertions, and temptations, which God permits, though
himself moves none to Evil. Desertions are either total, or partial; as to the
former God has foreclosed himself by the Covenant of Grace, in which he has
said, He will never leave his People, nor forsake them. His loving kindness he
will not utterly take from them, nor suffer his faithfulness to sail, Psalm. 89.
33. Partial desertions therefore are the only rod, the only stripes which God
has reserved to punish his people with (as to their inward man) who break his
Statutes, and keep not his Commandments, these must be the withdrawings of some
manifestations of his love, which are promised to those who love him, and keep
his Commandments. Hence it is, that as Sampson found the continuing influence
of God upon him (as to his bodily strength) while he kept his vow and covenant
with God as a Nazarite, yet when he had betrayed himself to Dalilah, and she
had shaved off his locks, he discerned that God was departed from him, and he
had not strength to do, as at other times, whatever he resolved: so when the
Soul that found in itself a strength before sufficient to grapple with its
temptations, and to perform the several duties and operations of a Spiritual
life, has suffered itself to be overcome with motions; and temptations to sin,
it finds itself weak, falls before a temptation, fails in its Spiritual duties,
it cannot believe, hope, meditate, rejoice, and delight in God, etc. Thus it
was with Peter, that had faith enough to walk upon the Sea at Christ's command,
when he had sinned by too much confidence in himself, he falls by the hand of a
silly Damsel in the High Priests Hall, hence it is oft-times, that the
liveliness, and cheerfulness of the Soul in its conversation also fails, and it
is at a loss where to find its beloved, and how to enjoy its desired communion
with him.

2. Sometimes these dispensations are not so much founded in the Divine
Justice, and intended as the punishment of guilt in the Soul, as in the Divine
Wisdom designing to prove, and to try his People, and to make them to seek more
after him. Job was thus tried. Though Job doubtless had guilt enough of sin to
have justified God in such providence, yet God himself says of him, Job 2. 3.
That there was none like him in the Earth; that he was a perfect, and an
upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil, yet had he not been under
some divine desertion, and withdrawings of grace, as well as more external
Trials, he had never fallen into those extravagant passions in which you find
him, chapter 3, etc.

3. On our part this loss and ignorance happens diverse ways. I shall instance
in some more principal causes.

1. The prevailing of sin and corruption in the Soul. The guile of sin always
causes weakness and blindness. How weak is thine heart, says the Lord, seeing
thou do all these things, Zech. 16 30. Weakness is the cause of sin, and it
is the effe ct of sin, it argues weakness in a Soul to do those things which
God has forbidden, and which will certainly end in the harm of the Soul. It is
a weak thing wilfully to sin against God, and weakness is also the effect of
sin, this is caused from the sour reflections, and reverberations of
conscience, when a man would medirate on God, believe, and hope, joy, rejoice,
and delight in God, conscience throws his sin in his face, and brings his
iniquity to remembrance, he remembers God, and is troubled, he cannot tell how
to believe, how to hope, how to joy, and rejoice in God, whom he now looks
upon as angry with him; for the proof of this (though I might fetch enough from
David's Poenitential Psalms) yet I need no more then the experience of every
good Christian, who keeps any watch upon his own heart and ways. I appeal to
any of your Souls, when you are conscious of any wilful slips, and failings in
your life, can you remember, and think of God as at other times? Can you
believe, and hope in his mercy; Can you pray with that boldness, and courage,
and confidence, does not shame cover your faces, so as you know not how to look
upward?

2. Diabolical suggestions are another cause; what strange and horrid
impressions do the best of Gods people find? some indeed of more strength, and
longer continuance then others, but there is scarce any who does not find them
at some times, and in some degree, or other, and although if they be mere
impressions, not consented to by the Soul, but abhorred by it, they are not the
Souls guilt, yet they must be the Souls disturbance, so as under them the Soul
will not know how to uphold, and maintain a communion with God as at other
times, but its communion is broken, and interrupted, and imperfect; though the
Devil cannot stain the Soul without its own concurrence, yet he can trouble the
Soul, if God permits him, by his mere suggestions, and impressions, and
therefore we had need pray every day, Lead us not into temptation. The Devil in
this case can do as much to a Soul, as a clamorous railing fellow can do to
disturb our communion with our friends, though we hearken not much to him, and
chide him away, yet he can make a noise, and disturb our communion.

3. Severe outward afflictions may be a cause. Though afflictions be not
always indications of Divine Wrath, (for the Apostle tells us, that whom he
loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every Child whom he receives) yet
oftentimes they are so, and whether Gods end be to punish sin, or no, yet there
is no Soul but is conscious of so much daily guilt, as gives him cause to
suspect, they are the punishments of some guilt; and I told you before how
apprehensions of guilt, very ordinarily make the Soul at a loss how to uphold,
and maintain its wonted communion with God. Besides afflictions usually excite
passions, particularly those of fear and sorrow; Both opposite to the exercises
of faith and joy, and delight in God, both distracting the Soul in the sweet
meditations of God. To this may be added, that the Soul in afflictions, as it
stands in more need of the divine presence, and influence, so it is prone to
expect more, or to think it has nothing. Neither can the Soul under the
roilings, and prevailings of passion so well discern Christ's communications of
himself unto it; and besides, they hinder the Soul in its motions, and
communications of it self to Christ. I am so troubled (says the Psalmist) that
I cannot Speak. The Soul is so troubled, that it cannot believe, it cannot
hope, it cannot Pray, etc.

4. The last cause that I shall assign is distractions, caused either from
worldly cares and businesses, or from some false guides. A Soul overwhelmed
with businesses and cares of the World, will many times find it self at a loss
how to maintain its communion with God, there is such an opposition betwixt a
communion with God, and the World, the first being wholly a Spiritual thing,
the other wholly of the Earth, earthly, that a man overwhelmed in the World
will find the maintaining of this communion difficult, and be more at a loss to
it, then another man more free from these encumbrances. Besides, in the World
Christians are subject to distractions from false guides; one saying lo Christ
is here; another saying, lo he is there; one telling us that the way to have
communion with Christ is to cast off duties, and ordinances; another
prescribing an attendance upon them as the only means of such communion: One
telling them that there is no other communion with Christ then with Christ
mystical, having and keeping in the communion of his Church, whereas many may
do so (if we mean the visible Church) that have no communion with Christ at
all. Upon Christ's floor there is Chaff as well as Wheat, which when Christ
comes with his fan thoroughly to purge his floor, shall be cast into
unquenchable fire; tares, as well as wheat, which must grow together until the
Harvest, but then the Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom, all things that offend, and them which do iniquity,
and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, where shall be wailing, and
gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 13. 40, 41, 42. Some telling them, that there is no
communion with Christ, but by joining with the Prayers of the Church, and
receiving the Sacrament with the Church, as if an external communion with
Christ, (which Judas a Son of perdition had) were all, that men and women need
look after. These different notions, and instructions sometimes puzzle the
minds of Gods own People and make them to be at a great loss. I now come to the
Application.

Use 1.
This in the first Place lets us see what a perpetual use, and need there will
be of an able standing Gospel Ministry and the goodness of God, in providing
such an ordinance for his Church. The interest of Souls lies in two things. 1.
In an union with Christ, and reconciliation to God. 2. In a fellowship and
communion with him. The Ministry of the Gospel is, and will be useful to the
end of the World on both these accounts. 1. For procuring, and promoving Souls
reconciliation to God, and union with Christ, 2, Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us we pray you in
Christ's stead be you reconciled to God. So long as there are any sinners in the
World, any Souls in such a state, as living and dying in it, they cannot be
saved: So long will be need of Gospel Ministers and such too as are both able,
and faithful. There are some in the World that think a Conversion to an
opinion, from Paganism to the outward profession of Christ, is all the
Conversion necessary, and Baptism all the regeneration necessary (according to
whose Doctrine all Drunkards, Whoremongers, Men-stealers, Liars, Thieves,
Extortioners, Covetous Persons, Sorcerers, if Baptized must be saved, (directly
contrary, to what the Apostle affirms) these indeed may think the Ministry of
the Gospel needless, Preaching needless amongst Christians, and only of use
amongst Heathens or count no more need of Ministers, then of Philosophers from
Athens, to read men lectures of a good life, and any Ministers, any kind of
Preaching will serve the turn; A lecture out of Aristotle or Plato is as good a
Sermon as they see any need of But those who will believe what Paul says, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. That there are multitudes amongst Baptized Persons, not
reconciled to God, and who shall never come into Heaven, which is confirmed
also by Saint John, Rev. 21. 8. They must see a need of this Ordinance, and
acknowledge the great mercy in this gift to the Church. 2. Nay indeed this
Doctrine may convince you, That if all within the Church, were Christians, not
in name only but indeed, washed with the blood of Christ, Justified and
Sanctified, yet there would be need of such an Ordinance. For the best of
Christians are often times at loss how to uphold, and maintain their communion
with Christ. Here now lie th the work of the Ministry of the Gospel, as the
hand in the way to direct Christians which way to go, that they may come to the
journies end which they aim at, the end of their hopes, and the Salvation of
their Souls. This was the end of Christ's institution of them, Ephesians. 4. 12. For
the perfecting of the Saints -- for the edifying the body of Christ. If there
be such a thing as Christians fellowship and communion with Christ, if they may
be, and often are at loss, how to maintain this communion, they had need of
some to be helpers of their faith, and of their joy. Which is the Notion of
Ministers given by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 14. Yea and they had need be able
Ministers too. How various are the cases of Christians, how different one from
another? This work is to be done publicly which indeed serves for the most of
Christians, and privately also, for those who cannot receive Satisfaction from
public instructions. Alas who is sufficient for these things? and how slighty
a business is ordinarily made of the greatest work, the most weighty employment
under Heaven? How many watchmen are there that like those mentioned in the 3d
Chapter of this Song? When the Spouse of Christ comes to them complaining, as
v. 6. That her beloved has withdrawn himself, and is gone, when their Souls
fail, when they come and tell them, that they have sought their beloved, and
cannot find him, they have called, but he has given them no answer, instead of
relieving of them, they smite them, and wound them, and take away their vails
from them, they wound them with cruel and envenomed Words, mock and jeer, and
revile them, and know not how to speak a word to the weary, (indeed not
understanding what a wearied Soul means) the most they are able to say is, what
is thy beloved more then another beloved? The Lord pity his flock and give
them Pastors according to his own heart, who can feed them with wisdom, and
understanding, and will be faithful in doing of it, men to whom the Lord God
has given the tongue of the learned, that they may speak a Word in season to
those that are weary, as he promised, Isaiah. 50. 4. There are no more
pestilent enemies to the People of God, then those that would have the flock of
Christ, without Shepherds, or (which it may be is worse) Supplied with Idol
Shepherds (as the Prophet calls them, Zech. 11. 17. And indeed are like Idols
that have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not, the name of Shepherds, but
nothing of the skill and faithfulness required in such a place.

Use 2.
This Notion (Secondly) may give some relief to Souls, whose condition this may
be. Here may be some before the Lord this day, who are crying out, where is my
God become? Lord when will thou strengthen me? Quicken me? Comfort me? I
confess the case of these Christians is sad, communion with Christ is the life
of a good Christians life. All the comfort, and Satisfaction of his life is
bound up in this one thing, let him want this he wants all, if he be at a loss
as to this, he is quite lost; this is that which differenceth the true Child of
God from an Hypocrite; the profane man lives without a God in the World, all
talk of communion with God is but canting, the thing it self a Chimera. The
Hypocrites ends cannot be obtained by this course of life he takes up with
mere external acts of communion, never regarding whether he has any communion
with God, in, and by those acts, he can live without any presence of God,
without any influence of God upon his Soul: A Child of God cannot, if he
wants communion with God, he calls all into question, doubts of his union,
and whether he has not been all this while mistaken, whether his Soul be yet
actually reconciled, and at Peace with God. All that can be said to relieve the
Child of God under this complaint, to ease him under this burden, is this; That
this misery which befalls him, is but what is common to the very best of men,
it is a privilege reserved for the Saints in glory, to live in a not
interrupted communion with God. To be ever with the Lord, beholding his face,
to live in the sense of such a constant communion with Christ as does afford
the Soul a perfect Satisfaction. The sublunary Saint is often crying out, Tell
me, O thou whom my Soul loves, where tho u feedest. This dispensation indeed
will speak thee sensibly miserable, and sad, but it will not speak thee to have
no relation to Christ.

Use 3.
I shall shut up this discourse with a Word or two of exhortation, Pleading
with you to do what in you lies to avoid such a state, and to keep your selves
within the knowledge, where Christ feeds, where he makes his flocks to rest at
noon, 1. Consider first, That as the Spiritual life of any Soul lies in its
union, and communion with Christ: So the comfort of his life lies in his sense
of this communion and knowledge, how at all times, and in all conditions to
Support, and to maintain it. Our Savior tells us that, As the branch cannot
bring forth fruit unless it abide in the Vine, so neither can we except we
abide in him, John. 15. 4. That Soul which has no communion with Christ is as
certainly dead, as the body is that has no communion with the head, or the
branch that has no communion with the stock. Now it is true, Sense is not
necessary to Spiritual life. We live (says the Apostle) by faith, not by
sight. But the comfort of the Soul does depend upon sense and knowledge, it is
true as to a Christians comfort, not to live, and not to know that we live, are
much the same thing, as to its happiness, it is not; but I say as to his
comfort it is; What quiet can a Christian have in his breast, what Peace in his
conscience? What joy in the Holy Ghost, that feels no intercourses, is
sensible of no inward communion betwixt his Soul and Christ?

2. Hence consider Secondly, That to the waky Christian there is no greater
misery upon the Earth then what arises from his apprehensions of his having no
communion with Christ. All the enjoyments of the World will be nothing of
Satisfaction to such a Soul, it is an evil -- Nullis medicabilis herbis. I say
with a waky soul it will be thus; some Souls are in a profound sleep, they
never think of Eternity, never consider their latter end, they are ignorant,
and know not the relation that Christ has to a State of Eternal happiness,
that as Eternal life is the gift of God, so it is through Christ, for that the
Father has given into his hands the Power of Eternal life, and he gives it to
whomsoever he pleases. Now these Souls though they have no fellowship, no
communion at all, yet they have no misery, no grief from it. But I say to the
Soul that is awake, to consider the Grave, the Eternity to which he is
hastening, it is the greatest burden imaginable to lie under apprehensions, that
his fellowship is not with the Father, and with the Son Jesus Christ.

3. Thirdly, consider that of all evils, those lie heaviest, and most sadly
upon the Soul, concerning which the man or woman is conscious, that he himself
has been accessory to them, and a cause of them. Let a good Christian be at
loss for his communion with God, let the cause of it be what it will, he is sad
enough, but if his heart smites him that he himself has been the cause of it,
Oh! insupportable burden of that reflection! he cannot bear the thoughts of his
destroying his Soul by his own hands; of this you may make an easy judgment by
considering the frame of your Spirit under such accidents, though of a much
lighter nature, it is sad enough for a man to lose his estate, for a Mother to
lose her Child, but for the man to think that he lost his estate, through his
own supine negligence, or for a Mother to think she has been the death of her
Child: These are wounds healed usually with great difficulty. So for a Soul to
think it has lost its communion with its dear Lord by its own supine
negligence, or any voluntary act of its own which it might have avoided. This
makes a deep wound in the Soul. But will some say, what should, what can we do
to uphold our communion with Christ and to maintain a sense of it? Let me here
speak two words.

The first to such as have their beloved in view, and do yet enjoy desired
communion with him; 2. To such as have lost this view, in order to their
recovery of it.

To the first I say,

1. Be much with him whom your Soul loves. What the Prophet said of Gods
presence of Providence is as true concerning the presence of God in gracious
influences, 2. Chron. 15. 2. The Lord is with you while you are with him, if
you seek him, he will be found of you. Souls that are much with God seldom lose
their sight of him, ordinarily the Souls of men, and women, first withdraw the
communications of themselves unto him through levity, and wantonness, then
Christ withdraws, both in justice, to punish in them that levity, and in
wisdom to make them to seek after him, Hos. 5. 15. I will go, and return to my
place, until they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face, in their
affliction they will seek me early. That Soul is seldom or never at a loss to
know where Christ feeds his flocks, that keeps a constant correspondence
with him. Be much in Prayer, especially secret Prayer, much in Heavenly
meditation, and contemplation; when the Spouse after her loss, Cant. 3. 1, 2
had found her beloved, I held him (says she) and would not let him go. How
does the Soul hold Christ so as she will not let him go, but by faith, and
constant, and frequent acts of fellowship and communion with him?

2. Secondly, Take heed of grieving the holy Spirit. It is the Apostles
Counsel, Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the holy Spirit by which you are sealed to the
day of Redemption. We maintain our fellowship with Christ by the Spirit. That
takes of Christ's and gives to us, and again it takes of ours and gives to
Christ, by the Spirit we Pray, by its assistance we exercise faith, Love, etc.
Christ by his Spirit communicates himself to us, and we by the Spirit do
communicate our Souls to him. Take heed therefore you grieve not this Spirit,
either by any presumptuous sinnings, or by quenching its motions, or resisting
its operations. Let every Knock, every motion, and impulse, every impression of
the holy Spirit be very valuable to, and regardable in the Eyes of your Souls.

3. Thirdly, Maintain in your Souls an high estimate of Jesus Christ, and the
influences of his grace. If (says Christ) any man loves me, I will come to
him, and make my abode with him, John 14. 21. The Soul that truly loves Christ
shall never be ignorant where to find him.

4. Lastly, Study holiness in all manner of conversation. The Spouse says that
he feeds among the Lillies; the Lillies are white, and fruitful Let your
apprehension of Christ's withdrawing, the communications of himself to your
Souls, be no temptation to you to withhold the communications of your selves to
him, though you may find it more hard, and difficult, and that you cannot do
your duty with so much ease, yet do it. If you cannot do what you would, yet do
what you can, if (as you think) you do not, you cannot overtake God, yet let
your Souls press hard after him.

But what shall be said to that Soul that is at loss and in such a state as
that it does not know where its Beloved feeds, where he makes his flocks to
rest at Noon?

1. Let such Souls look for him in the promise, where it wants the sight of him
in his Providence. There David found him, when he cried out, Remember thy
Word, in which thou have caused me to hope. The promises are Christ's place,
when he returns from a Soul he retreateth no further. All the punishment that
our tender Lord puts his Spouse to suffer is to live by faith, not by sight.
Christ in his Providence may appear to a Soul yea and nay, sometimes a friend
sometimes an Enemy. But in his promises he is always yea and Amen the true and
faithful one. I have already showed you that the Promises are those green
pastures were Christ feeds his flocks in the Noon of trials and afflictions.

2. Look for him in supporting influences, when you cannot see him in
comforting and quickening influences. Christ communicates himself variously to
the Souls of his People, not always in the same methods or influences, see if
thou do not feel his strength, when thou do not find his consolatory
manifestations; you have heard that the communion of the believing Soul with
Christ never cease, it is only our sense that fails, or some particular
Manifestations or the degrees of them may abate. We ought therefore to look
narrowly to see if we cannot find any influences of Christ upon our Souls, when
it may be we cannot discern those which our Eye is most upon.

3. Thirdly, Be as free as you can in your part of this communion, when you
cannot discern your Lord so free in his part. You may rest upon this; That
Christ will never be in your debt, nor be long wanting in his communications of
his grace to that Soul that is ready to communicate it self unto him. It may be
I or another Soul may not see, and discern it, but Christ is never behind hand
with the Soul as to acts of love. Nay we could not be free in communication of
our Souls to him, without his first influencing our Souls with strength to such
a liberty.

4. Lastly take the advice of your beloved in the text. Go your way by the
footsteps of the flock: And feed your kids by the Shepherds tents. But that
leads me to the last part of the Text, which I called the Direction in answer
to the petition. Of that (if God please) in my next exercise.

Sermon XLVI.
Cant. 1. 8. If thou know not (O thou fairest amongst Women) Go thy way
forth by the footsteps of the Flock, and feed thy Kids by the Shepher ds Tents.

I am now come to the last part of the Text; The Beloved's Direction, What to
do, that she might find where her beloved fed his flocks, where he made them to
rest at Noon. It is expressed in these words, Go thy way forth by the footsteps
of the flock, and seed thy kids by the Shepherds tents. By the flocks when I
opened the words more largely, I told you was meant, the Church, the People of
God, often in Scripture compared to a flock, I will gather the remnant of the
flock, Jer. 23. 2. The Lord has visited his flock, Zech. 10. 3. Fear not
little flock it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom, Luke. 12. 32. Feed
the flock of God, 1 Pet. 5, 2. So in many other Texts. The word in the Hebrew
(...), indifferently signifies any company of lesser Cattle, whether Sheep, or
Goats, though it be most ordinarily applied to sheep, as in 1 Samuel 15. 2. Jer,
50. 6. Jer. 31. 19, etc. The People of God are ordinarily the lesser sort of
men, and women in the world. Not many noble, not many wise, but the poor of the
World has the Lord Chosen. The great ones of the World for the most part are
of the Herd, not of the flock.

1 A flock is a term of multitude. Gods People are not the greatest number of
the World, but yet they are a great number, God in the worst times (which were
those of Ahab had 7000 in Israel who had not bowed the knee to Baal, nor kissed
him, with their lips. St. John saw 144000 sealed, Rev. 7. 4. There were two
great breeders of Gods ancient Flock. Leah, and Rachel, these two did build up
the house of God, from these came threescore and ten Souls whom God sent to
pasture in Egypt, there they were killed up apace, yet they multiplied to an
exceeding great number; from thence they were led like a Flock through the
Wilderness by the conduct of Moses, and Aaron; in Canaan they also increased,
till for their sins God let in Wolves upon them to destroy them. It is true all
were not Israel, that were of Israel, but yet they all constituted the visible
Church of the Jews, and doubtless there were a great number of them who were of
the invisible Church, of that little Flock to whom it was the Fathers will to
give a Kingdom. In Christ's time, the flock of God began to be gathered together
in one, and soon after his ascension into Heaven, those other sheep, mentioned,
John 10. who were not of the Jewish fold began to be added, by virtue of his
commission granted to 12 principal Shepherds, under the great Shepherd, and
multitudes were added to this flock; since that time the wild beasts of the
field, and forest, have broken in upon it, seeding in several Countries and
places; But yet they are many.

2. A flock is a term of unity. The Church of Christ is many, yet but one body,
united by one common faith, and under on head, All the true Members of it, have
one Shepherd, one law, and rule. The true Church therefore is doubtless the
flock which is here mentioned.

By the footsteps of the flock.] The footsteps you all know is the Print of the
feet. The course of boliness is in Scripture called, The way of the Righteous.
The footsteps of the flock, can signify nothing but the Examples of the holy
Servants of God which have gone before us, in the way of holiness.

And feed thy Kids by the Shepherds tents.] Kids as you know are young Goats.
Once in Scripture Goats are put in opposition to sheep, Math. 25. to signify
the wicked of the Earth, which has given Interpreters occasion to interpret
this phrase [thy filt by and unclean thoughts.] But it is observable that
though Goats be a term once used in Scripture in that sense, yet Goats are not
always mentioned in holy writ in an ill^sense. In this very Song the Spouses
hair is compared to a flock of Goats, Chapter 4. v. 1. The Goat to the Jews was not
an unclean beast, the hair of it was much used about the Tabernacle, and the
body of it was often used in Sacrifice. Their interpretation therefore is
doubtless to be preferred, who interpret it, 1. Either of the weak Members of
Christ, o^ 2. of the infirm faculties of the Soul.

By the Shepherds tents.] It is all along a Metaphor, The flock is the Church.
The true Sheep of this Flock are those who hear the voice of Christ, and follow
him, as himself tells us, My Sheep hear my voice, and follow me. The Principal
Shepherd is Christ, John. 20. 1, I am the true Shepherd. He administreth this
great charge committed to him by his Father by inferior Shepherds. He led his
ancient People the Jews like a Flock by the hands of Moses and Aaron, and
afterward made use of several Shepherds to feed them. Christ committed his
Flock to the 12 Apostles, with power to ordain Pastors and Teachers. The
Shepherds tents signify the places, where they feed the Flock of Christ.
Shepherds in those countries had no fixed houses, but moveable tents which they
carried about with them, and pitched now here, now there, as was most
convenient for the feeding of their Flocks. If any ask me, where we shall find
these footsteps of the Flook? I answer in the Word of God, we have no other
infallible record of them that I know, so that by the footsteps of the Flock,
and the Shepherds tents, two things are clearly to be understood. 1. The
Examples of Gods Saints recorded in Scripture. 2. The Ordinances of God
dispensed by his faithful Ministers.

Hither does Christ send his Spouse, inquiring where he fed, where he made his
Flocks to rest at Noon You see whither my Text would lead me, viz. To a
discourse concerning the Word of God ^s the Rule of Christians, the certain
footsteps of the Flock are to be found there. 2. To a discourse concerning our
duty to imitate the Saints of God. Something I must touch upon as to both
these, but I shall discourse neither of them in their latitude, having fully
done it lately in set Discourses upon those Arguments; I shall now speak to
neither of them further than they relate to the direction of the Text: Being
both the surest compass for a Christian when he is at loss, to direct his
course by, when he is in distress, and knows not what to do.

Hence the Doctrine is;

Prop. The surest way for Christians to support and maintain their communion
with Christ, under any doubts or dark dispensations of God to them, is for them
to keep to the examples of the Saints of God under such dispensations, and to
keep themselves close to Divine Institutions.

The Proposition you see is concerning Christians enjoying and upholding their
communion with Christ in a day of darkest dispensations, in the Noon of Trials
and Afflictions. 2. It directs a double means in order to this end. 1. A
keeping to the footsteps of the Flock. 2. Feeding by the Shepherds Tents. I
shall speak to this by way of Explication, Confirmation, and Application. By
way of Explication; the only Question is, What Flock, what Shepherds are here
spoken of?

1. It must be Christ's Flock; that is plain. There are other Flocks in the
World, but the Text is doubtless to be understood of the Flock of Christ, which
I before showed you was the Church of Christ.

2. I think it reasonable also to determine, That that Flock is here meant, for
whose feet we have the best assurance that they were guided and upheld by the
unerring Spirit of God. The Papists call to us for this, to keep to the
footsteps of the Flock: But when we come to ask them where that Flock is, they
will tell us, it is at Rome, where it has been kept and fed by a lineal
Succession of Bishops from the Apostles times. The name of the Church of Christ
is an honorable name; this makes every Party cry out (as the Jews of old) The
Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord are we. There is scarce any company
of Heretics and Sectaries, but lays claim to this name. Neither can this Text
be understood of all those that are within the Pale of the Visible Church,
which has in it bad as well as good, but of that little Flock only, who hear
Christ, and follow him, and those to whom it is our heavenly Father's will to
give a Kingdom, the footsteps of those who have made the Word a light to their
seet, and a lamp to their paths; for none can be so absurd as to think, that
Christ here directs his Spouse to go her way by the footsteps of those who
walk contrary to the will of his Father. Now, where shall we find, where can we
find those of whom we are sure they were of this little Flock? or, where shall
we find the certain practice of such, but in the Records of holy Writ? For the
present Church of Rome, those that know the second Commandment, or any of the
Revelations of the Divine Will against Idolatry, must know this Flock is not to
be found there. For the Primitive Church, if they mean the Apostolic Church,
the Church in their Age, whose Story we have Recorded in the Acts of the
Apostles, we agree with them, that this is the Flock whose footsteps we are to
follow, yet no further than they followed Christ. Be you followers of me (says
the Apostle) as I am of Christ; but for the following Church after their Age,
we are so much at loss to know what they did, Antichrist has so trodden out
their footsteps, so purged and corrupted all Writings that should give us any
true account of what the Church did, that we can by no means allow the Record
of their practice to be a sufficient Guide to us. We have no sufficient
Evidence of the prints of their feet, in matters wherein the Eternal Salvation
of our Souls are concerned. We have a more sure word of Prophecy, and we are
sure we are not to follow them in any thing wherein they did not follow Christ.
We conclude then as to this matter, that Christ in these words intended to give
his Spouse a certain Rule, to follow the steps of those whom they might be sure
it was Christ's Flock, and whose footsteps might be seen. This Flock can be
only that, the print of whose feet we have in the unerring Word of God. We
believe that in all Ages of the World Christ has had a Flock, a number that
have heard his voice, and followed him, to whom he has given, and will give
Eternal Life, but they have been under various dispensations, sometimes more,
and sometimes less perspicuous to the World. We believe that it has been the
design of Rome ever since the Mystery of Iniquity began to work in it, to blot
out the prints of the feet of the Flock of Christ in former times; we therefore
reasonably in pursuit of this Direction of Christ's, overlook the Churches of
this, and former Ages. The practice of those of Rome in this and late ages we
know to be directly contrary to the Word of God. The practice of the Primitive
Church in former ages we are uncertain of, further then what is contained in
holy writ, we know that it has been the policy of the Papists, to blot out all
the records of those times which might make against them, any thing that might
show us that the Doctrine, Worship and Discipline of the Church in those ages
was different from their present practices, we know that the records of the
Primitive Churches practice (excepting that in the Apostles time recorded in
Scripture) have been mostly in their hands and they have blotted out, and put
in what they pleased, to justify their Idolatry and Superstitions, we therefore
call to the Law and to the Testimony; to the holy Scriptures; we are sure they
have not been kept in their hands only, we believe them the pure Word of God.
We say there is no other certain rule, no other unquestionable record of the
footsteps of the flock: We know they are able to make the man of God wise to
salvation. thoroughly furnished to every good work. All Protestants acknowledge
them a perfect rule as to matter of Doctrine, we say they also are so as to
Worship and Discipline, and as to all our conversation. We know the practice of
the Saints, and Servants of God in holy Writ (not reproved by it) are the
footsteps of Christ's flock, for others we know not, we are sure if they were
contrary to the footsteps of the Servants of God in holy Writ, they are no
footsteps of the flock of Christ, which hears his voice, and owneth that only,
and will not follow strangers.

2. As to the Shepherds mentioned in the Text, We know Christ is the true
Shepherd, the chief Shepherd. He feeds his Flock like a Shepherd. He
ascending up into Heaven, has betrusted his Flock to Pastors and Teachers, to
Under-Shepherds, we know that if these be Christ's Shepherds, they must take,
and follow Christ's directions, and they are no further Shepherds then they do
so. He has indeed betrusted to some his Gospel, the Ministration both of the
Doctrine, and the Ordinances of the Gospel; As they are to publish no other
Doctrine, so they are to prescribe no other Rules of life, either for the
Worship of God, or government of the Church, they have no legislative power in
the Church committed to them; only an executive power, to execute those Laws,
those Ordinances, which Christ the Supreme Shepherd, and his Apostles, which
were his first Commissioners have left. This is the trust which Christ has
committed to them, in the discharge of which alone, they can be faithful, they
are not the Ministers of men, but the Ministers of Christ. By the Tents of
those Shepherds who do this all Christians are bound to ab de, and to feed
themselves, neither casting off Divine institutions, nor submitting to humane
institutions contrary to the Divine rule; and if the Divine rule be a perfect
rule, whatsoever is besides it is contrary to it, for it reproacheth it with
imperfection, or else is merely, idle, and Superfluous.

That this is the duty of Christians, will appear both from the the
consideration of the end for which God has left us the footsteps of the flock
in holy Writ, and also from comparing this with other courses.

1. Let us first consider the end for which God has lest us the footsteps of
his flock in holy Writ, and when he ascended up on high, gave gifts unto men,
and amongst others Pastors and Teachers. The footsteps of the flock of Christ
are to be found in the Word of God, you have in Scripture not only the
instructions of David, the words of the man according to Gods own heart, but
the practice of David recorded under several circumstances: Not only the
Doctrine, and instructions of the Apostles in their Sermons, and Epistles, but
the Acts of the Apostles teaching us their practice. Now though it be true,
that their examples oblige us in nothing wherein they did not follow the Lord
Jesus Christ, nor in any thing which they did in conformity to the Ceremonial
law, wherein they used a liberty (that law being dead with Christ, but through
a gracious indulgence, allowed, for a time, till the believing Jews could be
Satisfied concerning the abolition of it, in order to the gaining the Jews, and
walking toward them without offense, upon which account Paul both circumcised
Timothy and purified himself. Nor are their examples our rules, in what they
did as Apostles or as men endued with the extraordinary gifts of the Holy
Ghost, working miracles or speaking with tongues; for as we cannot do the
latter, so we want their mission and more extraordinary commission to do the
former. Hence Ministers are under no obligation to do as they did, fixing no
where, but going up and down preaching the Gospel, and settling Churches: yet
in other things, wherein they acted as Ministers of the Gospel, or private
Christians, we are bound to the imitation of them, and God has left us their
actions upon sacred record for our instruction. For whatsoever is written
aforetime is written for our learning, Romans 15. 4. The Apostle tells us, That
all Scripture is given by inspiration of God and is profitable for Doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. This is the end
for which God has given us the Scripture, and all the Scripture, 2 Timothy, 3. 16.

2. It is the most safe and certain rule. The two great things that commend a
rule given with reference to any end is the security of it, and the certainty
of it. To walk by the footsteps of Christ's flock recorded in Scripture must be
a safe rule, no man needs fear sinning against God, by obeying his Word, and
living up to the rule, direction, and prescription of it, sin must be something
contrary to the Divine Rule. In following other rules men may err, in following
of this rule they cannot err. The certainty, of a rule much commends it. If the
Trumpet give an uncertain sound who shall prepare himself for the battle? If
there be no certainty in a rule who can follow the direction of it? Let us now
compare this rule as to this case what a Christian is to do, especially in a
time of affliction and distress, to maintain and uphold his communion with
Christ.

1. Some will pretend to the Spirit as their rule. They have an anointing (they
tell us) which teaches them all things, and so pretend to follow the motions,
and impressions of the holy Spirit. But there is no certainty in this pretended
Rule for all Spirits are not of God. The Spirit has given us the Rule of the
word, for you heard before, That all Scripture is given us by divine
inspiration, and that it is able to make the man of God wise to Salvation. The
Spirit teaches nothing contrary to the Word. The Word directs us to follow the
footsteps of the Flock. There can be no certainty in pretended impressions from
the Spirit which are contrary to the Word of God, no nor any security. For all
such pretenses must Issue in the deceit of our own hearts, we following our own
lusts, and imaginations in stead of the holy Spirit, or (which is worse) the
impressions of the evil Spirit. Yet this is the rule of all Enthusiasts.

2. Others call out to us to follow the Church, the practice of the Church in
all ages. And indeed if they could make appear to us what that was, they would
say something, but what certainty can there be in this rule while they that
talk of it, can neither make that Church appear to us, nor yet what their
practice was; we know who were the Church, in the Apostles age, and we know
what their practice was, by the records of holy Writ, but who the Church were,
and what their practice was in latter ages we cannot tell, and by consequence
there is no certainty in this rule, we may follow the steps of the Synagogue of
Sat an instead of the steps of the flock of Christ.

3. The Papists call to us to follow Traditions, and indeed for the Traditions
delivered us by the Apostles we see reason to follow them, and if they could by
an unquestionable record make out any thing to us, which had been received as
an Universal Tradition of the Universal Church, we should have a great respect
and reverence for it, but for unwritten Traditions, which the Papists put into
an equal balance with the Word of God for Christians rule, being (as they
pretend) delivered as rules by the Apostles to the Church of God, as we know no
need we have of such, so we have no certainty that any such things were ever so
delivered and therefore can see no security in receiving them, or giving any
ear unto them.

4. There is a 4th sort, that in distresses are much for seeking God, and
walking according to the impressions we have upon such seeking; this practice
is founded upon an excellent bottom: 1. A Precept for the owning, and
acknowledging of God in all our ways. 2. A Promise that he will direct our
steps, Prove. 3. v. 6. Seeking of God at all times, (at such times especially)
is the great duty of Christians, and if rightly done, cannot be in vain, but
for the right performance of it, a Christian must have respect both to the
matter of his Prayer, and also to the manner of it. It is to the matter of our
Prayers only that I am here concerned to speak. As to this our rule is, that
it must be something consonant to the will of God. I mean his will revealed in
his Word. Hence it follows,

1. That when God has revealed his will in his Word for, or against a thing
which we are about to do, for us to seek God, whether we should do it or no,
forbear it or no, is to tempt and provoke God. This is like Balaams going to
inquire of God whether he should go with the Messengers of Balak, after that
God had plainly told him he should not go. We ought to acquiesce in the
determination of Gods will in his Word, whether in the Precepts or the examples
of the Servants of God recorded there, and for things forbidden to avoid them,
for things commanded to do them; here is no place for seeking God as to the
doing or forbearing; so that although for things of this nature, as to what God
has commanded us to do, we may, and ought to seek God for direction, help, and
assistance in the doing of them: And as to things forbidden we may seek God for
strength to avoid them, and all temptations to them, yet we may not seek God
whether we should do the things so commanded, and forbear the things so
forbidden yea or no. Such seeking of God is but asking leave to sin against him.

2. In particular actions as to which Gods Word has not particularly directed
us, it is our duty to seek God for direction, and having first well considered
the general rules of the Word of God, if we find the action neither commanded
nor forbidden, according to them we may, for ought I know, attend the
impressions we find upon our Spirits, after such sincere and serious seeking of
God. And take them to be the will of God concerning us as to such actions. But
this is but a digression from my subject. This is enough to show you, there is
no such security, or certainty in any direction we can have, as in following
the footsteps of the flock of Christ, the prints of whose feet we find in the
Word of God.

2. It is as reasonable that we should feed by the Shepherds Tents, that is,
attend upon Divine institutions, if we would enjoy any fellowship, and
communion with God; for it is unreasonable to expect the influences of Divine
Grace in any way, but such only as God has promised he will give them in, much
less in the neglect, or contempt of any such means as he has appointed. The
promise is, Exodus 20. 24. In all places where I record my name, I will come
unto thee, and bless thee. Our communion with God depends upon his coming to
us, and blessing us. Where God will come unto us, and bless us, there we may,
there we shall have communion with him. Now where will God come unto us, and
bless us? In all places where he records his Name to dwell; what does that
signify but in all his sacred ordinances, and institutions? Conformable to this
is his promise in the New Testament, Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are
gathered together in my name (that is, at my command, or by my order) there am
I in the midst amongst them, and to his Ministers his promise is made, Mat. 28.
19* Go you therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you always, to the end of the
world. Where can we expect communion with God, but where he has promised to be
with his People, to meet them, and to bless them?

Use 1.
Observe from hence how unreasonable they are that talk of a communion with
God, or expect any such thing, who make not the Word of God a light to their
Feet, who go not forth by the footsteps of the flock, who feed not their Souls
by the Shepherds Tents: under this condemnation fall,

1. All such who having no regard to the Word as their rule, walk according to
the imaginations of their own hearts, which you shall find to be the constant
Character of wicked Men in Scripture.

2. Such as follow the uncertain examples, and traditions of men.

3. Lastly, Such as cast off ordinances under a pretense of a more immediate
fellowship, and communion with God. There is a middle way betwixt resting in,
and taking up with mere external performances, and casting them off. It is
true, a Soul may wait upon God in ordinances, and have no communion with God in
them. Communion with God lies in more then mere lending an Ear to God, and
allowing him our bodily presence, in more then a communication of the will of
God to our external senses: but this is to be had by the Shepherds Tents, in
places where God has recorded his Name to dwell, and the performance of such
external acts, as God has required, and made his promises of that nature unto.
To look for a presence of God with us in a neglect, or contempt of these
institutions, is to look for what we have no reason to expect to find.

Use 2.
Let me only further persuade you that hear me this day, to follow the counsel
given you in the Text. To go your ways by the footsteps of Christ's flock; to
feed your Souls by his Shepherds Tents.

1. In all your actions go forth by the footsteps of the flock. Do what you
have found the Servants of God have done, whose names and practices you have
upon a sure record in Holy Writ. As it was prophesied of old, that there should
come times when many should say, Lo here is Christ, or lo there is Christ, to
amuse Souls, and make their way uncertain to them. So the times are come. when
many say, Lo here is the Church, others say, lo it is there, the Papists say it
is with them, and other parties say it is with them, in this uncertain cry we
have a certain rule. In the Holy Scripture we have a certain record of the
flock of Christ, we have certain prints of their feet, peace shall be upon
those who walk according to that rule, you may be deceived as to other scocks,
as to that you cannot be deceived. The practice of the Primitive Church not
recorded in Holy Writ, the pretended Traditions of the Primitive Church, of
which the Scripture makes no mention, are very uncertain things, the Word of
God that is a sure rule, let none leave that which is certain, for those things
that are uncertain, if you cannot find in the Holy Scriptures a sufficiency to
make you wise to Salvation, both as to what you are to do in the Worship of
God, and in the whole of your conversation, then there may be some reason for
you to hear what others say, and to listen to your own reason, but there is a
sufficieney there.

Obj.
Some will tell us, That Scripture is obscure, and who shall interpret it to us
but the Church.

Sol.
If there be any thing in Scripture necessary for us to know, that is obscure,
I am sure the practice of the Church after the Apostles times, is much more
obscure; who shall vouch the Authority of any one Book that pretends to give
us any such account? There is a great deal of fault found with that principle,
that we ought to do nothing but what we have a Warrant for from the Word of
God. If it be rightly understood, I know no fault that is to be found with it,
not that we must have a particular Warrant from the Word of God, for every
action that we do, none ever asserted any such thing. But we ought to do
nothing for which we have not a particular, or general Warrant from the Word of
God. In foam actions (those especially which relate to the Worship of God) the
Word of God is a particular rule in all things. No act of Worship, no mean of
Worship is to be used, but what we have a particular Warrant in Gods Word; the
reason is, because there is all the reason in the World God should prescribe
his own Homage, and because it is a sufficient rule, he that worshippeth God
according to the rules of the Word, neither adding thereto, nor diminishing
therefrom, shall worship God acceptably. As to particular, natural, and civil
actions, the word is not a particular sufficient rule, but it is a general
rule; it is impossible that the Word of God should particularly direct all the
civil actions of a man's life, it has left a thousand things of that nature to
our own liberty and wisdom, only has given us some general rules, which we are
to observe in them; in these things a Christian has not such a liberty, but
that he ought to obey the Ordinances, and laws of men, so far as they respect
the order and government of Nations and Kingdoms, and that out of conscience to
the Commandment of God, requiring such obedience to men in their Spheres, and
the capacities which God has set them in.

Secondly, Feed your Kids by the Shepherds Tents. Keep to the Ordinances, and
Institutions of Christ, administered by those whom he has set over his flock as
Shepherds. That is the sense of that part of the direction, and by the way this
shows us a necessity, and usefulness of a Gospel Ministry. It is the design
of Jesuits, and Romish Priests to take you off from your Ministers. The
Socinian complains, that the world has been a long time troubled with an
idle sort of Persons called Ministers, Quakers, and other Enthusiasts, all sing
the same Song, yet there is none of these but have their Heads, their Guides,
and Teachers, only possibly some of them would have none who should wholly set
themselves apart, and give up themselves to this work, others would only bring
you off the true Ministers of the Gospel, to put you under Idol Shepherds.
Certain it is that the Shepherds mentioned in the Text are such as are sent by
the great Shepherd, and can truly derive from the Lord Jesus Christ. Here is
the question how shall we know which be the Shepherds tents, our reason will
direct us not to give credit to those who only bear witness of themselves,
Christ says, John. 5. 31. If I bear witness of my self my witness is not true:
That is, if I alone bear witness of my self. Such a Testimony is also more to
be suspected when it is arrogant, when men challenge to themselves to be alone
the true Shepherds. But for your direction I shall lay down a few conclusions.

1. It is both impossible for any to know them by their lineal succession from
the Apostles, who were the first deputed by Christ to feed his flock, and
needless to make such an inquiry for them. The former assertion proves the
latter, for it is doubtless needless to look for what is impossible to be
found. This is the great thing which the Papists boast of, the great thing
which they contend for, That those can be no true Ministers who are not
ordained by Bishops in a lineal succession or a personal succession from the
Apostles, and Rome has only had such a succession, therefore the Shepherds
Tents, are only to be found amongst them. I am sorry to find any Protestants
lisping this language of Ashdod; Protestant Divines in former ages have thought
it enough to prove succession in Doctrine. The truth is a succession of Persons
is a thing impossible to be proved, if we must own no Ministers, but such as
can prove they are made so by Bishops, in a true succession from the Apostles,
I am sure they must own none at all, for how is it possible think you that
after near 1700 years, any Ministers should be able to prove such a succession.
All the Issue of this contest must be either to bring us all again to Rome,
which indeed vainly boasts of such a succession, or else to Atheism, to the
owning of no true Ministry at all, and consequently to no Ordinances. Nor is
any such inquiry necessary, for certainly Christ has clothed his Church with a
power to restore his institutions if they were lost, or the exercise of them
for any space of time were interrupted.

2. Secondly, The true Shepherds are to be known by their mission. Christ is
agreed to be the true Shepherd, the principal Shepherd. All true
Under-Shepherds must have their mission from him. He certainly sends none
but, 1. Such as are by him fitted and qualified for all parts of their work. 2.
Such as are disposed, and inclined to their work. Consider but what the work of
the Shepherd is, viz. to seed the flock of Christ, to watch over them, etc. And
this is one way for you to know Christ's Shepherds, they are by him qualified
for their work with gifts and abilities to pray, and Preach, to open, and to
apply the Scriptures, they are also by him inclined and disposed to it,
desiring the Office of a Bishop, and to give up themselves to it. Where this is
found, there is Christ's Mission. They are also called by the Church, proved, set
apart to the work by fasting and Prayer, but this is only their external
mission. A Church may be so corrupted as to send out men who were never sent of
Christ, neither having any internal qualifications to fit them for it, nor any
inclinations, and heart unto it, only desiring to be put into the Priests
Office for a morsel of bread. No good Christian can judge these Christ's
Shepherds, for though he has given a power to his Church to send out
Ministers, yet they are limited to such as are able and faithful, nor ought any
to be looked upon as a true Shepherd or Minister of Christ, who apparently has
no inward qualifications for the work of the Ministry nor any heart faithfully
to discharge it.

3. Thirdly, You shall know them by their Doctrine, Gal. 1. 8. Though we or an
Angel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which we have
Preached unto you, let him be accursed, v. 9. As we said before so now I say
again, If any man Preach any other Gospel unto you, then that you have
received, let him be accursed. He that is accursed, or to be accursed, is none
of those Shepherds, by whose Tents Christians are to feed their Souls, but
those who bring any Doctrine to Peoples Ears, that is contrary to the Doctrine
delivered by Christ and his Apostles, or other then that, is accursed, and by
the Judgment of the Apostles to be accounted accursed; such a one therefore,
can be no such Person as Christians are bound to hear, or to feed their Souls
by their Tents. But you will say, what if they be not declared so or adjudged
so, by the Church. This is the Churches sin and neglect of their duty. The
Church by its judgments cannot make one hair of truth white or black, she is
only to declare and adjudg that to be the Doctrine of Christ which is so: And
to declare and adjudg that which is not so to be what it is. If the Church will
neglect her duty I am not to neglect mine. If the Major part of the Church be
so corrupted, that they will call evil good, and good evil, determine Error to
be truth, and truth to be Error, their Error cannot conclude me. If it could,
we had long since been Arrians, and in later times been Papists. Protestants
have therefore rightly determined that every true Christian has a judgment of
discretion in this case. The sole judgment of truth and Error is in Christ and
his Word. A declarative judgment is in the Church, but a judgment of
discretion, so far as to guide a Christians particular practice, is in every
Christian, who is to prove all things, and to hold fast that only which is
good. I cannot, I ought not to feed my Soul by the Tents of those Shepherds,
who bring me other Doctrine then what they can prove from the Word of God. If
the Church will suffer such, I am not bound by their sins. Gods Pastors feed
his People with wisdom and understanding, Jer. 3. 15. Not with meet
high-swelling Words of vanity, much less with lies and Erroneous Doctrine
contrary to Christ's and the Apostles Doctrine.

4. Fourthly, Christ tells us that to the true Shepherd, the Porter opens,
John 10. v. 3. And the Sheep hear his voice. God opens the hearts of his People
to such as are his Shepherds. The Apostle tells the Corinthians, they were the
seal of his Apostleships, 1 Cor. 9. 2. And again, 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. Ye are our
Epistle, Written in our hearts, and known, and read of all men, for as much as
you are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ Ministered by us,
Written, not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables of
stone, but in the fleshly tables of the heart. God has sealed the ministry of
those Ministersto be from him, whose ministry he has blessed, by opening the
hearts of People to it, and by it; there needs no further evidence, this is a
sufficient letter of recommendation of them to all that own the name of Christ.
I speak not here for that insignificant conversion of men to an opinion,
without a turning of their heart from sin unto God, but of the real conversion
or change of men's hearts. This is a proof Sirs, of true Shepherds a proof of a
true ministry, 2 Cor: 13. 3. I will never question the truth of that man's
ministry, with whose ministry I see God going along. So that their ministry
opens the Eyes of the blind, and turns men from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an
inheritance amongst them that are Sanctified. Which were the ends for which God
sent out Paul, Acts 26. 18. Let such men as these be ordained by whom they
will, Bishops or Presbyters, or only sent out by the Church, let them be
ordained by what Rites and in what manner they will, it is plain they are
Christ's Shepherds. Let there have been defects in their entrance, and admission
by the Church into the ministry. God has now sealed their ministry, all
defects are taken away.

5. Our Savior has given us another note of a true Shepherd, John 10. 4. When
he puts forth his Sheep he goes before them, he does not only lead them by
his voice but by his feet. I shall never believe that Christ sent an open
Drunkard to persuade men not to be drunk with wine wherein is excess, nor a
Scandalous and unclean Person to tell men that Whoremongers and Adulterers God
will judge. Nor a profane Swearer to Preach to men, Swear not at all. Christ
indeed did send out Judas, but he was under no Scandalous Character till he
betrayed his Master. A secret Hypocrite, whom we do not discern may be judged
by us sent of Christ. But a Scandalous profane Person cannot. The Church ought
to cast out such unsavory salt; if she neglects her duty, I ought not to
neglect mine: I am bound to feed by no such Shepherds Tents.

6. The true Shepherds of Christ will not traduce, and revile one another, the
false Apostles traduced Paul to the Corinthians, as an hireling, and a weak
man, etc. you read not that Paul and Peter, etc. ever did so, there was some
hot Contests betwixt Paul and Barnabas, and Paul and Peter, but they never
ended in revilings, and seeking of a proof of Christ one in another. In short,
if you see any Ministers who are able to Pray and Preach, and faithful in doing
it, and who in Preaching mind the Souls of the People, and feed them not with
the air of a few fine Words: Nor with rotten, and corrupt Doctrines. Any whom
the Lord owneth, making them blessed instruments to turn Souls to God, any who
walk before their flock, who live up to what they Preach in all holiness of
life, conclude these are the Shepherds Tents by which Christ has commanded you
to feed, if you would have any communion with him. Regard not what Romish
Priests say, that they have no Apostolical Succession; no what Enthusiasts say,
that they are wirelings, therefore none of Christ's Shepherds. He is no hireling
that receives wages, for the labourer is by God determined worthy of his hire.
He is an hireling in the sense of Christ, John 10. that regards not the Souls
of People, and looks at nothing but his hire. I shall only press your feeding
by the Shepherds Tents,

1. From the former advantages you have had from your Souls feeding there. I
shall allude to that of the Apostle, Galat. 3. 2, 3. This only would I know of
you, were not you converted from sin unto God by the Ministers of Christ, by
such Shepherds, as I have been describing to you? Were your hearts first
changed, by those that declaim against Ministers and Ordinances, etc.

2. Consider the moful Examples of those who have cast off the Ministry and
Ordinances of God. What horrors have filled the Souls of some? What stupid
blindness have others fallen into? How many of them are delivered up by God to
strong delusions to believe lies, or to a looseness of life and conversation, to
commit iniquity with greediness, and that without any apparent sense or
feeling. I could give you several, strange instances, but I shall rather choose
to leave you to be informed by your own Observation.

Sermon XLVII.
Canticles 1. 9. I have compared thee (O my Love!) to a company of Horses in
Pharaoh's Chariots.

I Have done with the Answer of the blessed Lover to his Spouse's Petition; she
prayed him to let her know where he fed, where he made his Flock to rest at
Noon. How in her state and circumstances of Affliction she might enjoy the
fullest and sweetest communion with him. He has directed her to go her way by
the footsteps of the Flock, to feed her Kids by the Shepherds Tents. But he
has not finished his Discourse. It Is seldom that Christ in his Answers to his
Peoples Prayers, gives them strict and bare measure; it is ordinarily pressed
down, and running over. He goes on,

I have compared thee (O my Love!) to a company of Horses in Pharaoh 's
Chariots. Upon a view of other Translations, I find little or no difference;
what is, is mostly about terms. The word which we translate Love, the LXX
translate (...), My Neighbor; others, My Kinswoman. The word which we
translate a company of Horses, the LXX, and those who follow them (the Syriack
and Arabic) translate my Mare. Pagnine, Montanus, the Vulgar Latin, and our
Translation read it, a company, or my company of Horses. We will shortly
inquire the sense of those two terms. The first word which we translate My
Love, comes from the Hebrew root (...) which in its primary signification,
signifies to feed as a Shepherd feeds his Flock. In a secondary sense it
signifies, To associate, to show ones self a companion to another, or a
friend, because Shepherds use to associate together; thence (...) which is a
Substantive in the Feminine Form, used both in this verse, and again, v. 15.
chap. 4 1, 7. chapter 2. 2. 10. 13. chapter 5. 2. signifies one who does intimately
associate him or her self with another, so may be translated by, My Friends, my
Love, or My Companions or any other term of like signification. It is not
material which.

For the other term (...), the question is, Whether it should be translated My
Mare, or my company of Horses, the Original word (...), signifies an Horse;
thence comes (...), in the Feminine Form, which is the word used here. I think
that in the Feminine Form, it is only used in this Text, so that it is
difficult to determine which is the truest Translation, My Mare, or My Horse,
or My company of Horses, or a Mare, an Horse, a company of Horses, (...), is
often used, to signify a single Horse, Psalm. 32. 9. A company of Horses, Exodus
14. 9. It is also as hard to determine whether it should be read, My company of
Horses, or a company; for though the Affix often has the force of the Pronoun
of the first Person, yet it is sometimes added Paragogically; so Pagnine and
Mercer determine it here, and justify it from the like usage of it, Lam. 1. 1.
Isa. 1. 21. Besides that, the following words, in Pharaoh 's Chariots, would
make one think it should not be translated My Company, but A Company. In the
words is, 1. A very amicable Compellation; My Friend, My Love, My Associate. 2.
A Comparison; where is, 1. The Person comparing, I have likened. 2. The Person
compared, thee. 3. The Thing to which she is compared, Horses, A company of
Horses in Pharaoh 's Chariots. The Text affords us two Propositions.

1 Prop. The Believing Soul is Christ's Associate, or Companion, his intimate
Friend.

2 Prop. That Christ has likened such a Soul to a company of Horses in
Pharaoh's Chariots.

I shall begin with the first of these; The Believing Soul is Christ's Love,
his Friend, his Fellow, or intimate Associate. The word signifieth*all these.
There is a great deariness, and friendly fellowship betwixt the Lord Jesus
Christ and the Spouse; whether by the Spouse, we understand the Believing Soul,
or the Church, which is made up of such Souls. The word almost in this Form,
from the same root, is translated fellow, Judge. 11. 37. I and my fellows, Psalm.
45. 14. The Virgins her Companions. He had before called her the fairest
amongst Women, v. 8. to show his value and estimate of her; he here calls her
his Love, his Friend, his Fellow, or Companion. It is a very sweet meditation,
a pleasant voice surely, to hear him whom God calls his fellow, and who
thought it no robbery to be equal with the Father, stooping to Dust and Ashes,
and to the Worms of the Earth, and calling them his Love, his Friends, his
Fellows. Surely it is good for us to stand here a little, and understand the
significancy and meaning of this expression, inquiring,

1. How Christ approves himself his Spouses Companion and Fellow.

2. How he (who knows not how to complement like vain man) by his influence
upon, and by his Communion with his Church, and with the Believer, declares her
to be indeed his Love, and himself to be her near and most intimate friend.

1. Christ has made himself our Fellow, by his taking of our Nature upon him.
He was from all Eternity God the Father's Fellow; God himself calls him so,
Zech. 13. 7. Awake O Shepherd! Awake O Sword against the Shepherd, and against
the man that is my Fellow! Christ applies that Text to himself, Mat. 26. 31.
The wise man tells us, Prove. 8. 30. that from Eternity, He was by him, as one
brought up with him, and was daily his delight. And the Apostle tells us, he
thought it no robbery to be equal with the Father. By his Incarnation he made
himself our Fellow, Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch as the Children were partakers of
flesh and blood, he also took part with them, And v. 11. Both he who
sanctifies, and those who are sanctified, are all of one, wherefore he is not
ashamed to call them Brethren. But I shall not insist on this, which amounts
to no more than a Fellowship in one and the same common Nature; and thus,
though there be this peculiar in it, that it was for the Spouse's sake, that he
took upon him Humane Nature, (for I take that to be a Romantic Fancy, for
which there is neither any Scripture, or found Reason, That if the World had
not been to have been Redeemed, yet God would have sent his Son to be
Incarnate;) yet in this sense he is in a sense a Fellow to all the Sons and
Daughters of Men. I shall therefore pass over this, and come to show you how
Christ approves himself as a Fellow or Companion to all those who are true
Believers.

You read in holy Writ, of Fellow-Citizens, and Fellow-Heirs, Ephesians. 2. 19. Ephesians.
3. 6. of Fellow-helpers, and fellow laborers, 2 Cor. 8. 23. 1 These. 3. 2. of
fellow prisoners, and fellow soldiers, Col. 4. 10. Philemon 23. Phil. 2. 25. I
think under one of these Heads, I may reduce whatsoever I need say for the
opening of this Notion.

1. Christ is with his Saints a Fellow-Citizen in the City of their God. The
City of God signifies either the Church of God, or Heaven. Take it in either
Notion, Christ is our Fellow-Citizen; he is the Head of the Church, Believers
are the Members. The Head of the Body, and the other Members, make up but one
Body; they are fellow members of the same Body. The Mayor of your City, tho the
most dignified Citizen, yet is a Fellow-Citizen. The Saints are all
Fellow-Citizens, Ephesians. 3. 6. Christ, though their Head, is their Fellow-Citizen;
he calls them Brethren, Heb. 2. 11, 12. saying, I will declare thy Name unto my
Brethren; in the midst of the Church, I will sing praise unto thee. Do
Fellow-Citizens dwell in a City compacted together? Christ dwells in his
Church: He walks in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks: He dwells in the
Believing Soul; his dewlling place is in Zion, in his holy Mountain, Zech. 2.
11. I will dwell in the midst of thee. He says, He will make his abode with
the Soul that loves him, and keeps his Commandments; I in you, and you in
me, says he, Joh. 15. He dwells in their hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. His
Spirit dwells in them, Romans 8. 9. But the Notion of a Fellow-Citizen speaks
more than Cohabitation: A Partnership in the same Rights and Privileges. So
does a Co-heirship speak a Partnership in the same Enjoyments. Thus Christ is
their Fellow-Citizen, their Fellow-Heir; they are Partners with Christ in the
same Privileges, in the same Enjoyments. Of his fullness they receive grace for
grace. And for the New Jerusalem, the City of God which is above, he has
willed them a Partnership with him in his glory, Joh. 17. 22. And the glory
which thou have given me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we
are one. Only there is this observable difference, Fellow-Citizens, and
Fellow-Heirs amongst men, are Notions which denote an equality in Privileges
and Enjoyments, but not so between Christ and us. They are Heirs of the same
Grace with Christ, 1 John 16. Of his fullness they receive grace for grace: But
with this difference; the People of God have the Spirit given by measure to
them. To him the Spirit is not given by measure, Joh. 3. 34. The People of God
have different measures, they have different measures of Faith, Romans 12. 3.
There is a measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. This
they ought to aim at, but none in this life attains it; they are Heirs of the
same glory with Christ, Joh. 17. 22. but not of the same degrees of glory. His
glory shall be the glory of the Sun; their's but as the glory of the Stars;
they shall be where he is; they shall Reign with him, but in the Throne he
shall be greater than they are; his glory shall be an excelling glory. The
Apostle calls them Heirs and Coheirs with the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 17.
In this sense the Lord approves himself their Companion, their Fellow.

2. Christ and his Spouse are fellow servants, fellows in the same work. What
is the work of Believers, but to glorify God? This is their great business.
Whether (says the Apostle) you eat, or drink, or whatsoever you do, let all be
done to the glory of God. What was the work of Christ while he was upon the
Earth? Joh. 17. 4. I have glorified thee on the Earth, I have finished the work
thou gave me to do: Christ and his Disciples have in the general one and the
same work, to glorify God. Though, if we come to speak of the particular
actions by which God is glorified by the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the
Believer, there is a great deal of difference. Christ glorified his Father by
performance of the acts of our Redemption, according to his Fathers Will, we by
those good works which he has commanded; yet in the general scope, viz. the
glorifying of God, and the more general mean by which this general End is
attained, viz. obedience to the Will of God, they are both the same; Christ
glorified his Father, by obedience to his Will: The Child of God glorifieth God
by obedience to his Will; both of them glorified God by the praedication of his
Name, by praising him, etc. Christ took upon him the form of a Servant, and
became obedient, Phil. 2. 7, 8. The Child of God is by Birth a Servant, and by
Covenant a Servant; (there is that difference betwixt them) but they are both
Servants, both obedient to the Will of God, and both by that obedience serve
the great End of glorifying God, which justifies the Notion, though the Acts
of their obedience differ according to their several spheres and stations. In a
great Family you know they are all fellow servants, though some of them have a
more, some a less noble Employment.

3. Christ is their Fellow-worker, their Fellow-helper, not only with reference
to the Father, as they both work to the same End, and by the same general
Means, viz. obedience to the Will of God, but as he works in them, and
excites their habits of grace, and strengthens them in the exercise of them,
Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.
13. Without me you can do nothing, Joh. 15. 3. His Spirit helps our
infirmities, Romans 8. 26. (...), it lifts over against them. The Child of God,
without the presence and assistance of Christ, cannot pray a prayer, nor hear a
Sermon, nor perform any spiritual duty; so as that Christ is not only to the
Believer a Fellow labourer, and Fellowservant, doing the same work that they
do, or at least having done the same work, but he is their Fellow-helper as to
all their own spiritual Motions and Actions.

4. You in holy Scripture read of a Fellow-Prisoner, Aristarchus, and Epaphras,
are both of them called Paul's Fellow Prisoners, Coloss. 4. 14. You read also
of a Fellow-Souldier, Philip. 2. v. 25. Philemon 2. This Notion signifies one
that is a Partner and Fellow to another in Conflicts, Combats, etc. a common
Partnership in hazards and sufferings. In this sense our Lord properly calls
his Spouse (the Believing Soul) his Fellow. He fought and overcame the same
Enemies with whom they daily fight. The Christian has three great Enemies; the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil. It is true, Christ had none of the second to
encounter; he was born without sin; he lived without sin; he had no body of
death. But yet he had to die for our sins; all our sins were set in Battle
Array against him; they were those which nailed him to the Cross, but he
conquered, and declared his Conquest, by his Resurrection from the dead. The
World is our Enemy, one of those Enemies against which we are to maintain the
Spiritual Fight. It was also his Enemy, he fought against it, and overcame it,
Joh. 16. 33. -- Be of good cheer, I have overcome the World. The Devil is
another of our great Enemies, against whom we are commanded to put on the whole
Armor of God, Christ overcame him also, Heb. 2. 14, 15. Through death he
destroyed him who had the power of death, even the Devil. And the same Apostle
in the same Epistle tells us, that he was therefore tempted, that he might be
able to succor those that are tempted. The Apostle mentions Christ in this
Notion, when he calls him, The Captain of our Salvation. It is long since
that he let his People know by his Prophet Isaiah, that In all their
afflictions he was afflicted. He took himself concerned in the persecution of
his Church, and therefore calls from Heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me. Indeed it is not easy to determine what kind of Sympathy the most perfect
Nature of Christ is capable of, but that he is their Fellow-sufferer, the
Scripture plainly determines. Thus you see, that it is not in a complement
that Jesus Christ speaking to his Saints, speaks to them in this dialect, Thou
that art my Fellow.

But our Translation reads it, O my Love; and the word, as I before showed you,
is also so translated properly enough. A Friend has this name in the Hebrew,
because he is always the companion and associate of his correlated Friend.
Hence we translate it, My Loves, and conformably to this our Lord speaks,
Joh. 15. 14. You are my Friends, if you do whatsoever I have commanded you. And
again, v. 15. Henceforth I call you not Servants, I call you Friends. Let us a
little inquire how Christ approves himself a Believers Friend. Friendship
speaks 4 things.

1. Love. 2. Free and ingenuous love. 3. Mutual, and reciprocal Love. 4. Mutual
communion and converse each with other. 1. It Speaks Love. Amicus ab amando.
This is so obvious to every one that either understands any thing of the
Revelation or History of holy, Writ, that it will need very few words to
demonstrate. Besides the frequent friendly compellations which Christ has
given his People, whosoever considers his conjuction with his Father in the
Eternal Purposes for their Salvation, and all those means by which they are
made meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light; his concern in the
Eternal Covenant of Redemption and of Grace, in which he became a Surety for
them; his taking upon him humane Nature, walking up and down in our flesh,
Dying upon the Cross for us sinners; his resurrection from the dead for their
justification; his ascending up into Heaven, and giving Gifts unto men, Pastors
and Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints; his sending his Spirit to
convince the World of sin, righteousness and Judgment; his daily influence upon
his People, strengthening, quickening, and comforting of them; his being their
advocate with the Father, in case both of Sins and duties; his passionate
expressions while he was on the Earth for the conversion of Souls; his
entreating them by his Ministers, as his Ambassadors, that they would be
reconciled to God; the charge that he has given the World against offending
them; his declarations of his coming to judge the World, to render tribulation
to them that trouble them, and to them Rest and Peace: I say he that
considers any of these things, much less, all of them together, must say that
he loved them with an Everlasting, unchangeable Love; alone suited to all the
necessities of his poor Creatures, and that he has willed them good suitable to
all their Evils.

2. Secondly, Friendship speaks free and ingenuous Love. Not the Love of a
Child to a Father which is Natural, and to which he is obliged by a filial duty
because of his Fathers care of, and provision for him; not the Love of a
Servant, which is purchased by a kind usage, and dependence. A friend loves
freely. The Love of true Friends, is ordinarily an inaccountable thing. They
love one another, and can hardly give one another an account of it, further
than a goodness, and excellency, a suitableness, and likeness which they
discern, or at least think they see each in other. Christ's Love to us is free.
He heals our backslidings and loves us freely. He has mercy on whom he will
have mercy. The reciprocal Love of the believing Soul is not so free and so
ingenuous, as is his beloveds love to him. Yet it is thus far ingenuous, that
it is not only for that the Soul has from Christ, but for that goodness, and
excellency which it discerns in Christ; this we had before, Because of the
Savor of thy good Ointments, therefore do the Virgins Love thee.

3. Love properly does not make a friend unless it be mutual, and reciprocal.
Indeed in a large sense, a man may be said to be a friend to his Enemy: That
is, to wish well to him, and to do him some kind Offices. But this is not
friendship. All Friendship, implies a reciprocation of Love. Christ Loves the
believer, and every true believer loves Christ. So they are Friends, in the
strictest, and most proper sense. Indeed there is a great difference which is
well expressed by one of the Casuists thus: We will good to him, but we Tolet.
in Cas. ^. 4. c. 8.
do not bestow that good upon him, which we will him: But he while he wills
good to us, also gives us that good which he, wills, and by his loving us
makes us good, and lovely. But every Child of God truly loves Christ; truly I
say, that is, sincerely though not with that kind or degree of Love with which
Christ loves him. Lord (says Peter) thou that know all things, know
that I Love thee. And If any man Loves not the Lord Jesus (says the Apostle)
let him be Anathema Maranatha.

4. Lastly, Love of friendship always speaks Communion betwixt the two
Lovers. We are bound to Love our Enemies, and in every good man there is such a
Love, even to those that hate them; but this is no Love of friendship, for the
Precept of Love to Enemies, obliges only against malice and private Revenge,
and to common Offices of kindness, it does not oblige to intimacy, or to any
near fellowship, and Communion with them. We are so far obliged to Love our
Enemies, as to bear no malice against them, to take no private Revenge upon
them, to be ready to do any acts of kindness for their Souls, and any common
offices of love. But I say we are not by it obliged to make them our intimates
nor to keep any fellowship or communion with them. But in a Love of friendship,
there is always Communion, or a mutual Communication of the Parties loving
each to others. Christ gives this account of his love of friendship to his
disciples, John 15. 15. Henceforth I call you not Servants, for the Servant
knows not what his Lord does, but I have called you Friends, for all things I
have heard of my Father I have made known to you. Christ Communicates himself
to believers, to such as are his disciples indeed, he is in them, they in him,
and he is daily Communicating of his life, and strength to them, for, John 15.
4. Without him, they can do nothing. They are daily communicating themselves
unto him, making a secret surrender to him, of their hearts, their wills, their
affections. Communicating their wants and desires to him by Prayer, etc. Thus I
have justified the notion of Christ's Love, his friend, his Companion, to be
agreeable, to what the Scripture reveals concerning Christ, and the believing
Soul.

Use 1.
This in the first place leads us into a just admiration, of the Divine Love,
and condescension. Who is this that calls from Heaven to Earth, to the Worms
of the Earth, and speaks in this language, My Love! My Friend! My Fellow! Is
it not he who is the Eternal Son of God, God over all blessed for ever, he to
whom there is none like, and besides whom there is no God? He whom God calls
his fellow, and who thought it no robbery to be equal with the Father. And to
whom does he speak? Is it not to those who must say to corruption, thou art my
Mother, and to the Worms, you are my brethren and my Sisters? To those whose
Fathers are Amorites, and whose Mothers are Hittites, who by nature are dead in
trespasses and sins, unclean Children of unclean Parents. Will the Lord Love
such Ethioptans, as we are by nature? Such Enemies, as we have showed our
selves by practice? Will the Lord make himself a companion to the creature,
that is but as the dust of his feet? What manner of Love and condescension is
this? For him whom the Eternal Father has proclaimed to be his Son, and that
Son in whom he is well pleased in whom the Lord has set up his rest, he whom
Kings and Prophets desired to see, whom Angels and glorified Saints adore, to
whom the Father has given a name above every name, he who has Heaven for his
throne, the Earth for his footstool, and the utmost ends of the Earth for his
possession to say to us, My Love, My Friend, My Companion? Certainly these
terms ought to ravish our hearts, and to affect them with in expressible
admiration; and to whom does he say thus? Is it only to the Glories and
beauties of the World? To the Emperors, Rings, Princes and Nobles thereof? No;
he says thus to every believer, even the meanest that treads upon the Earth,
to the most poor, distressed, afflicted creature, to Job that sits upon a
dunghill scraping himself with a potsheard, to Lazarus that lies at the rich
man's gate full of sores, and begging bread, while the Dogs lick his sores, to
the poorest believer living in the meanest and dirtiest Gottage, to those whom
the World revileth, slighteth, scorneth, to those who have spit in his face,
and abused his patience, and despised his goodness, that have hardened their
hearts against him, grieved his holy Spirit. Yet having repented of these
things and being turned to him, to these he calls, to these he says, My
Love, My Friends, My Companions! He upbraideth them not for their former
miscarriages, to these he becomes a fellow Prisoner, in these he becomes a
fellow helper, these shall be joint heirs with him. Hear O Heavens! be
astonished O Earth, never was Love like this, never such matchless Love. Let
all our Souls swallow up themselves in this gulf of unfathomable Love, and
while we are sinking let us cry out, O the height, and depth, and length, and
breadth of the Love of God in Jesus Christ, It is a condescension beyond the
grasp of our faith. The greatness of it causes in us a difficulty to believe
it. Who is a God like our God, a Savior a Redeemer, an Husband like our
Savior, our Redeemer our Spiritual Husband? When they told David, that he
should have Michal the Daughter of Saul to Wife, and persuaded him to it;
Seems it to you (says he) a small thing to be a Son-in-law to a King? If
there be any of you not affected with this Love, this transcendent Love, give
me leave to speak to you in the language of David; Seems it to you a small
thing, to be the beloved, the friends, the companions of the Lord Jesus Christ?
Ah! That I could send you away this day, admiring the divine Love, that he
should take the fellowship of our nature upon him, that he should make us his
fellow Citizens, admit us to a fellowship with him both in grace here, and in
glory hereafter, that he should be our Companion in tribulation, our Companion
in labor, and follow Soldier. But I leave this to be further improved by you
in your more private meditations.

Use 2.
2. Secondly, This notion is of wonderful use to relieve, and comfort the
People of God under all their present afflictions or fears of greater. The face
of things as to Gods People has been a long time gathering blackness and there
is this day a great blackness. Prisons in the Primitive times were more the
habitations of Gods People then Palaces, God grant we may not see them to be so
again; we have been so used to beds of Feathers and Down, that the thoughts of
a bed of straw make us shrink, so wedded to our own Country, that a strange
land appears to us a strange thing. The Providence of God looks as if it
were preparing Prisons, and Fetters, and banishments for his People and the
hearts of Gods People are every where as sad as the times. What a wonderful
comfort and relief to the People of God at such a time is it for them, to hear
the Lord Jesus Christ calling them his Companions. His Companions in
tribulation, and to call himself their fellow Soldier and fellow Prisoner.
There are a great many arguments with which the suffering Servants of God may
be relieved; Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer (said the Angel
to the Church at Smyrna) Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison,
that you may be tried, and you shall have tribulation that you might be tried,
and you shall have tribulation for ten days, Rev. 2. 10. There are several
arguments, 1. It is the Devil that cast Saints into Prison. He does it by men
as his instruments, but he fills them with their rage and malice, 2. It is
that they may be tried. God permits it, the Devil could have no power against*
a believer more then against Christ, if God did not permit it. The Devil and
his instruments design is to ruin and to destroy them, Gods end is to try them.
3. It shall be but a tribulation for ten days, a short time. The rod of the
wicked shall not always rest upon the lot of the righteous. Well, but how shall
they hold out these ten days? See Isaiah. 43. 1, 2. Thus says the Lord that
created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not, for I have
Redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. When thou passest
through the waters I will be with thee, and through the rivers they shall not
overflow thee. When thou walk through the fires thou shall not be burnt,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. In the ten days of tribulation, the
Child of God shall not be alone, he that Redeemed them, will be with them. This
was made good to the three Children in the fiery furnace in Babylon, Dan. 3.
24. Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? (says
Nebuchadnezzar) lo I see four men loose walking in the midst of the fire, and
they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. He was
with Daniel, Daniel 9. 22. With Paul and Sil^s, Acts. 16. They could never else
have sang in the Prison at midnight. Let the People of God lift up their heads
as Moses, seeing him who is invisible. Only take the caution of Peter, 1. Pet,
4. Let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an Evil doer, or
as a busy body in other, men's matters. But if any man suffer as a Christian,
let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God one this behalf. Let men look
that they suffer for righteousness sake, that is, to avoid sinning against God,
(all such suffering is for righteousness sake) then they shall never be alone.
Saul, Saul why (says Christ) persecutest thou me, calling out of Heaven to
Paul, when he was in his full carreer of persecution of the Church. No man can
expect, that Christ should be a companion to him in his tribulation while he
suffers meetly for his stomach, or out of humor, much less if he suffers
for doing that which is plainly sinful and which he ought not to have done, but
if he suffers to avoid sin against God, to keep himself unspotted from the
World, as he is made a partaker of Christ's sufferings, so Christ will be a
partaker of his sufferings, his Companion in suffering, and whenever Christ's
glory shall be revealed, he shall be glad with exceeding joy. It is a marvelous
sweet notion to suffering Christians, to hear that Jesus Christ is, and will be
their Companion in sufferings; fear not therefore Christians! in despite of
evil men, and evil times, to keep a good Conscience, but Jam. 1. 2. Count it
all joy, when you fall into diverse temptations. A good Conscience was yet
never in Prison alone. Nor will this be strange to us if we consider, that even
death it self, though it makes Soul and Body part Company, yet it does not make
Christ and a believer part Company. Our Bodies shall be raised from the Grave,
by the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, Romans 8. 11. There are two great
arguments amongst others to comfort the People of God in all their noons of
Afflictions, 1. That even then they are Christ's fellows. They then are in the
fellowship of his death, Phil. 4. 10, 11. They suffer with him, Romans 8. 17.
They are made conformable to his death, Christ is magnified in their body. They
make up what is lacking in the sufferings of Christ, 2. That Christ will then
be their fellow; it is to the Spouse at Noon, that he says here, O My Love, My
Fellow! etc. When the World is spitting their Venom, showing their utmost
Malice and hatred, even then Christ is calling to them and saying, My Love.
When the World is casting them out as Pestilent fellows, then is Christ saying
unto them, My Companions! Then will he be with them, and manifest himself as a
friendly Companion to them.

In the third place, How should this raise up the hearts of Christians above
all discouragements, as to hard and difficult duties. O says a Christian. This
is an hard saying, who can hear it, a difficult duty, how shall I ever perform
it? how shall I ever get up my heart to it? Put to thy hand Christian, thou
can do nothing of thy self, but thou may do all things through Christ that
strengthens thee, what cannot Christ and thou do together? I live, says
Paul, Gal. 2. 20. yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now
live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God. Remember Christ has
called thee fellow, and why? Because he is thy fellow helper in duty as well as
thy fellow Prisoner, and fellow Soldier in all thy sufferings. Only do not
like a Sluggard, lie down, and stand still, and cry, there is a lion in the
way. Isa. 41. 10. (Says God) Fear not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed,
for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will
uphold thee, with the right hand of my righteousness, v. 13. I the Lord thy God
will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, fear not, for I will help thee. It
is Christians great fault, they pore upon themselves, and discourage themselves
from their own natural impotencies and insufficiencies, and do not consider
that their fruit is found in Christ, and all their strength also laid up and
found in him, and to be derived from him.

Use 4.
Fourthly, Does Christ say to us, My Love? And shall not we say to him, My
Beloved! shall not we Love the Lord Jesus Christ, and complete this Love of
friendship? It is said that when Christ was going with his disciples to Emaus
their hearts burned within them, while they heard him talking by the way. Have
not your hearts burned within you, while you have heard Jesus Christ speaking
to you in this dialect? My, Love, My Fellow, If you Love them that Love you
(says our Lord, Matthew. 5.) What reward have you? even the Publicans do so. O
Love the Lord Jesus Christ all you his Saints, for he loves you, and that too
with the greatest, and most unmeasurable love.

Use 5.
Is Christ our Companion? let us not grudg then to be his Companions, and let
us behave our selves toward him as toward a Companion, and such a Companion.
This learneth us several things.

1. It learneth us what is our constant work and duty, viz! To Glorify God by
doing the work which God has given us to do, by manifesting his name to those
whom God has given us. This was Christ's work, he went up and down doing good,
says the Evangelist. This was Christ's work, this should be our work, we should
be thinking every morning, how should I glorify Christ this day? How may I show
my self this day a Companion in labor to my great Lord and Master? this we
cannot do by making our selves Companions of fools, nor mere Companions of
worldly men, but by being the Companions of those that fear the Lord.

2. It learneth us our duty, to be courageous, valiant in fight, striving
against sin, confident of Victory over all our Spiritual Enemies. Of these I
have spoke before. We should also in consideration of this use Christ as our
Companion, and behave our selves toward him as to our Companion, and as to
such a Companion, as he is. I shall direct in that in two or three particulars,
1. Be no Companion to Christ's Enemies. David says, Psalm. 119. 63. I am a
Companion of all them that fear thee, Psalm. 119. 63. Solomon tells us, That a
Companion of fools shall be destroyed Prove. 13. 20. Who those fools are you may
read, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Revel. 21. 8. All such as shall never enter into the
Kingdom of God, such as shall be destroyed in the lake that burns with fire,
and brimstone, are fools with a witness. No Companion to these can show himself
a Companion to Jesus Christ: Solomon says, Prove. 28. 7. A Companion of riotous
men shameth his Father. He that is a Companion, an ordinary Company, to loose
and profane men, Drunkards, Swearers, Blasphemers, profane Swearers, and
cursers, and professes to be a Companion of Christ shameth Christ to whom he
pretends to be a Companion. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. If you have see what the same Apostle says, 2 Cor. 6.
14. What fellowship can righteousness and light have with you? The Gentleman
abhors his Mistress that makes herself a Companion to ever Tapster and
Porter. 2. Be you much in company with Christ. Fellows, and lovers use to be
so, they are never well but when they are so. Frequent Communion with God, is
like the frequent meetings, and converses of lovers, which ripen things apace
for the wedding day. The Soul that is much with Christ in Soliloquies and
meditations, much in Prayer, ripeneth apace for glory, for the great marriage
of the Lamb. Much communion with God, has these two eminent advantages. God is
by it much indeared to the Soul and the Soul is again reciprocally much
endeared to God by it.

2. When thou art in communion with Christ be not Idle. A man may be in his
study, and do nothing of moment; a Child may truant in the School: Domitian,
may be killing flies in his Councel-Chamber. A Soul may lose that time that it
pretends to spend with Christ. Spend this hallowed part of your time, as
Lovers, and Companions use to do.

1. In imparting your secrets unto Christ: Your secret wants, doubts, fears,
desires, not concealing your most secret thoughts from the Lord.

2. In wooing of your beloved: Begging his love and favor, crying out to him
with the Spouse, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. Draw me, and we
will run after thee. Tell me O thou whom my Soul loves! where thou feedest,
where thou make thy flocks to rest at Noon.

3. In mutual embraces: The embraces of faith and love. I held him (says the
Spouse) and would not let him go. Put the hand of faith about the neck of your
beloved, it is a Chain from which he cannot, from which he will not get loose.
But I have dwelt long enough upon the compellation in the Text, [my Love or my
Fellow] I should now come to the matter of my text, I have compared thee to a
company of Horses in Pharaoh's Chariots. But of that hereafter.

Sermon XLVIII.
Canticles 1. 9. I have likened thee (O my Love!) to a company of Horses in
Pharaoh's Chariots.

I Am come to the second Proposition I observed from these words* I have done
with the first raised from the Compellation.

Prop. Christ has likened his Spouse to a company of Horses in Pharaoh's
Chariots.

I shall speak to this Proposition in my usual method, by way of Explication,
Confirmation, and Application. By way of Explication I shall show you, 1. In
what sense that term, I have likened, or I have compared thee, is to be
understood. 2. Why Christ has likened his Spouse to Horses, to a company of
Horses, and why to a company of Horses in Pharaoh 's Chariots.

As to the first, the only question is, Whether the sense be, I have made thee
like, or I have fancied thee like; the Radical word (...) signifies to be
like, or to assimilate. I find it frequently in Scripture used in Pihel, the
very Conjugation in which it is used in this Text. From some of those Texts we
may possibly gather the sense of it in this Text, Numb. 15. 35. I will do unto
them as I thought to do unto them. There it is translated, I thought, Isa. 14.
24. As I have thought, so have I brought it to pass, Judge. 20. 5. The men of
Gibeah -- thought to slay me, Psalm. 48. 9. We have thought of thy loving
kindness, Hos. 12. 10. I have used similitudes, Lam. 2. 13. To what shall I
liken thee? The word is in Scripture often used to signify the making Idea's
and Representations of things in our minds. No man does any action but he first
makes the Idea and Platform of it in his thoughts: Now this action of the mind
informing the Idea or Platform of a thing, is that which is expressed by this
word. In short, the word may signify either; I have made thee like, or I have
in my mind fancied, or conceived thee like; so it either denotes a gracious act
of Christ terminated in us, or an action of Christ terminated in himself. In
the first sense it signifies, Christ's induing of his Spouse with some noble
and generous qualities, bearing some proportion to those that are found in an
Horse. In the second sense it is rather expressive of some duty in the Spouse
proceeding from such Endowments. In the Text the latter must include the
former. For he who draws the similitude, is one who cannot err in his
Judgment. We may have Fancies that are vain, and our minds may conceive of
things otherwise than indeed they are. He cannot conceive his Spouse like to a
company of Horses, if indeed she were not so, He could not be deceived with a
false Representation of any Object. I think it no vain conjecture of some
Interpreters of this Text, that our Savior adds these words, with some
reference to the Spouse's Petition immediately preceding. She had begged to to
be directed how in the Noon of her afflicted state, when the Sun of Trials and
Persecutions beated hot on her, she might enjoy, a free, full Communion with
him, he had bidden her to go forth by the footsteps of the Flock, to follow the
steps of those who before had walked with God under the darker dispensations of
his Providence. Now, lest she should shrink at the thoughts of Trials, he goes
on, and tells her, he had made her like, and looked upon her as like to an
Horse, yea a company of Horses in Pharaoh 's Chariots. But,

1. Why does our Savior compare his Spouse to Horses? We would in our Age
think it a strange Complement for a man to use to the woman whom he loved. But
we must remember, that a great deal is to be allowed in the different Dialect
of several Nations, in different Ages, as we see is to Persons in the same Age
living at an hundred years distance each from other. There are many Phrases
which an hundred or two years ago were good English, and good sense, which in
our more Polite and Reformed Age we should now judge very ordinary course
Language. Elijah you know was called by the King of Israel, The Chariots of
Israel, and the Horsemen thereof; all that was meant, was the honor, and
strength, and defense of the Nation. So Zech. 10. 3. It is said, God had
visited his Flock, and made them like a goodly Horse in Battle. And Rev. 19.
11, 14. Christ is described as riding upon a white Horse, and his Army on white
Horses. The Spouse is here compared to Horses, a company of Horses, only for
some eminent quality, or qualities in Horses. Nor is our own Dialect free from
such comparisons. We say of a man without disparagement, He is as strong as an
Horse. Nor is this similitude improper, whether we consider, 1. The generous
qualities of that creature: Or, 2. The general repute and value which some of
that Species have, especially with some Persons. The Hebrew Doctors reckon up
seven Qualities of an Horse, but they reckon good and bad Qualities together.
1. It is a goodly creature. 2. It is a docible creature, easily to be taught
several things. 3. It is a martial valiant creature. 4. It is a swift creature.
5. It is a very laborious useful creature. I do not think that all these are
intended in this Text, because it is not said, I have likened thee to an Horse,
but to a company of Horses in Pharaoh 's Chariots. There are two or three of
them which may be intended, and it is questionable which of them is principally
intended.

1. An Horse is a goodly creature. You read of a goodly Horse, Zech. 10. 3. We
take a great delight to look upon some Horses whose Limbs are well
proportioned, and which have been well managed. An Horse is very comely above a
Swine, or an Ox, or any neat Cattle: And usually Horses used in Coaches and
Chariots, (especially Princes Chariots) are of the most goodly and comely sort.
If we should take it in this sense, it signifies Christ's high Opinion of his
Church, and every Believing Soul. He had before called her, The fairest amongst
Women, here he compares her to goodly Horses. This is Beza's, and some other
Learned Interpreters Notion of the Metaphor in the Text. The stature and
talness of the Woman, and just proportion of her Limbs one to another (says
he) adds much unto her beauty. Horses (upon those accounts) are very lovely,
beautiful creatures; but besides that, I have discoursed before the beauty and
comeliness of the Spouse, I must confess I incline with several other
Interpreters rather to another sense of it in this Text.

2. An Horse is a very swift creature. There are indeed other creatures in
other Countries that are more swift of foot than an Horse, but none of ordinary
use that are swifter of foot. Deodate thus interprets the Metaphor, and there
is a truth in it. God puts into his People a Spirit of life and activity, so as
they are swift to hear, James 1. 19. ready to every good work. We read in
Scripture of Horses swifter than Leopards, Hab. 1. 8. But I do not think this
principally intended in this place, and it seems too much a straining of the
Metaphor.

3. And lastly, Therefore the Horse is a strong and valiant creature. God
himself propounds the Horse as a pattern of strength, Job 32. 19. Have thou
given unto the Horse his strength? And it is said of God, that he delights
not in the strength of an Horse, Psalm. 147. 10. And as the Horse is a creature
of strength, so it is a creature of a great spirit and courage; He rusheth into
the Battle, and is not afraid, Jer. 8. 6. God speaking to Job concerning the
Horse, gives an excellent and elegant description of him, Job 39. 19, 20.
where God asks Job, Have thou clothed his neck with Thunder? Can thou make
him afraid at a Grasshopper? The glory of his Nostrils is terrible. He paweth in
the Valley, and rejoices in his strength. He goes on to meet the armed man,
he mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted, neither turns he back from the
Sword. The Quiverrattleth against him, the glittering Spear, and the Shield, he
swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage, neither believes he that it is
the sound of the Trumpet. He says amongst the Trumpets, Ha, Ha, and he
smells the Battle afar off, the Thunder of the Captains, and the shoutings.
With respect of this Quality of the Horse I conceive it is, that the Spouse is
here compared to Horses; Warlike Horses, full of spirit and courage. I have
likened thee to a company of Horses; That is, I have made thee bold,
courageous, full of resolution, to make a spiritual resistance to thy Enemies,
to bid a defiance to them, no more to regard the reproaches and revilings, the
threats, and rage, and violences of wicked men that oppose thee, and cause thy
trouble, than the Horse regards the ratlings of the Quiver, or the sound of
the Trumpet, or the glittering Spear or Shield. Fear not the rage and madness
of thy Enemies. I have made thee like to the Horses in Pharaoh's Chariots,
which are so bred, and so spirited, that they mock at fear; and the more their
Enemies rage and make a noise, the more courageously, and with the more mettle
they go on. This I take to be the most proper and likely sense of the Metaphor
in this Text; accordingly I shall handle it.

2. But it is not said, To an Horse only, but to a company of Horses: Why to a
company of Horses? The term company denotes Multitude and Unity. 1. It denotes
Multitude. The Church of Christ consists of many Individual Believers, who in
respect of their Innocence, and feeding in the same Pastures, are compared
sometimes to a Flock of Sheep here in respect of that spirit of valor,
courage, and fortitude which animates them all, to a company of Horses.

2. It is a term which denotes Unity, not a numerical Unity, but an Unity in
some common work, and in some accidents common to them all. Thus the Apostle
says, We being many are one body. There is, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5.
one Body, one Spirit, they are called in one Hope, of their Calling, they have
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, they have one God and Father of all. The
Spouse is not compared to a company of Horses in a field, or in the streets,
but to a company of Horses in a Chariot, where they draw together, run together
upon the Enemy. Every Believer also has a Company within himself, the several
powers and faculties of his Soul armed with the whole Armor of God. These are
like a company of Horses in Pharaoh 's Chariots.

3. But why in Pharaoh's Chariots. Pharaoh was a common name to the Kings of
Egypt, and a company of Horses in Pharaoh 's Chariots, signifies no more than
a company of the best Egyptian Horses-Egypt at that time was one of the most
famous places for Horses in the world. Hence you read that Solomon had Horses
brought out of Egypt, 1 King. 10. 28. And the King of Judah sent his
Ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him Horses, Ezekiel. 17. 15. So Isa.
31. 1. Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay on Horses. v. 3.
Their Horses are flesh, and not spirit. So as I think they have but a feeble
support from this Text, who would make advantage of this Text to justify their
notion, that this Divine portion of holy Writ is no more but a Love-song
betwixt Solomon and Pharaohs Daughter.

To all this I might add one thing more, that the Horse by reason of those
excellent qualities, which the God of nature has endued it with, has in all
ages been in a very high esteem with men. The vanity of some Persons in the
expression of this has been very great. Historians tell us, the Persians made
solemn funerals for their Horses; in other places they builded Pyramids over
their Sepulchers. Alexander the great, built a City to the memory of his Horse.
Julius Caesar set up his Horse a marble effigies. The Emperor Commodus, would
have his Horse buried in the Vatican. Our age is more rational, then to allow
these vanities, but yet it is vain enough, many a man takes more care for the
mangery of his Horse then for the Education of his Child, and allows his
Horses more attendance then his wife. Which lets us see what a value men yet
put upon this creature. So as this sense may be put upon the Words of this
Text, thou art as dear to me, and in as high esteem with me, as the Horses in
Pharaohs Chariots are to, and with him. The Proposition then of the Text
amounts to this:

Prop. That the Church of Christ, and every particular believer in it, is in
Christ's Eyes exceeding lovely, and highly esteemed of by him, and knowing that
she is in the midst of Enemies he has clothed her with strength for the
victory sufficient if she will make use of it; he has made her like to a
Company of Horses in Pharaohs Charrots.

The proof of the Proposition then lies in the proof of these two things.

1. That the Spouse of Christ is in his Eyes exceeding goodly, and beautiful,
and highly esteemed of by him.

2. That she is clothed with sufficient strength and might to overcome her
Enemies.

For the proof of the former, I shall not insist upon it, for besides the large
discourse I have already spent upon that, when I handled that phrase (O thou
fairest amongst women) The expressions of Scripture are so obvious to every
Eye, where Christ sets out his Love to, and esteem of his Church, and every
particular believer, that I need not spend time in giving you an account of
them.

The latter is no less plain, Immediately upon the fall God gave out this
promise, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the woman shall break thine head, and thou
shall bruise his heel. The seed of the woman was Christ, and his seed, those
that believe in him. Conformable to this is that promise, Romans 16. 20. God
shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. It was an ancient promise made to
Abraham, and in him to all that walk in the steps of his faith, Thy seed shall
possess the gates of its Enemies. God says, Zech. 10. 3. That he made his
flock as a goodly Horse in the day of battle, v. 5. And they shall be as mighty
men which tread down the Enemies as mire in the streets; in the battle they
shall fight, because the Lord is with them. I come to the Application.

Use 1.
I shall only apply it by Exhortation to two great duties: Fortitude and unity.
I begin with the first, upon which I shall most enlarge, as to which I shall
show you, 1. Wherein it lies, and discourse it to you as it stands
distinguished from a natural Spirit, and stomach. 2. From a moral fortitude. 2.
I shall offer you some directions in order to the promoving of it. 3. Lastly I
shall press it by some arguments.

It is agreed on all hands that the object of it is dangers and sufferings.
That the nature of it lies in a bold encountering, and going through them: That
the vices opposed to it are. 1 Cowardice. 2. Rashness, or fool hardiness, as we
call it. There is a courage or fortitude which arises only from the natural
Spirit and courage of the creature. Now this is to be found in beasts as much
as in men, yea and more then in men, the reflections of whose reason makes them
less Spiritful then Horses, or Dogs, or Lions, etc. This commends no man, for
no man has more of this then many Beasts have. So it removes not man at any
distance from a Brute Creature. Secondly. There is a moral fortitude. Which
though it must have some foundation in nature, for none that is naturally
fearful, and cowardly, will by reason be improved to any degree of valor, yet
differs from the other. As it arises from knowledge, and some just
improvement of reason, and is governed by the dictates of reason, and directed
to some noble, and rational end, such now as the preservation of our honor or
Country, etc. But now Christian fortitude is quite another thing as it arises,

1. From a threefold principle of grace, 2. As it is directed by the rule of
the Word. 3. As it is exercised upon and against sin; As lastly it works for a
more noble end, the glory of God, and the Salvation of the Soul, you may take
this Description of it:

It is an habit infused into the Soul by the holy Spirit of God inabling the
Soul, from the dread of the Eternal God, a Love to him, and a faith in him, and
his promises, to despise the prospect, or presence of any danger, in a
resistance and fighting against sin, and all temptations to it, governing it
self by the rule of Gods Word, in order to the glory of God, and the Salvation
of a man's Soul. From hence may easily be gathered, both how it differs from
Natural Spirit and stomackfulness which is under no government, either of
reason or Religion, and is a mere natural quality, and found in beasts, as
much, and more then in man.

It also differs from Moral sortitude, both in the Principle, the rule, and
manner of its exercise, and the End. All which I shall open. I shall begin with
the first of these.

1. The first Principle of Christian Fortitude is the holy Spirit. Fear not
says God, I will strengthen thee, and uphold thee with the hand of my
righteousness. It is indeed God as the God of Nature that puts the natural
Spirit and courage into the Horse, or other beasts, Job. 32. 19. Have thou
(says God) given strength to the Horse; Have thou clothed his neck with
Thunder? But here God acts as the Author of saving grace. The holy Spirit is
the Author of all gracious habits, now there is a threefold Spiritual habit,
from which this fortitude or Christian courage proceeds; they are as it were
the Parents of it.

1. The first is the fear of God. No man is valiant against sin, when
temptations to it lie from great dangers, but he that has a true dread of God
in, and upon his heart. It is said of Moses, Hebr. 11. 27. That by faith he
forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King, for he endured, as seeing him
who is invisible. He forsook Egypt in obedience to the command of God, he
feared not the wrath of the King. When he saw he must either incur the Kings
wrath, or Gods displeasure, he feared not the wrath of the King, though (as
Solomon says) The wrath of the King is as the Messenger of death: Yet he
feared not the wrath of the King, here now was courage; here was Christian
Fortitude: Whence was it that he was so courageous? The Text tells you, He
endured, as seeing him who was invisible, he had the dread of the King of Kings
upon his Soul, agnovit imperatorem coeli, he knew there was one, that was
higher then the highest mortal; and this is necessary, and that too in a very
good degree to every Soul that is valiant for God. Every Person that fears
not God will be a coward in the Spiritual fight.

2. A Second habit contributing to this fortitude or Christian courage, is The
Love of God. The Apostle tells you it constrains; we see in daily experience,
the lover will endure no difhonour to be done unto, no affront to be put upon
the woman that he loves. The vain Gentleman is ready to fight upon any such
account. The Soul which truly loves God, will fuffer no affront, no dishonor
which he can help, to be done unto, and put upon God, much less can he allow
his own Soul in any such thing, what ever be the consequent of it.

3. A third habit from which this Christian courage or fortitude arises is
Faith: Faith respecting both the Proposition of the Word, and the promise of
the Gospel, and Person of the Mediator. Faith agreeing to all which the holy
Scripture reveals concerning the wrath of God, his power, justice greatness,
concerning the reward of those who well fight the good fight, who overcome,
etc. And also hoping, and trusting in God for the fulfilling of those promises.
Natural courage is much from Nature, and derives much from the Blood, Moral
Fortitude deriveth much from Education and Reason. Christian Fortitude in
encountering dangers arises from quite different principles. The Christian is
stout and valiant in the resistance of sin, because he fears the great and
living God, whose wrath is a thousand times more formidable then the wrath of
the greatest man, who when he has killed the body can do no more; God can cast
both body and Soul into Hellfire. Because he loves God, and will suffer any
thing, rather than grieve and offend him, and because he believes, whatsoever
God has revealed in his holy Word concerning the greatness, power, wrath, and
justice of God against sin, and concerning those who strive in the resistance
of it. Hence you read in that martyrology which you have Heb. 11. 33. That they
through faith subdued Kingdoms, -- v. 34. quenched the violence of fire,
escaped the edge of the sword, -- waxed valiant in the fight, v. 35. they were
tortured, not accepting deliverance, v. 36. they had Trials of cruel mockings,
and Scourgings, yea moreover of bonds, and imprisonment, etc. The principles of
the Christian valor, are not mere Natural Spirit and stomackfulness, nor mere
principles of honor, and reputation, and reason, which were the principles of
the Roman valor, but these which I have showed you.

2. As to the Acts of it. They are all lawful resistances of sin. He will
resist unto blood, but it still is in striving against sin, Heb. 1. 2. 4. And
this he does by a lawful resistance; This in the description I called a
governing himself according to the rules of Gods Word, 2 Timothy 2 5. If a man
strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned except he strive lawfully. All sin
is a transgression of the law of God. No Christian fortitude can be shown
either in the encountering of a danger, for not doing what he ought to do: Or
for the encountering of a danger, rather then doing, what God has given him a
freedom and liberty to do. As to the first a man is not Gods Martyr but the
Devils: As to the Second, he cannot be a Martyr for God but for his own humor,
God has left him a liberty, he need not suffer unless he will. But now there
may be several actions as to which a good man does not see his liberty, but
lies under apprehensions, that they are unlawful. The Question is what a
Christian is to do as to them? And whether a Christian can show any Christian
fortitude in incountring dangers rather then doing them. To which I shortly
answer,

1. That it is the duty of every good man as to such actions to use all the
means he can, as to a true information of his own conscience. Reading the holy
Scriptures, and other good Books, interpreting the Scriptures, which may
rightly inform him: Keeping his ear open to all arguments on both sides, to all
instructions.

2. If by no means he can receive Satisfaction as to the lawfulness of such
actions, the doing of them would be sin to him, and he is bound to encounter
any danger rather then do them and this is a piece of Christian fortitude. The
proximate Rule of our actions must be our own Conscience (by which I mean, our
own practical judgment of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of things to be done,
according to the best information we have, or can get concerning the will of
God in his word;) the persuasions, commands, dictates, or practice of others is
no rule to us. We must resist what our own Consciences tell us is sin and
contrary to the will of God.

But it must be lawfully. It must be such a resistance only as Gods Word does
allow us. A private Person in the resistance of sin, must not resist the power,
which is the Ordinance of God, Romans 13. 2. It is one thing to do what such
powers command, another thing by Arms to resist. God has not given the Sword
into any private hand, and such a Person drawing it shall perish with it; we
must strive against sin, but we must strive lawfully, not by ill Language, or
boisterous actions, but by meek and patient Suffering.

3. Lastly. The End of Christian fortitude must be, 1. The glory of God. 2. The
Salvation of our own Souls. It Is no Christian valor, to be valiant for any
thing but the truth, the honor and glory of God, the cause and concern of God
in the World: and in a matter where the Eternal Salvation of his own Soul is
concerned. Thus far I have opened to you the nature of this Christian courage
and fortitude, which I am calling to you for. Let me in the next place offer
something to you which may promove this excellent habit in your Souls. A
Natural courage cannot be given, where any thing of a Moral fortitude may be
promoved by rational arguments, education, and a due digestion of moral
Principles. But there must be some good natural foundation of courage, for the
Moralist in the managery of his disciple to build upon, but it is not so as to
this Christian fortitude. Persons of the weakest sex, of the lowest, meanest,
weakest Spirits by nature, have been made valiant as to the Spiritual fight
from the dread of God, the Love of God, by says in the Word of God, and in the
Lord Jesus Christ. Now in order to this excellent habit, and so necessary for
these times,

1. The first thing which I shall commend unto you in order to it is, a Sound
knowledge of the revealed will of God, both concerning sin, and concerning
duty. Knowledge is the foundation of says. It is that which gives boldness to
a man both in speaking and in acting. A poor ignorant Person may be valiant,
but he cannot expect to be so, he is Sometimes made valiant in an extraordinary
manner, by some special instinct, and impression of God upon him, as that Woman
which told her Judges, She could not dispute, but she could dye for Christ. A
just knowledge of what I may, or may not do, of the Nature of God, his
promises, and threatenings, is most necessary to a true Christian courage and
fortitude. He fights more like a madman, then a Christian, that is not first
fully Satisfied in the goodness, and justice of his cause.

2. A knowing man may be cowardly if he be not rooted and grounded in the
faith, heartily and firmly believing what he has the notion of. Faith is the
only shield that keeps off the fiery darts of the wicked. Now this is the
gift of God, and the way to obtain it is Prayer. Beg of God his Spiritual
armor, and to make you valiant in the Spiritual fight, Math. 26. 41. Watch and
pray that you enter not into temptation.

3. Set as loose to the World and all your concerns, and Relations in it as you
can. It is observed of great Cities that they seldom hold out long against an
Enemy, Their Riches, their Wives and Children make them Cowards. That Man or
Woman that has not learned to deny himself in all his worldly contentments can
never be valiant.

4. Lastly look unto Jesus the Author, and the finisher of your says, who for
the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despised the shame, and is
set down on the throne of God; consider him who endured such contradiction of
sinners in himself, lest you be wearied, and saint in your minds. It is the
Apostles advice, Heb. 12. 3. The valor and courage of a General often times puts
metal, and courage into his Soldiers, and retrieveth a day of battle when it
is upon the point lost. The eying of Christ who is the author and finisher of
our faith, is of mighty use to us to engage us to go on to the Spiritual fight
without fear or dread. Let me press this upon you by a few arguments.

1. The first shall be from the ton general decay of this gracious habit in the
Spirits of Christians. God of 'old complained by his Prophet, Jer. 9. 3. That
there was a generation of them who bent their tongues like bows for lies, but
there w^^ none valiant for the truth upon the Earth. How few are there this day
that are valiant for the truth? There are many that bend their bows for lies.
Papists are full of courage and metal for an idolatrous worship; wicked men
are full of malice and courage to accuse, inform against, and to destroy the
People of God, but who is on the Lords side? Who? Where is the courage of
Christians for the truths, the ways, the Ordinances of God? They dare not
appear for God, but seek all ways to hide, and cover themselves, and to
withdraw themselves from the Lords battles. They are not like the warlike horse
God speaks of to Job, that says amongst the Trumpets, Ha, Ha, that mocketh
at fear, is not affrighted, and turns not his back from the Sword. It is time
for some to show themselves valiant for God, for the truths, and Ordinances of
God. We are afraid that true Religion is almost at its last Gasp in our times.
Where is the Spirit, of the Lord God of Elijah? The Spirit of those Ancient
Worthies that noble Army of Martyrs, that loved not their lives unto Death, but
witnessed a good confession, they transmitted the true Religion to us sealed
with their blood, the Spirits of Christians do not appear as if we were like to
add many such seals to it, and pass it also under our Seal to the generation
which is like to succeed us. Let this a little move us.

2. Consider how necessary a grace it is for the times in which we live. The
whole Life of a Christian upon the Earth is such a warfare, such a warring with
Principalities and Powers, and the Rulers of the Darkness of this World,
against spiritual wickedness in high places, that he had need be called to, at
all times, to put on the whole Armor of God, that he may be able to stand
against the Wiles of the Devil, to withstand, and when he has done all to
stand. But the times wherein we live seem to have a particular malignity
against Religion and Godliness above the times we have seen, or the days of
our Forefathers. The Devil is come down with a great rage, we had need of
courage, and of patience. The Casuists trouble their Readers with many
Questions in order to the Solution of this one Question, When a Christian is
obliged to make an explicit Confession of his Faith, and to declare what he is,
and what he will stand to, and abide by? They agree generally, that he is bound
to do it where the glory of God is eminently concerned. 2. Or where the good of
others is in eminent hazard. There are certainly two times when the glory of
God is eminently concerned in Christians appearing for him. 1. When his Truths
and Ordinances are like to be trodden under foot. 2. When the Name and Things
of God are eminently blasphemed. I beseech you consider whether these be not
times of great reproach and blasphemy; were ever the Truths of God more
opposed? was ever the holy Name of God to that degree blasphemed? was there
ever a greater rage against Religion and Godliness? Is it not now time for
Christians to buckle on their Armor, to quit themselves like men, to arm
themselves with courage, to show themselves like a company of Horses in
Pharaoh's Chariots, Horses that will not be afraid, like Grasshoppers, Horses
that paw in the Valley, and rejoice in their strength, and go on to meet the
armed men.

3. Consider, That Christ has made you like the Horses in Pharaoh 's Chariots.
I will open this in two things.

1. He has put of his strength into you. The wise man says, The Horse is
prepared for the day of Battle; he is prepared by Nature, by a great natural
Spirit which God has given him, and he is prepared by Art and Managery. God
has prepared every Christian for this Spiritual battle by giving him a New
Nature. We use to say, That if the Horse knew its own strength, it would be too
hard for the Rider. God in mercy to man has hidden the Horses strength from
him. God in judgment has hidden Christians strength from them, in these sinful
times. The Church has a strength in it, such a strength, as the Gates of Hell
cannot prevail against. Believers have a strength in, and with them, if they
would but put it forth; prisons, torments, fires, in former times could not
prevail against them. How has God in these sinful times hidden the wisdom of
the wise, and the prudence of the prudent, and the strength of the strong men
from them? What a strength was there in Luther when Melancthon was afraid they
should perish in their appearing for the Cause of God, and he made answer,
Esto, ruamus, ruet Christus una Christus magnus ille regnator mundi; mallem cum
Christo ruere, quam cum Caesare stare. Be it so (says he) Let us perish,
Christ must perish with us, Christ, that great Ruler of the World; I had rather
fall with Christ, than stand with Caesar. The Horse is not afraid of an Army of
armed men; he goes on to meet the armed men, he mocketh at fear, he is not
affrighted, he turns not his back from the Sword, he fears not the rattling
of the Quiver, nor the glittering of the Spear, and the Shield, he swalloweth
up the ground with fierceness and rage, neither believes he that it is the
sound of the Trumpet. Christ has made his People like to these Horses, only
the strength of the Horse is natural, the Believers strength is spiritual. Why
are we afraid? 2. The Horses in Pharaoh's Chariots had doubtless some Armor to
protect them and preserve them. However, he that governed the Chariot took a
care of them. Thus also were the Horses prepared for the Battle, by Art, as
well as by Nature. Thus are Christians also prepared; there is an Armor of God
prepared for them, which they are to put on. And Christ who governs his own
Chariot, his Church, will take care of them, Psalm. 46 5. God is in the midst of
the Church, therefore it shall not fall, Isa. 27. 3. I the Lord do keep it, I
will water it every moment, last any hurt it, I will keep it night and day,
Psalm. 125. 2. As the Mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round
about his People; He will create a defense upon their glory, a cloud, and a
smoke, and a flaming fire upon her Assemblies, a Tabernacle, a place of Refuge,
a cover from the storm, and from Rain, Isa, 4. 4, 5.

4. And lastly; Christ expects this from you. Thus much methinks is signified
to us by the phrase, I have compared thee to a company of Horses in Pharaoh 's
Chariots. The Prince expects that his War-horses should serve him in the day of
Battle, that they should not be afraid of armed men, of Drums or Trumpets, etc.
It is the service we have to do for Christ in the use of the habits of his
grace bestowed upon us, and in thankfulness for all the goodness he has showed
us in more calm and quiet times. That Christian ill requiteth the Lord for all
his feeding in green and fat Pastures, who when an Evil day comes, and the Lord
by his Providence calls out to the World, Who is on my side? Who is afraid,
or ashamed to appear for God, own his Truths, and sacred Institutions? Christ
has not compared us to Asses, that couch under burdens, but to a more generous
sort of creatures, to Horses, to Horses in Pharaoh's Chariots. Look upon your
selves as such. Be not like the cowardly Cur, that runs away as soon as a Man
takes but up a stone to throw at him. We read of Christians in the Primitive
times, that they would expose themselves to their Tormentors, telling them,
They were Christians. In Queen Mary's time the Persecutors cursed the People of
God, and said, They had a mind to burn. Oh that Christians in these times had
such a courage, as the wicked Apostates, and their most furious Adversaries;
might think that Christians in the defense of the Gospel, had a mind to suffer
whatever their wicked hands durst do against them. Certainly he who has given
Christians the grace of fortitude and courage, expects the exercise of it.

2. But secondly; This Doctrine calls aloud to Christians for Unity. Christ
has not compared us to Horses in a Field, but in a Chariot, where they are
united. Horses in Chariots draw by couples, and that makes their draught the
more easy. Oh that my head were a fountain of waters, my eyes rivers of tears,
that I might weep day and night for the Divisions amongst the People of God.
This has made almost every Horse draw singly, and has almost mired the Lord's
Chariots.

1. I beseech you consider how God's Enemies are united. Gebal, Ammon, and
Amalek; Papists and Atheists are united in their opposition to Truth and
Holiness, against every person, and everything which has any thing of the
stamp and impression of God upon it. Is it not time for all Protestants to
unite, all such especially as are Christians not in name only, but in deed, and
in truth? It may be we cannot unite in every Principle or Ecclesiastical
Practice; we have different apprehensions, and we cannot reconcile them: Can we
not forbear one another in love? who has made us more infallible than our
Brethren? 2. I beseech you consider, what already have been the fruits of our
breaches, and disunion, and what is likely to be the further issue of them, if
not in time prevented. Popery is increased; many absurd and blasphemous
Opinions are propagated; what will the end of these things be? Shall we not be
made a common prey, pugnant singuli, vincuntur universi; while men fight
singly, they are overcome universally. You that have any savor of the things
of God upon your Souls, that have sense of things, and how dismal the state of
them is, and is like to be, I beseech you lay these things to heart. The whole
Ministry of the Gospel, the Ordinances of God are struck at. One Truth of God
is cried down after another. Lay these things to heart, and while you are
persuaded that your Brethren own the same common Faith with you, and pursue the
same common design of the glory of God, and Holiness as the means to it, give
an allowance to them in some things wherein you differ; do not arrogate
Infallibility to your selves; believe it is possible you also may be mistaken;
and though you are bound to live by your own Faith, and walk according to your
own Faith, and Persuasion, yet do not pronounce an Anathema against all that
are not just of your size. Lay aside your heats and animosities, and your
differences, which are of far less moment than the whole Interest of Christ and
his Gospel is. I shall conclude my Discourse, as the Apostle begins his second
Chapter to the Philippians; If therefore there be any consolation in Christ, if
any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercy:
Let me add, If any concern for the honor and glory of God, or the Interest of
Christ or Religion in the Nation, fulfill the comparison of my Text, and be you
yet at last like a company of Horses in Pharaoh 's Chariots, being like minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, and of one mind, and do the same
thing in bearing a joint Testimony for God.

Sermon XLIX.
Cant. 1. 10. Thy Cheeks are comely with rows of Jewels. Thy neck with Chains
of gold.

THE Blessed Lover in this song goes on yet in the commendation of his Spouse.
He had before commended her from her more inward beauty, he had called her, The
fairest amongst women, he had compared her to a Company of Horses in Pharaohs
Chariots, those Phrases had respect to her inward indowments. He knows not
how to leave, he here goes on in her further commendation, thy Cheeks are
comely with rows of Jewels, thy Neck with Chains of gold. These Phrases speak
Riches, for Jewels and Gold are things of value, and her beauty, her artificial
beauty. For these are Ornaments supposed to add to the beauty and comeliness of
the Person that wears them. Only there is something looks a little odd
according to the guise of our Country, where Women use to wear ropes of Pearl
about their Necks or Wrists, or Jewels on their Breasts or in their Ears, but
how these should reflect a beauty on her Cheeks is hard to understand, but we
understand not the fashions of other Countries. We read, Isa. 3. 21. Of Nose
Jewels in use amongst the Jews, which dressers of Women in our times would find
hard to put on And if a way could be found for that, we should judge them very
strange Ornaments. But let me first open the words. Our translators add some
Words here to complete the sense. In the Hebrew is no more then, Thy Cheeks are
comely with rows -- and thy Necks with Chains. Our Interpreters not being able
to conceive, what rows (except of Jewels) could adorn the face, have added
these Words to the former part: Nor able to conceive what Chains should adorn
the Neck of a woman except of Gold or Pearls; And having added (...) to the
former words, they add here not of Pearl, nor jewels, but of Gold. Neither are
other Interpreters agreed about the translation of the other Words, either as
to the matter or form. As to the form the Septuagint reads the Word as a
question. How comely are thy Cheeks? But most other Interpreters read them
positively, and indicatively, as we read them; that difference is not much. But
there is yet a greater difference as to the matter of the words, for the
Seventy read it, How fair are thy Cheeks, (...), as of a Turtle. The Arabic
and Vulgar Latin follow them. The Syriack Interpreters translate it, thy Cheeks
are fair in thy locks. Pagnin, Montanus, and most others read it according to
the sense our translation puts upon it. Let me at least attempt to reconcile
this difference. The Word is (...) which unquestionably derives from the
radical Word (...) which in its Original and primary signification, signifies
to make a diligent search and inquiry. Thence the Noun (...) which signifies a
search, or the order of a search. We translate it estate, 1. Chron. 17. 16.
David says, thou have regarded me according to the estate of a man of high
degree: That is, according to the rank or order of one that is of an high
degree. It is used to express the order in which the Maidens came in to King
Ah^shuerus, Esther 2. 12, 15. Pagnin translateth the Noun (...) (which is used
both here, and in the next verse) series, ordo, ratio, dispositio, forma, and
says this signification arises out of the other; and that it signifies such
a search or inquiry, as is in, and according to order: The Word also signifies
a Turtle. So it is used, Levit. 12. 6. Genesis 15. 9. Cant. 2. 12, Psalm. 74. 19.
Levit. 14. 22. Levit. 1. 14. But it is hard to put that sense of it upon this
Text, though the Septuagint, and those that follow them, do it. For what sense
can we make of this? Thy Cheeks are comely with Turtles. But some of the Hebrew
Doctors tell us, that the word signifies also a kind of Women's Ornaments, and
Pagnin tells us that R. David says it signifies Pearls or Jewels, set in
order; some think it was an Ornament that had something of the figure of the
Turtle. They say the Turtle has this name from the mournful noise which it
makes, sounding in our Ears like this Word. Others think the French word Tour
(which we have now made English) signifying an Ornament of the head, and the
English word Attire both derive from this Hebrew word. From this discourse you
may gather, that the penury of words in the Hebrew tongue, constraining them to
signify several things by the same word, is the reason of the difference of
Interpreters in the translation of the Hebrew Text both in this, and many other
Texts. It is most probable, that Women had some Ornaments in those Countries,
which they expressed by this name, and that, (...) in the Greek also did
express it (though our Lexicographers give us no such account of (...).) The
learned Mercer observes that those Interpreters who translate the words, as the
Turtle, are mistaken both in the affix which is not (...) but (...), and in the
number, which is Plural. It must be thy Cheeks are comely in the Turtles, which
it would be hard to make sense of, if we should interpret the word of the
Turtle doves: I conclude therefore, that it is a very difficult Text to give a
certain Interpretation of, and that the sense our Interpreters have put upon it
bids as fair as any other, and therefore I shall adhere to that. The word
certainly signifies some Ornaments in those times used by Women to adorn their
heads with, called by this name because of the order and exceeding neatness of
them, or because of their figure, and fashion. Our Interpreters have thought
fit, to Interpret the word concerning those Ornaments, though we do not exactly
know their fashion. So then the sense must be, Thy Cheeks are comely or
beautiful, in o^ between the Ornaments of thy head. It follows, Thy Neck with
Chains of Gold or Pearls. Two or three things I shall observe to you.

Qu. 1.
1. Some Interpreters make a question whether in this expression our Savior
has not a respect to the former comparison, he had there compared to his
Spouse to a company of Horses in Pharaohs Chariots; it is you see a fashion
with us to deck up Horses which we value with Ribbands etc. It might be a
custom in those richer places of the World to deck them with Jewels and Chains
of Gold. Mercer and other learned Interpreters think it more probable, that he
passed on to a new similitude, comparing his Church, or the particular
believing Soul to a Beautiful Woman in her Ornaments.

2. This blessed Lover had before commended her for her internal worth, and
beauty: For strength and courage she was like to the Horses in Pharaohs
Chariots. Here he commends her from her external Beauty: Her Cheeks were
comely with Rows of Jewels, her Neck with Chains of Gold, or Pearls.

Let me now pass from the explication of terms, to the understanding of things.
I shall only turn the words of the Text into a Proposition.

Prop. The Spouse of Christ, has her Cheeks comely with Ornaments and her Neck
adorned with Chains.

The Proposition will call to us principally for Explication and Application.

In the Explication we will inquire,

1. What is here to be understood by the Spouses Neck, and Cheeks.

2. What are those Rows, and Chains with which the Spouse of Christ is, and
must be adorned.

As to the first of these I shall not trouble you with the several fancies of
Interpreters of Luxuriant fancies but only insist upon what I conceive most
proper, and show you the grounds of it.

1. They are both exterior parts, and ordinarily exposed to the view of
others. Other parts are covered, and not so exposed. Mercer notes, that
amongst Women, if these parts have their just proportion, and beauty,
concerning others, there uses to be no inquiry, their Symmetry and comeliness
is judged from these. So as doubtless these terms note the Spouses conversation
before the World in her outward visible appearance; The Spouse of Christ is (as
the Psalmist expresses it) all glorious within; Her chief Ornament is what the
Apostle Peter advises Women professing Godliness, the hidden man of the heart
in that which is not corruptible, 1 Pet. 3. 4. But that is not all her Beauty,
her light also shines before men, that they see her good works, and glorify
her Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. The Cheeks are the path upon which the
penitential tears run, her tears are on her Cheeks, Lam. 1, 2^ Her tears of
affliction also run down there. Her Cheeks are those parts which are exposed to
the violence and injuries of others, Isaiah 50. 6. I gave my Cheeks to them
that plucked off the hair, Lam. 3. 30. He gives his Cheek to him that smites
him. Micaiah you know was smote on the Cheek by the false Prophet. These Cheeks
of the Spouse, exposed to the smiters, bedewed with tears, either because of
sin, or sharp sufferings, are in Christ's Eyes very lovely. Thus the words
afford us two notions. 1. That the Spouse of Christ is very beautiful not only
within but in her more external conversation. 2. That even the suffering parts
of the Spouse are in the Eyes of Christ very beautiful. It is reported of
Constantine the great that he would often kiss the hole of Puphnutius his Eye,
that was out for the profession of the Gospel. Christ commends the Cheeks of
his Saints bedewed with tears, and given to the smiters for his sake, how
beautiful says he are thy Cheeks?

2. Secondly the Neck is that part of a man upon which men use (as to beasts)
to put ropes and yokes to bring them into Subjection, as also upon which men of
labor, Porters and such like, use to carry burdens. Hence we often in holy
Scripture read of a stiff neck, to express stubbornness and disobedience,
Isaiah 48. 4. Thy neck was as an Iron sinew, Jer. 17. 23. They made their neck
stiff, that they might not hear; and the disobedient Israelites are often
called a stiffnecked People, Exodus 32. 9. 33. 3, 5. And so in many other places
of Scripture. The Freedom, and pliableness of the Neck are also often made use
of, to signify the Freedom and obedience of the Person. So Genesis 27. 40. Thou
shall break his yoke from off thy neck. So Isa. 10. 27. His yoke shall be taken
from off thy neck, that is, thou shall be at liberty from him. The neck is that
part of man which the Holy Ghost makes use of in Scripture to express
disobedience by, the stiff necked man, is the man that is stubborn, and
disobedient to the Law of God, the man that hardened not his Neck, is the
Obedient man: Christ has Chains for the necks of his People; wicked men put
yokes upon their necks, their yokes are yokes of Iron. God promises to break
these yokes, but yet they are not without a yoke, Christ has a yoke, Matthew.
11. 29. Take my yoke upon you for my yoke is easy, and my burden is l^^ht.
Christ has Chains, but they are of Gold, the Enemies Chains are of Iron, they
are hard, and grate, but (says Christ) my yoke is easy. By the Spouses neck,
our Savior doubtless means his Spouses Obedience, whether in doing or in
suffering.

Qu. 2.
The next Question is what is here to be understood by the Rows of Jewels, and
the Chains that are here mentioned; I noted to you before that the Word here
used signifies an orderly disposal of things, and from that word the word,
(...) (which signifies the Law of God) comes; in the Law of God the duties of
men and women are orderly disposed. To say nothing of the various^fancies of
Interpreters, I take the most genuine probable sense to be this, thy external
conversation is beautiful and comely, by thy orderly walking according to the
rule of my Law. Holiness which lies in the ordering, and government of a
Christian steps, according to a divine order and rule, is exceeding beautiful,
comely in the Eyes of Jesus Christ. To this sense the Chaldee Pharaphrast an
ancient Interpreter (but applying the whole song to the Jewish Church) carries
it, for he thus Paraphraseth upon my Text:

How comely is this People, which has the Words of the Law given to them? That
they may be as an ear-ring on their Cheeks, that they may not depart from the
right way, as the Horse that has a bridle in his mouth is kept that he does
not go back. And how beautiful are their necks [or backs] which bear the yoke
of my commandments, which are upon them as a yoke upon the neck of the Ox which
ploweth in the field?

He (as you see) applies all to the Jews (and therein he is very fond, and
partial) but you see by the rows and Chains he understands the Laws and
Precepts of God, according to which every good man orders his conversation
aright. Chains for the most part both for the hands, and necks and feet, use to
be made of brass or Iron, or some baser metal; with these Prisoners in war, or
Malefactors in peace use to be bound, and hence the term is made use of to
signify the greatest and basest subjection and servitude. Chains are also made
of Pearls and gold, or some valuable metal, Pro. 1. 9. And these Chains denote
greatest liberty, being used and worn by none but by Persons of Quality. The
Text is to be understood of the latter, and the most valuable Interpreters
interpret the Chains here concerning the yoke of Gods Commandments. Solomon
counsels the young man, Pro. 1. 8. to hear the instruction of his Father,
and not to forsake the law of his Mother, for faith he v. 9. They shall be an
Ornament of grace to thy head; And Chains about thy neck. Certainly the
instructions; and the Laws of God are much more so. Holiness is a great
Ornament and beauty to a Soul; take Chains in which sense you will, either for
Chains of Iron, with which Enemies load the necks of Saints (for I told you
those Words [of Gold] are added by our Interpreters;) or for those Chains,
which are of gold, and Pearl, and the richest Ornaments, either of them are
lovely in the Eyes of Christ; but I rather concur with our own Translators, and
the most Interpreters, who expound the term of the latter sort of Chains, not
only because our Savior seems here to allude to the Ornaments of women, but
because the Heb. Word here used, (...) is never used to express Chains of
Bondage in all those Texts of Scripture where any mention is made of such
Chains. And Pagnin assures us from three of the Hebrew Rabbits that the word
properly signifies Chains made of Gold, or precious Stones joined with a thread
together.

By this time you may easily understand the Proposition, the sense of which
according to this explication is,

The Spouse of Christ, whether by her we understand the Church which is a body
made up of several believers, or a particular believer, is not only inwardly
comely, and beautiful, in respect of those habits of grace, by which she is
made (as the Psalmist expresses it) all glorious within, but she is also
visibly comely, in her more external appearance, by her orderly conversation,
according to the Laws of God, which is as an Ornament or Chain of well set
Jewels unto her, and by her ready submitting her Neck to the yoke of Christ's
Commandments, his several Precepts being like a Chain of Gold or precious
stones about her neck. This is enough for the explication, the Child of God is
not only inwardly, but outwardly holy, and his holiness is a great beauty to
him. Here are two things.

1. The Child of God, is not only inwardly, but externally holy.

2. This external holiness is to him a great beauty.

A Child of God has a good heart, but that is not all; he must live a good
life: this is a point exceeding obvious whether we consider, 1. The Rule by
which he walks. Or Secondly, The influence that the heart has upon the life.
Or 3. The example he is to follow. Or 4. The Patterns of holy men upon
Scripture record. 5. Or the promises of God to whom they are made, Or 6. The
descriptions of good men in holy writ. Or 7. The end which he serves.

1. If we consider the Divine rule, it reaches not the heart alone, but the
outward man. Let your light so shine before men (says our Savior) that they
may see your good works. Show me thy says by thy works, faith James, Faith
without works is dead. It were endless to reckon up the several Texts of
Scripture by which God has directed the Government of our Tongues, our Eyes,
our Ears, our Hands, our Feet. In short the several Precepts for good works are
all proofs of this.

2. It must be so if we consider what influence the heart, and will, and
affections have upon our whole outward man, commanding all the outward members,
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, from the dictates of the
heart, the Eye looks, the hand moves, the mouth speaks, the Feet turn this
or that way; So that if the Tree be good, the fruit must be good also; the
Fig Tree brings not forth thistles, nor the Vine thorns. A naughty tongue, eye,
hand, foot, is a certain indication of a corrupt, and naughty heart.

3. The ^^liever is made conformable to Christ. He went up and down doing good,
finishing the work, which his Father had given him to do, glorifying his Father
on Earth, doing his will, manifesting his name, no guile was found in his
mouth, no iniquity in his hand. No iniquity toward God, no unrighteousness
toward men.

4. See the Patterns of holy men upon Scriptural record, Abraham, and David,
all the holy Servants of God, you will find their holiness did not lie only in
the obedience of their heart, but of their whole external converse, a strict
walking with God in obedience to his will.

5. Observe the promises of God, they are not only made to Faith, and Love,
and the more inward habits of the mind, but to external acts, such as Prayer,
hearing the Word, Sanctification of the Sabbath, showing mercy to the poor,
doing justly, walking righteously, etc;

6. The descriptions of holy men also make out this. They are described to be
men fearing God, and eschewing evil, walking in the Commandments of God.
Working righteousness, all which expressions signify that a believer must not
only be internally holy, but externally so also.

Lastly the end, which they serve shows also a necessity of it; they are lights
to inlighten the World, and therefore they must not be hid under bushels: They
are Salt to season the World, and therefore must be exposed to their use, their
end is to glorify God before men, which cannot be without an external, as well
as an internal holiness; thus the first thing appears. I have passed over
these things, easy enough to have been extended into a much larger discourse
Because it is a point so exceeding obvious and indeed agreed by all men. The 2d
thing is that holiness is a believers beauty, it is so in the Eyes of Christ
which is here spoken of. Nor is this of any thing more difficult demonstration
then the other. What is that which we call beauty but an amiable external
appearance of a Person, arising from a Symmetry of parts, a due mixture, and
Proportion of colors, in conformity to some Original Pattern or Idea. A
Christians Original Pattern is God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ; be
you holy at your Heavenly Father is holy: As I am holy, (says the holy Writ.)
What can be a Christians beauty but his conformity to God, and that amiableness
which arises from that. All Spiritual beauty is to be measured, from the
symmetry of the Soul to the divine law. That which makes the Soul amiable to
God and to all those who are like God. This is holiness. But I shall sum up all
in some few Words of application. I shall first observe from hence two or three
Corollaries for our instruction, then close all with a few words of exhortation.

Corol. 1.
Observe then, That it is not enough for one that owneth the name of a
believer, to glory in a good inside. There goes a good outside, as well as a
good inside to make up a good Christian. There are 2 Sorts of hypocrites, and I
am at loss with my self to determine which is worst. The first sort glory in
appearance but not in reality. The Pharisees were of this Sort, they were
painted Sepulchers, they made clean the outside of the platter; of this Sort
are men that pretend much to acts of devotion, praying, fasting, hearing, and
acts of righteousness toward men, and perhaps charity, but are without any true
faith in God, or love to God, full of malice, and envy, and cruelty, and
covetousness, these are Pharisaical Hypocrites. The 2d are such as will pretend
to a good inside, but they have a bad outside. These men, bite, and devour
their brethren lie and cheat, and defraud, and oppress, neglect duties of
Religion, etc. And yet tell you they have a good heart, they have faith, in
God, Love to God, etc. Thou Hypocrite! show me thy faith by thy works, thy
pretended Love to God by thy keeping his commandments. Truly of the two, these
are the worst, they pretend to holiness, but which way will you look for it?
What notion of holiness have these men taken up? Will you look for it, in their
conscientious, constant attendance upon duties of public Worship, there you
see their places empty, or if they be filled, observe their behavior, they are
prating, or sleeping, or sporting, or with their Eyes compassing the whole
congregation. Will you look for it in their private families? There it may be
you may hear the voice of Cursing, or Swearing, or reviling, but the voice of
Praying, of reading the Word, of those that sing praise unto God, is seldom or
never heard in their Houses. Will you look for their holiness, in their
behavior toward men, you shall there find neither Justice nor Charity;
cheating, defrauding, Oppression, cruelty, hard-hearted behavior, etc. Yet
they will tell you they have good hearts. Either now these men have Souls not
like other men's Souls, that have no command of their tongues, and hands, etc.
Or else they speak falsely. I say these are of all others the Vilest
Hypoerites. 1. Because they have nothing good, the first mentioned do some good
things, materially good, they read, fast, pray, walk justly, give alms: But
these wretches have nothing, do nothing at all that is good. There is nothing
good in their lives, and that assures us, there is nothing good in their
hearts. 2. These men do much more hurt then others do; these are they that
cause the name of God to be Bla^^^emed and evil spoken of. Brethren! be not
deceived, they are fifty men that you can impose upon, but you cannot impose
upon that God who searches the heart, and tries the reins. Let none be
deceived by the pretenses of these Hypocrites. The Spouse of Christ has
beautiful Cheeks, and a beautiful Neck, as well as a beautiful inside; her
Cheeks are comely betwixt rows of Jewels; She has a Chain of gold upon her
Neck. The laws and instructions of her Heavenly Father, are an Ornament to her
head, and a Chain upon her Neck. She durst not before men dishonor God. Let
this be the first instructive Corollary from this discourse.

Corol. 2.
Secondly observe. The Laws of Christ, are both rows of Jewels, and also Chains.

1. They are Chains of Restraint; As Chains about creatures necks restrain
their natural Liberty, and keep them in due obedience and subjection to their
Governors: So does the Law of the Lord. Man is like an un^amed Heifer, which
would run wildly this and that way; Christ therefore puts a Chain upon him,
when he intends any Soul for his use. I will (faith God) write my Laws in
their inward parts. (There now is the Chain about the Spouse's Neck.) Joseph
had this Chain about his neck: How shall I do this evil (says he) and sin
against God? Do this and live (says he) for I fear God, and so durst not take
any revenge upon you. The Children of God have in them lust and corruption, but
it is chained. The Law of God written in their hearts, is a Chain upon their
lusts; and this may mind us to take heed how we abuse that sweet Notion of
Christian Liberty. Christians are free, but they must take heed that they use
not their Liberty for a Cloak to maliciousness, 1 Pet. 2. 16. that being the
Lord's Freemen, they do not make themselves Servants of corraption. It is not
a Liberty to the Devil's Chains, but from them; not a Liberty to the Flesh, but
to serve the Lord without fear. 2. As the Precepts of the Lord are Chains of
Restraint, so they are also Chains Indicative of the greatest liberty and
honor; they are Chains, but they are Chains of Gold, Chains of Pearl; such
Chains speak both the liberty and dignity of those that wear them. The Law is
spiritual, and just, and good (says Paul.) But further yet, the Precepts of
God are also Rows of Jewels. It speaks two things:

1. Rows of Jewels are things as to which a great Art is seen in the orderly
disposing of them. There is a strange orderliness to be observed in the Divine
Precepts. Could you imagine a Family, a Church, a Commonwealth, any Society of
men, in which the several persons, both in their single, and relative
capacities, lived up to the strictness of the Divine Rule, respecting them, how
orderly would they appear even in the Eye of humane Reason? All the ugliness
and disorder that we see in men's Lives, in Families, Churches, Cities, Kingdoms
(if you observe it) arifeth from men's deviations from the Divine Rule, through
the impetuousness of unmortified passions. Hence sinful walking is by the
Apostle called properly disorderly walking, 2 These. 3. 6, 7, 11. And the holy
man is called one who orders his conversation aright, in the last verse of
the 50th Psalm.

2. Rows of Jewels are Ornaments. There is something of beauty and comeliness
resulteth from them, and it resulteth much from the orderly setting and wearing
of them. There is a great comeliness in Holiness. But of this more in the third
Corollary.

Corol. 3.
Observe thirdly; That Holiness is the only Ornament of a man or woman in the
Eyes of Christ. The World is at this day full of gawdry, Rings and Jewels,
Bracelets, and Necklaces of Pearl, Patches, and Paintings. Solomon has told
us, that favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain: But a woman that seareth the
Lord she shall be praised. As a Jewel (says he) in a Swines Snout: So is a
fair woman without descretion, Prove. 11. 21. Christ accounts holiness the only
beauty of a man, or woman. Our acts of holiness, are in his Eyes the only ropes
of Pearl, and Chains of gold, and rows of Jewels. We live in an age of great
vanity, as to Artificial beauty, and it would make the heart of a Christian to
bleed, to see even to what excesses of this nature, Persons professing to
Religion, and Godliness run. Let me therefore close this discourse with a word
or two of Exhortation. 1. To neglect other beauty. 2. To study this beauty more
and more. 3. Not to Satisfy your selves, with mere pretenses of inward purity,
whiles your more exterior conversation gives no evidence to it.

1. I say first to neglect other beauty, whether natural (though that be a
great gift of God where it is found:) Or Artificial which is borrowed from Gold
and Silver, and Precious Stones, and Jewels, and fine Clothes, and Linen, etc.

1. Consider, This is not your beauty. That Is our beauty which Commends us to
our Husband Jesus Christ. He regards not a fine face, nor well proportioned
limbs, he regards not Jewels, and Ornaments, nor fine Clothes and Linen. They
are in his Eyes poor vile things. Leave these things to the men and women of
the world that have nothing else to Commend them to the wantons of the world.
The beauty of a Christian lies not in these things, nay they are his shame,
and deformity, as I shall by and by show you.

2. Secondly let me urge the Precept of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 9, Let women
(says he) adorn themselves in modest apparel with shamefastness and sobriety,
not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly array but (which becomes
women, professing Godliness,) with good works. Mark that phrase (which becomes
women prosessing Godliness) as if he should say, these vanities of broidered
Hair, Gold, Pearl, costly array, may become men and women of the world, and
commend them to the world, but they do not become men and Women professing
Godliness, they are not to approve themselves to the vain Persons of the World,
but to Christ alone, these things Commend no Soul to Christ, good works, an
holy life and conversation according to the rule of the Gospel, that and
nothing but that will Commend a Soul to God, that is the only adorning which
becomes women that profess to Godliness. You have the like in Peter, 1 Pet. 3.
3. Speaking of good women whose adorning (says he) let it not be the outward
adorning of playting the hair, and of wearing Gold, and putting on of apparel,
but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible,
even the Ornament of a meek, and quiet Spirit, which before God is of great
price, for after this manner in the old time the holy women also who trusted in
God adorned themselves, I do know the Common Interpretation which some put upon
these Texts, as if the Apostle did not wholly forbid these Ornaments, but only
forbad Christians to look upon these things as their only Ornaments, so as to
neglect the adorning of the hidden man of the heart. Nor indeed do I think
these Texts to contain an absolute prohibition of these things to all women
that are Christians and at all times. I do know that our Savior seems to
allow sost raiment to those that are in Kings houses. Reason allows an array
to Persons according to the Station and quality they take up, and are in in the
World Religion does not contradict it. But when I consider, 1. What of men, and
women's estates, which God has given them to Cloth the naked, to feed the
hungry etc. (The necessities of their families being first provided for) is
spent on these things, 2. The difference between habits for distinction of
Persons in magistracy and habits for vanity, where there is no such
distinction. 3. The time that is spent in the dressing up worms in this manner.
4. The proneness of our hearts to value our selves upon these accoutrements. I
cannot but think that there is more forbidden in those Texts, then that
Christians should look upon these as their only or Principal Ornaments.
Especially when I also consider that as God in the old Testament forbad his
People the habits of Heathens: So he has commanded his People, Romans 12. 2. Not
to be conformed to this World, Romans 12. 2.

3. Thirdly, Consider the sinfulness of some of these things. Where these
adornings are beyond the quality of Persons, and beyond what their estates will
bear, in consistency with that Proportion of good works which God requires of
them, where they are temptations to draw out the lusts of others: Where they
are offenses and Scandals to such as fear God, they are doubtless ^inful.
Cyprian in his Book de Virginum disciplina, has several arguments against the
new arts of the World for Ornaments, especially that of painting, God, (says
he) made us after his own Image, it is the Devil who makes the alteration, O
the vile presumption of those, who dare attempt to alter the workmanship of
God! Art not thou afraid (says he) that God in the resurrection should not own
thee, and say opus meum hoc non est* This is none of my workmanship. Again
(says he) is not this poor wretch always a torment to her self? She has her
Eyes always in her glass and is never pleased with her self.

Consider lastly, how inconsistent these things are with that Ministering to the
necessity of Saints: That richness in good works, that mortification. The
declaration of our sense of Gods dispensations to us, which are the duties of
Christians: God requires that we should labor with our hands, that we may have
to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4. 28. And should not we think you, leave off
a Silk garment, or a little Silver or Gold lace, a Ring, a Jewel a costly dress
that we might have more abundantly to give to those that need? Are you rich in
the World, and will your estate bear such expenses, and has not God charged
such, 1 Timothy 6. 18. To do good, to be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to Communicate, laying up in store for your selves a good foundation,
against the time to come, that you may lay hold on Eternal life. Can you be
rich in clothes, and habits, and rich in good works also? If you could does not
the Apostle tell you, That those who are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with
the affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 5. 24. Is this your crucifixion of the
flesh with its affections and lusts? What is a gratifying and pleasing the
flesh, what is a making provision for the affections, and lusts of it, if this
be not? To what other use, or end can these things be? Does adorning our selves
with Jewels and Silks, and Ribbands, patchings and paintings, speak a mortified
heart to the World? a Crucified heart to the flesh? They speak nothing less
then this; surely they speak flesh, that is wanton, and proud, and puffed up.
It is the Observation of a learned Author, That heretofore Christians wounded
their flesh for mortification, we wound it for pride, folly and vanity; the
Ears are boared to hang Jewels in: But how much better is that boaring of the
Ear mentioned, Psalm. 40. 6. A boaring of the E ars in Testimony that we will be
the Lords Servants for ever. Besides, look throughout all the Scripture you
shall find Gods People conformed their habits to Gods dispensations toward
them. This was done by Gods direction, Exodus 33. 5. I will come up (says God)
into the midst of you in a moment and consume you, therefore now put off thy
Ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee. They did so v. 6.
Accordingly you shall observe Gods People all along in holy Writ, under sad
dispensations, putting on Sackclot h, throwing ashes on their heads, rending
their garments. Behold (faith God to ^^ru^h, Jer. 45. 4.) What I have built I
will break down, and that which I have planted I will plack up, even this whole
land. And seek thou great things for thy self, seek them not. I beseech you
look about, see what God looks as if he were doing with us; does not he look as
if he would come into the midst of us in a moment, and consume us? As if he
would strip us all naked, and make us all bare? Is this a time to seek fine and
gay things for our selves? How little do we consider what God is about to do in
all appearance in the midst of us?

2. Secondly, Study holiness, If you will look after beauty, study the true,
the inward beauty, that which commends the Soul to God; your labor for the
other many times destroys your Souls, it consumes the time which should be
spent in reading, in praying, fasting. It devours your estates which should be
spent in good works. The beauty vain Persons labor for is but Jezebels beauty;
study the beauty of Sarah, of which you read in, 1 Pet. 3. 5. The Ornaments
with which holy Women of old, adorned themselves, Ornaments which become such,
as do not profess Pride, and vanity, but Godliness. Put Christ's Chains about
your Necks, his rows upon your Cheeks. The Pharisees prided themselves in their
Phylatteries. They did ill to adorn themselves with those Scrowls of the law in
their Skirts, while they lived not up to the rule, and true sense of it in
their lives, but there are no such rows of Jewels as those of Gods Precepts.

3. Lastly (with which I shall conclude this discourse) Satisfy not your selves
with dreams, and fancies of mere inward, Spiritual beauty. I again tell you it
must be a counterfeit. There may be an external appearing beauty, without any
inward beauty, but that is but a counterfeit, there can be no inward beauty
without an external beauty. Faith and Love too must be showed by works, where
holiness to the Lord is engraven in any man or Woman's heart, it will also be
written (to use the phrase of the Prophet Zechariah, Chapter 14. 20.) upon the very
bells of the Horses -- yea every pot in Jerusalem shall be holiness to the
Lord. We have a great cry of Religion, and for Religion in these days. We hear
a bundance talking as if there were no Saints in the World but themselves, but
wherein does their Religion lie? In a fine tongue; they can (as Luther said)
Crepare Christum make a crack, and boast of Christ. But where are the rows of
Jewels upon their Cheeks? The Chains of Gold about their Necks? Where is their
strict, and conscientious waiting upon God in Ordinances? Where Is the fear of
God to be seen in their lives? These times make me often to think of that
saying of Hierom, Grande est Christianum esse, non dici. To be a Christian that
is a great, and difficult thing, to be called so, that is a poor and mean, and
very easy thing. Look abroad and see how few serious, and uniform Christians
are to be found in the World, how few who in any measure answer that great name
by any severity of life, and conversation. If Luxuriousness in meats, and
drinks, if excess in apparel and dresses, if griping the poor, if cruelty
toward Persons in distress, and oppression, and covetousness, and adding house
to house speak Christians, we have too much of these things even amongst
Professors: But if a true believer must show forth his faith, by works of piety
toward God, and works of righteousness, and charity toward men, if they must
abound in good works, and their light must shine before men so as they may see
their good works, and glorify their Father which is in Heaven, how small is the
number of Christians in this age wherein there is so much talk of it; We must
say of many Professors to Religion as once Isaac said of Jacob, Genesis 27. 22.
The voice is Jacobs voice, but the hands are Esaus hands. There are many whose
voice indeed is Jacobs voice, they talk like Saints, O but their hands are
Esau's hands. Let them come unto you that you may feel them. Their habits are
Esau's habit; they eat and drink like Esau, they deal in the World like Esau.
They are Virgins upward, beasts downward, monsters in Religion. Oh let not this
be any of your Character. Know it to be your duty, as much to abound in Prayer,
hearing, fasting, exercises of repentance, and mortification, as others make it
their vanity to abound in good words, costly apparel, in Pride and Luxury. You
must have Christ's rows upon your Cheeks, his Chains about your Necks. I shall
conclude with that of the Apostle to the Philippians, Philip. 4. 8. 9.

Finally (Brethren) whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things.

These things which you have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in
me, do. And the God of peace shall be with you.

Sermon L.
Canticles 1. 11. We will make thee Borders of Gold, with Studs of Silver.

THE Chaldee Paraphrast out of his unreasonable fondness to make this whole
Song to be nothing else but a discourse betwixt God and the Congregation of
Israel, thus glosseth upon these words.

It was then said unto Moses go up to the firmament, and I will give thee there
two Tables of stone cut out of the Sapphire of the throne of Glory, shining
like the best Gold ordered with lines written with my own Fingers, in which are
engraven the Ten commandments which are more pure, then Silver purified seven
times, etc. I should hardly mention this ancient Jewish Paraphrast so often,
but to convince the Atheistical Spirits of latter ages, that the Jews did not
understand this excellent Song as a mere wanton Love Song, between Solomon and
the Daughter of Pharaoh. Neither did Gregory Nyssen, Gregory the great, nor
Bernard, who with others of the Ancients have wrote Commentaries upon it, so
understand it, though they agreed not with this Paraphrast concerning the
Persons in it. The Paraphrast you see makes the law given on mount Sinai to be
the Borders of Gold, and studs of Silver.

I am not much satisfied with the translation of the words by our interpreters,
because I find no other Interpreters agreeing with them. The 70 interpreters
who are followed by those who made the Arabic Version interpret it images, or
pictures. The Syriack Interpreters translate it Chains. Arias Montanus, and the
Vulgar Latin translate it Collars. Junius and Tremellius, translate it Golden
threads. Pagnine translateth it Golden Jewels Besides, the word here used is the
same with a small alteration of the form which we had in the foregoing Verse
and there we translated it Rows, why we should here translate it Borders I
cannot tell. I think the Tigurine Version translateth it best. They translate
it Ornament a convenientia, Convenient Ornaments. It is certain the word
signifies some such Ornaments as Women used in those times, and Countries.
Ornaments differ both in several Countries, and in several Ages in the same
Country, so that it is no wonder if Interpreters are at a loss so many hundreds
of years since, exactly to translate words signifying things so variable after
such a distance of time, and in another country. The more general translation
of Ornaments, suitable Ornaments, is doubtless the best.

I am as little satisfied with the translation of the other word [studs] others
translate it Points, the Sepeuagint (...), marks. It is granted by all that the
word is derived from (...) which signifies to point. This word is not (that I
can find) used any where in holy Writ except in this Text, ^and Genesis 30. and
31. in those chapters it signifyed^ the spots which were upon the lambs after
the sheep had conceived upon the sight of the pilled and straked rods, which
Jacob had laid before them in the troughs. The Dutch translators interpret the
Term, Buttons or knobs of Silver, doubtless the truest translation were with
Badges, or spots of Silver. Mercer faith, the Phrase does signify the highest,
and most excellent Ornaments. But the difference about the words makes no
difference in Interpreters as to the sense, so that it is but a light
difference. The sense is we will give thee yet more and more excellent
Ornaments. Let me only note to you four or five things which will much conduce
to clear up the sense, and lead us to that Proposition of truth and point in
Divinity which the Text holds forth.

1. I conceive (first) That you will all here understand a Metaphor drawn from
Women, who delight much in Ornaments of Gold, and Silver, and other precious
things. Christ here speaks to his Spouse as to a delicate Woman which Loves
such Ornaments, and promises her such. My Spouse faith Christ shall have her
Ornaments too, answerable to, though infinitely excelling Ornaments of Gold and
Silver: Most excellent Ornaments, tho Spiritual, and of a far other Nature.

2. He had before said, That her Cheeks were comely between the Rows of Jewels,
and her Neck with Chains of Gold she was richly adorned, but (says Christ) she
shall have more also, Habenti da^it^^. To her that has shall be given, and she
shall have more abundantly. I will not cease to adorn her.

3. Thirdly, He does not say, Thou shall buy thee Borders of Gold with thy
money. No not yet I will give the some money which thou shall improve, and with
the improvement buy thee more. Grace is not merited. Nor is the first grace
given and the further grace of God merited. It is all given. We will (says
Christ) make for thee. The porro esse as well as the esse, the aboundings as
well as the first breathings, and motions of Spiritual life, are all from God.

4. Lastly, He speaks in the Plural Number: We will make. This is either
spoken Stylo Regio, in the style of a Prince, Christ is a great King. Or else
as it is said, Genesis 1. 26. Let us make man, to denote the Plurality of Persons
in the Divine Being, and the concurrence of the whole Trinity, in the collation
of Grace, and more Grace upon believers. It is a rule in Divinity; omnia opera
Trinitatis adextra sunt indivisa. All the works of the Trinity, out of itself,
and with relation to the creatures, are individed, what is the Act of one
Person, is the work of all three Persons. The Father created, the Son creates,
and the Holy Ghost creates. So in the works of Providence. The Father works
hitherto, and the Son works. This is eminently true in that noble work of
Providence. The Collation of special grace, John. 14. 23. If any man love me,
he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and We will come unto him,
and make Our abode with him. The Text being thus opened, you see to what point
in Divinity it leads us. The Doctrine is this:

Prop. That Christ is ready to give out more grace, more Spiritual Ornaments to
the Souls of believers, where he sees the Cheeks of his Saints already comely
with Rows of Jewels, and their Necks with Chains of Gold, he will still be
preparing for them Chains of Gold, with Spots of Silver.

To this purpose is the promise, Matthew. 13. 12. To him that has shall be
given, and he shall have in more abundance. It was the end of his coming into
the World, not only that his People might have life, but that they might have
it more abundantly, John 10. 10. And he acts in the dispensations of his
grace according to, and in fulfilling of the end of that his coming. He gives
out pardoning grace abundantly, Isaiah. 55. 6, 7. He will abundantly pardon,
even according to, and much above the abundings of sin in the creature. As sin
has abounded grace shall much more abound, Romans 5. And as sin renews so his
gracious acts of pardoning are renewed also. Sanctifying grace (and that indeed
is properly the Ornament of a believer) he gives abundantly. He fills the
Souls of his People with joy, and peace in believing, that their Souls may
abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 15. 13. He makes the
Souls of his People to abound in loves; hence the aboundings in this gracious
habit are made the matter of the Apostles prayer, 1 These. 3. 12. They could not
grow in grace if he were not always ready to give out more grace, for all Acts
must proceed from habits and a growth, and improvement in gracious Acts must
flow from an increase of the power, and principle of acting. If any one asks
the reason of this Liberality of Christ to his Spouse it is not hard to assign
it.

1. That fullness of Grace and Love which is in him is the great ground and
cause of it; what makes the loving Husband who knows that his Wife is already
full stockt with Clothes, and Linen, and Rings and Jewels, and other
Ornaments, that yet he can never go abroad but he must bring her home something
to add to her stock in these things, but only first he finds that his purse
will hold out to it; He has wherewithal to do it. 2. His Love and kindness to
his Wife is such as constrains him to it, so as he can never think she has
enough, and he is still giving to her as if she had nothing. Christ is a
fountain of fullness, the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, and of his
fullness (says John) we receive grace for grace; The full fountain runs
over, neither does he lose any thing by his communication, while he gives
grace, he is but like unto the Sun which loses no light by imparting its light
to the World: Then his Love to his Saints is infinite and transcendent, he must
not be outvyed by his creatures. Does therefore a loving Husband when his Wife
has already a competent wardrobe, and a competent number of Ornaments, yet add
to her stores, and so much to supply her wants as to show his own Love and
kindness to her? How much more shall the Lord Jesus do it? So that in this
reason there are indeed three. The first is that infinite fullness of grace that
is in him, which cannot terminate it self in him, without a communication to
the creature, the Second is the nature of his communication which is such, that
he loses nothing by it. He says we will make thee, borders of Gold, men and
women are not so forward to give what they have aliunde, from without
themselves: As what they have from themselves and are no losers by the
communication of. The term make does not denote a non praeexistence. All the
Chains of Gold with which Christ adorneth his Spouse are coaevous with Christ
himself, given out in the pursuance of an Eternal purpose, purchased with the
blood of Christ, but it signifies that Christ has them of his own. And then
thirdly, His exceeding Love to his Spouse causes the giving of them out. It is
said of Paul, Acts 18. 5. That he was pressed in Spirit and Testified, etc.
Christ is pressedin Spirit, with Love to the believing Soul. His heart is
ravished as he afterward expresses it in this song, Thou ^ast ravished my
heart, my Sister, my Spouse. This love is the great and first moving cause of
these communications; as the loving husband that has an estate which will bear
it, and a Wife wherein he greatly delights, is always giving her such things
as he judges will be pleasing and acceptable unto her; so our blessed Lord,
having first made his grace acceptable to the Soul, and then loving that Soul
that hungreth and thirsts after him, with a transcendent love cannot but be
daily Satisfying such a Soul with his good things.

2. A second Reason of this is the Renewing wants of his Spouse. Love does not
give^bare measure, but shows it self further than in a bare supply of wants,
Ministering also to the pleasure and delight of the Person beloved, but to wants
and desires it cannot be wanting; the Soul of a Christian, through the revival
of lusts, and corruptions within itself, and through the repetition of
temptations, and in regard of Gods various dispensations to it, stands in need
of the daily increase of grace. Nogood Soul has so much grace, but it still
wants. A prudent husband though very loving and tender, may judge his Wife has
Ornaments enough, and therefore may cease to add to her stock, though she may
not have some particular Ornament, because though she has it not yet she may
not want it, and it would be to her of no profitable use, only it may be, serve
for Pride or ostentation, but no tender husband withholds from his Wife what
he knows her to need. But the Child of God never has so much faith, but he
sees cause to cry out, Lord help my unbelief, he is in daily want of Spiritual
strength, complaining of weakness, and impotency, so as supplies of grace are a
daily good to gracious Souls, and Christ can withhold no such thing from them.
Desire does yet more engage the love of a correlate, and the more passionate
and vehement the desire of the beloved is, the more he that loves moves
toward her Satisfaction. The Philosopher says, to Love is to will that which
is good to another, though indeed, love rather lies in a complacency which one
takes in another, of which the willing of good is but a first fruit, and an
effect, good he tells us is that which all desire. The nature of good lies in a
Sutableness and convenience to our needs, for the supply of some vacuity, or
emptiness in us, all the effluxes and emanations of divine grace are such,
suited to some great wants of our Souls, and not only so, but also to the
desires of every gracious man and Woman, who is continually crying, give, give
and God cannot be wanting either to supply the necessities, or to answer the
cravings, and importunities of his Peoples Souls. He hears the desire of the
humble, Psalm. 10. 17. And gives them their hearts desire, Psalm. 21. 3.

Lastly, The interest of Gods own honor and glory is concerned in his giving
of more grace. The loving husband buyeth his Wife Chains, and Jewels. And fine
Clothes, and when she has a good stock he is yet adding to the stock; his love
to her, his desire to Satisfy her desires so far as he is able in all things
convenient, are the great grounds, but yet he has also some Eye to his own
honor and Reputation, by it he is taken notice of in the World as one that is
able to do such things, and also as one to whom his Wife is very dear, this
blessed Lover first aims at his own honor. Hereby faith Christ is your
Father glorified if you bring forth fruit; much fruit of holiness requires
much of the seed of God, much grace, as the Principle productive of it, for
without his influence the Soul can do nothing. Further grace is necessary to
uphold and maintain what grace he has already bestowed. It is also necessary
to the production of that much fruit by which God is glorified by his People in
the World. Grace in its true exercise is a lovely thing in the sight of the
World. Men that hate the practice of grace in themselves, yet love it in
another. Hence the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 12. commands Christians to have their
conversation honest amongst the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against them
as evil doers, they may by their good works, which they shall behold, glorify
God in the day of their visitation. The Children of God are like Stars, which
shine from a borrowed light; God has all the honor of their well doing. The
man that walks piously, devoutly, humbly in his conversation toward God, and
in the exercise of justice and righteousness, humility and meekness, mercy and
charity, and bounty toward men, that is moderate and sober in the use of
prosperity, and patient in the time of adversity, does by this conversation
commend himself to all that part of the World, that has yet any remainder of
reason left, whose passions have not outlawed their reason, and transformed
them into Beasts: And look as when the Wife is excellently attired, it draws
the Eyes of all after her, and sets them upon enquiry, whose Wife she is, and
the honor redoundeth to the Husband, out of whose Purse her Ornaments are
known to come: So when men see Christians abounding in the fear of the Lord, in
faith, and love, in meekness, sobriety, liberality to the Poor, love to their
Enemies, a doing good to all, the honor does not only redound to them, but the
Name of Christ for their sake is also well spoken of, the grace of God in them
is commended and magnified. I come now to the Application.

1 Branch.
In the first place I cannot but observe from this Text how Christ
condes^endeth to our weakness, that he might make himself and his grace
desirable to us. Why does not our Lord speak plainly, I will give them more
grace, I will communicate more of my self unto them? He does so in some other
Texts; here he clotheth his discourse with metaphors, and compares his grace
to things which we much desire, and which are very lovely, and admirable in our
Eyes. This is observable, there is hardly any thing which, while we live in the
World, is either necessary for our use, or delightful to our senses, which our
fleshly appetite longs for, to which Christ some where or other has not
compared himself and the influences of his grace. Is Bread necessary? I am
(says he) the bread of life, John. 6. Is water necessary? He compares himself,
to living water, John. 4. Yea to a fountain of living water. Is meat and drink
necessary? My flesh (says he) is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. Is
clothing necessary, and fine and rich clothing desirable? Come (says he) buy
of me white raiment, that thou may be clothed, that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear, Rev. 3. 18. Is Linen necessary? And fine Linen
desirable, Rev. 21. 8. To the bride (the Lambs Wife) is granted, that she
should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean, and white. Is Physic sometimes wanting
to us? The whole (says he, speaking of himself) need not the Physician but the
sick. Is salve necessary sometimes to us? I counsel thee, (says he, Rev. 3.
18.) To Anoint thee with Eye Salve. Is rest and ease desirable? Come (says he)
to me all you that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Is Gold
and Silver, are rows of Silver, and Chains of Gold, borders of Gold, and studs
or spots of Silver, desirable? I Counsel thee (says he) to buy of me Gold
tried in the fire, that thou may be rich; and here in my Text, thy Cheeks
(says he) are comely between the rows of Jewels: Thy neck, with Chains of
Gold; we will make for thee, borders of Gold, and studs of Silver, Ez. 16. 10,
11, 12. I clothed thee, with b^oidered work and shod thee with badgers Skins,
and I girded thee about with fine Linen, and covered thee, with Silk; I also
decked thee with Ornaments, and I put Bracelets upon thy hands, and Earrings
in thine Ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head. What is the meaning of
all this, but I bestowed my love, my grace upon thee? How does our blessed Lord
humble himself to make himself, his favor, and grace, the object of the most
vain and airy Souls desire?

2 Branch.
Observe Secondly that Christ's graces are those Ornaments with which he
surnisheth the Souls of his beloved. They are those borders of Gold, and studs
of Silver, which are here spoken of. They are the true, and the best Ornaments.
Other Ornaments are but the Devils, or at best our own Ornaments. Such
Ornaments as are put on for Pride or lust are the Devils Ornaments. With these
Souls are adorned whom he has by the hand, leading in the broad way which
leads to destruction. There are indeed other more innocent Ornaments which
serve to signify the quality of Persons, and to make them appear more lovely,
and amiable, but at the best these are but humane Ornaments, they are not the
dresses in which Christ dresseth his Spouse; a pious Soul may be dressed in
these, (those that dwell in Kings houses, that are of higher quality, and in an
higher station, and greater estates in the World, may wear soft raiment;) but
these are none of the Ornaments which Christ puts upon the Soul that he Loves,
though he may allow their infirmity in the use of them. There is other bread,
and men must use it, but Christ is the bread of life. There are other
clothings, but Christ's righteousness is the true clothing, and the white Linen
of the Saints. There are other Ornaments of our bodies, but the habits of
grace, with which Christ dignifieth and adorneth the Souls of his People, are
the only Ornaments of the Souls, which he looks at. Christ's Ornaments are,
says, Love, meekness, humility, temperance. The Love and fear of God Heavenly
mindedness. Thus says the Apostle Peter of old, the holy women who trusted in
God did adorn themselves. You have an account of other Ornaments, Isaiah 3. But
you find not this sentence at the foot of that account. Thus of old holy women
who trusted in God adorned themselves. With some of them you read that Jezebel
adorned her self when she looked out at the window. Methinks this should be a
mighty humbling consideration to a good man or woman who have adorned
themselves (after the manner of the World) that they might not be singular, but
go like Persons of their rank in the World, to think; Now I have decked, and
adorned my self at the expense of a great deal of money, and I have spent in the
doing of it a great deal of time. None of these things are Christ's Ornaments,
he has allowed me to wear them, but these are none of those things which I
have received from him as my Savior, and Redeemer; none of those things which
do commend me unto him, or make me at all more lovely in his sight. These are
none of his rows of Jewels, or his Chains of Gold. None of that attire, in
which I must, if ever I come to Heaven, be brought unto the King of Kings. This
is none of that raiment of needlework mentioned, Psalm. 45. 14. And would
serious Christians but entertain some such thoughts, with what a contempt, and
neglect would they look upon their other Ornaments, while their circumstances
make it but decent for them to wear them. How would they use them only to put
them in mind of those better things by Christ resembled by them. This
comparison also lets us know, that the Ornaments of grace, are the best, the
most valuable most desirable Ornaments. Christ compares them to rows of Jewels,
to Chains of Gold, to badges and spots of Silver; Jewels Gold and Silver
amongst things Ornamental, are the bravest, and amongst men counted above
others. Ah! that I could this day but fasten this one nail, this one persuasion
in your Souls, That habits of grace, are the best Ornaments; how much wast of
money would be saved? How many good works more would be done? How much more
given to the necessities of Saints, how much glory would be more given to God?
How much more good done to others? How much more peace would be brought to your
own Souls? How much more would the poor creature that upon the account of our
vanity, is made more a Servant to corruptions, and groans (as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 8.) for the day of judgment upon that account, be rescued from
that bondage? How much more time would be rescued for holy duties, were you but
rooted, and grounded in this persuasion that there are no Ornaments like those
of the grace of Christ. Hear what Solomon says, Prove. 1. 7, 8, 9. The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of Knowledge. -- My Son hear the instruction of thy
Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother, for they shall be an Ornament of
grace unto thy head, and a Chain of Gold about thy neck, Prove. 4. 9. Wisdom
shall give to thy head an Ornament of grace, and a crown of glory. It were easy
to demonstrate these to be the best and most excellent Ornaments, otherwise,
then by the Metaphor of the Text. These adorn the Soul: Others adorn the
carcass only. The substance of others is corruptible, they are things beneath
us for the most part, in the lowest ranks of creatures. It is a shame to man to
be beholden to a stone, or a little Earth, or a Silkworm or a little flax for
his Ornament; they are Ornaments that degrade the creature, and make a man
beholden for his Honor and Ornament to things he treads upon. Grace is a
supernatural thing, a thing that enters into the substance of the Soul, and
makes it substantially beautiful. It is not a Pendent that hangs at the Ear, or
a Necklace that hangs about the Neck, but makes no alteration in it; the Neck,
the Ear, is the same thing still, with it, and without it, still the same grace
makes a real, a lovely change in the dispositions, and the affections of the
Soul. Other Ornaments commend us but to our earthly Relations, and the vainer
part of the World. Grace commends us to Christ, to his Father, to Saints and
Angels. The demonstration is easy: But ah! how few are they that believe our
Report? How few will believe that Grace is the Best Ornament?

3. Branch.
Thirdly; Observe, The Spouses Ornaments are of Christ, and his Fathers
preparing and making. We will make thee. Neither is the Soul natively adorned,
neither is it in its own power by any act of its own will to adorn it self.
It Is Righteousness is as rags, and as a filthy cloth (faith the Prophet) rags
and filthy cloths are no Ornaments, neither can these Ornaments be purchased,
Job 28. 15. It cannot be gotten for Gold, neither shall Silver be weighed for
the price thereof; Nor can these Ornaments be borrowed. The wife Virgins could
lend no Oil to those that were foolish, Matthew. 25. To talk of grace under any
other notion, than that of a free gift, is indeed no better than Nonsense.
There are Ornaments for minds indeed to be got at Athens, and other Schools of
Philosophers. But these are not that white Linen, in which at the great day
the Lamb's Wife must be brought to her Husband: Not that Garment of
Needle Work, in which the King's Daughter must be brought to the King. There Is
no Faith in Christ, nor pure Love to God and Christ to be got at Athens. Flesh
and Blood will not convey these things into a Soul.

4 Branch.
Lastly; Observe how the whole Trinity is concerned in the dispensations of
grace. It is the note of the Learned Mercer, That the Mystery of the Trinity is
here held out to us in the Plural Verb (...). I touched upon this before,
though indeed the works of the Trinity within it self be divided: The Father
begets, and is not begotten; The Son is begotten, but does not beget; The
Holy Ghost proceeds from both, and does neither beget, nor is begotten; and
although to denote the order of working in the holy Trinity, Creation is made
the work of the Father, Redemption the work of the Son, and Sanctification the
work of the Holy Spirit; yet it is most certain, that all the works of the
Trinity, out of it self, are individed; what one person does, all do. All that
grace of which the Believer is made partaker, flows from the whole Trinity;
it is from the Father, through the merits of the Son, and by the Holy Ghost.

Use 2.
In the second place; Will Christ go on in giving to his Saints more grace? Let
not then those of little Faith be discouraged. Let not those that are strong,
despise the weak, nor those who are weak, be discouraged and despond in
themselves. If the Child of God has Faith but as a grain of Mustard seed, it
shall increase: If it has but a stock of grace, like the Widows Meal in the
Barrel, and Oil in the Cruise, yet the Meal shall not fail from the Barrel, nor
the Oil from the Cruise. If the Child of a rich and indulgent Parent be
despised by another that has finer Clothes, and richer Ornaments, than the
Wisdom of its Parent thinks fit at present to allow it; it will comfort its
self, that its Father is able to do as much for it; that he wants no love to
prompt him to it; that it has a large Inheritance that is made sure unto it.
Shall not the Child of God thus comfort himself from its hopes of glory, though
it as yet has but a small earnest of it, from that fullness of grace which is
in Christ? He shall be holden up (says the Apostle, speaking of the weak
Brethren) for God is able to make him stand, Romans 14. 4. And from that
readiness that is in Christ, and his Promise to give to him that has, so that
he shall have more abundantly; from the Promise of Christ to the Soul, whose
cheeks are already comely with Rows of Jewels, and Chains of Gold, that he will
make for it Borders of Gold with spots, or badges, or studs of Silver. Let true
grace in the Soul be never so faint and weak, it is the Seed of God, it shall
abide, yea it shall grow and increase. Hypocrisy is always withering; the
Hypocrite grows worse and worse, his fair shows and appearances daily decay,
but true grace is always growing; Christ is always adding to it. And indeed
this is one thing which distinguishes a sincerity and truth of grace, from all
the counterfeits of it. A Child of God is always growing better and better,
the Lord is adding to his spiritual habits. Wicked men, and Hypocrites, are
growing worse and worse.

Use 3.
In the last place, This Notion calls to all the People of God, 1. For an
admiration of the Love of God toward them; what a God do we serve! what a
Savior, what a Friend, what a Beloved has every Soul, whose Soul sincerely
loves the Lord Jesus Christ? The Beloved of your Souls is not like another
Beloved, in himself he is not, he is the chiefest of ten thousand, he is
altogether desires. He is not to you as another Beloved, he is unweariable in
his acts of grace, and dispensations of goodness. Are there any Souls here
whose iniquities are forgiven, whose sins are covered, whose Souls are
regenerated, renewed through the Sanctification of the Spirit, might not these
Souls go into their Closets with David, and sit down and say, Who are we, O
Lord God! and what were our Souls, that the Lord should bring us hitherto, that
God should wash our Souls white in the Blood of the Lamb, and give us another
Spirit than we had by Nature, a new Heart, a new Nature, that he should make us
partakers of the Divine Nature? But this was yet a small thing in the sight of
God; he has spoken also of his Servants for a great while yet to come; he has
spoken of more grace, of making for us Borders of Gold, with Badges of Silver.
A faithful man shall abound with blessings. The beginnings of saving grace in
the Soul, in the Justification of the Soul, and the first change and renovation
of our Natures, are blessings of that nature, as Eternity will be too short a
time to admire the Love of God in, and for; but will the Lord also add to his
Servants stock, and increase their heap? will he be still making and preparing
new Ornaments for them, and giving further grace to them till all their wants
shall be supplied, all their emptinesses filled up? what manner of Love is
this? Let our Souls be swallowed up in the admiration of this Love; Let our
Souls, and all that is within us bless his holy Name.

2. How does this Notion call to us for all manner of holiness? Holiness lies
in two things, 1. The mortification of lusts and sinful habits with the
eschewing and declining of sinful acts, which are the fruit of those trees. 2.
The exercises of Godliness. Let me shortly press both, from this notion of out
beloved's being preparing still, and making for us, Chains of Gold, and spots
of Silver. I will begin with the 2d.

1. The exercises of our selves unto Godliness, in all those positive duties
which God requires of us. Whether they may be more internal, such as faith,
hope, Love, or more external, in our more external communion with God, in
Prayer, reading, hearing his word, receiving his holy Sacrament. Or in our
conversation before and toward men: I shall press these from this notion upon
a twofold consideration.

1. These exercises are the way to keep Christ still at work, making for us
these further Ornaments.

2. They are the wearing, and using of these Ornaments.

I say (first) these exercises will keep our Lords hand continually at work, so
as he will never be weary but be still adding to our Ornaments of grace.

I have had occasion often in my former discourses to hint to you, that
although God be engaged by his covenant, and faithfulness, to bring the Souls
of believers to glory, and consequently to give out to them such necessary
supplies of grace, as shall make them meet for that inheritance, yet he is at
liberty as to the gradual manifestations of his grace, to dispense them
according to his own infinite wisdom, and his Peoples behavior toward him. And
the promises, of that grace, are made to the exercises of grace; Christ will be
always giving to those, who are always working out their Salvation with fear
and trembling, exercising themselves to Godliness. These exercises are those
sacred means, in the use, and not without the use of which he has promised the
influences of further grace. Men mistake the promises of further grace, if they
apprehend them made to any who do not their duty as to the fulfilling of them,
when God had made those large promises of which you read, Ezekiel. 36. He
concludes, v. 37. Thus faith the Lord God I will yet for this be inquired of
by the house of Israel to do it for them. I will do it faith God, but yet I
will be inquired of to do it for them. And for that promise, Matthew. 13. 12.
Whosoever has to him it shall be given, and he shall have more abundance,
though by the foregoing verse where our Savior gives a reason why he soake to
his disciples more plainly then to others. Because it is given to you to know
the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given. It seems
to be a promise of further grace to those to whom the first grace is given. Yet
in Matthew. 25. 29. where the same promise is repeated and annexed to the parable
of the talents, it is plainly to be understood of those who have and use and
improve what they have; so as take those two Texts together, they are a promise
indeed of further grace to be given, but to such as make a just improvement of
what grace God has first bestowed upon them.

2. Secondly, Our exercises of Godliness are indeed the wearing of these
Jewels. God gives men and women grace for their uses, exercise is the use of
the habit, and the end for which the Lord gives it. What man will be
continually buying clothes, and Ornaments for his Wife, who when she has them
will not wear them? They are no Ornaments if they do not adorn us, how shall
they adorn us in the sight of the World (which cannot look into our hearts)
unless we use and wear them? How can we wear, and exercise our grace, but by
works of piety toward God, and goodness toward men? I will add yet one thing
more.

3. It is but ingenuity in us when our Lord is never weary of giving out to us,
never satisfied, never thinking that he has done enough for us, to be thinking
we have not done, enough, nor can ever do enough for him, when we hear Christ
saying to us, I will make them borders of Gold, and Ornaments of Silver. Should
not we be saying, We will take some new steps in the ways of God, do some
further acts of obedience then we have yet done, forget what is behind, and
press on to what is before, unto the price of the high calling. Shall my
beloved never think me fine enough? Adorned enough? And shall I ever think my
self, holy, and Spiritual enough? Serviceable enough to him in my generation?
Shall not I be ever trying some new ways to advance Christ in the World, in my
family, in my own Soul? Christ asks his disciples, what do you do more then
others, Matthew. 5. You receive more, but what do you do more? Every good
Christian should ask himself these two questions;

1. What do I more then others? I have more mercy then others, what do I more
than they? It is a shame for a Christian to do no more than a Publican, a poor
wretch that never tasted how good the Lord is; yea it is a shame for him to do
no more than he who has not received the measures of grace which he has
received.

The 2d Question I would have him propound to himself is, What do I do more
than I was wont to do? Wherein do I go on from strength to strength? Wherein do
I exceed my self? Christ is preparing new measures of grace for, giving out new
measures of grace to me? What new affections have I for Jesus Christ? What new
performances do I do for him? The second thing in which I told you Holiness
lay, was in mortification of lusts, and vicious habits, in eschewing evil, etc.
Is our Lord making and preparing new Ornaments for Believers? How should they
be afraid to grieve and dishonor him? This Notion affords a double Argument,
whereby to press this second part of Holiness. 1. From Ingenuity. It is no way
ingenous, and becoming Christians, to be pulling Jewels (as it were) out of
Christ's Crown, while he is adding Jewels to our Crown, to be spoiling Christ
of his Honor and Glory, while he is consulting our honor and satisfaction. O
therefore grieve not his holy Spirit!

2. There will by it arise a disadvantage to your Immortal Souls. What Husband
will still be bringing new Ornaments to a froward and disobedient Wife, that
takes no care to please him? Duty may oblige him to see that she shall not
want necessaries, but he will certainly cut her short of superfluities. God in
this, as I have showed you, deals after the manner of men. God's Cove nant, his
Truth and Faithfulness to that, will oblige him, notwithstanding his Peoples
frowardness, to give them what grace is necessary to bring them to Heaven, but
they must look to be cut short of that more grace, which they otherwise might
receive from him. The Soul of a Christian, who gives himself too much liberty,
may be saved, but it will be as through fire. When David had fallen into those
two great sins of Adultery and Murder, I remember God sent Nathan to him with
this Message, 2. Sam. 12. 7, 8. I anointed thee King over Israel, and delivered
thee out of the hands of Saul, and I gave thee thy Masters Houses, and thy
Masters Wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the House of Israel and Judah; and
if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and
such things; wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do
evil in his sight, etc. God there aggrava^eth (...) not only from those mercies
which he had already received from God, but from that Love which was yet in his
heart for him, and his readiness to do much more for him than he had yet done.
Think when you have any temptations to sin against the Lord, that you hear
Christ saying to you, I died upon the Cross for you, I washed you in my Blood,
I have pardoned thy sins, clothed thee with my Righteousness, changed thy
heart, put my (...) into thee; and if that had been too little, I was ready to
do for thee such and such things, to make for thee Borders of Gold, and Studs
of Silver, and should thou now favor thy lusts, which are the Enemies of
Christ? should thou now despise the Commandments of the Lord, and do evil in
his sight? Let this engage all of us to fulfill the Precept of the Apostle, 2
^et. 1. 5. Giving all diligence, To add to our faith virtue, to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to our temperance patience, and to
patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to our brotherly
kindness charity; for if these things be in us and abound, they will make us
that we shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. I may add; If these things be in us and abound, our gracious Lord
will be still adding to us, making for us Borders of Gold, and Studs of Silver.

I have now finished my Discourse upon this Text, and all I have to say upon
the return which this blessed Lover makes to his Spouse's Petitions.

It now comes to her turn to speak, which she does in the next words, While the
King sits at his Table, my Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. But of
these words hereafter.

Sermon LI.
Cant. 1. 12. While the King sits at his Table, my Spikenard sends forth
the smell thereof.

IN the close of my last Discourse, I told you I had finished what I intended
to speak upon Christ's Answer to the Petitions of his Spouse. We are now to
attend to her Reply to him, which is contained in v. 12, 13, 14. While the King
sits at his Table, my Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. A bundle of
Myrrh is my Beloved unto me; he shall lie all night betwixt my Breasts. My
Beloved is unto me as a cluster of Camphire in the Vineyards of Engedi, I begin
with the first of these. Let us first inquire into the sense of the words.
Concerning the Grammatical sense, there is little difference amongst
Interpreters. We read it, While the King, some read it, So long as the King
sits at his Table. The sense is the same, and the Hebrew particle signifies
both. In the next word, which we translate the King, there is something
extraordinary, the Hebr. is (...). There are two praefixes, (...) and (...)
before the word which alone signifies The King. I find Interpreters taking
little or no notice of them; but I am willing to allow as few redundancies in
holy Writ as may be. I find the same prefix, Psalm. 146. 5. There it is prefixed
to (...) God. Ar. Mont. translateth it, The God of whom. Others, Because the
God of Jacob is his help. If we may be allowed to interpret it so here, it runs
thus, whiles, and because the King sits at his Table, and learns us that our
Spikenards smell depends upon Christ's presence with us. The King, (...) is
demonstrative, or emphatical; I should judge it so here: As much as That King;
Christ is a King above all Kings; he is that King, The King of Kings, the most
noble, the most excellent King. The Spouse in these three verses gives her
Beloved two Names; she calls him King, in this verse, her Beloved twice, v. 13,
14. Christ's familiarity with the Souls which he loves, and the freedom and
boldness which he allows them with himself, ought not to breed in them low
and mean thoughts of him. He is a King, and that King, whiles he is the poor
Soul's Beloved. [Sitteth at his Table.] The Dutch and French translate it, at
his Round Table. Arias Montanus, in circuitu suo, in his Round. The LXX
Interpreters, who are followed by the Syriack, the Vulgar Lat. and Tremellius,
in his Lying down. That we may the better judge which is the rightest, we must
know the Hebrew word (...) comes from (...) which signifies, he has compassed
about: Thence comes the Noun (...) which signifies a circuit, a compassing
about, and that is the word here used; and (except in this Text) I can find it
but four times in Scripture, 1 King. 6. 29. He carved all the walls of the
House round about, 2 King. 23. 5. The places round about, Job 37. 12. It is
turned round about by his Counsels, Psalm. 140. 9. Those that compass me about.
So as the most literal Translation is, While the King is in his Round, whiles
the King is round about. But by those that are Critics in the Hebrew Language,
it is observed, that it is a word which signifies the form of their sitting,
or rather lying down to eat meat (for so was the fashion of those Countries.)
The use of Tables and Stools was not then known, but they were wont to sit or
lie down, leaning upon their Elbows, and so to eat their meat. Samuel, 1 Samuel
16. 11. (speaking of their sitting down to eat) says, We will not sit down
until he come, that is, David's Jesse's youngest Son. In the Hebrew it is (...)
we will not round it. Their meat was set on the ground, and their manner in
eating was, to lie down round about their meat, and so eat, leaning on their
Elbows, with their hand raising their head from the ground. The word only
denotes to us their fashion of sitting, or lying in a round figure when they
did eat, as we now sit about Tables. Hence our Translation is good enough to
express the sense; While the King sits at his Table* and the Dutch and
French* yet a little better, at his round Table. And the Translation of those
who translate it (...), accubitu, recubitu, circuitu, is also proper, because
those words signify the posture in which they did eat in those Countries. But
there is no foundation for their Translation, who understand it of a lying in
Bed, it doubtless signifies, While the King sits or lies at meat. It
follows [My Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof.] The word translated
Spikenard is (...) from whence comes the Greek word (...), the Lat. Nardus, and
our Spikenard. In holy Writ it signifies two things.

1. A Plant, Cant. 4. 13. 14. The Plants are an Orchard of Pomegrantes with
pleasant fruits, Camphire, with Spikenard, Spikenard, and Saffron, Calamus, and
Cinnamon with all trees of Frankincense, etc.

2. An Ointment made (in a great part at least) of that herb, and plant, and
made liquid, that it might be poured out, Mary used it to anoint the feet of
Jesus, John 12. 3. And the Woman, Mar. 14. 3. The Ointment is probably meant in
this place, It may easily be gathered from those two Texts in the Gospel which
mention it, that in those Countries it was a piece of their entertainment of
their friends to bring sweet Oil, and to anoint their friends with it. Thence
Christ checked Simon, Luke 7. v. 46. Mine head with Oil thou did not anoint,
but this woman has anointed my feet with Ointment. This expression plainly
alludeth to that usage. I shall not trouble you with the various fancies of
Naturalists, or their various stories about this herb or Ointment.

My Spikenard gives it smell.] Smells you know are of two sorts* either more
grateful, or more ungrateful which we call stenches. The Jewish Doctors
generally understand this of an ill savor, strangely interpreting this Text of
the Golden Calf which the Israelites made soon after they came out of Egypt,
after the commission of which Idolatry, they say the name of the Israelites,
which before was exceeding sweet in the nostrils of God, stank and had an ill
savor. But all of the most valuable interpreters of this Text, understand it
of a sweet and fragrant smell which alone* is proper to Spikenard. Thus far we
have inquired out the Grammatical sense of the words.

Let us further inquire, 1. What is meant by the King sitting at his table.

2. What is meant by the Spouses Spikenard sending or giving out the smell
thereof.

By the King, that King, is doubtless meant the same Person whom the Spouse in
the two next verses calls her Beloved, by whom we have all along understood
the Lord Jesus Christ; the only question here is what is meant by his sitting
at his table Some by it understand his Incarnation, the time during which he
tabled with us; others his glorified estate (so Tremellius.) I think Genebrard
hitteth the sense right, who says, the phrase Denotat praesentiam Christi cum
Ecclesia, signifies the presence of Christ with his Church. Thus also Mercer
interprets it, while Christ (says he) is present with his Church, feeding it
with his Word, the Church sends forth the sweet smells of Faith, grace, and
good works, as Paul says, we are a sweet savor unto God. And what he says of
the presence of Christ with the Church, is as true concerning his presence with
the particular Soul that believes in him; he who fitteth with another at the
table has a fellowship and communion with him while Christ vouchsafes me his
presence. That I take to be the sense of this Phrase. You read in the Gospel of
a Marriage Supper which the King provided for his Son. And Rev. 19. 9. You read
of the Marriage Super of the Lamb, and God promises, Rev. 3. 20. That if any
man opens to him while he stands at the door and knocks, he will come in,
and sup with him. Which phrases only note Gods nearness of presence, intimacy
of fellowship, and mmunion with his People.

The next question is what is here meant by the smell thereof. Tremellius
translates it Nardinum, that which is of spikenard, taking the Suffix* not as a
Pronoun, but as forming a Noun adjective. So it should be read thus, while the
King sits at his Table, that which is of Spikenard sends forth the smell
thereof, as if the smell related to the fullness of Grace which is in Christ.
But I shall rather follow our own translation. To send forth its Smell (says
Mr. Durham on the Text) is to be in lively exercise: Grace without smell or
lively exercise being like flowers somewhat withered, that savor not, nor like
unbeaten spice that s^nds not forth its savor. My grace is in exercise, that
is his Sense. But 2dly. The smell of a thing is that which discovers a thing,
and that both to our selves, and to others. Not only the motions, and vigorous
actings and exercises of grace, but the Notifications and discoveries of it,
both to our selves and others, depends upon Christ's presence with, and
influence upon the Soul, that is possessed of it. Two Propositions of Doctrine
arise from the words thus opened.

1. Prop. That true grace will give its proper smell.

2. Prop. The smell of the Saints grace does much depend upon Christ's influence
upon them and communion with them.

I cannot but observe the connection of this verse with the two former. Her
beloved had told her that her Cheeks were comely with Rowsrof Jewels, her Neck
with Chains of Gold, he had been commending her for her grace and holy
conversation in the World. Ay (says she) while my beloved, whiles the King
sits at his Table, my Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. So long as
it pleases the Lord to keep my Soul company, to vouchsafe me his gracious
influence, so long I can do something, those habits of grace with which he has
blessed me, so long send forth their smell, but if he has withdrawn himself
from me, if he withholdeth his blessed influences, my grace moves not,
smells not. But before I can reach that, I would willingly speak something to
the first Proposition concerning the nature of true grace, to send forth a
smell, a peculiar smell.

1. Prop. True grace where it is will send forth a proper smell.

The Philosopher tells us that a smell is a quality of a mixed body which is
drawn out by heat, arising from a due temperament of things in it which are hot
and moist. But I have nothing to do with the Philosophical notion of a smell,
it is here without question taken Metaphorically, and (as I before hinted)
signifies Motion, and discovery. In all smells, that arise from things, there
is. 1. Something of motion, the thing giving out the smell moves, and sends
some quality into the air. The smell of grace signifies the motion and exercise
of it, 2. There is in smells something of discovery. By the smell of a thing we
both discover the place of the thing, and know where it is, and also the nature
of things in a great measure. I will open my meaning to you in this proposition
in three conclusions shortly.

1 Conclus.
Where a truth of grace is in the Soul it will not lie hid, but discover it
self both to him that has it, and to others, or at least to one of them. A man
may carry dust in his pocket, and neither himself, nor others with whom he
converseth know it, but he cannot so carry Musk or any odoriferous thing, if it
be open; grace is a glorious light which God kindles in the Soul and must not
be hid, the Kingdom of Heaven which is within us as well as that without us is
like unto leaven which cannot lie long hid in the meal. The Romans faith was
spoken of throughout the World, Romans 1. 8. The elders obtained a good report,
Heb. 11. 2. Grace where it is will be heard of, Ephesians. 1. 15. After I had heard
of your faith, and your love to all the Saints. The like he says to the
Colossians, Colos. 1. 4. It is a thing to be seen in its fruits and effects.
Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works,
James 2. 18. The grace that dwells in Christ has a favor; so we had it
before, Because of the Savor of thy good Ointments therefore do the Virgins
love thee. Grace is the salt of the Soul. Have salt in your selves (says our
Savior) and sale must not be without a Savor. It is compared to light, to
fire, neither of which will be restrained.

2 Conclus.
Secondly grace does not send forth a Savor only, but a sweet savor, like the
Savor of Spikenard which is very grateful to the exterior senses. Corruption,
and lust has a savor. The Savor of the body of death is like the Savor of
the dead body when putrefied. Lusts are like Solomon's dead flies which send
forth a stinking Savor, Eccles. 10. 1. The Drunkard has a smell of drink. The
unclean Person has a smell, but it is a stinking Savor; the Covetous
Worlding, has an earthy Savor and smell. But the Savor of the Saints grace
is a sweet smelling Savor; his garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, His
smell is as the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed (as Isaac said of
his Son, Genesis 27. 27. like the smell of Labanon, mentioned, Hosea 14. 6. All
the Children of Gods garments smell of Myrrh, Psalm. 45. 8. The Lord smells a
sweet Savor from them. He tells us he will not smell in the assemblies of
wicked men, Amos 5. 1. But Paul was a sweet Savor to God, 2. Cor. 2. 15. And
the Apostle calls the alms of the Saints, an odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice
acceptable unto God, Ephesians. 4. 18. Their grace sends forth a sweet smell amongst
the People of God who are partakers of the same grace, yea even into the World,
that even those who know little of God, or of the mysteries of his Kingdom yet
many times will speak well of them and stand up in their defense.

Conclus.
Though grace at all times sends forth a smell, yet it does not give a like
smell, in all times and in all Persons. Things (you know) that are most
odoriferous, give out a smell according to the quantity of them, and according
to the heat which comes to them, a dram of Musk does not give out such a smell
as a pound gives, nor does the most Aromatic Ointment in the Winter, or when
it is kept in the cold, give out such a smell, as when it is kept in a warm
hand, or influenced by the warm beams of the Sun, or brought near to a warm
fire, it is so with our habits of grace they have in them a sweet smelling
Savor, but exert it variously.

1. According to the different degrees of grace in the Soul. Every Child of God
has his (...), his measure of grace, but every one has not a like measure the
faith of one is weak and little like a grane of mustard seed which is the least
of all seeds, yet grows up to a great tree, the faith of another may be so
strong as to remove mountains; according to the degrees of our infused habits
of grace so will the smell of them be.

2. According to the influence of Christ (who is the Sun of Righteousness) so
also will the smell of our grace be weaker or stronger. Three things contribute
much to the smell of any odoriferous thing, 1. Heat, 2. Air, 3. Motion. Heat
eliciteth and draws out the odoriferous quality, air conveyeth it to the
sense, motion rarifieth the parts. Three things also much contribute to the
sweet smell of the Saints grace.

1. The influence of the Sun of righteousness upon the Soul. Therefore our
Spouse here says, Whiles the King* sits at his table, my Spikenard sends
forth the smell thereof. 2. The Breathings of the holy Spirit which our Savior
compares to the wind blowing where it lists, 3. Motion, the exercise of
grace. As the Ointment does not smell so sweet in the box as when it is poured
out, so it is grace in motion and exercise that causes the sweet smell
thereof. When Mary poured out her Ointment, the house was filled with the Odor
of it, John. 12. 3. and Christ's name is compared in this Chapter to Ointment
poured out, which is exceeding sweet.

Does any now further ask whence it is that true grace wherever it resides
will send forth its smell? I answer,

1. It is from the Nature of it. It is some peculiar quality in the nature of a
thing which makes it to send forth a pleasant smell, what that is in natural
things is not easy to determine. The Philosopher faith it is a quality which
arises from a due temperament of something that is dry, and Savoury, and
something which is moist; (It is an account of it which will hardly bear a
strict Examen) that it is a peculiar quality is most certain: So it is from the
peculiar quality of gracious habits that they send forth their pleasant smell,
and of that I think a more easy and certain account may be given what it is. 1.
Its conformity to the Holy Nature of God. 2. Its proportion and conformity to
the reason of man. 3. Its life and activity. 1. In gracious habits there is a
conformity to the Holy Nature of God. Hence gracious Souls are said to be
partakers of the Divine Nature, conformable to the image of the Lord Jesus
Christ. The light of Nature shows the greatest part of mankind, that there is a
God, Reason tells us, this God must be the Supreme, first, and most perfect
Being, from hence it follows, that the excellency of every thing lies in a
conformity to God, who himself is the most perfect Being, and the Pattern of
all perfection. This must make it the most amiable flower in the creation, and
causes it to give out a sweet smell to all who have not lost their smelling,
debauching their reason by their most sordid lusts, and passions. 2. In all
gracious habits and exercises, there is also a conformity to humane reason.
There are in man some relics of that reason in which much of the Original
image of God wherein man was created lay, for Right reason (which Socinians so
much talk of) it existeth in no man or Woman perfectly by nature, but some
judgment remains of what is good and filthy, some notions of good and Evil,
though very imperfect; now all gracious habits will approve themselves, and all
gracious acts do approve themselves to these notions, Hence all truly moral
acts, are materially gracious acts: That is, the same acts which grace teaches
the good man to do, though from noble^ Principles, in a better manner, and to a
more pure, and noble End. So that so long as there are any men in the World,
who have not outlawed their natural reason, and almost extinguished it by their
brutish lusts, and passions, grace will give a smell, and a good report. And
the great hatred which good and holy men meet with from the men of the World,
is from this, that grace carries out the Saint beyond the measures of the man
of reason: So that in some acts, especially of Religion, he cannot be bounded
by his limits. The man of the World commends the Child of God, for his
justice, and Charity, for his Sobriety, and temperance, his readiness to
forgive his Enemies, his meekness, humility, his serving of God, etc. He is
only angry at him, that he will offer up to God more and more excellent
Sacrifices, that his measures of praying, hearing, fasting, etc. Will not serve
his turn, etc.

3. Lastly Grace is of a nimble, active nature. It is the Fire with which the
Holy Ghost baptizeth the Soul, and it cannot lie hid in the Soul.

2. It is from the Ordination of God that grace sends forth its smell. We may
say this of every created Quality, which produces any effect. It is from the
Law of God in creation laid upon that Plant, Gum or Oil, known to the Eastern
People, by this name of Spikenard, and the Law of God laid upon Musk, and sweet
Flowers amongst us, that they or any of them, send forth a pleasant smell, the
powerful hand of God in creation has created such virtues, and qualities in
these things, and God has ordained that they should emit, or send forth their
savor; and there is a daily influence of the providence of God upon them, by
which these natural powers, and faculties in them are upheld, by which they do
produce these grateful effects to our senses, and daily affect the Air which we
suck in, by which that gratefulness is conveyed to us: The like may be said of
grace which is but a savoury, sweet smelling quality in the rational creature,
correspondent to the other savory, sweet smelling qualities in vegetative and
sensitive creatures: It is Gods creation in the Soul, and it is from Gods
Ordination, that it sends forth this smell. This is true, whether by the
Sending forth the smell thereof, we understand the exercise thereof; Or the
gratifying the Spiritual senses of others by such exercise: Both of them do
proceed from the Ordination of God, which is the Law of God upon the New
creature.

There is a double Ordination of God in the case. The exercise of a believers
grace is from a divine Ordination, Joh. 15. 16. You have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you, and obtained you, that you should go and bring forth fruit. We
are chosen in him before the foundation of the World, that we should be holy,
and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1. 4. Predestined to be to the
praise of his glory, v. 11. He has also ordained the acceptableness of the
savor of grace, both in his own nostrils, and in the nostrils of others, those
especially, that are made partakers of the divine nature, And from hence it is
that grace, and the actings and exercises of it, send forth a sweet smell to
some: And others revile them, and speak ill of them. As it is in natural
things, savours which are to some exceedingly grateful, and delicious, are to
other creatures as ungrateful and abominable, which proceeds from a different
nature or different qualities in several creatures; all which are Originated in
the Creation and Ordination of God: So it is with grace, the exercise of which
is a sweet smelling savor in the nostrils of God, let me hear thy voice (says
the beloved in this song) for thy voice is sweet, and thy countenance is
comely, and a sweet smelling savor, in the nostrils of such as are made
partakers of the same divine nature: It is a stench in the nostrils of debaucht
and profane men, and the lively and vigorous exercise of it is so in the
nostrils of Hypocrites; all this proceeds from their different nature and the
Ordination of God, whose Ordination it is, That wisdom should be justified of
her Children. God has ordained that where habits of grace are, they should
sprout forth in acts; there is a Principle of life in the seed of God, as in
natural seeds, which being committed to a fitting soil shows it self. Nor is
this without the concurrence of a daily providence of God, upholding this
Spiritual, virtue.

Use 1.
Let us then observe, that true grace is neither a dead and insipid thing, nor
yet an ungrateful thing in its exercise, to any that have any acquaintance with
God, or fellowship in the divine nature. The name of grace is an excellent name
and every one would be called by it. Amongst Christians the name of an
ungracious man is a name of such reproach, as every one is offended at. But
alas! How dead, and insipid a thing must grace be, if all had it who would
pretend to it, in the age wherein God has cast our lot? Men would be thought
to have grace in whom we cannot discern one good work. They pretend to
spikenard, but where is the smell thereof? Show me thy says (says the
Apostle) by thy works. Nay how many are there in the World, whose lusts, and
corruptions send forth an ill savor? It is observed in nature, that unless the
four Elements, there are no things but sent out some favor, some smell. Thence
the Philosopher makes a smell the affection of a compounded body; all
compounded bodies send forth a smell, little, or much, grateful, or ungrateful
to us. The most of men and women send from their conversations some scent, some
smell abroad in the World, but alas! The smell of the most is not like the
smell of a field of a Soul that the Lord has blessed, with the blessing of his
grace, but like the smell of Souls which the Lord has cursed, and will curse.
One man smells of drunkenness, another smells of the lusts of uncleanness, a
third smells of covetousness, a fourth of Pride and haughtiness of mind, a
Fifth of earthly mindedness, and covetousness, a Sixth of Levity and airiness.
Another smells of cruelty and unmercifulness, another of lies and perjuries,
breaking all oaths, covenants, promises, etc. These are not the smells of
Lebanon, but of Topheth. God said of old, he would not smell in the Israelites
assemblies, Amos 5. 21. I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not
smell in your solemn assemblies. Though you offer me your burnt offerings, and
your meat offerings I will not accept them, neither will I regard the peace
offerings of your sat beasts. There are some whose smells are such in the
nostrils of God, with respect to their ordinary conversation, that nothing they
do, or can do, will smell sweet in Gods nostrils. As some ill Savours are so
strong as they drown the sweet smell of any perfumes which the Person has
about him. So some sinners smell so odiously, so abominably in the nostrils of
God, that no good act they can do, is or can be acceptable to God; this was the
case of these Israelites: They did some good things, the keeping of solemn
feasts, the offering, of burnt offerings were things which God had commanded,
and else where he calls them a sweet savor. But such was the stench, the ill
savor of the lives of these degenerated Israelites, that it had drowned the
sweet smell in Gods nostrils which these acts had sent forth, had they been
done by better men. What was the matter? v. 5. They sought to Bethel. They were
Idolaters. Jeroboam had set up Calves, at Dan and Bethel, and thither they went
to Worship the true God, but by, and before the Calves. They were full of
unrighteousness, they turned Judgment to wormwood, and left off righteousness,
v. 7. They trod upon the poor, and took from them burdens of wheat, v. 11.
They were haters of Gods faithful Servants, v. 10. They hated him that rebuk d
in the gate, and abhorred him that spoke sprightly. v. 12. They afflicted the
just. They took Bribes and turned aside the poor in the gate from their right.
These are they of whom God says, I will not smell in your Solemn assemblies.
To the same purpose God speaks, Jer. 6. 20. To what purpose comes there to me
incense from Sheba, and the sweet Cane from a far Country. Your burnt offerings
are not acceptable nor your Sacrifices sweet unto me. And, Isaiah 2. 11, 12,
13, 14. Look as it is with some very strong natural ill savours, they do not
only themselves offend our nostrils, but they so infect the whole air, which
should bring the sweeter savor of some other things which we have about us to
our nostrils, that nothing smells sweet; we smell nothing but the Castoreum or
other stinking thing; so it is with rampant lusts and corruptions, with
notorious Scandalous sins, whether the acts of impiety toward God, such are
Idolatry, etc. Or acts of injustice, and uncharitableness toward men, they
send forth such a strong, and ill savor in the nostrils of God, that the Lord
can smell a sweet savor of nothing they do that live in such sins, he will not
smell in their Solemn assemblies, their Sacrifice are abomination to God. God
cannot away with the calling of their assemblies. Ah how many are there whose
smells are of this nature.

2. Neither are these smells only offensive to God, but to the Church of God.
The Protestant Religion may speak to these Simeons and Levies. You have
troubled us, you have made me to stink amongst Papists and Atheists, and God
grant that these spots in the assemblies of Protestants in our time cause not
the latter part of Jacobs Words to be verifyed upon us, That our Enemies gather
not together against us and slay us, and we be destroyed.

Use 2.
2. We may learn from hence, That a true Child of God need not set a Trumpet to
his own mouth to blazon and proclaim his virtues. The Wise man says, Let
another mouth praise thee, and not thy own. The Child of God needs not that
his own mouth should praise him. His Spikenard will send forth the smell
thereof, and that is always a pleasant smell. Good Wine needs no Bush, we
say. We have a saying, That Virgins should be seen and not heard. God's Virgins
should be so, they should be seen acting and exercising their gracious habits,
not heard admiring themselves for them. It is the Peddler that goes about the
Country, proclaiming his Pins, Points, and Laces. The rich Merchant, though
better furnished, leaves himself to the report that others shall give of his
Warehouse. The naughty woman praedicates her own virtues, whiles the woman that
is truly virtuous, trusts her reputation to those who see and observe her to
speak of her as they find her. You need not write upon a Box of Spikenard, This
is Spikenard; the smell will tell you what it is.

Use 3.
From what you have heard, you may observe, That every one is not to be
condemned whose Spikenard sends not forth so strong a smell as another. There
is no Child of God but has his Spikenard, his Box of Spikenard, his measure of
grace, but every one has not the same measure. The least of the Believer's
Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. But I have showed you before, that
in the People of God there are differences in degrees of grace. None can lay
claim to the name of a Believer, or a Child of God, but he must have some
faith, some love, some gracious habits, and must bring forth some fruits of
holiness proportionable to his measure of grace. One Christian has not the
like measures of grace as another, nor the like influence of heat from the Sun
of Righteousness to elicit the smell of those good habits. But of the necessity
of that I shall speak more under the next Proposition. If a Christian's Soul be
kept from scandalous and presumptuous sins, if he lives up to those measures
of knowledge and light which God has given him, if (...), as we say, in the
generality of his conversation, he walks close with God, though in some things
his foot slippeth, a Christian is not to be condemned, if his Spikenard sends
forth the smell thereof, though larger quantities in others, and under more
encouraging and glistering circumstances, send forth a greater and stronger
smell.

Use 4.
4. A Christian may hence take some comfort, who does not see his own grace It
is the case of many a good Christian, yea, almost of every good* Christian, at
one time or another, he cannot see his own Faith, or Love, or it may be any
other habit of grace with which the Lord has blessed him. Others possibly can
see much good, much of God in him; he can see nothing in himself. This often
perplexeth a Christian who thinks that he should know himself best. But the
judgment of others is not always to be despised as no foundation of comfort.
Grace casts its smell, and there may be a time when a Christian's grace and
Spiritual life may be more discernable to others than to himself. Nay, there
are several such times; times of natural disturbances from Melancholy, times of
Divine Desertion, times of great Temptation. In all such times, others are
better Judges of the People of God's grace and sincerity, than themselves are;
these things cast a mist before their Eyes.

Use 5.
5. I shall conclude this Discourse with a word of Exhortation; To do what in
us lies that our Spikenard may send forth the smell thereof. It amounts to
that of our Savior, Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. I shall press it with
two Arguments.

1. It is no Spikenard that sends forth no smell, no pleasant smell. James
tells us, that Faith without works is dead, that is, it is no true Faith. John
calls pretended love to God without love to the Brethren, no love. Tantum es,
quantum agis, a man is so much, and no more a Christian than he acts, and
lives like a Christian.

2. There is nothing so scandalous in the World, so dishonorable to God, so
dangerous and infignificant to our selves, as the name of Saints, without the
smell of Saints. The World expects that things and persons should in some
measure answer their names; hence it is that the falls and slips of Christians
make a greater noise, and give a greater offense to the World, than the grosser
actions of persons who make no pretenses to Religion and Godliness. For
Branches in Christ, which bring forth no fruit, Christ tells us, the
Husbandman, his Father will cut them off. These are they who bring up an evil
report upon the ways of God, and make them to be abhorred. Nor can an empty
name be of any significancy to our selves.

I shall shut up this Discourse with a few Directions.

1. Would you have your Spikenard send forth the smell thereof? Take heed then
of Dead Flies. The Wise man tells us, That one Dead Fly will make the
Apothecary's whole Box of Ointment to stink. What are Dead Flies in this case
but scandalous sips, proceeding from our extravagant lusts and passions? One
open scandalous sin, will make a Christian's whole Box of Spikenard cast forth
an unpleasant smell in the World. One sinful act will not lose us Heaven, but
it will in a great measure spoil our scent. How many have we known, who, I
hope, are gone to Heaven, who yet by their scandalous actions, (like David)
made the Enemies of God to blaspheme. I hope they are some of them gone with
Spikenard, I mean, with a truth of grace to their graves, but their Spikenard
had woefully lost its scent. It Is a sad thing when a man, of whom we can hardly
presume, that he was in favor with God, and in a state of Grace, yet leaves
the World, with a better report for justice and charity, for mercy, and bounty,
and liberality, than one who professed higher, and went for a Child of God.

2. Take heed of exposing thy conversation to too much Air (I speak in this
Dialect, to keep to the Metaphor a little.) Too much of Air spoileth the scent
of the most precious Ointment. Take heed of too much needless converse with the
World. Things that keep their scent must be kept close. It is true at all
times, much more in such debauched times as we live in, the more recluse and
private from the World a Christian keeps himself, the better he will keep his
scent.

3. Keep thy self from actions, as to which, though thou art satisfied thou
may do them, but they are not of good report, either amongst Christians, or
men of the World. It is too much the Error of Christians, that in matters of
offense and scandal, they only have a respect to Brethren. It is true, we ought
to have a first and principal respect to them; I am sure our Rule is more
extensive, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Give none offense, either to the Jews or Gentiles, or
to the Churches of Christ. The Apostle puts the Churches of Christ last, as if
it ought to be the least of our care not to offend the Churches of Christ. I
know no such thing can be concluded from the order of the Apostle's words: Yet
one would think, if in actions of this nature any might be neglected, it should
be Believers, whom we might presume to be of more knowledge and judgment, than
to take any such offenses; and if they did, so as they should reprove us for
it, yet to have more love for God, than for any such actions in any persons to
cause Religion, and the holy Name of God to be evil spoken of, our great care
should be to have a good report of those who are without, and Christians
carelessness as to this, is without doubt their great Error, we ought not only
to follow things that are just, and honest, and pure, but things also that are
lovely, and of a good report, Phil. 4. 8. and to provide things honest in the
sight of all men, Romans 12. 17.

4. You must live in the practice and exercise of Grace, if you will have it
send forth the smell thereof. It is the rubbed Pomander that is sweet. The
Ointment poured out, which sends out a savor. It is not Grace talked of, but
acted, and in its full exercise that sends forth its pleasant smell.

5. Lastly; Be as much in communion with Christ as thou can. The King must be
at his Table, when our Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. Be much with
him in Prayer, Meditation, Hearing the Word. The Preaching of the Gospel is the
feast of fat things upon the Mountains; and here, because it is a time when
some of you are preparing for your duty of communion with Christ in the
Ordinance of his Supper, let me mind you of your duty as to that, the rather,
because I find our own Annotators, and diverse other Expositors of my Text
touching upon it in their Notes. That Table is the King's Table: It is called
the Lord's Table, he is the Master of that Feast, as well as the Provision. It
is an Ordinance which the Lord has instituted for our Soul's fellowship and
communion with him; Our Souls draw out from the Fountain of his Fullness, by
this Conduit-pipe. Neglect not that sacred Ordinance, that your Spikenard may
send forth the smell thereof; And Remember while you sit there, that you do not
restrain your Souls from God, but give out your Souls in the exercise of the
graces of Faith, Love, Repentance, Thanksgiving proper for that holy communion
with this King of Glory.

Sermon LII.
Cant. 1. 12. While the King sits at his Table, my Spikenard sends forth
the smell thereof.

I Proceed to the 2d Proposition which in my last discourse I observed from
these words.

Prop. That the smell of the Spouses Spikenard, does much depend upon Christ's
presence with her, and influence upon her.

I have already told you, that the believers gracious habits are the Spikenard
here mentioned. That the sending forth the smell thereof signifies the
exercise of these habits, to the pleasing of God, and the honor of God in the
sight, and face of the World. This I say does very much depend upon Christ's
presence with, and influence upon the Souls which is the thing here expressed,
by the Kings sitting at his table. I shall prove this proposition by proving
these four things.

1. That all exercise of gracious habits depends upon Christ's influence upon,
and communion with, the Soul.

2. That degrees of gracious exercises, depend upon degrees of such communion,
and influence.

3. That as is the exercise of grace, So is the smell thereof.

4. That in deserted Souls, grace does not give out its smell. Or at least very
little.

Conclus. 1.
1. I say, 1. All exercise of gracious habits depends upon Christ's influence
upon, and communion with the Soul. God does not only infuse habits of grace,
but he also eliciteth the acts of grace. Hence our Savior tells us, Joh. 15.
3. That without him we can do nothing. And the Apostle tells us, That he gives
to will, and to do of his own good pleasure. It is Musculus his observation
upon Joh. 15. 3. our Savior does not say, that without me you can do no great
thing, or without me you cannot do any great thing but without me you can do
nothing. And the Apostle calls Christ not only the author but the finisher of
our says, Heb. 12* ^ and 1 Phil. 29. It is given to you on the behalf of
Christ to believe, a power to believe, that is the habit, but the Lord does not
only give us a power to believe, but to believe actually. Acts of faith, and
holiness, are our fruit; The habits of either are the seed, the Acts are the
fruit, and so are often called in holy writ, Joh. 15. 2, 3, 4. Romans 7. 4. In me
(says God) is thy fruit found; hence a life of Holiness is called a walking
in, and after the Spirit, Gal. 5. 25. Romans 8. 1. I live (says the Apostle,
Galat. 2. 20.) but yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and again Phil. 4. v.
13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. To every good act
there is not required only a first exciting grace, and a working grace,
quickening, and determining the will unto the act: But a further exciting,
assisting, and cooperating grace, Thus that ancient Council (Council. Araus.
Can. 9.) determined, As often as we do that which is good God works sn us and
with us that we may work. Hence the Apostle says, of himself, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
By the grace of God I am that I am, and his grace which was bestowed on me was
not in vain, but I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the
grace of God which was with me. In every good action of a regenerate Soul The
renewed Soul acts, and God acts. Thus I remember August. asserted of Old. Some
(says he) may say, Then holy men are acted, and do not act; Respondeo (says
he) Immo agis, and ageris and ^unc been agis si ab eo agaris; that is, I
answer, yes, thou both actest and also art acted and then thou actest well, if
thou be acted by him; For the Spirit of God which acts thee helps thee
in acting; he has styled himself thy helper, because thou thy self do
something; only here is to be observed a double difference.

1. The first is the difference between Gods influence upon our natural powers
to their natural acts and our Spiritual habits and powers as to their Spiritual
acts. God influenceth our bodily members, as to their natural acts. Without his
influence we could not move, nor speak, nor do any natural act; but how does he
influence us as to them? By upholding our natural powers: And by keeping off
those things which would hinder their natural exercises. God has given unto
man a Soul, endued with the powers both of the Vegetative Soul in plants, and
of the Sensitive Soul in brute creatures, besides some more noble powers, which
are proper to the reasonable Soul. Now these Souls act from this natural power
in them, which being upheld in them, and not hindered by any foreign, or
intrinsic cause, produce the acts that are proper to them: This is but an
influence of common providence, and is common to all men. But the influence I
am speaking of is an influence of Special grace: Not an influence common to
men, but peculiar to the People of God who have experienced this grace.

2. The Second difference I desire you to observe is, The difference betwixt
Divine influences, as to the first and this further grace. No man comes unto
the Son unless the Father draws him. In the first grace the Soul is merely
passive; that change is wrought by working grace; this by cooperative, and
assisting grace; the renewed Soul moves and acts from it self: It is only
quickened and assisted by Divine influences. To speak therefore clearly, and
distinctly, we say God has a double influence upon our wills as to any good
actions done by us.

1. He influenceth our wills as the cause, Exciting our wills to the Acts. Our
wills are the cause of all good actions done by us, (the proximate cause;) we
first will the thing which we do, sed ille facit ut velimus, it is he who
influenceth our wills, and makes us willing, and then excites our wills.

2. God together with our wills (as the proximate cause) has an influence upon
the effect. It is universally granted by sober men, That there is a concurse of
Divine providence, to the production of every effect; nor does this concurse of
the first cause hinder the liberty of the Second Cause. No Natural agent
produces any effect without a concurse of the Divine power, and a simultaneous
motion of the Divine power. Some will have this influence of God upon us, as to
Spiritual acts, to be no more then an ordinary concurrence of Providence. But I
think the contrary will appear to every one who shall diligently consider two
things.

1. The imperfect state of the will of man even after regeneration. Before
Regeneration man has servum arbitriun: A mere servile will. Augustine tells us
that in the state of Innocence, man's happiness lay in a posse non peccare, a
power which he had in that state, if he would, not to sin against God. The
happiness of the state of the Souls in glory will lie in a non posse peccare,
in this that they shall have no power more to sin. They shall be like the
Angels in Heaven, confirmed in a state of purity, and holiness. The state of a
Man or Woman not regenerated is that he cannot but sin. Now though the
Regeneratedman be by regeneration freed from the servitude of the last
mentioned state, yet it is much short either of the more perfect state of the
will of the glorified Saints, or of the state of Adam in innocence, we cannot
say that their will is so stated through Grace, that they have a power not to
sin. Even the best of men sins 7 times a day, and who can tell how often he
offends. We know but in part, and so may sin through ignorance, and often times
do so. We are men full of passions, and live in a World that is full of
temptations, and are often overborn. Our will is indeed manumised, and to will
is present with us, but our freedom is imperfect.

2. Yea I cannot understand, but that we should have need of a Divine influence
exciting, and assisting us to our Spiritual acts, supposing that upon our
regeneration we had been perfectly restored unto that indifferency in which
Adam was created. For admit the will of man indifferently free to move to good
or evil, what but the Influence of Divine Grace should incline and determine it
rather to that which is good, than to that which is evil. But that which makes
it much stronger, is the consideration that we are not restored to such a
perfect liberty or indifferency, but there is remaining even in the best the
body of death, passions, impetuous passions, which strongly Incline us to that
which is evil, and often prevail against us. David complains, That iniquities
prevailed against him. Paul complained, That he was sometimes brought into
captivity to the Law of his Members. Besides, if we could imagine that the will
of man (though renewed) could be the first Principle of any spiritual action,
it must be a First Cause, and man would be a God to himself.

But it may be some will say, though it be true, that the will of man cannot
move it self to a Spiritual Act, but it must have a first mover, yet God's
Influence upon it may be no more than the ordinary concurse of his Providence,
such as he allows to all his creatures upholding their Beings, and their
natural powers and faculties. I therefore add,

3. That this may seem plausible to those who either do not consider, or will
not allow those two contrary Principles which are in every renewed Soul, but to
those who believe and consider this, it cannot, Gal. 3. 17. For the Flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are
contrary the one to the other, so that you cannot do the things which you
would; especially when we consider also the advantage which the Flesh has in
us against the Spirit. Vicious habits and inclinations are natural to the soil
of our hearts. It is a common observation, Quod sponte prodit laetius prodit,
what a soil naturally brings forth, it brings forth more vigorously and
certainly, than what it is made to bring forth by Art and Cultivation. The
heart of every man naturally inclines to motions and actions, contrary to the
Will of God. Hence Self-denial is the first thing necessary to Christ's
Disciple; this makes more than a concurse of common Providence necessary to a
spiritual act. Now in our natural motions there is no opposition, and therefore
an ordinary conservative power of common Providence is sufficient to their
production, Nature giving no opposition to them; but this reason differs very
little from the first, therefore I shall not further enlarge upon this head.

4. Lastly; If we could exercise gracious habits without any supernatural
influence exciting and quickening, and also assisting and cooperating; Then we
might from our selves begin, and carry on a supernatural act: For suppose one
endued with the habits of grace, he is only by these furnished with a power to
believe, to love God, etc. The Question is, Whence he acts and exercises these
powers? If this be from himself, then the supernatural act begins, and is
carried on from himself, and God should give only to will, but not to do. The
Apostle tells us, in 2 Cor. 3. 5. That we are not sufficient of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is from God. If it be
answered, That as in natural actions God upholdeth the natural powers and
faculties of the Soul; so in the renewed Nature, he upholdeth the Spiritual
Powers. This is too short; for the Question is, Whence a Christian is inclined
to this or that individual good action, and why more at one time than another;
for there is a never-ceasing influence of God upholding the principles and
powers of the renewed Nature; yet experience tells us there is not at all times
the same power and vigor to act. Besides, in all God's influences and
concurses of Providence with his creatures, his influence is according to the
nature of the second Cause with which he concurreth. But when God concurreth
with a spiritual habit or power in the Soul, he concurreth with a Second Cause
which is supernatural, not a native quality in the rational Soul, but
adventitious, superinduced qualities, therefore an ordinary concurse of
Providence is not sufficient; and as the Second Cause with which he concurreth
is supernatural, so the Effect to be produced is of that nature also. To all
this might be added, the mention so often made in Scripture of the Spirit
dwelling in us, helping our infirmities, working in us: And St. Paul's telling
us, that he lived, yet not he, but says he, Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 2^.
and that, 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the grace of God I am what I am; and his grace
which was bestowed upon me, was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly
than they all, yet NOT I, but the grace of God that was with me. But I have
spoken enough to the first Conclusion I laid down, proving that our exercise of
grace depends upon the Influence of Christ, and that considering him not as God
only granting his ordinary concurse of Providence, to all his creatures motions
and actions, but considering him as Mediator, and from whom the Spirit of Grace
proceeds. There must be a double Influence of Christ to a Spiritual Act. 1.
The first exciting, moving, quickening, and stirring up the Soul unto it. 2.
Assisting the Soul in it.

2. 2 Conclus.
Degrees of exercises of Grace depend upon the degrees of those Influences.
Christ tells us, That he came into the World, that his People might have life,
and that they might have it more abundantly, Joh. 10. 10. The aboundings of
gracious acts depend upon the aboundings of Spiritual Life. This is so obvious
to every man's common reason, that I need not enlarge in a Discourse to prove
it. Every one will conclude, That if without Christ we can do nothing, we
cannot without him do great things, if we cannot think a good thought, we
cannot pray a good prayer, nor do an act which must speak a great self-denial,
and mortification of our members.

3. 3 Conclus.
As is the exercise of Grace, so is the smell of it. I have before told you,
that some Divines say, the exercise of Grace is the smell of it. I had rather
by it understand the Acceptance of such exercise of Grace with God, and the
report of it amongst men, which indeed depends upon the exercise, and is more
or less according to the exercise of it. The more a Soul lives in the
improvement and exercise of those blessed habits with which God has endued it,
the more it glorifieth God, Joh. 15. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that you
bear much fruit; so shall you be my Disciples. Abraham being strong in the
Faith, gave glory to God; and the greater is the sweet savor which the Soul
gives in the World. There is nothing in the exercise of gracious habits, that
is unlovely, or unsavory to that part of the World, that has not through
malice outlawed its reason; they are not the exercises of Grace, but the
breakings out of sin and corruption which give the Souls of Christians any ill
report amongst the generality of the men of the World. Some few persons indeed
there are, who have such a perfect rooted hatred of God in them, that as they
say of the Basilisk, that it has such an hatred and antipathy to man, that it
will fly upon the Picture of a man; so they will fly upon the Image of God
wherever they see it, or think they see it; but the number of these (though
in it self too great, yet) comparatively is but small. The generality of men
and women in the World are not so bad, but a good man living uniformly up to
his Principles, has a fairer quarter amongst them. But amongst the People of
God, those who excel in virtue, the exercises of Grace always smell very
sweet, and amongst all men under the conduct of reason; as is the exercise of
these spiritual habits, so is the Christian's smell more or less. The Ointment
poured forth is that which perfumes the house, the reason is, because that
odoriferous quality is by the Air, (as its vehicle) conveyed to our senses. So
for men and women in the World; the habits of Grace in the Soul are not
discerned but by the exercise. Indeed as to our acceptance with God, the
reason is different; he sees the hearts of men in their internal change and
renovation, but he has given them their gracious habits for this very end,
that they should exercise them; he has commanded the exercise of them; Let me
hear thy voice (says he) for sweet is thy voice. By the exercise of them he is
glorified; a great deal of honor redoundeth to him from others. So as it must
needs be true, that as is the exercise of Grace, so must be the smell thereof,
whether you by smell understand exercise (as the smell of the odoriferous
Ointment or Plant is the product of its odoriferous quality) or the acceptance
of it with God, and acceptableness of it unto man. Where there is no exercise
of Grace, there can be no smell; where the exercise of it is weak, the smell of
it must bear a proportion; where there are the highest and strongest exercises,
there is the sweetest and strongest smell.

4. 4 Conclus.
Where the King is withdrawn from his Table, the Soul's Spikenard sends forth
little or no smell. This is my last Conclusion, in proof of the Proposition.
God sometimes hides himself from the Souls of his People. The presence of God
with Churches, Nations, and particular Souls (of which you so often read in
holy Writ) is to be understood not of his Essential Presence, for so he is
never absent from any of us; Enter, praesenter Deus est, and ubique potenter
(according to the old barbarous verse) he fills Heaven and Earth, and
infinitum ultra spatium, an infinite space beyond what we can comprehend under
these two terms. It must be therefore understood of his Providential Presence
respecting his goodness, and such grateful dispensations as from thence flow to
poor creatures. Now the goodness of God respecting our outward or inward man,
God is said to be present or absent, with or from his creatures, as he
dispenses out good unto them, or withholds them from them. Hence you read
in Scripture so often of God's presence with his People in going out with their
Armies, blessing them with successes, etc. And on the contrary, of God's hiding
his face, and departures from his People, by his giving them up to their
Enemies, his cursing them in their baskets and store, etc. As to their inward
man, God is said to be present with them when he upholdeth their Souls to their
spiritual operations, gives them quiet, and peace in their Spirits, etc. to be
absent, and to hide his face from them when he withholds these Influences.
God indeed does never wholly forsake a living man, for he must then die and
return to his dust; nor as to his Spiritual Influences does he ever wholly
withdraw himself from the Believer's Soul, for then his Spiritual Life must be
wholly extinguished, the Union betwixt the Soul and Christ, and his Spirit
wholly dissolved, but he oftentimes does gradually withdraw himself; this is
what we call Desertion. Take a Soul under these circumstances which enjoys
not the presence of Christ with it as at other times, this Soul at this time
has its Spikenard, for the Seed of God abides in it; but (alas!) it sends
not forth the smell thereof, at least not so as at other times; the deserted
Soul acts its Grace weakly, falls under many corruptions, and into many
temptations: It is like a Flower in Winter, whose Root is kept in the Earth
alive, but it does not bud and blossom as at other times. It is true, God at
such a time loves the Soul, (for whom he loves, he loves to the end, but
many of its actions in this state are not so pleasing to him; it cries out, I
think upon him, and I am troubled; I am so troubled, that I cannot speak, I
cannot pray, I cannot sing praises, etc. Nor can its conversation be so sweet
to men; it walks dejectedly, and troubled, etc. It is true, Desertions are of
several sorts and degrees, and that Soul from whom God hides himself as to
consolatory Influences, may yet enjoy his presence as to strengthening and
quickening Influences, but the actions of a deserted Soul, so far as it is
deserted, are far from sending forth a pleasant smell. These four things are
sufficient to make good the Proposition. viz. That the presence of Christ with,
and his supernatural Influences upon the Soul, are highly necessary to the
Spouse's Spikenard sending forth the smell thereof. I come now to the
Application.

Use 1.
Observe from hence (in the first place) how little room is left for any
creature's boasting, and how just reason the best of Souls have to walk humbly
before their God. We are naturally proud, and have hearts exceedingly prone to
be lifted up above measure. God knows our infirmity, and has so ordered the
whole business of our Salvation, that all boasting is excluded. There are but
two things as to our Spiritual concerns that we can boast or glory in: The
dignity of our state, or the change of our hearts manifested in our holy
dispositions, or virtuous and pious actions. As to the former God has (as the
Apostle has determined) excluded boasting, by the Law of Faith, Romans 3. 27.
Where is boasting then? (says he) he answers himself, It is excluded; By
what Law? Of Works? nay, but by the Law of Faith. Would any man glory that his
Soul is in a state of righteousness, and favor with God? What reason is there
for that, if he be justified through Grace, and righteous only through the
imputed righteousness of another? If he be only complete in Christ, all
glorying of that Nature is excluded. What is then left for a man to glory in,
will he glory in his habits of grace, the renovation of his nature, etc. So
indeed he might if this change had proceeded from himself, if he had been born
again of the will of man, or of bloods, but if it be of the will of God, if it
be of water, and of the Spirit, which works as a most free agent, blowing
where it lists, where is there any room for boasting? Will he boast of his
good acts? If it be not he that lives, but Christ that lives in him, if all
things which he does be through Christ that strengthens him, where is there
any room for boasting? God has not left us a Feather to boast of: Will a man
boast that he has a power to will what is spiritually good? He boasts beyond
his Line, and of a Lie. For it is God who gives both to will and to do. This
is gratia operans, working Grace; it is working, efficacious Grace that gives
man any spiritual power; he cannot make his own Spikenard; it is indeed his,
but ex dono, of God's free gift: But it may be when he has it, he can exercise
it without any further assistance; no, as he must first receive the Spirit
before he has in him any thing of Spiritual Life, so he must be led by the
Spirit. If God did not excite the Grace bestowed on him, it would be choked by
that body of death, that lust and corruption which is in the best men's hearts.
What can the creature do, when the Holy Spirit has quickened his habits of
Grace? he cannot act and exercise them, and put forth spiritual acts; but does
he no more need the Influence of the Holy Spirit? yes, without Christ he can do
nothing; he must still have the Grace of God with him, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Not I
(says Paul) but the Grace of God which was with me. This is now cooperative
and assisting Grace. He cannot make the Wheel which must carry him in the ways
of God, (working Grace must do that) when it is made, he cannot set it upon
motion. Exciting Grace must oil it; Assisting Grace must keep it up, move with
it, or he will never come to issue any good action. A Believer indeed acts,
for the habits of Grace from which he acts are inherent in him; he is not
moved like a Machine, or dead Engine, but yet he is acted, that is, assisted
and helped in his action: He is nothing but what he has received; he does
nothing but while he is receiving. Let not then the Natural man glory in the
power and good inclinations of his own will; he neither has, nor can have any
power to do that which in a spiritual sense is good, until it be given him from
above. Let not the renewed man glory in his infused habits of Grace; for as he
did not merit it, nor any way purchase them, so of himself he cannot use or
exercise them: But let him who glories, glory in this, that to him Christ is
all in all, that he lives, he acts, and brings a good action to an issue,
but yet not he, but Christ that lives in him, acts with him, and works in
him what he accepts from him. It is Christ who lays the foundationstone,
and then lays the cornerstone, who is both the Author and Finisher of our
Faith; we have nothing to do but to cry Grace, Grace, when we see the work
done. In the mean time, nothing hinders but that the Soul may rejoice, and
boast in the Lord, while it walks humbly with God, mourning over the
infirmity of its lapsed Nature; for certainly man did not come out of God's
hands in the day of Creation in this impotent state. Let no man therefore
despise those that labor under greater degrees of this impotency than he
possibly does, but let him bless the Lord who has further excited,
strengthened and assisted him to the operations of his Spiritual Life.

Use 2.
I shall shut up this discourse, with a word or two of Exhortation to every
Child of God to use his utmost diligence to keep the King sitting at his Table,
I mean to keep the presence of Christ, as much as he can, in and with his Soul,
that so his Spikenard may send forth the smell thereof. I shall urge this by
one argument, and then offer you my advice in the case, and so sh^^ up this
discourse.

1. My argument shall be drawn from the high concerns of the Soul in its
Spikenard sending forth its smell; every Soul is concerned in it three ways. 1.
In point of duty as God thereby is glorified. 2. In point of comfort as it will
evidence its Spikenard to be such indeed. 3. In point of honor, as it brings
the Soul to a repute in the World.

1. I say first in point of duty, as God is thereby glorified. For this cause
we are born, for this cause is every man come into the World, that he may bring
honor and glory to his great Creator. Herein (says our Savior, John 15.) Is
my Father glorified, if you bring forth match fruit, and as the Lord is
glorified by the vigorous exercise of its grace: So is he also honored, by the
predication of his grace, by the sweet smell which our habits and exercises of
grace have in the World. That they may see your good works says our Savior,
Matthew. 5. And glorify your Father which is in Heaven. That they may see your
good works says the Apostle, and glorify God in the day of their visitation;
no man so glorifyeth God as he who vigorously exercises his habits of grace.
The barren field is not that field which crediteth the husbandman, the barren
and unfruitful Soul is not that Soul which brings honor, and glory to God.
It is the fruitful Soul, whose smell is like the smell of a field which the
Lord has blessed, that brings honor to God, and so eminently serves the
great end of his Creation.

2. The Soul is not only concerned in it in point of duty, but also as to its
peace and comfort. Indeed it cannot be, but that comfort should result from the
Souls performance of its duty for the fruit of righteousness shall be peace;
but yet first, as he, or she that has a box of Spikenard, or any other
odoriferous unguent, or perfume, which casts out a sweet savor to delight,
or refresh others, does first partake of it him or her self, so it is with the
Spouses Spikenard, ordinarily, its fruits of righteousness do not only affect
others, but first affect the Soul in which they are found, hereby (says St.
John) we know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren. Hez^kiah upon a message of death sent by God to him was refreshed
with the smell of his own Spikenard, 2 Kings 20. 3. I beseech thee, O Lord
(says he) remember now, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart, and have done what is right in thy fight. When a Christian comes
to lie upon a sick bed, or a deathbed, it will be no grief of heart unto him,
but a great pleasure and Satisfaction, to consider, that he has with his
Spirit served God, and endeavored by holiness in all manner of conversation to
show forth the grace of God bestowed on him, not to have been received in vain.

3. Lastly a Christian is concerned in point of honor. A true Christian is an
honorable Person, born of God, and he is bound to consult his honor, and
repute in the World. It is the smell of a Christians grace, that gives him a
name and honor, a repute before men? The World takes no notice of our habits
of grace, while they lie dormant in the Soul, but when they show themselves in
our conversations in the exercises of faith, humility, patience, meekness
obedience then has a Christian honor before men. Thus you see how a Christian
is concerned to have his Spikenard send forth the smell thereof. Now seeing so
much depends upon this, that a Christian should keep this glorious. King
sitting at his Table, it follows that this is of high concernment to every
Soul.

But you will say what can we do toward it, is not the Spirit of Christ free,
as the wind, which blows where it lists? May not the King sit or rise up
from his Table when he pleases?

I answer, It is true, that our God (as to his manifestative presence with the
Souls of his People) governs himself according to the good pleasure of his
will, and his own infinite, and unsearchable wisdom: The King oft-times rises
up from his Table when the Soul of his Child is able to give it self no account
what distaste he has taken, nor what has made him to go away from it, and not
to give out his influence as at other times, but yet it is as true that at
other times, he withdraws for the punishment of his Peoples sins, either of
Omission or Commission, and there are some means to be used in order to the
keeping of his presence with us, upon the Omission, or neglect of which he
withdraws, and hides his face, and he ordinarily departech not from the Soul
but upon some distaste given to him; I shall therefore conclude this discourse,
with a few directions given in order to the keeping ofhis presence with us. To
keep to the Metaphor here used, there are four or five things, which will make
a serious and ingenuous Person make have from a Table, or depart from a place,
where he might have made a longer stay, or abode. 1. The frowardness or ill
humor of his host, 2. A discerned want of love or attendance, 3. An ill
intertainment, 4. The dullness or unpleasantness of the company, 5. A discerned
slight or carelessness of his presence. To avoid these,

1. Take heed of grieving his holy Spirit, quenching the motions of it, Rev. 3.
20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man will open, I will come in,
and sup with him, and he shall sup with me. O Christ's coming in, and supping
with the Soul, and allowing the Soul to sup with him, signifies what is here in
the Text expressed, by the Kings sitting at his Table. And the Spouses
Spikenard, sending forth the smell thereof; now this depends upon the Souls
opening; when Christ stands at the door, and knocks, he knocks by the
motions of his holy Spirit, the Soul opens, by its willingness to receive,
embrace and obey such motions; the reason why this great King, rises up from
his Table, is, because when he knocks the Soul is not obedient to his
motions, he pipeth to the Soul, and it does not dance. He mourns to it and it
does not weep, it does not answer his motions to it, according to the nature of
them, but denies, delayeth or disputes. God tells the presumptuous sinner,
Prove. 1. 24. That, Because he has called and he refused, because he stretches
out his hand, and he does not regard, but he sets at naught all his Counsel,
and would none of his reproof, he would laugh at their calamity, and mock when
their fear comes, etc. As a Child of God cannot be guilty of sinning to such a
degree, as setting at naught all the Lords Counsel, and refusing all his
reproof: So he cannot be under such a severe threatening as is there mentioned.
But as the Child of God may in some degrees be guilty of such sinning, not
hearkening to, and obeying all the motions of Gods holy Spirit, not receiving
all its reproof; So for this he may be punished in his measure, by Gods
withdrawings of his manifestative presence, take therefore the Apostles
Counsel, Ephesians. 4. 30. And grieve not the holy Spirit whereby you are sealed unto
the day of Redemption.

2. Let this great King want no love, no attendance, no reverence nor
obedience, while he sits with you. When Christ was at meat in the house of
Simon the leper, Mary brought a box of Spikenard, and poured it on his head,
Mar. 14. 3. Christ sits still while the Ointment was poured out, it was not the
smell of the Spikenard but the love of her that brought it, which made the room
pleasant to him. He stirred not from the Table at Marthas house, so long as
Mary sat at his feet and Martha served him. Hear what he says, Job 14* 23 If
any man love me he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and make our abode with him. Say you to all the powers and
faculties of your Souls to all the members of your bodies as the Virgin Mary,
said to the Servants at the wedding in Cana of Galilee where Christ was
present, Joh. 2. 5. Whatsoever he says unto you do it. That is the way to keep
him still sitting at his Table in your Soul.

3. Take heed there come nothing to your Table that shall distaste him. Every
ill smell of lnsts and corruptions will disturb him; this made him to hate the
Jewish feast days, and not to smell in their Solemn assemblies, Amos 5. 21. If
you look into Isaiah 1. 11, 12, 13. Chapter 66. v. 3. Jer. 7. 8, 9, 10. You will
see what sins will make him to rise up from his Table: All formality, and
hypocrisy in your behavior toward him, all gross, and Scandalous sinnings,
etc. When in stead of wine he meets with the poison of Dragons instead of sweet
grapes, he meets with grapes of gall, and clusters of wormwood, he will not
long sit at his Table in that Soul.

4. Not only the apparent badness, and rudeness, but the dullness, and
unpleasantness of a company, makes an ingenuous man rise up from his Table.
Take heed of heaviness, and dullness, inactivity, and want of delight in your
communion with God.

5. Lastly, As a discerned carelessness, and slighting of a friends Company,
makes the stay of an ingenuous Person with his friend, much shorter, then it
otherwise would have been: So any careless slighty behavior toward this great
King, may make his stay, and abode with your Souls, in the sensible
manifestations of his love, much shorter then it otherwise might have been. He
will be a welcome guest wherever he abides; on the other side, he does not
easily rise up, or depart from a Table where the Soul inlargeth it self in
testifying the gratefulness of his presence to it, by offering him all the
entertainment it can afford him, giving up of it self to him, daily importuning
him not to leave him. Thus you shall find our Spouse doing, Cant. 3. 4. -- I
found him whom my Soul loves, I held him, and would not let him go, until I
had brought him into my Mothers house, and into the Chamber of her that
conceived me.

Sermon LIII.
Canticles 1. 12. A bundle of Myrrh is my Beloved unto me, he shall lie all
night betwixt my Breasts.

YOU may by the Language spoken, understand who it is that speaks, it is the
Spouse, for she talks of her breasts. Our business is to consider what she
says: She has already expressed her grateful sense of her beloveds presence
with her, and the advantage she had by it, her graces cast a precious savor.
By the advantage of his company, and influence. She goes on still in the
Language of one that loves, under further Metaphors expressing her sense of
her Saviors company. And she does it in the Text,

1. By an elegant Metaphor; comparing her beloved to a bundle of Myrrh.

2. By an affectionatt resolution, to give up her self to him for an
intertaintment; He shall stay, or he shall lodge all night betwixt my breasts.

I find Interpreters exceedingly well agreed in the rendering of the Heb. words,
according to their several Languages. Only, Montanus, Pagnine and some others
translate the verb, He shall stay, not, he shall lodge all night (as we do) the
word will bear both: Let me therefore shortly run over the words.

My beloved.] (...) The Septuagint and Arabic [my Nephew] the difference is
slighty, for it was usual in those Countries, for Lovers to call each other by
names of relation (as it is not wholly out of use with us.) So in this Song,
chap. 8. 1 chapter 4 9. The Heb. word in Scripture signifies 3 things. 1. In the
first and proper signification, it signifies a friend, a beloved, an Uncle or
Aunt, Lev. 10. 4. the Uncle of Aaron, Esth. 2. 5. The Uncle of Mordecai; and
elsewhere it is used to express a friend or beloved, not less then 30 times in
this Song, so also Isa. 5. 1. and often to fignify Love it self as in the 2d v.
Of this Chap and elsewhere, it does also in Scripture signify a Caldron and a
Mandrake. But those significations cannot be proper here. Whether therefore we
translate it, My Beloved, or My Friend, or my Nephew or Kinsman, the sense is
still the same. For My Beloved, is that which is understood: [Is a bundle of
Myrrh] (...) Upon a survey of the several Texts of Scripture, which make
mention of Myrrh, and the use of it, and a consideration of what learned men
say of it, I do not think it easy to determine what it was; If I mistake not,
the Scripture makes mention of Myrrh under a threefold Notion.

Plinius Not. hist. l. 12. cap. 15.
1. Under the Notion of a Plant. So in the fourth chap. of this Song, v. 14.
Thy plants are -- Myrrh and Aloes, and Pliny tells us of such a Plant, that
grows in Arabia both wild and in Orchards about five Cubits high, and reckons
diverse kinds of it.

Prove. 7. 17. Exodus 30. 23. Psalm. 45. 9. Cant. 5. 1.
2. Under the notion of a Spice, or dry perfume, Prove. 7. 17. I have perfumed
my bed with Myrrh. It is reckoned amongst the principal Spices for the holy
anointing Oil, Exodus 30. 23. Thy garments smell of Myrrh. Psalm. 45. So also,
Genesis 37. 25. Genesis 43. 11. Though indeed the word there used be (...) not (...).

3. Under the Notion of an Oil or Gum, or wet Perfume, Cant. 5. 5. My hands
dropped with Myrrh. v. 13. His lips like Lillies dropping sweet smelling Myrrh;
Esth. 2. 12. It was one of the Oils with which the Virgins were perfumed. There
are two other Texts in the Old Testament, where there is mention of Myrrh.
Which may indifferently be understood of it as a Plant, or Spice, or Gum, or
Oil, Cant. 4. 6. You read of Cant. 4. 6.
the mountain of Myrrh. And Cant. 3. 6. Who is this comes up -- perfumed with
Myrrh? In the New Testament you find it 3. 6. Matthew. 2. 11. Mark 15. 23. John
19. 33.
mentioned in three Texts. Mat. 2. 11. Where the three wise men offered to
Christ Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh. So, Mar. 15. 23. Joh. 19. 39. Where you
read of Myrrh used in the burial of our Savior. I am not hard to believe, that
Myrrh is nothing else then a Plant which might bear, the Spice as a fruit. And
whose Gum was that Oil of Myrrh or liquid Myrrh which we read of, to which
purpose Pliny tells us that they were wont Plinius loc. praed.
to slit the rind of it at certain times of the year, and from those slits
dropped that which the Greks called (...) doubtless both the plant, and fruit
and Gum, were all exceedingly sweet; upon which account the Spouse here
compares Christ to Myrrh. Grotius in Matthew. Plinius loc. praed. Nieremb.
histor. Not. p. 105.
Grotius says the plant was good for little but for the smell, and only grew in
Arabia; but Pliny reckons many other Physical qualities it had. Nierembergius
observes that it grows no where but in very Southern Countries. It is granted
on all hands that it was a great Enemy to putrefaction which was the cause that
the Jews (who some think learned it from the Egyptians) used it to embalm their
dead bodies. Certain it is it was an exceeding Genesis 43. 11.
precious commodity, for Jacob calls it one of the best things of the land. And
it was one of the 3 Choice things which the wisemen coming from the East
brought with them for a present to Nomen aromatis K. M. Nathan. Est ex
speciebus Germinum, ib.
him whom they looked upon as the King of the Jews. Those four things we have
learned by this discourse of Myrrh. 1. That it was exceeding sweet. 2. That it
was a great preservative against putresaction. 3. That it was very medicinal.
4. That it was exceeding precious. But the Spouse compares her beloved here,
not to Myrrh only but to a bundle of Myrrh, (...) Some question whether it were
not properly translated a box of Myrrh, supposing the Myrrh a Gum, or a bag of
Myrrh; Supposing it a spice. Others think a bundle or posy is well enough,
understanding it of the herb. The truth is any of them all is well enough. (...)
The word comes from the Heb. verb (...) which signifies to bind, and it
properly signifies, any heap or quantity of things, Hag. 1. 6. Job 13. 17.
Prove. 7. 20. 1 Samuel 25. 29. Genesis 42. 35. and 40. 35.
that are or may be bound up: It is translated a bag, Hag. 1. 6. Job. 13. 17. a
bundle; you read of the bundle of lives, 1 Samuel 25. 29. A bundle of money, Genesis
42. 35. Genesis 40. 35. Once in Scripture it is translated a stone, 2 Samuel 17. 35.
But it is to be meant of an heap of stones, and once Corn, Amos 9. 9. But meant
of an heap of Corn. Christ is compared to a bundle of Myrrh. 1. A bundle of
Myrrh is more sweet then a single drop, or grain; Christ is an heap of sweets.
2. Men tie up things in bundles or boxes, for their better preservation: Christ
says the Spouse is a bundle of Myrrh, intimating that she would be very
careful to preserve the sweet influences of grace. But of this more anon. It
follows (...)]. To me: I do not think this particle is redundant, but
exclusive. Others have no value for my Beloved; they have no sense of his
sweetness: But to me Christ is infinitely (...)
sweet, a bundle of sweets, (...)] he shall lie all night, or, he he shall
stay. The word in the Heb. signifies two things; 1. Either to stay, and lodge,
and spend nights in a place: Or, 2. To murmur, and clamor, and make a noise;
so it is used, Exodus 15. 25. The former must be the sense here; and it is not
material whether we translate it (as in our Translation) he shall lodge all
night, as it is often used in Scripture, Genesis 19. 2, etc. or he shall stay, as
others choose to read it.

(...)] Between my Breasts; this term has no difficulty. The Metaphor is
either drawn from Lovers, which delight to lodge in each others Arms, or else
(as our own Annotations) from Mothers, giving suck to their Infants, who use to
give them their Breasts, and to lodge them betwixt their Breasts; or from Women
who use to wear Posies, and sweet smelling things upon, or betwixt their
Breasts; for the words [all night] are not in the Heb. but put in by our
Interpreters. The meaning is, Christ shall have of me what he pleases. I will
do what I can to get him to stay, and make his abode with me. Some lay some
stress upon the term night, as if her sense should be in the time of
persecution, I will keep my communion with the Lord Jesus Christ close. But in
regard the word (...) does not necessarily import the abode of a night only but
a stay for some time, I cannot lay any stress upon it. Some by the breasts,
understand V. Mercerum ad loc.
the heart. Whose place is under the left breast. The Hebrews understand by the
Spouses breasts, the two bars of the Ark, or the 2 Cherubims. Others, the 2
Testaments. But in Mammis amoris signum. There is nothing else meant then that
the Spouse would entertain her beloved, with the most cordial, affectionate
expressions and demonstrations of Love, that she might keep him the longer with
her.

Mercer observes. That the Spouse had before commended her Spikenard for a
sweet smell, but she here rises up higher: Though says she my grace be sweet,
yet my Christ is more sweet, for he is as a bundle of Myrrh, etc. You have by
the Apostle Peter a succinct, and plain exposition of this Text -- To you
therefore who 1 Pet. 2. 7.
believe he is precious.

The Propositions of the Text are plainly these.

1. Prop. That the Lord Jesus Christ is the Church's and the believing Souls
beloved.

2. Prop. That the Lord Jesus Christ is to his Spouse a hundle of Myrrh.

3. Prop. That the Spouse of Christ will be very covetons that Christ shall
abide with her.

4. Prop. That in order to Christ's abiding with the gracious Soul, it will
allow him a Room betwixt its breasts.

1. Prop. That the Lord Jesus Christ is the beloved of the believing Soul.

I do not intend to dwell upon this Proposition, because I spoke to what must
be the substance of this discourse, when I opened the 7th verse, where the
Spouse had spoke the same thing, though by another term. There she called him,
O thou whom my Soul loves. Here she calls him (...) My beloved. I will only
note to you two or three things about this term which learned Interpteters have
observed before me.

Ainsworth ad loc.
1. That the same letters in the Heb. make up David. My David. David's name
signifies beloved, and Christ himself was David's Antitype. He was the Son of
David, Matthew. 13. 2. David was a type of Christ. 3. Christ is called David,
Hos. 3. 5, etc.

2. As the word it self is a term of Love, so the Affix makes Eng. Annotat.
Ainsworth.
it to be Vox Fidei, the Language of Faith; My Beloved. The believing Soul
fiducially applies Christ, and cries with Thomas, My Lord, My God. The natural
man upon the common Illumination of the Gospel, may discern Christ a lovely
Object, but the Believer only can call him, My Beloved. Faith only gives an
Interest in Christ.

3. I noted to you, that the word also signifies a near natural Heb. 2. 14.
Relation, as that of an Uncle or Aunt, etc. Christ is near akin to the
believing Soul; he is flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone; he took
flesh, that he might take part with them; he loves them as natural Relations,
but by nature he is not akin to them; he is the Well-beloved of God; they are
Children Heb. 2. 11. Hos. 2. 18, 19.
of wrath, but by the Grace of Redemption they are of kin: The Kindred arose
from the Marriage of the Divine Nature to the Humane Nature; and from their
marriage to him in Justification. Both he that sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified are all one, wherefore he is not ashamed to call them Brethren. But
I shall conclude all I shall say to this Proposition with that of the Apostle;
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. I
proceed to the second.

Prop. 2. That the Lord Jesus Christ is to his Spouse a bundle of Myrrh. I
shall speak to this Proposition, 1. By Explication of the term, and
Confirmation; 2. By Application.

Qu. 1. In what sense is Christ to his Spouse a bundle of Myrrh?

I noted to you four things concerning Myrrh, and two concerning a bundle of
Myrrh: I shall pursue them alittle, and by them give you the sense of the
Proposition.

1. I told you Myrrh, true Myrrh, was an exceeding scarce thing, and therefore
very precious, and of great value; it grows but in some Countries, few have it,
it is the best thing of the Country, a Present for a Prince. I proved this;
Christ is of great value to a poor Soul; 1. Not easily procured. 2. When
procured, of inflnite worth. He is the Gist of God, and God gives as a King.
No man comes to the Son, but he whom the Father draws. In the Country where
Myrrh grew, but few got it. In a Country where Christ is Preached, but few get
a portion in him: One of a City, and two of a Tribe God brings to Sion. Judas
sat under the Myrrh-tree, and yet got no Myrrh. Many are called, but few are
chosen. If they did not make their Incision into the Myrrh-tree, and that in a
seasonable time of the year too, even the inhabitants of Arabia got no Myrrh.
Even those that live where Christ is preached, without laying hold upon him and
receiving the drops of his blood, and that in a seasonable time too, in the
acceptable time (as the Holy Ghost terms it) while he may be sound (as the
Prophet Isaiah speaks) they get no part in Christ. The foolish Virgins may
come when the Door is shut: And our Savior says, Many shall seek and shall
not enter. 2. Myrrh when procured was of high value. Especially a great
quantity, a bundle of Myrrh. So is Christ; Witness the Apostle, who counts all
things dross, and dung that he may win Christ, who desires to have nothing but
Christ, to know nothing but Christ to be Phil. 3. 7, 8.
nothing but interested in Christ. Nay let the Evidence of the thing witness.
By his name alone we can be saved, Acts 4. 12. By him we have remission of
sins, justification, peace with God, indeed all spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3.
He is All in all. Thus, you see in the first sense he is a bundle of Myrrh.

2. I told you Myrrh was very medicinal, of this the Scripture speaks nothing,
but Dioscorides and Pliny, and other Naturalists, Plinii Not. hist. l. 24. c.
26.
tell us large stories of its usefulness. They tell us it is wholesome against
insection, helps women in travel, cures consumptions, quickens the
appetite, etc. I shall not dwell upon this, because I do not think it chiefly
intended: But Christ in this sense is to the believing Soul a bundle of Myrrh,
healing all the Soul's diseases, Ps. 103. 3. He is that tree, Rev. 22. 2. Whose
leaves are for the healing of the Nations. He heal^th the broken in heart,
Psalm. 147. 3. What he did while he was upon the Earth, by his miraculous power
as to men's bodies, Mat. 4. 23. Healing all manner of Sickness, that he does now
in Heaven for the Soul, by his saving efficacy.

3. Myrrh is (as I told you) a great preservative against putresaction. Which
was the cause of their using of it about dead bodies, either putting it into
the body (after the Egyptian Method) or outwardly anointing, or embalming the
body with it (after the Jewish Method.) Christ is the same to the Soul where he
dwells, he preserves the Soul against the putrefaction of lusts and
corruptions. The Apostle speaks this, Romans 6. 3. Romans 6. 3.
How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein. Where he argues
that the Souls Interest in Christ arising from its justification, preserves
the Soul against putrefying lusts, that sin cannot have dominion over it,
because it is not under the law, but under grace. But I hasten to the 4th which
in the Judgment of Interpreters is chiefly intended here.

4. Myrrh, whether in the Herb, Spice, or Gum, is exceeding sweet. Hence you
read of beds, and garments persumed with Myrrh: Now the greater quantity there
is, the stronger the odor must be: Christ is a heap of sweets, exceeding sweet
to Cant. 5. 13, 16
the Soul; his mouth is most sweet, Cant. 5. 16. his Cheeks are as sweet
Flowers, his lips drop sweet smelling Myrrh, Cant. 5. 13. Sweetness to the
nostrils is nothing else but a smell that arising from some hidden quality in
the thing that emits it, and conveyed to the nostrils by the air, gratifies
that outward sense. There is a sweetness, that is mental too. A Notion is as
sweet to the Prove. 13. 19.
Scholar, as a perfume is to a Lady, Prove. 13. 19. Desire accomplished is sweet
to the Soul. Christ's sweetness is mental sweetness, he is sweetness not to the
nostrils, but to the Soul, and so he is a bundle of sweets: Let me unty this
bundle of Myrrh a little. And show you how Christ is sweet: I will open it to
you in three things.

1. He is exceeding sweet in his actions as our Redeemer. As to these he is a
bundle of Myrrh, there were many of them: His Uniting of the Divine nature to
the Humane nature, in his Incarnation, his fulfilling the law, his death upon
the cross; His resurrection, ascending, sitting at his Fathers right hand,
making intercession for us: The Soul smells of all these by Meditation and
faith, and the smell is like that of a bundle of Myrrh; shall I show you how?
1. For his Incarnation, with the manner of it, he united the divine, and humane
nature, by an hypostatical union, was conceived by the overshadowing of the
Holy Ghost in the womb of a Virgin without the help of man. Mr. Ainsworth and
others think this Text, has a special referenee to this; this is Christ now
considered, as wrapped in swaddling clothes, and laid in a manger. The Soul smells
of this by a firm and steadfast divine faith, believing the thing because God
has said it in his word, though it cannot see it by the evidence of reason and
sense. And the Souls smells of it continually by meditation. And O how sweet it
is to a believing Soul! Then says the Soul (first) he that Sanctifies, and I
that am Sanctified are both one. I see Christ is not ashamed to call me
Brother. 2. Then faith the Soul, I see I have a merciful High Priest, that
knows how to pity a poor piece of flesh, hungring, and thirsting, and full of
infirmities.

3. Again here is comfort says the poor Soul to me, I was born a leper, under
the imputed guilt of Adams sin, I was conceived in sin, and brought forth in
iniquity; But my Savior was born without sin, the vessel was made pure, by the
overshadowings of the Holy Ghost and no impure hand contributed to his
conveyance into the World. I was born a Child of wrath, indebted to justice
before I knew what I did, but he was born a Child of Love: He was born with a
knowledge of humane infirmities to know how to pity me, but without sinful
infirmities; That he might be in a capacity, to save, and help me. Again says
the Soul, Then I see a perfect and sufficient Savior. One me^rly God
(considering the justice of God that could give no remission without blood,)
could not have saved me because he could not have died for me, and so have
destroyed him that had the power of death. One merely man could not have saved
me, for he could not have merited. But a Person that was God, and man; God, and
man in one Person, must needs be in a perfect capacity; as man he died, as God
he merited, nay the Person that was God-man both died, and merited. How sweet
is this to the Soul, torturing it self with thoughts for the filthiness of its
nature, troubled with humane infirmities, perplexed with thoughts how Christ
should be able to save it, etc. This is but one of his actions,

2. He fulfilled the law for us. I am not of their mind that think that Christ's
active obedience is not imputed, I think the Apostle speaks plain enough to the
contrary, Romans 8. 3, 4. And if not he, yet the Prophet; By his knowledge he
shall justify many. You read that he was made righteousness for us: And
doubtless (whatever some may fancy) the obedience of the Person which was
God-man, could not be an homage due from the humane nature of Christ (which was
indeed but a creature;) Christ fulfilling the Law is exceeding sweet to the
gracicious Soul. This poor Soul when renewed is but renewed in part, and in
many things offends, and the sense of its daily backslidings makes it
tremble. How sweet is it now to the Soul, to be able to conclude thus to its
self: Though there be much guile found in my heart, and in my mouth, yet in his
mouth there was no guile found, though I have been an Absalom, rebelling
against my Heavenly Father, from my youth upward, yet he was an Adonijah, a Son
that never displeased his Father, 3. Look upon him in the laying down of his
life. How sweet is the meditation of it to a poor Soul? Christ crucified is a
bundle of Myrrh; indeed from hence the Soul draws many precious smells, hence
it is that the Soul smelis Spiritual life, with all the consequences and
dependencies upon it; Hence it smells Spiritual liberty, with all the sweet
fruits of it: I say from hence it smells Spiritual life to itself, when it is
almost suffocated, with the apprehension of the guilt of sin, and cries out, if
I pine away in my iniquities how can I then live? And faints at the
apprehension of the wrath of God due to it, for every single sin, and much more
for the numberless number of the sins which it Isa. 53. 5, 6.
has committed; It smells that of the Prophet, Isa. Chapter 53. v. 5, 6. He was
wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities: the
Chastisement of our peace lay upon him, and with his Gal. 3. 13.
stripes we are healed, v. 10. His Soul was made an offering for sin. Or that
of the Apostle, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has Redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us, and this refreshes it; I have deserved to dye
(says the Soul) but Christ has died for me. I have deserved to tread the wine
press of my Fathers wrath; but he has trod the winepress of his Fathers wrath
alone. I was born a slave to lusts and corruptions, but Christ by dying has
made me free. Ah! what a bundle of Myrrh is a crucified Christ to the Soul?
Hence it smells Spiritual life, even from his death for we have Remission of
sins through his blood. It smells Spiritual peace; Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods elect? it is Christ that died, To. 8. 38. It smells an
access unto God: The holy of holies being Sprinkled with his blood, and Heaven
itself by it Sanctified, and made accessible. It smells Spiritual liberty. For
the blood of Christ, says the Heb. 9. 14.
Apostle, purges the Conscience from dead works, to serve the living God. It
smells Spiritual strength. For through the cross of Christ (says the Apostle)
my heart is crucified to the World. Thus you see that in this action (or
suffering rather) Christ is to the Soul a bundle of Myrrh. 4. Look upon Christ
as rising up from the dead. He is a bundle of Myrrh there too, the Soul from
hence again smells Spiritual life, Romans 4. 25. He rose again for our
justification. Spiritual peace, Romans 8. 38. It is Christ that died, yea rather
that is risen again; Spiritual strength, and quickening, Romans 6. 4. 5. We shall
rise with him to newness of life, Col. 3. 1. If you be risen with Christ seek
the things that are above. It smells life from the dead. This the Apostle
proves, 1 Cor. 15, Romans 8. 11. He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall
also quicken your mortal bodies. Nay it smells Eternal life from hence, Joh.
14. 19. Because I live you shall live also. 5. Look upon Christ (as the men of
Galilee, Acts 1. 11.) Ascending up to Heaven. Thus he is also a bundle of
Myrrh, he lives, and from hence Job smelt, that he should see him with his
Eyes, the Angels, that stood to wait upon his ascension, told the men of
Galilee, so much, that as they had seen him ascend, so they should see him
coming again. Hence the believing Soul smells, that he shall ascend too, for
where Christ is there he must be. The body is there, the Eagles shall flee to
it one day. He is lifted up, and every believer shall be drawn after him. Our
flesh and blood shall inherit the Kingdom of God. For it is in part there
already. Heb. 6. 20.
Heaven is the place whither our forerunner is entered. Heaven was an open City
before the fall, Adam and all his Posterity might have entered presently; upon
the fall, it is gates were locked up, the flaming sword of divine Vengeance kept
it, but the Captain of our Salvation has now entered, and he keeps the gates
from shutting any more, till every believer be come In, 6. Look upon Christ as
sitting one the right hand of the Majesty on high: So he is a bundle of Myrrh,
too. Is it so says the Soul? Then he has favor with God, and power with God,
and what need I any more then for my God, my Savior, he in whom I have
believed, to be in favor with the King of Kings, and to have power with the
Almighty. Nay says the Soul, then I am half in Heaven. For, Ephesians. 2. 6. We sit
together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Christ and I are one, if he sits
there, I sit there too; For he is flesh of my flesh. 7. Lastly, look upon
Christ as interceding for us, Romans 8. Heb. 7. He is not there Idle, his work is
to plead for us, to solicit our business, to act our part, to do our work. And
thus he is a bundle of Myrrh to every believing Soul. When the poor Soul sinks
in the thoughts of its sins renewing after justification: Christ is a bundle of
Myrrh to it, 1 John 2, 1. If we sin we have an advocate with the Father, even
Jesus Christ the righteous. When the Soul again sinks at the thoughts of its
imperfect duties, to think that it cannot do a duty, but with so many faults,
that it may fear the wrath of God for it. What a bundle of Myrrh it is to the
Soul, to think, well, Christ is in Heaven, and he will pick out every fault out
of this Prayer, this duty, etc. And so present it in the golden censer.
Incensed with his merits: Thus now I have showed you, how Christ is to the
believing Soul, a bundle of Myrrh. Considered as to his actions as our
Redeemer. It remains further to show you, that he is so also, as to his
Spiritual influeuces. And Lastly in his Gospel institutions and Ordinances: And
then I shall come to the Application.

Sermon LIVE.
Canticles 1. 13. A bundle of Myrrh is my Beloved unto me, he shall lie all
night betwixt my Breasts.

I Proceed, in opening the bundle or bag, or box of Myrrh, which makes my Text
give a fragrant smell. I have showed that it is Christ, who is thus resembled,
and have propounded to show you the aptness of the comparison in five things: I
am yet upon the 4th: He is to the believing Soul a bundle of Myrrh for
sweetness: I proposed to open this in three particulars: showing you, that
Christ is so, 1. In his mediatory actions. 2. In his Spiritual influences. 3.
In his Gospel Institutions, and Ordinances. I have done with the first and now
proceed to the second: To show you the sweetness of Christ to the believing
Soul.

2. In his Spiritual influences. When he ascended upon high (says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4.) he gave gifts unto men: he gave gifts to his Church: his Ordinances.
(Of those the Apostle speaks:) but he gives other gifts likewise, gifts even to
the Rebellious, Psalm. 68. All these are summed up under one head: The gift of
the Spirit. This is that which he calls the promise of the Father. He was the
promise of the Father of old, Ezekiel. 36. 27. It was his promise, John 14. 16. I
will pray the Father and he shall give you another (...), Comforter, and he
shall abide with you for ever: Even the Spirit of truth. He is sent in Christ's
name. 26. v. he is called the Spirit of Christ: hence the influences of the
Spirit are the influences of Christ. I shall instance in a sixfold influence,
of the Spirit of Christ, upon the Soul, as to all which he is a bundle of Myrrh
to his beloved.

1. The first is his convincing influence, Joh. 16. 8. When he is come, he will
reprove the World of sin; In respect of this influence the Spirit of Christ is
called the Spirit of bondage, Romans 8. 15. They say of Myrrh, that in the
gathering, it makes the hands of the gatherers exceeding bitter, but gathered,
it becomes incomparably sweet: Thus it is with the Lord Christ as to this
influence of the Spirit upon us, the Soul, for the time that it is under this
influence, is full of bitterness: but it turns to an exceeding great
sweetness. The Book which St. John did Eat, was in the Mouth as sweet as honey,
but in the belly more bitter than wormwood. A fit emblem of sin. The
convictions of the Spirit of Christ are of a quite contrary nature, in the
mouth they are as bitter as wormwood: but in the belly they are exceeding
sweet; the Soul in the hour of conviction, is exceedingly sad, and troubled,
but when convinced how it blesses God, who was pleased to convince it of sin?
Like the woman, who in an hard labor is full of pain, and wishes she had
never bred a Child: but being once delivered forgets her pain, and remembers
her throws with pleasure.

2. A second influence of the Spirit of Christ is Illumination. The Spirit is
the Spirit of wisdom and knowledge, Isaiah 11. 2. It teaches us all things,
Joh. 14. 26. 1. Joh. 2. 27. That is, all things necessary to Salvation. The
things which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart
of man to conceive; even these things are revealed to us by the Spirit, 1 Cor.
2. 9, 10. Concerning the manner of the Spirits teaching, how consistent with
the teachings of Ordinances, and yet distinct from it, I have else where showed
you: my business now is to show you that Christ in this influence is a bundle
of Myrrh. Light is sweet to the Eye (says Solomon) knowledge is that about
which the understanding (which is the Eye of the mind) is exercised, and is
every whit as pleasant unto the Soul as light is unto the bodily Eye. Now as
all knowledge is sweet to the Soul, so especially the knowledge, 1. Of things
hidden from others. 2. Of such things as are of nearest concernment to us:
especially, if the knowledge be certain.

1. I say, the knowledge of such things as are hidden from others: such
knowledge we upon experience find to be very sweet, and such a knowledge the
Spirit of Christ gives to the Soul. The Gospel of Christ, is it self called a
mystery, a thing hidden from ages, and hidden from the wise and prudent. This
indeed is more generally revealed to all, but more especially and fully, and
clearly to the believing Souls. But further the Spirit of God reveals the
secrets of God to the Souls of the Saints, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. Even the deep
things of God, its particular election and the truth of its graces, etc. Now
this knowledge is sweet to the Soul.

2. The knowledge of such things as are of nearest concernment to us, is most
sweet. Such is the teaching of the Spirit it teaches us to cry abba Father, it
teaches us to see the things that are freely given us of God. Add to this,
that by how much any knowledge is more certain, by so much it is more sweet,
the understanding is not so pleased, with probable notions, as what is matter
of demonstration, and assured to the Soul; such is the teaching of the Spirit,
1 Cor. 2. 4. It teaches by demonstration, leaving no doubting in the Soul.
This is a second influence of the Spirit of Christ upon the Soul in respect of
which he is a bundle of Myrrh unto the Soul.

3. A third influence of the Spirit of Christ, is its Sanctifying influence,
Romans 15. 16. -- being Sanctified by the Holy Ghost: It is Christ that
Sanctifies, Heb. 2. 11. Sanctification is expressed under the Notion of being
conformed to the Image of Christ. Now as to this influence of grace, Christ is
a bundle of Myrrh to the believing Soul. The unbeliever hates holiness, but the
Child of God Loves it, and desires further degrees of it, Romans 7. 22. I delight
in the Law of God after the inward man (says Paul, Romans 7. 22.) He his highly
pleased, when he finds the power of grace in his heart, overpowering lusts, and
corruptions, and his Soul every day growing more and more like God, and like
Christ, more full of Spiritual desires, Spiritual affections, his heart more
willing to deny it self, to be under the plenary power, and Command of Jesus
Christ when he finds, that it is not he that lives, but it is Christ that
lives in him; Christ in respect of this influence, is to the Souls of his
Saints as a bundle of Myrrh.

4. A fourth influence of Christ upon the Soul, is his strengthening influence,
Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. He
strengthens the Soul, 1. In doing Spiritual duties. 2. In resisting
Corruptions. 3. In suffering sharpest trials. Romans 8. 26.
The Lord stood by me (says Paul.) But it is not my present business, to
discourse either of the several sorts of Spiritual strengthening influences:
Nor yet of the ways and methods, by and in which Christ meets the Soul with
strength, and Communicates strength unto it. My work is only to show you that
this influence of his is as a bundle of Myrrh to the Soul. Now that Christ in
this influence is exceeding sweet to the Soul, needs no other proof, then the
daily experience of the Souls of Gods People, how refreshed do they rise up
from Prayer, when they have found the Spirit of Christ in it, helping their
infirmities, with strong cries, and groans? It is said of Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.
That she rose up, and her Countenance was no more sad. This was that which made
the holy Martyrs take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, the burning of
their bodies. And made them feel no more pain (to use the expression of one of
them) then if they had been upon a bed of Roses. So that their Persecutors
cursed them, saying they had a delight to burn.

5, A fifth sort of influences are the Quickening influences of the Spirit of
Christ. I have formerly told you that the Scripture mentions a threefold
quickening: All of them from Christ, and by the Spirit. 1. The quickening of
the dead body, mentioned Romans 8. 11. This will be as a bundle of Myrrh,
exceeding sweet when it comes, when in the resurrection we shall be like
Angels. And the thoughts of this are exceeding sweet, while we live here. 2.
The quickening of the dead Soul, mentioned Ephesians. 2. 1. This is exceeding sweet
to the Soul (when done;) Oh how pleasant it is to a Soul to remember his
conversion, the time, the Sermon when, and by which God was pleased at first to
work upon it, and work a change in it. 3. The quickening of a dull Soul,
laboring under any Spiritual deadness, heaviness, or inactivity; of this David
often Speaks, and prays for it, Psalm. 119. Quicken me in thy precepts, etc. The
knockings and motions of the holy Spirit, are tiresome and tedious, and
exceeding grievous to a carnal heart, they disturb its sweet sleeps, in its bed
of idelness, Security, and lust, but they are exceeding sweet to a gracious
heart. The renewed Soul prays for them, thirsts after them, delights in them,
and is never more pleased then when it feels itself most alarumed, and
awakened, and spurred on by them.

6. The last sort of influences are the comforting influences of Christ by his
Spirit. The Spirit is called the comforter often, John chapter 14. and 16. It is a
piece of its office, to seal, and to witness; It witnesses with our Spirits
that we are the Children of God. It seals us up to the day of Redemption. I
shall not need stand to prove, that Christ in these is as a bundle of Myrrh;
The very name comforter imports sweetness, and is of it self a bundle of Myrrh
to the Soul. Now all our Consolations come from Christ, Phil. 2. 1. 2 Cor. 1.
5. He was called the Consolation of Israel. And the Jewish believers waited for
him under that Notion, Luke 2. 25. I have now opened to you the 2d thing, and
showed you how Christ in his influences is a bundle of Myrrh. One thing yet
remains.

3. Christ in his Ordinances, and Gospel Institutions, is a bundle of Myrrh.
Christ is in his Ordinances. We preach Christ crucified, (says the Apostle)
and we are Baptized into Christ, Romans 6. And for the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 10. 10. It is the Communion of the Body, and Blood of Christ.
Christ in these is a bundle of Myrrh to the Souls of believers. But indeed,
Christ in these is only sweet upon the former account, viz. in respect of his
influences, which he is pleased to convey in and through these Organs, and
separated from these, Ordinances signify little but burden to the Soul.
Ordinances are sweet to the Soul two ways. 1. As God is pleased in, and by
them actually to convey the influences of Christ, and his grace to the Soul.
Thus they are only sweet to the Soul, when it sees the power and glory of God
in his Sanctuary, 2. As they are under a divine appointment in order to that
End. Thus Ordinances are sweet to the gracious Soul, though at present, the
Soul does not meet with, and enjoy God in them: yet says the Soul, they are
those appointments, wherein God has said he will be found, and instituted of
God, in order to that end, and it may be my lot, as well as others, to meet
with God in them, therefore the Soul prizeth them; how precious Ordinances
(even those which were carnal (as the Apostle calls them) under the Jewish
Economy) were to the Servants of God who lived in those times, appears by the
eminent instances of David in Psalm. 84. Psalm. 63. Psalm. 42, etc. The Psalmist
speaks of the Body of Jews, Psalm. 84. v. 6. That they passed through the valley
of Bacah and went from strength to strength, until they all appeared before God
in Zion. And thus I have opened to you the fourth thing in this similitude,
showing you how aptly Christ is compared to a bundle of Myrrh, viz. For
sweetness: but I also noted two things hinted in the term of bundle; a bundle,
or bag notes a quantity of sweets. 2. Men use to bind up things in bundles, for
their better preservation. Hence two things more.

5. Christ is a bundle of Myrrh. He is an heap of sweetnesses, exceeding sweet
to the gracious Soul. The Apostle says, (Col. 2. 3.) That all the treasures of
wisdom are in Christ. All the treasures of Soul sweetness are in Christ also.
There are other things that are sweet to the Worldling, and him that is a
stranger to Christ. Stolen waters are sweet to the Thief, Prove. 9. 17. The
bread of deceit is sweet to the deceiver, Prove. 20. 17. Lust is sweet to the
unclean Person: yea and to the exterior senses of a gracious Soul other things
may be sweet to the Child of God. But to the Soul of the Saint (considered as a
Saint) nothing is sweet but Christ, he is its bundle of Myrrh, all the
pleasure, and sweetness, and delight that it has in the World on this side of
Heaven, is either in the meditation of Christ or application of him,
fiducially, or assuredly; all his hopes of good are in Christ. Christ in him
the hopes of glory. All his enjoyments, which he valueth, are the enjoyments of
Christ, and his grace, he is a bundle of Myrrh unto it.

6. Lastly. Christ is to it as a bundle of Myrrh, In regard of of its great
care and diligence to preserve and keep alive its sense, and enjoyments of the
Lord Jesus Christ. The gracious Soul is very careful to keep its view of
Christ. Observe the next words. He shall lie all night betwixt my breasts (of
which hereafter.) Observe again this Spouses carriage, Cant. 3. 4. Upon her
recovery of Christ when he had absented himself, I held him, and would not let
him go, until I had brought him into my Mothers house: into the Chamber, of her
that conceived me. See also, Cant. 8. v. 1. The Soul that has had any
experiences of Christ and of the influences of his grace, binds them up as it
were in a bundle. The memory of that Soul is the bag and the string too. Thus
the Psalmist Psalm. 77. 5. I have considered the days of old, the years of
ancient times. I call to remembrance my Song in the night, v. 11. I will
remember the works of the Lord, surely I will remember thy wonders of old. I
will meditate also of all thy works, and talk of all thy doings. And indeed
this needs no further proof then what my former discourse has given it, for
it is very connatural to us, to be careful in the preserving, and keeping
^lose, and safe whatsoever is precious to us. The Worldling ties up his money in
bags, and is very careful to keep safely what he has got with care; the Lady
keeps her perfumes, and Jewels safe; so does the Scholar his Books; indeed so
does every one, whatsoever he accounts sweet and precious: Now nothing being
more sweet and precious to the Soul then Jesus Christ and his influences, it is
as natural to him to endeavor the preservation of them. But I have spoke
enough to the explication, and confirmation of the point.

Use 1.
Have you heard, that Christ is to the Soul, as a bundle of Myrrh? How sottish
then is the generality of the World, that either despise, or neglect their
interest in him. If ever a People despised their own mercies, and set light by
the rock of their Salvation; If ever a People forsook the fountain of living
Waters to dig up to themselves cisterns, broken cisterns, that will hold no
Water: Certainly those are they who sit under the tenders of Christ in the
Gospel, and yet do despite to the Covenant of grace, and neglect so great
Salvation. Christ is calling aloud every day as in the fifth of this Song, v.
1. I am come unto my Garden, poor creatures! I have gathered my Myrrh with my
Spice; I have eaten my Honey Comb with my Honey, I have drank my Wine with my
Milk; Eat (O friends!) Drink, yea, drink abundantly O you beloved. Christ
incarnate, crucified, ascended up to Heaven, sitting at Gods right Hand, is
daily preached to poor creatures. And what is their language, other then that
of the Prophet, Isa. 53. 3. He has no form, no comeliness: There is no beauty
that we should desire him? People that live in these lightsome parts of the
World, dwell upon the mountain of Myrrh, upon the hill of frankincense (to use
the expression, Cant. 4. 6.) and yet how few are those that look after and
discern any sweetness in Jesus Christ? What is the reason? Are not these men
rational persons as well as believers? How comes it that the Lord Jesus Christ
is as a bundle of Myrrh to a believing Soul, and not at all precious unto
others? I will assign a double reason.

1. The first is their want of Spiritual senses. There are but few that have
senses exercised to discern between Good and Evil. Heb. 5. ult.) the Carnal man
is said to be dead in sin, life and sense go together, the dead man smells
nothing. The Natural Soul is a dead Soul. He has Natural senses, he discerns
the sweetness of Honey to his taste, Music to his Ear, fair and beautiful
objects to his Eye, Perfumes to his Nostrils, the sweetness of notions to his
understanding, but he discerns no sweetness in spiritual things, he savours not
the things of the Spirit.

2. But Secondly, His Nostrils are choked with other Smells. The vitiated
pallat tastes not the sweetness of the best meat, the Nostrils suffocated with
stinks discern not the sweetness of the best Perfumes; the Souls of
unbelievers, are filled and suffocated with the smells of the World: One with
the smell of unjust gain, Dulcis odor lucri, he cannot smell the sweetness of
Christ, who commands him to leave the gain of injustice, to distribute and give
to the poor, to avoid covetousness which is Idolatry; another is suffocated
with the savor of Worldly business and employments, he smells the smell of a
field which the Lord has blessed, the smell of his Worldly business puts out the
smell of Christ's sweetness, he is cumbred about many things, and he smells no
sweetness in the One thing necessary. A third has his smell adulterated with
sordid lusts, the smell of a drunken cup, of a fordid wanton, spoils him for
smelling this bundle of Myrrh, which is infinitely more sweet. But give me
leave to turn this complaint and reproof into an Exhortation.

Use 2.
In the first place. O you fools, when will you be wise? You that are creatures
of pleasure, and are not satisfied without a ransacking of the whole Creation
for objects of delight, Turn in hither I beseech you, and tell me if there be
any sweetness like this bundle of Myrrh. Your Eye engages your Tongue to call
the comely face sweet; Alas! A fit of sickness spoils the beauty of it, the
Smallpox spoileth that glory; how ever when death has taken possession of it,
you see no more sweetness in it. You hear the voice of a singing man or Woman,
and you think it sweet, but that voice will one day grow hoarse, or you may be
in a state, that it will grate upon your Ears, and be offensive to you. You
smell a powder or perfume, and you must have it and wear it about you, because
it is sweet: But what are all these to one Christ, who is sweetest to the Soul
in an evil day, who does not refresh the outward man so much as the inward man;
whose sweetness ravisheth every soul that is possessed of it, never corrupts
nor decaies, nor saileth, Imagine all the lines of beauty, which adorn all
sublunary faces, to be brought into one face, that face must be very lovely:
But all nothing to the face of Christ, in the Eye of a believing Soul. If you
could rifle Arabia, and from all the sweet Plants and Gums, and Spices, which
abound there, distill one sweet Water, or make one aromatical compound or
perfume, that should have in it united, whatsoever is scattered in them, of
pleasure to the senses, they would all be nothing to one Sprig of this bundle
of Myrrh, to one beam of Christ's countenance, the least breathings of his Love
upon the Soul of his Saint.

Ob. Ah! But says a poor Soul, you told us that Myrrh. Is not every ones
portion, it only grows in Arabia, and every one there gets it not, you told us
there was a season in which it must be got, and if that were lost, or if during
the season, due means were not used, People got no Gum; I am afraid my season
is gone, and know not what course to take to get it.

Sol. 1. What the Country of Arabia was for Myrrh, that is every place (where
the Gospel is preached) as to the gaining of Christ. It is true there are many
Countries where the Gospel of Christ is not preached, but England is a mountain
of Myrrh, and it drops every day amongst you.

2. I told you that in the Country where the Myrrh grew every one gathered it
not: But I told you it was their own fault, either despising through ignorance,
or through laziness neglecting their opportunity; in the Country where Christ
is Preached, every one receives him not, but it is their own fault. I do not
think it is true, in every sense, that every man may be saved that will; This
phrase implies a power in our selves to Spiritual actions: but it is
unquestionably true that if any Soul sitting under the Gospel perish, it is
because it will not be saved. You will not come to me says our Savior, that
you may have life.

3. I told you indeed that there is a season, (as there was for gathering
Myrrh) which if neglected, we get no share in Christ. The foolish Virgins came
when the gate was shut. Many shall seek and shall not enter. There is a season
of grace. And some Divines think that this season is often times finished while
our life yet lasts, and the means of grace continue: Whether it be so or no I
cannot determine; sure I am, thou have no sufficient reason to conclude thy
season past, whiles yet thy life lasts, and the means are continued, especially
if God yet at last give thee an heart to come unto Christ.

4. Do thou ask what thou should do? Remember what I told you, concerning
the procuring of the dropping of Myrrh. 1. They made an incision into the tree.
2. They set something to receive it. The incision is made already. The
Soldiers made that when they pierced thy Saviors side.

There is nothing left for thee to do, but to open thy heart to receive those
influences of grace which freely drop from a crucified Christ: yea God must do
that too. The truth is, thou have nothing to do more then to go up to the
mountain of Myrrh, to wait upon God in his Ordinances, to sit under Gospel
dispensations and to look up to Heaven for further grace. Only remember the
full Soul loathes the Honeycomb, the full dish receives not the most precious
liquor; and while thy Soul is full of the love of the World and love of lusts,
it receives no Myrrh, while it is full of the love of pleasures, wantonness,
froth and idleness, it is like the riven dish, that holds nothing. But to come
to a conclusion,

Use 3.
Is Christ to the Believers as a bundle of Myrrh? Then hear me O you Children
of the most high! I will urge but two things upon you as an improvement of this
Notion.

1. Use him as a bundle of Myrrh. I will press this in three things. 1. Be
often taking the savor of him: The woman that has a rare smelling flower, or
perfume, wears it in her bosom she suffers not the first to dye in her Garden,
nor the latter to evaporate in her cabinet, but she is often smelling of it. Oh
that the Children of God would make as much use of Christ, that they would not
let his sweetness in a Gospel ordinance evaporate into the Air, nor the
sweetness of his mediatory actions revealed in the Gospel die in sheets of
Paper, but that they would study the Scriptures, meditate on the Word, think
over Gospel Sermons when they have heard them! Oh that they would wear, the
remembrance of Christ's actions upon their hearts every day, how sweet would it
be to their Souls? How pleasant to their thoughts! the lazy student loses the
sweetness of those thousand notions, that are in his Books, because he never
reads his Books, nor spends time in studying them: The negligent Christian
loses much of that infinite sweetness that his Soul might have by reflecting
upon the Gospel story, and Gospel truths, for want of meditating upon them.

2. Be exceeding careful to preserve the influences of Christ upon your Souls
and your experiences of his love. Shall the woman bind up her sweet flowers in
a posy, and the Lady carefully tie up her perfumes in bags and glasses, that
they might not lose their scent, and she the sweetness of them? And shall a
Christian possessed of the sweet influences of grace, possessed of the presence
of Jesus Christ do nothing to preserve it. Say with the Spouse here, he shall
lodge all night betwixt my breasts; do as the Spouse, Cant. 3. When she had
found him whom her Soul loved, she held him, she would not let him go, till she
had carried him to her Mothers house, to the house of her that conceived her.
Bind up your experiences of the Love of Christ in so many bundles, and do what
in you lies to preserve his influences in the Vigor of them, would you know
how you might preserve them? There is no better way then for you to keep up in
your Souls, an high value and esteem of them; it is ordinarily for want of
love, that the Beloved withdraws himself.

3. You are communicative, of your sweet perfumes. The Lady cannot wear her
strong perfumes, but others whom she comes near will partake of her sweetness.
It is of the Nature of the perfume to season the whole Air. She will hardly
have a perfume, bat out of a desire to have it taken notice of, she will be
holding it to the Nostrils of others. Oh that you who are possessed of the Lord
Jesus Christ, this bundle of Myrrh, would be as communicative of that also:
That you would be commending Christ (as the Woman of Samaria did, John. 4.) to
your Neighbors, Kindred, Children, Friends, Acquaintance, that they also might
follow after him in the savor of his precious ointments. This is a piece of
Christians duty. When thou art converted (says our Savior to Peter)
strengthen thy Brethren. Thus to do good, and to distribute forget not, for
with such service God is well pleased: But to come to a conclusion,

2. Is Christ to the believers a bundle of Myrrh? Let not them be as bundles of
Nettles to him. The Bundle of Myrrh gives a pleasant smell, cheereth the
senses. The bundle of Nettles Pricketh, and offends, and grieveth the
Nostrils; It is the Apostles exhortation Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the holy Spirit
by which you are sealed to the day of redemption. The Exhortation is to
holiness of Conversation: The Argument is from the love of Christ to you. The
love of God constrains (says the Apostle.) There are many arguments to press
holiness from, none so ingenuous, none so constraining to an ingenuous Soul, as
the sweetness of Jesus Christ to it. It breaks the heart of an ingenuous Child
to remember its frowardness to an indulgent Father, and a tender Mother. Love
works much upon a good Nature. Study this Argument and the force of it upon
your Souls to make you perfect holiness in the Lords fear.

Sermon LV.
Cant. 1. 13. He shall lie all night betwixt my Breasts.

I Have united the bundle of Myrrh in my Text, that I might give you the fuller
smell thereof. Christ is the Posie of his Saints; we must now find him a
convenient place; the Text assigns him a Posies place, about, or betwixt the
breasts, not upon her shoulders, as if he were her burden, nor behind her
back, where she could not view him, but in her breast, where she may be always
pleasing her senses with him. The Psalmist, Psalm. 16. 8. says, I have set the
Lord always before me, he is at my right hand, therefore I shall not be moved.
De Ponte notes, that the believing Soul in the time of spiritual Combat,
sets Christ at her right hand, but in the time of Peace she lodges him
betwixt her breasts. It was an old usage, says Atheneus, to anoint the breast
with Myrrh, because of its virtue to strengthen the heart; here our Spouse
places her bundle of Myrrh.

Not to trouble you with the strained fancies of Interpreters, concerning the
Spouse's breasts; In mammis signum amoris: the place betwixt the breasts is
near to the heart, and the seat of the beloved Object; it is the beloved
Husband, and the Beloved Babe that is allowed to lodge betwixt the breasts. She
might have said he shall lodge near my heart, but she rather chooses to say,
betwixt my breasts, (which are an outward part, nigh to the heart) intimating
that she would not only bear Christ upon her heart, but express her love, by
living to Christ in her outward conversation. But not to overstrain the
Metaphor, she does not say, he shall come, but he shall lodge, or lodge all
night betwixt my breasts. There are two Propositions which I named from these
words, and which yet remain to be discoursed:

1. That the believing Soul is wonderfully desirous of Christ's abiding with it.

2. That to engage him to such an abode, she will allow him a room betwixt her
breasts. The latter will be a proof to the former, and come in collaterally,
while I handle the former.

Prop. That a gracious heart will be exceeding desirous of Christ's abiding
with it.

I shall speak to this Proposition in this Method: 1. Showing you what are
those lodgings and abidings of Christ with, and upon the Soul, of which the
gracious heart is so exceedingly desirous. 2. How it does appear that a
believing Soul is so fond of Christ's abidings with it: 3, Whence it is that
she is thus exceeding fond of Christ's lodgings and abidings with it. 4. I
shall apply the whole.

Qu. 1. What is to be understood by the lodging or abiding of Christ with the
Soul?

You read in Scripture of Christ's abiding with the Soul, and the Soul's
abiding with Christ. The first is mentioned as our privilege, the second as
our duty. Of the first you read, John 14. 23. My Father and I will come unto
him, and we will make our abode with him. Of the second, John 15. 6. If a man
a^ide not in me, he is cut off, etc. So again, v. 6. each depending upon the
other; for it is God's Covenant: I will never depart from you to do you good,
and I will put my fear into your hearts, that you shall never depart from me.
Abiding, or lodging in the primary Notion, signifies the continuance of some
corporeal presence transferred to spiritual things, it signifies The
continuance of a privilege, or perseverance in a duty. Christ's abode with us
signifies the first; our abiding with him signifies the latter, each of them
expressed in Scripture, by various expressions. Christ's abiding with us, is
expressed, John 14. 16. By the abidings of the Comforter, by the abiding of the
anointing Oil, 1 John 2. 26. It is opposed to the momentany, and short
refreshings of grace, when to use that other phrase of Scripture, God is to the
Soul but as a wayfaring man, that tarries but for a night. Our abidings with,
and in Christ, are also variously expressed, by the abidings of that in us
which we have received, 1. Joh. 2. 24. by abiding in light, 1 John 2. 10. and
the Word of God abiding in us, v. 14. by abiding in the Doctrine of Christ,
Joh. 2. ep. v. 9. But I have nothing to do save only with the former Notion. In
short, The abidings of Christ with the Soul import two things.

1. The permanency of his Union with the Soul, continuing the state of
Justification, 1 John 3. 24. Hereby we know he abides in us, by the Spirit
which he has given to us.

2. The constancy of his gracious Influences upon us, which Joh. 14. v. 21. he
calls A manifesting of himself unto us; and v. 22. his abode with us. This is
also the abiding of the (...), the Comforter mentioned, v. 16. This is the
lodging of Christ betwixt the Soul's breasts. This it is of which the gracious
Soul is so exceeding fond and covetous: And so much shall serve for the first
Question. I come to the second.

Qu. 2. How does it appear that a gracious Soul is so desirous of Christ's
abidings with it?

There are three ways by which the Earnest desire of our friends abode with us
are discernable to others: 1. By Verbal Expressions. 2. Real Actions. 3.
Vehement Passions. By all these the believing Soul's desires that Christ should
lodge with it, have been, and are discernable.

1. Verbal Expressions (before the World was so far debaucht as now, that none
knows by the Index of the Tongue what the Clock strikes in the heart) were
sufficient Evidences of cordial desires. The Children of God cannot lie unto
him, we may therefore from their words conclude still. If you look upon the
Saints or Church in former times, see what the Church says, Jer. 14. 8. O thou
hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in times of trouble, why should thou be
as a stranger in the Land, as a wayfaring man, that turns aside to tarry for
a night? The expressions of David in the Psalms this way are very many; this is
it which he means by the lifting up of God's Countenance upon him, which he so
passionately desires above Corn, Wine, and Oil, Psalm. 4. for which he prefers
the place of a doorkeeper in the house of God, before dwelling in the Tents of
wickedness, Psalm. 84. Indeed, if you look upon the whole sum of the desires
both of David, and other Saints, who stand upon sacred Record, you will find
that as to spiritual things, all their desires are comprehended in this one,
that God would abide with them, lodge all night betwixt their breasts. And the
same Spirit yet breaths in the Souls of all that fear the Lord. I need do no
more for the proof of this, than appeal to the experience of all such who have
in the least degree tasted how good the Lord is; what is the sum of all their
prayers? what is their language to one another, and to all the Ministers of God,
to whom at any time they address themselves? but oh that they might find the
Abidings of the Comforter with their Souls, the abidings of the strengthening
and quickening Spirit of God with them! Oh that Christ would not be as a
stranger in their Souls, nor as a wayfaring man that turns in to their Souls
for a night!

2. The Earnest desires of gracious Souls for the abidings of Christ with them,
are evident also upon the consideration of what they will be ready to do for
the continuance of them: This is in part hinted in the Text: He shall lodge, or
stay, or lie all night betwixt my breasts, which metaphorical expression
signifies (by interpretation) these two things:

1. I will deny him nothing which he shall desire of me, so I may but keep his
company.

2. I will entertain him with the highest demonstrations of cordial Affection.

1. I will deny him nothing which he shall desire of me. The Mother will deny
nothing to that Child, nor the Wife to that Husband, which either of them allow
to lodge betwixt their breasts. The believing Soul will deny Christ nothing, so
it may keep his presence with her. Will he have the man do for him? Lord, says
Paul, Act. 9. 6. What will thou have me to do? Will he have the Acts 9. 6. Acts
21. 11.
man to die for him? I am ready (says Paul, Act. 21. 11.) not to be bound
only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jsus. Will he have
it deny it self, distribute and give to the poor, make satisfaction where he
has done injury? No sooner is Zacheus told that Christ was come to his house,
but he cries, Luke 19. 5, 8. Lord, the half of my goods I give to the Poor, and
if I have taken anything from any by false accusation, I restore him fourfold.
Will he have Peter gird himself, and come to him upon the waters? Peter will do
it immediately. Does he call Simon and Andrew from their Nets to follow him,
upon a promise that they shall be made Fishers of men? and does he by and by
require James and Zebedee to do the like? they immediately leave their Father,
forsake their Nets, and follow him, Mark 1. 16, 17, 18.

2. The phrase signifies as much as, I will entertain him with the highest
Evidences of most cordial Affection. I have more than once noted, that the
heart lies under the left breast; however, the breasts are the place of love.
It were endless to enlarge upon those several Scriptures expressing the
satisfaction of gracious Souls, upon the presence of Christ with them, or his
returns of presence to them. One or two of them shall suffice. The first shall
be that of David, Psalm. 146. You will discern upon the reading of that Psalm,
that God had returned to his Soul in Influences of mercy, testifying his
gracious presence, he had heard his supplication, v. 1. Inclined his Ear unto
him, v. 2. helped him, v. 6. Mark with what a satisfaction his Soul receives
these Influences; v. 2. I will call upon him as long as I live; v. 7. Return
unto thy rest O my Soul; v. 12. What shall I render to the Lord for all his
benefits; I will take the cup of Salvation, etc. v. 16. Oh Lord, truly I am thy
Servant, I am thy Servant, and the Son of thy handmaid, etc. How welcome is the
presence of God to David's Soul? Do you use to say to your friend? Sir, what
shall I provide for you? I think my self much beholden to you, I am much your
Servant for this kindness, rejoiced to see you, etc. Observe if David here
speaks not much the same language. The other instance shall be that of the
Spouse, Cant. 3. 4. when she had recovered her beloved, I found him whom my
Soul Loves, I held him and would not let him go, until I had brought him into
my Mothers house, and into the Chamber of her that canceived me. The Child
knows not how to express its love to its friend better then by bringing him
or her home to its Mothers, or Fathers house. What need any further evidence
then that exuberance of joy which is found in every gracious Soul, upon any
return of divine love which may evidence Christa abiding with it?

3. Vehement passions will also discover a gracious Souls desires to the
Enjoyment of Christ, and his abidings with the Soul. When they saw our Savior
weep over Lazarus his grave, Joh. 11. They cry out, How he loved him! He that
sees a Friend mourn when his Friend is gone from him, or perhaps but going;
the woman jealous of any, whom she but suspects would draw away her husband
from her, falling into fits of passion whes;he does but fear such a thing, will
easily conclude, that this friend, this Wife is eagerly desirous of the
presence and abiding of his friend, or her husband with her; and Secondly he
that observes the jealousy of a gracious Soul, over the Lord its Savior, and
of every sin of Omission, or Commission which it suspecteth as that which may
probably separate betwixt his Soul and it. He that observes what slavish fear
the Christian (yet living in the enjoyments of God) is often tormented with
left he should lose his beloved presence, o^ takes notice of his weepings even
till he can weep no more when he lies but under a (perhaps) false apprehension
that he has withdrawn himself in displeasure, how his Eye oft-times consometh
with grief, how he makes his bed to swim, and wateroth his Couch with tears,
must needs conclude, that the abidings of Christ with the Soul are great
objects of its desire. And no wonder though they be so as we shall see by
enquiring upon the third question.

Qu. 3. Whence it is that a gracious Soul is so desirous of Christ's lodgings
and abidings with it?

To make a thing the object of a reasonable Soul's desire, it is required, That
the understanding conceive it under the Notion of good, and some good which it
wants, and may possibly obtain, and according to the degree of goodness
apprehended in an object proposed, so is the motion of a reasonable Soul's
desire more or less toward it. Now that which appears to us as good, appears
so, 1. Under the notion of profitable and advantageous; Or, 2. Under the notion
of sweet and pleasant, or under the notion of vertaous and honorable. It is
almost impossible to conceive, but that the spiritually enlightened Soul should
apprehend the abidings of Christ with it transcendently good upon all these
accounts.

1. Under the notion of Virtuous and Honorable. What greater honor can betide
a poor creature than to have the Almighty pitch his Tents in and with it? for
the Lord of Heaven and Earth to make his abode with a Worm? the Eternal Son of
God to dwell with Dust and Ashes, yea and delight to dwell and continue with
it? Such honor have all the Saints, and no wonder if they be so fond of it.
Does Abigail think it an honor to be but a Servant to an Earthly David? and
Mephibosheth judge it an honor to be admitted to eat Bread at his Table? What
is it then to have the Son of God in the Arms of our Souls, and to have him
dwell in our hearts, and make his abode there?

2. Nor certainly can any thing be more sweet to a gracious Soul. The joy and
peace (that peace which passes all understanding) which is the issue of
believing, ebbs and flows according to the abidings of Christ with the Soul:
His presence makes an Heaven, and his absence makes an Hell there. There are
two Passions, which are like overflowing Floods, and drown a Soul's beauty and
comfort; Fear and Grief; the presence of Christ with the Soul keeps them both
under. The Soul of the Saint cannot fear, when it knows that it is He that
saves it, and upholdeth it with the hand of his Righteousness, and the
Children of the Bride-chamber (himself told us) cannot mourn while the
Bridegroom is with them.

3. For the advantage which accrews to the Soul by the abidings of christ with
it; besides that already mentioned, in the quiet and holy security which it
has by his company, which is infinitely above the value of all other
concernments; I say, besides that, the advantage is exceeding great. I will
mention but two things.

1. Its enemies are still; when the Captain of our Salvation is in our
quarters, there is no great fear that the enemy will beat them up. The tempter
has nothing to say, whiles he that succors the tempted is speaking peace to
the Soul, God must first say to the Devil, behold this Soul is in thy hands,
before he can meddle with it. And our own inbred enemies, those of our own
house (our innate lusts and Corruptions I mean) are as still as our grand
Adversary: The very waters of Marah themselves turned sweet when this Tree of
life is in them. Our hearts lose much of their bitterness by the presence of
Christ in them, it is when the Sun is down, that the Frogs and Toads croak and
the Dors and Bats fly. It is in the night when the Thief steals. The time of
Christ's withdrawings from the Soul is the time when Satan molests, and lusts
are most busy.

2. The Souls Spikenard then sends forth its pleasant smell. You had it in the
former verse. I showed you there what dependence the exercise of our grace has
upon Christ's presence with us, both in respect of his exciting and assisting
influence. Christ speaks it plain in that excellent parable of the vine, and
the branches, Joh. 15. 5. He that abidath in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth fruit, for without me you can do nothing -- v. 6. The same
brings forth much fruit. Otherwise the Soul withers, v. 6. Naturalists say
that in those Countries which abounded with Myrrh, they were wont to bind
bundles of it to the heart, or to anoint it with the Gum; the use of it was to
strengthen the heart against what was noxious, and unto a due discharge of its
natural operations. It is Gregory's observation, (or similitude rather) that
the Soul that applies Christ to its heart, and which finds his influence will
find it like a bundle or an anointing of Myrrh strengthening the Soul against
the prevailings of corruptions, and filling it with a Spiritual heat, and
fitness for Heavenly operations. And thus I have showed you just reason, why
the lodgings or abidings of Christ with a gracious Soul are so desirable to it.

Obj. But will some poor Soul say? Can Christ not abide with that Soul which he
has once owned, is his love mutable, is he not the God that changes not, but
loves to the end whom he once loves?

I answer, The Love of Christ is an abiding love, he is not yea and nay with
the Soul, upon which he has once fixed his heart, whom he loves he loves to
the end.

1. His union with the Soul abides. Christ once in us and ever in us, is a
truth to which we must adhere, that corruption which could not at first prevent
it, shall never he of force to dissolve it; but the sense of this union may
fail. The indwelling Spirit shall not be disseised, but the Spirit as a
comforter may fail the Souls of the Saints. When will thou comfort me? (says
the man after Gods own heart.) Besides that our state of justification is to be
maintained by the performance of our Spiritual duty, and there can be no
justified Soul, that does not earnestly desire its own continuance in that
state.

2. His necessary influences upon the Soul abide too. The promise must stand
good, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, nor can it be imagined that so
noble and vertual an head as the Lord Jesus Christ can be united to any member
of his Spiritual body without a proportionable influence upon it: or that the
seed of God in the Soul should be wholly inactive. But Spiritual desires are
also the sacred means, which God has appointed for the preservation of these.

3. But Gradual abidings of Christ in the Soul may fail. He may not abide with
the Soul in such proportions of Spiritual influence, at all times. Now the
degrees of Spiritual influence from Christ are highly desirable to a gracious
Soul. But I have spoke enough to the explication and confirmation of the point.
I come now to the Application.

Use 1.
In the first place, Let us from this try our selves whether we indeed be the
true Spouses of the Lord Jesus Christ, and he our beloved yea or no? Can we
say, and say it, cordially, he shall lodge betwixt our breasts?

1. There are many that say he shall sit upon my tongue, I will talk to Christ,
and take his name into my mouth, concerning whom we may say, as the Prophet
sometimes said of the Jews, The Lord was nigh in their mouths and far from
their reins, the woman dandles many a Child in her arms, that never lodges
betwixt her breasts in the night, she talks of many a man in the day time, whom
she will not allow to lodge in her bosom at night: there is many a wretch that
talks of Christ that yet will not let him come ^igh his heart.

2. There are many that say they shall lodge to eternity betwixt his breasts,
that yet cannot, will not say this; going to Heaven is grown market talk, and
every one is a pretender to that journeys end that yet will not set one foot
before another in the way. Balaam wishes vainly, and many a one concludes as
vainly, that he shall dye the death of the righteous, and his latter end shall
be like his; those mentioned, Mat. 7. 24. said they should lodge the long night
of eternity betwixt Christ's breasts, but he says unto them, depart from me I
know you not; there are too many that build Castles in the air, and houses upon
the sand, and dream of golden mountains, but every one is not wife to another
that says she shall one day have him, nor is every Soul a Spouse to Christ
that promises to it self eternal content in him.

3. A man may say, Oh that Christ would come betwixt my breasts, that yet is
not the Spouse of Christ. There Is scarce a wretch living but at one time or
other wishes Christ would speak to his Soul pardon and peace; it is one thing
for a woman to desire the Physician may make applications to her breasts, when
full of pain, that yet will not say he shall lodge betwixt her breasts, you see
there may be a great many mistakes in this point, but plainly let me ask you
two or three questions.

1. Are you willing to open the secrets of your Souls to Jesus Christ? There Is
many a one is willing that Christ should come so near him as his Ear, but not
into his heart; can thou say that thy Soul cleaves to the Lord Jesus Christ,
that thou desire he should enter into its secrets, not only to tip thy
tongue, regulate thy Countenance, but to Command in thy heart?

2. Art thou willing that Christ should lodge all night with thy Soul? Not
serve thee only by fits to cure thy heart akings, but that he should lodge and
dwell with thee; make an abode with thy Soul.

3. Art thou willing that a perfect Christ should lodge with thee? Not only
Christ as an High Priest to expiate for thee and make an atonement for thy
sins, but as a Prophet to guide and instruct thee, as a King to rule over thee,
and govern thee. The Wife desires not an Husband only as her Companion, but as
her head.

By this, O Christian I shall thou know if indeed thou be the Spouse of the
Lord Jesus, and not an harlot. I might have further added. That the Soul that
is so, says so of no^e else, (...) and none but be, shall lodge betwixt my
breasts. She is an harlot that speaks it in any sense less then exclusive. If
thou can^t truly say of the Lord Jesus Christ, be shall lodge betwixt my
breasts. Thou also say, He shall, and none else shall; not the sweetest lust
I have, nor the loveliest piece that the World can afford me, not any thing
contrary unto him, nor any thing besides him. That Earthly Object comes too
nigh a Christian, that comes between its breasts. The heart is reserved for the
Beloved. Deal faithfully I beseech you with your own Souls; the World is full
of pretenders, but I fear me exceeding thin of such as can say, and say it in
truth, and say it cordially, That Christ is he, and he alone whom they desire
should lodge and stay betwixt their breasts. But enough for this Use. I hasten
to conclude.

Use 2.
Let us in the next place see what this Doctrine will afford us, for the
promoving our comfort, or our holiness, by way of Consolation or Exhortation;
and first for Consolation. The term or Verb in the Text speaks certainty, but
futuriety, and the phrase denotes, 1. The Spouse's leave, 2. Desire, 3.
Confidence; He shall lodge: And thus considered (to say nothing of the too
Critical note that some make upon the term night, as fignifying here a time of
affliction, in which Christ is an especial comfort to the Soul; I say, to say
nothing of that, because the word in the Text does not necessarily imply a
night, yet the phrase thus considered) the Text and Doctrine offer a great deal
of refreshings to those appearingly forgotten Souls, who cannot obtain the
sensible abidings of Christ with them, and are therefore ready to pronounce
sadly against their Souls, that God is not with them, nor they with him: As
Gideon said, If the Lord be with us, why are we thus? forgetting that God
sometimes hides himself even from the House of Jacob. Let such a Soul observe,
That the Spouse here does not say, He does lie always betwixt my breasts,
though it be true that Christ does truly and constantly dwell in the heart of
his Saints, yet it is often indiscernably to it; but she says, He shall lie,
which imports, 1. I will give him leave; I will not drive him from my Soul; my
breasts shall be free and open to him. 2. The Spouse's defire, it is Vox
cupientis. 3. It speaks confidence; it is Vox fidei, the language of Faith,
which when it speaks properly, always speaks in the future tense; for hope
which is seen is no hope, unless when it calls the things which are not in
present fruition, as if they were, because of its being an evidence of things
not seen. Look, as the true Wife is not ^lwa^es known by having her beloved
Husband in her Arms, but first, By her readiness so to receive him; Secondly,
By her desire of it, as her happiness* So is the true Believer not always
known by his or her sensible Enjoyments of the Lord Jesus Christ, but by the
openness of her heart to receive him. 2. By the longing; of the Soul after him.
3. By the confidence of the Soul in him.

Use 3.
But lastly; Oh that the same frame of spirit might be found in you (even in
every one of you who profess to have tasted how good the Lord is) which was
here found in the Spouse toward the Lord Jesus Christ, that you would all say,
He shall lodge all night betwixt our breasts. I but now told you it imported
three things; 1. Leave, 2. Desire, 3. Confidence. 1. Lift up your heads, O you
gates, stand open you everlasting doors, that the King of Glory may come in.
Stand open, O my Soul, to the Lord Jesus Christ, keep your hearts free to the
entertainment of the Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Make it the business of your desire
and prayer. 3. Be confident that he will make his abode with you. These might
be three distinct branches, but I have not time to speak fully to each of them.
For the two first, I have prevented my self as to the Arguments which I should
use to urge them. Consider what I spoke to the third Question in the
Explication, how honorable a thing it is to you, how sweet and pleasant, how
infinitely advantageous and profitable; thereis only to be added a word of
Direction: Will the poor Soul say, How should I procure the abidings of Christ
with me, (I mean) his abidings as to his gradual Influences? For your
direction, I will only turn you to that one Text, Joh. 14. 22. where you shall
be resolved from our Savior's own mouth; If any man love me, he will keep my
words, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Christ is ready
enough to stay where he finds love, but it must be real love, such as is joined
with keeping of his words. Be expressive then of your love to Christ; 1. By
voiding from your heart whatever may be offensive to his Majesty. 2. By
heightening in your heart a great esteem of him. 3. By doing whatsoever he
commands you. Do you abide with him in a way of duty, and he shall abide with
you in a way of mercy; according to that of the Prophet in the Book of
Chronicles to the King; God is with you, if you be with Chron. 15.
him; but if you forsake him, he will forsake you; if you be uncertain and
unconstant with him, he will be so with you, as to the gradual Influences of
his Love; With the froward he will show himself froward.

2. I told you it is the Language of Faith. He shall lie. Faith is the sacred
Instrument by which Christ is united to the Soul, and it is that by which
Communion with Christ is maintained and preserved. According to a Christian's
Faith it ordinarily is unto it (as to Divine Dispensations;) Faith merits
nothing of Christ, but it applies much. Believe, and the abidings of Christ
shall be established upon your Souls; but you must know, that this Faith must
not be a dead Faith, but such as works by love. Though Faith and Holiness must
not be confounded, yet (unless as to Instrumental efficacy in Justification in
the act of justifying) they can never be separated. But thus much shall serve
for this Verse.

Sermon LVI.
Canticles 1. 14. My Beloved is unto me as a Cluster of Camphire in the
Vineyards of Engedi.

IT is agreed on all hands, that it is the Spouse, which yet speaks, and the
term (...) which we met with from her in the former verse is enough to prove
it, and to let us know that she is yet speaking concerning her beloved. It is
also as well agreed that what she says in this verse amounts to little more
then what she had said in the 13. v. Only she expresses the same thing under a
new resemblance, but it is not so easy to give you a just account of her
expression, and to set out the aptness of the Metaphor which she here used: The
difficulty of which arises, from this that the plant, to which or to the Gum
of which she here resembles her Beloved, is an exotic plant, not known to us
in these countries neither in the kind, nor in the qualities, we having no
perfect account given us by any, of the Natures of those several plants which
grew in those Eastern Countries: Which has made that great diversity of
Interpreters in translating the Heb. word (...) which we (and it is but a
conjecture) translate Camphire; The Vulg. Lat. Sept. and Tremellius and the
Dutch Translators translate it Cypress; Castalio, the Cyprian Grapes; the
Arabic, a cluster of Flowers; Pagnine and Montanus translate it not at all,
but put in Copher; the Heb. word. The Tig. Version Caphurd, Camphire. Let us
endeavor as far as we may to find out the truth, by way of Explication of the
Text; we will therefore enquire,

1. Qu. What were these Vineyards of Engedi. 2. What is this Cluster of Copher
or Camphire growing in these Vineyards, to which the Spouse here resembles her
beloved. 3. Why she resembles him in this manner, to a Cluster of Copher, in
the Vineyards of Engedi.

1. Qu What were these Vineyards of Engedi?

The name Engedi signifies Oculus hoedi, a kids Eye. It was a City, the same
with Hazazon Tamar, 2 Chronicles. 20. 2. Now Hazazon Tamar was a City of the
Amorites, Genesis 14. 7. called by them Hazazon Tamar, taken in by Josuah, in the
conquest of Canaan, and by him set out to the tribe of Judah, for a part of
their portion, Jos. 15. 62. From which place you may observe, it was a City,
and in or near the Wilderness, it was a place at or near which were strong
bolds, David fled thither from Saul, 1 Samuel 23. 29. and 1. 24. where you read
of the wilderness and of the strong holds of Engedi. But of the Vineyards at
Engedi, you read no where else in holy Writ. Some tell us that the Queen of
Sheba brought with her out of (...)Sonat palmam. Mer cer. in Genesis 14. Nieremb.
de Mirac. Naturae terrae promissae, cap. 12.
her Country, some choice and odoriferous Plants, which Solomon planted here,
and that they thrave exceedingly. Hazazon Tamar signifies a City of Palms, and
speaks it anciently famous for rare plants, for it was called by that name in
Abraham's time, Nierembergius tells us, it was a place of old famous for a
multitude of sweet smelling plants, especially Balsams which it brought forth
in great plenty. Which balsams say he and others, were certain shrubby plants,
which if an incision were made into them with a sharp stone, or a knife of
bone, or Glass, a sweet smelling juice dropped from them, and they say that
Engedi continued such a place, till Herod's time, when Cleopatra, transplanted
them into Egypt, they say there are still in Engaddi some remainders of those
plants, but of no value. But they say there is yet in Egypt a great Garden full
of them, betwixt Heliopolis and Babylon, which Saligniacus says he saw, and
many strange stories he and others tell of Christ when he was in Egypt, being
washed in a fountain nigh this Garden, etc. But they are Apocryphal, and I
shall not trouble you with them. But,

Qu. 2. What is meant here by (...) which we translate a Cluster of Camphire.
We translate it Camphire. It is no easy thing to give a just account of it. The
word in the Heb. according to R. Mordecay Nathan has 7 distinct
significations. Forsterus in Heb. Dict. reckons six significations, 1 Pitch.
Genesis 6. 16. 2 A Village, 1 Samuel 6. 19. 3 A price set upon another life for his
Redemption, Exodus 21. 30. 30. 12. Number. 35. 31. 4 Any gift given to appease a
Judge. 1 S^m 12. 3. 5 An Expiation, Prove. 6, etc. 6 The name of a Tree bearing
Clusters, which the Latins call Cyperus. V. part, ibid. So also Cant. 4. 13.
I shall not need insist upon them all, but one or two of them are possibly
applicable here, for those significations of the word where it signifies the
frost, or the dew (...) as Exodus 16. 13. A standing cup, or a flesh hook, as
in. 1 Paral, 18. v. 17. A Village, as in 1 Samuel 6. 19. A young Lion as in Judge.
14. 5. It is not in this Text capable of any of these senses, by reason of what
goes before (...) a Cluster, or branch, etc. But besides these, there are 3
other significations: You read the word Genesis 6. 16. Thou shall pitch it over
with pitch. The Heb. is (...) with Copher. I think Avenarius his conjecture is
good, who thinks it has obtained this Signification from its likeness to
Gopher which signifies a Pine tree from whence came pitch, with which the Ark
was covered; from this Original signification of the word according to which it
signifiesa Covering, it has obtained another; it signified, the Mercy seat,
Exodus 25. 17. and 37. 6. Either because the Mercy seat was covered with the
Cherubims, or it self was a kind of covering to the Ark being over it. And
hence this word also signifies an expiation of sin, and is translated
Redemption, Psalm. 49. 8. God in pardoning sin provides a covering for it, Psalm.
32. 1. Blessed is he whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
And I find expositors that think there is in this Text, a great respect had to
that signification of the word: But what ever allusion the Spouse may be
thought to make to that signification, certain it is, that she here understands
by it a plant which the Jews knew by that name. But now what Plant that was is
very hard to determine. I hinted to you before the various senses of
Interpreters; some translate it Cypress, some Camphire, some Cyparis, some the
Cyprian Grapes: Others at a pure loss retain the Heb. word Copher. There are
three more eminent opnions.

1. Some think the sense this, As a Cluster of Cyprian Grapes is my Beloved to
me. Thus Castalio, and some others, who have observed out of Plin^, that the
Cyprian Grapes were famous for sweetness. But they did not duly consider the
distance between the Isle of Cyprus. And Engaddi (a City in Juda) as Mercer
well observes, therefore although the Vineyards of Engaddi be mentioned, yet
(...) was no Vine as some think but some other plant which grew with the Vines
(as was usual.)

2. Others think that it is that which we call Privet. The Latins Alba
ligustra cadunt, etc. Virgil.
Ligustrum. The Gr. (...). Which in those Countries was of a better Kind then
ours, and Pliny tells us, bare a White Flower, with a kind of Seed in Clusters
like Grapes, and that of this Plant the Vnguentum Cyprinum was made which had a
rare smell.

3. Others again think that Cypress is meant, as a Cluster of Cypress is my
well Beloved unto me. Now this Cypress they tell us was a plant, which flowed
with a sweet Gum. It was a rare sweet smelling Balsam and the Best of it grew
in the Vineyards of Engaddi.

You see how much Interpreters are in their sense divided, See a story about
this Plant in Forster; Heb Dict. in verbo, (...)
concerning the nature of this Plant from which the Metaphor of the Text is
drawn. And no wonder then if it be hard to determine the third thing, viz. why
the Spouse here compares her Beloved to a Cluster of Copher.

Yet in that I find them most reasonably well agreed; That whatever, Plant it
was, either the Herb of it, or the Juice of it was exceeding sweet, and the
Spouse here compares Christ to it, to denote that exceeding and abundant
sweetness which her Soul had tasted in him. And so this Text speaks but the
same in another phrase, which she had said before. A bundle of Myrrh is my
Beloved to me; she means the samething when she here says, A cluster of
Camphire or Copher is my Beloved to me, that is, exceeding sweet and precious.
When I spoke to the other expression, I spoke so fully to that point, of the
infinite Sweetness that is in Christ, that I have nothing to add upon that
Subject; only I remember that I then took notice, that I did not judge the term
(...) redundant, but exclusive; My Beloved is not sweet to others, they smell
no sweetness in him, but to Me he is a cluster of Camphire, as a bundle of
Myrrh, sweet, infinitely sweet, above all other sweet things most sweet. The
Proposition which I shall only insist upon is this;

Prop. That the true believing Soul sees peculiar Excellencies, and tastes a
peculiar Sweetness in Christ which others do not see nor taste. This Doctrine
supposes,

1. That there is such an overflowing Fountain of goodness and sweetness in
Jesus Christ, that even those who are not Believers may discern some sweetness
and excellency in him. 2. It asserts,

That there is a peculiar excellency and sweetness in him discernable to the
Believer, which others do not discern. The former is a truth. As a good woman
may so far approve her self to all that see her, or hear of her, that they may
in heart admire her, and praise her, and have a general love for her; but yet
this woman may to her Husband, in respect of her peculiar suitableness to him,
and more immediate and intimate converse with him, be ten thousand times more
precious in his Eyes, than unto others: So it is with the Lord Jesus Christ; a
wicked man, who is far enough from saving Faith, or any special Interest in
Christ, may yet have a general love for him. Give me leave alittle to enlarge
upon this supposed part of the Proposition. 1. By enquiring upon what bottom
this general love can stand. 2. By making some Inferences from it. The grounds
of it may be, 1. Real, or 2. Supposed and mistaken. The truth is, such is the
Lord Jesus Christ, such a Fountain of sweetness, that there is real ground for
all the Sons of men to love him. I will hint you two or three.

1. The first shall be, his humbling himself for the good of mankind. The
Evangelist says, Joh. 3. 16. That God so loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, etc. Arminians cannot understand what the greatest part in
the World (as to the matter of Redemption) have to thank God for, if Christ
were not given with equal respect to one as to another, or at least (as others
qualify) to purchase a possibility for all: But certainly if one should say,
such a one so loved such a Family, that he gave his whole Estate to a Child of
it, we might understand it* though every Member of the Family neither had, nor
were in possibility to have part, and part like. It is very questionable
whether the Angels ever shared in the death of Christ any way; yet I believe
they love Christ for his dying for men: And to that end, Ephesians. 3. 10. the
manifold Wisdom of God is by the Church made known to them. Beneficence, or
doing good to others, especially such as are in misery, is a thing so commends
it self to the reason of man, that we cannot but have a love for such as are
bountiful, though we never taste of their bounty. We see it in ordinary
experience, if we that live here (be rational and ingenuous) hear that one who
lives in the furthest parts of England has given all his Estate to good uses,
though we have no share in them, yet we love the man for it. And certainly, if
you could suppose a reasonable creature, who should but hear that Christ, the
Eternal Son of God, came down from Heaven, and died upon the Cross, for some
men, though he knew he were none of them, yet it would be a ground of love to
him considered as a reasonable creature.

But secondly, a ground of it may be, The certain apprehension of 2 Reason.
some good which even the Unbeliever enjoys from Christ. It is said by many,
and those too such as can by no means agree, that Christ died equally for all,
or that he purchased a possibility of Salvation for all; that yet there is none
who lives, but is for his life and preservation beholden to the death of
Christ; and that all receive this good from him, which may to rational men
evidence a ground of Love. I must confess I cannot too boldly strike this
string, for I much doubt whether the standing of the World, and the common
preservation of men, flows from the Death of Christ as the Issue of his
purchase; I should rather ascribe it to the gracious Providence of God, of
which even the Death of Christ also is an Issue.

3. Certain it is, that whatever the intention of Christ in dying was, such is
the Wisdom of Divine Providence, That the Gospel is held forth indefinitely;
Whosoever believes shall be saved. So that there is no ground for any Soul to
conclude, I was none of those considered in the purchase of Christ, and there
is ground sufficient in the intrinsecal value and sufficiency of the Death of
Christ, considered together with the indefinite Proposal of the Covenant of
Grace, to encourage every man under hope of finding mercy with him, to come
unto him. Now, which is there of us, that should hear of a liberal man worth
many thousands of pounds, that should have freely determined with himself to
spend it all upon our Family, and should make a general offer to us, that to so
many of us as would come to him, he would give a share sufficient, would not
(as a reasonable creature) judge himself engaged to love him, even before we
should so go to him and receiveour share? Give me leave only to infer two
things from this Discourse.

That there is sufficient ground for God to condemn those for want of Corol. 1.
love to Christ, who yet never had a saving sight of him.? All men deserve to
be Anathema Maranatha, whose hearts yern not toward Christ, whether ever they
had any saving experience of the Love of Christ to their Souls, or no. I speak
but as a reasonable creature. If I were sure that I were shut out of Christ's
thoughts when he died upon the cross, and that he would never save my Soul; yet
I see reason enough why I ought to hate my self, and condemn my self if I
should not love him: I remember what the Jews said for their Centurion: He has
loved our Nation and built us a Synagogue; this I am sure of, Christ has loved
mankind, he has purchased salvation for some of them. O my Soul (if thou be
forgotten of God) yet love him, who would so far humble himself as to pity dust
and ashes.

Corol. 2.
2. Hence secondly, No wonder if there be some love to Christ appearing in
those who have no share nor interest in him. It has been the assertion of
some, that Common grace and special grace differ not specifically but
gradually. I think the assertion, amongst understanding men but a contest of
Logical terms; I no way doubt of the truth of this, That an unbeliever may love
Christ in a sense: But the Love of the Child of God vastly differs, being an
infused habit and of another species. Whatsoever is presented to us under the
Notion of good, whether so really or apparently, is plainly the proper object
of our love: Now such may Christ appear even to an unbeliever, who is far from
having tasted how good the Lord is; hence even in a carnal man there may be
desires after Christ, good wishes to the interest of Christ upon the Earth, yea
and he may do much for the Service of Christ; either from a general Notion of
Christ's excellency, or 2dly (which I should have mentioned before) from a
supposal that he has as good a share, and interest in Christ, as any other,
though in this (possibly) he may be mistaken. And this is very useful for us to
consider, that we may not build too great confidences, from such desires, which
we find in our Souls, or any such external actions, without a due inquiry after
their Principle. But enough of this, I come to the positive part of the
Proposition.

2. That there is a peculiar excellency in Christ, which the believing Soul
sees and savours, and is not discernable to others. My beloved (says the
Spouse) is a Cluster of Camphire unto me. They said to her in 5th of this Song,
v. 9. What is thy beloved Cant. 5. 9.
more then another beloved, O thou fairest amongst women? what is thy beloved
more then another beloved that thou so strictly chargest us? She answers, v.
10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand, etc. For the
opening of this, I will propound two questions,

1. What are those peculiar excellencies, which the believer sees in Christ,
more then another sees.

2. How comes the believing Soul to be more eagle eyed then his neighbor.

To the first

1. The believer sees further into the heighths, and depths of redeeming love
(in the general) then another man does. The height of redeeming love is too
great for a reasonable man to take, the Astronomer is lost at taking the
height of this Star, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17.
we must be strengthened with might by the Spirit in the inward man, Christ must
dwell in our hearts by says, and we must be rooted, and grounded in love,
before we shall be able with all Saints to comprehend, what is the breadth,
length, and depth, and height, and know the Love of Christ which passes
knowledge. The unbeliever living under the light of the Gospel is like the
blind man, whose Eyes Christ has once touched, and he sees something of he
excellency of Christ, but alas! he sees men like trees; Christ must touch him
again before he sees things clearly; the believer sees Christ as another thing
to what the unbeliever sees.

2. The believer discerns a particular respect of Christ, to his Soul. Ah this,
this is it which makes Christ as a Cluster of Camphire, it is sweet to a
rational Soul, to see a Savior: Bu^ infinitely sweet for it to see him, as its
Savior, to cry out, my Lord, my God: Propriety in a good sweetens it infinitely
unto a Soul, the believer sees Christ as his Christ, his Savior. It is sweet
to poor Creatures, who are so far enlightened, as to see the World lies in
darkness, to know that he is the true light enlightening all that come into the
World; but infinitely more sweet to the Soul, when it sees that he has
enlightened it in particular. A good woman (to a reasonable man) is p^etious
and he loves her quatenus good, and virtuous, but if she becomes his Wife, that
strangely indears her to him, and shows her a peculiar excellency in him. It Is
sweet to a reasonable man, that is enlightened to see that all the Sons of Adam
are by nature under misery, to see that Christ came to Redeem them from this
misery and Curse; but how sweet must it be for this Soul to apprehend* that he
has redeemed it in particular from this misery? I shall not need to enlarge
further upon this which in so plain. Does any ask,

Qu. 2. Whence it is that the believing Soul sees such a peculiar sweetness
and excellency in Christ.

I answer. 1. From that special illumination which attends regeneration. There
is a Common illumination and there is a special illumination; the Common
illumination is the work of Gods Spirit concurring with the Preaching of the
Gospel, inabling men to understand, and give some general assent to what is
there revealed: but when the Lord comes to deal savingly with the Soul, it
opens the Eyes of the Soul, to a fuller, clearer and more certain sight of
Gospel mysteries, 1 Cor. 2. 10. God reveals to his Saints by his Spirit,
those things, which the Princes of the World (though they heard the Gospel)
never knew, what things Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor can it enter into
the heart to conceive. A Commonly enlightened Soul, upon the Preaching of the
Gospel, may see the same things that a believer sees, that Christ died, etc.
But it sees them not so fully and clearly, as upon special saving
illuminations, when the Spirit deals with the Soul, as it were by
demonstration, and gives it to see a Christ crucified as it were before its
Eyes. There are two things especially, which the Soul (upon conversion) does
doubtless see after a quite other manner then it saw them before conversion. 1.
The sinfulness and mischief of sin. A man merely reasonable may see the
ugliness, and sinfulness of some sins, (such as are contrary to the light of
nature, etc.) A man Commonly enlightened may see more of the sinfulness, and
danger, both of these and of other sins: but when the Spirit of God comes
savingly to work in the Soul, it sees the sinfulness, and danger even of these
sins, after another manner; sin then becomes exceeding sinful, Romans 7. 13. It
then thinks it sees Hell fire before it, and is dropping into it, and so has a
clearer sight of the danger of it. 2. The excellency of Christ, is doubtless
seen by it too after another manner. Of this there needs no greater evidence
than the Souls strange workings of affections toward him, its groanings after
him, longings for an interest in him, etc.

2. This proceeds also from the Souls union to Christ, and experiences of him.
There are three ways by which the mind of man is united to its object, every
one of which makes it more sweet, then when it merely contemplates it, and has
it in speculation: one or all of which ways every believer is united to Christ.

1. The first is by hope. Suppose a man, has in his Eye a beautiful, and
virtuous Woman: there is such a proportion to his reasonable nature, in her
goodness and virtue, that she is precious to him, and he puts a value upon her,
though he never hopes to make her his Wife, but if he has any such grounded
hope she is much more precious to him: there is no gracious Soul, but is at
least thus far united to Christ, not only beholding him as an excelling object,
but possessed of a good hope through grace that this Christ is his Christ; now
this must make him more sweet then to another, who has no such hope.

2. But secondly: Suppose this man has some assurance, that this virtuous
Woman shall be his Wife, though it may be as yet they be only man and Wife
before God, yet this union makes her more sweet and precious to him: now this
is the portion of many of Gods Children, they can say, my Beloved is mine and I
am his; I am sure the death of Christ is mine, the grace of Christ is mine, and
the glory of Christ shall be mine, I shall see my Redeemer with these Eyes (as
Job said) how much more sweet, must this assurance make Christ to his Soul,
then to another, that can only say, there is a Savior given to the World, but
whether for my Soul, or no, I cannot tell.

3. Lastly (to keep my similitude still) Suppose now the man that has taken
notice of a good and virtuous Woman in the World and has formerly had hopes,
to obtain her for his Wife, and promises, has at last come to the enjoyment of
her, and to experience the fruit of her virtues, in her good conversation with
him, you will certainly say that to this man, this Woman is more sweet then to
all the World besides, this is the case of every believing Soul. It has had
some experiences or other of the warmings, quickenings, strengthenings,
comfortings of his grace, and hence it is that Christ to this Soul, I say to
this Soul more then to another, is a bundle of Myrrh, and a Cluster of Copher.
But I have insisted too long upon a truth, so far experienced by every gracious
Soul.

Use 1.
By way of application. No wonder then, to see the excessive Triumphs of a
gracious Soul for a present Christ, or the exorbitant passions of it for an
absent Christ. Or its excessive fondness of what may conduce to its further
enjoyments of him: these three things the silly World stands and wonders at.

1. The excessive Triumphs of a Soul for a present Christ, to hear a David call
come and I will tell you what God has done for my Soul: Or a Spouse cry out, I
will hold him, I will not let him go, he shall lie all night betwixt my
breasts: I charge you O you daughters of Jerusalem, that you stir not up nor
awake my love until he please: Oh that thou were as my Brother who sucked the,
breasts of my Mother, when I should find thee without I would kiss thee, etc. I
would lead thee, and bring thee into my Mothers house, when I should find thee,
without I would kiss thee, etc. Cant. 8. 1, 2*
I would lead thee, and bring thee into my Mothers house, etc. I would cause
thee to drink of spiced wine, etc. The World wonders to see a broken spirited
Hannah rise up from Prayer, and her Countenance be no more sad: but it is no
wonder. As a Cluster of Copher is Christ to the Soul, Christ by his influence
puts more gladness into a gracious Soul, then the increase of corn, wine, and
oil creates in a Worldlings heart, it is no more to be wondered at, then the
drunkards shouting for new wine, or the farmers joy in harvest.

2. The World wonders too at the exorbitant passions of a gracious heart for an
absent Christ; to see a gracious Soul weeping and refusing to be comforted,
alas her beloved has withdrawn himself, and she knows not whither he is gone,
and as a Cluster of Copher her beloved is to her, nothing so sweet, so precious
as Christ is, pardon her trouble, she cannot help it.

3. Nor lastly, is she more to be wondered at for her fondness of any Ordinance
where she thinks she may meet her beloved, or enjoy ought of his presence, or
obtain further influences of grace from him. Wonder not then my friends to see
believers going from Ordinance to Ordinance, from duty to duty, it is Christ
they seek in every Ordinance, in every duty: and as a Cluster of Copher in the
Vineyards of Engedi, so is their beloved unto them.

Use 2
2. Let this engage you, then to prove your selves Christians indeed by
exceeding others in duty to Christ. By this you shall know if you be the
Spouses of Christ, if you discern more of the excellency, and sweetness of
Christ then others do, and if you do, it will be evident by your further
motions toward him, and actings for him: what our Savior therefore said to
his disciples give me leave to say to you Ti (...), What do you more for him
then others. I will conclude this discourse by offering you two questions to
inquire upon in secret.

1. Qu. What more frequent, and precious thoughts have thou of Christ then
others? supposing the Lord Jesus Christ, a bundle of Myrrh or a Cluster of
Camphire. The art of smelling lies much in meditation, and by how much the more
sweet Christ is to thy Soul, by so much the oftener will thou be smelling his
sweetness: How are thy leisurable thoughts busied, I remember what David said,
When I am awake I am with thee, Can thou say, Lord when my thoughts are at
leisure from my Worldly disturbances, they are with thee: when I am awake in
the night I am with thee, when the sinner is thinking how to dishonor thee, and
to defile himself, I am thinking, Ah! what shall I render unto thee? This is an
excellent sign. Thou have a truth of grace, where the treasure is, there the
heart will be. Hearken to David, Psalm. 104. 34. My meditation of him shall be
sweet. See Psalm. 119. 97, 99. Can thou say, Lord I remember thee in the night
season, etc. Will some poor Soul say, I do remember God and Christ, but I
cannot say it is sweet to me to meditate on him, Psalm. 77. I remember God and am
troubled? Sol. Judge not thy self from this, if the act of meditation be sweet
to thy Soul (it is well with thee) although the fruit be bitter. The Woman,
shows her self her Husbands Wife, as well by the passions which her meditations
of him cause in her, when he is absent: as in the pleasure she has by the
thoughts of him when he is present.

Qu. 2. What diligence do thou use to preserve the sweet savor of Christ
unto and upon thy Soul. Christ considered in himself, is not like a flower that
may lose its scent and sweetness; no, he cannot lose that sweetness which is
essential to him, he would cease to be Christ, if he could cease to be sweet,
to a lost and and undone Soul, but although he retains his sweetness, yet thou
may lose thy savor of it. He may not be sweet to thee. There are two sorts
of Souls who savor very little of Christ's sweetness. 1. The Soul that lies
under guilt of sin; the thoughts of Christ to that Soul are ordinarily very
terrible. 2. The Soul that is choked with Worldly Encumbrances. The freer the
Soul can keep it self, from distracting cares for the World, or from the
renewing guilt of sin, the sweeter will the thoughts of Christ be unto it. Now
if Christ be as a Cluster of Copher to the Soul. It will be very careful to
preserve the sweet savor that it has of him. And by this thou shall know if
Christ be indeed to thee, as a Bundle of Myrrh, or a Cluster of Copher. But
thus much shall serve to have spoken to this verse.

Sermon LVII.
Cant. 1. 15. Behold thou art fair, Behold thou at fair, thou have Doves Eyes.

THere is a great harmony of Interpreters in the version of the words of this
Text, out of the Heb. into their several Languages, excepting only that what we
(according to our dialect) translate My Love, they translate sometimes, My
Neighbor, or My Kinswoman, or My Companion (for which you also perceive our
Margents give an allowance, and that some translate a Dove, some Doves Eyes,
and the Arabic differing from all, thy Eyes are as a pair of Doves. There is
no other difference. And this is so inconsiderable, that I shall spend no time
in endeavoring to reconcile it.

All Interpreters agree, that it is the Bridegroom which now speaks. He who
acts that part I mean in this Song. The Lord Jesus Christ. The Person he
speaks to and of is the believing Soul which he calls (...) My beloved, or My
Campanion, etc. It is of the Foeminine form in the Hebrew, which is that which
leads Interpreters to conclude, that it is the Spouses speech. It is a word
often used in this form in this Song, and I think no where else so in all the
Scripture. In the sentence you have considerable, 1. The matter of it in two
Propositions, Thou art fair, thou have Doves Eyes. 2. The manner of expressing
it; 1. The words are doubled. Thou art fair, Thou art fair, 2. Here is a double
Ecce Prefixed. Behold! Behold! There are in the Text 2. Propositions, 1. The
Spouse of Christ is fair, 2. The Spouse of Christ has Doves Eyes.

1. Prop. The Spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ is fair.

The believing Soul is a beautiful Soul; to the main of this Proposition, I
have very lately spoken, when I spoke to the compellation, v. 8. where Christ
had called her the fairest among Women. I then discoursed the Nature of her
beauty, and showed you, 1. That it was not a corporeal but a Spiritual beauty,
2. Not a visible but an invisible beauty, 3. Not a Native but an adventitious
beauty, 4. Not an artificial, but a created beauty, 5. Not an adherent beauty
only but an inherent beauty also, 6. A desirable beauty, 7. A durable beauty,
8. Not a perfect beauty. And having spoken so fully to it there (where also the
same word is used) I intend not to repeat it here, only I shall take notice of
some circumstances, by which the Proposition is advantaged in this Text. And

They are four or five, 1. He had told her before, She was the fairest amongst
Women. Not satisfied with that he repeateth his Love to her again, and tells
her she is fair, she is fair.

2. The Soul had been commending Christ, that he was as a bundle of Myrrh, as a
Cluster of Camphire to her; Christ upon her expressing affection to him
replies, Behold thou art fair, etc.

3. When he calls her Fair he adds, My Love; Thou art fair my Love.

4. It is not barely expressed, Thou art fair, but here is an Ecce prefixed;
Behold thou art fair.

5. Lastly, He does not speak it singly; But he doubles his words; Thou art
fair, Thou art fair, and the term Behold, is repeated too, Behold! thou art
fair; Behold! Thou art fair.

Here is none of these five circumstances, but will afford us a meditation,
which will be either informative, or sweet, or profitable to us. Give me leave
therefore to speak a word to each of them.

1. Circum.
He had told the Spouse before, she was (...) the fairest amongst Women. But
not Satisfied with that he tells her Obs.
again, Thou art fair my Love, Thou art fair. Christ does not only speak peace,
but he repeats peace to the believers Soul. God often appears to Abraham, and
Jacob to assure them that he was their God. Once have I spoken, and twice have
I heard it, (says the Psalmist) that Power belongs unto God. There is many a
Soul that can say, Once has God spoken, yea twice have I heard it, that the
Love of God belongs to me. There is many a Christian that can say, In such an
Ordinance I heard God speaking peace, at such a time I found this Spirit
witnessing with my Spirit that I was his Child. Christ in this consulteth, 1.
His Peoples infirmities; 2. His own glory.

1. Christ I say in this thing consulteth, 1. His Peoples infirmities. They are
many which make them need this; two chiefly.

1. The Believers Soul is dull of hearing. The Apostle charge the Hebrews,
Heb. 5. 11. That they were dull of hearing, which made the repeating
fundamental truths necessary for them -- There Is nothing in the World, that a
gracious heart would more gladly hear then this, that it is fair in the Eyes of
Jesus Christ, and yet nothing that it is more dull to hear: the reason is
because it so eagerly desires it, and prizeth it so highly, that it cries out,
It is too good news to be true. You shall observe in the World a double
disposition in men: some are disposed almost wholly to fear, others to over
much confidence. Hence at such a time of changes in the state as this is, one
man (be a thing never so true, and to his mind, yet) he hardly believes, he is
naturally disposed to fear the worst. Other men, let things be never so
improbable yet they will hope, and talk as confidently as if the thing they
would have were done. It is much from their natural temper, they are disposed
to confidence, etc. Take now an unbelieving natural man, and he is disposed to
bless himself and hope well of his condition, you have his copy, Deuteronomy. 29. 19,
20. He says, I shall have peace, though I walk according to the imagination of
my heart, etc. But now take a believing Soul, and he is very dull of hearing
words of peace. Tell him news of the wrath of God revealing against the
Children of disobedience he easily believes it, and tells you he feels it in
his Conscience, he is one of them designed to this wrath. The terrors of God
have been upon his Soul and (like an affrighted man) he is very prone to shake,
at any representation of what he has found so terrible to him. But let a
Minister of Christ tell him, thy iniquities are pardoned, Christ is at the door
of thy Soul, it is Such improbable news to his affrighted Soul, such a strange
thing, that he should be pardoned, and such a sinner received to mercy, that he
is like the Christians met, Acts 12. to pray for Peter, when the Maid brought
in word that Peter was at the gate, they say unto her, thou art mad: And when
she stands to her word, they will believe no more then that it was his Angel.

A gracious Soul especially when it comes first to believe, is ready to say to
it self, Surely I am mad to think that Christ should account me fair, pardon my
sins, etc. Now Christ in repeating peace, consulteth this infirmity in us: as I
remember Judge. 12. 3.
he did with Manoah, Jud. 12. Manoah's Wife had been barren, God sends an Angel
to her to tell her she should conceive a Son, etc. v. 6, 7. Manoah's Wife tells
her Husband (you must think there was nothing in the World these two desired
more then a Son.) But it seemed too good news to be true and therefore, v. 6.
Manoah, goes and Prays, O Lord let the man of God which thou did send to us
come again to us, indeed the reason of his desire which he assigns is to direct
him how to order his Son: but certainly Manoah thought the news too good to be
true: and God so far yields to Manoah's infirmity, as to send his Angel the
second time,

2. As the believing Soul is dull of hearing Christ at first speaking 1 Samuel 3.
4, 5, 6, 7.
peace to it, and is like to Samuel when Eli called, and cannot apprehend Gods
voice: So it is also very prone to forget the words of peace which God speaks
to it. Of all the joys which we are in this life capable of, these are the
greatest, and none so soon lost as these are, so uncertain is the state of the
Children of God. In many things we offend, and even the righteous man sins
seven times in a day, and who can tell how often he offends? Now every sin in
its own nature is a breach of our peace with God, and gives the watchful Soul
occasion of doubting, whether it did not at first mistake the voice of God, or
whether God has not changed his mind toward it: and hence in the second place
God highly consults our infirmities, in doubling his words of peace upon us and
repeating them unto us. Christ had told Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock will I build my Church, but when Peter had denied his Master Christ easily
foreseeing, that Peter's thoughts would be much troubled, and that he would be
ready to forget all his former evidences of his favor: Mark 16. 7.
orders his Angel, Mar. 16. 7. To bid the woman go tell his disciples and
Peter, that he went before them into Ga^ilee, and there they should see him.

But secondly; As the Lord Jesus Christ does by it consult his Peoples
infirmity, so he also highly consulteth his own Glory. Reiterations of Divine
Love to the Soul, command reduplications of duty. Love is of an obliging
nature, and there is no Soul that puts on so lively for God, as that Soul that
has the most fresh and frequent manifestations of Divine Love to it. David's
Instance in the 118 Psalm, is a full Evidence of this. And this is the account
that may be given why it pleases the Lord Jesus Christ to repeat his Love so
frequently unto the Souls of Believers.

Obj. But I hear some gracious Souls saying, Blessed are they that are in such
a case, who hear God speaking Love to their Souls, and often repeating his Love
to them: But alas! we are so far from this, that we could never yet hear Christ
speaking any such thing to our Souls; we could never yet hear Christ so much
asonce saying, Behold thou art fair my Love, etc. What will you say to us?
Shall we hope that we are the Spouses of Christ, who never yet could obtain one
good look from him? I answer;

Sol. 1. As it is not the Husband's fond and affectionate expressions to his
Wife, which make, or alone evidence her to be his Wife, but the
Marriage-covenant is that which does it; her consent to have him to be her
wedded Husband, and his consent to have her to be his Wife So, it is not a word
of peace, sealed to the Soul which makes the Soul, or which alone evidenceth
the Soul to be the Spouse of Christ: No, it is the Marriage-covenant, it is the
Soul's consent to have Christ for its Savior, for its Husband. Though Christ
has not said it in thy hearing, Thou art fair my Love, thou art fair, yet if
the Soul can say, and say it in truth, that it has accepted Christ as its
Savior, and consented to Christ as its Husband, there is no cause of
despondency, 2 Cor. 5. 7. We walk by faith, not by sight.

2. Though the Lord be pleased thus to speak his Love in the hearing of some
Souls, and again to repeat it to them; yet he is pleased to reserve himself
more from some who are equally dear to him. It may be the indulgent Father
loves every Child he has with a dear and tender love, and does design to give
them all due proportions of his Estate, yet he may carry himself more strangely
and reservedly to some than unto others: Possibly he may do it out of prudence,
as knowing it the best way in order to their good: Possibly no other account
can be given of it, than a mere (...), a mere delight that he takes in one more
than another, which he exercises by Prerogative: It may be God out of a depth
of Wisdom shines not upon thy Soul so clearly as upon another: Possibly no
other account can be given of it, but because he will do it.

3. Take heed thy loose walking with God be not the cause of it. When ever
Christ speaks to the Soul, he will speak truth, if thou be all foul, and
spotted, he will not say to the, behold thou art fair my Love, behold thou art
fair. The Soul may have many failings, many spots upon its face, and yet be
fair in the Eyes of Christ, fair as to its Justification: But Christ will not
say to such a Soul, Behold thou art fair. The Father or prudent Mother, may
dearly love a disingenuous and rebellious Child. But their prudence will keep
them from commending such a Child, and from expressing exuberant affection to
it, lest the Child by it take advantage to go on in courses of disobedience.
Christ dearly loves many a poor Soul that has its wanton tricks, and is full
of failings, but he will not say to such a Soul, Behold thou art fair my Love.
I will add but one thing more.

4. Lastly; Possibly Christ has spoke, and spoke it to thee often, Behold thou
art fair my Love, Behold thou art fair, but thou have not heard him. I have
already told you that many of God's People are very deaf of that Ear. I was
about to say, there is no better sign of a gracious Soul, than not to be too
ready to hear such messages of peace. God sometimes speaks so as the Soul
cannot but hear, when he pleases to set the Broad Seal of his Spirit unto the
poor Soul; this indeed is an audible voice, and distinguishable enough. But God
in every Sermon speaks to the Believer, Thou art fair my Love, thou art fair.
We never Preach those great Truths of God, That whosoever believes shall be
saved, and whosoever is justified by Faith, has peace with God, and such like;
but God to every Believer that hears us speak, Thou art fair my Love, thou art
fair. But alas! not one of many has an Ear to hear, no not those who truly
believe. It is in this case as with Samuel, 1 Samuel 3. 4, 5. Samuel was young,
and had not been used to the voice of God; God calls him once, away he goes to
Eli; the Lord calls a second time, Samuel runs to Eli again, and so a third
time, till Eli instructed and assured him it was the voice of God. Till the
Spirit of God brings the voice of God in the Gospel to the Ear, to the inward
Ear of a Christian, he will not understand God speaking peace to him, when
indeed he does speak it. In very deed it is for want of Spiritual Logic. The
Word of God has the Proposition. He that believes is fair: Though a man has
been a Thief, a Drunkard, a Covetous person, etc. yet, if he be washed, if he
be justified, if he be sanctified in the Name of our God, and through the
Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, he is fair. Thus much is plain in the Word, 1
Cor. 6. 11. But now when the Soul should come to assume, -- But I am washed, I
am justified, I am sanctified; there it fails; and these may be the Reasons of
a gracious Soul's complaint in this case. But I have spoke enough to the first
of the five Circumstances which I mentioned, I proceed now to a second.

2 Circumst.
The Spouse had been admiring Christ, comparing him to a bundle of Myrrh, to a
cluster of Camphire, or Copher. Now Christ adds, Behold thou art fair my Love;
Behold thou art fair.

Obs. High outgoings of a Soul toward Christ; are ordinarily productive of
great returns of the Love of Christ upon the Soul.

Duty in us is not the Father of Grace, for who has given first unto God, and
it shall be repaid to him again? but extraordinary influences of Grace, are
commonly the wages of great duty. It is very seldom that any Soul lets Christ
know that he is exceeding dear to it, but (by the next Post) the Soul shall
know that it is very dear to Christ. Does God hear Ephraim bemoaning himself
thus? Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed
Jer. 31. 18, 20.
to the yoke, turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my
God, etc. Ephraim shall presently hear God saying, Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is
he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him I will surely have mercy upon
him, says the Lord. Is the Spouse sick of love? Cant. 5. 8. Does she indeed
think Cant. 5. 8. chapter 6. 4, 5.
her Beloved the chiefest amongst ten thousand, etc. She shall presently hear
him saying, Thou art beautiful O my Love as Tirzah, etc. Turn away thine Eyes
from me, etc. chapter 6. v. 4, 5. I might instance in many Texts of Scripture, but
I forbear. Will you know the reason of this? Take it. 1. Negatively, 2.
Positively.

1. Negatively; It is not because there is any merit in duty. Christ is no
Merchant of Grace, he gives it, but he sells it not. Indeed it is a
contradiction to speak of meritorious duty; if it be duty, it is the payment of
a debt on our part, and can be no purchase-mony. The compass of that
Commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all thy
Soul, and with all thy strength, is of an exceeding latitude; there is no
finishing of it by any creature in this life. It was from the jejune
Interpretation that the Pharisees of old, and the Papists of late, have put
upon the Law of God, that they ever dreamt that man was able to perform it,
much less do any thing of supererogation. The foundation-stone of man's
Salvation is laid in Grace, and the top-stone is Grace too: To the whole
Building you must cry, Grace, Grace. But Positively

2. It is from the overflowings of Divine Grace in him who is our Fountainhead
the Lord Jesus Christ. The Eye that weeps for its sin, till it can weep no
more, does not by its tears make it self an Handkerchief to dry its Eyes, but a
tenderhearted Savior moved from his own bowels cannot but afford it one, and
say unto it why weepest thou? The Soul, that for Christ's sake parts with Father
Mother, Children, Brethren, Sisters, all, does not by this purchase to it self
peace of Conscience or eternal life (Alas! what proportion is there betwixt
things temporal, and such as are Spiritual and eternal?) But he who has both
these to give, gives them upon the Souls performing its duty in this
particular, Matthew. 19. 29. The Soul that casts up many a long look to the Lord
Jesus Christ, and earnestly wishes for his presence with it, and valueth it
above the World, and seeks for it more then for Gold, or hid treasure, does not
by this earn Christ's Love to it, but Christ from the fullness of his grace makes
choice of this Soul, to reveal himself unto. The Isa. 30. 18.
Prophet, Isaiah Chapter 30. v. 18. has such an expression as this; The Lord will
wait that he may be gracious unto you: Christ is a fountain of Grace; a full
fountain: now when the fountain is brim full of water, the water waits for an
opportunity to diffuse it self: it may be there is a bank that hinders the full
river, that it cannot diffuse its water, the water therefore works secretly and
softens the bank first till a breach be made, and then it emptieth it self by
it. Christ is a sea, a full sea of Grace, but sinful man casts up a bank,
against this sea, a bank of unbelief: A bank of stone (hardening his heart) a
bank of earth, (favoring an earthly mind) a bank of mud, delights in sensual
lusts and objects; Christ now cannot show his grace to such a Soul, the bank
hinders; where he pleases indeed he works secretly, takes away the heart of
stone, and makes it an heart of flesh, takes away unbelief, vanity, earthly
mindedness, sensual affections, and then he emptyeth the treasuries of grace
upon the Soul. In a word, to apply this,

Use 1.
No wonder then, to hear many a poor wretch complain, that God never yet spoke
peace to his Soul: others indeed have heard their beloved has said to others
behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair, but they never yet heard
such a voice. Let me ask thee, who thus complainest this question, Did Christ
ever yet hear thee say, as a bundle of Myrrh is my beloved unto me, he shall
lie all night betwixt my breasts? Have thou served Christ with Ordinary
expressions of duty? How can thou expect to be feasted by him with
extraordinary returns of mercy? If thy breathings after him have been faint,
and short, what reason have thou to expect, that his breathings should be so
full upon thee? He is indeed a full ocean of free grace, but it may be thou
have cast up a bank against him: it may be thou have clogged him with an hard
heart, and unbelieving heart, a vain heart, a filthy sensual heart: Wonder not,
O Christian! that he is so little toward thee in a way of mercy, if thou be
scant toward him in thy way of duty. There is a generation of men and women in
the world, who are taken notice of to behave themselves as if they thought that
all the World were made to serve them, and they not made to serve any (but they
are an unreasonable generation, and sober persons so account of them, and
accordingly slight them.) Oh that there might not be such an unreasonable
Christian found in the World, who should so much as think in his heart, that
Christ stands concerned to open all his Treasuries of Love upon his Soul, which
in the mean time has scarce a thought of doing any thing more than ordinary
for the Lord Jesus Christ; if thou find thy heart cold in duty, frozen in
affections toward Christ, wonder not at all if thou find the bowels of thy
Savior which yern upon others tied up toward thee. And I fear me Psalm. 22. 1,
2, 3, 4.
this is the cause of most complaints of this nature, although it may be
possible, that this is not the case of every such complaining Soul; witness
David, Psalm. 22. 1, 2, 3, 4.

2. Use 2.
What an engagement does this Notion of Truth lay upon the Sons and Daughters
of men, to stretch out their Souls for and toward God. Certainly if there be
any thing in the World of force to open a Soul for Christ, this will do it; to
hear that Divine Grace keeps pace with our duty, and that the proper way to
have Christ speak to us and say, Thou art fair my Love, Thou art fair, is for
us to get up our hearts in a readiness, to say, and say it in truth; As a
bundle of Myrrh is my Beloved to me. The Psalmist cries out, Psalm. 34. 12. What
man is he that desires life, and loves many days that he may see good? Depart
from evil, and do good, seek peace, and pursue it. Give me leave to speak to
all you who fear the Lord, in the same dialect: What man is there amongst you,
who would not gladly have Christ speak peace unto your Souls, and whisper the
words of my Text in your Ears; Thou art fair my Love, thou art fair. O let
Christ be yet more and more precious to you; let him have the strength of your
Love, that you may have the seal of his Love; let the World know, and let him
know, that he is dear in your Eyes, that you may know that you are fair in his
Eyes. But this is enough for the second Circumstance which I observed; I pass
to a third.

3 Circumst.
Thou art fair my Love, thou art fair. It is not said, thou O man! or thou O
woman art fair! but thou my Love art fair. It is both the observation of our
own Annotators, and some others.

Obs. The Spouse of Christ is fair as she is His Love.

I observed to you before, that the word signifies Amica, and Socia, (...)
a Friend, and a Companion, the Object of ones love, and the Companion of ones
life. This is not after the manner of the Children of men, amongst them Beauty
raises Love, but with Christ it is Love that raises Beauty. Locutio verbi
infusio Doni; Christ in calling her fair, makes her fair, Ezekiel. 16. 14. Thy
Beauty was perfect through my comeliness which was put upon thee, says the
Lord God. A good complexion, with a lovely air of the countenance, and a due
proportion of bodily parts, makes the Children of men fair to a sensual Eye. An
head well furnished with Notions of Learning, and a mind endued with virtuous,
generous dispositions, makes a man fair and beautiful to a rational Eye: But it
is Grace alone that can make the Soul fair to the Divine Eye.

1. Nature does it not; for all are by Nature Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.
like the Infant, not cut, not washed, not swadled, Ezekiel. 16. We are by Nature
all Blackamores in the Eyes of God, our Father an Amorite, our Mother an
Hittite. 2. Art will not do it; Though thou wash thee with Nitre, and take thee
much Soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me (says the Lord,) Jer. 2. 22.
The Pharisees were men who used as much Art as others, yet their Beauty (to our
Savior's Eye) rose no higher than to the Beauty of a Painted Sep^lchre, that
outwardly is beautiful, but within full of rottenness; so little, that our
Savior says, Publicans and Harlots should (as to the Kingdom of Heaven) have
the pre-eminence before them.

3. Grace then alone must do it. Those who are Christ's Love, are fair only so
far forth as they are his Love, his Companions. There is a double Grace; the
first of Justification, the second of Sanotification; according to the first,
the Believer is Christ's Love, according to the second the Believer is Christ's
Companion.

1. I say first, the Grace of Justification; this is gratia gratum faciens,
that Grace by which the Soul is accepted of God. It is the free Love of God
shown to the humbled Soul upon its exercise of Faith, pardoning its sins,
reckoning over the Righteousness of Christ unto it, and accepting it as
righteous in and through Christ; this changes the Soul's state; this is it
which takes away its filthy garments, and covers the Soul with Christ's
Robes; with this is conjoined the Grace of Regeneration, by which God changes
the Soul's nature and disposition; old things pass away with it, and all things
become new; this is no quality infused into us, or inherent in us, but the free
and pure love and good will of Christ embracing us.

2. The second is the Grace of Sanctification; this makes the Believer the
Companion of Christ, having both a fellowship with the death of Christ, in
dying to sin, and with the life of Christ, in living unto newness of life: Upon
these accounts, and these only is the Believing Soul fair in the Eyes of
Christ. Before I part with this Observation,

Use.
Let every gracious Soul make a stand upon it, and consider what it affords him
for Consolation, while he looks over his Soul, and sees it full of spots, and
taking a review of his life, he can find no ground of hope to his Soul, that
Christ should cast an Eye of love and pity upon him, he sees there is no
proportion between his duties, or any actions of his conversation, and the holy
Law of God. Well, yet the comfort lies here, that the Lord has not said,
Blessed is the man that has no sin, for who lives and sins not against
God? but Blessed is he whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered, Psalm. 32. 1.
and to whom the Lord imputes no sin, Psalm. 32. 1. If we once lose this great
Truth, of the Justification of a poor Soul, by the Righteousness of Christ, we
have cut up a Bridge which we shall see a need of to go over, as often as we
enter into any serious thoughts of our own state, the weight of all our Souls,
and all the comfort of them, hangs upon this one pin. That what the law could
not do, because Romans 8. ^.
it was weak through our flesh, that God has done sending his Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for fin condemning fin in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us. We have lost all that day
that we forsake that desire of St. Paul to be found in Christ, not having our
own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is of God: Even the
righteousness of God by faith in Jesus Christ.

But you will say, How shall we know that Christ has thus loved us? That must
be known by our loving him, and so the matter will return to the same point. We
freely grant that our Justification is to be evidenced for our Sanctification,
and that even the witness of Gods Spirit is not a single, but a joint
Testimony, together with our Spirits. But yet there is a great difference (as
to Christians comfort) in these things. That Soul that looks to be made fair
with his own works (if he rightly understand himself) shall never be Satisfied
concerning his Spiritual beauty: because his works must necessarily be
completely perfect, otherwise the law accuses, and curses him. But he who
acknowledges that his beauty is merely from grace, freely justifying, but yet
his receiving of this grace is to be evidenced by his works, stands concerned
no further to enquire concerning the perfection of his works in order to this
end, then only to see if they be perfect according to Gospel allowances, not
according to lawstrictness. And such are the Gospel terms, that if there be a
willing mind, a presence to will, a delight in the Law of God as to the inward
man, it is accepted of God. Here Is a bottom for him.

4 Circumst.
I proceed to the 4th Circumstance, which I observed relating to the first
Proposition of the Text, and that was the term, Behold, which is prefixed,
Behold! thou art fair, and doubled, Behold, Behold. There is a threefold use of
this particle in Scripture: it denotes 1. presence of a thing. 2. Certainty. 3.
Eminency. It may in this Text denote all three.

1. It may denote the present state of a believing Soul to be a beautiful
state. Behold thou art fair, now in this life, while thou art black with
infirmities, and corruptions, black through afflictions, and temptations, yet
even now thou art fair, 1 John 3. 2. 1 John 3. 2.
Beloved, Now we are the Sons of God. It does not yet appear what we shall be.
This particle is often thus used in holy Writ. Genesis 29. 2, 25. and it is
capable enough of this sense in this Text. Behold thou art fair, thou shall not
only be hereafter beautiful, when the Crown of glory shall be set upon thy
head, but thou art now beautiful, thou do not apprehend thy self so, thou
art bewailing thy spots, and thy infirmities, but I look upon thee as fair,
with all thy spots, I look upon thee as beautiful even now.

2. It denotes the certainty of a thing. Behold is a particle of Demonstration,
and is often so used in Scripture. There is nothing more certain, then what we
can behold. Thus the particle is used, Genesis 16. 2. Behold now the Lord has
restrained me from bearing (they are the words of Sarah) that is, the Lord has
certainly restrained me; see Genesis 18. 27. The believing Soul is (certainly) a
beauteous Soul. The Beauty of that Soul which truly believes in Jesus Christ is
not an imaginary thing, it is a true, and real thing, it is a certainty's
Behold thou art fair, etc.

3. Lastly this particle Behold does very often denote eminency, and
excellency. When something is wonderful in Nature or otherwise, the Scripture
uses to make mention of it, by prefixing this particle Behold to it. So James
3. 3, 4. It is a wonderful thing, that the strength of an Horse should be ruled
by a bit, and that so great a bulk as a ship, driven about with fierce winds,
should be turned about with a very small helm; and thus it is a very often used
in Scripture, and it may have that use here. Behold thou art fair (My Love!)
Behold thou art fair; and so it may hint to us these two things.

1. That the beauty of a believer is no ordinary beauty, but a rare, and
eminent, beauty, not like the beauty of Woman, not like that vain thing which
we call beauty in a natural fense which is only the object of the lust of the
Eye: no, it is a Spiritual beauty, which age will not deface, diseases will not
spoil, no outward accidents will hurt; a beauty that is not exposed to wind,
and weather. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within* and yet so great is her
glory, that the King of Kings desires her beauty. Or secondly it may denote
this,

2. That it is a wonderful thing, that Christ should account a Child of Adam, a
poor believing Soul beauteous. When David considered the Heavens and the Earth,
he cries out, What is man (O Lord!) that thou should remember him; or the
Son of man that thou should be mindful of him? It is a matter of high
admiration to any ingenuous Soul to sit down and think, that Jesus Christ
should account it beautiful. But I hasten to the last Circumstance.

5 Circumst.
I observed to you that the phrase is doubled: Christ does not only say, thou
art fair (my Love) but he doubles the phrase, Thou art fair, thou art fair.
There is doubtless nothing superfluous in holy Writ, though possibly there may
be something both in the matter, and style, of which we can give no
Satisfactory account: almost in all languages these repetitions and
reduplications of words and phrases are usual. The Hebr. is very full of them;
they are of several uses. I shall note such of them as may be properly applied
to this Text.

1. Sometimes the doubling of a word or phrase denotes the certainty of the
thing, or action, Genesis 15. 13. Know of a surety, thy seed shall be a stranger,
etc. In the Heb. it is, knowing thou may know. And thus frequently in the
new Testament, verily verily, denotes the exceeding certainty of the
Proposition spoken, and thus it may do in this Text, thou art fair my Love,
thou art fair: That is, thou art certainly very fair.

2. Sometimes it is to note the exceeding earnestness and intention of him who
speaks. Bis dictum magis dicitur. Thus it is often used in Scripture, Genesis
14. 10. The valley of Siddim was full of slimepits, (so we translate it) in the
Hebr. A valley of pits of pits. So in many Texts: other Writers, amongst whom
Julius Scaliger, etc. much Commend this form of speaking, as having in it a
great kind of force and vehemence: according to this usage, the sense is, thou
art exceeding sair my Love, which comporteth, with what he had said before, v.
8. where he had called the Spouse, thou sairest amongst Women. Christ has his
delight amongst the Sons of men. He takes no such delight in the Angels as in
believers.

3. Repetitions (thirdly) of the same word or phrase, in Numb. 1. Exodus 26.
Scripture sometimes note a distribution. And so the sense may be this, thou
art fair my Love, thou art fair; Thou art justified by my grace, and so thou
art fair; thou art Sanctified in my name, so thou art fair; thou art fair
without and thou art fair within, thou art fair in this part, and fair in that
part, fair in every part.

4. Lastly (to mention no more) Repetltions are often used by Orators not only
to express a vehemence of intention, in him that speaks, and the certainty of
the thing that is spoken, but to beget a vehemence, and earnestness of
attention in him that hears, and Interpreters of holy Writ do assign this as
one reason of the use of them in several places of Scripture, when the
Holy Ghost designeth earnestly to inculcate the thing spoken, and to beget in
us a belief of it: hence now we may learn these things which I will but name,
and conclude what I have to say from the consideration of the Circumstances of
the first Proposition of the Text.

1. The beauty of a believing Soul is unquestionable, it is not in a complement
that Christ says the believing Soul is beautiful: it is not a seeming beauty,
but a certain beauty.

2. The beauty which grace gives the Soul is an eminent beauty, not an
ordinary, but an eminent beauty. The phrase is doubled to denote eminency.

3. The Beauty of a believing Soul is a manifold beauty: A beauty in every part.

4. It is the will of the Lord Jesus Christ, that a believing Soul should know,
and believe it self to be a beauteous Soul. A Gracious Soul may debase it self
too much, and often err as much in having too mean thoughts of it self, as the
hypocrite does in having too high thoughts of himself, thinking of himself
above what be ought to think.

But I intend not to enlarge a discourse upon these things, having spoken to
them, or at least to some of them before, thus much is sufficient to have noted
concerning the Circumstances; I proceed to the second part of the Text, Thou
have Doves Eyes.

Prop.
The Proposition of this Text is plain enough. The true Spouse of Christ has*
Doves Eyes. I before observed to you, that some read it, thy Eyes are like the
Eyes of a Dove: others thy Eyes are as a pair of Doves: but as the difference
is not much, so I see no reason to deviate from our English translation. For
the explication and confirmation of the Proposition (for I will join both
together) we will enquire these three things.

1. Qu. Why Our Savior in commending his Spouse begins with her Eyes, and only
Commends her for them?

2. Qu. What is here meant by the Spouses Eyes?

3. Qu. Why the Spouse is said to have the Eyes of Doves rather then of any
other creature?

1. Qu. Why does our Savior, here Commend the Spouse only for her Eyes?

1. The general account which Interpreters give of it, is this; That it is a
Synechdoche, and by a figure, according to which a considerable part is often
put for the whole; our Savior does here speak his whole Spouse to be like a
Dove, like a Doves Eye. Indeed we are commanded to be harmless as Doves, Matthew.
10. 16. And the Church is called Gods Turtle Dove, Psalm. 74. 19. And David
wishes that he had the wings of a Dove, Psalm. 55. 6. The shape of a Dove was
that shape which the Spirit of God chose, when it descended upon Christ: And
the coming in of the Gentiles to Christ is set out by the flockings of Doves to
the Windows, Isa. 60. 8. And the Eye (of all the members) is the most
considerable as to beauty, a good Eye much commends an ill complexion, and a
bad Eye much blemisheth any other Symmetry of parts. And this may be allowed
for one reason. But,

2. The Soul does much discover it self at the Eye. It is the casement at which
it shows it self: many of the Virtues, and Vices of the mind are read in the
Eye; wantonness discovers it self at the Eye: hence you read in Scripture of
Eyes full of adultery, 2. Pet. 2. 14. So does rage, pride, malice, envy and
many other vices, and as the evil, so the good dispositions and virtues of the
Soul, are much discovered by the Eye too: so that indeed when our Savior
commends his Spouse for her Eyes, he commends her whole Soul, and it is but
a proof of what he had before said, Thou art fair my beloved, thou art fair.
Thou have Doves Eyes, proves that.

2. Qu. What is here meant by the Spouses Eyes?

After such a resolution, as I gave to the first question, this might seem
needless, if Interpreters had not led me the way, who are in doubt whether our
Saviors design here be to commend those bodily parts of his Spouse: or some
inward parts, called Eyes by a Metaphor; the difference is not much, for
supposing him to resemble the Eyes of her body to Doves Eyes, the reason is
because of those gracious dispositions in her Soul, which by her Eyes discover
themselves, and are like the natural inclinations of Doves; if he speaks of the
Eyes of her mind, and his meaning be that his Spouses understanding (which is
the Eye of the Soul) is like a Doves Eyes, the thing is much the same,
Unquestionably, that which our Savior here designs to Commend believers for
is, the gracious dispositions of their Souls discovered in their outward
conversation, much resembling, the natural dispositions and behaviors of
Doves. But the chief thing we have to enquire into for the full understanding
of our Saviors meaning in this Text, is,

3 Qu. What these rare and remarkable properties are in Doves, or in the Eyes
of Doves more then in other creatures, for which our Savior resembles his
Spouse to them, either to show us what true believers are, or ought to be?

The Dove is a creature sufficiently known to us; a creature which of old God
made use of in Sacrifices, rejecting others. It was the creature sent out of
the Ark by Noah, which brought the olive branch. Naturalists observe many
remarkable things of the Dove. Give me leave to open to you, the aptness of the
similitude in nine or ten particulars.

1. The Doves Eyes are meek and harmless Eyes. Hence Naturalists observe that
the Dove presently forgets an injury, and builds her nest and lays her eggs,
and hatcheth her young, where her nest was newly destroyed, and her young ones
taken away, Matthew. 10. 16. Be harmless as Doves. The cruelty and revenge of the
mind is much seen in the Eye, Prove. 23. 6. you read of him that has an evil
Eye: there is a bewitching Eye and a flaming sparkling Eye; in which you may
see the sparks of that rage, and envy, and anger, which flame in the Soul, you
may read rapine, and cruelty, and mischief, in an Hawks Eye, but in a Doves Eye
nothing but meekness: the old verse says,

Fell Columba caret, rostro non-laedit, and ungues
Possidet innocuos --
A Dove wants gall, and though it has nails and claws, yet it gripes none with
them. The Dove does not wholly want gall, but Naturalists say, it has but very
little (compared with other creatures;) and hence it is, that it is very
gentle, peaceable, fearful, and does no other bird hurt: Believers are compared
to Sheep, and to Doves. Sheep have horns, but they hurt none with them: Doves
have claws, but they hurt none with them: and (as I faid before) this may be
read in their Eyes in which you do not see such a sharpness, and sparkling as
it were of fire, as in the Eyes of birds of prey: Believers Mat. 10. 16.
have, or should have Doves Eyes: Samuel is able to stand up and say, whose Ox
have I taken? Or whose Ass have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded: Our Savior
commands us that we should 1 Cor. 14. 20.
be innocent as Doves; in malice they are Children, 1 Cor. 14. it is the
Apostles Command, Ephesians. 4 31. Let all bitterness, and Ephesians. 4. 31.
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you with all
malice. Believers when unregenerate lived in malice, and Titus 3. 3.
envy, hateful, and hating one another, Tit. 3. 3. But, Col. 3. 8. Col. 3. 8.
They have put off all these, anger, wrath, malice, etc. And it is their
business to be still laying them aside: every true Believer has something of a
Doves Eye, and it is his work to be daily getting his heart up to it more and
more.

2. A Doves Eye secondly, is a satisfied Eye. The satisfaction of the sensible
and reasonable Soul, is much discerned in the Eye. You shall discern a
greediness in the Eye of an Hawk, to let you know, that if it were loose it
would be tearing: And you shall ordinarily know a man of a covetous spirit, and
a discontented spirit by his Prove. 28. 22.
Eye, Prove. 28. 22. He that hastes to be rich has an evil Eye. You shall
discern a gladness in a Doves Eye, which speaks it a contented, satisfied
creature. Such should a Believer be; such is a true Believer, Heb. 13. 5.
Heb. 13. 5. Let your conve^sation be without covetousness, and be content with
such things as you have. I have learned (says Saint Paul) in all estates to be
content. Faith teaches a Soul to cast its care upon God, believing that he
cares for it: Faith teaches him to depend upon the Promise, which Godliness
has; to trust to a Providebit 1 Timothy 6. 8.
Deus: This now is a Doves Eye, an Eye which is not greedy of gain, which does
not covet its Neighbors House, nor Ground, nor Wife, nor Ox, nor Ass, nor any
thing which is his.

3. The Dove's Eye is a Benign Eye. You do not only not discern any thing of
rage and fury, or cruelty, and greediness in a Dove's Eye; but you discern a
certain kindness, and (as it were) a good will in it: Hence it is very friendly
amongst its fellows, and it loves an habitation near dwelling-houses of men.
Doves Eyes are Benign Eyes. Believers have, and should have Doves Eyes, Ephesians. 4.
32. Be you kind one to another; they are commanded to Godliness to add
Brotherly kindness; and Col. 3. 12. to put on kindness. What Solomon says of
the good woman, Prove. 31. 26. is true of a Believer; in a Believer's Tongue is
the Law of kindness; they know the grace of the Lord Jesus, and the great
kindness of their Savior to them. Grace takes away that currishness and
doggedness, which makes men rugged in their speeches and behavior, and
churlish in their spirits; and if ought of this remains upon their hearts, it
is because their Faith is but in part, and they have yet a body of death, some
unmortified corruption that yet remains in them, which is in the fault; for
Grace is of a benign, kind nature; the Believer has Doves Eyes. Look as it is
with a Dove; let a Cock be feeding, that is a churlish creature, and will endure
none to be near it: The Dove is kind, and allows room to all comers; such a
kindness there is now in a Believer's heart, where Grace has taken its full
hold.

4. Doves Eyes are lowly Eyes. The pride and haughtiness of the Natural
disposition, both in sensible and rational creatures, is much seen in the Eyes:
You discern a proud and lofty Bird by the surliness of its Eye; and so it is in
a reasonable creature. Hence you read of a proud look, Prove. 6. 17. (one of the
things which God hates; and Prove. 21. 4. an high look, and a proud heart are
put together. And in brute creatures, the height of the Natural disposition is
seen in the scornful Eye of Lions, Hawks, Parrots, etc. But a Dove has lowly
Eyes. Now a Believer has Doves Eyes. Take carnal, natural men, they are proud
and scornful; they are sometimes in Scripture described under the Notion of the
scornful, Psalm. 1. 1. Isa. 28. 14. But the believing Soul is an humble Soul. It
is the Law of their Profession, Micah 6. 8. They must walk humbly with their
God. They cannot serve the Lord but with all humility of mind, Acts 20. 19. It
is their clothing, 1 Pet. 5. 5. and they duly put it on, Col. 3. 12. They talk
not high things, they affect not, they seek not high things, (that is, of this
World;) indeed they se^k the things which are above, where Christ sits on
the right hand of God; but this they do with all humility of mind, confessing
with the Prodigal, that they are not worthy to be called the Sons of God.

5. Doves Eyes are simple Eyes. As other virtues or vices of the mind, so truth
and falsehood, simplicity and craft, or doubleness of mind, are much discerned
in the Eye. There are some brute creatures, that discover far more natural
sagacity and craftiness than others in their looks; and so there are also some
men, that you say of them, they look as if they were false-hearted, and
oft-times you do not take your mark amiss. But now amongst brute creatures, the
Dove's Eye is simple, you see no deceitfulness, no craft or subt^lty in that,
Matthew. 10. 16. Be you wise as Serpents, and (...), Mat. 10. 16.
we translate it, harmless, as Doves; but there is a doubt upon it whether
(...) be compounded of (...) and (...), a horn (then it signifies without an
Horn, as Doves, and we translate it well enough harmless) or whether it be not
compounded of (...) and (...), which signifies to make a mixture. Such should
the Saints be, simple, without mixture; Christ was so, there was no guile in
his mouth, Phil. 1. 10. without deceit in their hearts; they should not have an
heart, and an heart. It was Paul's glorying, 2 Cor. 1. 12. That he had his
conversation in godly sincerity.

6. Doves Eyes are clean Eyes. Hence it feeds upon pure grains, drinks no other
than pure water, delights most in houses of a pure white color, which the Poet
observed of old, Aspicis ut veniant ad candida tecta columbae. And many other
things are reported by Naturalists of the cleanliness of this Bird. The
Believer is one of a pure heart, Joh. 15. 3. You are clean (says our Savior)
through the word I have spoken to you; he is one of clean hands, and a pure
heart, Psalm. 24. 4. of a clean heart, Psalm. 73. 1. clean every whit, Joh. 15.
10. his heart is purified by Faith, Acts 15. 9. he has purified his Soul in
obeying the truth through the Spirit; and he delights in pure company, his
delight is in the excellent, Psalm. 16. 3. The wicked shall not tarry in his
sight, Psalm. 101. he has Doves Eyes.

7. Doves Eyes are fearful, tender Eyes; this experience teaches, and
Naturalists say, That it is caused by the little proportion of Gall that is in
them: There is not in them indeed such a shiness and fearfulness as is in some
other Birds, because they are (many of them) nursed up near to houses, and made
familiar to men, but it is evident they are trembling creatures. The Spouse of
Christ has (upon this account) Doves Eyes. It is true, he has not the fear of
a reprobate upon him; he is more acquainted with God, and has been bred up in
nigher communion with God; yet he is very subject to fear; he fears sinning
against God, and God cannot lay an hand upon him, but he is ready to tremble;
he cannot cast an Eye upon any Judgment of God, but he shakes at the
apprehension of an angry God in it: He has Doves Eyes.

8. The Dove's Eye is a mournful Eye. Hence in Scripture the mourning of Doves
is made use of to express sad mournings, Isa. 38. v. 14, I did mourn like a
Dove, Isa. 59. 11. We mourn sore like Doves. I conceive it chiefly relates to
the mourning of Turtles. The Saints Eyes too are mourning Eyes; they are
persons of sorrowful spirits, broken and contrite spirits; and look as it is
with Turtles, they never mourn so bitterly, as when they have lost their
Companion; so it is with the Believer; he never so mourns, as under the
withdrawings of Divine Love. It is not proper for the Children of the
Bridechamber to mourn while the Bridegroom is with them, but when he is gone,
Then they shall mourn.

9. The Doves Eyes are exceeding chaste Eyes. I noted to you before, that the
uncleanness and wantonness of the heart much appears in the Eye. Hence the
Apostle Peter mentions Eyes full of Adultery. There are large stories told of
the Doves Chastity, especially Turtle Doves, and Stock Doves. Hence possibly it
was, Lev. 12. 6. that a Turtle Dove was the Sacrifice which God appointed for
the Woman after Childbirth. The Dove keeps to its Mate, and to him alone. The
Saint too has Doves Eyes, he cries out, None but Christ! None but Christ! he
cleaves to Christ alone for Justification, for Sanctification, for Salvation.
Christ is his all in all, Isa. 17. 7, 8. At that day shall a man look to his
Maker, and his Eyes shall have respect to the holy one of Israel, and he shall
not look to the Altars, the work of men's hands: Neither shall he respect that
which his fingers has made: Either the Groves or the Images. No, he has Doves
Eyes.

10. The Doves Eyes are quick Eyes. Naturalists observe, that the flight of the
Dove is very swift, so swift, that when they fly directly forward, no Hawk can
take it; and for this quickness of flight, quickness of the Eye is necessary.
The Spouse of Christ is quicksighted too; its Eye immediately pierces through
a mist of difficulties and dangers; he believes in hope against hope: When he
does not see by the Eye of Sense, yet he believes: He has Doves Eyes.

11. The Dove has Circumspect Eyes. You shall observe this in it, that it
seldom or never takes its flight toward the Earth, but it looks this way, and
that way, and every way; and when it is alighted you shall discern it thrusting
out it is Neck first on one side, then on another, to see that all be safe. The
believer has also circumspect Eyes. He should have, Ephesians. 5. 15. See then that
you walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5. 15. Psalm. 39. 1.
Psalm. 39. v. 1. I said I will take heed to my ways. The Child of God should
be like the Dove, not move a step in the World without casting its Eye of
consideration upon its way first, considering whether the action which it is
about to do, be like to bring glory to God: Whether it be consonant to a Divine
rule.

12. In the last place. The Dove has very observing Eyes. hence let its flight
be never so far, and remote from home, yet it finds its way thither again
directly. Hence Historians tell us, that the Romans Varre.
made great use of Doves; when they were absent a great way from home, they
would by Doves which they carried with them, send home directions to their
Servants, for the management of their business; and by the help of Doves, they
would in their Wars keep intelligence with their Friends in their Enemies
quarters: The Christian should likewise have Observing Eyes, to observe his own
motions and actions, and to observe Divine Providence, Prove. 23. v. 26. Let
thine Eyes observe my ways, etc. But I have enlarged enough in the Explication
of the Metaphor; it is time that I should come to the Application; and so the
Proposition may be useful to us: 1. By way of Discovery. 2. By way of
Exhortation.

Use 1.
This Notion discovers to us these two things; 1. That there are but few in the
World that can be allowed to be the Spouses of the Lord Jesus Christ. 2. That
those who indeed are so, yet while they are here, are in a very imperfect
estate, very short of what they ought to be.

In the first place we may learn, That there are but very few in the World that
can be allowed to be the Spouse of Christ; but a few to whom he can say, You
have Doves Eyes. This Notion will separate diverse, five or six sorts of persons
(more especially) from having any relation to the Lord Jesus Christ.

1. Such who have malicious, wrathful Eyes, sparkling with nothing but revenge
and fury. How many such Professors is this Age full of, whose Eyes sparkle like
a flaming fire? they breathe out nothing but malice, and revenge, and cruelty,
Prove. 30. 14. There is a generation whose Teeth are Swords, and their Jaw-teeth
as Knives, Psalm. 74. 19, 20. the least they can talk is of doing unto others as
they have done to them, it may be seven times more. O! how contrary is this to
the Spouse of Christ! Psalm. 74. 19, 20. v. 19. The Church of Christ is called a
Turtle Dove; what are her Enemies? v. 20. The dark places of the Earth are full
of the habitations of cruelty. There Is no relics of cruelty in a Dove house,
if you go in there, you will find no blood, no limbs of Birds; but if you find
an Hawk's Nest, it is there you find the blood, and limbs of other Birds, better
than it self. The tender Christian has not his hand in the blood and ruin of
his Brethren; you find not in his Habitations the Instruments of cruelty, nor
any prey taken from the Widow and Fatherless: He has Doves Eyes. I know no
more certain character of one that is a stranger to Christ than this; Let me
see one that is full of cruelty, (wanting tenderness of heart) malice, and
revenge, etc. I shall easily conclude him to be one who never digested that
Gospel Precept well, Matthew. 5. 44, 45. The Whelps of the roaring Lion are
continually crying for blood, and rapine, and plunder, but the Spouse of Christ
has learned from him (concerning her Enemies) to say, Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do.

2. Set aside those also whose Eyes are never satisfied, Prove. 27. v. 20.
Covetous greedy worldlings; these have Hawks Eyes, and not Doves Eyes: And ah!
how full is the World of these Birds of prey too? those that are like the
Grave, and like to Hell, that never say, There is enough, but their whole
business is to look about for more still, and to cry with the Horsleaches
Daughter, Give, Give, Prove. 30. 15, 16, 17. The Horsleach has two Daughters
crying, Give, Give. Nor does any thing come amiss to them; they never consult
Conscience in it, whether they can enjoy their desires without sinning against
God, or doing injury to others, or no. The Dove takes the meat which is thrown
to it, and is satisfied; however, it feeds not it self to the prejudice of any
other Bird (as the Hawk does.) A good Christian has learned in all estates to
be content, and is satisfied with the portion God allots to him; he seeks
nothing to the injury of another in his right; he covets not what is his
neighbors; the World is a wide Sea, he fisheth with his neighbor, but he robs
not his neighbors Net, nor suffers his heart to covet what he has in it.
The covetous man is none of Christ's Spouse. That Is the second.

3. Hence also the Proud man is shut out from any true Relation to the Lord
Jesus Christ. Give me leave still to go on with the Wise man, Prove. 30. 13.
There is a generation, Oh! how lofty are Prove. 30. 13.
their Eyes! and their Eyelids are lifted up! But what are they? Are they the
Spouse of Christ? David says, Psalm. 131. 1. Lord, Psalm. 131. 1.
mine Heart is not haughty, nor my Eyes lofty. They are such as God shall
humble, Isa. 5. 15. Isa. 2. 11. The Psalmist brings it in as an Evidence, that
men were corrupt because they spoke loftily, Psalm. Psalm. 73. 8.
73. 8. The pride and haughtiness of many speaks it unto their faces, that they
have not Doves Eyes.

4. Hence fourthly; Unclean persons are shut out from the Kingdom of God. Such
as (to use St. Peter's expression, 1 Pet. 2. 14.) 1 Pet. 2. 14.
have Eyes full of Adultery, that have wanton Eyes, as the Prophet Isaiah
expresses it, Isa. 3. 16. But I shall not need enlarge upon Isa. 3. 16.
this, 1 Cor. 6. 9 These (continuing such) are shut out of the Kingdom of God:
And every one who understands any thing of the mind of God, will agree in
this, and even Reason it self will allow the Sentence.

5. Hypocrites are also, by this, shut out of the number of those who are
Spouses to Christ. You have heard there is a great deal of simplicity in the
Dove, which discovers its self at the Eye. The deceitful Eye is not the Eye of
a Saint: Such are those mentioned in the aforementioned Text of Prove. 30. 12.
There is a generation that is pure in their own Eyes, and yet is not washed
from their filthiness. It is said of Jacob, Genesis 25. 27. that he was a plain
man. This Genesis 25. 27.
is a great commendation of a Christian; a true Christian is a plain man; an
Hypocrite lies in folts, there is many an hole in an Hypocrite, but that it is
hid under plaits of seeming Sanctity, but the Child of God has no doublings in
his heart, he has Doves Eyes.

2. Br. But in the second place, you may observe from what you have heard, that
even the Children of God in this life are very imperfect. There is none of them
but have something of a Doves Eye; something of all these habits of graces
which I have noted to you under this comparison: yea and so much as may
distinguish them from others, but yet where is the Soul that has a perfect
Doves Eye, either for quickness, or cleanness, or circumspection. But I had
rather press these under the Notion of an use of

Use 2.
Exhortation. The Proposition in that latitude according to which I have
expounded it, indeed does rather speak what every Child of God should be, then
what he is. Every Child of God has the habits of these graces, but they are in
all imperfect, the things which we should press after, although who can say he
has attained. Give me leave therefore to press you all, who hear me this day,

1. Those of you, (if there be any such) who are prejudiced against the ways
of God, to a good Opinion of the ways, and People of God, because the walkers
therein have, or should have Doves Eyes.

2. Those of you who are entered into them, to show it forth in your
conversation that you have Doves Eyes.

1. 1. Branch.
In the first place. Let me take the advantage of my Text to make an Apology
for my Master, and those who take upon them the profession of his Gospel in
sincerity. Christ's Friends are not the Persons the World takes them for, They
have Doves Eyes. Our Luke 17. 1. Luke 7. 23.
Savior has of old told us, Luke 17. 1. That it is impossible but that
offenses must come. And Lu. 7. 23. Blessed is he whosoever shall not be
offended in me. The World is peevish to the Lord Jesus Christ, and seeks
occasions against that sect, which follows him most closely. It Is every where
spoken against. Christians were so of old, and I fear me much of the rancor
lies still in men's hearts, though it be more bit in through policy. There are
two things, that as in all times, so in our times, have highly contributed to
the Scandal and reproach of Religion.

1. The intruding of many false friends into that honorable profession. The
flock of Christ would be much more lovely in the World, if we could remove out
of them all those that are ringstraked, spotted, and speckled, all Hypocrites,
I mean, but it is Gods will the tares and wheat should grow together tell the
harvest.

2. The 2d is, The imperfect state of the very best of Gods People. Which makes
them subject to many failings. And what you have in the English Proverb, It is
safer for one to steal an Horse then for another to look over the hedge, is
eminently true of the Child of God, and the man of the World. The worldling may
cut a Purse, and not make so much a noise, as if the Child of God shall drop
one Penny of unjust gain into it. But methinks (were the World but rational) it
were not an hard matter to reconcile them to a better Opinion of the ways of
God, by an easy distinction, betwixt the fault of a rule or way, and the
Miscarriage of a Person pretending to walk by that rule. The Saint has or
should have Doves Eyes; do thou therefore see any Challenging to himself the
honorable name of a Christian, and yet cruel, revengeful, full of malice,
deceitful, hypocritical, unchaste, or the like, how unreasonable a thing is it
for thee to say presently, see what these Puritans are, these are the Saints;
and how much more reasonable and just were it for thee to say, Either these men
are not what they seem to be, or if they have any root of goodness, they have
foul failings, and make work for repentance. A man may justly be offended at a
professor, for his Sins, and unsuitable walking to his Profession, but woe to
that man that is offended at Christ! Blessed is that man who is not offended in
Christ. Religion teaches none rapine, and plunder, and cruelty, and unmerciful
dealings, it teaches none covetousness, and unjust gains, etc. Their lusts
teach them this. Charge it not upon Christ, nor upon the Gospel to which they
make a Profession charge these things upon the lusts and corruptions of
professors, and upon their temptations; so you shall do no wrong. In the second
place,

2 Branch.
Let this engage you all, who own the honorable name of Christians, to labor
to answer this Metaphor, to show by your conversations, that you have Doves
Eyes. Labor for harmless dispositions; when Christ sent out his disciples, Lu.
10. 4. Luke 10. 4.
he says, behold I send you as Lambs amongst Wolves. The Christian must expect
to meet with Wolves in the World but he is to Prove. 20. 22.
be as a Lamb amongst Wolves, as a I illy amongst thorns, Prove. 20. 22. say not
thou I will recompense evil, but wait on the Lord, and he shall save thee. 2.
Labor for contentedness of Spirit. 3. For a benign kind temper to others, for
humility, for plainness of heart, and so for those other graces which I have
instanced in, let them shine forth in you. I shall not enlarge upon each of
them, but only press them upon you by some general arguments, by general, I
mean such as will suit every of them. They shall be four.

1 Motive.
Thus shall you fulfill the will of Christ concerning you. The Apostle pressing
Sanctification makes use of this, argument, For you know what Commandment we
gave you by the Lord Jesus. For this is the will of God, even your
Sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2, 3. Certainly no higher argument can be used. I
know nothing that a Christian (as to the practick part of his duty) has to do,
but to inquire what is the will of God concerning him. Thus others would have
me do, thus my own corrupt heart would have me do, but what would God have me
do? What would Christ have me be? Do thou like an ingenuous Soul ask what
Christ would have thee be? Much of the will of God concerning thee, is wrapped up
in this, it is his will that thou should have Doves Eyes, it is the will of
God that thou should have harmless Eyes, and clean Eyes, and chaste Eyes,
etc. These are the expectations of Christ upon thy Soul. The Devil would have
thee have an Hawks Eye, that when he shows thee where thou may execute malice
revenge, cruelty safely, thou might fall upon it, that when he shows thee
a wedg of Gold, and a Babylonish garment thou may take it without scruple,
but this is the will of Christ that thou should have a Doves Eye and do
injury to none: the Devil would have thee have want on Eyes, Eyes full of
Adultery, that when thou see a beautiful strumpet, thou might run after
her, but Christ would have thee to have a Doves Eye. The Devil would have thee
have a lofty Eye, that when he shows thee an object of am bition, thou might
wound thy Conscience in straining for it: but Christ would have thee to have a
Doves Eye, to be meek and lowly. And methinks to a Christian (whose very
denomination sounds a man subjected to the will and Law of Christ,) this
argument should be sufficient to him, to engage him to labor toward this
perfection, and to endeavor after these Doves Eyes mentioned in the Text.

But Secondly, Thus you shall be like unto the Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Motive.
Christ is the unquestionable Idea of all perfection, and there is nothing more
worthy of a Christian, then to labor after a conformity to Christ, to make
Christ his Archetypon, In many sciences, in order to a man's perfection
imitation is as much his concernment, as his following the rules, and Precepts
of Art. I am sure it is so in the great Mystery of Godliness: it is the
business which God is doing with us by his Providence, Romans 8. 29. and which
we ought to endeavor in our practice, Phil. 3. 10. to be made conformable unto
the Image of the Son of God He has given us an example, John 13. 15. and he
has left us an example, 1 Pet. 2. 21. now what were Christ's Eyes? Cant. 5. 12.
His Eyes are as the Eyes of Doves. It were an easy matter here to run through
all the aforementioned particulars. He had harmless Eyes. Whose Ox did he ever
take? Whom did he ever defraud? To whom did he do wrong? Upon whom did he ever
revenge himself? Nay when he was reviled (says Peter) he reviled not again,
but suffered quietly, etc. He had satisfied Eyes. What Covetousness was he ever
guilty of? he had a bag indeed, but it was for the poor, he had not an hole
where to hide his head. Yet he neither coveted the holes of the Fox, nor the
Nests of the Birds. He had Benign Eyes, upon whom did not he look kindly? To
whom was he not ready to do good? He had meek and lowly Eyes, he says of
himself, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly. He had simple Eyes, no guile was
found in his mouth, no deceit in his heart, no doubleness in his actions, etc.
He had clean Eyes, he delighted not in filthy conversation, not in filthy
company or places, if he came at a publicanes and sinners house, it was to make
it clean and a fit habitation for his holiness. He had mournful Eyes, he wept
over Jerusalem as truly as a Turtle that has lost its mate. He has chaste
Eyes, not only in a carnal but a Spiritual sense, all his delight is in the
Sons of men, in the Souls of his People. By Doves Eyes Christians! you shall be
like the Lord Jesus Christ whose Eyes you see were such, and like the holy
Spirit, which descended in the form of a Dove; and what more honorable for a
Christian then to be like Christ; for a godly man, then to be like God?

^
Thus (Thirdly) you shall distinguish your selves, from those who only glory in
appearance. The Apostle tells us of some that glory in appearance, only but not
in heart, 2. Cor. 5. 12. Now it should be the great business of a Christian, to
distinguish himself from these. Christ tells his disciples, (Joh. 8. 31.) that
if they would continue in his word then they should be his disciples indeed,
(...), there are many in the World that are so but (...) in show and
appearance. The Doves Eye is a certain note of a disciple of Christ; many have
the countenance of Doves, and the voice of Doves but they have not the Eye of
Doves; an Hypocrite may groan like a Dove, and may look like a Dove in some
part of his conversation, but yet want the Eye of a Dove. The Eye is a noble
part of the body, it discovers a man much, and it serves him much. Our Savior
says, the Mat. 6. 22.
light of the body is the Eye, Matthew. 6. 22. if therefore thine Eye be single,
thy whole body is full of light. But if thine Eye be evil, thy whole body shall
be full of darkness. He speaks (chiefly) of the danger of an evil Eye, and its
unprofitableness to the body. It is true concerning the Soul, an evil Eye
discovers an evil Soul (in a great measure.) O labor therefore for Doves Eyes,
that you may have an evidence to your own Souls, and that you may by them
evidence unto others, that you are such as glory not in appearance only, but in
deed.

4 Motive.
My last argument, shall be from the honor and repute which by them you will
gain to your Master and to his Gospel in the World. It is one of the great
things, that a Christian has to take care of, that the name of God for his
sake be not Blasphemed in the World, and on the contrary, it should be his
great care so to order his conversation, as that by the ordering of it he may
in the World gain a name, and glory to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to his
Gospel, and bring up a good report of the land of Canaan, and the Inhabitants
thereof. Now could we find a Christian, that were harmless and innocent, doing
injury to none, slow to conceive wrath, ready to forgive, free from greediness
of the World, and covetousness after that to which he has no right, kind, and
courteous, meek, and lowly, simple in heart, and of a single Eye, tender
spirited, of a clean conversation. chaste, and sober, of a broken Spirit,
observing his ways, and circumspect in his walking, how lovely would this
Christian, appear even in an evil World? How likely were a company of such
Christians to recover the honor which others have lost to Religion in the
World? Oh! let the honor of the Gospel move you, that the report of your faith
may spread, and others may see that Religion is not an empty thing; and glorify
God in the day of their visitation.

Obj. But you will say, are these things in our power? Can we create to our
selves Doves Eyes? If not, why do you persuade us? And why do you not rather
spend your time in praying to God for us?

Sol. I answer, that for the habits of these graces (the exercise of which I
call to you for) they are the gift of God. The Creator gives the Dove its Eye,
and the God of grace must create in men Doves Eyes. But yet,

1. As to the outward exercise of these things (some of them at least) much
lies in a man's power, in the use of that Common grace, which the Lord denies to
none, till by their abuse of it they have provoked him to deal so with them;
they may doubtless, restrain their hands, and tongues from acts of cruelty,
revenge, and malice, their bodies from unchaste acts, etc. it is true these acts
as done by them cannot please God, because not done from a right Principle, to
a right manner, nor to a right End nor are they able to mortify their inward
lusts, but the outward acts are their duty, and would take off much of the
reproach cast upon Religion.

2. For those who have received the habits of regenerating grace, it is true the
Lord must excite them to action. And the Lord by the influence of his Spirit
must also assist us in the exercise or we shall do nothing, but these are such
influences of graces, as he. 1. Grants to use, in the use of our endeavors.
And such influences. 2. as he (ordinarily) does not deny to his Children,
putting forth themselves to what they can in the performance of their duty. So
that (asserting yet those great truths of God. That it is the Lord that gives
to will and to do. The first by the infusion of the habit of the grace of
regeneration, the second, by the influence of his grace upon his People,
exciting those habits, to exercise, and assisting them in their exercise) yet
there is room enough for exhortations of this Nature.

Sermon LVIII.
Canticles 1. 16. Behold thou art fair (my Beloved) yea pleasant; also our Bed
is green.

IT is generally agreed, that the person spoken to in this verse, is he who is
in this Song represented under the notion of a Beloved, by which I have told
you, that we understand the Lord Jesus Christ; and the person speaking is she
whom he calls his Love, the fairest amongst women, etc. By her the Caldee
Paraphrast all along understands the Congregation of Israel, which by that
ancient Interpreter is brought in thus speaking; How beautiful is the glory of
thy Holiness, while thou dwell amongst us, and freely hear our prayers;
whiles thou abidest in our beloved Bed, our Children are multiplied upon the
Earth, we increase and multiply, like a Tree planted by the Rivers of water,
whose Leaf is beautiful, and its Fruit much. But I have all along observed too
great a fondness in that Reverend Interpreter, to apply all spoken in this Song
to the Jewish Synagogue, because once she was the only Beloved of God, not
attending this as a Prophecy, concerning also such as should be received into
Divine favor, when God should have said to his Ancient People, Loammi, you are
not my People. We have therefore by the Spouse here all along understood the
Church of God in all times, and more particularly, believing Souls, which are
here brought in thus speaking to Christ; Behold thou art fair my Beloved, yea
pleasant: Also our Bed is green. The words in our English Translation, are
punctually translated: Nor is there any considerable difference amongst
Interpreters, rendering them in their several Versions. We shall therefore fall
(immediately to consider the sense of the words, as they lie before us, which
are a Reply unto what Christ had said, v. 15. He had told the believing Soul,
that she was fair, she was was fair, she had Doves Eyes. She now replys in the
words of the Text, Behold thou art fair (my Beloved) yea pleasant; also our Bed
is green. Where you have,

1. Her usual friendly Compellation, (...) My Beloved, my Love, my Nephew, my
Uncle, my Kinsman. I gave you an account of the significancy of that word
before.

2. A note of Attention or Admiration (...) Behold. I showed you in my
Discourses on the 16th verse; the usage of that particle in Scripture.

3. A double Assertion; 1. Thou art fair; to which she adds, yea pleasant,
(...) 2. The second in those words, Our Bed is green.

He had told the Spouse, v. 16. that she was fair; she now replies, Behold!
thou art fair my Beloved; Pulchritudo ejus dilectio ejus (says Bernard) His
love to his Spouse is his beauty, Et ideo Bernardus ad loc.
major quia praeveniens, which is so much the greater, because it prevents us.
And (says he) she therefore loves more, because she discerns her self
prevented, and overcome in Love. It is as much as if she had said, Does my
dearest Savior say, I am fair, who am by Birth an Ethiopian, black with
original corruption, and upon whom the Sun has looked? Nay, My Beloved, thou
art much more fair: Let the World be invited to behold thy Beauty; Behold thou
art fair my Love. Observe,

Prop. 1. The Beauty of our Savior does infinitely transcend the Beauty of his
Saints.

Prop. 2. The sense of the value which Christ puts upon his Saints, will, and
ought to engage them to put an high value upon him.

Give me leave to speak something to the first of these Propositions, before I
pass on to the other words of the Text. I begin with the first.

Prop. 1. Christ's Beauty does infinitely transcend the Beauty of his Saints.
The Saints are Stars, and there is not the least Star, but has its luster and
glory; but yet there is a difference of Stars in glory, and the glory of the
Sun of Righteousness, of the Star that came out of Jacob, is far more eminent
than the Beauty of other Stars, which are set in inferior Orbs. Pulchritudo
est qualitas per quam aliquid Martinius, Psalm. 45. 2. seems to favor this
notion of Beauty. -- Thou art fairer than the Children of men. Grace is poured
into thy lips.
pulchrum est. Beauty is a quality from which any thing is made beautiful. That
is beautiful which is lovely. Pulcher quasi (...), or quod pollet charitate.
There is a corporeal Beauty, and there is a mental Beauty; the corporeal Beauty
is nothing else besides a certain loveliness that arises from a due proportion
of bodily parts, and due temperament of humors, and a comely bodily figure.
The mental Beauty is a loveliness which arises from a well tempered Soul,
adorned with good natural dispositions, moral habits, or spiritual infused
habits of Graces. When I speak of the Saints Beauty, and of Christ's Beauty, I
understand it of a spiritual loveliness in them arising from that Grace which
dwelled in Christ essentially, as God, and was poured out upon-him without
measure, as Mediator, and is derived from him to all that truly believe in him.
Now I say, this Beauty in Christ does infinitely transcend that of the Saints.
I will show it you in some few particulars, which you may gather from what I
said before concerning the Saints Beauty. I showed you that the Saints Beauty
was not native, and primitive, but derivative, not essential, but accidental,
not perfect, but imperfect. I told you that it was indeed durable, but yet the
degrees of it might fade. Let me now open to you the transcendent Excellencies
of Christ's Beauty.

1. And more generally: It is a glorious, incomprehensible, and most
incomparable Beauty; When the Word was made flesh, and came and dwelt amongst
the Sons of men, they beheld his glory as the glory of the only begotten of the
Father, full of Grace and Truth, Joh. 1. 14. In all created Beauties, there is
not equality: There are some faces more beautiful, and some minds more
beautiful and lovely than others, which yet have their loveliness too. (Beauty
is a quality which is capable of degrees.) There is a glory in Christ's Beauty,
which is not to be found in the Beauty of any Saint. The Apostle tells us, that
the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily. And the Evangelist, that his
glory was like the glory of the only begotten Son Col. 2. 9.
of God; he was full of Grace and Truth. Now, if you ask me what this glory is,
what Tongue is able to express it? Every one sees a glory in the Sun's Light
excelling the glory of the Stars; but wherein the Excellency is more than in
the fullness of the Light, none is able to determine. Here it is true which the
Vulgar Latin makes the sense of Prove. 25. 27. Qui scrutatur Majestatem
opprimetur a gloria: While the Soul sets it self to fathom the transcendent
Divine Excellencies that are in Christ, it is overcome with glory, as the Eye
is with the Light of the Sun, that looks too wistly upon it; as the Boy that
appeared to the Ancient, (who had promised his People to open to them the
Doctrine of the Trinity,) unlading water out of the Sea into a little hole with
a Spoon, and told him that he should sooner have done that work, than he would
have opened the Doctrine of the Trinity: So I may say in this case: Christ is
every way wonderful. The Prophet (concerning his Birth) cries out, Who shall
declare his Generation? I may here cry out, Who Isa. 53. 8.
shall declare his glory? Thus much we can say, that his Beauty is extensively
and intensively more than that of the most eminent Saint in the World, that it
is incomparable, and incomprehensible, but it is impossible fully to delineate
his glory to you; yet something we may speak more particularly.

2. Therefore Christ's Beauty is a Primitive Beauty. The Beauty of the most
eminent Saint is no more than a derivative Beauty; we are clean through
Christ's cleanness, and we are comely through Christ's comeliness. Take the
Saint out of Christ he has nothing in him but blackness, ugliness, and
deformity, all his Beauty is derived from Christ; he is but like the Star, that
has its Light from the Sun, being of it self but a thicker part of celestial
matter; yea he is in a lower degree than a Star, which the Philosopher says
has some (though a very small) Light of his own. The Child of God of himself
is not only dark, but darkness: You were once darkness (says the Apostle) Ephesians.
5. 8. John 1. 9. 8. 12.
but now you are light in the Lord. But now Christ is not only lightsom, but
light it self: I am the true Light, Job. 1. 9. Joh. 8. 12. Yea, and his Light,
his Beauty is from himself. Consider him as God equal with the Father, and
coaevous with him; all the Divine Perfections were in him. The whole Beauty of
the Godhead was in Christ. Consider him indeed as to his Humane Nature, so his
Beauty was derivative; the Spirit was given to him (though not by measure) John
3. 34. Col. 1. 19.
Joh. 3. 34 Col. 1. 19.) It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness
dwell. But consider now the Lord Jesus Christ personally, as God and Man, and
so all his Beauty was Primitive, and from himself: His Divine Nature being the
Fountain of all Perfections, and his Humane Nature receiving the fullness of the
Godhead from that Nature to which it was joined, in the fellowship of the same
Person: Now look what difference there is betwixt the Original Light of the
Sun, and the borrowed Light of a Star, betwixt the Primitive Light of the Fire,
and the Derivative Light of a Taper, such a transcendent difference there is
between the Beauty of Christ, and the Beauty of a Christian.

3. Christ's Beauty is an Essential Beauty. When I discoursed to you concerning
the Beauty of Christians, I told you that their Beauty was accidental and
adventitious; all those gracious dispositions which are found in the Souls of
Saints, which make them lovely and beautiful, either in the Eyes of Christ, or
of their Brethren, are but adventitious qualities, and accidents, no part of
their Essence; But Christ's Beauty is Essential to him. It is certainly true,
that there are no accidents in God; all that love, and goodness, and mercy,
which is in Jesus Christ, that slowness to conceive a wrath, and readiness to
forgive, it is all Essential unto him. -- Essentia Divina identificat sibi
omnia quae sunt in Divinis (say the Schoolmen) Christ is from his Essence wise,
good, gracious, holy, etc. Now every ones Reason will easily apprehend a
transcendent difference between Essential and Substantial Beauty, and
Adventitious and Accidental Beauty. But

4. Christ's Beauty is a spotless Beauty; He is called the Sun of
Righteousness. The Sun has no spots in it, it is all beautiful, all glorious.
The Saints Beauty is a spotted Beauty, or at least a Beauty attended with
spots; it is like the Beauty of the Moon; the Moon is a glorious creature, but
the Moon has its spots. Take the fairest Saint in the World, he has some
blemishes, much grace, but some corruption, much rectitude, but some
crookedness; yea, he is in nothing perfect. He believes, but cries out, Lord
help my unbelief. He loves God, this is his Beauty: Oh! but he wants some
degrees of love, he bewails his want of love to God, and begs of God to teach
him to love him; there is his spot in his Beauty. He does direct his ways
toward God; there is his Beauty: But he Psalm. 119. 5.
cries out, Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes! there is his
spot, there is his deformity. But now look upon Christ, there was no spot found
in him, no defect of Beauty, no mixture of deformity; no guile was found in his
mouth, no deceit in his heart, no crookedness in his actions.

5. Christ's Beauty is a never fading Beauty. I remember that I told you
concerning the Beauty of the Saints, that it is a durable Beauty, it is never
wholly lost, and it is true in the Eyes of Christ, but what is the reason?
because the Providence of God continually upholds that state of Beauty which is
once conferred: Nor has God so ordered the upholding of the Saints Beauty, but
that it may fade and decay as to degrees, yea and be wholly lost (as to humane
Judgment.) It Is true, the Beauty of Justification can never be lost, can never
decay, but the Beauty of Holiness may. Now, Holiness is a great part of the
Saints Beauty, both in the Eyes of God, and also of men: But Christ's Beauty
can never fade, the Rose of Sharon cannot wither; this is proved from the third
thing. If Beauty could fail from Christ, the Divine Essence might be
extinguished.

6. In the last place; Christ's beauty is a communicative Beauty; The loveliest
face in the World, cannot procreate such another, the most virtuous ingenuous
mind, cannot communicate its virtue, and ingenuity so as to possess another
Soul with it You have many a Child of God, that is exceeding beautiful, both by
justifying, and regenerating grace, but what they have is to themselves. The
wisest Virgins can lend no Oil to the foolish; if they do, there will not be
enough for them both. But now Christ's Beauty is communicative, he is in himself
comely, and he can put his comeliness upon others, yea (which is more) he can
communicate, without loss to himself, as the Fire gives heat to all in the
Room, and yet has no less heat in itself, or as the Sun inlightneth the Moon,
and all the Stars, yea and all the World, and yet has as much light still as
it had before that communication. So does the Lord Jesus Christ, he has
communicated Beauty to ten thousand thousand Saints even to all that have lived
since Adams fall to this day. They were all comely through his comeliness put
upon them, yet has he in himself the same Beauty he ever had. But I have spoke
enough to the opening of this point. I come to the application in three or four
words.

Use 1.
1. In the first place, This calls to all the Children of God, for that great
duty mentioned, Romans 12. 3. Not to think of himself Romans 12. 3.
more highly then he ought to think, but to think soberly according as God has
dealt to every man the measure of faith. The want of this Spiritual Sobriety,
has been one great cause of the Drunkenness of this later age.

1. Professors have been too apt to think of themselves above others,
forgetting that of the Apostle in that Chap. v. 10. In honor preferring one
before another; ah how vile have Brethren seemed in one another Eyes? How
ready have the followers of Paul been to despise the followers of Cephas, and
those that followed Apollo to despise those that followed Paul? How subject
have we been to contemn those not of our own form, though possibly better
Scholars in Christ's School then we! (for Scholarship in Religion is not to be
judged by forms in the Church?) Certainly it had been much better for those
self conceited Christians, that looking upon their own beauty have so scorned
others, as low, legal Christians, to have thought with themselves. Ah! but what
is my Beauty to Christ's Beauty? And why do I despise, who my self have not
attained.

2. A 2d sort of professors have erred by thinking of themselves above the
measure of faith given to them. I know nothing has contributed so much, to the
miserable distempers of our Church as this, that our professors have looked
their faces in a multitiplying glass, there they have beheld their parts above
what indeed they were, yea and their graces too. But alas (Friends) Suppose
them what you would have them, there is no cause of glorying, for if thou have
received it, why do thou glory, as if thou had not received. And let the
parts and graces that make thee beautiful be what they will, certainly they are
short of Christ's still (who is thy great Example.)

3. But most abominable are those, who dream that they are as holy as Christ,
as perfect as he is, yea that they are Christed and Godded. They may be
Devilled, and Sathanized, with pride and self conceit, but certainly, when the
Saint is grown to the highest pitch, Christ must be higher by the head, and
shoulders. Did these poor worms, ever drink of that cup of which he drank? Or
were they ever baptized with the Baptism wherewith he was baptized? If not, how
come they to sit at his right hand? were they the only begotten Sons of God,
full of grace and truth? How then come they (if they were not so) to be sharers
with him in his glory? Away then with this blasphemous pride; and if thou (O
thou worm of the Earth!) know not how to difference Christ's Beauty from
thine, go to the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and consider if the imperfect
twinkling light of the latter bear any Proportion to the triumphing light of
the former; go and learn, how the heat of thy hand (made hot by the Fire) can
possibly be proportionable to the heat of the Fire, which gave thy hand what
heat it has. But no more of this. It is a thing not fit to be named amongst
Christians. This is the first Use.

Use 2.
In the 2d place; Let this Caution you against that which the Apostle Jude
complains of, Jude 16. Having men's persons in admiration. Under the former
branch of Application I took notice of one great cause, of the sad miscarriages
of professors in our age; I shall here touch upon another, It is This having
men's persons in admiration, Christians have had such a one in their Eye, whom
they have looked upon as an holy and eminent person, full of Spiritual Beauty,
and him they have followed over hedge and ditch, never looking at Christ all
the way. It is good to behold the workings of Grace upon those who are made the
subjects of it; but to what end? What? that we might admire them, and follow
them? no, but that we might admire God in them, and that Grace of Christ by
which they are so holy, so humble, so meek, so eminent in any Grace. I am
afraid many have made another use of Professors seeming Beauty in these times,
and the Lord has let them see, that their Beauty was vain, and their appearing
Favor deceitful. Certainly Brethren, if that which you have heard be true,
Christ alone is to be admired by you; he is the chiefest of ten thousand. Do
you hear any one saying, such a Minister, such a Christian is fair, O! he, or
she is fair, they have Doves Eyes, look thou up to Heaven, and say, Nay, (my
dear Savior!) thou art fair; these are derivative Beauties, thine is a
primitive Beauty; the Beauty of these is but an accidental, adventitious
Beauty, thine is an essential, substantial Beauty; these are mixed Beauties,
thine is a perfect Beauty. We have hearts that are exceeding carnal. Men are
very prone to admire their fellows rather for Outward Advantages, than for
Spiritual Perfections; more for outward parts, than for Grace; and when they
take notice of Grace in any, to admire them rather than Christ for the Grace of
God bestowed upon them. The Woman, Luke 11. 27. was guilty of the first, that
hearing Christ speak, lift up her voice and said, Blessed is the Womb that bare
thee, and the Paps which thou have sucked. Christ reforms her wish, v. 28. yea
rather, Blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep it. The Corinthians
were guilty of the second, who much admired those amongst them that had parts,
and extraordinary gifts: The Apostle endeavors to reform that, 1 Cor. 12. 31.
-- I show unto you a more excellent way; that was Grace. Grace is better than
all the gifts in the World. Christians are also subject to a third Error,
where they see, or at least think they see eminent Grace in any, they are prone
to admire them, and follow them. But Christians! I show unto you a more
excellent object; do you see eminent grace in any, admire Christ in them, and
the eminency of Grace in Christ, who has given them such a proportion. But let
Christ still be greater in the Throne than the greatest Saint upon the Earth;
admire him, and follow him. But that will be a third branch of Application.

Use 3.
What you have heard, methinks, should send you all away filled with the
admiration of Christ, panting with desires after Christ, and filled with the
love of him.

1. I say first, Filled with the admiration of Christ. Have you at any time
seen an eminent Christian abounding with love to God, zeal for him, clothed
with humility, buried in self-denial, adorned with any Graces which have made
him acceptable to all with whom he has conversed, and have you admired such a
one, how he could abridge himself of the sweets and contentments of this life,
and satisfy himself with being any thing, or nothing, so he might but attain
to the Resurrection of the Dead, win Christ, be found in him, and win others to
him? and will you not admire that Fountain from whence all these streams are
derived? Is he a reasonable creature that gazeth upon a twinkling Star, and
admires the luster of it, and looks upon the Sun without any admiration at all.
Oh! admire Christ, to whom all created Perfections are no more than so many
drops of Water to the Ocean, so many grains of Sand to a Mountain, so many
slender Beams to the body of Light in the Sun.

2. Shall not this send you away panting after Union, and the seal of Union
with Christ? Man as a sensual creature, desires corporeal Beauty, and it is hard
for him to see it in a Woman free for him, and not to desire her for it. Man as
a rational creature desires mental Beauty, and it is hard for him to know of
any adorned with moral Virtues, and with a pleasing and ingenuous disposition,
and not to desire friendship and acquaintance with him or her that is so
qualified. Man as regenerate and a spiritual new creature, desires spiritual
Beauty; and it is ordinary for Christians, seeing others more eminent in Grace
than themselves, to desire fellowship with them, and to be made partakers of
their Grace. But lo here Christians, a beautiful Object excelling all created
Beauties; Lo here one that is the fairest amongst the Sons of Men; Lo here one
to whom all the Lillies of the Field, yea even Solomon himself in all his
glory, was never like; shall not your hearts pant after Union with him? Shall
none say, Oh that this Christ were mine, his Grace mine, his Beauty mine, his
Glory mine! Shall not every Soul which has had a glimpse of his Glory, desire
that he would kiss it with the kisses of his mouth, that it might have further
confirmations of its Interest in him?

3. And thirdly; Shall not all your hearts, who have this day heard of his
Beauty, burn with further love to him? Does the Woman's heart leap when she
hears her Husband magnified? Does she pride her self in secret thoughts,
saying, This is my Beloved, This is my Husband? and does the commendation which
others give him blow the Coals of Love in her heart, and make them burn unto a
flame? Oh that this Discourse might have such an influence upon you this day!
Have not your hearts burned within you, while I have discoursed in your Ears
concerning Christ's loveliness? O go home now and love him more! But our
Savior has said. If you love me, keep my Commandments.

4. Lastly; Therefore seeing that the Beauty of Christ is so transcendent a
Beauty, let all the Children of God do that one thing, (which St. Paul says he
did) viz. Not think that he has attained, but forgetting that which is behind,
press on forward to that which is before, unto the price of the High Calling.
Christ is our mark; we are to learn of him to be lowly, and meek, to be holy
and separate from sin. Let no man therefore set up himself a stand short of
this mark, and let every one see, that there is room for him yet to be more and
more holy; thou may be as holy as thy Neighbor, but thou art not yet as
holy as Christ; that is that thou should study; that is it which thou should
labor after. But this is enough to have spoken to the first Observation. The
second follow: That the sense of that Value and Estimate which Jesus Christ
puts upon our Souls, should make us put an high value upon him. The Spouse's
saying, Thou art fair (my Love!) Thou art fair, made her reply Thou art fair my
Beloved.

Sermon LIX.
Cant. 1. 16. -- Yea pleasant.

IN my last Exercise I discoursed to you the transcendent Beauty of Christ
above the creatures Beauty, which is but a Beam from that Sun, a Drop from that
Fountain, the Shadow of that Substance. Our Spouse here adds, (...) yea
pleasant; not only fair, but pleasant; not only (...) It is a word often made
use of in Scripture, signifying (sometimes) that which gives satisfaction to
the outward Senses; sometimes that which gives satisfaction to the mind. You
read of the pleasant harp, Psalm. 81. 3. of pleasant riehes, Prove. 24. 3. of the
sweet Psalmist, 2 Samuel 23. 1. in all which Texts, this word is used: it
sometimes denotes the Satisfaction of the mind in an object, thus it is said to
be a pleasant thing to praise God, Psalm. 135. 3. Psalm. 147. 1. and a pleasant
thing to keep Gods Commandments, Prove. 22. 18. and to see brethren dwelling
together in unity; Psalm. 133. 1. in all which Texts also this Word is used. The
Spouse here uses the word by way of auxesis adding something to what she had
said before; Thou art fair: Yea pleasant. The Proposition is plainly this:

Prop. Jesus Christ is not only beautiful, but pleasant.

I shall speak to this Proposition by way of Explication, and Application. By
way of Explication, I shall enquire, what is meant by pleasant?

2. How the Lord Jesus Christ is not only fair, but also pleasant? I shall
there subjoin the confirmation.

1. Qu. What does the Spouse mean, when she says Christ is pleasant?

The word translated pleasant, is sometimes used to signify what is grateful to
the sensual Eye, and so may be conceived Synonymous, to the term fair, but I
conceive the Spouse here intends something more, (as I hinted to you before.)
Amongst men, beauty properly relates to the complexion, pleasantness to the
conversation, a man may be fair and yet not pleasant, he may have a fair face,
and a false heart, a sweet countenance, and a sour Soul. But yet this
difference will not serve us here. For Christ's beauty is not a corporeal,
sensual beauty, but an inward Spiritual beauty, and it is yet harder to
distinguish, fair, and pleasant, as they relate to Christ: Bernard Bernard.
super Cant. Ser. 45.
gives a double guess in the case -- Eminentiam decoris illa repetitione
designat. Aut certe in utraque Christi substantia dignam expressit omni
admiratione decorem: in altera natura, in altera gratid: That is, the Spouse by
this repetition signifies that eminency of beauty, which is in Christ, or else
by this double term, signifies the beauty of Christ's two Natures; the first,
i. e. His Divine Nature being beautiful by Nature; the second by Grace: Thou
art fair considered as to thy Divine Nature, as thou were from all eternity,
existing in the form of God, God blessed for ever, the bright Character of thy
Fathers substance, and the express Image of his glory. Yea pleasant, in thy
form Pulcher and decorus dilectus dicitur qui in divinitate and humanitateomni
amanti sementi sine macula reprehensionis aspicitur. Gregor. ad loc. Zech. 11.
10.
as a Servant, when thou did make thy self of no reputation for my sake, etc.
Gregory agrees, in the same Notion.

2. There are others, who by the pleasantness (which the Spouse here entituleth
her Beloved unto) understand his pleasant administration of his Covenant,
Doctrines, reproofs, etc. indeed the Lords staff (which denotes his Covenant)
is called (...) Beauty. And David uses this word to express the Satisfaction
he took, in the Ordinances of God, Psalm. 27. 4. Psalm. 90. 17. And our own
Annotations expound this Text by Psalm. 84. v. 1. The sense then is this: Thou
art sair (O my Savior!) transcendently fair, and beautiful, adorned with all
Grace. Yea pleasant, in all thy administrations, and dealings out of thy self,
in thine Ordinances, thou art pleasant. Thou sweetly dispensest grace, (from
the fountain which is in thee,) by the Ordinances of the Gospel which are so
many conduit pipes.

3. I shall offer you a third Notion of the term. As amongst men, we may easily
distinguish betwixt beauty, and pleasantness, whether you take beauty, for the
comeliness of the outward man, or the Ornament of the inward man. A man or
woman may have a sweet complexion, a lovely Countenance, a beautiful personage,
and yet have a debauched Soul, and so be far from pleasantness, yea a man may
have a mental beauty, and yet not pleasant, no good Companion for ones life.
There are many men who are wise, and just, and learned, and yet possibly,
through pride, morosity, or surliness, or reservedness, not pleasant:
Pleasantness does much refer to the conversation: and if we allow this sense of
the term; by which (As our own Annotators observe) the Spouse does elegantly
correct, and raise the sense of what she had before said: Then this is that
which the Spouse says: My Dear Savior, is not only beautiful in the Eye of my
mind, both in respect of his Maj sty, and glory, and of that Grace, which was
poured forth upon his lips, in respect of the eminent perfections, both of his
Divine, and humane Nature, but he is also lovely, and amiable, and so I have
sound him in all his dispensations to me and also in all my converse with him.
Thus it denotes the pleasantness of the Souls Communion with Christ, and may
comprehend both his Communication of himself to the Souls of his People in and
through his Ordinances, and also, his Communication of himself to them, by way
of more immediate, Spiritual influences; and it imports thus much, That a
Christians walking with God, is a pleasant walking, you know that the life of a
Child of God in Scripture is expressed under several Notions; it is sometimes
called, a walking with God. It is said of Enoch, he walked with God, Genesis 5.
22. 24. the like of Noah, Genesis 6. 9. it is called, a walking in Gods ways: And
after Gods Commandments. A walking with Christ, Col. 2. 6. A walking in the
Spirit, Gal. 5. 16. 25. Christ is he who maintains, and influenceth, and
upholdeth, a Christians life, he is the Companion of his life, now that which
the Spouse asserts is, that Christ is not a sour Companion, to make use of the
similitude of the Text. Many a Woman has an Husband, who it may be is a comely
Person learned, sober, wise, but yet possibly of a morose reserved temper, or
of a proud, and surly disposition, he is fair but he is not pleasant, Jesus
Christ the Husband to a gracious heart, is not only beautiful, so as a Soul may
please it self in beholding of him, and looking upon him, but he is also
pleasant: all his dealings and converse with the Souls of his People are sweet,
and delightful. And thus much may serve to have spoken to the first question,
and for the more general explication of the term; the second follows, viz.

2. Qu. How is the Lord Jesus Christ pleasant? And in what particulars does his
pleasantness appear?

1. Pleasantness implies a general sweetness, and loveliness in conversation, 2 Samuel 1. 26. I am distressed for thee, (my Brother Jonathan) very pleasant were
thou to me. David apprehended a loveliness in his converse with Jonathan: as a
man delights to be in the Company of his friend, and has much Satisfaction in
it, so it is with the gracious Soul. The life of a Christian is a pleasant
life, because Christ is pleasant to it. I told you before that a Christian has
in this life a double converse with Christ.

1. In Ordinances and duties.

2. By the immediate influences of his Spirit in all his conversation. As to
both Christ is pleasant.

1. It is a pleasant thing for the Soul of a Christian, to enjoy Christ in his
Ordinances, Psalm. 84. 1, 2. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts, my
Soul longs, yea even faints, for the Courts of the Lord: it is a pleasant
thing to a Christian, to hear of Christ in a Sermon, to look up to Christ in
Prayer: to praise the name of God. David upon this argument engages the
Children of God to praise him, for it is pleasant, Psalm. 135. 3. Psalm. 147. 1.

2. It is a pleasant thing, to a gracious Soul, from the influences of the
Spirit of grace to direct his life according to the rule of Gods Word. As it
was the meat and drink of our Savior, to do the will of his Heavenly Father:
so it is the meat of a disciple, of Christ to do the will of Christ especially
when he finds his Soul advantaged to it from the influences of the Spirit of
Christ, Rom, 7. 22. I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man. Observe
two things, St. Paul does not say I delight in the Love of God; who could do
otherwise then so? But I delight in the Law of God: an holy heart delights in
the Law of God: but secondly, Observe the restriction, as to the inward man.
This may prevent an objection. Will some poor Soul say, I cannot say that I
delight in strictness, the Lord Pardon it to me, I even force my self upon any
close walking: But do thou not delight in the Law of God as to thy inward
man? If thou do, Christ is pleasant to thee, he is not pleasant to thy
flesh, but he is pleasant to thy Spirit.

2. you will further understand how Christ is pleasant to the Soul, and receive
a further confirmation of it, if you but consider, what is requisite to make
one pleasant, as a pleasant Husband, or a pleasant Companion, of ones life,
etc. I conceive there are three things.

1. Some real positive worth. A man or woman that has no worth, is pleasant to
none, but such as are fools, or sots, Christ has an infinite worth in him, nay
you will observe, that although a man have much worth in him, yet he is
pleasant to none but such, as may have an advantage from his worth: the most
learned man in the World has no pleasantness in him, to the apprehension of a
Clown, that is not in a capacity to partake of his worth: so that to make a man
pleasant, he must not only have a real worth in him, but a worth of such a
Nature, as he to whom he is pleasant may be advantaged; such is Christ, such
are the excellencies of Christ.

2. To make a Person pleasant (besides a real worth,) there is required some
sutableness of nature, and disposition, to the party which so judges of him:
take now an eminently learned man in any science, though he has a worth in
him, and such a worth, as might to a novice be advantageous, yet all this does
not make him pleasant that which makes the Husband pleasant to the Wife, and
the Superior pleasant to the inferior, is some congruity of disposition. And
such a congruity there is betwixt Christ and a believing Soul. Christ
notwithstanding all that perfection of grace, and excellency which is in him,
and notwithstanding, the aptitude, and fitness of his grace to the wants of a
Soul, yet is not pleasant to a natural man: he is not beautiful to him, because
he wants Spiritual Eyes to discern, he is not pleasant to him, because he
wants that congruity of disposition which is necessary: Christ is holy, he is
unholy. But now the believer is made partaker of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.
4. He is a partaker of Christ, Heb. 3. 14. And indeed hence arises, that
particular pleasantness, which the believing Soul does above any other Soul
discern in Christ; even from that congruity.

3. To make any one, not only fair, but pleasant, there will be required of him
a Freedom from those things, which spoil all pleasantness in converse, and a
presence and exercise of those dispositions, which are in themselves grateful
to humane Nature. I will instance in two on three, and show you how Christ is
freed from the former and possessed of the latter.

1. The pleasant man must not be reserved, but Communicative. A man that is of
a reserved close temper, may be a worthy Person and have much real worth in
him, but yet he is not pleasant: it is the Communicative man, who is the
pleasant man. Christ (upon this account) is pleasant, he is not reserved from
the Souls of his Saints, Look now as it is with a man, if he be one that has
real worth and abilities to do good to his friend, and of a free temper, that
if his friend speaks to him he presently hears and answers, if he asks him a
question, he presently resolves, this man now is a pleasant man. Christ is
pleasant, as he is furnished, with a sufficiency of power, and ability, for the
comforting, resolving, advantaging his Peoples Souls any way, so he is not
reserved from them. How free, was he with his disciples while he was upon the
Earth, how ready if they doubted to resolve them, if they asked any thing of
him to answer them, if he saw them troubled to resolve them, etc. Christ has
removed the place of his residence, but he has not changed his disposition.
How free is Christ still with the Souls of his People? How ordinarily does he
resolve their doubts, speak peace to their Souls, answer their Prayers? Does
any Soul object against this in the words of David, Psalm. 22. 3. I cry in the
day time, and thou hear not, and in the night time I am not silent? That
Soul should do well to inquire, whether some reservedness found in it toward
Christ, has not caused Christ's reservedness to it; whether he does not
restrain Faith. He should do well also to enquire, whether he be not mistaken.
Christ oft-times gives Answers which we do not understand. Finally; Let him
wait, and he will see that Christ reserves himself only that he might hereafter
be more pleasant to the Soul. But this is enough to have spoken to this first
particular.

2. He that is pleasant, is not morose, but courteous; a man may be
communicative enough, and yet not pleasant; he that is of a churlish, dogged
temper, morose in all his behavior, is never pleasant: He that is of a gentle
behavior, is pleasant. Oh how gentle is the Lord Jesus Christ! How tenderly he
deals with his Peoples Souls! A bruised Reed he will not break, a smoking Flax
he will not quench, Mat. 12. 20. It was prophesied of him of old, Isa. 40. v.
11. that he should gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom,
and gently lead those that are with young. If he speaks to a poor laden sinner,
mark how tenderly he speaks, Mat. 11. 29. Come unto me you that are weary and
heavy laden, and I will ease you. I appeal to the Souls of you that fear God,
Has not Christ dealt tenderly with you? Has he pleaded against you with his
great Power? Have you at any time found him churlish to your Souls? Nay, who is
there amongst you but has admired his expressions in his Word, and the manner
of his dispensations unto your Souls? and can (from experience) say, He is
pleasant. If any Soul from its own experience object against this Notion, I
shall only advise it to consider, whether it has not put a false
interpretation upon Christ's dispensations to it: Or secondly, To distinguish
betwixt Christ's ordinary dealings with the Souls of the People, and his
carriage to it, upon some eminent provocations.

3. A third thing which makes a man pleasant, is humility. The proud person is
grateful to none, no not to him who is as proud as himself, but he who is full
of humility, of a condescending spirit, etc. is ordinarily pleasant to his
Companion. Upon this account also Christ is pleasant; he condescendeth to us
who are of low degree. Nothing more indears a Person of Honor, and makes him
pleasant to his Companion, than when there is discerned in him a readiness to
stoop and be serviceable to those who are beneath him: Oh how pleasant is
Christ upon this score to every honest heart! From the time that he Nothing'd
himself, and humbled himself to a death upon the Cross, unto this day, he has
been, and still is thus pleasant to every gracious Soul. Every dispensation of
special grace makes him thus more and more pleasant to his Peoples Souls. But I
have spoken enough to the Doctrinal part. I come now to the Application.

Use 1.
By way of inference in the first place, let me conclude from hence, That a
Christian's Life must needs be a pleasant Life. To me, says Col. 3. 3. Ephesians. 2.
1. Cant. 2. 3.
St. Paul, to live is Christ, Phil. 1. 21. And again, Col. 3. 3. Our life is
hid with Christ in God. A Believer lives from Christ, Ephesians. 2. v. 1. You has he
quickened, and he lives in Christ, and Christ lives in him: Now Christ is
pleasant. Hearken to our Sponse in this Song, chap. 2. 3.* I sat down under
his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. It is one
great discouragement that keeps off men from following the Lord Jesus Christ:
They have taken up a fancy, that Christ is an hard Master; reaping where he
has not sown, and gathering where he has not strawed. They fancy the life of
a Christian a moping life, burdened with cares, troubled with sorrows, etc.
and think all their friends good days are gone when once they turn Puritan^s,
and begin to follow after God. And in very deed, then, and not before, do they
begin to live, and to understand what true contentment is. Oh! let not this
prejudice take hold of any of your Souls; come but taste land see how good the
Lord is. Might but this prevail with any of you to embrace the offers of
Christ, and to fall in with the ways of God, let my Soul go for yours, if when
once you have truly experienced the Contentment of a Christian's life you do
not with David choose to be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, rather than to
dwell in the Tents of wickedness, if you prefer not one day in the Lord's
Courts before a thousand elsewhere. Let not the deceitful pleasures of the
World seduce you* if the Earth affords any satisfaction, that Soul has it that
walks with God, and has a fellowship with the Lord Jesus Christ. By way of
Argument, let me but plead with you,

1. To observe the difference between sensual and intellectual pleasures: And
again, betwixt rational and spiritual pleasures. Who is there that observes not
how much the satisfaction of the mind, in the possession of Learning and
Virtue, excels all that satisfaction which the Eye has in seeing, or the Ear
in hearing? Christ is pleasant to the Soul, not to the outward, but to the
inward man. The pleasures of the mind are rational or spiritual. The proportion
which knowledge bears to the understanding of man, and which moral Virtue
bears to his Reason, makes them pleasant, and creates an intellectual rational
pleasure. But alas! it must be imperfect; for as the Eye is not satisfied with
seeing, nor the Ear with hearing, so neither is it possible that the Soul
should be satisfied with knowledge, or moral accomplishments, especially when
it is awakened to consider Eternity. Hence the Learned man, that before took
pleasure in his knowledge, being awakened, cries out, I with my Learning may go
to Hell, when one that knows much less may go to Heaven; where is the pleasure?
But now the Soul that is possessed of Christ, has its heart perfectly at rest,
because it sees its eternal Interest provided for, and cannot discern it self
in danger of future misery. Furthermore, the things in which it takes pleasure,
are above the rank of all sublimary contentments, even such things as Eye has
not seen, nor has Ear heard, nor can it enter into the Heart of man to
conceive. Besides, Conscience is quiet. Conscience is that which spoils much of
the Worlds pleasure; for as a good Conscience is a continual feast, so an evil
Conscience is (more or less) a continual torment. Now Christ is he alone that
quieteth the Conscience. Many a poor Christless Soul drinks Wine in Bowls, and
boast in their outwardly happy condition, but by and by a finger of a man's hand
appears; their Conscience begins to stir, and to tell them they are damned
undone sinners; what becomes of their pleasure? But now the Soul that is in
Christ, his Conscience speaks peace to him, he has peace without trouble. And
to give you a demonstration of this pleasantness of a Christian's life, as I
remember Christ said of the Lillies, they neither spin, nor sow, yet Solomon in
all his glory is not like one of them: So give me leave to say; Step unto the
poor Cottages of Christians, who have searce Bread to eat, no Silken Rayments
to put on, no Music to make them merry, no Money to spend, no Orchards or
Gardens to delight them; and yet there is many a Nobleman, many a Gentleman who
have all these in abundance, and yet in all their glory are not like one of
these Lillies; these poor Souls have more true content and pleasure in one day,
than they have in all their life, nor would they change conditions with them.
So true is that of Solomon, Prove. 15. 16, 17. Better is a little with the fear
of the Lord, than great Treasures, and trouble therewith. Better is a dinner of
Herbs where love is, than a stalled Ox, and hatred therewith. I dare warrant
you, that the Philosopher could have dined more sweetly at home with Bread and
Water, than at the Tyrants Table of Dainties in view of a sharp Sword hanging
over his head by a thread. There Is many a poor Christian in this like a true
spiritual Diogenes, that satisfies himself with the influence of the Sun upon
his Tub, better than an Alexander could do himself with a whole World subdued
to his feet.

Use 2.
2. Observe from hence the difference between Christ and lusts, Christ and the
World. The Soul of man cannot be alone, it is either espoused to lusts, and to
the World, or else to the Lord Jesus. There Is many a one whose Soul is united
to it is lusts. Lust is its beloved. Can this Soul say, Behold thou art fair my
Beloved, yea pleasant? Doubtless nothing less. Reason tells the Drunkard, that
his Drunkenness is a foul thing, and Reason tells the Unclean person, that his
Soul is united to a filthy thing. Take him that is united to the World, to the
Riches of it, or to the Honors of it, Reason tells him they have no beauty in
them; nor are they more pleasant than beautiful. Ah! what racks of Conscience
have profane sinners oft-times? The Wine tickles the throat as it passes, but
it makes the stomach sick: The lusts of the flesh leave a Thorn in the
Conscience, which abides, when the pleasure of them is vanished. The World
pleases the Eye, while the figure of it passes before it, but it is no more
than (...), a great fancy, and vexation of spirit, spoils the pleasure of it.
But Christ is pleasant; never any Soul that followed him, repented of it; yea
those that follow him weeping, never repent of their repentings. Bring me that
Soul which ever said I would I had never known, or never walked with Christ.

Use 3.
Let this therefore prevail with every Soul that hears me this day, to get
acquaintance with Christ; And 2. With those who have interest in him, to labor
to grow up in him. 1. The former; Because he is pleasant. 2. The latter;
Because they have not tasted the bottom of that pleasantness which attends him,
and the full Enjoyment of him Pleasantness is an alluring thing. When Eve saw
that the Apple was pleasant to the Eye, she took it, Genesis 3. 6. When Issachar
(in Jacob's Prophecy, Genesis 49. 15.) saw that the Land was pleasant, he bowed
his shoulder to bear. Were you but possessed of this one Truth, that Christ is
pleasant, that the way of Christ is a way of pleasantness, it would go a great
way to persuade men into it. Hearken to the Wise man speaking of Wisdom, (of
Christ indeed, and his Grace under the notion of Wisdom) Prove. 3. 17. Her ways
are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a Tree of Life
to them that lay hold upon her. Hearken you that are at ease in Zion, that
drink away care, and spend your time in singing away the Evil day, you that lie
upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch your selves upon Couches, and eat the Lambs out
of the Flock, and Calves out of the midst of the stall; you that chant to the
sound of the Viol, and invent to your selves Instruments of Music; you that
drink Wine in Bowls, and fare deliciously every day, and dress your selves in
gorgeous Apparel, I tell you, there is many a poor Soul that has Christ, and is
clothed with Rags, and feeds upon Roots, and drinks Water, whose Soul is more
at ease, and enjoys more pleasure than yours does. O! therefore return you
Shulamites, return, and understand aright the ways of true pleasure from those
things that are mere empty shadows of vanity. 2. Let this engage you that have
received Christ, to grow up in him, to study him more, to converse with him
more, to keep to closer communion with Christ; you yet know not the
pleasantness that is in him; there is a breadth of sweetness, you have not
measured, and a depth of pleasure which you have not fathomed.

Use 4.
In the last place; Is Christ not only fair, but pleasant? not only beautiful
through Grace, but pleasant, lovely, gentle, sweet in his converse with the
Souls of his Saints? Let this commend pleasantness to every true Christian.
Labor not only to be gracious, but to be pleasant. I will name but two
Arguments in the case.

1. Consider, Thus you shall be like unto the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Thus shall you honor your Profession. An unpleasant Conversation in a
Christian dishonours the Lord Christ; it makes men think that he is an hard
Master, that Christianity is an odd thing, which metamorphoseth men and women
into strange kind of creatures, unfit any longer for converse with the World.
Take off this scandal from the Gospel: You may be pleasant, yet not profane;
your conversation toward the World may be winning, though you do not give your
selves up to such a liberty, as to hazard the ruin and loss of your own Souls.
It was a piece of Paul's pleasantness; He became all things to all men, that he
might win some, 1 Cor. 9. v. 22. 2 Cor. 10. 33.

Sermon LX.
Canticles 1. 16. -- Our Bed is Green.

I Am come to the Second Proposition of the Text, in those words, Our bed is
Green. The Chaldee Paraphrast making the Congregation of Israel the Spouse in
this Song, thus glosseth upon these words, In the time, when thou dwell in
our Beloved Bed, our Children are many, and multiplied upon the Earth, we grow,
and multiply, like a Tree planted by the Rivers of Waters, whose leaf is
beautiful, and whose fruit is much. Possibly that ancient Interpretation has
led the generality of Interpreters to expound the Text concerning the
flourishing condition of the Soul, and of the Church, while it is in Spiritual
conjunction with the Lord Jesus Christ, it is not My Bed, but Our Bed, is
Green, and flourishing, for so the word may be translated. So that not to
enlarge in further discourses about the Exposition of the Text; taking it for
granted that the Holy Ghost in this Text respects the Bed, as it is the place
for procreation, or as it was the place where they did eat their meat in those
Countries, we may from it observe this plain Proposition.

Prop. That the fruitfulness of the Soul, and of the Church, does depend upon
Christ's conjunction with them.

I shall speak to this Proposition by way of Explication, confirmation, and
Application. By way of Explication, we will only enquire what is the gracious
Souls fruitfulness, or the Gospel Churches fruitfulness.

1. The particular Souls fruitfulness lies in its bringing forth Deuteronomy. 28. 4.
7. 13.
of good works. You read in Scripture of the fruit of the Body. Deuteronomy. 28. 4.
And of the fruit of the Land, Deuteronomy. 7. 13. The Children of God, are said to be
Married unto Christ. And as the fruit of the Womb is the consequent of carnal
Marriage, so the fruit of holiness is the consequent of Spiritual Marriage,
Romans 7. 4. You are become dead to the law by the Body of Christ, Romans 7. 4.
that you should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead
that we should bring forth fruit unto God. This fruit unto God is called fruit
unto holiness, Romans 6. 22. Christ is also compared unto a vine, John 15. 2. We
are the Branches, and John 15. 2. 5. 6.
therefore purged that we may bring forth fruit, ib. 5. 16. Whether therefore
the gracious Soul be looked upon as the Spouse of Christ, and Married to him,
by faith, its fruit is holiness, or whether it be looked upon as a branch in
Christ, still its fruit is holiness; our works (considering us as men) are our
fruit. Now look, as several Plants, according to their different natures bring
forth different fruit, some bring forth pleasant, some bitter fruit, some
wholesome, some again noxious fruit: so it is with men and women, who are the
Plants of the World; by Nature they are all wild Plants, and are corrupt, and
bring forth corrupt fruit, called by the Apostle, the fruit of sin unto death:
But having a new Nature given them by God, they Romans 6. 22. Ephesians. 5. 9. Gal. 5.
22.
bring forth fruit unto life, the fruits of righteousness, which are also
called the fruits of the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 9. Gal. 5. 22. the fruit of
righteousness, to show the species, or kind of them, fruit unto life, showing
the consequent of them, the fruit of the Spirit, showing the more external
cause of them: Now as these fruits more or less abound in the Soul, the Soul is
more or less fruitful. This is the particular Saints fruit.

2. The Churches fruitfulness is its bringing forth many Sons unto God.
Children are the fruit of the body, caused by generation. Gods Children are the
fruit of the Church, caused by Regeneration; Conversion is called a begetting,
2 Pet. 1. 3. We are said to be begotten of God, 1 Job. 5. 1. God is our Father,
2 Pet. 1. 3.
but the Church is our Mother: It is the Church which bears us, which travels,
and brings forth Children unto God: And the Saints are called the Churches
Children, Isa. 54. 13. All thy Isa. 54. 13.
Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy
Children. The thriving of the Church lies in this when many Souls are in it
converted, and brought home unto God. This is the Souls fruitfulness and
thriving, and this is also the Churches fruitfulness, and thriving. This is
that which my Doctrine speaks of and says, that i t depends upon Christ's
conjuncton with the Soul and with the Church. Look as the fruitfulness of the
Woman depends upon the conjunction of her Husband with her, as the fruitfulness
of the plant depends upon its conjunction with the Earth; as the thriving of
the Body by its meat, depends upon the blessing of God. Man lives not by
bread only, but by every word that comes out of the mouth of God: And as the
thriving of the plant depends upon the influence of the Heavens, the shinings
of the Sun, and the distillations of the Clouds; so, yea much more then so,
does the thriving of a Church and of a Soul, depend upon the influence of
Christ's grace. I will prove it first concerning the particular Soul. 2.
Concerning the Church, 1. Concerning the particular Soul.

1. It is Christ that gives the Soul a prolifick virtue. The fruitful Woman
must have a prolifick virtue, so must the plant of the field, otherwise the
Woman is barren, and the plant is barren. That power which is in any Soul, to
bring forth the fruit of holiness, that is its prolifick virtue, and this is
from the Lord; this is that which the Apostle calls to will in Philip. Phil.
2. 13.
2. 13. The will is the root of all humane actions, and the power in the Soul
to do them lies in its ability to will them. This is from the Lord, yea and
from the Lord in a way of special providence too. The God of Nature has put
into the creature a prolisick virtue that (supposing the particular concurrence
of Ordinary Providence) the woman brings forth the fruit of the Body, in a
Natural course. And so concerning the plants of the field, (supposing the
concurrence of Ordinary Providence) the plant brings forth fruit in its kind.
But it is not thus with men, and women, as to the fruit of grace and of
holiness. It was thus indeed with Adam; Adam in the day of his creation (as to
the fruit of holiness) was like the plant of the field, endued with a prolifick
virtue, he had not only Natural faculties, understanding, will, etc. but he had
a power, and disposition in these faculties, to that which was good, this was
connatural to him in the day of his creation; but as it is with the woman,
created at first with this prolifick virtue, yet by accident this or that
particular woman, may want it, and so is barren: So it is with all the Children
of Adam, though in him created in statu integro, with a posse velle, a power to
will that which is well pleasing in the sight of God, yet by that sad accident
of the first man's transgression we are all become barren, and without any power
to will that which is good. A will indeed is left to us, but an indisposition
in that will unto that which is good; we are reprobate unto every good work.
And that not only, by wicked works, as men are by them hardened in sin, and
accustomed to Evil (and custom we say is a second Nature,) but even by Nature
we are so. Now it is from Christ, that the Soul has its first power, and
ability so much as to move to a good action, 2 Cor. 3. 5. We are not of our
selves sufficient to think one good thought, Ephesians. 2. 5. When we were dead in
sin, he has quickened us together by Christ. Life is the Principle of all
operation, we are by Nature dead, it is the Lord that quickens us. Look as
the Child moves not till it be quickened, so neither does the Soul move unto
any thing that is good until grace at first quickens it.

2. As Christ gives the prolifick virtue to the Soul, so it is he also that
does excite this virtue to act. God has given unto the plant a prolifick
virtue from whence it is that it brings forth fruit; God has given Bread-Corn
a Power, and faculty to nourish the Body, and it is from hence that it
nourishes, but withal God by a daily Providence does both uphold the faculties
of the plant, and of the bread, and excite them to their exercise, otherwise
neither would the bread nourish, nor the plant bring forth its fruit in its
season. So it is with the Soul. Supposing the Soul possessed, of a power to
will that which is good, (the will being renewed through grace) yet it is God
that excites this power, Phil. 2. 13. He gives to do. Not only to will, but
also to do. And indeed this must be granted, or else grace shall have the least
share in any good action that is done by us, for the Act is more Noble then a
mere Power, It is Christ that gives a Power to will, and it is Christ that
gives the Act of willing. disposing and quickening the Soul to the exercise of
the Power which himself has bestowed upon it. For let us consider whence it
should come: The Lord in the change of the heart, does not change the Nature of
man, but man has a liberty in his will, I mean a liberty opposed to coaction,
his will is not compelled to that which is good; he has indeed a power, but
not compelling him: now when the will of man is in that state that he can will
that which is good, or that which is evil, tell me what is it which inclines
him to the one rather then the other, save only the influence of Divine grace.

3. Nay, Thirdly, It is Christ that must assist in every good action; not only
excite to it, but assist in it, or it will never be persected. Even in natural
productions, besides the prolifick virtue, which the fruitful woman must have,
and must be supposed to her conception of a Child in her womb; and besides the
influence of Providence, which must be supposed to excite this virtue, which
first causes the conception (as to the Divine causation) there must also be a
daily influence, and concurse of Providence, preserving and upholding the
woman's natural faculties, etc. or she miscarrieth, and the fruit of her body
thriveth not; and as it is with a Plant, notwithstanding its prolifick virtue,
and the influence of Providence exciting this virtue in the Spring time to put
forth it self, there must be a daily influence of Providence upholding the
natural virtues of the Plant, and assisting them to the perfecting of the
fruit; and without this, though the Plant has such a virtue, and has put it
out, yet the fruit dwindleth away, and comes to nothing: So it is with a Soul:
Supposing the Soul quickened, born again, disposed unto that which is good; and
supposing it to have begun a good action, yet without the continuance of the
same grace with the Soul, and in the Soul, it brings nothing to perfection.
Hence Heb. 12. 2. Christ is faid to be the Author and Finisher of our Faith.
Hence says St. Paul, Gal. 2. 20. I live, but yet not I, but Christ lives in
me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son
of God. And 1 Cor. 15. 10. Saint Paul says, He labored, yet not he, but the
grace of God which was with me. To be short then; To a particular Soul's
fruitfulness in good works, there is required, 1. The Grace of God upon the
Soul, giving it a power to act. 2. The Grace of God in the Soul, exciting it to
its spiritual operations. 3. The Grace of God with the Soul, assisting it in
its operations. This not supposed, the Soul either wants a power to will, or
wants a power to move, to do, etc. The Reason of this lies not only in that
general necessary influx upon the creature, which is necessary to all its
motions and actions, and which God has reserved to himself, to grant or
withhold as he pleases. But in this, that through the Fall of Adam, the Nature
of Man is so lapsed, that it requires a more particular eminent influx of
Providence upon it, to enable it unto that which is spiritually good, its
spiritually prolifick virtue, being by the fall quite extinct, and the Soul of
every man and woman dead in crespasses and sins. But thus much shall serve for
the first. I come to the second, to prove it.

2. Concerning the Church; That neither can it be fruitful without conjuuction
with Christ. I told you, that the fruitfulness of the Church lies in its
bringing forth many Sons unto God. The more Souls are converted, the more
fruitful the Church is; but without Christ's conjunction with it, it brings
forth none. If Christ's presence be in his Church, it brings forth many Souls.
If he be not present, it brings forth no Children. This will easily appear by
considering how the Church of God is Instrumental to the conversion of Souls;
and by making it appear to you that these causes are not principally efficient
sole causes; nor can be so, but are only instrumental causes. 2. That upon
experience it is made evident, that where Christ does not concur, they do
nothing. For the first,

1. The Church is to be considered as to its parts, and as to its privileges;
as to what God has planted in it, and what God has betrusted to it.

As to its parts; So it is made up of Officers, and members. As to its
privileges, so there is committed to it the Oracles of God; the Mysteries of
God; the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: there is none of all these, but have or
may have, (for ought I know) an instrumental causation, in bringing forth
Children unto God, or in bringing of them up, but none of them have a Principal
efficiency none of them have a sole efficiency, nor can produce the effect
without Christ's conjunction; let us look upon them severally.

1. Look first upon the Officers of the Church: these were extraordinary, such
as Apostles Evangelists Prophets: Ordinary, Pastors, and Teachers. That these
have an instrumental causation, in the conversion of Souls is plain, they were
set in the Church, for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 12. for the
perfecting their number, and for the perfecting of their graces, Paul calls
them Fathers, 1 Cor. 4. 15. and says he begat the Corinthians. He says the
same of Onesimus: but alas, as the Apostles of old, so Ministers now, have no
more then an instrumentality in this production: Paul planted, and Apollos
watered, but God gave the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6. God was all, he that planted
nothing, he that watered was nothing, but God that gave the increase was all,
v. 7. v. 9: They are but waterers together with God, workers together with him.
Hence though Paul Preached the same Doctrine to all, yet he was to some, the
savor of life unto life, to others, the savor of death unto death. And though
his earnest desire was to convert his own Nation, it was his hearts desire, and
Prayer to God that they might be saved, Romans 10. 1. yet he could not effect it.
And if the Officers of the Church, who are under a special ordination of God
for the great end of conversion, could do no more, it will easily be granted of
private members, whose endeavors in quickening others, though they may be
sometimes blessed, of God to such an end, yet doubtless are not more efficient
to it then the labors of Ministers, nor yet in an equal tendency with their's
unto so great an end.

2. As to the privileges granted to the Church. The Oracles of God, are
committed to the Church, Romans 3. 2. it is the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. the mysteries of God are committed to it, 1 Cor. 4. 1. The keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven are Committed to it. Mat. 16. 19. I understand ever by
the first term, the Word of God, and the dispensation of it in the Preaching of
the Gospel: by the second, the Sacraments of the Gospel, by the third, the
Censures of the Church. I know the terms are more generical, and not so to be
restrained (I only for distinction sake so restrain them at present) nor do I
meddle here with the disputes, whether the dispensation of these or any of
these, belong to the whole Church, or only to Officers, nor yet to which of the
Officers: I shall only assert two things.

1. That the Scripture seems to assign to all these, some instrumentality as
to the bringing forth of Children unto God: this is plain. 1. Concerning the
Word, 1 Cor. 4. 15. I have begotten you through the Gospel, James 1. 18. of his
own will begat he us by the word of truth: As to the Sacraments, for the
Sacrament of Baptism, we are said to be Baptized into Christ, Romans 6. 3. Gal.
3. 27. and again, Acts 2. 38. to be Baptized for the Remission of sins. For the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; though I dare not assert it a converting
Ordinance yet unquestionably it has its instrumentality to the Salvation of
Souls. For Censures they have also their instrumentality, 1 Cor. 5. 5. the end
of their administration is for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit
may be saved in the day of Christ. But now.

2. It is as plain, that they have but an instrumental causation, and separated
from the influences of Christ, and his concurrence with them; they do nothing,
hence, James 2. 18. of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, John 1.
13. we are born again not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh: nor of the
will of man: but of the will of God, John 3. 5. except you be born again, of
water and of the Spirit you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Thus the
truth is evidenced from Scripture. And Scriptural reason.

2. In the second place? Consider all experience, wherever the Word of God
has been Preached, the Sacraments administered, Church Censures duly executed,
so long as Christ has granted his presence with the administrations; they have
been made mighty in order to the bringing home of Souls unto God. Where the
Lord has withdrawn his presence, either as to the generality of Persons under
the external administrations or as to any particular Souls they have signified
nothing. Isaiah does but make the heart of the People fat, and their Ears
heavy, and shuts their Eyes, Chapter 6. 10. he complains, that he labors in vain
and spends his strength for nothing and in vain. Saint Paul's Gospel is to the
Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishness, 3000 are converted at
St. Peter's Sermon, while Christ is in his Bed with his Church, but few or none,
of the Jews in their Synagogues, Acts 19. they were hardened. Christ was gone
out of his Bed, and it was now no longer green and flourished no more. But this
is enough to have spoken as to the proof of the Doctrine, come we now to the
Application.

The Proposition might be applied variously.

1. For the confutation of the errors of those who either deny the necessity,
of any conjunction of Christ with the Soul, as to the production of the fruits
of grace, or at least of such a conjunction, as is unquestionably necessary;
and of those who think, that there is a power in man's will, ad bonum
Spirituale, to produce that which is Spiritually good, and that a moral suasion
is sufficient to the conversion of a Soul.

2. We might from hence observe the reason, why the Word and Ordinances of God
are so ineffectual as to some, however effectual unto others, but I have not
time to enlarge so far. I shall therefore close up all with one Branch of
Application, --

Use
Beseeching every Soul that hears me this day to labor, that Christ may yet
be kept in his Bed, in our Bed. The Bed is the resting place, while Christ
remains and rests amongst his People, The Bed is green. The Soul in which
Christ rests, is a flourishing Soul, the Church in which Christ rests, and
in which he dwells, is a flourishing Church: whiles he walks in the midst of
the Golden Candlesticks, they are full of light. If he withdraws himself
their light will be darkness. Give me leave a little to improve this argument
with you to the quickening up of your endeavors to the utmost, for the keeping
of Christ in our Bed. I am the rather engaged to it from the fears, that the
experiences of late years, and the present juncture of affairs have created in
me, that Christ is risen up out of his Bed amongst us. It was said of old, That
when the Church had wooden Challices, she had golden Priests; but after she
came to golden Challices, she had wooden Priests, I cannot say so for our late
times. The Church of God amongst us has had golden Priests, I believe there
was no Nation under Heaven, that in such a space of time enjoyed more of the
Ordinances of God, more able Preachers, more powerful and Spiritual
administrations. The Bed has been lovely: or the Bedstead rather, has been
so, but has it been flourishing? how few Children have been all this time
brought forth, unto God? The Lord help us. Thousands have been perverted but
how few have been converted? Thousands carried off from the ways of God not so
many tens brought into Christ? Where are the Souls have been convinced of fin,
or converted to Christ? The conversion of our days has been to opinions, and
factions, not to Jesus Christ. Yet blessed be God it has fared with us as with
trees withering, which bring forth some small proportions of fruit, though
dwingling, as to the proportion, and not in so great plenty as formerly, but I
am afraid we are yet growing worse and worse, sure I am if the Lord withdraws
his presence from his Ordinances, it must be so, seeing you may see, and not
perceive, hearing you may hear, and not understand. Methinks I see our Savior
(though now exalted at the right hand of his Father) weeping over England, (as
once over Jerusalem) and saying, O England! England! thou that have despised
the Ordinances of God, and despised those that have been sent unto thee: how
often would I have gathered thee, as an hen gathers her Chickens under her
wings: but thou would not. Behold my house shall now be lest desolate. You
may have Ministers, and you may have Ordinances, but you shall not see me
henceforth till you say, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. The
pulse of the Spirit in Ordinances, has for many years, beaten faintly, now and
then a stroke (like the pulse of a dying man) I am afraid lest the last stroke
should be nigh at hand. Where Is the power, and presence of God in our
assemblies? Where Is the taking of Heaven by force, which former times
experienced? Oh that the consideration of the uneomfortableness of a desolate
sanctuary, or dead Ordinanees in an open sanctuary, might awaken you while yet
you have hope to do what in you lies that Christ may be kept in his bed with
you: it is true, the wind blows where it lists, and who can command the
breathings of it? But yet, let there be nothing wanting in your endeavors,
That if God shall measure out such a dispensation, your Consciences may not
rebuke you; as wilful occasioners of it. To this end give me leave to advise,

1. That you do not first go out of the bed from him. The Prophet told the
King, that God would be with him and his People, if they were with God. God is
not ready to rise up from his Bed of Love, he never forsook a People that kept
clofe to him. The Jews would not be gathered, then Christ hid the things from
them that concerned their peace. Christ in the last day of the feast cried. You
would not come to me that you might have life. First they would not, then he
would not, you have had a Gospel feast, possibly this may be the last day of
it; this day Christ cries to you: Oh let him not go away with this dreadful
word, you will not come to me that you may have life. Take heed of despising
Ordinances, of slighting Christ and the means of grace: Take heed of shunning
Christ's Bed. How many are there that shy the Bedstead, refuse the Sanctuary,
how dreadfully do these poor creatures despise their own mercies? Your days of
grace (for ought I know) may be very few, you had not need neglect them. The
woman that will not come nigh the Chamber where her husband lodges, is not
like to have a flourishing Bed.

2. But secondly. Take heed also, of making Christ's Bed unquiet to him. The
unquiet wife often loses her husbands Company, nothing makes Christ's Bed so
unquiet to him, as sin does. The Soul, that resists convictions, quenches
the motions of the Spirit of God thrusts Christ out of his Bed: while you
have the light, do not only come unto it, but walk in it. Sanctuary sins make
God abhor his Sanctuary and loath his dwelling place. Take heed of quenching
private motions of the Spirit, or of resisting the more public convictions of
the word.

3. Give up your selves to the Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle to the
Corinthians says, 2. Cor. 8. 5. that they gave themselves to the Lord, and
then to them. Do what in you lies to give up your selves to the Word of God,
allow not in your hearts any rebellious thoughts against it. Audite verbum Dei
and tacete: Something of this you may do, when you hear the Word of God,
convincing you of sin, hold your peace to it, suffer the conviction to take
hold upon your hearts, and to have its operation But alas! man has a vain, a
stubborn, an unquiet, ungospellized heart. What therefore remains but that we
should

4. Pray that the Lord would keep us in his Bed, and not himself rise up from
us, let us therefore take unto our selves the words of the Prophet, Jeremiah,
Jer 14. 7, 8, 9.

O Lord though our iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy names
sake, for our back slidings are many, we have sinned against thee.

O the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble, why should
thou be as a stranger in the land? And as a wayfaring man that turns aside to
tarry for a night?

Why should thou be as a man astonished? As a mighty man that cannot save?
Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name; O leave
us not.

Sermon LXI.
Cant. 1. 17. The Beams of our house are Cedar: and our Rafters of Fir.

THe same Person speaks still, which spoke in the former verse, she had there
Commended her beloved: and Commended her Bed, ever since he came into it: she
now comes to Commend her, and her beloveds house, in the words of the Text, The
Beams of our house are Cedar and our rafters of Fir. The Chaldee Paraph* thus
glosseth: Solomon the Prophet said, how beautiful is the house of Lords
Sanctuary, builded by my hands, of Cedar wood. But the house of the Lords
Sanctuary, which is to be builded in the days of the Messiah is more beautiful,
whose Beams are of those Cedars, which are in the Paradise of pleasure, and the
Galleries thereof shall be of Fir, Pine, etc. There are some difficult terms in
the Text, I must therefore halt a little, in the explication of the letter.

(...) The Beams of our houses. The word is used two Kings, 6. 2. 5. 2 Chronicles.
3. 7. where it is translated also a Beam, Genesis 19. 8. it is translated a roof,
it comes from (...) which in Pihel signifies to lay the Beams of an house: the
Beams of an house are properly those pieces of timber which bear the whole
weight of the building. The Beams of our house are, (...) Cedar. The word
properly so signifies. It is a word often used in Scripture to express that
kind of wood which is called Cedar, which with us is very rare, with them very
frequent, and ordinary in building, we shall by and by further inquire the
nature of it. The Common usage of the word in Scripture to express Cedars,
makes me a little wonder at Montanus his translation of it Larices, which
signifies a certain tree, not known (says Vitruvius,) but to those that dwelt
near the Adriatic sea, a kind of wood very useful in buildings because in
regard of the great bitterness of the sap, it was neither subject Isiod. l. 17.
Dioscor. l. 1. c. 74.
to worms, nor putrefaction, nor to be burnt with fire? but I know not whether
it was known to the Jews or no: nor can see any reason to depart from our
translation. -- It follows,

(...) Our Rafters of fire, some read our Galleries: of Cypress, some of Fir,
some of Pine. The word translated rafters, is used only in this sense in this
place, it is also used, Genesis 30. 38. v. 41. Exodus 2. 16. but in those Texts it
is translated gutters, and wells. And Cant. 7. 5. where it is translated
Galleries. Pagnine, thinks it signifies the little Beams, or pieces of timber
in buildings. These Rafters, says the Text, are (...) a word which is no where
used in Scripture (saving only in this Text) which has given Interpreters a
liberty to abound in several senses: Hierom, makes it Cypress, so the LXX --
Vulg. Lat. Sir. Arab. Others Ash, Others Fir. Aben Ezra Thinks it the same with
(...) Fir; our translators seem to follow that so, does Montanus, and Pagnine.
The Caldee Paraph, makes it to be the wood of the Brutine tree, of which tree
Pliny speaks, and tells us that it is like a Cypress tree. The boughs white,
the smell sweet. And a great enemy to Poison, having thus far enquired the
literal meaning of the terms, let us enquire for the real sense: we will first
enquire

1. Qu. What is here meant by the house mentioned.

2. What the Beams, and Rafters of this house are.

3. What the excellencies of these sorts of woods were.

Which makes the Spouse choose to compare her and her beloveds house, to an
house builded of these forts of wood.

1. Qu. What is here meant, by the house, mentioned in the Text, Our house?

Whosoever considers that the Beloved here mentioned is the King of glory, the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, who dwells not in houses made with hands, will easily
conclude, it is no fabric of wood and stone, (Christ when he was upon the
Earth had no such-place where to hide his head, and now the Heaven of Heavens
contain him) that is here meant. True it is, that the Lord of old, chose a
particular house in which he was pleased more eminently to manifest his
gracious presence, in allusion to which, his mystical Spiritual habitation may
possibly be called his house. But this is not it which is here intended. The
Chaldee Paraphrast makes Solomon in this a Prophet for foretelling an house of
God, to which Solomon's in all its glory was not like. The new Testament
mentions a double house of God. The first more See Heb. 3. 6.
public, viz. The Church, 1. Tim. 3. 15. The second more private, The Souls
and bodies of believers. The Apostle tells the Ephesians, that they were become
an habitation of God through the Spirit: and the Apostle dissuades from the Sin
of Fornication, upon this argument, because their bodies were the temples of
the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. By the house here I find Interpreters generally
understanding the aggregate body of Christians, which we call the Church:
properly enough called the Lords house, because as a man dwells in his house,
so the Lord is said to dwell in his Church, 2 Cor. 6. 16. God has said he will
dwell amongst his People, that he is in the midst amongst them, that he walks
in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, etc. So that by our house in the Text
the Church is meant, in which Christ dwells, and the Saints dwell.

The 2d Question is, What is here meant by the Beams and Rafters?

The Beams of a building you know, are those Principal parts which sustain, and
uphold the building. We must therefore inquire what those things or Persons are
which do as it were uphold, and bear up the Church: some understand by these
terms V. Bernard. hom.
Persons, others understand things: those who understand Persons, understand by
the Beams the several sorts of Officers in the Church of God. Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers. By the rafters they understand
particular Christians. So Gregory. Per tignacedrina praedicatores designamus,
per laquearia V. Greg. Mag. ad loc. Cedrus -- sublimiores significat Sanctos,
Cypressus simpliciores.
cupressina ipsos populos figuramus. This seems to be conform to that of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 20. you are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets. But Protestant Writers observe, that the Apostle, there does not make
the Apostles, and Prophets the foundation, but Christ Preached by them, and
their Doctrine. And thus they interpret, Chrysostom Oecumenius, Theophylact,
and Tertullian, concluding that the Apostles and Prophets, could not be called
the foundation upon any other account then with respect to their Ministry, and
the Doctrine of the Gospel, Preached by them. For other foundation can none
lay, then what is already laid, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner
stone. Non enim respexit rei nomen sed rem nominis (says Chamier;) others
therefore by the Beams and rafters, of Christ's house (mentioned in the Text)
understand rather Si ad Ecclesias haec referas quasi tigna ^arum sunt Divina
Praecepta. Lud. de Ponte.
things then Persons: yet here again they are divided: some understanding by
the Beams and Rafters, The Word and Ordinances of God. Thus the Dutch Annotat.
By the Beams is understood the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. 2. Others
understand the grace of the holy Spirit of God. There are other particular
fancies. But I shall choose to follow those who interpret the Rafters and Beams
to be the Word and Ordinances of God: for these like the Beams of an house keep
up the Church, and are as it were the Common Soul, that running through the
whole Church keeps it together and indeed makes it one, and so much shall serve
for the second question: the third follows.

3. Qu. Why the Spouse, here compares the Word and Ordinances to Cedar and Fir,
or Cypress, or Brutine.

There are four or five things which these trees, and sorts of wood are more
famous for, viz. 1. Duration. 2. Beauty. 3. strength. 4. Talness. 5. Smell.

1. It is observed, of the Cedar, that it is a beautiful, goodly tree, I shall
add the 4th. Talness; indeed its talness is a great part of its beauty: hence
you read of the goodly Cedar, Ezech. Can^. 5. 15.
17. 23. Psalm. 80. 10. and the tall Cedar, Isa. 37. 24.

2. As these are tall trees, so they are strong, and therefore ordinarily used
in buildings, strong and yet light. Hence when the Holy Ghost sometimes would
express the great power of God, he expresses it under this Notion, The voice
of the Lord breaks the Cedars in Lebanon, Psalm. 29. v. 5. Firs and Cedars are
apt to bear great weights and yet without any great loading of the building.

3. It is observed of them that they are very durable. Naturalists, say, that
they are not as other wood subject to worms, Pliny Not. Hist. l. 16. cap. 40.
nor (so soon) to rottenness and decay, as other wood is. Pliny says that it
is commonly thought they will never decay: and gives an instance of the Temple
of Diana, whose Beams, Rafters and Spars were made of Cedar: The leaves and
doors of Cypress. And after 400 years, they not only continued sound, but (the
doors especially) shining and as it were polished. They report of the Temple of
Apollo, (whose Beams and main pieces were made of Numidian Cedars) that it
continued entire and sound 1188 years. How true these stories are I cannot
assert, but certain it is, these sorts of wood were very durable.

4. A 4th thing observed of the Cedar and Cypress trees, is their odoriferous
smell.

According to this interpretation of the Text, the scope of it is to Commend
unto us, the Word of God, and the Gospel Ordinances. 1. For their Beauty. 2.
Continuance. 3. Power and and Efficacy. 4. And lastly, For their exceeding
sweetness. From the Text thus far opened, you may observe three Propositions.

1. Prop. That the Church of God is the house of God.

2. Prop. That the word, and Ordinances of God, are the Beams and Rafters of
this house.

3. Prop. That there is a Beauty, sweetness, power and efficacy, and an
incorruptible nature in the Word of God, and Ordinances of the Gospel: I begin
with these in their order.

1. Prop. The Church of God is Jesus Christ's and the believers house. Our
house (says the Text.) We will first enquire

1. What is meant by the Church. 2. How it appears, that the Church is the
house of the Lord Jesus Christ. 3. How it is the believers house. 4. What may
be inferred from hence for our profit, in matter of knowledge and holiness.

1. Qu. What is meant by the Church.

This has in this latter age of the World been found an hard matter to agree
amongst Persons of different Notions. That the term Church, is a name of
multitude, and that a Church, must be an aggregate body, is generally agreed;
that it is a body of People called by God out of the World, is also as freely
consented to. But whether only called by a general call, outwardly accepted by
them so far at least, that they do own the Doctrine of the Gospel, or by a more
special and effectual calling, not only out of the Pagan World, but also out of
the unbelieving World: These things have been matters of great dispute amongst
us: yet all acknowledge the distribution of the Church into that which is
Triumphant and that which is militant. The Triumphant part of the Church, is
that part of it, who (God having in the time of their life called them out of
the Paganish and unbelieving World and they afterward finished their course)
are called also by God out of this sensible, sinful, elementary World to the
enjoyment of himself in glory. These are thrice called. 1. Out of the Pagan
World, to the acknowledgment of the Doctrine of the Gospel. 2. Out of the
unbelieving World, to partake of the Lord Jesus Christ and his Grace by true
and lively Faith. 3. Out of the sensible sinful World, to the Inheritance of
glory. The other part of the Church, is that which is usually called Militant,
and is the whole number of those whom God has called out of the Paganish
World, to the acknowledgment of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine of the
Gospel. This is again distinguished into that which is Invisible, and that
which is Visible. The Invisible part is that whole number of men and women in
the World, which the Lord by his Gospel has called out of darkness into
marvelous light, out of a state of Nature, into a state of Grace. The Matter of
this Church are men and women; the Form their Union in and with the Lord Jesus
Christ. The Visible Church is that about which the great quarrels have been:
Some agreeing it to be the whole number of People over the face of the whole
Earth, called out from a state of Paganism, to the embracing of the Doctrine of
the Gospel. The Matter of it are men and women professing to Christ Jesus; the
Form is their Union in the same Profession, acknowledgment of the same Truth,
and Ways, and Means of Worship. Now, as the Sea is but one, though as it
passes by several Coasts it receives several denominations, as the Irish Sea,
the English Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, the Baltic Sea, etc. so as this great
body is divided into several Countries, it receives several denominations, as
The Church of England, Scotland, France, etc. And as again in a particular
Nation (suppose England) it is impossible that the whole body of Professors
should meet in one place; and therefore there are several places of Public
Worship, and several Precincts of People who meet together in several places to
worship God, (yet Upon which account you read in Scripture of Churches, and the
word in the Text is plural, our houses.
all agreeing in the same Doctrine of Faith, and order of serving God) so there
are in the World thousands of such Bodies which are called particular Churches,
and are under the inspection of several Officers; all which yet together make
but one Church of God. For their Notion who think that the Church of God must
needs be such an even number as can meet together in the same numerical acts of
Worship, in one place* we conceive it stands upon no such bottom, that it
deserves any pains in the confutation of it; it may be a good Notion of a
particular Church, but not an exclusive of the Application of the term to more.
Now this Visible Church of God, is that which is Christ's House. The Invisible
Church is so, and the Visible Church is so. He walks in the midst of the
golden Candlesticks.

2. That this is Christ's House, appears,

1. From the letter of Scripture, 1 Timothy 3. 15. That thou mayess know how thou
ought to behave thy self in the House of God, which is the Church of the
living God. Timothy's charge was not the Invisible Church, but the Visible
Church; this is called the House of God, Heb. 3. 6. Christ is said to be
faithful as a Son over his own house, whose house, says he, we are, etc. I
shall not here dispute the Question, whether the hypocritical part of the
Visible Church be aequivocal or univocal Members; sure I am, take those
together with the sincere Professors, and they make up but one Church, which is
his House.

Quoad Dominium.
But secondly; Look which way you will upon the Church, it is Christ's House,
he has the dominion of it, and he uses it as his House; he has bought it,
Act. 20. 28. he has redeemed it with his own precious blood: It is given him:
It is his House by right of donation. The Members of it are given him by his
Father. The Stones of it are his; the Saints are the lively Stones, built up
into this Spiritual House, 1 Pet. 2. 5. and they are built upon the foundation
of his Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner
Stone; they are sanctified in and through Jesus Christ; his blood is as the
Mortar and Cement, by that they are united to God, and made one each with
other: The Builder is his Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 22. Consider an House as to the use
of it; and upon that account they are also his House. Is an House the place
where a man abides and Quoad Vsum.
dwells? so is the Church to the Lord Jesus Christ; that is the place where he
dwells: He dwelt of old in Mount Zion, Isa. 8. 18. there he abides. Is the
House a man's resting place? so is Zion to God, 2 Chronicles. 6. 41. Psalm. 132. 8,
13, 14. The Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his habitation. This
is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it. Is the House a
man's feeding place, where he dineth, and suppeth, and feeds? so is the
Church, Cant. 2. 16. He feeds amongst the Lillies. When the Spouse desired to
be informed where Christ fed, her answer was, Go thy way forth by the footsteps
of the Flock, Cant. 1. 7. Is that a man's House where he keeps his Wife, his
Children, his Servants? such is the Church, there Christ keeps his Children,
his Servants, his Spouse. Is a man's House the place where he spends what he
has? such is the Church, there it is that Christ gives out grace and glory,
yea and every good thing. Lastly; Is a man's House the place where he is
protected and defended? such is the Church to Christ, there he expe^^s
protection for his great Name, his Ordinances, etc. But this is enough to have
showed you the propriety of the Metaphor. But,

3. The Church is not only Christ's House, but it is the Believer's House too;
not the Believer's House as to dominion and title, but as to use. No man but
Jesus Christ alone has a dominion and Lordship over the Church of God; even
the Apostles themselves were but Ministers to it. But yet I say, The Church is
the Believer's House; it is the place where he dwells: He chooses rather to be
a Doorkeeper in the House of the Lord, than to dwell in the Tents of
wickedness, Psalm. 84. 10. Hear David expressing himself, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing
have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the
House of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord,
and to inquire in his Temple. A man cannot be a Believer, but he must forthwith
be a Member of the Church Invisible. None is a true Believer, but he
immediately, by his Profession of that Faith, makes himself a Member of the
Catholic Visible Church; and he will desire to unite himself to the particular
Assemblies, which are parts of that Catholic Body. No sooner were the three
thousand converted, at St. Peter's Sermon, Act. 2. 41. But they added to the
Church, and there they dwell, v. 42. They continue steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of bread and prayers. No sooner was
Paul converted, Act. 9. 26. but he assayeth to join himself unto the Disciples.
And v. 28. he was with them going out and coming in at Jerusalem. But this is
enough to have spoken to the Explication of the Point. I come to the
Application, which shall be in four words. This Notion speaks the Churches 1.
Dignity, 2. Duty, 3. Security, 4. Probability of Reformation.

Use 1.
In the first place; This Notion speaks the Church's Dignity. It is the
Habitation of the King of Kings. When Jacob in his Journey to Padan-Aram, had
had that notable Vision, he breaks out in the morning into this expression,
v. 17. How dreadful is this place! This is none other but the House of God;
this is the Gate of Heaven. I am not speaking of the Church in a local notion,
but of the true Church. The number of true Believers, or the number of Visible
Professors, let the World vilify them as much as they please, they are a Noble
Society. Those who have clean hands, and pure hearts, who have not lift up
their Souls unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully, they shall receive blessing
from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of their Salvation. This is the
generation of them that seek thy face, O Jacob, Psalm. 24. 4, 5, 6. Believers
may have their infirmities, and a Professing* People may have their great
failings, (the Lord be merciful to the Professors of England for theirs) but
yet take them (notwithstanding all) and they are the best People in the World;
they are the Lord's Habitation, he has pitched his Tents among them, and
manifests his presence with them.

Use 2.
Secondly; As it speaks the Dignity of the Church; so it speaks the Duty of
those who are the Members of the Church, Psalm. 93. 5. Holiness becomes thine
House, O Lord. The Wise man commands us to keep our feet when we go into the
House of God, Eccles. 5. And God bid Moses put off the shoes from off his feet,
upon this account, because he was upon holy ground, (he was near the burning
Bush) where God made himself a temporary Habitation. Those that take upon them
the Profession of Religion, stand concerned to be holy; and those that are
entered into the Profession of it stand concerned to be holy; they are in the
House of God, and God is an holy God. There is in this Notion a double Argument
for this, from 1. God's Holiness, 2. God's Jealousy.

1. God is an holy God: Hence those who are unholy, are not like to please him,
nor he likely to continue long with them. Look as it is with a Neat man, who
has a large House, the filth and nastiness of this or that Room, will not make
him leave his whole House, but it may make him leave this or that part of it,
and seldom or never be seen in this or that Room; the dirty filthy Room shall
not be his Lodging-chamber, nor the place where he will rest or feed: So it is
betwixt God and the Church. The profaneness or looseness of a particular
Church, or particular Person in the Church, shall not make God forsake his
whole Church; but it may cause God to leave this or that Church, or this or
that Member of the Church.

2. God's Jealousy engages Members of his Church to be holy: Hence it is that
he is more severe to a Professing People living contrary to their Profession,
than to any others. Judgment begins at the House of God. Hence that in Jer. 7.
9, 10. Will you steal, murder 1 Pet. 4. 17.
and commit Adultery, and swear falsely, and burn Incense to Baal, and walk
after other Gods whom you know not, and come and Jer. 7. 9, 10.
stand before me in this House which is called by my Name? -- Is this House
which is called by my Name become a Den of Robbers, etc. And that, Amos 3. 2.
You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth; therefore I will punish
you for all your iniquities. O therefore, you that profess to God, be holy, for
he is an holy God, and a jealous God, and you are his House.

3. I may add a third Argument, it is that of the Apostle, Heb. 3. 6. -- Whose
House we are, if we hold fast the confidence and rejoicing of hope firm to the
end. The unholy man disclaims God, and God disclaims him; he has but the name
of a stone in the Lord's House, if he be not a lively stone.

Use 3.
Thirdly; This Notion of the Church's being the House of God, speaks protection
and security to it. Every man stands obliged to defend his House. God stands
obliged by his Nature, and by his Word, to protect and defend his Church: Hence
those many Promises for its protection, Psalm. 46. 5. God is in the midst of
her, therefore she shall not fall, Psalm. 125. 2. As the Mountains are round
about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his People. The Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it, Matthew. 16. 18. with many others of the like
nature, particular Churches may be destroyed and rooted out. But God will have
a dwelling place upon the Earth, let Satan and his Instruments do what they can.

Use 4.
Fourthly, It speaks to us hopes of Reformation. No man will suffer his House
to fall down, but will repair it, if there be any breaches, and if he be able,
he will make it his business to adorn and beautify it, and make it fit for him
to dwell in it. God will not let his House run to ruin, but will seasonably
repair it, and make it a dewlling place fit for his Holiness.

Use 5.
Lastly; Is the Church Christ's House, and the Saints House? what cause have we
to bless God who has cast our Lot within the Pales of the Church? And how do
we all stand concerned not to forsake her Assemblies. But I shall not enlarge
further upon this first Proposition.

Sermon LXII.
Cantieles 1. 17. The Beams of our House are Cedar, and our Rafters are of Fir.

I Come to the second Proposition, which I have observed out of these words.

Prop. 2. That the Word and Ordinances of God are the Beams and Rafters of his
House, which is his Church.

So I chose rather to interpret these metaphorical terms than (as some)
concerning Persons. I shall show you the propriety of the Metaphor in a few
particulars.

1. Beams and Rafters are integral parts of an House, indeed part of the
substance of it, without which there can be no House. An House may want a due
proportion of Beams and Rafters, and yet be an House; but some there must be,
some more principal Beams and Rafters, or there can be no House; Without the
Word and Ordinances of God, there can be no Church of God. Every company of men
make not a Church, but a company owning the Word of God, and walking in the
Fellowship of Ordinances; these make an House of God. A Church may for a time
(it may be for some long time) want some particular Ordinances, and yet be a
true Church of God, but its state must be lame and imperfect. But if it want
all the Ordinances, if it wants the Word and Sacraments, which are the Church's
Beams, it cannot be a Church of God. It is lame if it wants any Ordinance of
God, but it loses the nature of a Church if it wants all Ordinances. That
which makes a Church to be a Church, is Union and Fellowship; now the Word of
God, and the Doctrine of Faith contained in the Word and the Ordinances for
Worship and Order, are those things in which the Church has its Fellowship, by
which the Members of the Church have Fellowship both with God, and also one
with another.

2. The House is built upon Beams and Rafters, and they bear up the weight of
the other materials. The weight of every Tile in the House lies upon the
Rafters, and the whole Building is laid upon the groundsel and dormans, and
wall plates, and studds; all which come under these two Notions of Beams and
Rafters. The Church of God also is builded upon the Word of God; this is that
which the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 20. calls the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets; the Faith and Obedience of every particular Member of the Church is
builded upon the Word of Promise, and the Word of Precept. Our Faith is built
upon the Promises of the Word; our Obedience upon the Precepts, they are the
Foundations, and Rule of all Holiness. The whole weight of every particular
Soul is laid upon the Word, and the weight of the whole Church lies upon the
Word of God. Look as it is in an earthly house builded with the hands of men,
if the Beams prove false or untrusty, or the Foundations prove unsure, the
whole Building either sinks and falls, or at least sways this or that way: So
it is with the Church as to the Word of God; yea so it is as to every
particular Soul; the security of the particular Soul, and the whole Fabric of
the Church, depends upon the truth, and sureness, and permanency of the Word of
God. If the Word of God should not hold sure, if the Truth of God could be
found a Lie, all our Faith and Hope is in vain. The very notion of a Church is
a Chimaera, and the greatest concernments of it are buried up in ruins. It is
the Word of God that is the Basis of the Church, and the Basis of every
individual Soul, that is a Member of that Church.

3. The Beams and Rafters of an House, as they support the burden, and bear
the weight of the Building: so they also unite the parts and sides of it; they
are the Mediums of Union to it; so is the Word and Ordinances to the Church:
The Word is the Foundation upon which the Church, and every particular Soul is
builded; and the Doctrine of Faith, and the Ordinances of God, are the means of
Union in it. I do not think that an Explicit Covenant-Union, is necessary to
the constitution of a Church: I think that Union which the whole Church has in
the Profession of the same Doctrine of Faith, and in the practice of the same
Ordinances and Rules of Worship, is sufficient to make up such an Union amongst
all Gospel Professors, as may justify the denomination of a Catholic Church.
And again, an agreement in the Profession of the same Faith, and the practice
of the same Ordinances in the same place, is enough to make up a particular
Church of God. Look as in a Building, let the walls be at never so many foot
distance one from another, yet the beams or dormans that go across the
Building, unite them together, and make them all but one and the same Building:
So it is with the whole number of Professors, scattered over the face of the
whole Earth, though part of them be in England, part in France, part in
Germany, part in other parts of the World, yet the same Doctrine and Profession
of Faith, and the practice of the same Ordinances of Worship running through
them all, makes the whole but one Body, one Church, the House of the Living God.

4. Look as it is with the Beams and Rafters; the purer, and stronger, and more
substantial they are, and the more entire and homogeneous they are, the
stronger the House is: So it is as to the Word and Ordinances of God; the purer
the Doctrine of Faith, and Ordinances for Worship are, the stronger and better
the Church is. If the Beams of an House be sappy, or rotten, or patched up of
several heterogeneous pieces, the weaker the House is, and more subject to
fall, and to decay: So it is with the Church, which is the House of the Living
God. If the Doctrine of Faith, owned and professed in it, be as it were heart
of Oak, pure Doctrine, taken out of the heart of the Written Word, not sappy
through the additions of Humane Inventions, nor heterogeneous, part of it the
pure Word of God, part of it the mere Fancies and Doctrines of men; if the
Ordinances for Worship practiced in it, be pure Ordinances, if the Tabernacle
be according to the Pattern of the Mount, according to the form of sound words,
and pure Rule of the Gospel, the Church is fair, and glorious, and strong, the
gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; but if otherwise, if the Doctrine
of Faith professed in it be mingled with the Clay of Humane Fancies and
Errors; if the Ordinances of Worship practiced in it, be full of the sap of
Traditions and Ceremonies, the Church is a declining, decaying Church, and has
no strength in her. The reason is, because God will not continue with such a
Church. The Psalmist says of the Church, God is in the midst of her, therefore
she shall not fall; now they must be golden Candlesticks in the midst of which
God walks. But thus much may be sufficient to show you the propriety of the
Metaphor. Let me shortly Apply this before I pass on to the other Proposition.

Use 1.
This (in the first place) commends unto us the Excellency of the Word of God,
and the Doctrine of Faith contained in it, and the Excellency of Gospel
Ordinances; they are the Beams and Rafters of the House of God, hewed out,
framed and fitted to the Building, by him who was the Master Builder, the Lord
Jesus Christ, and laid by him. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11. says, that as a
wise Masterbuilder 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11.
he had laid the Foundation, and another builded thereon -- v. 11. Other
Foundation could no man lay, than that already laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Christ is called the Church's Fundamentum, its Foundation, and he is the lapis
angularis, the corner stone, as is contained in the Scripture. Says St. Peter,
1 Pet. 2. 6. Behold I lay in 1 Pet. 2. 6.
Zion a chief corner stone, ele^t and precious; the head of the body, Col. 1.
18.
Col. 1. 18. He from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted
by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual Ephesians. 4. 16.
working in the measure of every part, Ephesians. 4. 16. Our Divines say, that Christ
is the Foundation of the Church in a double sense. 1. He is Fundamentum
Salutis, the Foundation of Salvation in the Church: The Salvation of every Soul
lies upon his shoulders, Act. 4. 12. Neither is there Salvation in any other.
2. He is Fundamentum Acts 4. 1^.
Fidei, and Cultus, the Foundation of Faith, and Doctrine of Worship and Order,
the Foundation of Doctrine and Ordinances, I say: And as no man can lay any
other Foundation of Salvation than Christ; so neither can any lay any other
Beams of Doctrine or Institutions for Worship, but what Jesus Christ has laid.
Christ, by himself, and by his Apostles, laid these Foundations and Beams of
Doctrine and Worship; from the Gospel of Christ, and the Writings of the
Apostles must be drawn, the Articles for the first, and the Canons for the
latter: And the whole Building of the Church depends upon these Foundations and
Beams. Let the Word of Faith, or the Purity of Worship fail from the Church, or
any part thereof, it presently cease to be a Church of God, and turns into an
Antichristian Synagogue. Now I say, this commends to every Christian, the
Doctrine of Faith, and the Ordinances of God. There is an Excellency in Entity
or Being: Hence whatsoever it be which gives Being to a thing, and without
which it would not be (at least not such) has a great Excellency in it; and
the more noble the thing is, to which Being is given, the more Excellent is the
Form by which it has such Being. The Soul of man gives Being to a man: The
Body without the Soul is but a lump of flesh, a piece of Clay; the Soul
informs, and inliveneth, and gives an Humane Being to it; separate that from
it, and the man is no more. Some Philosophers have vainly dreamed of an Amma
Mundi, a general Soul of the World, which should give Form, Life, Motion to
every part of the World. Now as the Soul of a man is more excellent than any
Souls of Beasts, because it is the Principle of a more Noble Being, so
(doubtless) if there were any such Universal Soul, which gave Life, Being,
Motion, Form, Union, to all the World, it would be a more excellent substance
than any particular Soul is. But God himself supplieth that place. Now The Word
and Ordinances of the Gospel, though they be not Anima Mundi, the Soul of the
World. Yet they are Anima E^clesiae, as it were the Soul of the Church of God,
without which the Church would be no such thing as the Church of the Living
God: They are those things which make the Church to be a Church; and the whole
Church to be but one Church. Let this therefore engage every Christian to prize
the Word, and to prize the Ordinances of the Gospel. That Is the first Branch.

Use 2.
Hence in the second place you may observe, what is a sad Symptom of a decaying
Church, and by this you may also discern a lame and imperfect Church. Look as
in a Building there are some more principal Beams and pieces of Timber, without
which there can be no House, no Building: Others that are integral parts,
without which the Building is not complete, yet the House may be an House,
though lame and imperfect. So it is in this case, without the Doctrine of
Faith, and some Ordinances of Worship, the Church is no Church. If any part of
the Doctrine of Faith be wanting, or corrupted in a Church, the Church is
(however true) yet lame and imperfect. Suppose a Church wholly want some
Ordinances, (as some do the Ordinances of Ecclesiastical Censures) yet they are
not by this made no Church, if they have the Doctrine of Faith, and some
Ordinances of Worship; much less ought a Church to be so censured, for the
temporary want or suspension of the Exercise of some Ordinances, (which was the
case of the Jewish Church in the Wilderness as to Circumcision) but yet the
Church that wants such Ordinances is imperfect and lame. And again I say,
this is a sad Symptom of a decaying Church, when either the Doctrine of Faith,
or Ordinances of Worship, are denied, or corrupted in it; for these are the
Beams and Rafters of the House; and every one grants that House to be a
decaying, declining House, where the Beams and Rafters are rotten. We need no
further Evidence of this than what we have in God's Epistles to the seven
Churches of Asia, recorded by St. John in the second and third Chapters of the
Revelation. The Church of Smyrna was a decaying Church: The Doctrine of Balaam,
and of the Nicolaitans was holden in it. The Church of Thyatira was a decaying
Church, for the Woman Jezebel taught, and seduced the Servants of God in it.
And but a while after, (these Rafters and Beams being decayed) these Houses of
God fell, and to this very day lie in their rubbish. From that time that
Jeroboam set up the Calves at Dan and Bethel, and the Kings of Judah set up
Altars in Groves, the Church of the Jews was a declining, decaying Church, and
the Rulers of it, and Members of it having no heart timely to repair, and
reform it, the House fell. It is true, God raised it again after the Captivity,
but it decaying the second time, fell, and lies buried in its Ruins this day.

Thirdly. From this Notion, may be drawn a great argument both for unity, and
uniformity. Unity in matters of faith. Uniformity in matters of practice. The
Doctrine of unity in the Church of the Gospel is exceedingly pressed in
Scripture, scarce is there any one of the Epistles of the Apostles, in which,
it is not again and again pressed; Be of one mind: there is a double union,
which is our duty to labor after. The first is unit as fidei: the unity of
faith, as to the understanding. The second is unit as Charit at is quoad
affectum, the unity of Love, and Charity as to the affections. The latter of
these has been highly pleaded for in these sinful, and woefully divided times:
and indeed never more need of it, but it has not been duly considered, that
considering the corrupt state of man, The former union must be the Mother of
the latter. For as all love is founded in some similitude, so this love and
affection where it has any where grown up to its due height, we shall find,
has been founded in the similitude of understanding, and de facto it is
evident, that amongst Christians of different persuasions in the things of God,
there has seldom been an intireness of cordial affection. Indeed these things
ought not to be: therefore I do not Commend them, nor yet blame the exhortation
of brethren of divided Principles to an union in affection, forbearing one
another where all things have not been alike revealed to all; but such is the
corruption of our natures, that 1 Cor. 1. 10.
this is rather optandum, then sperandum, to be wished for rather than hoped,
for if there could be unity in Judgment and uniformity in practice, (which the
Apostle calls a thinking and a speaking the same things) the other union of
affection would follow more readily: O let us labor for this. There is but one
truth; but one true rule of Worship. This Doctrine, these rules are contained
in the Word of God: these are the Beams and Rafters of the Church, and if the
same Beams and Rafters run through the whole Church, and be upon every part of
the roof, we may expect that the building should be strong, and durable; on the
other side, the difference of these Beams and Rafters, whiles one Church holds
one thing in ma^ter of faith, another Church holds another thing; nay, whiles
one particular Christian believes one thing, another Christian believes another
thing, whiles this Church, or this Christian Worships God after one way and
order, another Church, or other Christians, they Worship God after another way:
though indeed it is possible their differences may not be so great, but they
may yet agree in one and the same head, the Lord Jesus Christ, and so both
parties differing may at lest be saved, yea it may be their differences are not
so great, but there may be a just forbearing one of another (provided all
Christians were of equal understandings, or that they rightly understood each
other;) yet doubtless, this breach of unity, as to matters of Judgment, in
things relating to the Doctrine of Faith, and breach of Uniformity as to
matters of practice, is a great weakening of the Church of God, and much
spoileth the beauty, and glory of it: O therefore study unity, and study
uniformity: you strengthen the building by both these, you weaken it, by
dividing or disagreeing (at least to open notice.) It is to me very remarkable
that St. Paul almost in every Epistle presses these things, and Phil. 4. 2.
Phil. 4. 2.
when but two women dissented, he thought it worthy of his pains to persuade
them to it: I beseech Euodias, and I beseech Syntyche that they be of the same
mind in the Lord. Do thou therefore O Christian, differ from other
Christians amongst whom thou live, in any matter of faith, or in any matter
of practice, as to fellowship in Ordinances? sit not down Satisfied, but labor
for this unity, for this uniformity. And as means to it, let me but offer you
my thoughts.

1. I would have Christians open hearted and free in the discovery of their
dissents. It is one of the great plagues of our times, that Christians are not
free one with another, but lock up their private opinions, and make it a great
piece of their art to conceal themselves and to lurk under ambiguous phrases,
etc. It is true some are too open: the Apostle Commands him that in an
indifferent thing has a particular faith, to have it to himself before God,
Romans 14. 22. that is to be understood as to the open publishing of it to the
disturbance of others, and the offense of the weak: but in the mean time
(doubtless) a prudent discovery of such dissents, to able and faithful Persons
of a differing Judgment, would much contribute to the unity of Christians.

2. Especially 2dly, If they would be willing to be convinced, and to hear
arguments against themselves, to bring forth their strong reasons and to hear
others bring forth theirs also: I know not how it comes to pass, that
Christians who have Spiritual sores, in their understandings and Judgments, are
very loath to discover them, and are impatient of having them touched (at least)
at first, would Christians be willing to take Satisfaction, and give
Satisfaction each to other, many of our differences in Doctrine and practice
would easily be composed; especially if to their mutual discourses to this
purpose they would but bring humble hearts, and pietatem discendi rather then
discutiendi acumen, a pious mind to learn rather then a defire to show their
quaintness in arguing their own cause (which Augustine lamented that he did not
do in his reading the Scriptures whiles he was a young man.)

3. And 3dly, If to all this Christians would add Prayer unto that God who
reveals truth to his People, it would highly contribute to this unity I am
pleading for, it is a piece of Christ's intercession for us that we might be one.

4. And lastly, Would Christians (as becomes such as are humble) if after all
due means used for mutual Satisfaction, and attaining to this happiness, but
learn that piety and prudence which the Apostle Commands and reason dictateth,
viz. To keep the things wherein they dissent to themselves and walk together so
far forth, as they have mutually attained, and are mutually agreed: certainly
this would go very far, and if this course did not fully contribute to preserve
the strength and beauty of the Beams, and Rafters, of Gods house amongst us;
yet the weakness of them, or rather indeed our weakness would not be so
manifest to our enemies nor our nakedness so much discovered unto them that
hate us.

Use 4.
Is the Doctrine of faith? And are the Ordinances of God, the Beams, and
Rafters of the Church? How much are we then all concerned to keep them in their
strength, and purity, and beauty. We are Commanded to contend earnestly for the
faith, which was delivered once to the Saints, Jude. 3. and to strive together
for the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 2. 7. there is a striving about words to no
profit, but to the subverting of the hearers, which the Apostle warns Timothy
against, 2 Timothy 2. 14. and there is a striving about things that are
indifferent and it may be granted on both sides to be so. These are vain
janglings and unprofitable strivings. But there is a striving for the Doctrine
of faith, against Haereticks, and erroneous Persons, and there is a striving
for a true Worship of God, and a pure administration of Ordinances, according
to the rule of the word, without the mixture of Ceremonies and humane
Inventions. In these things Christians that are members of the Church, stand
highly concerned to strive: To strive to maintain, the Word of God, and the
Doctrines of faith contained in them, that they be not corrupted with the
leaven of error. And to maintain the Worship of God in its perfection, that no
part of it be loft: and in its purity, that the administration of it be not
mixed up with humane inventions: now to strive for these things is a noble
striving, and worthy of Christians: for the Ordinances of God and the Word of
God they are the Beams and Rafters of the house of God, and what man is there
that does not take himself concerned to take care of the Beams and Rafters of
hishouse, that nothing comes to them which may expose them to a sudden
putrefaction and rotenness, and endanger the whole building to fall? If a
Church defends the Doctrine of the Word, and the Ordinances of God, and
maintains them in their strength, beauty, purity, they will defend it. There
can be no instance given of Gods leaving any Church, so long as the Doctrine of
faith remained in it incorrupted, and the Ordinances of God abode in it and
were administered in their power, strength and purity. But this is enough to
have spoken to the 2d Proposition: the 3d yet remains.

Sermon LXIII.
Cant. 1. 17. The Beams of our house are Cedar: and our Rafters are of Fir.

I Am now come to the last Proposition which I observed out of these Words,
with which I shall close my discourses, both upon this verse, and upon this
whole Chapter. The point is this:

Prop. 3. There is a Beauty, Sweetness, Power and Efficacy, and an
incorruptible nature in the Word and Ordinances of God.

These four things I noted to you concerning these two sorts of wood to which
the Spouse here likeneth the Beams, and Rafters of the Church which is her, and
her beloveds house: Here are four things (in the Proposition) praedicated of
these Spiritual Rafters

1. The first is Beauty* Cedars, and Fir trees, are tall, and goodly trees, the
latter lose not their beauty in the Winter time. Zion of old was called the
perfection of beauty, Psalm. 50. 2. strength and beauty were said to be in the
Sanctuary, Psalm. Psalm. 50. 2. 96. 6. Romans 10. 15.
96. 6. the feet of them who bring glad tidings of peace are called beautiful,
Romans 10. 15. the Sanctuary indeed of old had an external beauty, it was full of
Gold, and of rare work, which much pleased the carnal Eyes of the beholders.
This beauty is ceased with the Jewish Worship. But there is a greater beauty
still remaining, the beauty of Solomon's Temple in all its glory, was not like
the beauty of Gospel administration.

1. Beauty is a pleasing thing. That which Satisfies the lust of the Eye, is
that which we call carnal beauty: the orderly administration of Gospel
institutions is a comely thing in the Eyes of a Spiritual Soul, the simplicity
of the Gospel administrations hinders not the beauty at all. The sober, grown
Person, thinks a suit of plain Spanish cloth, as beautiful, as the Child thinks
its gay coat, whose colors it may be are more diverse and the ribbands about
it of several colors, but the substance of it not of half so much value. It Is
true the legal administrations were more gay, but though the trimming were more
costly the cloth was not so good: They were all but shadows of things to come.
The substance is ours. What sober Person lives in a Congregation, where the
Sabbaths of God are strictly observed: where the Pastor powerfully, plainly,
clearly, gravely, Preaches the wholesome Doctrines of the Gospel, Prays
powerfully and Spiritually, where the Word of God is read, and the Sacraments
duly and orderly administered, where Psalms are daily sung in a Spiritual
manner; and the Ordinances of discipline, are prudently and faithfully
executed, and does not see a great comeliness in them, at which his Soul is
pleased, and with which it is delighted?

2. As they are exceeding pleasing to a Spiritual heart, so there is a lovely
Majesty in them, and also a great Symmetry and proportion. God has stamped a
certain secret Majesty upon every holy institution of his, which Commands
love and reverence for it, from all sober Persons, who have not outlawed both
their reason and Religion too, and here again the plainness, and simplicity of
the Gospel administrations gives advantage to them: besides there is a great
Symmetry in them: the word Preached is verbum audible, an audible word, the
Sacrament is verbum visible, a visible word. When the Gospel is Preached* what
is Preached but Christ crucified, and what is that which is represented in the
Sacrament but a Christ crucified? The whole Gospel administration is a goodly
thing, and does shine nativa luca in a certain native light of its own: and
has such a loveliness attends the pure dispensation of it, that the
superadding of any humane inventions, is but like adding black patches to a
lovely face, without which it was far more beautiful.

3. But lastly the Beauty of the Word and Ordinances, of the Gospel lies in
this that the beauty of the Lord Jesus Christ is upon them. This is that which
gives them luster. Observe holy David, Psalm. 27. v. 4. one thing have I desired
of the Lord: that will I seek after that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in
his holy Temple. The gracious Soul sees the Face of God in his Word, and the
Image of Christ in Ordinances, this makes them lovely. Look as it is with the
body; let it be never so goodly a structure, the lineaments of it never so
proportioned, yet if the Soul informs it not, there is no beauty in it: So it
is with Ordinances. Christ is the Soul of Ordinances, and it is only his stamp
upon them, his presence in them, which makes them lovely, and beautiful. Take
the Word of God, as Christ is wrapped up in it, the Ordinances of God, as they
are the institutions of Christ and sacred conduit pipes, and means, by which
Christ conveys himself, and the influences of his grace, unto Peoples Souls; so
they are exceeding beautiful: they are those performances in which the Soul
sees Christ, and meets with Christ; and this makes them goodly things.

2. The 2d thing which the Proposition praedicates concerning the word and
Ordinances, is power and Efficacy, and usefulness, I observed to you concerning
Cedars, that as they had much beauty and goodliness in them: so they had much
strength in them, which made them very useful for Beams and Rafters, fit to
bear the weight of materials in building laid upon them and to uphold the
building. There is a wonderful power and virtue in the Word and Ordinances of
God.

1. There is a supporting power in them.

2. There is a working power in them.

1. There is in them a supporting power: They support a Church. The Apostle
says that the Church is built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Ephesians. 2. the Church cannot stand without them: they support a
particular Soul. The weight of poor Souls all lies upon the Word of God: how
often does holy David speak to this in that excellent Psalm, Psalm. 119. v. 49.
Remember thy Word into thy servant upon which thou have caused me to hope, v.
15. This is my comfort in my affliction for thy Word has quickened me, 81. My
Soul faints for thy Salvation: but I hope in thy word, v. 92. unless thy love
had been my delight I should have perished in my affliction. Nay herein does
the wonderful power of the Word of God appear above the strength of Cedars, you
must Imagine a Cedar Beam of some proportionable bigness to bear the great
weight of a building, every stick of Cedar will not do it. But now not the
whole Word of God only, but a particular promise, will strangely support and
bear up the whole weight of a Soul sinking into despair, I have heretofore
given you strange instances in this case, and I doubt not but many of your
Souls can verify this from a particular experience.

2. But further, there is a working power likewise, in the Word, and
Ordinances; this is now more than is in a Cedar beam, that has in it a great
strength, but it has no life, it is an inanimate thing, and so works
nothing, it bears much, but has no activity in it. The words which I speak
(says our Savior) are Spirit, and life. Indeed the life and Spirit which they
have, is Christ's life, Christ's Spirit; without which they are but dead letters,
and weak things, but from Christ's concurrence with them, they have not only the
forementioned power to uphold, and bear up a sinking Soul, but they have an
active, working power, to cast down the strong holds of the Soul (according to
that of the Apostle 2. Cor. 10. 4) The Weapons of our warfare, are not carnal,
but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into Captivity every thought to the Obedience of Christ.
But I shall not enlarge upon this being something beyond my Metaphor.

3. The third thing which my Proposition predicateth of the Word and Ordinances
of God is sweetness. This is one thing which I observed to you concerning the
C^dar wood, and the pine Tree they were of a grateful and delightful smell. The
sweetness of the Cedar is a gratefulness to the exterior senses: But the
sweetness of the Word and Ordinances of God is intellectual, they are sweet to
the inward man. Which intellectual sweetness is yet set out by similitudes of
sensible things, Psalm. 119. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste. What is
sweeter then honey says Sampson; Judge. 14. 18. Holy David ^elleth him, Psalm.
19. 10. The word of God is sweeter then the honey or the honey comb, and Psalm.
119. 104. He doubleth the Expression for the further confirmation of it. They
are the words of God, that are the pleasant words, of which Solomon says,
Prove. 16. 24. Pleasant words are as an honey comb: Sweet to the Soul and health
to the bones. The sweetness, that resulteth to the Spiritual sense, from the
word of God, arises from two things.

1. The first is that sweet joy and peace, which God Ordinarily brings into the
Soul from them. God will speak peace to his People (says the Psalmist) and he
creates the fruit of the lips peace, peace, (says the Prophet;) this joy is
indeed of different degrees, there is the rejoicing of hope, for hope growing
from a true Root brings forth some fruit of joy in the Soul, though it indeed
be not so fair and pleasant a fruit as that joy which is the fruit of
assurance, because the Union which hope gives the Soul with its beloved object,
is of the lowest fort. But yet even this joy has a great deal of sweetness,
but Oh! How great is that sweetness which is the riper fruit of assurance, that
peace which passes all understanding; A sweetness which often times overcomes
the Soul and is too great for it to bear. Both which the Soul reaps from the
word of God and from the Ordinances of God.

2. But secondly this sweetness in the Word and Ordinances of God arises not
from this alone, but from other usefulness of them to the Soul. That is not
only sweet: but that also which is profitable, David says, that the Law of the
Lord does convert the Soul, makes wise the simple, enlightens the Eyes, that
they are useful to warn us, and that in keeping them there is great reward. By
the word and the Ordinances of God the Soul has wherewithal to answer the
tempter, in that it finds arguments to help it in repelling a secret motion to
sin, etc. This makes the Word and Ordinances of God exceeding sweet to gracious
Souls as they are those things by which the Soul is profited.

3. But thirdly, there is a further sweetness, that the Word, and Ordinances of
God have to a gracious Soul, as they are pure and holy, Psalm. 119. v. 140. Thy
word is very pure, therefore does thy servant love it. The heart of man
(naturally) does not love purity, but the Spiritual heart that is conformed to
the image of God loves it* It is turned into the likeness of the word, and made
to love whatsoever is holy and Spiritual and pure. This makes the Rafters, and
beams of the Church, to the true Christian to be like Cedar and Fir, sweet
smelling, because of that purity, and holiness which cleaves to them.

4. A fourth thing which the Proposition predicateth of the Word and Ordinances
of God, is their duration, they are of an incorruptible Nature, as Cedar and
Fir, or Pine: Not subject to corruption, and putrefaction as other sorts of
wood are, Isa. 40. v. 8. The grass withers, and the flower fades, but the
Word of God shall stand for ever. Our Savior speaks to this purpose, Heaven
and Earth shall pass away, but one jot or tittle of the Law shall not pass away
until all these be fulfilled. I will open this a little.

1. The Ordinances of the Gospel endure for ever. Herein the excellency of the
Gospel dispensation appears, above the legal dispensation. The Law brought
nothing to perfection (faith the Apostle to the H^brews) the Ordinances of
worship under the Law were but shadows and types which ceased, when Christ who
was the substance of those shadows, and the Antitype to those types once
appeared in the World, or at least when he dyed, but the Ordinances which are
as the beams and Rafters of the Gospel Church are durable and do not pass away.
The Jewish Priesthood ceased; But the Gospel Ministry continues, Christ has
promised to be with them to the End of the World, Ephesians. 4 11, 12.
God has given Apastles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints until we all come in the Unity of the faith and of the
knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man* unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ. The passover was but for a time, until the* Messiah
(who was the true paschal Lamb*) should he slain for the sins of his People,
but the Ordinance of the Lords Supper (which comes instead of this) is an
Ordinance by which we show the death of Christ until his coming again, 1 Cor.
11.

2. The word of God in particular indureth for ever. I will open this in two
things,

1. The Propositions of the word endure for ever. They are Propositions of
Eternal truth, whether they be Dogmatical Propositions, which assert the truth
of God, concerning the Nature or will of God, or concerning the state of man,
or any thing relating to his duty, or whether they be such as are promisory,
they are of an immortal Nature, the reason is, because God is a God that
changes not, he is not Yea, and Nay, but Yea and Amen, a God that cannot lie
to his People, nor repent of what he has said unto them. The truth of the word
abides for ever.

2. The virtue of the word abides, and is immortal. The same virtue which the
word of God ever had in it to convince, convert, to enlighten, quicken support,
comfort, the same is in it still, and indeed the proof of this depends partly
upon the former, for the virtue of the word, whether it be the word of precept,
or the word of promise, does much depend upon the truth of it. Now the truth of
it being perpetual, the virtue of it must also be so, supposing the same
concurrence of that holy Spirit which must be to make the Word of any use or
virtue at any time, I have spoken enough to the Explication of the point; I
come now to the Application of it; which I shall dispatch, by drawing some
speculative and practical Inferences from what you have heard.

Use 1.
Hence (in the first place) you may observe a great difference betwixt the
Legal and the Gospel Ministry; And (consequently) the excellency of the latter
above the former. The Apostle to the Hebrews insisteth much upon this, and by
this argument proves the excellency of the Gospel above the Law. The Beams and
Rafters of the Church under the law they were not of Cedar, they lasted no
longer then until the timeof reformation. The Evangelist St. John says. The
law was given by ^ Joh. 17.
Moses, but grace, and truth came by Jesus Christ. Two things commend the
Gospel above the law. Grace came by it, truth came by it*. The law brought
wrath, the Doctrine of it tended to curse men and women, and to conclude all
under wrath, but the Doctrine of the Gospel, brought grace, the news of the
free pardon, and remission of sins, through the blood of Christ, and the
acceptance of the Soul upon the account of his merits. Truth also came by
Christ. Whether you take Truth for Substance and Realities, opposed to types
and shadows, that came by Christ who was the End of the Law: Or whether you
take Trut^ for Certainty, and that which has in it porpetuity and dur^bleness;
that also came by Christ, who put an end to the Ce^emonial law, which consisted
of temporary Ordinances for worship, etc. It is true, the Doctrine of the Law
and Gospel, the Propositions of truth, contained in both are much one and the
same. The moral precepts the same, and the promises the same, etc. Yet that
great Proposition of truth De M^ssia venturo, concerning the star that should
come forth out of Jacob, the coming of Shiloh. The raising of the great Prophet
like to Moses, etc. This Proposition, was perfected in the Gospel, and turned
into another of far more comfort to us, viz. That Christ is come, and has dyed
for our si^s, etc. But all the Propositions of the Gospel are of eternal truth,
and all the Ordinances of the Gospel are like Beams of Cedar that shall never
decay. That Is the first Inference.

Use 2.
2. Observe from hence* The blindness of many Peoples Eyes, and the hardness of
our hearts, together with the unreasonableness of unbelief. You have heard that
there is a Beauty and a sweetness in the Word and Ordinances of God, they are
beautiful to the Eye, and they are sweet unto the taste and to the smell; the
lips of Christ drop sweet smelling Myrrh; what is the reason then that the most
of People can taste no sweetness in them, nor see any beauty in them? Alas, the
most men and women in the World have no more savor of a Sermon or Sacrament
then in the white of an Egg: They see more beauty in a play-book, or an
history, then they can see in the holy Word of God, the reason is this, they
are void of Spiritudl senses, they have their exterior carnal senses, they can
taste sweetness in an Honeycomb, but they have not any Spiritual sense, they can
taste no sweetness in the Word of God, which to David's taste was sweeter then the
Honeycomb. They must needs want Spiritual sense, for they want Spiritual life,
they are dead in trespasses and sins: no sooner does the Lord quicken a dead
Soul, but it savoureth the things of God, and tastes that sweetness, and sees
that beauty in the Word of God, and in the Ordinances of God of which I have
been discoursing.

2. As it discovers the want of Spiritual sense, in an unbelievers Soul, so it
also discovers the hardness of men's hearts. The Word and Ordinances of God,
have a power and Efficacy in them, but alas! how few do they make any
impression upon? But I shall not insist upon this as not so proper to the
resemblance of the Text. Let me rather,

3. Infer the unreasonableness of unbelief, from what you have heard, of the
supporting power of the Word of God. The Word of God, is the greet supporter of
Souls, under all afflictions, temtations, in all distresses and agonies, etc.
God is indeed pleased as to some of his People to give them in sensible
evidences of his love, sealing them up, (by way of assurance of his love) unto
the day of redemption: and blessed are they who are in such a case, but this is
not the portion of all the People of God, the most of Christians have nothing
but the royal Word of God to trust to, and upon this all their hopes hang as to
Eternity. And we are so carnal, that we find it an hard thing oft-times to keep
up the building of grace, faith and hope, upon this foundation, but are ready
to sway, and sink through distrust and doubtings, through unbelief, and anxiety
of thoughts, etc. This is that which we call unbelief. The unreasonableness of
which is sufficiently evidenced from the stability of the Word of God, it is a
Beam of Cedar. Thou that think it an hard thing, to have nothing but a bare
Word of God to trust to, unless thou have some sensible evidence, that can
not believe without a sign, consider,

1. That the Word is the Beam of the Church. The whole Church of God is built
upon the Word; it is that which God has judged sufficient at all times for his
People: God the Father had no more than Christ's word for the price of all the
Souls that were saved, from the beginning of the World, until the time of
Christ's Death and Passion, (when the price was actually paid into God's hand.)
All the Believers that were saved, from Adam till Christ's coming in the Flesh,
had no more to trust to for their Salvation, than the Royal Word of God; That
the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head: That a Messiah should
come and be slain to make reconciliation for iniquity, etc. They all trusted on
these words of God, and were saved.

2. Consi^er, This Beam is a Beam of Cedar; it is an incorruptible thing. The
Apostle calls the Word and Oath of God two immutable things: It must needs be
so, because of the immutable Nature of God; he is a God that cannot lie, that
cannot speak that which is false; he is a God that cannot repent; he cannot,
like man, eat his word, or recede from it. David says, That the Word of the
Lord is settled in the Heavens. The Grass may wither, and the Flower may fade,
but the Word of the Lord must stand for ever. Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
but one jot or tittle thereof cannot fail. Has he said it, and shall he not do
it? Has he spoken it, and shall not he bring it to pass? The Apostle calls the
word of Prophecy a sure Word. The word of Prophecy is sure, and the word of
Promise is sure, therefore trust to it.

3. It is a Beam that never yet brake; never Soul miscarried that trusted its
whole weight upon it. What greater Arguments can any have to persuade his Soul
to trust to the Word of God, than these two.

First; That the Nature of the word is such that it cannot fail. The truth of
God cannot be turned into a lie.

Secondly; That no instance can be produced of any Soul that miscarried in its
confidence. Look over all the Book of God, and find me Gods Word given to any
Soul, for anything, whether temporal, or spiritual, and it was not made good
unto him: indeed the Visions have sometime tarried beyond the patience of God's
People, but they have always been fulfilled in their seasons.

4. Consider how unreasonable a thing it is, that thou should trust to the
word of a man, and distrust the Word of a God? You think your selves concerned
to trust in the Royal word of a King, in the serious word of a Noble Person, in
the word of an ordinary Friend who is but accounted morally honest, how
unreasonable a thing then is it, that thou should not take the word of a
God, the word of him who cannot lie? To sum up this then Christian, what though
thou have nothing but the word of God to trust to, either for those things
which concern thee as to this Life, or for those things which concern thee as
to another Life; yet the Word of God is enough; it is the Beam of Christ's
House, and it is a Beam of Cedar, which cannot corrupt or putrify, nor fail
for ever. Nor indeed

5. Is that Assurance (of things not seen) which God gives to any Soul, any
thing more than the sealing, and particular application of the Word. In the
mean time, it is the Word that supports and upholds the Soul. The sealing of
the Spirit adds no new strength to the Word, only helps me to bear my self upon
it.

3. Is there such a Beauty, Sweetness, Strength and Power; and such an
incorruptible and immortal Nature in the Word of God, and in the Ordinances of
God? Oh that these things might commend them more to all you that hear me this
day! Under this head let me plead with you for these things.

1. For a knowledge and understanding of, and an acquaintance with the Word of
God. Let the beauty of an Object be never so perfect, it pleases not me, if I
look not upon it, or looking upon it, do not observe and understand it! Let the
sweetness of an Object be never so great, it affords me no pleasure unless I
taste it. Let the power and efficacy of a thing be never so much, it is nothing
to me if I make no application of my self to it, or it to me. And in very deed
this is the reason why the most poor Souls see no beauty, understand no
sweetness in the Word of God, why they feel nothing of the power and strength
of it, because they seldom look into it; or if they read in it, and attend upon
it, they observe not what they read and hear; they understand not the Mysteries
of the Gospel; they make no appplications of the Word of God to their Souls,
nor of their Souls to the Word, and try not the strength of it: Oh let the Word
of God be precious to you! Read it, and read it over and over again, thou will
every time discern some sweetness in it, which before thou did not discern;
hear it; and hear it often; observe what thou read, and what thou hear;
get understanding in the Lord's Statutes; make application of the Word to thy
Soul, and of thy Soul to the Word. When thou art in straights as to thy outward
condition, or as to thy spiritual condition, thou will then find this
sweetness, beauty, power and efficacy in the Word, which till that time affords
but matter of discourse to thee.

2. Let this plead with you for a due Attendance upon Ordinances. The Word, the
Sacraments, every Ordinance of the Gospel, they are the Beams and Rafters of
the Church, which deserve all your care and diligence to uphold and maintain,
and to keep up in their perfect strength glory and beauty: They are Beams of
Cedar, and Raferes of Fir; they have a sweetness, beauty and excellency in
them; and this beauty and excellency which is in them, will not be discerned by
the Soul that neglects its Attendance upon them.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, or to be sold by Edward Giles Bookseller in
Norwich, near the Marketplace.
SEveral Discourses concerning Actual Providence.

A Word in Season. Denfensative Armor against four of Satan's most fiery Darts.

Sermons upon the whole first and second Chapters of the Canticles. All
Published by John Collinges, D. D.

Allen's Way of the Spirit in bringing Souls to Christ.

The Glories of Christ set forth, with the Necessity of Faith, in several
Sermons: By Mr. Thomas Allen late Minister in Norwich.

Several Sermons of Mr. Timothy Armitage late Minister in Norwich.

Lougher's Precious Promises, the Portion of Overcommers.

The Saint's Ebenezer: By Mr. Francis English late Minister in Norwich.

Directions for Learners to Spell English right.

The History of the Protestant Reformation, as it was begun by Luther.

The Dead Saints Speaking. Being a Sermon Preached upon the Death of Mr.
Newcomen.

English Presbytery.

The Ordinary matter of Prayer drawn into Questions and Answers.

Good Reader;
THough the Printer has acquitted himself in the Printing this Book, as well
as we can reasonably expect in a Book of this bulk, yet the Author must beg thy
charity, as for some misplacing of stops, or letters, which might be the
Authors fault as well as the Printers; so for correcting the following
Errata's, which if not all, are yet the most considerable that will trouble
thee.

Page 9. line 13. read should me, p. 18. l. 26. r. we call, p. 29. l. 26. r.
quarrel the* p. 31. l. 34. r. Christ by that of, p. 47. l. 18. r. such subitam,
etc p. 74. l. 2. r. nothing more than that, p. 79. l. 1. r. can find, p. 85. l
23. r. from us, by, p. 87. l. 40. r. keep them, p. 88. l. 1. r of themselves,
and l. 22 r. expose us, p. 105. l. 9. r. excuse. For, p. 116. l. 9. r. room
left, p. 117. l. 7. r. chapter or, p. 129. l. 24. r. when that is, p. 130. l.
28. after himself, add, can promise himself to meet him, p. 144. l. 3. r. to
such, p 147. l. 1. r. only so far, p. 154. l. 32. r. it fares, l. 35. r more
hated, p. 150. l. 26. r. you that, l. 39. r. to you, p. 169. l. 13. r. abate a
cup, p. 185. l. 24. r. It is desire, p. 136. l. 19 r. is the use, l. 36. r. is
observable, p. 248. l. 22. r. exult p. 268 l. 34. r. out of God, p. 289. l. 12.
blot out, For although, p. 307. l 7. r. make peace, p. 341. l. 20. r. they are, p
351. l. 4. r. not know, p. 438. l. 36. r. signify, p. 472. l. 29. r. the Rod
of God, p. 479. l. 33 r. the fruit, p. 487. l. 7. r. is much, p. 491. l. 21. r.
Ez^k. 16 8. p. 498. l. 4. r. he must not tell a lie to cover his own, p. 506.
l. 4. r. in it, lies, p. 513 l. 36, 37. blot out, For one to come to him, p.
516. l. 16. r. a Christian to consider his, p. 550. l. 27. r. it gets, p.
566. l. 31. r. its ends p. 614. l. 6. r. their ordinary, p. 618. l. 11. r. then
others, p. 626. l. 1. r. understand, p. 628. l. 2. r. God cannot, p. 629. l.
13. r. command. On, l. 16. r. not lawful, l. 32. r. St. Paul says, l. 33. r.
But I observe p. 630. l. 17. r. every good Soul, p. 631. l. 10. r. aedificans,
l. 14. r. not lay, p. 636. l. 18. r. of such, p. 657. l. 28. r. is so, is
evident, p. 659. l. 39. r. Ezekiel. 16. 30. p. 680. l. 40 r. we must own, p. 734.
l. 31. r. not so much, p. 768. l. 29. r. respects, p. 780. l. 27. r. as men
love natural, p. 802. l. 23. r. or a woman, l. 27. r. and so, p. 812. l. 21. r.
them reasonably, p. 813. l. 38. r. being rational, p. 816 l 8. r. merely
reasonable, p. 832. l. 1. r. evidenced from, p. 841. l. 9. r. take them, p.
849. l. 27. r. to us, p. 871. l 23. r. internal cause. p 873. l. 39. r. a power
upon him: but, p. 882. l. 40. r. Prophet, foretelling, p. 886. l. 36. r. not
exclusive, p. 888. l. 19. r. were added, p. 901. l. 3. r. verbum audibile, p.
903. l. 34. r. which is pleasant.

AN Alphabetical TABLE, Containing Directions to find the Principal things,
opened and discoursed in the Book.
A.
A Biding of Christ with the Soul, and the Soul with Christ, what it signifies,
799, 800. The Souls advantages by it, 804, 805. How Christ's abidings with the
Soul may fail, 805, 806. How to know if we be willing that Christ should abide
with us, 806, 807. Adam's state, and ours, how different, what power he had,
276, 277. Afflictions the lot of Christ, and of the believing Soul, 536, 537.
Whence they are so: How they make Christ's Spouse black, 539, 540, 541. What use
we ought to make of it, 542, 543. Arminians Opinion of grace, with the
absurdities of it, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 268.
B.
BEauty of believers of what Nature, 638, 639, 640. Whence it is, 657, 658. How
it renders them to Christ lovely, 642, 643. what use to make of it 648, 649,
650. Beauty of Christ in what it excels the beauty of Saints, 852, 853, 854.
Beams and rafters, of Christ's house what, why of Cedar and fir, 890, 892, 893.
Bed, of Christ what, 870, 871. Behold, what it signifies, 832, 833. Believers,
thirst after distinguis^^ing ^ercies, 59. Whence it is, 61, 62, 63. Arguments
to (...) it, 64, 65, 66. Their thirst after all manifestations of grace, and
^hy, 83, 84. Arguments persuading ^ach a th^^st, 90, 91. (...) 93, 94. Their
thirst after Christ, in his word and Ordinances, especially in the Gospel, and
the teachings of his Spirit, 95, 96, 97. Their earnest desire after communion
with Christ, 136, 137, 138. Why, 138, 139. Their duty in the Noon of trials,
618, 619, 620. Their more special need of the presence of Christ at such a
time, and why, 622, 623. What use they should make of that, 624, 625. They may
be at loss sometimes how to maintain Communion with Christ, 653, 654, 655, 656.
Blackness of Christ's Spouse, what and whence, 465, 466. Breasts of Christ what
they import or signify, 47. 48.
C.
CAmphire, or Copher what 811, 812. Causes of Persons not coming to Christ 285,
286, 287. Chambers of Christ what, 172, 173, 174. Chains about the Spouses neck
what, 721. Christ the Souls beloved, 598, 599. What are his feeding and resting
places for his flock at noon, 615, 616, 617. How the Spouses companion, fellow,
and friend, 687, 688, 689. 691, 692* What duty arises from those notions of
Christ, 698, 6^9. How he is beautiful transcendently, 852, 853. How he is to be
used as a bundle of myrrh, 79^, 796, 797. Why he is the peculiar object of the
Spouses love, 816, 817, 818. How he is fair, 852, 853. How he is pleasant, 861,
862, 863. How he is the cause of the Spouses fruitfulness, 870, 871. Cheeks of
the Spouse what they sign sie, 717, 718. Cedar, or Cypress, famous for what
884. Church of Christ, what, how it is Christ's, and the believers house, 885,
886, 887; What this speaks of dignity, or duty, 888, 889, 890. Communion with
God what, 106, 107. In his word, how many ways, 94. why desirable by believers,
97, 98, 99. The nature of more external communion with God in his word, and of
more internal communion with God by his word and Spirit, 107, 108, 109, Why
believers cannot be satisfied in a more external communion with God, 118, 119,
120. What Ch^istians should do, that they may have, such communion, 129, 130,
131. Where Christians may have the freest communion with Christ, 606, 607. In
what the Julness and freedom of a Souls communion with God lies, 609, 610.
What may be done by us to obtain or maintain it, 612, 613, 666, 667. Comeliness
of the Spouse what, 470. How she is comely in her blackness, and in whose Eyes
she is so, 472, 473. Whence it is, 473, 474, 475. Confession of sins to be
made, to whom and in what cases, 494, 495. Before men in what cases, 497, 498.
Whence the Spouse is so free to it, 501, 502, 503. Directions as to it, 504,
405, 506. Conflicts of Christians with their lusts, 550, 551. Of the Church
with corr^pt members make Christians appear black, 552, 553. Reasons of it,
553, 554, 555. Conversation of Christians must be holy, 721, 722.
D.
DAnger of thinking we have our life in our hands, 305, 306. Defires the true
object of them, 176, 177. What desires will evidence a truth of grace, 182,
183, 184. Of Christ's abiding with us how manifested, 800. Drawing, what it
signifies, how many ways God draws us, 251, 252, 253. A powerful drawing
necessary to conversion, 255, 256, 257. The Nature of Gods drawing, 257, 258.
Why necessary, 260, 261, 262. The absurdity of those who deny any need of such
powerful influence of God, 265, 266, 267, 268. How such powerful influences,
may be promoved or hindered, 311, 312, 313. What may draw men to some degrees of
reformation who yet are not drawn to Christ, 313, 314. Gods drawing of some is
a means to make others run 333, 334, 335, 336. Drunkards reflected on, as
preferring wine before Christ's Loves. Doubting a term, or phrase, what it
signifies, 834, 835. Doves Eyes, What the commendable qualities of them are,
837, 838, 839. why the Spouse is said to have them, 839, 840. Persons persuaded
to get Dovos Eyes, 845, 846 847.
E.
ENgedi, what it signifies, 810, 811. Eyes of the Spouse of Christ why they are
commended, 835, 836.
F.
FAith saving what, 292, 293. How it works in Prayer, 349, 350. Flock, why
the Church is compared to it, what that flock of Christ which the Spouse of
Christ is obliged to follow the footsteps of, 671, 672, 673, 668, 669. Folly of
resisting, vexing, or quenching or grieving the holy Spirit, 271, 272, 273.
Fortitude in Christians, how distinguishable, from a natural stomach, and a
moral courage, 705, 706. Means to promove it, 709. Arguments to persuade it,
710, 711, 712. Fruitfulness of a Church, or a particular Soul flows from
Christ's conjunction with and influence upon it, proved, 871, 872, 873. what use
to make of it 879, 880.
G.
GRace of God what, various, several distinctions of it, 81, 82, 83. All the
Emanations of it desired by believers, 83, 84. why 85, 86. Graces of Christ
what, and in what respects like to good Ointments, 201, 202, 203. The Nature of
special saving grace as in its operation powerful, and yet sweet, 280, 281.
Grace to be owned to others and in what cases, and to whom, and in what cases,
508, 509, 510. The reasonableness of it, 512, 513. Christians persuaded to it,
directed in it, 514, 515, 516, 517. more grace, to whom given, 732, 733, 734.
Grace in the Soul gives a smell, what contributes to its smell, 750, 751, 75^,
753. Its smell much depends upon Christ's presence with the Soul, 761, 762.
Greenness of Christ's bed what it signifies, 874, 875.
H.
Jerusalem, what, 456, 457. Holiness, mistakes about it, 297, 298. How
distinguished from mere moral virtue, 298. and from formality, 300. it is the
Christians Ornament, 725, 726. Arguments to persuade it, 726, 727. Horses, why
believers are compared to them, to a company of them in Pharaohs Charrets, 701,
702, 703, 704.
I.
JEsuits Notion of Grace, 269, 270. Influence of God upon our natural, and upon
our Spiritual acts how different, 763, 764, 765. Joy, the Nature of it, 398,
399. The special Nature of Spiritual Joy, 399, 400. Christ the peculiar object
of the believers Joy, 404, 405, 406. The reasonableness of rejoicing in Christ,
407, 408, 409.
K.
KIsses various, used as various Indications, 41, 42. Kisses of Christ's mouth
what, 44. 45. Knowledge, the various degrees of it, 178, 179. The Kings sitting
at his Table what it signifies, 761, 762. What we are to do, that we may keep
Christ sitting at his Table, 772, 773.
L.
LEast tokens of Christ's distinguishing love what, 67, 68. desirable to
believers, and why, 69, 70, 71. all persuaded to value them, 75, 76. Looking,
on the Spouses blackness, how far our duty, how our sin, 524, 525, 526, 527,
528. Unkind lookings upon the Spouse, because she is black, reproved, 529, 530.
Love, to Christ, in what seen, 443, 444. by what it may be discovered, 450,
451, 452, 601, 602, 603. How far it may be in an unbeliever, 813, 814. Love to
Christ persuaded from his love to us, 157, 158, 159, 160. Loves of Christ what,
148, 149. proved better then wine, 162, 163, 164. Love of God to man whether
more commended from the Doctrine of Common, or special grace, 282, 283, 284.
M.
MErcies of several sorts, distinguishing mercies what, 58, 59. Ministers of
the Gospel, how necessary, 662, 663. Murmurings for God's inequal distributions
of special grace, unreasonable, why, 386, 387, 388, 389. Myrrh, the several
acceptations of it, 777, 778. A bundle of Myrrh what, 778, 779. Why Christ is
compared to it, 781, 782, 783.
N.
NAme of Christ what, 54, 216, 217, 218. How sweet, 212, 213, 214. Whence its
sweetness is, 219, 220. Neck of the Spouse, what it signifies, 719.
O.
OIL, its sacred, and civil use, 51, 52, 53. the met aphorical sense of it, 52,
53. pouring forth, what it imports, 54. Ordinance of the ministry, how
necessary, 662, 663. Ordinances the Beams and Rafters of Christ's house, 890,
891. how properly so called, 892. Why compared to Beams of Cedar, 903, 904.
their beauty power, durableness, 900. what to conclude from hence, 905.
Ornaments of believers what, 726. Excess in other Ornaments dissuaded, 727,
728.
P.
PErfection, of Christians threefold, 481, 482. Pleasant, what it signifies,
861. How Christ is not only fair, but pleasant, 861, 862, 863. What renders
him so, 865, 866. Prayer, rightly ordered, what, 146, 147, 148. it is a mean of
our communion with God, 140, 141, 142. Sometimes presently answered, 345, 346,
347. What Prayers usually meet with such answers, 348, 349. Prayers of faith
what, 349, 350, 351. what to be done when we have not a present answer of our
Prayers, 368, 369, 370. Prayers heard a cause of joy and rejoicing in Christ,
410, 411. How to discern an answer of Prayer, 420. 421, 422. Special Presence,
of God, what, 375, 376, 377. Presumption, no says, 296.
R.
REsisting, divine grace how far there may be, or not be, 258, 259, the great
danger of such resistance, 308, 309, 310. Rejoicing in Christ, our duty, how to
be discerned, 413, 414. Persuaded by Arguments, 416, 417. Remembrance, of
Christ, and his loves what it imports, 424, 425, 426, 427. Why our duty, 428.
Who come short of it, 429, 430, 431, 432. The duty persuaded, 433, 434.
Directed, 435, 436. Repetitions of Christ's Love to Souls, why used, 823, 824.
Why not to all Souls alike, 825, 826. Returns, of Prayer sometimes very quick,
345, 346. In what cases usually, 348, 349. Rows of Jewels, and Chains about the
Spouse, what they signify, 719, 720. Running, after Christ what it implies,
242, 243, 244. 318, 319, 320. Many run not, 327, 328.
S.
SCripture rule compared with other rules, 675, 676. Scandal, and sin, the two
great objects of believers fears, 627, 628. The Nature and difference of
Scandals, 628, 629. why to be feared, 630, 631. Shepherds Tents, what they
signify, 670, 671. By what Shepherds Tents we are to feed our kids, 673, 674.
How to know the true Shepherds Tents, 680, 681, 682, 683. Smell of grace, what,
and whence, 752, 753. How to be promoved, 759, 760. Smells of wicked men what,
754 755. Solomon, what he was, 18, 19. whether he sinned in marrying Pharaohs
Daughter, 19, 20. whether his Apostasy was total and final, Opinions, and
Arguments on either side, 21, 22, 23, 24. That it was not total nor final,
proved, 22, 23, 24. In what order he wrote his books, 27. Song of Solomon of
Divine Authority. Objections answered, 28, 29, 30. The Nature of the Song, 32.
Why called the Song of Songs. Spirit, how it teaches, and how by it we have
communion with God, 108, 109, 110, 111. Special favors of God, what, 172, 173.
Sweetness of Christ to a Believer, 785, 786, 787, 788, 789.
T.
TIme for mercy set, how to know God's set time, 353, 354 355.
V.
VAriety of Divine Grace, 81, 82. Valuing of Christ's Loves, an excellent
Argument when it can be used in truth in our Applications to God, 188, 189.
None but Believers can use it, 193, 194, 195. Means to bring our Souls to a due
value of Christ, 196, 197. Vineyard, what the Church's Vineyard is, 580, 581.
What the particular Christian's Vineyard is, 578. How Both are to be kept, 581.
Not duly keeping our own Vineyards the cause of our blackness, 585. Tht due
keeping them pers^aded, 587, 588, 589. Virgins, who, 55, 223. Why Believers so
called, 223, 224, 225. Whence it is that they love Christ, 445, 446. Upright,
who, 439, 440, 441. Those who are so, love Christ, they cannot but love him,
why, 445, 446. Unity persuaded, 713, 714. In what, 895, 896. Means to it, 897,
898.
W.
Wants of men, what the principal, 162, 163, 164. Willingness to a communion
with God, if true, how to be judged, 141, 142. Arguments to persuade it, 143,
144. Wine in no notion to be compared with the Loves of Christ, 165, 166, 167.
How to know whether we do not prefer Wine to the Loves of Christ, 170, 171,
172. Word of God, its several parts, 95. Communion with God in it, three ways,
94. Why desirable, 97, 98, 99. Those who despise it reflected on, 101, 102,
103. In what sense the Word of God is as the Beams and Rafters of the Church,
893. The Beauty, Power, and Duration of the Word, 904. Worldly Employment a
cause of the Spouses blackness, why, 571, 572. Worship, the Nature of it,
several Propositions about it, 564, 565. The sinfulness of corruptions in it,
567, 568, 569.
FINIS.

