CHRISTIAN HND Sober wish FOR MODERATION.

By a true Son of the Church.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1662.

To the Reader.
WHose experience in these late and so long times of Faction has not evidenced
to him how slight, nay how harsh returns the Assertors of truth, and through
them truth it self, have ever received from them? whilst men so engaged through
blindness or Jealousy (two inseparable adjuncts to Faction) either cannot see
it as such when proposed, or so far misapprehend it, as to judge any thing
moderate or sober, to be contradicting or betraying of their Cause. I heartily
wish that the continuance if not increase of Faction still among us, and its
sad Portents, did not, by showing us the need we have of Sober Truth, more then
excuse my exposing of it to its former fate, by endeavoring to hold it forth
upon so great disadvantage.

But because there is usually so much Modesty as not to fly in the face of
Truth, but to seek to wound it through the sides of its Maintainers, and by
raising the mists of Prejudice against them, to darken the light of Truth it
self. I do therefore, to prevent undue Prejudice to my Person, and thereby to
Truth, in the sincerity of my heart declare. That I am fully satisfied with,
and devoted to the Government of this Kingdom both Civil as it is a Monarchy,
and Ecclesiastic as Episcopal. That the raising of the late War, was at the
first, exceedingly against my Judgment, and was never countenanced or
willingly promoted by me to the last. In a word, That nothing but a desire to
help toward such a settlement of this Nation in Christian Peace and Unity, Ut
Obedientes gaudeant, wherein the Subject may delight, has drawn what follows
from me: And I have no other request to you, but that you will come to the
reading of it with the same unbyast desires, The best preparative to a Sober
Judgment.

A Christian and Sober wish for Moderaration.
THough a particular Description of the late War, and succeeding great
oppressions, under which this Kingdom has miserably suffered by the space of
almost twenty years, would be of singular use to manifest our misfortunes who
seem not yet to be in love with Peace, and to increase amazement in others to
see us perpetuating Feuds and Ammosities, when Peace after so long confusion is
brought home to us by so stupendous revolution: Yet seeing their deep
impressions upon men's minds cannot so soon be blotted out, and it being my
desire to contract my thoughts into as as narrow a compass as I may, I shall
only give this short account of the issue of that War, which was the
destruction of the King (in a manner scarce to be paralleld) The change of the
form of Government, and thereby the eversion of the Laws; and in their room we
were subjected to the will and Tyranny of an Usurper that burdened this
Nation: till we dispairing of deliverance, God brought it to us in his own way,
by his Arm: so that without the least outward force, without the loss of one
drop of blood, All weapons fell out of the Armies hands as leaves in Autumn,
Our King, Charles the Second, (the undoubted Heir to his dead Father) and with
him the ancient Government and Laws restored to us, and the same face again to
the whole Kingdom, without any so much as sign of opposition.

No man will doubt, much less deny, but that as this wonderful dispensation of
the Almighty is a Complication of numberless Mercies to this nation, and more
especially to those therein who having engaged on the weaker side, were in a
low, depressed and hopeless condition; so it multiplies obligations upon us
both of Thankfulness, Love, Fear, Obedience, Considence toward that God, Who
remembered us in our low estate. Psa. 136.23. And of Charity, Humanity etc.
toward our Neighbors, and gives cause to look upon our selves, if we answer
not those obligations, in a far greater danger (as having received much greater
mercies) then what Samuel denounc't against the Isralietes. 1 Samuel 12.24. Only
fear the Lord and serve him in Truth with all your heart: for consider how
great things he has done for you. But if you shall still do wickedly, ye shall be
consumed both ye and your King. Signal mercies challenge signal returns. Signal
ingratitude does draw on signal Judgments.

I will not take the task upon me to enter into a strict enquiry how we answer
God his expectation, in our retributions to him for all his Benefits. I shall
only so far take notice of the apparent increase of Drunkenness, Excess, and
Profaneness, as to appeal to all sober men whether that reproof be not suitable
to us, which Moses used against his People, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the
Lord O ye foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy Father that has bought
thee? has he not made thee and established thee? But because God is the
searcher of the heart, I shall humbly leave this sore to his fuller search
wishing earnestly for his Grace to enable us so, both to examine and Judge our
selves, that we may not be judged and condemned by him.

But as to the discharge of those great obligations which are thereby laid upon
us toward our Neighbors; Who can be so inobservant as not to see how
Universally the Spirit of Revenge has spread it self throughout this Kingdom?
what repining at the Act of Oblivion and General Pardon? so far as to use that
scurrile us and disloyal expression That it is a general Pardon for all the
Kings Enemies, and an Act of Obl^vion for all his Friends. How common are the
repetitions of those upbraiding names of Rebels, Roundheads, Fanatiques? (this
last extended unreasonably to any, who are not too extreme) What provocations
in Civil concernments? What stumbling blocks in Matters of Conscience? (though
I may grant weak and erring) What stiffness in things indifferent? as if
Abraham his example toward Lot his inferior Genesis 13.8. etc. were not to be
followed; nor the Precepts of St. Paul Romans 12.16. To condescend to men of low
Estate. and Romans 15.1. That the strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, were not to be observed. What exasperations, nay what exaggerations if
men shall, or shall but seem to, Humanum pati, to show some humane frailty? What
Indictments are brought upon some sudden forgetfulness under such
Provocations, and with what unusual violence prosecuted, and with no less
severity managed? How narrowly do men search to find starting-holes in the Act
of Oblivion? And set others Actions upon the Tenters beyound their true Staple
til they crack, to take from them the Bulwark of that Law? Nay how blindly do
men run for revenge sake into the very paths and footsteps of the Long
Parliament, Cromwell, his Mirmydons, against the Loyal Party, and so imitate
them whom they account the Pests of this Kingdom? In a word, what is left
untryed to make men desperate?

If this manner of proceedings shall be examined by the straight rules of men's
duties as they are Christians, as Men, and as Subjects, I am confident they
would appear so crooked and unanswerable in every respect, that Charity leads
me to hope, that the unreasonableness and danger of these eager courses being
thereby manifested, will make way for more moderate and sober Counsels. When
therefore I look upon the Law of Christ, it is so plain in this case, that I
may well say with the Apostle. 1. These. 4: 9. For as touching brotherly love ye
need not that I write unto you for your selves are taught of God to love one
another. God has created us all Brethren, has therefore stamped his Image
upon us all; and has renewed it, when defaced, through Jesus Christ, has
given to us the same Law, the same Promises, and hopes of the same Inheritance,
has ti'd us altogether with that indisoluble bond of Love; Made that the
fulfilling of his Law. Gal 5.14. the confirmation of our hopes, the earnest of
our Inheritance and the touchstone of our Love to God: without which here, no
hope of Union with Him hereafter. 1 John. 4.20. If any man say I love God, and
hates his Brother, He is a liar. For our Furtherance in this great duty God
has taught us by his own Example. John 3.16. For God so loved the World that
he gave his only begotten Son etc. 1 Ioh. 4.10. Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for
our Sins; Has magnified that Grace by owning of it v. 7. Love is of God; Has
owned it as his own essence, made it himself. v. 8. God is Love; And from all
this grounds our duty v. 11. Beloved if God so loved us, we ought also to love
one another; Has taught us by his Precepts John. 13.34. A new Commandment I
give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved you, That ye also love
one another. So again Chapter 15. v. 12.17. Christ there makes this his Badge, the
sure Mark of his Disciples. Chapter 14.35. By this shall all men know that ye are
my Disciples if ye have love one to another. And least any should presume to
limit this Universal duty within such bounds as Interest, Malice and Passions
of our corrupted narrow hearts would prescribe unto it, God has also taught
us, both by his own Act and by his Command, That none, no not our bitterest
Enemies, are to be excluded from being the Objects of our Love. Romans 5.8. But
God commends his Love toward us in that while we were yet Sinners Christ
dyed for us ver. 10. For if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God by
the death of his Son; much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life.
Ephesians. 2.4. To the same purpose Mat. 5.44, 45. etc. But I say unto you love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use
and persecute you, That ye may be the children of your father which is in
heaven: For he makes his Sun to rise upon the evil and on the good, and
sends rain on the just and on the unjust. And to the same is that of Luke
6.25. etc. But because every man will be ready to affirm (as usully they do of
faith) That he has love: give me leave to say to him the same which St. James
to such boasters of faith Iam. 2.10. Show me thy love without thy works, and I
will show thee my love by my works. God has made his graces fruitful that they
may be visible, and occasions to glorify him. As faith works by love, Gal.
5.6. So love also is continually operative; Mercy and Pity, and their effects
flow from it, as light and warmth do from the Sun. Thus has the love of God
manifested it self in the redemption of mankind through the death of his only
Son. Thus Christ made his love appear by laying down his life, and commands us,
as before, to love our neighbor even as he loved us, and to be ready to give
the same testimony of it as he had done. Commands us not only to love our
enemies, but to bless them, to do good to them, to pray for them, to forgive
them. Matthew. 6.14. To give, to lend etc. And from hence are those often
Exhortations and Precepts in Scripture to love, Mercy, Bowels etc. Zach 7.9.
Thus speaks the Lord of hoasts, Execute true ^udgment, and show mercy and
compassion every man to his brother. Romans 12.10. Be kindly affectioned one to
another in brotherly love, 14. Bless them which persecute you, etc. 1 Pet. 3.8,
9. Finally be ye of one mind, have compassion one of another. Love as
brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, rendering not evil for evil, or railing for
railing but contrariwise blessing, etc. Col. 3.13. Put on therefore (as the
elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of Mercyes, kindness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another etc. This is a
Principal channel whereby through the whole Scripture, the spirit of the
Covenant in Christ seems to delight to run. The first and second Epistles of
St. John are a continual Echo of Christ his last legacy so often commanded in
the 13. and 15. Chapter of St. John's Gospel. But my resolution for all possible
brevity enforces me to conclude this point with that of Romans 12.19, 20. Dearly
beloved avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath. Vengeance is
mine and I will repay, says the Lord: Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed
him, if he thirst etc. Much more to our Brethren, Qui eundem Deum ex eadem
lege colunt, etiamsi; forte sententiis quibusdam, aut Ritibus disside ant.
Grotius de Iure Belli: etc. who by the same Law, worship the same God, though
perhaps they differ from us in some Opinions or Ceremonies.

But because this may be thought by some to be too high a Form in this
corrupted Age, and to strict a rule, to be applied to the generality of men:
let us examine the proceedings before mentioned by those duties which lie upon
us as Men; among which none so natural, and therefore indispensable to us as
Gentleness, Tenderness, Pity, Mercy toward all Men, and has therefore
obtained the common name of Humanity, This I say is so natural to us that where
we are not hindered by Interest or other incitements of Corruption, we do as
naturally and without discourse or use of reason, exercise this virtue, as we
do eat, drink, digest, and other actions which we perform Ductu Naturae, by
natural instinct. So that to be wanting in this duty is to put off Man, nay to
fall below the nature of Beasts for

-- Clementiacunctis
In similes.
It may be objected, That such mere natural actions if not guided by Reason may
prove of most dangerous concernment, we may eat (if without consideration)
poison etc. I shall therefore lay that Rule also to them. But because this
would open a field too large for my intended brevity to run over, I will
consine this examination to that great esslux and operation of Reason, that
Cardinal virtue (for Moral virtue is but the perfection of Reason) Prudence.
Whether it be Prudent to grutch at the Act of Oblivion, to endeavor to
overthrow or in any Measure to lessen the benesit to any Person to whomsoever
it is intended, Let His Majesty give judgment, who accounted it to be a most
prudential Act in that his gracious Declaration from Breda. Apr. 4. 1660. to
prepare way for his reception not only into his Kingdoms but into the hearts
of his Subjects by holding forth his General Pardon to all except only (as his
Majesty explains himself in his speech to the house of Peers 27. July 1660.) to
the immediate Murtheres of his father: with this further Declaration in the
word of a King. That no other Crime whatsoever against Him or his Royal Father,
before the Publication thereof, shall over rise in judgment, or be brought in
Question against any of them to the least endamagement of them either in their
Lives, Inberties or Estates or (as far as lies in his power) so much as to the
prejudice of their Reputations, by any reproach or term of Distinction from
the rest of his best Subjects, desiring, and ordaining, that henceforward all
Notes of Discord, Separation, and Difference of Parties, be utterly abolished
among his Subjects. His Majesty acknowledges the great Benefit and Advantage
which he had reaped from those his Promises and Resolutions in that
Declaration. That he did owe his being there in Parliament, to Gods blessing,
upon the intentions and Resolutions he then expressed to have. That he was
persuaded, if he had not made that Promise, neither himself, nor those of the
House of Peers, had then been there. His Majesty there, and often since,
acknowledges that Love is his great Security; and mutual Confidence, the great
foundation of it. He well knows,

Non sic Excubiae, nec circumstantia Pila,
Qu^m tutatur Amor, nunquam extorquebis amaci,
Hoc alterna Fides, and simplex Gratia donat.
No circling Spears, nor Watches set by course,
So guard as Love, which thou can never force
From mutual Trust and Clearness, is Loves source.
From this ground his Majesty so often and so earnestly invites both Houses of
Parliament to bring that his Promise into an Act of General Pardon, Indemnity,
and Oblivion, which he there says, is the most reasonable and solid foundation
of that Peace; Happiness and Security which he hopes and prays for to himself
and all his Dominions, the securest expedient to prevent future Mischief, That
nothing can more enable Men of dangerous and obstinate Principles, to do so
much harm, as the deferring the passing of that Act. And in his Majesty's
Speech to both Houses of Parliament, 29. December. 1660. He concludes with this,
(which He says, He cannot say too often, nor they too often where they go)
That next to the miraculous blessing of God Almighty, and indeed as an
immediate effect of that blessing, He does impute the good Disposition and
Security that they all were in, to the Happy Act of Indemnity and Oblivion,
That that is the Principal Corner Stone which supports this excellent building,
That creates Kindness in Us to each other, and Confidence is our joint and
common Security, That they may be sure, he will not only observe it Religiously
and Inviolably himself, but also exact the Observation of it from others. And
that if any Person should ever have the boldness to attempt to persuade him to
the contrary; he will find such an Acceptance from him, as he would have who
should persuade him to burn Magna Charta, cancel all the old Laws, and to erect
a new Government after his own Invention and Appetite. His Majesty yet further
against the first meeting of the next Parliament, which was 8. May 1661. caused
a Bill to be prepared for the Confirmation of that Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion (there being some scruple of the legality of this preceding
Parliament, by reason of the Style of Custodes Libertatis Anglia in the Writ of
Summons thereunto) repeated in his Speech to them the same words, and tells
them, that He is still of the same opinion, and more if possible of that
opinion then He was, by the experience He had of the benefit of it. That He
shall never think him a wise man who would endeavor to Undermine or shake that
Foundation of our Public Peace, by infringing that Act in the least degree.
Passages of so plain and undeniable Reason, that to endeavor to enlarge upon,
or explain them, would but lessen and obscure them; I shall only observe upon
those his Majesty's irrefragable Principles. That this our Act of Oblivion, is
the happiest Copy that ever was drawn from the (...) of Athens: Quae concussum
and labentem Civitatis statum in pristinum Habitum revocavit. Which restored
that shattered, and even falling City, to its former Happiness and Estate. I
might add, That it is also the best parallel to it, whereby upon the return of
the People of Athens from Banishment, and the Miseries which attended it; and
the Ruin of the thirty Tyrants whose cruelty had enforced them to it, it was
enacted, Ne qua rerum praeteritarum mentio fieret: That there should not so
much as any Mention be made of any of those sad things that had passed among
them. Whether to compel men to be desperate be an Act of Prudence, I appeal to
every man verst in any degree of History to decide. It have ever been the
constant and unalterable course of all wise Commanders to avoid and prevent all
occasions of Despair to their Enemies.

Inclusis aperire Fugam, ne pejor in arcto Saeviret Rabies.
To open way for Flight to enclosed Foe,
Least straightened Rage should thereby fiercer grow.
And on the other side, have often put necessity upon their own Armies, as the
surest way to give Valor the sharpest edge. Vt scirent, auxilio sugae ademto,
aut vincondum, aut moriendum esse. That they might know that all means to sly
being taken away, they must either overcome, or dye. How successesul this later
course has been, does appear by Alexander the great, who had placed his Army
(consisting but of 34000 Foot, and 4000 Horse) with the River Granicus on their
beck, so that they could not fly, and thereby overthrew Darius with 700000
men. By William the Conqueror, who upon his first Landing in England burnt all
his Navy, so taking from his Army all hopes of Flight, thereby so enflamed
their necessitated courage, that they became Masters of the Field, and himself
of the Nation* How fatal the contrary has been, is evident by examples which
fill all Histories, I shall only offer two. The first is the most famous
Victory at the Battle of Poictiers, where the Black, Prince with about 8000
English, overthrew about 40000 French, and took their King Prisoner, who in
confidence of his advantages of number, etc. denyedany reasonable terms to the
English, any mediation though of the Pope, and forced them to extremities: of
which Victory, take the confession of a French Author Frossard. Qua nescio an
Vetust as proferre possit clariorem. I know not whether Antiquity can produce a
more glorious. The other is the late Victory of the English over the Scots at
Dunbar, 3. Sept. 1650. Where Ol. Cromwell having brought an Army of above 20000
to 7000, and of those not above 5000 sound, sinding his weakness, and having
slipped his Ordinance, and Sick, marched to return for England. The Scots having
intercepted his passage, held a Council and therein admitted some Divines, who
alleged that God had delivered Agag into their hands, and therefore if they
let him go, would require it of them: whereupon they wholly stopped the passage,
and enforced the English to sight, who now made desperate, overthrew the Scots
Army of 20000 men, regained their passage, and returned safe and victorious
into England. This last I mention to show that no place or age wants these
examples, and to manifest the gross error of Cromwell in not securing his
retreat, an observation I received from many of his own Colonels, who
therefore, and for some other mistakes, denied him to be of skill in Conduct.

What I have before cited by way of Argument out of the Kings own mouth, will
save much of what might be brought to prove how unanswerable these courses are
to the duty of Subjects. Certainly to break or lessen that which made the way
so smooth for his Majesty's return, which conduced so much to His and the
Parliaments safety when returned, which tends so much to the composure of men's
spirits, so much to the advancement of the Honor and Credit of the King upon
these His first and so necessary Promises to these Kingdoms (which if once they
sail, what foundation can the People ever have to depend upon for their
safety?) is so far from being agreeable to the duty of Subjects in relation to
the King, or of fellow Subjects in relation to others; that no sober
uninterrested Person but will judge such Actions as proceeding from the Enemies
of them both. Nothing can lay so sure a foundation toward Universal Ruin, as
the begetting of Universal Jealousies, Fears, Dispondencies, and Distrusts in
his Majesty's Royal and Solemn Word and Promises. And therefore I do the more
wonder and am unsatisfied, when I consider the Persons who are so forward in
these ways of Violence: those who term themselves Royallists, who would seem
to engrosse to themselves the Title of faithful Subjects to the King, and the
sole Care of his Person, Credit, All who magnify his Person as Sacred, and his
Power as Absolute: to see these Men thus to set up their own Interest and
Spirit of revenge so far above them both, that there should not the least
regard be had by them, so little to that his Declaration from Breda in April
1660. either in relation to tender Consciences, or Purchasers upon Public
Sales, or to that his other Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, in
October 1660. (that thereby some have taken the boldness to scatter scurrilous
papers about London, to enquire if any man have found his Majesty's Faith or
Promise lost between that City and Breda) gives too much cause to think that
these men do mean nothing of what they with so much noise pretend, that they
use his Majesty, but as a stale to their Lust and Interest, to which his
Person, Power, Safety, Credit, Kingdoms, All must veil or signify nothing. I
shall to this Point only add that Parallel both of his Majesty's gracious
deportment, and these men's Violence in King David and Abishai, 2 Samuel 19. When
Shimei, who had impudently and maliciously cursed David, did after meet him
returning with Victory to Jerusalem, Abishai stirs up David to revenge, saying
v. 21. Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the Lords
Anointed? Observe how David takes this motion, v. 22. And David said, What have
I to do with you, ye Sons of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be Adversaries
unto me? The Greek Septuagint renders it (...) insidi^sum, Treacherous. The
Chaldee Paraph, the Syriack, Arabique, and vulgar Latin Translations have it,
Ut sitis mihi Satan? That ye should this day be Satan unto me? Thus David
rebukes him as his Treacherous devilish Adversary. The reason hereof David
gives in the same verse, Shall there any man be put to death this day in
Israel? Do not I know that I am this day King over Israel? his return and
restoration to his Kingdom, was the reason why he pardoned Shimei, yea all the
men of Israel. And herein doubtless his Majesty in the former passages has
endeavored to imitate King David, and these so passionate Englishmen, do as
industrously follow the pattern of Abishai; herein only they go beyond him;
that we read not after David had so declared himself, that ever the Sons of
Zeruiah had the confidence to open their mouths against it. But these men
notwithstanding the King has so often and so fully declared his Gracious
Judgment toward his Subjects to all the World; yet still continue their
incessant endeavors to frustrate all those his intentions, to weaken all his
endeavors, and to break all his promises* In all that hitherto has been said
it was supposed as if those Persons who are, as before and full of revenge, had
conquered those over whom they now so much insult: and truly if they had, yet
such carriage, as it is manifested to be contrary to Humanity and Prudence, so
is it far below the Magnanimity of the Romans. Qui nihil victis eripiebant
praeter injuriae Licentiam. Who took nothing from those whom they conquered but
power to rebel. And of that brave Heathen who said, Armatus sit oportet quem
oderim. He must be Armed whom I hate. But if we should cast our thoughts back
upon the whole tract of our late troubles we shall find little ground for them
to boast of that. Alas, their turning their backs was so constant that some of
their Adversaries might have had the confidence of Z^sca, who willed a drum to
be made of his skin after his death in assurance that whenever it was brought
into the field it would be sufficient alone to put the Adversaries to Flight
who had so constantly sled before him when he lived. And I wish it were not too
true that some of those men have weakened the late Kings cause more by their
Debauchery then by their Cowardice my desire and resolution to abstain from all
unnecessary provocations takes me off from touching further upon this string;
or from pressing how clear an evidence such carriage is of the most beastly,
and lowest Spirit.

At Lupus and tristes instant morientibus Ursi.
The Wolf and ugly cruel Bear,
Their very dying Prey do tear.
How unworthy it is of noble and brave men, let the Scripture judge in that
answer of the Prophet Elisha, to the King of Israel 2 Kin. 6. When that Prophet
had led the great host of the Syrians (whom God at his Prayer had smitten with
blindness) into the midst of Samaria the King of Israel asked the Prophets v.
21. My Father, shall I smite them? shall I smite them? v. 22. And he answered,
Thou shall not smit them, would thou smite them whom thou have taken Captive
with thy sword and with thy Bow? Intimating that it were Cruelty to have done
it in cold blood to those whom he had conquered.

Post Acis, Odiis idem qui terminus Armis.
When Fight is done, all hate must cease,
And with Arms be laid down to Peace.
Much more where the absolute hand of God upon them had Delivered them into his
power. If this be not the present case, as at the first I hinted, I dare appeal
even to these men themselves.

I cannot here omit one Argument, which present experience has brought in
these few years of this great Revolution whereby is evidenced even to sense,
how unfit and improbable a way to Settlement these Violences are and are like
to be, by what they have already effected. Hand ignota loquer. I speak but what
is to well known. was there ever a clearer day in England then that wherein the
King appeared in his return to London 29 May. 1660? Was there ever a more
enlarged and Universal Testimony of satisfaction and joy, then at that time?
Did not many several judgments and Parties yet join and emulate in their
endeavors for his Majesty's Restoration, and Entertainment? Did ever Prince
offer himself to Public view with more applause, or ride, walk, swime, and
any thing with more security? Did not this Sereinty continue till by the Act
for establishment of the Present book? of Common Prayer, and the total neglect
of that His Majesty's Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs 25 October
1660. all hopes were taken from those who (as His Majesty therein says) had
declared themselves to him To be neither Enemies to Episcopacy, nor Liturgy,
but modesty to dosire such Alterations in either as without shaking of
foundations might best allay the distempers which the Indisposition of the time
and the tenderness of some men's consciences had contracted, from others whose
consciences were not satisfied with set forms till by so vigorous a putting in
execution of the Stat. of 35. Eliz. 1. (which was scarce ever made use of in
fourscore years before) many thousands were put in fear of Banishment for their
Conscience sake till thousands were cast into Prisons only for meeting to
serve God (at least as they think in a right way) till Purchasers upon Public
Sales found themselves left to the mercy of those who claimed those Estates,
and the gracious intentions of his Majesty in his Commission issued out in
favor of them made frustrate by the Commissioners not attending that Service,
till very many were at several times upon bare suspicion imprisoned, some sent
to remote Castles, etc. And thereby bereaved of that part of His Majesty's
Declaration from Breda which promised them freedom from the least endamagement
in their Liberties as well as in their Lives and Estates. But after that in
these and other things of so general and tender concernment so great and
considerable a number of the People, found such disappointments of their
Expectations though grounded as aforesaid Jer. 8.15. That they had looked for
Peace, but no good came, for a time of Health, and behold trouble. I wish I
might not too truly add, After God also so failed in his just expectation from
us, for such his unparrallel'd Mercies that he might now say as in Isa. 5.7. I
looked for Judgment but behold oppression, for Righteousness, but behold a
Cry. After these uncharitable Violences against our Neighbor have been
seconded with such open and universal dissolution and profaneness against God,
as if we alone had taken upon us to fulfill that Prophecy of Christ, Matthew.
24.12. And because Iniquity shall abound, the Love of many shall wax cold.
After all this and much more, there is indeed a sad and dark Cloud arisen, and
which every day increases, and has almost overspread the face of our so late
glorious Horison. How are men's minds filled with all manner of Fears and
Jealousies? How have they broken forth according to the several apprehensions
and constitutions of men, in some to desperate Attempts, in others to voluntary
Banishment and Transplantation of themselves, their Families, Stock, Trades,
etc. in very many to a Stupefaction, and sitting still, to a giving over all
manner of employments? what an unheard of deadness is there in all manner of
Trading over all the Kingdom? (whereof and of the Causes his Majesty takes
notice in his last Declaration, where he professes, That he can never think
the Peace of His Dominions secure, whilst there shall be a Color left to the
Malicious and Disaffected to inflame the Minds of so many Multitudes upon the
score of Conscience, with despair of ever attaining any effect of His Promises
for their ease) His Majesty is enforced contrary to his own inclination to
continue extraordinary Guards for the security of his Person, who can express
what dreadful events such Jealousies may portend? no man but may in some
measure guess. This I say is an Argument whereby the Truth of what was before
offered by way of Reason, is brought down and evidenced to Sense, wherein both
the Contraries being put together, they do appear as clear, as if written with
a Sun beam; so that, without the inevitable decree of this Nations ruin both
in Church and State be gone out from Heaven, it is impossible for us to be
possessed with such blindness, and dementation, as to forsake so plain a path
for our future Peace and Settlement, and to follow the other Precipice, whereof
every step appears already to be so dangerous, and the end destructive. God by
almost a miracle has put into our hands the power to provide for our future
Happiness and Security, and has graciously put it into His Majesty's heart to
choose the better part; who has accordingly shown in his last mentioned
Declaration, That he does and shall ever think his Royal Dignity and Greatness
much more happily and securely Founded in his own Clemency, and his Subjects
Love, then in their Fears and his Power: Wherein his Majesty not only acts
according to those rules of Reason and Christianity, but from his clear insight
into the nature of his People, who as Tacitus observes, when under the Power
and Conquest of the Romans yet were only Domiti ut parean, non ut Serviant,
Subdued to obey, not to Serve. The Foundation well or ill laid, concerns
exceedingly the whole building; if there be an error or defect in the first
concoction, it will hardly be rectified by all that follow: That will scarce
attain to be a true Settlement which is founded upon the Fears, Jealousies,
Dislike, and Dissatisfactions of so very many thousands, especially when
grounded upon or accompanied with those things which concern that whereof no
man can be Master, His own Conscience; whereof God only can be judge: Et sic
liberavi Animam meam.

FINIS.

