A NEW-YEARES-GIFT, OR A BRIEF EXHORTATION To Mr. Thomas Edwards; That he may
break off his old sins, in the old year, and begin the New year, with new
fruits of Love, first to GOD, and then to his BRETHREN.

PSALM. 7.14, 15, 16. Behold, he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived
mischief, and brought forth falsehood.

He made a pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made.

His mischeife shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall
come down upon his own pate.

PSALM. 50.19, 20, 21. Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames
deceit.

Thou sit and speak against thy Brother; Thou slanderest thine own
Mothers Son.

These things have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reproove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes.

By KATHRINE CHIDLEY.

Printed in the Year, 1645*

The Introduction or Epistle, To the Godly Reader.
THe cause which formerly moved me to Answer Mr. Edwards his first Book, was;
First, the frothinesse of his reasons: for when I saw them light, I thought a
man of understanding would not meddle with them, because they were so rotten
they could not hold together: And I conceived that if he were not answered at
all, he would then have abounded in vain glory.

Secondly, the hearing of the disturbance it made in the City, ( the better
party being greived that he so discovered himself, and the worser party
domineering, that Mr. Edwards was become their Champion,) moved me to take into
consideration the difficulty, and finding his book to be (as indeed it was) a
rangling-insinuating, -contradictory, -revengefull story, it appeared unto me
to be a task most befitting a woman; The consideration whereof moved me to
answer it publicly as it was published.

And forasmuch as it plainly appears, that this his second book (or
Antipologie) is of the same nature with his other, and has no more substance
then it, I do affirm, It was answered before it was written: for it
consists (for the most part,) of tales, and reports, it is an unsavory
history, full of revengeful-slaunderous-accusations, but abounding with
reprochful jeeres and evil calumniations; But I have now noted some things
therein which concern my self -- and all who fear God, and walk in his way,
[I mean the way of Separation] that way which Paul walked in, which way was
then called herisie, and so is still, by Mr. Edwards, and such as he.

Both I, and my faithful yoakefellow have jointly tasted of the pressures of
the Hyrarchy above these twenty years, and the Bishops-Priests have driven us
out of our place of abode 16. years ago: and we (amongst the rest of the
people of God,) are now prosecuted afresh by Mr. Edwards, and such as he, for
he has unjustly charged them to be the movers of sedition, and distubers of
the Kingdoms. By all which it appears that it concerns the Separation
principally to take notice of Shimies cursings, and Rabshakes raylings, and not
only to consider that it may be God has bidden them so do, but also to
declare that what they do is unjust, which was one cause that moved me to
endeavor (according to my skill) to unmaske the faces of those ungrounded
arguments, against Independencie, and Tolleration, in his former book, which I
answered three years ago: And though he has not ability to defend, or
relieve, any one of those his arguments against Separation, yet he charge
others with neglect in not answering his first borne: against that way, in
which book he declared that though it was the first brought forth, yet not the
first conceived: for that he had large tractates to put forth against the whole
way of Separation; I have waited these three years, for the bringing of them
forth,
but now it seems to me, It was a false conception.

Moreover I suppose that (Mr. Edwards) his painful laboring thus, arises
out of fear, least (as Christ is exalted, and as the hill of Syon appears
more eminently (then the Priests will be in danger to loose some maintenance (as
he has in part expressed in his former book (...)n his 5. Reason a(...)ainst
to(...)eration.
where he speaks of their demanding dues.) And true it is, that people
rightly informed will not have their necks captivated, under Jewish yoakes of
tithes paying, to maintain a popish-ordained-Clergie; for God requires his
people to maintain no Ministry but their own, even such as labor with them
in the word and doctrine, and not those who labor against them: And I know
right well that the Ministers of the Separation, have never been chargeable to
the Church of England, neither have any of their poor Orphans been left to
any of her Parishes, though their parents have suffered death (in prison) by
the cruelty of the Prelates, [as I could name diverse within these 10. years:]
yet God turned his hands upon the little ones and provided for them, according
to his promise, Zech. 13.7.
so that as the righteous parents were never forsaken, neither did their seed
beg their bread.

And Remember ( good Reader) that though Balack would have had the people of
God cursed, and Baalam would feign have had the wages, yet at length he was
constrained to confess, that surely there was no enchantment against Jacob,
neither divination against Israel, but according to this time (says he) it
shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, what has God wrought? Behold the people
shall rise up as a great Lion, and lift up himself as a young Lion, he shall
not lie down, until he eat of the Prey and drink the blood of the slain,
Numb. 23. verse 23, 24.

K. C.

A BRIEF EXHORTATION to Mr. Tho: Edwards, that he may break off his old sins,
in the old year, and begin the new year, with new fruits of Love, first to
God, and then to his Brethren.
Mr. EDWARD'S,
THe causes of my writing unto you at this time are three. 1. Your threatenings.
2. Your challenge. 3. The outcries of the people against you, for that which
you delivered in Pulpits Pulpit, turned into Cockpits
where they expected to hear the Gospel of Jesus Christ Preached by you; in
stead whereof, they hear proud boastings that you will after your skirmishing
with the Separation take their Fort* But peradventure you may, by your fishing
for others, be caught your self. Now our fort, and fortress is Jesus Christ,
and though you take him, you shall never take him from us, for he is all
fullness to all, and sufficiency for all, that draw near unto him; But
whether you intend so to take him as to rest upon him, or to take him as the
High Priests Officers once took him, to crucify him; let your hearers judge.

Sir, you are a brave warrior, and can fight well in a Pulpit, where you are
sure none shall come near you, so much as to give you an answer: for proof
whereof, witness your own confession in your Antipologia, that the
Separatists will not come in your Churches: Therefore you may easily make the
people believe great matters by your juggling, where there is none to resist
you, nor hold out the light in opposition to your false figures; But if they
were there, they might not be admitted there to opose you, nor to use any
means to undeceive the people; But it is an old saying (though somewhat
gross) that every cock croweth on his own miksen, and that makes you so
bold, where you are sure you shall have no oposition.

But (Mr. Edwards) now I will counsel you, to muster up all your army you
brag of, and come forth, set up your colors, and pitch a field with the
Separation, bring forth all your strong reasons, not only the last conceived,
your latter thoughts, and studies, but also your large tractates [against the
whole way of Separation,] which were the first conceived of old, which you
promised in your former book In your Introduction.
for you have brought no argument in your Antipologia against Separation from a
false Church and false Ministry, but you have challenged all, high, and low,
Anabaptists, Separatists, and Semiseparates, etc. to bring a ground from
Scripture for the lawfulness of seperating from a true Church, which thing we
never strived for, for we know it is utterly unlawful. But this was your
policy (especially when you preached upon the house top,) to make the people
believe that those who separate from the Church of England separate from a true
Church: But this is yours to prove, I therefore challenge you now, to prove [by
the Scripture] that the Church of England is a true Church, and the Ministry
thereof a true Ministry, and that they have a true outward calling, which yet
you have not done, neither have you brought any argument neither in your former
book, nor in this Antipologia, that proves your Church and Ministry true; And
I think you dare not deny but that these be substantialls, and not some of
your mere circumstances, which you would have decided without the word of God,
Page 73.
for if the Church be but a circumstance, and the calling of the ministry a
mere circumstance, then you need not stand so much for it, and upon
ordination from the Pope, for if ever you be true Ministers of Jesus Christ it
must be without that, and therefore it appears to be you, who have
ordination by persons that are not ordained, and not the Ministers of the
Separation: for God has ordained his Church to ordain their own Ministers,
but has not ordained the Church of England, nor the Ministry thereof at all,
wherefore it appears that you can have no true ordination, unless you become
Separate; And all your arguments in your former book tended to the keeping
down of the kingdom and power of Jesus Christ. And all the tales which you
tell in your Antipologia, tend to the defaming of your Brethren as they came
from you. But (as your tales are in themselves) many of them turn to the
praise of those whom you would defame.

As for instance, [you tell us of their humility, and that they say that they
dare not take upon them to determine all the ways of God,]

For ought I know they do well, 1 Samuel 13.14.
for the Prophet David, who was not only a King, but a Prophet of God, and a
man after Gods own heart, thought not himself sufficient for that work of
universal determining, which you may plainly see in the 119. Psalm, where he
so often desires of the Lord to teach him his - ways, -statutes, -precepts,
-commandments, -testimonies, -laws, - and to direct him in his word, yet
David refresh not there, but strikes Covenant with God, promising that he will
run the ways of Gods commandments when he has learned them, Psalm. 119.32.
and also that he would teach others when the Lord had taught him, even as you
say these men have done, for you report that they are active for their way: Now
if God have made known his way to them more fully then he has done
heretofore, they ought to be more active for it, and as God enlarges their
hearts, so to enlarge his praise.

You tell us of a sort of Anabaptists that would preach on the top of houses,
because they would imitate the Apostles. But have you not now taken their
turn? for these men (as you say) even the Apologists, with diverse others have
of late preached not only to the Parliament, but also to the people in diverse
places, which you name as Margrets Westminster, Michaell Cornewell, Mag^es at
the bridge foot, and Stepney, with other places. These men (I say) preaching
true doctrine there in the ears of the people, you have published it (as it
were) upon the house top, for you have put them in print, that so we that are
Separatists, who dare not come to your Church; and all the men in England may
know it. And you have threatened to print them at large Page 219.
.

You say, their doctrines make for their way, -- and they are active for their
way. Answ.
-- Indeed (Mr. Edwards) though Gods ways be not as men's ways, yet when men
make Gods ways their ways, they ought to be active for the same, for they are
the ways of peace, the ways of truth, and the ways of life, and though they
are narrow ways, because there is no rule leading unto them, but the Word of
God, yet he that is guided by Gods spirit shall be led into all truth Joh.
16.13
; Therefore it is good for you and all persons to labor to be clothed with
humility, for God has promised to teach the humble his ways.

You say there are four passages (in the Apologeticall Narration) which are
good and useful amongst so many bad, Therefore we will consider of these
which are good, and useful, amongst those which you say are bad.

The first being their acknowledgement of the Parliament.

Answ.
Herein I conceive they give Caesar his due.

The second of the Assembly of Divines. They did not give them the Title of a
Synod, Answ.
nor atribute authority to them to determine for the Church of Christ, laws,
rites, or ceremonies, etc. For I think they did not understand them to have
(or to be capable of) any such power from God: for if these had known they had
assumed it, they would not (as I think) have been of them.

The third is their taking notice of the miscarriages of the Separatists.

Answ.
In this they did very well, and made a good use thereof, as I may judge from
your own speeches, concerning their way, and I pray you tell me (Mr. Edwards)
for what end were the miscariages of Gods people (written by the direction of
Gods spirit) but to warn others of the Saints from falling into the like; for
wherefore did God at any time punish his people (for their Sins) but to
recall them back, that so he might be reconciled unto them again; but never
to deter them from his holy ways, wherein they walked before, or when they
practiced those miscarriages.

If Adam should have offered no more sacrifice, because Caine fell out with his
Brother (for offering a better Sacrifice then he,) he should have been
condemned of his own conscience* for the way was never the worse for Caines
miscarriage. And the way that Jacob walked in, was the way of God though the
sons of Jacob sinned; They were godly and holy men in the maine, though they
missied it in selling their brother; Genesis 37.7, 8, 9, 10.
And did not God visit them in mercy, to bring them to a sight of their sins,
when he caused their sheafs to bow down to Joseph's sheafe in Egypt, Genesis 42.
and 43. and 44. etc.
and caused Joseph to afflict them, to put them in mind of their sin; yea,
did it not work that good effect upon them, for which the Lord sent it, by
causing them to accuse themselves saying, we are verily guilty concerning our
brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we
would not hear, therefore this evil is come upon us; Nay, did not God further
illustrate Joseph's glory before them, not only by making all their sheafes to
bow down to his sheafe, but in letting it be seen that the Sun, and the
Moon, and the eleaven stars fell down before him, when they all went down
into Egypt; we will not deny but that the sons of Jacob did fatally
miscarry, yet the way of God wherein they walked was not therefore to be
abhorred, and yet their miscarriages are set before us all as land-markes, that
we should take heed of running upon such shelves; And I hope these Apologists
have not forsaken the ways of truth for the miscarriages of some that have
walked in the way before them, for you say, they have been active for their
way since; And I hope that they know that the way was Christ's, though Judas
betrayed his Master, and Annanias, and Saphira discembled, and Simon Magus was
proud, and one of the Church of Corinth, committed fornication, and Demas
forsook the way, and embraced the world, and Diotrephus (Antichrist like)
sought for pre-eminence, and many Balaamites crept into their society, who
preached for wages, and if any should have said that the way of the Gospel was
not the way of Christ, because these persons (and such as these) did miscarry,
it would have discovered great ignorance in them; for though they were spots in
their feasts of charity, yet the Church of God had always power to cast them
out, and that without the help of a Synod* which has been proved at large in
my answer to your book against Independency and Tolleration So that though the
Saints of God who are chosen vessels unto him should fail, as Peter did in
denying his Master, through the slavish fear that he was in of that company
of Priests, which Crucified Christ in that time, and the believing Corinths
wrought upon to eat things sacrifised to Idols, (according to the doctrine of
Balaam,) as some of the Church of Pergamus and Thyatira were, yet
notwithstanding these personal infirmities, the way of God wherein they walked
ought not to be abhorred, but we are to make the same use of these fatal
miscarriages now, as the people of God were to make then of the miscarriages of
Noah, Abraham, Lot, David, Soloman, Hezekiah, and diverse others, and not to
run upon the same shelves: And though these Apologists abhorred the
miscariages of those that went before them, in the way of Separation; yet by
your report, they still follow the way, and so they ought, for we are commanded
to walk in the way of good men, and to keep the paths of the righteous.

Objection.
But some may say, can those be called righteous men that so miscarry?

Answer.
We affirm still that the way is a righteous way, and if any man (that desires
from his heart to walk uprightly in it) fail through infirmity, he has an
advocate with the father Jesus Christ the rihgteous, and needs not to go to
a Pope, or a Synod for a pardon of his sin.

Objection.
Some peradventure will say, you will have the Saints to be subject to no Law!

Answer.
If the Saints break a just Law, they must submit to the sensure of that Law,
if they break their Covenant, and violate it in sinning openly against any of
the rules of Jesus Christ which he has given to his Church, they are subject
to be sensured by the Church, for the law was made for the disobedient. But
those that walk holily, against such there is no law. Magistrates were given
for the punishment of evil doers, and not only so, but for the praise of
those that do well, and these are the two parts of the Magistrates duty, which
if they neglect, they must answer it to God* who sits in the Assembly of the
Gods, and weighs all their proceedings.

And now what have you got by the Apologists declaration? (that they have
observed the failings of the people of God*) You have merely bewrayed your
own ignorance, for if you had knowledge, you might have made a better use of
their speech.

You say, their fourth thing that is good is their description of the people of
the Church of England.

Answer.
I conceive they speak of some of whom they had hope, because they conceived
them to be pliable to receive what is brought them for truth, and also capable
to discern error, in some measure; so it appears that if they preach error,
the people are capable to discern it.

But to leave this as a thing that does not much concern us that are
Separates, I will borow leave to paraphrase a little upon your applycation,
which you make of the miscariages of the Separation. You say you would have had
the Apologists to have made use of these men's fearful sins, to have deterd
them from their way, and you nominate Brown, Boulton, Barrow, Smith, and
Jonson. But here you commit two evils.

First, you insinuate a slander against the dead. Secondly, you would have men
forsake the the way of God for other men's failings.

For the first, you speak of their fearful sins; but you mention nothing,
The greatest sin that ever I heard any of them accused withal was, their going
back to communicate with the Churches of England and Rome, which was a great
sin indeed, for Idolatry is as the sin of witchcraft, and to speak the truth,
this is that great principle which has caused so much division among the
Separation.

You refer us to the stories of Brown, Boulton, Barrow, Smith, and Jonson.

I pray you ( Mr. Edwards) what Stories are those? and what are their fearful
sins therein mentioned? It may be you mean some lying popish stories (made by
some trencher Poets) for Prelates, like the stories made by Mercurius Alicus at
Oxford, and some of those stories are (by those who are best informed) ta^^n to
be like this book of yours. And like a book written by Mr. Peter Studley [my
old Parish Priest,] which he wrote diverse years ago, against the Professors
in the Church of England, concerning Enoch Abevan, who because he was mad, and
in his madness killed his Mother, and his Brother, this Mr. Studley (called by
the honest party, (Study-ly) inveighed against that way of profession,
and nonconforming, as you do against the way of Separation.

And touching the Apologists silence in not declaring the priciples which were
the causes of the divisions.

I Answer. It may be they did not perfectly see them.

But I pray you tell me, how you dare charge all these men you have mentioned
with fearful sins? If the sins were so fearful, which Brown and Jonson
were guilty of, the one in stepping back to the Church of England, for fear
of persecution. The other to the Church of Rome (for fear of nullifying his
baptism, because he had it in a false Church, thinking that there could be no
true Ordinance (in any respect) in a false Church,) and so was constrained
(through want of faith and light to justify the Church of Rome and her
daughters, (as Mr. Samuel Rutherford has done,) tell me Mr. Edwards, what case
are you in then? if their cases were so fearful in justifying your Churches.
For surely upon your own principles, these were virtues to justify your false
Churches to be true.

Smiths, you may know was of another nature, for he went from the Churches of
the Separation, because he judged them unbaptised persons, and that was his
ignorance.


But what have you against Mr. Barrow? Was there ever any thing justly laid to
this Separates charge? He was indeed hanged at Tyburne, for maintaining That
the Church of England was a false Church* and so was Mr. Greenwood who was his
companion and fellow Prisoner, though there was no matter of fact laid to
either of their Charge worthy of death or bonds: These two men were put to
death by the Prelates, in Queen Elizabeth's time, without her knowledge or
privity, and that Early in a morning, the figure of their sufferings being seen
in the Sky, by Mariners that were in other parts, and it was supposed, by the
beholders of the figure (then to be done in England) because of the women's
wearing of hats*
for the two poor widows that attended upon them in the Prison, waited upon
them to the Gallows bearing their winding sheets; the figure of all which was
seen as was said before: But this was done without the Queens knowledge, the
grief whereof (by relation of those who were near her) she carried to her
death. Honest Penry suffered death about the same time, he was hanged at Saint
Thomas a wattrings, Early in the morning; And who dare say ought against these
men, but that they lived Saints, where Satan's throne was, and dyed as holy
Martyrs of Jesus Christ as Antipas. And it may be, these are the fearful
judgments you mean befell them; for no other judgments befell them in this
life, and they shall be freed from judgment in the life to come; But such
false miracles you Priests work, (as has been told you at large in my answer
to your book against Tolleration) to make all the world wonder and run after
the Beast, Revel. 13*
saying, who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him? But why
did you not say that those were fearful judgments of God which came upon the
Martyrs, who were burnt in Smithfeild in Queen Mary's time? they suffered for
the same cause as far as they saw then: and the sentence against them (as it
came from the seat of the Magistrate) came from heaven, as well as the sentence
against Barrow, and Greenwood, and Penry, and all the rest of the people of
God. If you will deny this, you will deny Queen Mary to be a lawful
Magistrate, for the secular powers passed the sentence of condemnation then, as
in Queen Elizabeth's time; for when the priests once had cried, that such and
such of the Saints were guilty, then the Magistrates passed the sentence, that
so the Priests hands might be cleansed from their blood; as witness Mr. Foxes
book.

But to leave these holy Saints at rest with God. I will speak something of
those that are living, both the people of the Separation and the people of the
Church of England, As touching the people of the Separation, they are all
visibly holy. If any root of bitterness is seen to spring up amongst them it
is cast out.

But you would intimate that the casting out of a sinner is a strong division,
or else what do you mean, by the strong divisions you speak of, for there is
no other division of the Separation, but the separating the precious from the
vile. That was a strong division which was made in the Church of Corinth, 1
Cor. 5.
when they cast out the incesteous person, but it was a true, holy, and just
division, because God required it, and they were not to keep the feast of the
Lord, till they had made that division: For if they had, it would not have
been for the better, but for the worse. For they ought not to have kept the
feast with old Leven: Such holy divisions you seldom (or never) make in the
Church of England, neither indeed can you, being all in confusion, therefore
you were not capable to pick motes out of other men's eyes, for as much as the
beams were so bigg in your own, And whereas those that commit sin in the
Churches of Christ are cast out and remain no longer there, and are not
admitted again without repentance: The members of the Church of England
committing sin, yea, being common, and ordinary, and known sinners* yet they
are forced to be still of your Church, or else they shall be punished: yea,
though they commit sin worthy of death, and be condemned by the sentence of
the Magistrate, yet remain they uncast out of your Church, as appears by
giving the Sacrament to Thieves, and Murderers when they are going to the
Gallows, be they never so impenitent.

Objection.
It may be objected, This is a false charge, for we do not now admit all to
the Sacrament, we are about reforming.

Answer.
The Church of England was never so deformed [for the most part of the Kingdome]
as it is now, yet there is not the worst Parish of the Church of England, but
it has the Sacrament still, by which actions the Priests become open violaters
of Gods Commandments, and that against their own knowledge, in casting Gods
holy things to dogs; yea, the best in England, that takes upon him a Parish
charge, is guilty of this sin actually, in sealing the seed of wicked men
with Baptism, yea, and all men in the Church of England are guilty thereof,
that consent thereunto, though it be but with silence.

But how can it be said that any of the people of the Church of England are
wicked, Objection.
seeing they are all members of the Church; for the dogs and enchanters, etc.
are without? Revel. 22.15.

Answer.
By this it appears what manner of Church the Church of England is, even such
a one as Mr. Henry Barrow has discribed it to be long ago; for if you please
to read but his discovery of a false Church, which he wrote in prison, you
shall see there he has proved the Church of England to be as the Church of
Rome is, even Babylon, a filthy cage of all unclean and hateful birds. But
rather then you will take Mr. Barrowes advice, and the counsel of the Holy
Ghost to come from among them, you will sooner help to hang all such Barrowes,
and then say it is the judgment of God upon them: for none has been more
forward then your self to persecute the Lords people, as appears by your
Writ of Ne admittas,
which you sent to the Parliament, to keep the Petitions of the poor Saints
out thence. But it will not be for the Parliaments safety, to take such wicked
counsel as yours, I hope the Parliament sees (by this time) that God is
making inquisition for blood, yea, for the blrud of the Saints. And therefore
it is better that all sin which has been committed, should be repented of,
then that more should be added to the stock.

By all this you may see that the 4. things (in the Apollogie,) which you say
are good, are good for us, but not for you: And if you had not been benumed in
your spirit, you would never have taken up (against us) such weapons, which (if
you had been sensible) you might have known would have come positively against
your self; But these tales which you tell in your Antipologia, are like unto
some of your tales which you tell the people in the Pulpit: for there you say
you will face the Separation, and they will fly away, but you are shrewdly
mistaken: For I, (who am one of the meanest) dare give you the meeting, and I
hope to speed as well as I did, when I met that ragged Regiment which you set
out against Independency and Toleration, which you called your Scout; (in your
8th. Reason against Independency) and joined and subjoyned forces against
Tolleration.

Moreover you say, (in your Antipologia) that the Anabaptists cast away their
baptism, (received in a false Church) because they will not put a new piece to
an old garment. And upon the same ground, you say the Separation would have the
Material Churches pulled down.

If this be one of the Anabaptists grounds (as it may be it is) then you may
see their mistake: Answer.
For they ought to discern between Baptism in a false Church, which is an
Ordinance of God; which that Church has stolen and carried away in their
Apostacy, they ought (I say) to put a difference betwixt that, and an Idol of
their own making, as for example. The circumcision, which Jeroboam carried with
him, was Gods; but the Calves were his own, Daggan, and his Temple was the
Philistems, but the Arc was Gods. And therefore if the Separates desire the
pulling down of the Idols Temples, they do well, but if these high places
stand, they will be no piece sowed to their garments, for they touch them not.
But they have not been more forward (in this good work of the pulling down of
the Idols Temples,) then your self in writing to the Parliament for a whole and
total Reformation, because they should not be blemished, you would have them
to pull down the high places and all Idols and Idolatry,
as whosoever reads your Epistle to your book against Independency may see
at large, where your reasonable arguments are set down to the Parliament for
that end and purpose. But the Anabaptists have no such ground to put away their
Baptism which they received in a false Church, as has been proved before.
The Calves and high places of Jeroboam were to be done away, and it was their
duty to demolish them, because they were a curse to the Land, and Idols of his
own making as has been said before: But the Circumcision which was Gods,
which they carried away with them, they brought again to Gods Temple, (as we
have done our Baptism,) and were accepted. By all which it appears that you
are able to lay no error to the chage of the Separation.

Moreover in this your Antipologie, you advance, and extol your book against
Independencie and Tolleration: You say, that the Apologists meant that, as well
as others, which were written with strength against there way: And secondly,
you affirm it to be argumentall, and that therefore it behoved either all or
some of them to have answered it.

I Answer, They know best what they have to do, yet for my own part, I did
conceive it ought to have been answered, and therefore I answered it my self,
and that for these reasons.


First, because you should not be wise in your own conceit. Secondly, because I
read that our Savior Christ answered Satan, when Satan brought false
arguments against him, and it is also written, that we should be ready to give
a reason of our hope, to every one that shall ask us: and I considering the
many questions that you asked, and the weakness of your reasons and
arguments, and the untruths of some of them, and how contradictory they were to
one another, thought it very easy to undermine and overthrow them, therefore I
answered them, holding it meet for those who were more able, not to trouble
themselves therewith, but to be employed in matters of far greater and higher
concernement. But seeing you are yet so bold as to stand in it, to affirm that
your book was argumentall and ought to have been answered by them all, or
some of them.

I desire again to repeat the heads of some of the Chiefest of your arguments,
that so rational men may consider, whether they be truly Logical.

The substance of your first Argument is this: Its evident that the Church of
God could not stand without some other help,
then Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, and all other
Officers: But you have not declared any evidence, neither Scripture nor true
reason: what! must we then believe you upon your bare word? I will not, for
that were to make you a God, or at least one infalliably inspired.

Your second argument is, that the Government of Independent or separated
Churches, is not of divine institution, because it forces them to have
Ministers without Ordination, which thing is an untruth like your former, as
has been proved at large in the Answer thereunto: and there are diverse
untruths in this reason (or section) which have been answered, as will plainly
appear to those that will take the pains to read your book and mine.

Your third, is; that it is not to be thought that Christ would leave such a
Government, that affords no way of appeal, etc. This is answered at large:
that the Churches of the Separat^^^^ have true ways of appeal. But the Church
of England has not.

These be your mighty Arguments of strength, which deserved an answer, though
you proved none of them: If the answer which I sent you already have not
sufficiently proved your arguments to be groundless, declare (I pray you) what
substantial point is not answered, (if there be any substantialls in them) and
it shall be answered by Scripture, and good reason, or else you shall have the
conquest.

But you have (in this your Antipologia) named some learned Authors; who have
written against Separation, amongst which Mr. Rutherford is one.

And I have seen Mr. Rutherfords book, and also weighed it, But I could not
discern, that he has set down any thing against Separation that has any
force, neither has he proved any thing sufficiently, but has propounded many
queeries. which have been both framed and answered long ago, and he has in
his discourse expressed and repeated many answers, which have been made (to
those queeires,) by the Separation, and running them over, he tells us what
this man says, and what that man says, and what another man says, but he in
declaring his own conceptions, (following his blind zeal, and popish Authors)
runs himself headlong to justify the Church and Ministry of Rome: against
the Separates arguments, there specified, bringing no sufficient proof either
of his own or other men's against them: Mr. Rutherford has diverse times in his
book named (or rather nicknamed) me in stead of answering me, he has made a
show to repeat some of my arguments, and yet there was no argument in my book
(so childish) (though he calls them so) which he has answered, no, nor so
much as set my arguments down indeed as they are, as whosoever takes the
pains to read his book, and mine may see.
Therefore I would have understanding men to consider whether this of his be
learned or pious writing yea or no? The general scope of his book tends to
prove that the power of the Church rests in the hands of her Officers. But he
should consider that Christ has given the power to his Church which is his
body and spouse, of which: (and of whom) he himself is the head and Husband,
neither can any Officer in the Church move [ Ecclesiastically] without the
power of the Church, no more then a man's Arm, or Leg, or prime member can
move, except it derive power from the body of which it is a natural member:
Yea, the power of the Keys is as absolutely the Churches, which is Christ's
wife, as the power of the Keys of the Family are the Mistrises, to whom the
Husband gives full power; and I think no reason^^le man will affirm (if her
Husband give her sole power in his absence) that she is subordinate to any of
her servants. Now the Scripture is clear, that Christ (who is ascended up on
high) has delivered the power to his Church, therefore it is against the light
and law of nature, to conceive the Church to be thus subordinate to the
servants; but rather (we may speak with reverence to Christ) that her servants
are subordinate unto her; and it is a dishonor unto Christ for them to usurp
ecclesiastical authority over her; But in case they should so do, she has
received commission from Christ her Husband, to deal with them, according to
the offense committed by them, and if need require to cast them out, and then
not to suffer them to enter in again but by the door of Repentance.

But as Mr. Rutherford, by pleading for the Ecclesiastical power to be in the
Officers, has given great advantage to the Pope, so has he to the
Anabaptists, by pleading the universallity of his Church, bringing in the seed
of wicked men to be baptized because their fore father was a believing Parent,
Isa. 2, 6.
but upon this ground all the Infants in the world are baptizable, because a
believer was the father of them all. But the Scripture teaches us otherwise,
for the House of Jacob was forsaken by the Lord, because they enlarged
themselves from the East, and were Southsayers like the Philistime, and pleased
themselves, with the children of strangers.

YOu have joined to your Antipologia, certain reasons against Tolleration,
which are the same in substance with those which you brought in your former;
And seeing they have been largely answered there, in the answer to your ten
reasons, and in my reply, to your answer to their six reasons: It is folly for
you to study to relieve those reasons to serve your turn; For until you are
able to stand out, and prove by the word of God, that the Church of England
(which you call your Church) is the Church of Jesus Christ, as it now stands in
confusion; And the ministry thereof (either in the Synod or out of the Synod)
is the ministry which Christ gave to his Church, when he ascended up on high:
Till this is proved (which can never be) all the arguments which you have
brought, or can bring against the Separates (under the names of Sectaries) are
still against your self. For whether there be Sectaries, or Scismaticks,
whether Athists, or Papists? whether wanton witted Christians, (as you term
them) disobedient to Magistrates, unfaithful to King and State, Obstinate
Rebels, nay, what ever wickedness can be named, the persons practicing the
same are found to be Members of the Church of England. Therefore I would advise
you, hereafter to let Baal plead for himself: And go not about to make the
Magistrates believe, that it is their duty to suppress the Church of Christ,
to heal the Rents of your confused Church state, for though all the Prophets
in the land would heal Babel, yet she shall never be healed, for in a general
Apostasy there can be no true Reformation, but by a total visible Separation
of the precious from the vile.
And therefore you come short when you would intimate, there is nothing between
you and us in point of the ministry, but that our Ministers must sease from
their outward temporal labors, employments, or trades, for our Ministers have
no false calling upon them, as yours have which is a great gulf betwixt your
Ministers and ours, and betwixt you and us, And concerning our Churches you say
the controversy were at an end,
if our ministers would grant to our Churches, that Assemblies and Synods,
might judge and pass sentence upon our members as often as they see just
ground, But truly (Mr. Edwards) this were to adulterate from the true pattern
left unto us, and as this argues in you great slothfullnesse and pride, so (if
your council were followed) it would make others like you; but as our
Ministers do not desire to live Idly, as you would have them do, neither do
our Churches desire the thing which you would have our Ministers grant them:
you may know that you do not go according to the rules of Scripture, when you
persuade the Ministers of the Gospel to sease laboring with their hands: For
when Paul called the Elders of Ephesus, to give them their charge. He set
before them his own example, Acts 20.
I pray you read the 20. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles: And see whether
Paul required any to leave working with their hands: no sure, he commanded the
direct contrary: where he expressed that he Coveted no man's Silver or Gold, or
Apparel. But says, that they knew that his own hands ministered to his
necessities, and them that were with him. And further says, he has showed
them in all things how that so laboring they ought to support the weak,
Remembering the words of our Lord Jesus, how he said, It is a more blessed thing
to give then to receive. And concerning our Churches submitting to Synods, to
judge their cases; That were to make themselves fool: That were to go from
the greater, to the lesser, and (you your self do ask) what a rule is this:
Page 136.
For if there be a wise man amongst us, we ought not to go to law with one
another before those that are without, for temporal things, much less about
spiritual things: For the Apostle has declared that the Saints shall judge
the world, yea, the Angels; If this be true, (as no understanding man can deny)
then it would be a more greivious sin, and woeful adultery, for the Spouse
of Jesus Christ to seek, or sue, to a power, that is neither Jure Divino, nor
Jure Humano:

And now I will speak something to these your 8. reasons against tolleration,
though they are of the same nature with the other in the first book, and so
have been answered already, yet to satisfy the Reader more fully, I will here
give answer unto them particularly. But I would have you (and all men) know,
that I do not (neither do any that are truly religious) plead for such a
Toleration, as you would father upon us, even a Toleration to sin; We plead
not for a Toleration of all sorts of persons (who are members of the Church of
England,) for that were to plead for a Toleration for Thieves and Murderers,
and Adulterers, and Sabbath Breakers, and all sorts of wicked livers, that all
men might do as they list; But the thing we plead for, is a peaceable
enjoyment of our liberty to worship God, publicly, according to his revealed
word, most especially upon that time instituted for his public worship, even
the first day of the week, being the Lords day: And that all the 6. days, we
may follow our callings without fear of the execution of such unjust Laws
which former Parliaments have made; against such, who would not come to their
Common Prayer book, or submit to all the orders of the Parishes of England; for
such a Toleration as this we plead.

IN your first reason, you affirm that a Toleration of Independent Churches
and government with their opinions and practice, is against the Magistrates
duty laid down in the Scripture.

But I have proved it to be the Magistrates duty, to Tolerate the true worship
of God, and those practices which are according to the word.

But you would insinuate still your old slander, that we plead for a toleration
of herisie and Scisme: which we know is against the Magistrates duty; and this
makes against your evil way; For if a Parliament may not (as you say)
displease God to please men, nor wink at evil, to content some persons, And
if Parliaments in making laws for religion, must depend on the will of God,
revealed in his word, and not upon the consciences of some People. Then it is
dangerous for a Parliament to constrain men to submit to the decrees of a
Synod (or Presbytery) when neither the Presbytery, nor their decrees have
ground in the word of God.

YOur second reason is, that The Toleration desired is against the Solemn
League and Covenant taken by the Parliament and Kingdoms, and therefore the
Toleration desired comes to late, the doors being shut.

Ans. Here you lay a fearful aspertion upon the Parliament: for requiring such
an Oath and Covenant, Gospel Covenants do not teach men to persecute.
as if they intended to shut the Kingdom of Christ and his true worship out of
the three Kingdoms, for you say further, If the toleration were lawful in it
self, yet because of the Oath and Covenant, it is unlawful, though it might
have been granted before, it cannot be granted now, least the Kingdom should
be guilty before God of Covenant breaking.

Ans. Surely you will make the Parliament all like Herod, Mark. 6, 26.
they must take poor John Baptists head off, because of their oath!

But is this oath so foul as you would make it? and yet is it like the Decree
of the Medes and Persians, that it may not be altered. Wells God can deliver
Dan. 6.
poor Daniell in the Lions den, and (it may be) you shall come in our stead,
when once the Parliament discerns your wicked intentions.


But (Mr. Edwards) bethink your self, will not you blush, and be ashamed to
give in the oath in these terms, as you have ever expressed it (in this your
second Reason, page 283.) that we are to endeavor the reformation of Religion,
in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Government and
Discipline, according to the example of the best reformed Churches, [forgetting
the word of God] which ought to have been set before you (as it was indeed by
the Parliament) But you deal by the Covenant,
as you deal by the Scriptures, hack them, and mangle, and labor to make them
fit for your own turn; and yet you jeered the Apologists (when they spoke of
the way and practice of their Churches) because they did not name the Law or
O^d Testament in expres words (though they in the same place testify that they
reverence and adore the fullness of Scriptures and their sufficiency to make us
perfect, etc.) but here you have shamefully forgotten your self, and overslipt
both Law and Gospel. And so tie your selves to men's patterns without the word
of God.

And surely I cannot believe that the Parliament has Covenanted so, as you
infer in the same page of your book, How (say you) can they grant a
tolleration so different as their way is that will not depend upon a Synod? And
in the next page of the same Reason you say, that there is in the Covenant a
clause in the second branch, that we shall without respect of persons,
endeavor the extirpation of Scisme, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to
sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness, least we partake in other men's
sins. Now surely (Mr. Edwards) I wonder that wise men can smile upon you,
except it be in consideration of your folly, for you are made all of
contradictions, unless you would have us take it for granted, that it is
according to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness, that a number of
Priests should be called together of contrary religions, some for the Bishops
and some for the Presbytery, and some for Christ, and that the two first
casting aside the last, should agree to make decrees, and a Parliament should
be bound to establish them. Would this be now to extripate scisme? nay: it
would be to establish a grand scisme: For godliness is cast out by the two
first, and the Parliament must establish, what ever shall be thought of those
two first to be sound, whether it be for the Bishops the ancient fathers,
or for the Presbyters their younger sons: and so you would have the
Parliament to be indeed guilty of their sins.

YOur third Rreason is, that A Tolleration is against the nature of a
Reformation: and here you discover your self in this Reason; that the
Reformation you intend to make is to force all men in the Kingdom to submit to
some particular form,
for you say you cannot make a reformation but it must offend many consciences.
But if it be so, it will be the consciences of them that have knowledge in the
word of God: For the ignorant multitude will be offended at nothing, but of
what ever Religion their King will be of, they will be of the same, therefore
you are a contentious man indeed! that will offend the consciences of the
godly, to make your Church great, that so your revenewes may be large!

YOur fourth Reason is, A tolleration of men in their errors is against the
judgments of the greatest lights.

Ans. It is granted, Therefore you might have spared your labor, in citing
your ancient fathers: For in all that you do herein, I oppose you not.

YOur fifth Reason, is that the Magistrates tollerating of errors, and new
opinions, is a kind of invitation to them, etc.

Ans. This thing I grant.

And therefore the Magistrates ought not to tolerate errors, or any opinion
that is not grounded upon the word of God; And therefore I conceive it to be
the Magistrates duty, to make trial of the Synod, whether their gathering
together be according to the word of God? or according to the customs of this
Kingdom?
And whether they be not of the same nature with the Synod which used to sit
in the Convocation house? And whether any decree which they shall now pitch
upon [not having the Scripture for their warrant] may be consented unto? And
though it have the Scripture for their warrant, whether there be ever the more
weight in it for their decreeing of it: and it greatly concerns the
Parliament to consider whether the Assembly have any thing to do with the
things of God, [while they stand Priests by their OLD-POPISH-CALLING,] And that
upon your ground (namely) that the Magistrates ought not to tolerate errors,
or new opinions.

And all ways, and practices, are new, and strange, which have not warrant in
the word of God.

IN your sixth Reason, you plead against a tolleration of different forms of
Church government, for fear of division among Ministers and families (you
say) it will not stand with Christian policy, but it will stand with
Matchevillian.

Mr. Edwards, If Christian policy might take place in the Kingdom of England,
and all your Matchivillian policy banished out, there would be no striving
then about different forms of Religion; but Christ's true Religion and Gospel
would then have a free passage without interposing, for the free tollerating of
it will produce no mischiefs, nor evils at all; And it is not we, that
plead for different forms of Church government, but your own party.
We plead but for one entire government established upon sound principles,
unalterable. And not a government which may look with several faces, in
several times, upon several occasions, according to men's fancies.

And therefore it had been better for you to have held your tongue, then made
so many repetitions of things which have been sufficiently answered long ago.

YOur seventh Reason is, that Independency, or the Church way, as being a
scisme in forsaking the Reformed Churches, and constituting new, the way of
constituting Churches by the people, the way of making their Ministers, the
refusing of believers and their children to the Sacraments unless they be
Church members, with many more, are all flat against the primative pattern,
etc.

In these words you have so jumbled things together as it were in a broken
language. Answer.
If you mean that the way of Separation from your false Churches, and their
way of making ministers, and constituting Churches, is contrary to the
primative pattern, you speak untruly; for they make the primative pattern
their rule: And then (for their refusing of believers and their children from
the Sacraments, unless they be members of their Church,) in this you accuse
them unjustly also: for they do admit believers, and their Infants to the
ordinance of Baptism, though they be not members of a particular
congregation: for they are not capeable to be members before Baptism, (in
respect of order) and to partake of the Supper, till they be in [particular]
Church fellowship. And this I will engage my self to maintain against you, if
it please you to dispute the case; And therefore you had no need to have
branded this practice, with such a black badge, to call it the fountain of
evil, and root of bitterness and manifold errors and other mischiefs. For
this is but your bitter language against the truth.

And if you intend to make your rejoynders, and large tractates (which you brag
of,) of such stuff as you have made this Antipologia; It were better for you
to put on a buffe coat, and to go fight in the Army against your enemies, then
to sit at home to slander and accuse your friends, even those who never did,
nor thought harm to you or any other.

YOur eighth Reason is a commendation of the Presbyteriall way, and that by the
testimony of many fathers, and the testimony of the Scottish Commishioners.

But you say there will be objected a passage against it, in a book lately
printed of M. Simpsons.


Answ. I leave Mr. Simpson and you to try it ou^.

But if you had so defined your Presbyterian government, and set down your
bounds and limitts, what, and what not, according as you call upon the
Apologists, to define their Church way, then you should have had my judgment
of it, here, to the full. But to judge and determine so of a thing, which is not
yet begotten, or brought forth in this Kingdom, is not so easy a matter,
neither do we know what form or shape it will have when it is brought forth.
[It may (for ought I know) be a MONSTER like the Image of the seven beaded
beast,] and if it be found defective, Rev. 13.24.
then all, who have taken the National Covenant, are (by your own confession)
to endeavor the exterpation of it. Yea, And further (you say) as the
Parliament will not be respecters of persons, or partial, they must grant no
tolleration, but what is agreeable to sound doctrine.

In this you speak very true, although indeed you cross many of your former
speeches. And therefore the way to deside the controversy, is to sease writing
of such large tractates, wherein you do but (as it were) pick strawes (and
make abundance of repititions, to tryfle away the time,) (In my judgment) ( I
say) It were better (for your self, and Mr. Samuel Rutherford, and Mr. A.S.
(or any of you,
or whomsoever the Parliament shall apoint,) to produce Scripture and good
reason for your way, (if you can) and let as many of the Ministers of the
Congregations of the Separation, have freedom to produce Scripture, and sound
reason, for their way, [in a free conference.] And let the houses of Parliament
who are able to judge of the great, and weighty businesses of the Kingdom (let
them I say) have the hearing, and trial of the conference, and as things are
cleared, so let them allow, or disallow. And this is according to your counsel
(in page 304. of your Antipologia where you say. To conclude, If the way of
Independencie be of God,
and the Apollogists can make that good, let it be established by Parliament,
and let all come to that; but if not (say you) why then should it be tolerated.
In this I think you say right, stand to this, and let it come to the trial;
and do not insinuate against the Church way, as you have done (in this page,
and diverse other places of your book) where you say, the Devil would affect
the ^lleration of it. For that tolleration which the Devil would affect, is that
tolleration, which you would slanderously father upun us, and not the
tolleration we seek for.

And therefore I would have you to correct your language, and search and try
your ways, (as you exhort the Apollogists to do;) Consider with what spirit,
and intention you writ this book, Let your conscience reflect upon what is
plainly laid down before you, in the Answer to your former book, and in
this. And do not seek shifts, and superfuges. Consider and receive
admonition, though it be from a woman. I am sure many godly persons and
Churches beyond the seas, are grieved at your writing, as well as in this
Country.

Consider how that though you were, cried up by the worser sort, whose Champion
you were become, and that your confidence was so, of carrying any thing, and
saying any thing, yet your wit (so strong for you,) has deceived you.
Let my council (therefore) be acceptable unto you, Repent, Repent, of making
this Antipologie, give glory to God, and recant it, testify your Repentance by
coming out of your false estate, and recall this Antipologia. I have showed
unto you the greatness of your sin, and folly in particular, in making this
Antipologia, as well as your former book: They were both unseasonable,
disordered, sinful and ungrounded vapors; scandalizing the Churches of
Christ: There are many untruths in them both, and that not only where you make
naked relations of Tales, but where you make profession before God, and the
World, to bring sufficient reasons; when indeed you bring nothing but shadows
and fig leaves. And this sin of yours is agravated, by your laboring to
bring the houses to consent unto you, to keep under the people of God, and to
root them out of the Kingdom, or at least not to suffer them to perform
public worship, in the way which God requires. Now if a simple, and single
untruth need repentance, what repentance ought there to be for such a
compounded agravated evil as your is? And as I have represented it to your own
conscience, that you may repent and be humbled: So I turn you over to the
Parliament, to deal with you for the same.

Now if you had been a Member of a true Church, I could have admonished you in
another way,
But you [being in disorder] could not be dealt with by such an Order.

For what have I to do to judge them also that are without. 1 Cor. 5.12.
FINIS.

