THE PROLOGUE To the last new Play A Duke and no Duke.
Spoken by Mr. Jevon. Gallants,
WHo Would have thought to have seen so many here,
At such a Rambling season of the Year;
And what is more strange? all Well and Sound to the Eye,
Pray Gentlemen forgive me if I Lie.
I thought this Season to have turned Physician,
But now I see small hopes in that condition:
Yet how if I should hire a Black Flowered Jump,
And plye at Islington, Doctor to Sadlers Pump.
But first let me Consult old Erra Pater,
And see what he advises in the Matter.
Let Us see --
Venus and Mars, I find in Aries are,
In the Ninth House. a Damned dry Bobbing Year.
The price of Mutton, will run high it is thought,
And Vizard Masks will fall to ten a Groat.
The Moon's in Scorpio's House or Capricorns,
Friends of the City govern well your Horns:
Your Wives will have a mighty Trade this Quarter,
I find they will never leave their Natural Charter.
For once take my Advice as a true Friend,
When they a Walk to the new Wells pretend,
If you will avoid your Sail, quick hasten after,
They use more ways to Cool, than Drinking Water.
THE EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. Haines. TRapolin, supposed a Duke, in this place shows
Strange matters may depend on mere suppose.
One may suppose Masks chaste loved Nonsense Witty,
No Flattery at Court, nor Whig in the City
(...) am by one in the World supposed Pretty.
Fantasy digested unto Storms supposes,
Whereas you see no Lillies grow nor Roses,
^o Masks for Beauty pass that want their Noses.
The Reverend Cityzen, Sixty and above,
That by poor inch of Candle buys his Love,
Supposes that his Son and Heir he Got,
But Wife could tell that she supposes not.
The Trees by Rosamonds Pond, her Sins have known,
And tell-Tale Leaves, still stick upon the Gown:
Whilst the dull Sot, whilst he is a Cuckold made,
Supposes she is at Church Praying for Trade.
The Country Squire newly come to Town,
By Parents doomed to a Lawyers daggl'd Gown.
supposes some Bright Angel he has gotten
In our Lewd Gallary, till proving Rotten:
His Study soon he leaves for Sweating Tubs,
And Cook and Littlton, for Doctor Hobs.
Nor had Dull Cit sent Spouse to Drink the Waters,
So found her helping to us Sons and Daughters.
Had he supposed when e're her Belly Swells,
There must be something in it besides the Wells.
There Is no Man there had Married I Am afraid,
Had he not first supposed his Wife a Maid:
For it is Opinion must our Peace secure,
For no Experiment can do it I Am sure.
In Paths of Love no Footsteps e're were Traced,
All we can do is to suppose her Chaste;
For Women are of that deep subtle kind,
The more we dive to Know, the less we find.
Ah Ladies! what strange Fate still Rules us Men?
For whilst we Wisely would escape the Gin,
A kind suppose still draws the Wedlock in:
In all Affairs it is so, the Lawyers Baul,
And with damned Noise and Nonsense fill the Hall.
Supposing after Seven Years being a Drudge,
'Twill be his Fortune to be made a Judge.
The Parson too that Prays against ill Weathers
That thumps the Cushion till he leaves no Feathers.
would let his Flock I fear grow very Lean,
Without suppose at least of being a Dean.
All things are helped out by suppose, but Wit
That we cannot now suppose to get.
Unless a kind suppose your Minds possess,
For on that Charm depends our Play's Success.
Then tho you like it not, Sirs don't Disclose it,
But if you think it Bad, pray Good suppose it.
London, Printed by Geo. Croom, in Th^mes-street, over against Baynard 's
Castle, 1684.


