I Have perused this Comment or Exposition upon the Epistle to the Hebrews,
and finding it to be learned and judicious, plain and very profitable, I allow
it to be Printed and published:

JOHN DOWNHAM.

THE EXPIATION OF A SINNER. IN A COMMENTARY Upon the Epistle to the HEBREWS.

LONDON, Printed by THO. HARPER, and are to be sold by CHARLES GREEN, at his
Shop in Ivy Lane, 1646.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THe History of Christ, for his life, doctrine, and miracles; for his death,
resurrection and ascension, is copiously described by the four Evangelists:
But the Mystery of Christ, for the reasons, causes and effects of his
sufferings and actions, especially since his ascension into heaven and session
on the Throne of God, is exactly revealed in the Epistle to the Hebrews; which
seems in manner of an Appendex unto the Evangelists.

For that Epistle is frequently interserted with several deep mysteries,
containing, as it were, the history of Christ in heaven. How there in the
behalf of the faithful, he executes the sacred office of his everlasting
Priesthood; whereby he is able to save them for ever, who come unto God by him,
because he ever lives to make intercession for them. How he commiserates and
succors them in all their afflictions and trialls; for having himself been
afflicted and tried, he thereby learned the compassion of a merciful high
Priest. How he expiates and propitiates them from all their former sins, and
from all their after-lapses whereinto they fall through ignorance or infirmity;
for by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. How he
justifies and here difies them to that eternal blessedness, whereof he is the
heir and the donor, to admit them as co-heires with him; for he is become the
author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. How he consecrates
and dedicates their persons and all their sacrifices or holy services of
prayers, praises, and thanksgivings, which through him become acceptable to his
Father; for he is a Minister of the heavenly Sanctuary, and of the true
Tabernacle which God has pitched, and not men.

And therein is further accurately discoursed, what admirable benefits and
prerogatives are from Christ redundant to the faithful; for whom he has
obtained a Ministry so much more excellent, by how much he is the Mediator of
a better covenant established upon better promises. What necessary duties of
holiness the faithful on their part, over and besides their faith to believe,
are bound to perform, for the application and efficacy of those benefits, to
render them effectual to their salvation, which without holiness can never be
attained; for as without faith it is impossible to please God: so without
holiness no man shall see God. What virtue and power those benefits have upon
the conscience, to withdraw her from dead works, and to engage her in all
endeavors of holiness to serve the living God, by way of thankfulness to God
for his grace in Christ; for otherwise the soul is ungrateful and ungracious.
What solid comforts and assurances, under all the distresses of this life,
arise unto the soul from her endeavors of holiness, without which no soul
is capable of solid and assured comfort? for a sensual and sinful soul may be
sometime flattered and deceived, but effectually comforted and assured she can
never be, until in some measure she be purged from her sinfulnes, and
qualified by deeds or desires of holiness.

In the prosecution of these and the like points, the divine Author of that
Epistle proceeds after a grave and solid manner, yet soaring sometime into
expressions and reasonings so sublime, that he seems to penetrate the highest
heavens, and there to behold our Saviors actions. For the points he prosecutes
are high mysteries, of things so distant and remote from sense, that (as
himself acknowledges c. 5. v. 11.) many of them are hard to be uttered; and
therefore certainly, hard to be understood. Yet for the easier apprehension of
them, he always (...)

CHAPTER I.
GOD] The supreme and universal father, styled in the old Covenant, the God of
Israel, but in the new, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. At sundry times]
in the several ages of the world; as in the time of the servitude in Egypt, in
the time of the Judges, of the Kings, and of the Captivity, and a while
afterward, till about the finishing of the second Temple. And in diverse maners]
At one time after one manner, at another after another: as to Moses God spoke in
a singular and familiar manner, otherwise then to any other Prophet; for he
spoke with Moses mouth to mouth. Number. 12.6. And he knew Moses face to face.
Deuteronomy. 34.10. But to other Prophets God spoke after another manner; either by
Angels as his delegates, or by a voice sounding in their ears, or by a vision
before their eyes while they were awake, or by a dream while they were asleep.
Spake] Declared his will and pleasure for precepts, promises or judgments;
whether by voice, vision or dream. In times past] Anciently, during the time
of the Tabernable, and the first Temple: for after the finishing of the second
Temple, God spoke very rarely any way. Unto the Fathers] Not to the Patriarchs,
but to the people of Israel and Judah, who lived in the time of the Prophets,
and were ancestors to those Hebrews to whom this Epistle is written. By the
Prophets.] As by Moses and Samuel, by Elias and Elisha, and by the rest of the
Prophets whose works are extant in the sacred Canon of Scripture.

2. In these last dayes] The time of the Gospel is called the last days;
partly as opposed to the words before in times past; partly because the time of
the Law and the Prophets was before it; but chiefly because the Church under
the Gospel shall not receive from God any more Innovation or alteration; for
the time of the Gospel shall last till time shall be no more, till eternity;
and therefore is commonly called in Scripture the last days. See Act. 2.17. By
his son] Jesus Christ who here is opposed to the Prophets, by whom God spoke in
time past. Not that the Prophets were no way the sons of God, but because in
comparison of Christ they were not so accounted. For Christ by whom God spoke
the Gospel was more eminently the son of God then any of the Prophets, 4 ways:
1. By his conception; because he was conceived of a Virgin by the power of the
Holy Ghost. 2. By his function; because he was sanctified by God and sent into
the world, to publish and confirm the new Covenant; for which function he must
needs resemble God as a son the father, in divine wisdom, holiness and power.
This reason Christ gives why he called himself the son of God, John 10.36. 3.
By his Institution; because God appointed him his universal heir as an only
son is to his father. 4. By his Resurrection; because thereby he was
immortalised, or enfranchised from death and mortality; and consequently
deified as the son of God. This reason St. Paul gives applying to the
Resurrection of Christ the words of the Psalm, Thou art my son, this day have
I begotten thee. Act. 13.33. Whom he has appointed heire] God has appointed
Christ to inherit the sovereigne dominion and Kingdom of God; first by
granting him a right or title to it; and afterward by giving him the real
possession of it. Yet he possesses it not successively after his father, as
the manner is among men; but accessorily and jointly together with his father.
Of all things] His universal heir; he alludes to an only son, who is the sole
heir of all his fathers estate. For Christ is the unigenit or only son of God;
not that God has not other sons, but that he has none such as he. Seeing then
God is the universal proprietary and Lord of all things; therefore Christ
being his only son and heir, becomes universal Lord also of all things, over
all Angels and men, whether alive or dead. By whom also he made the world.]
God by the mediation or mean of Christ did reform and restore mankind who is
the chiefest part of the world, by giving him a new state and condition by a
new Covenant. For the Hebrews who have no or few compound verbs, say a thing is
made, when in regard of some qualities it is altered or renewed, or made
otherwise then it was before, by assuming a new form or fashion for a better
condition. So we are said to be created in Christ to good works, and we are
called a new creature; not in regard of any new creation, or new nature; but
because of new relations unto God, or new qualities in our selves.

3. Who being the brightness of his glory] Christ was the luster, raye or beam
of Gods Majesty. For seeing God is invisible and cannot be seen of men, by
reason of his immense and infinite light; therefore God sent forth Christ as a
raye or beam of his light, that in Christ men might have a kind of sight of
Gods Majesty. And the express image of his person] These words do but
interpret the former. Adam and in him every man made is made in the image of
God, to resemble God in some of Gods attributes: but Christ is the character or
image of Gods person; for God did as it were imprint his person upon Christ,
that Christ might be his substitute upon earth to personate, represent and
resemble the person of God; to be in wisdom as God, by publishing the
mysteries and secrets of God, and by knowing the thoughts of men; to be in
holiness as God, without all stain of sin; to be in power as God, having
dominion over all creatures, over winds, seas, and devils. For such divine
wisdom, holiness and power, are brightnesses, images, or marks of Gods
Supremacy, or Sovereign Majesty. Upholding all things by the word of his
power.] Christ carried all things by his powerful Command; for according to
the Hebrew sense, Word is put for Command; as Psalm. 33.7. and Psalm. 143.15. And
the Word of his power, is an Hebraisme also, for his powerful word. q. d.
Christ did personate God, not only for the acts of his power; but also for the
manner of his acts, because he wrought all his miracles by his sole Word or
Command. For at his Word or Command the winds ceased, the sea calmed, diseases
were healed, the devils were ejected, and the dead raised. And to this the
Centurion applied his faith, when he said, Lord, Speak the word only and my
servant shall be healed. Mat. 8.8. When he had by himself purged our sins.]
Christ offered up himself in his own person, and did not as the Leviticall
Priest, who used to offer sacrifices that were not himself; but Christ was both
the Priest who offered, and the sacrifice which was offered. And by this
oblation of himself, he expiated or purged away our sins, by removing our
guiltines and the punishment due to our sins. Christ was a sacrifice to expiate
our sins; and the slaughter of this sacrifice was made on earth upon the
cross: but the offering of this sacrifice was then performed, when he entered
into heaven, and made his Appearance in the presence of God; as the Leviticall
Priest after the sacrifice was slain, entered into the Sanctuary to offer the
blood of it. And this Oblation of Christ had then only an efficacy or power to
expiate our sins; but the effect of it follows not upon us, till we on our
part perform our office, by believing in Christ and obeying him. Sat down on
the right hand of the Majesty on high.] The Leviticall high Priest when he went
into the Oracle, where God was said to dwell and sit between the Cherubins,
did not sit down with God, between the Cherubins: but stood as a minister or
waiter with great reverence of the Divine Majesty, offering and sprinkling
that blood wherewith he entered. But Christ ascending on high, and entering
into heaven, did not stand before the Throne of God as a minister or
supplicant, but sat down at the right hand of Gods Majesty. Yet he sat not by
way of an Assistant unto God, as Nobles and Councellers do to earthly Princes:
but by way of Cor-regnant to reign with him, having absolute power over the
people or Church of God, and for the Churches sake over all other things. For
according to Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15.25. To sit at the right hand of God, is to
reign and govern as God; And Christ does now reign and govern absolutely
and arbitrarily in all things not defined by Gods law; but where Gods law
orders things, there he governs accordingly.

4. Being made so much better then the Angels.] The Apostle formerly having
tacitly preferred Christ before all the Prophets, and before the high Priests;
proceeds now to compare and prefer Christ before the Angels, to wit (which
must be marked) from the time of his session at Gods right hand, corregnant
with him. Whereupon he lays down this position or doctrine, That Christ
sitting at Gods right hand, reigning with him in absolute power, is become more
excellent then the Angels. This doctrine he presently proves, by several
arguments following. As he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name
then they.] This is the first argument whereby he proves his former doctrine;
because Christ has obtained a more excellent name then the Angels. By name
here, we are not to understand that dominion or dignity of Christ, whereby he
reigns with his Father in absolute power; for this were to argue
tautologously, seeing he mentioned that before. But by name he means the
Appellation or title given to Christ, noting his state and condition: For from
Appellations and titles, especially given by God, we may easily gather the
dignity and excellency of any person. And this excellent name, Christ has
obtained by Inheritance, Which shows, that he had it not by nature nor from
eternity, but in time, by grace from the favor of God.

5. For unto which of the Angels said he at any time thou art my son.] He
confirms his former reason, by a testimony from Scripture, Psalm. 2.7. Why
Christ has a more excellent Name then Angels; Because God gave Christ the Name
or title of Son, which is a title of honor above that of Angels, whose name
or title signifies them, to be the Messengers or Legates of God. The Angels in
general are some time in Scripture called the Sons of God, as Job 1.6. But God
on his part never calls them so in general; much less does he single out any
one peculiar Angel apart from the rest, to entitle him by the name or Son. But
God entitles Christ by that Name, Thou art my Son; thou and no other person
properly: For the Pronoune thou, is here put exclusively, to sequester all
other persons beside, from the participation of that name as a proper and
personal title. Indeed as the Angels in general, so all Christians are in
common called the Sons of God: but Christ only is so called peculiarly,
personally and singularly. This day have I begotten thee.] He confirms, why
Christ is singularly entitled and named the Son of God; because God after a
singular manner has begotten him, i. Raised him from the dead (for in David's
Psalms from whence this testimony is taken, extreme dangers resemble death)
and made him most resemblant and like to God himself, by giving him
Immortality and universal Royalty to be King over his people. For this
generating or begetting of Christ has respect to his Resurrection and
Ascension; for so Saint Paul expressly refers it, Acts 13.33. Not that Christ
was not begotten or not called the Son of God before his Resurrection; but
because by his Resurrection he was most assimilated and made semblant unto God,
by being made an immortal and universal King, whereby he had the highest
degree under God; therefore God is said to have then begotten him, and then to
call him his Son: For God is called God by reason of his supreme power and
dominion; whereof they also are called Gods and the sons of God, that have
power and dominion; and the greater their power is, or the nearer it resembles
Gods power, so much the rather, and more nearly are they his sons. And he is
most of all his Son, whose power and dominion is made either the same with
Gods, or equal to it. Christ was the Son of God before his Resurrection; for
during his prophetic function, he was a great Potentate, and wrought powerful
miracles: but after his Resurrection upon his Regal office, he became most
nearly and highly the Son of God, because then God made him an immortal and
universal Potentate; for then all Power was given him in heaven and earth,
Mat. 28.18. This day] It is an Hebraisme, frequently added to speeches, wherein
some remarkable matter is either done or given, or promised, or commanded; as
in this place; to the end that day might be kept in memory, or as it were
remain for a day of Commemoration, that the action of that day might be kept
in perpetual remembrance, See Genesis 4.14. Jer. 1.10. and many places in
Deuteronomie. And again; I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a
Son.] He confirms that Christ is the Son of God from another testimony of
Scripture, 2. Sam. 7.14. which was literally spoken of by Solomon; as the
former testimony of David, but both mystically of Christ; Intimating the dear
love and affection of God toward him; whereupon it must needs follow, that
Christ must be exalted to a most excellent state and condition above all other
persons, And as these words were spoken of Solomon futurely before he was
borne, and indeed the Son of God: so also of Christ.

6. And again, when he brings in] Another testimony of Scripture to prove
Christ better then the Angels; because all the Angels are commanded to worship
him; which must needs follow upon the state and condition of his filiation. For
all servants must worship or reverence their masters son and heir,
especially then, when his father had made over his inheritance or estate unto
him. This testimony is taken out of 97. Psalm; whereof the inscription in the
Septuagint, is, A Psalm of David when the land was restored unto him; namely,
when his kingdom was restored, after his expulsion from it by Absolon, but
mystically meant of Christ. And therefore again, may well be referred to his
bringing in: For after Christ was expelled the world by his death and burial,
God brought him into the world again by his Resurrection, in raising him from
the grave. The first begotten] Christ is the first begotten Son of God;
because God begot him before all his other sons, who are called the brethren
of Christ; for God first begot Christ, in that manner wherein God is said to
beget sons; for those he begets whom he assimilates and makes like unto
himself, and so Christ was the first that was assimilated or made like unto
God in holiness; in such holiness as he requires in the new Covenant.
Secondly, Christ is the first begotten of God by his Resurrection, because by
the power of God he was raised and brought in again from death to an
immortal life; for which cause he is called the first begotten from the dead;
and the first fruits of them that slept. 1. Cor. 15.20. Lastly, he is the first
begotten in all things whatsoever, whereby the faithful of Christ, become the
sons of God; for Christ has preceded them all, that (as St. Paul speaks) he
in al^ things might have the preeminence. Col. 1.18. Into the world,] First to
be upon the earth a while after his Resurrection from the grave, but chiefly
when he brought him into heaven, which is the superior and future world, and
seated him at his right hand; for then Christ became the Lord and head over men
and angels; and till then the angels worshipped him not. For in this sense the
Apostle here takes the world as himself shows in the next cap. ver. 5. where
he says, tha^ the world to come is the world whereof he spoke. And let all the
angels of God worship him.] The words are Imperative, laying a Command upon all
the angels of God, none excepted, to worship Christ; and therefore it follows
that Christ is made much better then the angels. In the Hebrew of the Psalm it
is, Worship him all ye Gods; where the word Gods is opposed to Idols, which
were the Heathen Gods, whose wo^shippers are there commanded to be ashamed; and
again to those Idols Christ is opposed, who not only is not an Idol, but so
true a God, that all other Gods who are not idols must worship him. But because
by Gods there, we can understand none but the Angels, therefore the Septuagint
transl^tes it, the Angels of God, whom this divine Author follows. Worship
him.] Use divine reverence before him, and unto him, by standing up, bowing
down, and falling down before him; in ^he very same manner that is done or
due to God himself. Because Christ sustaines the person of God, and commands
all things in the Name of God, and therefore in Christ. God himself is
worshipped. And the execution of this Command that the Angels do really
perform this worship, appears in the Revelation, where they are said to stand
round about the Throne, and to fall down before the Throne on their faces to
worship Christ. Revel. 7.11.

7. And of the Angels he says,] A third argument from the testimony of
Scripture. Psalm. 104.4. to prove Christ made better then the angels. Who makes
his angels spirits.] This is not spoken of their Creation, but of their
Emission, that God employeth them as his Emissaries, or Messengers, to show
their state and condition to be servants unto God, wherein they greatly differ
from the state of Christ, sitting at Gods right hand, and is not sent forth any
whether. And his Ministers a flaming fire.] Herein the Author aims at no more,
then what he says at the last verse of this Chapter, that they are all
Ministering spirits; saving that he alludes from the Psalm to the manner of
their Ministry; which is like a spirit or a wind, very forcible, and yet
invisible; and like a flaming fire or lightning, very penetrable, subtle and
agile, moving almost in an instant from one part of heaven to another.

8. But unto the Son he says, Thy Throne O God!] Herein he opposes Christ
to the Angels, and preferres him above them, from a testimony of Scripture,
Psalm. 45.6. which is literally spoken of Solomon, but mystically of Christ; And
therein Solomon is said to have a throne, and called God, for the royalty of
his throne, and sublimitie of his power over Gods people. And therefore Christ,
of whom Solomon was but a shadow, is by a far greater right called God;
because the Throne of Christ is far more royal, in being seated at the right
hand of God. And consequently, Christ is far better, and superior to the
Angels, as the King sitting on his throne, is greater then his servants that
minister unto him. Is for ever and ever.] Solomon's throne or kingdom, is said
to be everlasting or perpetual, because he was promised to reign in his
person, and in his posterity after him for many ages; Namely, so long as the
carnal and earthly state of Gods people should require an earthly King, See
Psalm. 89.28,29. and verse 36, 37. For that Solomon's posterity were deprived of
the kingdom before the coming of Christ; (which notwithstanding was restored in
Christ, though after a more divine and spiritual manner) that happened through
the soul sins of his posterity, which God neither would nor could any
longer tolerate. Seeing God put this Article or condition in the Covenant which
he made with David and his posterity, that his posterity should observe his
Law, See 1. Chron. 28.7. But this perpetuity of throne or kingdom agrees far
more eminently unto Christ; because Christ was made immortal to live for ever,
and to reign in his own person for ever, without any posterity to succeed
him; and he is to reign so long as the people of God shall need such a King;
which Throne must needs last to the end of the world, till all his enemies be
destroyed. And consequently the Throne or Kingdom of Christ is most properly
and truly everlasting for ever and ever. A Scepter of righteousness is the
Scepter of thy Kingdom.] Scepter, is figuratively put for government, because
it is the ensign of Royal government; and Scepter of righteousness is by an
Hebraisme put for a righteous government. Literally, Solomon's government was
very just and righteous; and mystically the government of Christ, is most just
and righteous over the faithful, who are Gods people.

9. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity,] These words do but
amplify and illustrate the former. Literally, Solomon did not only govern
righteously, but loved to do it, and hated to do the contrary. And mystically
Christ loved it much more; for he committed no iniquity nor sin at all; he
never did any man injury, nor suffers it to be done unpunished. Therefore God
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness.] He alludes to the anointing of
Kings, or rather to the anointing of guests at feasts, which was an ancient
custom, because oil does exhilerate and refresh the spirits, and cheer up the
mind, especially being perfumed with some sweet odor. And therefore Oil of
gladness is an Hebraisme put for exhilerating and cheering oil. To this custom
the Psalmist relates, Psalm. 23.5. and our Savior, Matt. 6.17. and Luke 7.46.
The literal sense is; God did entertain Solomon more delicately then other
men, endowing him with extraordinary gifts and graces; particularly with these
three, Wisdom, Riches, and Glory; for he gave him his own asking, and that
besides which he asked not, See 1. Kings 3.5. for his extraordinary wisdom,
See 1. Kings 3.12. and 1. Kings 4.29. for his Riches and Glory, See 1. Kings
3.13. and 1. Kings 10.21. to the end of the chapter. The mystical sense is,
That as God was the God of Solomon to endow him: so he was the God of Christ
also, who endowed Christ anointing him with the holy Ghost, and with spiritual
graces in far more extraordinary manner, for spiritual wisdom, whereby he
knew the secrets of God, and the thoughts of men; with spiritual riches, which
is holiness and righteousnsse; with spiritual power and glory to have
dominion over all men and angels, See Luke 1.15. and Luke 4.1. and Luk 2.40.
and Mat. 12.42. and Joh. 1.14. and Joh. 1.16. Above thy fellows.] The literal
sense is; Solomon's brethren, who were the rest of David's children, were
cheerfully anointed, or blessed of God, with Wisdom, Riches, and Honors; but
Solomon was blessed above them all in a singular and eminent degree, and
advanced by God to the Kingdom of Israel before and above them, so that all
they were not only rejected from the Crown, but made subject to him. The
Mystical sense is. All the faithful like Solomon's fellows or brethren, are
begotten from the same Father that Christ is begotten; and are anointed with
the holy Ghost, and have many things common with Christ; yet notwithstanding
Christ is anointed by God above all the faithful; has an immence measure and
power of the holy Ghost powered upon him; especially after his resurrection from
the dead, when he was totally sanctified, and advanced to be King and Lord over
the faithful.

10 And, thou Lord, etc.] A fourth Argument to prove Christ, better then the
Angels taken from a testimony of Scripture, Psalm. 102. verse. 25, 26, 27. And
here we must note, that this Testimony does so far only belong to Christ,
as it conduces to the scope of the Author; which as appears at the fourth
verse of this chapter, is to prove, that Christ after that he was seated at the
right hand of God, was made better then the angels. To which purpose the
Creation of heaven and earth makes nothing at all: For that cannot be referred
to Christ, unless the Author had taken it for granted, and for a ground that
Christ is the supreme God; because all this testimony out of that Psalm is
manif^stly spoken of the suprem God; but that Christ should be that God is not
intimated by any word in all that Psalm. And therefore if the Author had taken
this for granted, that Christ is the supreme God, certainly the Author had
discoursed very impertinently and ambiguously, to furnish himself with such
store of arguments, and so many Testimonies of Scriptures, (and those much more
obscure then the point to be proved) thereby to evince, that Christ was better
then the angels; the Creator, better then the creature. This had been to bring
proofs no way necessary for a point no way doubtful; seeing all might have
been dispatched in one word. We must therefore further observe, that this
Testimony out of Psalm 102. contains three clauses. The first concerning the
Creation of the world. 2. Concerning the destruction of the world. 3.
Concerning the Duration of God; for these three things are the subjects of
three verities contained in that Testimony, and all three are spoken
supremely, and primarily of God the Father: But the first can no way be
referred to Christ, because (as is before noted) it could not make for the
Authors purpose. The last, referres both to God and Christ; for the Duration of
Christ is perpetual and everlasting; yet this clause makes nothing for the
Authors purpose, to prove Christ better then the Angels, because for Duration,
the angels are equal to him, seeing they also are immortal, and
incorruptible, perpetual and everlasting. The second clause referres to God
supremely and primarily, and to Christ subordinately or secondarily; for God by
Christ will destroy the world; God has given to Christ a transcendent power to
destroy and abolish heaven and earth. And this makes fully to the Authors
purpose, and proves Christ clearly better then the angels; who have not this
power granted to them. Now to the words of this Testimony in particular. Thou
Lord in the beginning] God when first he began the world; even in the first
beginning of ^is visible works, Have laid the foundation of the earth.] He
alludes to buildings which are raised upon a foundation; for the earth is as it
were the foundation and groundwork of the world. And he mentions the earth in
the first place, because in the raising of all buildings, men begin from the
foundation. Now the earth is termed the foundation, because it seems
immovable and fixed, as all foundations ought to be. And the heavens are the
works of thine hands.] The heavens are all those vast bodies which do
circumvest the earth and one another. And they are called heavens, plurally,
because they are built and raised to the height of three regions or stories
each above the other. The first and lowest heaven is vulgarly called the air;
wherein fly the fowls of heaven; and therein are the supernall waters that
are said to be above in the heavens, as clouds, rain, hail and snow. The
second or middle heaven, is vulgarly called, the firmament, wherein are all the
fires that give light and heat to all the world; as the Sun, Moon, and
Stars. The third and highest heaven, is called by St. Paul Paradise; wherein
God, and Christ, and the angels do manifest themselves. All these are the
works of Gods word, and were wrought at his command: For God said, Let them
be, and they were so, Genesis 1.6. God commanded, and they were created, Psalm.
148.5. Yet the Psalmist terms them the works of Gods hands, alluding to the
speech of the vulgar, whose hands and not their words are the instruments of
their works, which therefore are called the works of their hands. Hitherto of the
first clause of this Testimony, concerning the Creation of the world, referred
to God only, who only was the Author of it.

11. They shall perish.] Now follows the second Clause of this Testimony
concerning the destruction of the world; referred to God supremely and
primarily, but to Christ subordinately and secondarily, because the power to
destroy the world is given to Christ, and therefore principally serves to the
Authors purpose to prove him better then the angels. They shall perish.] The
heavens and the earth shall perish, or be utterly destroyed and abolished; as
this Author phraseth it afterward in this Epistle, chap. 12.27. they shall be
removed, as things that are concussible and corruptible. And as St. Peter says
more expressly, 2. Epistle 3.10. The heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also shall be
burnt up. Now things that pass away and are no where, must needs have no
being, and a thing burnt up must needs perish. Here we have a clear testimony
that this present world shall be destroyed and abolished. For if (as some have
imagined) it shall only be endued with perfecter qualities, and be changed into
a better state, so to remain under that state, how is it said to perish?
Certainly things changed into a better state to be permanent under that state,
cannot be said to perish. Shall the Saints be said to perish, when they are
changed from mortal and corruptible creatures to become immortal and
incorruptible, and be made partakers of a nature and state far more pure and
perfect then they had before? certainly no. Or if the world shall have a
perpetual permansion or abiding for ever; how is it opposed to Gods and
Christ's permansion or abiding for ever? which is the scope of this reasoning,
as appears in the words immediately following: But thou remainest; and thy
years shall not fail. And they shall wax old as does a garment.] The heavens
are compared to a garment, because as has been said before, they do
circumvest, envelop, and enwrap the whole earth round about, as a garment
envolves the body; and therefore the attribute of a garment, which is to
veterate and wax old, is by a Metaphor fitly applied to the heavens: Not that
the heavens do insensibly wax old, and wear out with length of time, as
garments usually do: but because at last they shall wholly be abolished;
therefore they are said, to wax old as a garment, because a garment waxen old,
and worn out, is at last wholly abolished and cast away: For veteration or
waxing old, is a motion or passage toward destruction and abolition. Seeing
that which decays and waxes old, draws near to vanishing away, as this
Author expresses it afterward in this Epistle, cap. 8. v. 13. But how shall
the heavens wax old, if they shall be renewed into a better state. Is a garment
said then to wax old, when it is new dressed, by making it somewhat better and
neater?

12 And as a vesture shall thou fold them up,] When a garment is waxen so old
that we have no mind to wear it any longer, then we usually fold it up and
lay it aside; for properly a garment is a loose vest which we use to wear
outwardly over the rest of our clothing; and therefore being laid aside, is
usually solded up. Hence it appears, that at last, the time shall come, that
the heavens shall no longer circumvest, or enwrap the earth, and therefore must
needs be destroyed and abolished. And they shall be changed.] What change must
here be understood, more have showed before; namely, a destruction, abolition or
perishing; a change, not for the better, but for the worse; a change from being
to not being; as a garment waxen old, and thereupon folded up, becomes changed
for the worse, till first it fall into clouts and rags, and at last rots
quite away. Hitherto of the second Clause of this testimony concerning the
destruction of the world; referred primarily by the Psalmist to God; but
secondarily and subordinatly by this Author to Christ, by whose power under
God, this destruction shall be made, and thereby is proved to be better then
the angels. But thou remainest.] Now follows the third Clause of this
testimony, referred both to God and Christ, as the second Clause was; yet we
shall speak of it only in reference to Christ, because the main purpose of the
Author in this Clause, is to prove, not that Christ herein is better then the
angels, but to show upon the by, that the Duration of Christ's person and
Kingdom, does not only exceed the age of the world which shall be destroyed,
but shall be everlasting and perpetual remaining for ever. The world shall not
remain, but shall cease to be: But Christ shall remain and never cease to
be: but if the world be Innovated into a better state, to remain ever under
that state, wherein shall stand the opposition between the Duration of the
world and Christ? certainly in nothing. Thou art the same,] The heavens and
earth shall not be the same always, but at last shall be changed from being to
not being. But Christ once seated at the right hand of God, continues always
the same, and shall be the same everlastingly. And thy years shall not fail.]
The world had a beginning, and then her years began, but because she shall be
destroyed and abolished, therefore her years shall fail and come to an end.
Christ also had a beginning of his age and years, but because he is now
immortal, therefore his years shall never have an end; but shall run forth in
to eternity, and last everlastingly.

13. But to which of the angels said he at any time,] The fifth and last
Argument to prove Christ better and greater then the angels, taken from a
testimony of Scripture, Psalm. 110.1. Showing that God never vouchsafed them
that high dignity and degree of honor, as to sit at his right hand. Sit on my
right hand] The meaning of this phrase, see before in this chapter, verse 3.
For so great a dominion and power, as to correigne with God over all things in
heaven and earth, was never granted to any of the angels. Until I make thine
enemies thy footstool.] Here is declared the expiration and term of that
spiritual Kingdom, which Christ now administers upon earth: and such a term
as therewithal shows one of the greatest and most excellent effect of that
Kingdom; In so much as it is no marvel his Kingdom should determine after
the production of that effect. All which tends to the highest commendation of
that Kingdom. For if Christ had obtained that Kingdom for some short time, or
should relinquish it before he had destroyed and abolished all his enemies,
much would be wanting to the dignity of his Kingdom. The term therefore,
unto which the Kingdom of Christ must be produced, which also is a most
glorious effect of his Kingdom, is expressed, when God says, until I make
thine enemies thy footstool. By enemies here we must understand, not only the
adversaries to the person of Christ, who once reproached and crucified him, or
since to this day blaspheme and oppose him: but also all things adverse and
hurtful to the people of Christ, who are the faithful. Of which enemies the
chiefest is death, so far forth as it does hurt, or may hurt the faithful, who
are the people of Christ; as the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 15.26. For the death
which domineers and remains upon the ungodly and unbeleevers, shall not be
abolished; because their death is no enemy unto Christ, but militant and
subservient unto him in doing the work upon which he employes it. And the
enemies of Christ, are then made his footstool, when they are so fully
conquered, that all power of doing hurt is taken from them: or as St. Paul
expounds it, 1. Cor. 15.26. when they are destroyed and abolished. And God is
said to put Christ's enemies down; not that Christ shall be no agent in that
action, but because God gives Christ the power to perform it, and Christ shall
execute it by virtue of that power that is given him. As in the Scripture, 1.
Kings 5.3. God is said to have put David's enemies under his feet; yet David was
not idle in the wars, but very active. Or as some King, when his enemies were
conquered, should say that God had subdued them unto him; because God had given
him power and courage to perform it: For that Christ also himself shall
subdue his enemies, it plainly appears from the words of St. Paul, 1. Cor.
15.24. and Phil. 3.21.

14. Are they not all ministering spirits,] They, i. the Angels. In the former
verse, having showed the Sublimity and Majesty of Christ in his seat at Gods
right hand, and in the victory over his enemies, he now on the other part
opposes the condition of the angels; that the great dignity of him above them,
may evidently appear. Christ does sit; and he sits at the right hand of God:
i. he reigns as a King; and the manner of Kings is to sit. But all the angels
(none excepted) are ministering spirits; i. waiting spirits, and the manner of
waiters is to stand and appear, and be sent forth at his command upon whom
they wait. Sent forth to minister.] The angels are Gods messengers and
ministers; for they are sent forth, and the end of their sending forth, is to
minister or do service: What ministry or service that is, he will presently
show, and withal will intimate how long their ministry shall last, namely,
till the persons for whose sake they minister, shall attain salvation. For
them who shall be heirs of salvation.] The angels are properly ministers unto
God and Christ; for properly a man ministers unto him that has a right to
command him, though his ministry or service be many times performed for the
use and behoof of another. So the angels are ministers, not unto the Saints
and heirs of salvation; but for the Saints, i. for the benefit and commodity
of the Saints: they minister unto Christ for the use of the Saints, and then
they minister to the Saints, when they are sent for the custody and guard of
their bodies and souls to provide for their safety in both respects. For
seeing Satan and the other devils do not only pursue and hurt the bodies of
men, but their souls also: so likewise we believe it the office of the angels
to protect, not the bodies only of the Saints, but their souls also. Satan
has power to inject evil thoughts into the minds of men, and to incite them
to diverse sins; whom therefore the Scripture makes the Author and Parent of
all sin, who works effectually in the children of disobedience; whom she
calls the Prince and god of this world; who put it into the heart of Judas to
betray Christ, and into the heart of Ananias to lie unto the holy Ghost. Now if
Satan can do this, why cannot good angels inject good thoughts, and by diverse
objects draw the mind to that which is acceptable unto God? And when an angel
is sent to deliver a man from danger, he commonly delivers him no otherwise,
then by casting into his thoughts some advice or counsel, whereby he may
decline the danger, or by putting some thought upon his adversary, whereby to
divert him from his intended enterprise. Neither are we to understand that the
angels are sent forth only and soly for this end, to minister to the Saints,
but that is the principal and chief end; for many times the emissions redound
to the benefit and profit of others, both persons and kingdoms; but especially
concerning the affairs of the Church, whereof Christ is Lord and Protector.

The Contents of this first Chapter.
1. Doctrine. Christ is greater then any of the Prophets. Reason. 1. Because
God has spoken by Christ, in these last days, verse 2. 2. Because Christ is
appointed heir of all things. eod. 3. Because by him God made the new world.
eod.
2. Doctrine. Christ is greater then any of the high Priests. verse 3. Reason.
1. Because Christ is the brightness of Gods glory, and the express image of his
person. eod. 2. Because Christ has expiated our sins by himself, even by
his own blood. eod. 3. Because Christ is now set down, at the right hand of
Gods Majesty on high. eod.
3. Doctrine. Christ is much greater then the Angels. verse 4. Reason. 1.
Because Christ has a greater name then they; for he is called, and is the true
Son of God. verse 4. 5. 2. Because the Angels are his subjects and servants;
for they must worship him and minister unto him. verse 6. 7. 3. Because Christ
has a kingdom of righteousness, with a Throne and Scepter of righteousness,
verse 8. 9. 4. Because Christ has power finally to destroy and abolish this
visible world, and at the last day shall actually destroy it, verse 11. 12. 5.
Because Christ sits on Gods right hand on the Throne of God, whereas the
Angels minister and wait, verse 13. 14.

CHAPTER II.
1. THerefore,] Because we have formerly proved, that Christ is far more
excellent then the Angels. We ought to give the more earnest heed,] greater
attention, diligence and care. To the things which we have heard,] to the
doctrines, precepts, and promises of the Gospel, the Author whereof who first
published it upon earth, was a person far more excellent then the Angels, who
published the Law upon Mount Sinai; as the Author subjoynes it afterward at the
third verse. Least at any time we should let them slip.] He here expresses the
scope and end of their earnest attention and heed, not to decline or revolt
from the Gospel of Christ; and he alludes to a leaking vessel, that lets the
liquor run out. Now then, we let the Gospel slip and run from us, when either
we forget it, or give no further credit to it, or neglect the precepts of it,
to conform our lives to the holy rules therein delivered. For, when the Gospel
has not the force upon our souls, to make us obedient to the rules of it,
then it may be said to leake or slip away from us.

2. For, if the word spoken by Angels] He begins to bring a reason, why we
should take earnest heed that the Gospel slip not from us, by an argument a
mineri; for, if God punished the transgression of the Law which was less, much
more them of the Gospel, which is greater. The Law was the word or speech of
God, for God spoke it to the people, partly by himself, and partly by Moses,
see Exodus 20.1. and in the same Chapter, ver. 22. Yet God spoke not the Law,
either to Moses or the people immediately by himself, but by the mediation and
means of Angels, who published and proclaimed it upon Mount Sinai; see for
confirmation hereof, Acts 7.53. and Gal. 3.19. The Law therefore being
published but by Angels, is far inferior to the Gospel, which was published
by Christ, a person greater then the Angels. Hence we may collect two verities:
1. That God truly and properly did not descend down upon Mount Sinai, and
there publish the Law; but an Angel susteining the Name and person of God,
published it in the Name of God. For, if God himself, besides the Angels, and
accompanied with them, had descended from heaven into the Mount to publish the
Law; then, not only the Authors argument had been void, but also the contrary
must needs be concluded, That the Law in this respect was more excellent then
the Gospel, because God himself who exalted Christ, and made him head over the
Angels, came from heaven to earth, and did publish the Law; but the Gospel was
published but by him, who was exalted by God from earth to heaven. 2. The
second verity is, That the Lord, who published the Law upon the Mount, was not
the Son of God, in the person of his deity. For, if the Law were given by the
Son of God, how can this Author affirm it was delivered by Angels, and in that
respect make it inferior to the Gospel? Or, how is it at all inferior to the
Gospel, in respect of the publishing, if both it and the Gospel were published
by one and the same person? Was stedfast] The Law was ratified and established,
made steadfast and firm, when it was strengthened with power and force for
obedience, and supported with judgments and punishments against the
transgressors of it. For, when a Law is but a bare precept, and has no penalty
annexed to it, then it is infirm and weak; but, when it is fortified with
penalties, then it is made steadfast, and becomes a sanction; for thereupon men
dare not so easily violate and break it. And every transgression and
disobedience] The Law was made steadfast for this end, that it might be
fortified and supported against every transgression and disobedience, whereby
men would presume to break it. A transgression is a sin against an express
and known Law; for, every transgression is a sin, but every sin is not a
transgression; yet, every sin may become a transgression, namely if it be
forbidden by an express and known Law: Otherwise where there is no Law to be
transgressed, there can be no transgression. A disobedience is a transgression
done with malice and contumacy; for as a transgression is one kind of sin, so
a disobedience is one kind of transgression; yet, every transgression may
become a disobedience, namely, if it be committed out of malice and contumacy.
Received a just recompense of reward] Punishment is then a just recompense of
reward, when it is congruous and suitable to the sin, according to the due
desert of the sin. But, these words of the Author cannot mean, that every
transgression of the Law without exception, had a capital punishment ordained
by Law, or was de facto inflicted; for, every penal Law was not always put in
execution. And those transgressions which were committed out of ignorance or
infirmity, had their expiation appointed by Law, but disobedients, or
contempts, or, as the Scripture terms them, sinning presumptuously, or with a
high hand, could not be expiated any other way, then by that capital
punishment that by the Law was ordained, see Numb. 15.27. And, seeing it is
apparent, that the Author speaks of a matter openly and vulgarly known, it
is not credible, that he would be understood of those private and secret
judgments or punishments that God himself inflicted, for such for the most
part were concealed and not known. Wherefore we must needs conceive, that this
Author takes not the particle every, logically and strictly, but vulgarly, for
the most part of transgressions and disobediences, and has special respect to
the sacred precepts of the Law, and to the examples of those persons, whose
transgressions against those Laws are mentioned, and whom the Scripture
testifies to have been severely punished of God, according to their demerits.
For, if in some cases the rigor of the Law was mitigated, as in the case of
David; those cases being extraordinary and rare, must not take place against
the general rule. Although David also had no small punishment from God upon
him; so that here the Author speaks of divine punishments which God himself
inflicted; for, otherwise it would not follow, that the Law was made steadfast
with God, therefore because the Magistrate punished transgressors; but, because
God himself did it, or took order it should be done, either by the
Magistrate, or by others. For, when he speaks on the opposite part, concerning
the contemners of the Gospel, the punishments are understood to be inflicted by
God himself.

3. How shall we escape] If the transgressions of the Law were deservedly and
justly punished by Gods hand, much lest shall we escape it; If we neglect so
great salvation?] If we neglect the Gospel. He might have called the Gospel,
the word spoken by Christ, as before he termed the Law, the word spoken by
Angels; for, this had been enough to infer his conclusion, and also a more
eloquent opposition; but he calls the Gospel Salvation, for three reasons. 1.
To express the effect and fruit of the Gospel, which is Salvation; for, as S.
Paul says of it, It is the power of God to salvation, to every one that
believes, Romans 1.16. 2. To intimate the dignity and excellency of the Gospel
above the Law, because the Law contained no open prom^se of salvation, but
only hidden under shadows of things, and coverts of words; neither did the
Law specify that condition, whereby men might attain salvation, but that
only whereby they incurred condemnation, and the punishment of death. Hence S.
Paul says, The Law works wrath, Romans 4.15. and he calls the Law, the
ministration of death, and a killing letter, 2 Cor. 3.6,7. So that the Law
might be justly called rather the word of death and damnation, then of life and
salvation. 3. To add force and strength to his argument against the danger of
neglecting the Gospel; seeing thereby we neglect salvation it self, to which
the Gospel is the means. And, he calls not the Gospel simply salvation, but
great salvation:] Salvation may be manifold and various, as of our bodies and
goods in this life; and such a salvation was to Gods people under the Law,
whereby God saved them from their enemies, and thereupon is frequently in
Scripture called their Savior. Hence David says of them, They forgot God
their Savior, Psalm. 106.21. See Isai. 45.15. and 49.26. and 63.8. But, the
salvation promised in the Gospel, is a great and mighty salvation, even the
salvation of souls by the inheritance of eternal life. Neglect] This great
salvation in the Gospel is neglected, when either we despise the acceptance of
it, or believe not the promises of it, or observe not the precepts annexed to
the promises, but live so, as if there were no salvation at all, or no promises
extant of it, or no precepts concerning it, or as if none of these were known
unto us. So that the neglect here mentioned, means not some one small sin of
negligence, by the single breach of some one precept, but includes a contempt
and despising of the Gospel; for, it is opposed to the transgressions and
disobediences against the Law, that were punished with death, as a just
recompense of reward, at the former verse. If therefore they escaped not
punishment, who transgressed the Law, which promised not salvation, but only
threatened condemnation: how shall we escape if we neglect the Gospel, wherein
eternal salvation is openly promised, and a total remission of all our sins
is offered? yet, only upon condition, that afterward we pollute not our selves
with any wickedness, or accustom our selves to any sin, (with pardon,
notwithstanding of our infirmity) but live holily in the sight of God, as far
as our faith in his promise, and our hope of salvation may support us. If, I
say, we neglect or despise these things, so worthy of all reverence and
acceptance, what greater ingratitude can we possibly show to God, whose grace,
the greater it is toward us, the greater is our sin to despise it, and to
despise the greatest grace, must needs make up the greatest sin? Which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord] The Lord Christ was not the first Author
of the Gospel, as the Angels were not of the Law, but God was the prime and
first Author, both of the Law and the Gospel. But, as the Angels were the first
publishers and proclaimers of the Law upon Mount Sinai, by commission received
from God: So Christ was the first publisher and preacher of the Gospel upon
earth, by a like Commission from his Father. So the Gospel was preached by him
who is Lord over the Angels, and whom they reverence and adore as their Lord.
But, because this Gospel of salvation was preached by others also, therefore to
show the difference in the order of time between him and others, it is said of
him, that he preached it first, and after him others preached it, that were
instructed in it by him. And, in this preaching first begun by Christ, is
included all whatsoever that he either taught, or did, or suffered, to gain
belief to his preaching, that he might first also confirm it by himself, as
afterward it was confirmed by others. And, lest any man might say, that all men
did not hear the preaching of Christ himself, therefore he says, that Christ
was not the sole, but the first preacher of it; and after him others, who were
taught it by him, and sent forth by him, to preach it universally over all
parts of the world, who therefore were called the Apostles or Emissaries of
Christ. And was confirmed unto us by them that heard him.] In the confirmation
of the Gospel, the preaching of it is included, or thereby supposed. The Law
was confirmed or made steadfast, not only by judgments and punishments annexed
against the transgressors of it, but also the publishing of the Law was
confirmed and certified with wonderful sights and sounds, as the lightnings
and thunders, and trembling of the Mount, and the voice of a Trumpet exceeding
shrill, that sounded long, waxing louder and louder, so that all the people in
the Camp trembled, Exodus 19.16. Now, lest any man should think, that the Gospel
either in this regard was inferior to the Law, or was but a vain novelty,
that wanted solid arguments and proofs, both for the verity of it, and the
publishing of it; therefore the Gospel also was confirmed and certified with
most divine testimonies, that were without all exception, and such as were
never seen nor heard of in the world before. Unto us] To this Author, and
others. By them that heard him] that heard Christ publish and preach the
Gospel. The Gospel was first confirmed firmed by Christ, by virtue of his
miracles and sufferings, and afterward his publishing of the Gospel, his
miracles and sufferings were confirmed by them that heard his preaching, and
saw both his miracles and sufferings; even by them that were constant auditors
of his doctrines, and spectators of his miracles; such as were especially the
Apostles and disciples of Christ. Hence it may not improbably be gathered, That
Paul was not the Author of this Epistle. For he never exempts himself from
the number of the Apostles, nor reckons himself as a hearer of the Apostles,
as the Author of this Epistle here does. Paul always preserved his Apostolic
authority, and maintained it entire against all that maligned it; and he was
especially so to do, when he had to deal with the Hebrews or Jews, who
depraved and slighted his authority. Neither was any Apostle the Author of it:
but some Apostolic person, who had learnt the Gospel from some Apostle.

4. God also bearing them witness,] The Apostles after Christ, did second
Christ in preaching and confirming the Gospel; yet they confirmed it not by
their own power, but by divine power; for the confirmation of it was from God,
because God did bear witness of their doctrine, and gave his suffrage to their
sayings. Who therefore would not yield his faith and belief, to so great a
confirmation, and to so great a testimony of so great a witness? Neither could
these things be denied by these Hebrews to whom this Epistle is written,
seeing they themselves had seen and heard the preaching of the Gospel
confirmed before them. Both with signs and wonders and diverse miracles.] Here
he shows by what means God did confirm the preaching of the Gospel by the
Apostles; namely, by means of two sorts;by the works of miracles, and by the
gifts of the holy Ghost. Signs were testimonies in general, that the Apostles
were sent of God, and spoke the truth. Wonders were signs also, yet but one
sort of signs, namely, the sublimest and most powerful kind that bred
astonishment in the people; such as raising the dead, and the falling down of
Ananias dead; And these signs and miracles were not all of one sort, but
various and diverse; as casting out of devils, raising the dead, others falling
down dead, giving sight to the blind, and blindness to others, as to Elymas
the sorcerer; by healing diseases, not only by their word, but by the shadow of
Peter, and by the handkerchief of Paul. Concerning this confirmation of the
Gospel, St. Austine speaks very wittily. We know (says he) that almost all
the world was drawn unto Christ by the force of miracles. They that deny this
by eluding miracles, they themselves make a greater miracle. For when so few
Apostles, so unlearned men, preached things so incredible to humane reason,
that all the world anciently seasoned with other Religions, should believe them
without any miracles; this is a more incredible miracle, then any of those
miracles, which they are said to have done. And gifts of the holy Ghost,] for
gifts, the original has distributions: The second means of confirming the
Gospel preached by the Apostles, was by the distributions or gifts of the holy
Ghost. This the Author names in particular, because it is a most divine work,
and most peculiar to the Gospel, That at the preaching of the Apostles, or at
the laying on of their hands, the holy Ghost was given to those that believed
at their preaching. He calls them distributions or gifts diversely imparted,
because the gifts in themselves were diverse, and also were diversely imparted
to diverse persons. Not one and the same gift to all, but one to one, and
another to another; one to diverse, and diverse to diverse, in diverse manners,
to one in a less measure, to another in a greater, according to the measure
both for quantity and quality, that it pleased Christ to confer these graces.
See 1. Cor. 12.11. and Ephesians. 4.5. For this variety and diversity in
distributing the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost; did greatly redound to the
benefit and necessity of the Church, who is one great Corporation or body
mystical, composed of various and diverse members; that some standing in need
of others help, might more mutually conspire in love and unity among
themselves. According to his own will.] The power to diversifie and vary the
gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, was not at the will and pleasure of the
Apostles, but was a prerogative reserved to God, and the distribution was
varied according to his own will.

5. For unto the Angels] He returns to his former point of preferring Christ
above the Angels; for which he brings a new Argument, and withal tacitly
shows the cause, why Christ being one somewhat inferior to the angels, in
respect of his mortal nature, was at last advanced to be far greater and
higher then they. The reason hereof was, because the future world to come was
to be subject to Christ, and not to the angels: For to this purpose, the words
cited out of the eighth Psalm, that the world to come must be subject to a
man, are by the Author applied to Christ; as the like is done by Paul, 1. Cor.
15.27. and Ephesians. 1.22. And this testimony of Christ being made better then the
angels, seems to be reserved for the last place; because by this means, he
might both dissolve the doubt, why Christ being first lower then the angels,
was at last made much higher then they; and also might prepare himself an
entrance to explicate the cause of that Imminution of Christ, whereat he
principally aimed; and so gradually proceed to handle the Priesthood of Christ.
He has not put in subjection the world to come] The world future or to come,
is that place wherein now dwells God, and Christ, and all the holy Angels;
but hereafter in time to come all the godly shall dwell there. And it is called
future or to come, in respect of the godly, to whom it is yet future or to
come; whereas the place in respect of it self, of God, Christ, and the Angels
is already, present, and really extant. The right or title of dominion and
inheritance, God has neither given, nor decreed to give unto the angels. The
angels now inhabit in that future world, but yet as the house and kingdom of
another, and not as their own; for God should do them no injury, if he should
please to translate them from that seat, and command them to settle elsewhere:
because they are not Lords of that world, but servants there. And that hither
we may apply the words of Christ, John 8.35. The servant abides not in the
house for ever, i. has no right to abide for ever, though de facto of grace he
may abide for ever: but the son abides ever, i. has a right to abide for
ever. Whereof we speak.] These words as we noted in the former chapter, verse.
2. are added respectively to his former words, wherein he mentioned the worlds
simply, without adding the word future, or to come; that he might here give us
to understand, that there also he meant the world to come; for that was the
world whereof he spoke both there and here.

6 Eut one in a certain place testified, saying, It was not for want of
knowledge or memory, that this Author here quotes this text of Scripture
indefinitely, without citing the place; for seeing he knew to recite the words
so exactly, and the words themselves were so vulgarly known, how could he be
ignorant of the place? But because this Scripture and the place of it was so
vulgarly known, especially to the Hebrews, to whom he writes, therefore he
neither noted the place, nor named the Author of them. And it was his manner so
to do, though he cite many texts of Scripture. Indeed afterward, chapter 4.7.
he quotes David as Author of a saying formerly cited by him: but his intent
there is to manifest, the order of time, and not the name of the Author. What
is man that thou art mindful of him] The words are Psalm. 8.4. To be mindful
of a man, is to be careful for him, and make provision for his good. The
literal sense is, God made provision for the man Adam, the head and father of
all mankind, and gave him the right of dominion over this visible, earthly,
and present world, and over all the creatures therein contained, Genesis 1.28. The
mystical sense is; God made provision for the man Christ, the head and father
of all the faithful; and gave him the right of dominion over the invisible,
heavenly, and future world, and over all the creatures therein contained, 1.
Cor. 15.27. Ephesians. 1.21,22. and Phil. 2.9,10. For by man here is understood in
both senses, the first Head and Parent of mankind, natural and spiritual;
namely, Adam the first man, and Christ the second Adam. For in both these
persons, that which is expressed in the words, is fulfilled fully, though
diversely. Or the Son of man that thou visuest him?] To visit, is frequently
to regard and often to look unto; and argues the mindfulnesse or carfulness
formerly mentioned; for the person, of whom we are mindful and careful, him
we frequently visit, go to see, and look unto him. The literal sense is,
That mankind, for his natural birth is the son or posterity of the man Adam.
God gave Adam the dominion over this earthly world, yet not personally for
himself only, but for him and his sons, or posterity after him. For, though
he were sole Lord over his sons, during their minority, while they were under
age, and under his power; yet afterward as they grew up in the world unto
maturity, or fullness of age, then the like right should be communicated and
imparted unto them, that they also might be Lords over this earthly world. For
God gave the earth also to the children of men, Psalm. 115.16. The mystical
sense. The faithful for their spiritual birth are the sons of Christ. God
has given to Christ the dominion over the heavenly world, yet not personally
for himself only, but for him and the faithful, who are his sons and
posterity after him. For though now Christ, the sole Lord over the faithful,
during their minority, or nonage in this world, while they are under the power
and tuition of Christ, yet when they come to spiritual maturity, which is
their immortality, then the like dominion shall be communicated and imparted
unto them, and they also shall be Lords and possessors of that heavenly world
to come. For, then they shall no longer be under Christ, but besides him, to
reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12.

7. Thou made him a little lower then the Angels] The literal sense is. God
made man lower or inferior then the Angels, a little in degree for his nature,
because he made man by nature mortal, but the Angels by nature are immortal;
and a little in time, for man continues in this lowness of his mortal nature
for a little time, respectively to the time of his immortality, though
absolutely it be a long time, even from the Creation to the Resurrection. The
mystical sense is. God also made Christ lower then the Angels, a little in
degree for his mortal nature, but a very little in time, only during his
mortal life, which was but as a moment. Thou crownedst him with glory and
honor:] The literal sense. The dominion that God gave man over this present
world, was a great glory and honor to him, even a Crown or high degree of
glory. For, all dominion is honorable, and the highest is coronable. The
mystical sense. The dominion that God gave Christ over the world to come, was
much more glorious and honorable, because a heavenly dominion over Angels is
more glorious, then an earthly dominion over beasts. And did set him over the
works of thy hands.] These words do but express wherein man's dominion
consisted, that was such a glory and honor to him; namely, in bearing rule
over the earthly creatures, which were the works, not of his own hands, but of
Gods. So the Dominion of Christ consists in ruling over the Angelick and
heavenly creatures, who are the works of Gods hands also.

8. Thou have put all things in subjection under him:] These words are but
correlative to the former; for, if man were set in dominion over all things,
then all things were put in subjection under him. But the particle all must be
restrained from its absolute universality, concerning all things whatsoever, to
be limited only to all earthly creatures, as all sheep and oxen, and the
beasts of the field, the Fowls of the air, and the Fish of the sea, etc. as
they are immediately reckoned up in the Psalm. But, in the mystical sense, the
particle all must be left wholly to his absolute universality and full
amplitude, for all things both in heaven and earth; namely, all creatures
whatsoever are put in subjection under Christ; because, from the universality
of Christ's dominion, God only is excepted, who did put all things besides in
subjection under Christ, 1 Cor. 15.27. For, in that he put all, be left nothing
not put under him:] In these and the words immediately following, the Author
discovers and teaches us, that this place of the Psalm must be understood of
some other man then an earthly man: For the words being absolutely uttered, are
a clear argument, that the holy Ghost would have them taken in some other
sense altogether universally, in which latitude S. Paul also takes them, 1 Cor.
15.27. In so much that in them, the world to come is also comprehended. And
taking the words universally, who sees not, that during this mortal life, they
cannot be verified and fulfilled of a mortal man? And therefore the Author
immediately adds; But now we see not yet all things put under him:] Now: while
man lives this present and mortal life; not yet: not from the beginning of the
world, to this present time, we see not all things universally made subject to
any mortal man, when notwithstanding man was made less or lower then the
Angels, but for a little time, as we showed before. And therefore the
fulfilling of these words, that all things universally, even the world to come
should be subject to man, cannot be meant of any mortal man, but of some man
translated to immortality. Yet, who that immortal man should be, the Author
has not hitherto declared. But, in the following verse, he shows that it is
Jesus Christ translated to immortality. Whence it appears, that if we respect
the mystical sense of the words in this Psalm, they must be taken principally
and properly of Christ; but of Christians, only respectively and as it were
proportionably. For, no one of the faithful shall solely and singly possess
all things; but, all jointly as coheires shall possess all things: yet, not
all the faithful jointly shall possess all things universally, though ye
sever them from Christ their head; for they shall not have dominion over the
Angels, but Christ only shall possess all things universally; for, he only
shall rule over the Angels, that has dominion over the faithful. And yet
again there is one person excepted from the dominion of Christ, and that is
God the Father, who has given to Christ his universal dominion.

9. But we see Jesus who was made a little lower then the Angels] Here he
declares who that man was, in whom the words of the Psalm were to be
fulfilled; namely, that Jesus Christ was the man, to whom all things
universally, and therefore the world to come was to be subject; and
therewithal makes way to handle the Priesthood of Christ. And hence now it
appears, that in this there is no absurdity or repugnancy to truth, that he,
who in respect of his mortal nature was a little lower, for a little time then
the Angels, should be exalted to become much higher then they for ever after.
Yea, seeing the Scripture testifies, that the man who was less then the
Angels, must become Lord of all, who sees not that the exaltation of the man
Christ, far above all the orders of Angels, does excellently agree with
Scripture? And, hereby the Author removes the absurdity that seems in this,
That Christ, a man, should become far greater then the Angels, and be said to
be their Lord. For the suffering of death] The Reason, or cause why Christ for
a little time was made a little lower then the Angels, was this, that he might
suffer death. And this was not the formal cause of his lowness, for he was
not made lower then Angels in this respect, by his suffering death; an evil
which they suffer not, though it be true that he was also lower therein. But
the formal cause of his lowness was his mortal nature, in respect whereof he
was made for a little while a little lower then the Angels. And the final
cause of his lowness in that mortal nature, was actual death; for, he was
made in a mortal nature to this end, that he might suffer death under it; for,
unless his nature had been dyable, he could not have dyed. Christ was made a
mortal man, whereby for a little while he was a little lower then the Angels;
but why, to what end was he not at first made immortal, but mortal? It was to
this end, that he might be passive to suffer death; for, had he been at first
made immortal he could not have dyed. We see him crowned with glory and
honor:] Christ has now an universal dominion over all, not only over this
visible and present world and all the creatures here, but also over the
invisible and future world, and all the creatures there, which is a crown or
highest degree of glory and honor to him, whereto he was exalted after his
suffering of death. And though it be most true, that his suffering of death was
the cause or occasion of his exaltation to glory; for, Paul expressly so
affirms it, Phil. 2.8,9. Yet in this place the Author here intends not to
speak of Christ's death as the cause of his glory, as appears by the words
here following; For, in what sense can it be said, that Christ, because he
suffered death, he was crowned with glory and honor, that he should taste
death for every man; as if after his crowning with glory he suffered or were to
suffer death? But here his intent is to show Christ's death for the order of it,
that for time it was antecedent to his glory, and his glory for time was
consequent after his death. We see him crowned] We see him so by faith, with
the eyes of our soul; and not by sense, or the eyes of our body; for, we
believe it from the pregnant testimonies of the holy Ghost in the Scriptures.
That he by the grace of God should taste death for every man:] To taste death,
is to dye for a little time, as for a day or two, as Christ did: for, when we
take but a little of a thing, then we are said to taste of it. The final cause
why Christ in nature was for a little while a little lower then the Angels, was
this, That he might suffer death. And the super-finall cause why he suffered
death, was this, That his death might be propitious and salutiferous to men.
For the glory of God, and the salvation of men required it, that the Prince of
salvation should taste of death to bring men to salvation, yea God had so
decreed. Now that he might bring men to salvation by this means, i. By
suffering of death, he must by nature be a mortal man, and not an Angel;
because by nature, Angels are immortal, and naturally cannot dye. And the
efficient cause of both these subordinate finals of Christ's dying, and his
dying for men's salvation, was the grace of God; the free love and favor of God
did bestow this transcendent benefit upon men, that Christ should taste death
for them. For the Author had no sooner made open mention of Christ's death, but
presently he adds the great and weighty causes of it, both final and
efficient, lest any man should slight it, and think it not a matter of such
moment, that therefore the Lord of the faithful should be less then the
Angels for that end.

10. For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things:]
These words are a circumlocution or a designation of God, from his two great
attributes of being the last end, and the first cause of all things; and are
introduced as a ground, whereby to answer this tacit objection. Had it not
been far more convenient and decent, That Christ the Lord and King over Gods
people, (though he were not an Angel, but a man by nature mortal) should not
taste of death and other sufferings, but always remain in his happiness and
glory, as it became the worth of so great a King. To this the Author answers,
That it wonderfully became God to proceed this way, and not to do otherwise
then he did; because this way did especially suite to his end, and was a most
convenient means to attain the end by God intended. For God himself is the
last end of all things, for whom all things are; and he is also the first
efficient of all things, from and by whom all things are; and therefore it
became God, who begins all things by himself, and finisheth them for himself,
to apply such means as are most conducent to his end; for, it becomes the
wisest agent to work most wisely. The particle by whom] notes not God as an
isntrumental or mean cause, as if some higher agent did work by him; but
supposes him the principal and prime agent; which is always so, when it is
used of God as an efficient or agent of some thing. For that particle referred
to God, carries with it this force in sense, that the thing mentioned, was not
only primely invented and decreed by God, but by him also brought to issue by
effectual means proceeding from himself, and not borrowed elsewhere. This
working of God, as being sole Author and sole means, is distinguished by Paul,
by these two phrases; Of him, and through him are all things, Romans 11.36. But
by this Author both are comprised in this one, by whom are all things] And the
universal particle all things, must be restrained to his proper respective
subject, formerly mentioned, namely all things concerning the salvation of the
faithful. In bringing many sons unto glory:] Here is expressed the intention
or end, whereat God aimed, which was to bring many sons unto glory. The
faithful are the sons of God in a double spiritual respect. 1. Of their
spiritual birth; because they are regenerate, begotten and borne of God, by
the action of his holy Spirit upon them. 2. Of their spiritual right, because
they are adopted or instituted to be the universal heirs of all his estate,
by having the same right with Christ, whereby they become and are called his
brethren. For in a rural sense, he that has a right to another estate,
becomes his son. And the estate whereto God brings them is glory; whereby is
meant all that future happiness and heavenly inheritance, which eminently for
the honor of it is called glory, and which was mystically understood, Psalm.
8.5. and wherewith a little before Christ is said to be crowned. And the sons
brought to glory are many: not as many is a parcel opposed to all, but as it
is a multitude opposed to few; for, God has ordained to bring to glory not a
few sons, but a great many, even many multitudes. God is not as man, who can
have but a few sons, and cannot bring each of them to all his estate; but God
has many multitudes of sons, and yet will bring each of them to glory, even to
all his whole estate. And therefore no marvel if for so many sons sake, God
would not spare their Captain, whom he might have spared partly, though not
wholly, had their number been but few. To make the Captain of their salvation
perfect through sufferings:] Here is expressed the mean whereby God wrought
his end, in bringing a multitude of sons to glory; namely, by giving them a
Captain, and perfecting him through sufferings. For, seeing God has so many
sons, or rather so many multitudes, therefore they being so great an army,
required a Captain. Now Christ is the Captain, or in modern language, the
General over the army of the faithful in two respects. 1. By leading them in
their journey, going before them in all their troubles and afflictions. 2. By
governing them as their head and Lord to command over them; for, in an Army the
General does both lead and govern it. And he is the Captain of salvation to
the faithful, because he leads and governes them in their journey to
salvation: that is, to the eternal glory wherewith himself is crowned, as
before: which to them is salvation, because thereby they are safe, not only
from destruction, but from all affliction, and all other evils. And because
Christ is their captain, by whom God brings them to salvation, and by whom, God
saves them from death, therefore Christ is called and is their Savior: And
Christ their captain passed through sufferings] whereby is meant death,
especially a violent death, comprising also all the miseries and evils that do
precede and accompany it, through all which sufferings Christ passed, which
therefore are called and are his passion. And by these sufferings Christ was
made perfect. His mortality was finished and ended; and he being translated to
immortality was crowned with eternal glory and honor, as before; which was
his ultimate consummation, and final perfection, wherein nothing was wanting
to him, that might accrue to his supreme happiness. Now seeing therefore that
this journey to salvation leads for the most part, through diverse calamities
and afflictions, through death, and a violent death, did it not become the
wisdom of God, that the leader or captain in this journey should pass
through diverse sufferings, and death, yea a violent death, before he could
penetrate and arrive at the mark of eternal salvation, that by his example he
might teach us, that this so rough and craggie way, which seems to precipate
men into eternal destruction, should lead to the highest tower of eternal
salvation, by finishing our mortality, and perfecting us into immortality. And
did it not become the wisdom of God, that he, into whose hand God had put the
salvation of all his sons, and whom he would ordain for their high Priest,
should in all things be made like unto his brethren, and taste of the same cup
of sufferings with them, that being himself acquainted with sufferings, he
might learn to succor them in theirs.

11 For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one.]
Here he shows the great alliance between Christ and Christians, and what good
cause there is, why not only Christ, but also the faithful are styled by the
name of the sons of God, seeing Christ and they have the same parentage, and
come as it were from one stock. And he seems to deliver it as a general rule,
that the sanctifier, and sanctified are all of one. i. draw their original
from one person, as procreated from one and the same Father. To sanctify, is
to expiate or purge away sin; and to be sanctified is to have their sins
expiated or purged away; for as sin does pollute and profane us: so
Expiation does sanctify and hallow us. And in this sense the word sanctified
is often taken in Scripture, especially by this Author. Now Christ is he that
does sanctify; for he does expiate or purge away our sins: and the
faithful are they that are sanctified; for by Christ their sins are expiated
or purged away. And therefore Christ and the faithful are all of one lineage
and parentage; for he and they draw their original from one person, even from
God who is the common Father to them both; and consequently Christ and the
faithful make up between themselves, but as it were one nation or one people
under God; and consequently again, he and they are brethren one to another. An
example hereof was under the Law among the Hebrews, to whom this Author writes,
and to whom therefore this rule of union and fraternity, by means of
sanctification was the better known. For among them the high Priest was he,
that did sanctify the people by expiating and purging away their sins,
making atonement to God for them: and the people were they who were sanctified,
by being expiated and purged from their sins; And both Priest and people were
of the same nation, sprung from Jacob, who was one common Father to them;
whereupon they used to call one another brethren. In like manner the case
stands between Christ who is the high Priest to sanctify; and the faithful
who are Gods people to be sanctified; as we have already declared it. For which
cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren.] Indeed this cause is very
pregnant to make this consequent to follow upon it. For seeing that Christ and
the faithful are all of one God, as of one common Father, therefore they are
the brethren of Christ; and Christ is not ashamed to call them so: for all
children proceeding from one common Father are brethren, and should not be
ashamed to call one another so. Indeed, the condition of the faithful is in
this life so contemptible and shameful, that Christ might think it a shame to
him, to have such brethren. In which sense this Author says afterward, chap.
11. 16. That God was not ashamed to be called the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. For how vile are those Patriarks compared to God, the Sovereign Lord of
all things, especially then being rotted to dust for so many ages before. So
all Christians how vile and wretched are they, how poor, contemned, and
despised? insomuch that Christ now so great a King, of so great Majesty and
glory, might justly disdain to call such creatures his brethren: but Christ is
not ashamed either to acknowledge them his brethren, or to call them by the
name of brethren.

12. Saying, I will declare thy Name unto my brethren; in the midst of the
Church will I sing praise unto thee.] By three Testimonies out of Scripture,
he proves that Christ is not ashamed to call the faithful, brethren. The
first Testimony is taken from Psalm. 22.22. The literal sense is; David was
King over the people of Israel; yet he calls them his brethren, and when God
had saved him from death, he professes to praise God in their company, in the
midst of the Congregation or assemby. The mystical sense is, Christ is a King
over the faithful, yet he calls the faithful his brethren; and when God had
raised and saved him from death, he appeared to his disciples where they were
congregated, and in the midst of their assembly, he really declared the power
of God in raising him from the dead; and with out all doubt, did celebrate the
Name of God with words of praise and thanksgiving. For hence it is we read,
John 20.17. That Christ after his Resurrection, willed Mary to go unto his
brethren, and say of him; I ascend unto my Father and your Father; and to my
God and your God. In which words he gives the reason, why he calls them his
brethren; namely, because he and they had one common God and Father.

13 And again, I will put my trust in him.] The second Testimony to prove the
former point, is taken (as I conceive) out of Psalm. 91.2. because that Psalm
is so frequently applied to Christ, though this testimony be extant in several
other places. The literal sense: David makes God his God, and confidence, to
put his trust in him, and persevering, will put his trust in him. The literal
sense: Christ in like manner made God his God and confidence to trust in him,
and persevered to trust in him. For before his Resurrection, when he hanged on
the Cross, he said, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? Which words
argue no despair, but a confident and persevering trust in God, that though
God did seem to forsake him, yet he should be his God; and he would trust in
him. Yea, the Priests and Scribes mocked at his confidence and trust in God,
Matthew. 27.43. And after his Resurrection, he calls God his God; in the place
precited, Joh. 20.17. But now the Quere will be, what this makes to the purpose
of proving the faithful to be the brethren of Christ. The answer is; It proves
it directly, though not immediately; For seeing Christ and the faithful, have
God for their God, and for their confidence to put their trust in him;
therefore he and the faithful are of one.] i. are confidents and dependents
upon one and the same God and Father; and by means of that they must needs be
brethren, as was before concluded, upon verse 11. So this testimony proves
their unity in God; and their unity in God, proves their fraternity between
themselves: For when the first truth is the reason of the second, it is also
the reason of all other truths, whereof the second is the reason. And again;
Behold, I and the children which God has given me;]. The third Testimony to
prove the former point taken from Esai. 8.18. The literal sense: God had given
the Prophet children; and he and they were brethren in this, that they were to
be for signs and wonders; and were so appointed to be from God. The mystical
sense; Christ is the Son of God, and the faithful are the children of God,
Gods post-nati after Christ, and therefore are the brethren of Christ. And God
has given them unto Christ, by bringing them to believe in Christ, and
committing them to the care of Christ; See John 6.39.40. and John 17.6,7. And
by giving him power to give them eternal life, Joh 17.2. For he did
predestinate them to be conformed to the image of Christ, that Christ might be
the firstborn among many brethren, Romans 8.29. And Christ and the faithful
are brethren in being signs and wonders. For Christ was for a sign which
should be spoken against, Luke 2.34. And the Apostles were made a spectacle to
the world, unto angels, and to men, 1. Cor. 49. yet the faithful are not the
sons of God, before they be given to Christ and believe in him; for by faith
they are made the sons of God: But as soon as a man is given to Christ, then
he becomes the son of God; and unless he be so given, he cannot be the son of
God. See John 6.44,45.

14. For as much then as the children are partakers of flesh and bloud] After
the Author had taught us, the near alliance of brotherhood, between Christ
and the faithful; he now shows what is the state and condition of the
faithful, that from thence he might conclude, that Christ also their Captain
and high Priest, must needs have the like condition with them. And so returns
to what he had said at the ninth verse before, That Christ was made a little
lower then the Angels, expressing here the impulsive cause of that lowness. By
flesh and bloud] Here is understood, an infirm, frail, and ruinous nature and
condition, subject to diverse evils, even to death and corruption. Of this
nature and condition, the faithful, who are Gods children, are all partakers.
He also himself likewise took part of the same:] Therefore Christ also, the
Captain and high Priest of the faithful, to whom he was so nearly allied, as
to be their brother, did himself also in the very same manner partake of the
very same nature and condition of flesh and blood, to be as infirm, frail and
ruinous as they, subject to as many miseries as they, even to death and
corruption; For, he suffered death actually, and was by nature subject to
corruption, yet he suffered not corruption actually; for God by his power and
by his grace rescued him from it, and would not suffer his holy One to see
corruption. Acts 2.27. The sum of the Reasoning is: Seeing Christ must be the
Captain and high Priest of mortal and frail men, therefore he must not be
Angel, but lower then the Angels, even a mortal and frail man like his
brethren, subject to diverse sufferings, even to death it self. But the
Incarnation of Christ cannot be concluded from these last words; for, then by
the same reason, the Incarnation of the faithful (or the rest of Gods
children) must needs be concluded from the former, seeing Christ is said to
partake of flesh and blood likewise, or in like manner with them. But seeing
the faithful, the rest of Gods children are not incarnate, no more is Christ
their Captain and high Priest; otherwise between Christ and the rest of Gods
children, there must be a great difference and unlikenesse, in that wherein
they are here concluded to be most semblant and alike, namely in their
partaking of flesh and blood. And granting the Incarnation here, then from the
death of Christ and his Resurrection following it, the faithful cannot take an
example of their resurrection or immortality after death, by death to be
acquired; and therefore by the death of Christ, cannot be delivered from the
fear of death, as the Author inferres it in the verse next following. That
through death he might destroy the Devil.] The final cause to what end Christ
did partake of a mortal condition, and of death it self, whereby he was lower
then the Angels, is here expressed to be double; whereof notwithstanding one
end is dependent and consequent from the other. The first is, That by his death
he might destroy the devil. Christ by his death destroys not the devil for
his person; for, the devil by his person is an angel, and therefore by nature
indestructible, incorruptible, and immortal. But, Christ by his death
destroys the devil for his power; he abolisheth and abrogates the kingdom
and power that Satan has in the world, particularly his power of death; and
therefore he describes Satan by this circumlocution, him that had the power of
death.] The power of Satan consists in this, that he detaines men mancipated to
his command, and enslaved at his beck, most obsequious to commit any sin;
from the yoke of which slavery, they have of themselves no means to pull
their neck. This power is by an Hebraisme called the power of death. i. a
mortiferous or deadly power, because Satan by sin brings men to death, and that
death is eternal to them. Christ therefore suffered death, that he might
overthrow the tyranny of Satan, breaking all his forces, that he might take
from this power of holding men in deadly bondage, and deliver them from it. For
hence it is that we are said to be delivered from the power of Satan. See Acts
26.18. and Col. 1.13. And it is by the death of Christ, that Satan is said to
be divested and spoiled of all his dominion and power. See John 12.31,33. and
Col. 2.15. Now the reason why Christ destroys the deadly power of Satan by his
death is, Because Christ by his death has obtained the supreme power over all
things, whereby he is enabled to master all his enemies (whereof Satan is the
head) first, breaking their forces; and last, utterly destroying them. This way
of destroying Satan's deadly power, if we respect the nature of the action,
though Christ might have done it without his death: yet it was so ordered by
the decree and counsel of God, that it should not be effected, but by the
means of his death; and that for the second end of his death, which is
expressed in the next verse following; namely, to deliver them who through
fear of death, etc.

15. And deliver them who through fear of death, were all their life time
subject to bondage.] The second or subordinate end of Christ's death, is to
vindicate men from a fearful bondage. This servitude or bondage, is the fear
of death, and of eternal death, or as it may be feared, to last eternally;
for, as it is the manner of slaves to fear, so fear it self is a fearful
slavery; hence S. Paul terms it the spirit of bondage, Romans 8.15. And they are
subject to this slavery of fear, not who stand in actual fear, but who are
liable to fear, or by right ought to fear. Hence it plainly appears, that all
they who fear death, have no share in this deliverance or liberty by Christ,
but remain in a grievous slavery. And all they are forced to fear death, and
the eternity of it, who have not a sure hope of their Resurrection. And how
grievous this slavery or bondage of it is, appears from the duration of it, in
that it continues upon men all the time of their life.] No minute of their life
is free from the fear of it; for though every minute they do not actually fear
it, yet every minute they are subject to fear, and may justly fear it. From
this slavish fear of death, Christ has delivered men by his death, while by
his death, he not only passed to an immortal life, but also obtained power to
repress and destroy the power of Satan. Hence Christ says to John. Fear not,
I am the first and the last; I am he that lives, and was dead; and behold, I
am alive for evermore, and have the keys of hell and of death, Revel. 1.17.18.
For what man now will fear death to be his eternal undoing, when he sees a
deliverance from death with a most glorious issue, if he imitate Christ; when
he sees that the forces of his enemy, who before oppressed him, and enthralled
to eternal death, are no longer to be feared, but are broken and destroyed by
him, who himself under-went a bloody death? And hence it further appears, that
with the death of Christ here, we must join his Resurrection; for that we
might no longer fear death, Christ must needs not only suffer death, but must
again be raised from death. For if Christ be not raised, our faith is vain;
we are yet in our sins, and the dead in Christ are perished, 1. Cor. 15.17,18.

16 For no where he takes hold of Angels.] Here he confirms the doctrine
delivered at the ninth verse; That Christ was not made in the nature of an
Angel, but was made a little lower then the Angels, for the suffering of death.
Why so? The reason is here laid down; because Christ was not ordained, to
succor and help the Angels, who by nature are immortal and die not; and
therefore need not be succored or helped from death. For no where,] There is
no testimony or authority extant in Scripture, whereon to ground this: for it
is no where said, that he takes hold of Angels to help them. Takes hold] The
word in the original (...) signifies properly to take a man with thy hand,
either to lead him some whither, or to uphold him, thereby to help him. See
Mark 8.23. and Luke 9.47. and Luke 14.4. Hence figuratively it is translated to
signify succouring or helping. For when we would help one from falling or
sinking under some burden, or would raise him being fallen, then we put our
hand to him and take hold of him. Hence it is said of Wisdom that she exalts
her children (...), and lays hold of them that seeks her, i. she helps
or aideth them that seek her. And there is the same sense of the counterverbe
(...); because when we would help a man up with his burden, we take hold of it
over against him. And this sense of the word is explicated afterward by the
Author, at the last verse of this Chapter; for, what he calls here taking hold
of, there he expresses by the word succouring; That Christ suffering himself,
being tempted, is able to succor them that are tempted; for, in both these
verses he treates of the same thing, and the reason of the consequence proposed
in this verse is explicated in that. Thus for the sense of the word; now for
the sense of it. It is not of the preter-tense, as if referred to a time past,
particularly to that time, when (as it is at the ninth verse before) Christ was
made a little lower then the Angels: for at that time, being the time of his
birth, he did neither help Angels nor men: but it is of the present tense, he
takes not hold; in reference to the time of his death, upon which the Author
groundeth all this argument; For, by his death he destroys the devil, and
delivers men from the fear of death; What is the reason of that? Because, by
his death he takes not hold of Angels to help and succor them, or deliver
them from the fear of death, who being immortal by nature cannot fear it.
Neither can here be any enallage of the present tense for the preter, but
rather of the present for the future; Christ was made lower then the Angels;
Why so? Because by his death he was not to take hold of the Angels, to help and
succor them from the fear of it. Now, both this sense, and this sense of the
word was well perceived by our last Translators of the Bible into English; for,
they have noted it in the margent of this verse, though in the Text they
correspond with some other Translations. Hence it plainly appears, how these
words are mistaken by some Translators and Interpreters, who from hence would
show, that Christ took not on him the nature of Angels, which assertion,
though it be in it self most true, yet it cannot be the meaning of this place.
For, 1. It is against the sense of the words, whereof there are but two, and it
goes against the sense of them both. For, to apprehend or take hold of a thing,
cannot signify to assume or take on us the nature of it. And the word Angels
in the plural number cannot imply an assumption of their nature, for then it
must have been Angel in the singular. 2. It is against the context or
reasoning of the Author, who could not, nor ought not to take that for an
argument or a reason, which by argument and reason he was to prove; for, no one
and the same truth can be an argument or a reason to it self why it self
should be true. At the seventh verse before, this truth is laid down, That
Christ took not on him the nature of Angels, but was made lower; whereof, how
can a reason be given by this, that he took not on him the nature of Angels,
seeing these two sayings are identicall, whereof neither can be the cause or
reason of the other? But, if we understand these words of not helping or
succouring the Angels, then all things cohere most elegantly and rationally,
thus. Christ took not the nature of Angels, but was made lower then them,
because by his death he was not to help or succor the Angels from fear of
death, but to succor a creature lower then they, who is all his lise in
bondage of death, and subject to the fear of death. But he took hold of the
seed of Abraham:] That Christ should help the Angels is no where said in
Scripture; but it is said in some one or several places of Scripture, that he
was ordained to take hold of the seed of Abraham, to help and succor it: For
to take hold in this clause of the verse, carries the very same sense that it
did in the former, where it was denied of the Angels. The word seed, especially
among the Hebrews, is for the most part a Noune collective, and signifies a
multitude of persons; and therefore the Author fitly uses the word seed,
importing a multitude, that he might oppose it, to the Angels in the plural
number. And the seed of Abraham, are the children or posterity of Abraham,
whether they be carnal by birth only, or spiritual by faith only, or both
by birth and faith. And he rather said the seed of Abraham in two respects. 1.
Because we often read in Scripture, that Christ is promised to no other men
properly, but to the posterity of Abraham, or at least to his seed, chiefly and
in the first place. 2. Because this word would be most pleasing to the Hebrews,
to whom he writes, who were themselves the seed, or posterity of Abraham. But,
by this ambiguous appellation, which might signify the seed of Abraham,
whether carnal or spiritual, he so ingratiates the Hebrews, that withal he
might tacitly invite them, to continue Christians; because, Christians only,
of what Nation soever they be, are the spiritual seed of Abraham, Gal. 3.29.
For, Christ was destinate to take hold of, to help, succor, and save only
that spiritual seed, as being their only merciful and faithful high Priest.
And by the words here, we must understand rather the spiritual seed of
Abraham, then the carnal: but they that are his seed both ways, both carnally
and spiritually, as these Hebrews were, may challenge Christ in a manner by a
double right, to be their ayder and helper. The sum of all is. As in the
former clause of this verse, the Author proved the negative, That Christ was
not made an Angel, because he was not to take hold of them, to help and succor
them: So in this clause he proves the affirmative, why he was made lower then
the Angels, why he took part of flesh and blood: Because by his death he was
to take hold of the seed of Abraham, to help and succor the faithful, in
delivering them from the fear and bondage of death. So the words show, not
what Christ was by his birth, but what he did by his death. Hence now it
plainly appears how incongruously these words are wrested, to Christ's taking
on him humane nature. For, this sense is contrary to the context, and
altogether cross to right reasoning; for, by it the same truth is made a
reason whereby to conclude it self. At the fourteenth verse before, this is
laid down for a truth, That Christ took part of our flesh and blood, i. he
did partake of humane nature; of which truth, how can a reason be given by
this, that he took on him our humane nature, seeing these two truths are
identicall, though not in words, yet altogether in sense? But if we understand
these words of helping and succouring the faithful, then there runs a vein of
evident reasoning. Christ was made lower then the Angels, and took part of
flesh and blood; to what end? that he might suffer death: Why so? To destroy
the Devils power of death. Why that? Because he was to deliver men from the
fear and bondage of death: Why did he that? Because he was to take hold of
men, to help and succor them who are the seed of Abraham.

17. Wherefore in all things] Hitherto he has showed that Christ must be a
mortal man, to suffer death; now from the last cause of his helping or
succouring men, he teaches that he must not only be mortal, but subject to
diverse afflictions; and not only subject, but actually to suffer them, and
that not some few, but even all wherewith the rest of the faithful are
afflicted. It behooved him, to be made like unto his brethren] How, and why the
faithful are the brethren of Christ, has before been showed and proved. Yet,
in this place again the word brethren carries a powerful force of reasoning.
It behooveth a brother to help and succor his brother; and Christ therefore
takes hold of the faithful, to help and succor them, because they are his
brethren; especially the seed of Abraham, who are his brethren, both by God and
man. And it behooveth also a brother to be like a brother; and the more alike
they are, the more lovely they are to all, and the more loving one to another.
And therefore it behooved Christ to be made like unto his brethren, not only
in some one thing, as in their nature, to be made a little lower then the
Angels, as his brethren were, or to take part of flesh and blood as they did;
but also to be like them in all things, even in their whole condition, to be
subject to afflictions and temptations as they are, and actually to suffer all
sorts of them as they do; yet he was not like them in sin, for that is
excepted, Heb. 4.15. and a universal saying must always abate, when a
particular exception is expressly made against it. That he might be a merciful
and faithful high Priest.] Christ must be made like unto his brethren in
nature, that he might be their high Priest; for, the Priest and the people must
be of one Nation; he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, must be
all of one: and he was made like them in condition for suffering afflictions,
and therefore he must be unto them a merciful and faithful high Priest. 1.
He must be merciful, to be touched with a sense of his brethrens miseries and
sorrows; and to think them so his own or so near him, that he may be moved
readily to succor or help them as himself. For, mercy is a sorrow for
another misery, moving us to succor him. 2. He must be faithful, to
administer and perform all things with all care and diligence in their
behalf, that concerns their sanctifying or succouring; to expiate their sins,
and help them from misery. And this faithfulness takes some root and growth
from mercifulness; for mercy does beget and nourish faithfulness. Now that
Christ might be truly merciful and faithful to his brethren in all things,
therefore he must be made like them in all things, even in all their
afflictions and sorrows. In things pertaining to God:] The office of the high
Priest in general was this; to administer in things pertaining to God, as to
offer gifts and sacrifices for sin: (as the Author explicates it afterward,
chap. 5.1.) And it was peculiar and proper to the high Priest, to expiate or
make atonement for the sins of the whole people together; and not of single
persons by themselves, for that was common to other Priests. This popular
Expiation was performed by Christ our high Priest, when after the shedding of
his blood on earth he entered into heaven, as into the Sanctuary or holiest of
all, there to appear in the presence of God, to make Intercession for us; that
is, that resting in heaven with God, he might administer and perform all
things, that concerns our deliverance from the punishments of our sins. To
make reconciliation for the sins of the people] The end of the office of the
high Priest was, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. i. To
propitiate or expiate their sins. The word in the original signifies to
cover; hence the cover of the Arc was called the propitiatory, because it
covered the Tables of the Law that lay in the Arc; and was a figure of Gods
mercy, whereby he was propitious to forgive, or cover the sins against the Law.
For sins are no other way propitiated or expiated, then as it were by covering
or hiding, that they may no more appear against us in the sight of God. Hence
Gods people are said to be reconciled unto God; that is, to be sanctified and
purged from their sins; for, when the Tabernacle was sanctified and purged from
the sins of the people, it was called reconciling, Levit. 16.20. And, hence God
is said to be propitiated or pacified, or appeased; not as if hereby he were
always turned from anger which was in him before, but many times, that he
should not desist from being propitious, but continue pacified or appeased
toward us; and that he should pass by just causes of anger which otherwise he
might have. For, thus God was anciently pacified by the Sacrifices ordained by
his Law; for, it is no way likely, that God was really angry with his people
for those sins, for which he granted an expiation under the Law, then when the
people procured the timely expiation of their sins, according to the
prescript of Gods Law, then certainly God was not actually angry; for then God
must be angry at set times of the year yearly, at every solemnity of the
Expiation. By those sacrifices therefore God was not pacified, by being drawn
from anger; but thereby order was taken, that God might still continue
pacified, and not turn away his grace and favor from his people, by reason of
their sins. Hence it appears, that from these words of Reconciling, and
Pacifying, we must not conclude that Gods wrath against us was appeased by
Christ: but when we hear these words referred unto sins, we must thereby
understand nothing else, but their expiation or purgation made by Christ; as
this Author termed it before, chap. 1. v. 3. But, how Christ now residing in
heaven, and exercising the office of his Priesthood, does purge away our sins,
shall be declared hereafter; namely, no other way then by the power God has
granted him to forgive them, that we should not be punished and perish
eternally for them. The faithful are the people of God, who are reconciled,
and whose sins are expiated. And this, as was noted before, was proper to the
office of the high Priest, who used not to make reconciliation for single
persons, but for the people on the day of Expiation.

18. For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted] He says not simply
that Christ has suffered, but he adds being tempted. The sufferings of Christ
were not punishments but temptations or trials of his excellent fidelity and
piety. For, there was no sin in Christ for which he should be punished,
seeing punishments are only for sin. And therefore chap. 4. v. 15. speaking
of Christ's being tempted or tried, he expressly adds, that he was without
sin, i. his trial was not a punishment, as no way merited by sin. He is able
to succor them that are tempted] Afflictions to the faithful are temptations
of their faith and righteousness; whether they will persevere in their
obedience to God, or be beaten off by worldly calamities: as the offering of
Isaac was a temptation to Abraham; and our whole spiritual warfare against
Satan, the world, and the flesh, is a daily temptation or trial of us. In
these their trials Christ does succor them, by his assistance of them from
perishing under the miseries that press them. And this he does, when he
affords them strength and courage to sustain the afflictions, lest by force
thereof they fall from the faith and forsake it. Or when he so moderates the
afflictions, that they be not too great, for pain, or too long for time, by
lightning of them if they be too or shortening them if they be too long; or,
lastly, when he receives their spirits at their death, to restore them again
in due time with supreme glory. And when Christ succors the faithful in this
manner, he does even thereby expiate their sins. For thereby he endeavors
and provides with all care, lest that sinking under their afflictions, or being
destitute at their death, they should by this means suffer punishment for
their sins. And therefore the word able to help] must be ampliated and
extended, to be both able, willing and careful, for otherwise he should not be
a merciful and faithful high Priest; if having power to succor, he had
neither will nor care to perform it. Hence appear three verities. 1. That
Christ our high Priest expiateth our sins, by succouring us in our
temptations. 2. That the principal function of his Priestly office is
performed now in heaven; and was not performed at this death, wherein there was
only a preparation toward it. 3. That neither the Priestly function of Christ,
nor his Expiation of sins thereby procured, consist in this, that Christ should
suffer punishment for our sins, seeing that can have no place in heaven.

The sum or Contents of this second Chapter are 5.
1. We Christians have more cause to persevere in the Gospel, then the Jews
had to persist in the law. verse 1. Reason 1. Because if we neglect it, our
punishment will be more certain then theirs. 2. Because it was first taught by
Christ, and confirmed by his Apostles, by miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost.
2. Christ was made lower then the Angels. verse 7. Reason. 1. Because he was
to suffer death; not thereby to succor them but men.
3. Christ and the faithful are brethren. verse 11. Reason. 1. Because they
come of one Father who is God. Testimonies 3. out of Scripture.
4. Christ suffed death. verse 14. Reason. 1. Because he was to destroy the
devil that had the power of death. 2. Because he was to deliver the faithful
from the fear and bondage of death: for he was to succor not Angels but them
5. Christ was afflicted and tempted like the faithful in all things. ver. 17.
Reason. 1. Because he was to be their high Priest, to expiate their sins. 2.
Because he was to succor them, when they are afflicted and tempted.

CHAPTER III.
1. WHerefore] It referres to all that has been spoken hitherto concerning the
dignity of Christ; who seeing he is so excellent a person as ye have heard,
therefore ye have great reason to consider him well. Holy brethren,] Separated
from the profane vulgar and worldly, by your knowledge in divine mysteries;
and allied to me, not by a vulgar and carnal fraternity: but by a spiritual
affinity in Christ. Partakers of the heavenly calling.] Who together with me
and all other Christians have one common spiritual calling whereto we are
called. And this calling is called heavenly, not only because it was notified
from heaven, and comes from thence: but also because it is directive to heaven
to teach us the way thither; and conductive to heaven to carry us safely
thither: So that heaven is the double term of our spiritual calling; for
heaven is the start of it from whence it runs, and the mark of it whereto it
runs. Consider Jesus Christ] Ye six your minds and hearts upon Moses, to
consider him in all particulars; consider also Jesus Christ. The Apostle and
high Priest of our profession.] Our profession is our Religion, whereby we
profess to serve God and to be saved. Of this our Religion Christ is the great
Prophet, the grand Apostle, Emissary or Legate, or the first Messenger of it;
because he was the first that was sent from God, to bring it into the world,
and to publish or preach it unto men. For every Prophet sent with a message
immediately from God, is therefore an Apostle. And of this our Religion, Christ
is the high Priest, or chief President to order it: because he perpetually
administers and officiates all things pertaining to it; and because by him all
the professors of it, have their access to God; because he expiates and
purges away their sins; and because he takes care that all things pertaining
to divine worship, be rightly performed in the Temple of God, dedicate to this
Religion; For in this place, the Author remarkably calls Christ by the name of
high Priest, because anciently the high Priests were Presidents over the Temple
and holy things of God. From both these offices, thus united in Christ, appears
his transcendent dignity. For anciently there was an Apostle or Prophet of the
Jewish Religion, who was Moses, for he first taught and published it: but then
among them there was another high Priest, who was Aaron and his Successors. But
Christ alone in one person was both the Apostle and high Priest of our
profession. But in this place we must ampliate and extend the word high Priest
so largely, that it may also comprehend the Regal dignity or office of Christ.
For it is not likely that the Author in this breviate of Christ's offices would
wholly omit the chiefest, especially in this place, where he would move them
to consider Christ; especially when he had before termed him such a high
Priest, as was able to succor them that are tempted: which thing belongs also
to his Regal power, and had in the first chapter so lively expressed his
Regal dignity, by several testimonies of Scripture.

2. Who was faithful to him that appointed him.] It had been enough to move
the Hebrews to consider Christ, by what the Author had delivered before, in
preferring him above the Angels, by several arguments of reason, and
testimonies of Scripture: but the Author not content with this, does here
single out Moses, and equal Christ with him; because the Hebrews had Moses in
high esteem, opposing him to Christ, and preferring him before Christ. The
particular wherein he equals Christ with Moses, is the faithfulness of Christ,
and he instanceth the rather in this particular, because that when God gave a
singular commendation of Moses, the Lord instanced in the particular, of his
faithfulness to God. He therefore declares that Christ was as faithful to God
as ever Moses was. Now the faithfulness of Christ relates to both his offices,
of high Legate, (or Apostle) and high Priest. The faithfulness of a Legate
consists in these two things. 1. That he deliver his Message wholly and truly,
according to his Commission. 2. That he use all means to persuade and gain
faith to his Message; especially if he be thereto enjoined by him that sent
him. And the faithfulness of a high Priest is, To provide all things pertinent
to the worship of God; and then to propitiate God toward those that worship
him. The person to whom Christ was thus faithful, was the supreme God, who
made him his Legate and high Priest, by appointing him to the execution of
these offices, wherein he might exercise his singular faithfulness; for Christ
assumed not these offices of himself, but was thereto appointed of God the
Father; as afterward more fully. As also Moses was faithful in all his house.]
Moses was a great Prophet and Legate sent from God; in so much that when Aaron
and Miriam had spoken against him, the Lord to publish his great esteem of
him, would vindicate him by his own mouth, and thereupon preferres him before
all other Prophets, in that he would deal more familiarly with him then with
any other; for, he would speak to others by visions and dreams, and dark
speeches; but he would speak to Moses mouth to mouth, even apparently, and he
should behold the similitude of the Lord; of which dealing with Moses, the Lord
gives this reason, because Moses was faithful in all the Lords house, Numb.
12.6,7,8. In which words, who sees not how highly God esteemed Moses above all
other Prophets? Now, whether we take house for Gods Tabernacle, or for his
family; yet Moses was most faithful in both respects, in that he neglected
nothing that pertained to the care and good of either. The sum is: Lest by
this singular testimony given by God to Moses for his faithfulness, any man
should hereby think, that herein Moses was greater then Christ; therefore the
Author adornes Christ with the very same commendation of faithfulness that God
had given to Moses; that thereby he might take from Moses all prerogative of
his being above Christ in any thing, and consequently inferres Christ equal to
Moses.

3. For this man was counted worthy of more glory then Moses] Having showed
that Christ was no way inferior to Moses; here he advances a degree higher,
and affirms that Christ was much superior to Moses, and counted worthy of
more honor, that he might further move them to the consideration of Christ.
And yet more determinately, that the honor of Christ is a great distance above
that of Moses. And the following words show how much: As much as he who has
builded the house, has more honor then the house.] He properly builds the
house that either frames it himself, or causes it to be framed for himself;
for, whosoever is the owner, is properly the builder, and not the mercenary,
who is hired to build it for another. Now the builder is more honorable then
the building; for, the Builder by his building becomes the Lord or Owner of it;
which is the first original or natural ground of honor. And look how much
the builder is more honorable then the building, though the degree be never so
indefinite: so much is Christ more honorable then Moses. For, Moses was but a
part of the building in Gods family; but Christ under God is the builder of his
whole Church.

4. For, every house is builded by some man:] No house does raise or build it
self, but is built or raised by some person or other, who builds it himself
for himself, or causes it to be builded for himself. But he that has built
all things is God.] Here he expresses what person he understands for the
architect or builder of the house, whereof he speaks; namely, that he means
God himself. Hence it appears that the Authors mind was to say, That Christ
is so much more honorable then Moses, as God is more honorable then his house
which he has built; that is, then his people, who are the house of God. For,
as Moses must be joined with the house of God, whereof he was a principal
part: so Christ must be joined with God, who jointly with God has built his
house, and exercises dominion or Lordship over it. So that Christ this way
considered is not a part of the building, but a part of the builder, and
therefore above the building. Furthermore, if the difference in dignity
between Christ and Moses be the same that is between God and his house; then
consequently there will be also the same proportion in dignity between God and
Christ, that there is between Moses and Gods house. For, in proportions
consisting of four terms, the proportion is alternable. Wherefore, as Moses
is in dignity inferior to the house; for he is but Gods Minister or Legate
there, who though he be superior to any one person there singly taken, yet he
is inferior to the whole taken collectiyely or jointly. So Christ is a
secondary unto God, from whom he has received all divine power and authority,
to build and govern Gods house in Gods Name. But we must take notice, that in
all this comparison of Christ with Moses, there is no consideration had of
this, that the ancient house wherein Moses was faithful to God, was one, and
this new house is another, wherein God has adjoined Christ for the building
and governing of it. For, to the purpose in hand, it is enough that both of
them are the houses of God; and the latter wherein Christ governes, is as it
were succeeded in the room of that, wherein Moses was faithful; so that in
this respect they may seem in a manner all one. But if any man shall urge them
to be diverse; be shall thereby, not only not diminish the dignity of Christ,
for the advance whereof all these things are said, but greatly increase it; for
this new house in dignity far exceeds the old.

5. And Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant.] Before he
delivered the Prerogative or Dignity of Christ above Moses, but generally and
indefinitly; now he explicates it more particularly and clearly. Which being
done, it will plainly appear, That Christ is more honorable then Moses, so
much as God is more honorable then his house, which is his people; that is,
Moses must be reckoned with the house, and Christ with God. The particle and
here signifies not copulatively, but illatively as much as for. For Moses
verily was faithful as a servant. All the dignity that Moses had in Gods house
was but a servile dignity, for he ordered and governed the whole house of God,
not as Lord over it, but as a Minister and servant unto God. He was the steward
of Gods house; that is, the principal servant of the family, to whose charge
the Master of the family committed the charge of it; Wherefore he was always
forced to depend upon the beck and pleasure of God, as of his Lord, expecting
in all things his command. For hence it was that he could neither move the camp
nor pitch it, till first he had received notice of it from God. And this very
argument he takes from the testimony of Scripture before cited for the
faithfulness of Moses; in which verse God calls Moses his servant. For a
testimony of those things that were to be spoken after.] Herein is specified
the chief office wherein the service of Moses consisted. God spoke to his
servant Moses mouth to mouth, and Moses was to testify and relate unto the
people afterward those things which he had heard spoken of God, either
concerning their present affairs in the wilderness, or concerning the Laws
and Ordinances to be observed for the future in the land of Canaan: for in this
place the word Testimony is figuratively taken for a relating or rehearsing of
things that have been heard spoken by another. Hence the Gospel as it was
first spoken by God, is called the word of God; but as it was reported and
delivered by Christ or the Apostles, it is not seldom called their testimony.
See 1 Cor. 1.6. and 1 Cor. 2.1. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. and 2 Timothy 1.8. and Rev.
1.2. and Rev. 6.9. and Rev. 12.11. And the two Preachers in the Revelation are
called the witnesses of God, to whom God will give power to preach 1260. days,
Rev. 11.3. For it seems, they were therefore called the witnesses of God,
because they were to prophecy or preach.

6. But Christ as a Son over his own house.] Now he opposes and prefers
the dignity of Christ before that of Moses; because Moses was but as a servant
in his Masters house; but Christ as a Son in his Fathers house: that is, as
the Lord and heir of Gods house. And therefore Christ must not be reckoned
among the goods of the house as Moses was, but must be joined with the Master
of the house as Lord of the family. And consequently Christ is so much worthier
then Moses, as God is worthier then his own house. For these words, Over his
own house] may be referred 2 ways. 1 They may be referred to Christ, as his
own house. And then the comparison between Christ and Moses will carry an
opposition in three things. 1 That Moses was but the servant of God, but Christ
was the Son of God. 2 (Consequently to the first) that Moses was only in the
house as parcel of the house; and so with the rest of the house subject to the
Master of the house; but Christ is over the house as Lord and heir of it. 3
(Consequently to both the former) that Moses ordered another house; but Christ
governed his own house, that God had given him by right of inheritance. 2. The
words, Over his own house] may be referred to God, as Gods own house: for
the comparison seems to require, that in each term thereof mention should be
made of Gods house. For the Author either takes it for granted, that this house
of God whereof he spoke, was the house of Christ, or he takes it not for
granted. If he take it for granted; to what purpose did he say, that Christ is
over his own house, for if he be Lord and Owner of it, he must needs be over
it? He might have said more briefly, That Moses was a servant in Gods house as
in another house, but Gods house was Christ's own house. But if he take it not
for granted, then the reason of this comparison and the argument thence drawn,
will not appear. For merely from hence, That Christ is over his own house,
but Moses was a servant in Gods house, it will not follow, that Christ is far
more honorable then Moses; for many times it is a greater honor to be a
servant in another house especially in Gods house, then a Master over his
own. Besides, the argument here is about that house wherein both Christ and
Moses were faithful to God; but faithfulness is seen more in another house
then his own, or at least not as his own, but as another. For here is a
relation to those words of God formerly cited, That Moses was faithful in all
Gods house. Whose house are we.] He now expresses what we must understand by
this house of God or Christ; namely all they are this house that profess the
Religion of Christ, of which number these Hebrews were a part, and thereby he
opens a passage to his following exhortation. The faithful are the house of
God, whether by house we understand a family or a building. For they are the
family of God and Christ, who serve God and Christ, and are under his care.
They are also his building or spiritual Temple, because God and Christ do
inhabit them by their holy Spirit; and they are a Tabernacle for divine
worship, whereof are extant many testimonies of Scripture. Hence appears the
great dignity of Christians, who therefore are to endeavor that they never
fall from it, but that it continue stable and perpetual. If we hold fast the
confidence. For confidence, the original word properly signifies liberty of
speech, whereby a man speaks undauntedly, though otherwise there be cause of
fear. Hence the word is figuratively drawn to signify courage of mind, and
also confidence thence refulting. In this place it may be taken both properly
and figuratively; not only for a confidence or assurance of mind, but for a
liberty in professing Religion; so that a Christian, what fear soever assault
him, must openly and publicly profess himself the follower of Christ, and
not be deterred from it by any means. And in the same sense it seems the word
is taken afterward cap. 10.35. for there the Author treats not only of inward
faith, but of outward profession of the Christian Religion. Hence it appears
that to make us become the house of God, it is required that we have
confidence; and to make us continue so, we must hold our confidence fast and
firm unto the end. And therefore we are the house of God, being of the present
tense, must be understood as ampliated also to the future. For that we should
become the house of God for the present, it is not required we should hold
fast our confidence to the end, but that only for the present we should have
confidence. But that we might thence forward continue and remain the house of
God perpetually, we must also continue and remain in our confidence
perpetually, by holding it fast to the end. And the rejoicing of the hope.]
Hope is put here materially for the thing hoped for, which is eternal life, for
that is the final matter of our hope. Rejoicing is either a high degree of joy
exalted, or an outward expression of our inward joy, caused by our hope of
eternal life; for such great hopes must needs breed in us not only joy, but
rejoicing. For rejoicing is a patent sign of hope latent in us; and it is also
an effect of that hope: for if our confidence and hope of eternal life be
real and true in us, it will work this effect in us to rejoice of it, by
having it always in our mouth, and thereby professing our selves happy and
blessed. Whence it is no marvel the Author requires this rejoicing in
Christians, seeing Paul affirms of them also, That they rejoice in hope of the
glory of God, Romans 5.2. And this rejoicing of our confidence and hope does
necessarily draw with it, and in a manner compriseth our rejoicing of Christian
Religion, whereon our hope both depends and relyes. For we must needs perceive
that the Authors aim is, we should hold fast the Christian Religion, and not
only profess it freely and boldly; but also rejoice in it, because it brings
us a sure hope of eternal happiness. Firm unto the end.] Unto the last gasp
of our life; for this is the nature of a firm hope, for then our confidence is
firm and stable if it last and hold out to the last gasp of our life: Unless
we shall say, that a firm hope is opposed to a hope infirm, that is wavering
and weak, which comes all to one; because an infirm or weak hope is not
likely to last and hold out to the end. Hence it appears, that it is possible
for a Christian endued to true faith, to fall from that faith: For otherwise,
why should the Author annex this condition of persevering in faith, by holding
it fast and firm; if they who are once the house of God, and have faith, can
no way fail and fall from it? Why in the following admonition does he exhort
them to constancy? Why does he will them to take heed of departing from the
living God?

7. Wherefore as the holy Ghost says,] Here he begins an Exhortation against
obstinacy, that they should not show themselves incredulous and hard hearted
against the voice of God by Christ in the Gospel. Wherefore] this word
intimates, that his Exhortation is drawn from his former discourse. And it may
be drawn either from his last words, wherein he showed us to be the house of
God; and for our continuing so, we must persevere constantly in the faith and
hope of eternal salvation. For from hence the admonition may well be inferred,
that seeing the matter is of such moment, therefore we should show our selves
tractable and obsequious to the voice of God, and so persist constantly in the
faith. Or it may be drawn from the words before that, concerning the great
dignity of Christ above Moses; for if all obedience were due to the voice of
God delivered by Moses, how much more reverence and regard must be given to the
voice of God published by Christ, who was much greater then Moses? As the holy
Ghost says.] q. d. That I may use unto you the words of the holy Ghost, and
say unto you now, as he says in the Psalms. He attributes the words of
David to the holy Ghost, because David uttered them by the instinct of the holy
Ghost. To day if ye will hear his voice.] These words whereof the Author here
makes use to apply them to his present purpose are extant, Psalm. 95.7. The
literal sense is: Upon the solemn festival day the people were accustomed to
enter the temple of God, there to celebrate Divine worship, and to hear the
reading of the Law, which was the word or voice of God. Hereupon David composed
this Psalm for the festival day, wherein he excites the people, that when
they went into the house of God to worship him and hear his word, they should
also obey it, and not harden their hearts against it. For the particle if] is
put for when] when, or seeing ye will hear his voice. The mystical sense,
The voice of Christ, whereby the Gospel is revealed and delivered to men, is
the voice of God. And the time of the Gospel, is the festival day of Grace,
wherein God offers salvation, and invites us to it by the preaching of the
Gospel; which time will not last always in respect of particular persons, but
will continue to them but as a day, during their own days; and to some it
dureth not during their own days. For sometimes God is in a manner driven by
the contumacy or disobedience of men, either to take from them the preaching of
his word, or to harden their stubborn hearts that were fore-hardned by their
own malice, lest, as himself says, Seeing they should see, and hearing they
should hear, they should be converted and healed: or lastly, he wholly turns
the day of Grace and Salvation into a day of his wrath and punishment, All
which things by the just judgment of God happened at last to the nation of the
Jews. Wherefore by these words of the Psalmist they are admonished, that they
would speedily show themselves tractable to God, and as soon as they shall hear
his voice by Christ, they yield obedience thereto, without procrastinating or
delaying the matter from day to day.

8. Harden not your hearts.] Your hearts, that is your minds; the member is
oftentimes put for the faculty of it. Then a man hardens his heart, when he
resists the voice of God, and suffers not himself to be persuaded by it,
when he does the act of opposing, and besides has a will to continue it. As
hard things suffer not themselves easily to be handled, or molded, and yield
not to him that would figure or fashion them into another shape. This is done,
when a man has a will not to believe or obey the word of God, whether formerly
he believed or obeyed it, or did not. As in the provocation,] He notes that
notable contention of the Israelites with Moses at Rephidim for want of water:
which ennobled the place where it was made with the names of Meriba, and Massa.
i. Provocation and tentation; whereof see Exodus 17. That Contention is here
called Provocation; because in contention there is commonly provocation; for he
that contends with another, does anger and provoke him. The Israelites, as much
as lay in them, did in the first place provoke Moses, and then by him even God
also: For this provocation must primely and properly be referred to Moses and
not to God: as contrarily the temptation must primely be referred to God, and
not to Moses. For so Moses himself expressed it to the people, in saying, Why
chide you with me? wherefore do ye tempt the Lord? Exodus 17.2. And thereupon
the place was called Chiding and Tempting: But while the Israelites chide and
quarrel with Moses, who did nothing but by Gods command; they are by that
means reckoned to have chidden and striven with God. For when a second time in
like manner they murmured at Cades for want of water; those waters also are
called the waters of Meriba, that is, of contention or strife, because the
children of Israel strove with the Lord. Numb. 20.13. When notwithstanding they
strove not with the Lord himself, but with Moses and Aaron; as appears in the
same chapter, verse 3, 4, 5. So they strive with Moses, and therefore with God
himself, while they demand water of him with disdain and anger, ver. 2. while
reproachfully and most unworthily they upbraid him, that he had brought them
out of Egypt, to kill them, their children and cattle with thirst in the
wilderness, ver. 3. While therefore the Israelites in this manner contend and
chide with Moses the servant of God, did they not bewray the hardness of their
hearts, when by so many miraculous works of God, and by so many marveilous
benefits bestowed upon them, they could not be induced to confide in God, nor
persuaded that he would provide them of water. The particle as notes the
similitude or likeness of the case; and the sense is. Do not you harden your
hearts against God, to diffide and distrust him and his voice by Christ; as the
Israelites did in the Provocation at Meriba, when they did chide and strive
with God, in chiding and striving with Moses. The like speech we have, Job
29.2. O that I were as in months past! i. that my case were like to what it was
some months since. In the day of temptation in the wildernesse] These words are
referred both to the Induration and Provocation mentioned before, and are the
two circumstances of them; for, in the day of Temptation, shows the time of the
Provocation, that it was then upon the very same day that they tempted him;
they provoked and tempted him both on a day. And in the wilderness, shows the
place of it; for it was at Rephidim, a dry plain near Horeb or Mount Sinai,
where Moses fought with Amaleck. To the end, that notorious provocation and
tentation might be the more remarkable by the place, and thereby be
distinguished from others, that fell out in other places afterward. The matter
of the Tentation wherein it consisted was this, that they said of God, Is the
Lord among us or not? as the text expresses, Exodus 17.7. In which words they
doubt of the Divine presence, i. they were diffident of God; which
distrustfulnesse of God, and doubtfulnesse of his goodness or power, is called
a tentation of God. For, every tentation arises from some distrust, or at
least from some doubting. He therefore tempts God, that having many arguments
of Gods goodness toward him, and his power; yet is not sure of his goodness
or power, but doubts of either, and requires more arguments or tokens thereof.
It is a vulgar error in men to think, that God is then tempted, when a man
trusts too much upon God; that is, when he casts himself into danger
rashly and unnecessarily, in confidence of Gods assistance. This error seems
to spring from the answer of Christ to Satan, who required him to cast himself
down headlong from the pinnacle of the Temple; but Christ answered, Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God; As if to tempt God, were to cast himself into
danger rashly, upon too much trust of Gods help. But Satan in saying to Christ,
If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, etc. did not intend to draw
him to too great a trust in God, but rather to distrust and doubt whether he
were truly the Son of God, by seeking a further experiment or sign thereof, in
casting himself down; in as much as it was written of the Son of God, that
Gods Angels had charge over him, to bear him up in their hands, etc. To whom
Christ rightly answers; It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God, q.d. Seeing it is already abundantly evident to me that I am the Son of
God, and most dear to God, I will make no further trial thereof, and so tempt
God, which deed he has forbidden. Wherefore this precept of Scripture alleged
by Christ, pertaines nothing at all, to any excess of trust, but must be
referred to distrust and doubting, as all other places are concerning the
tentation of God; especially seeing in the very text when Christ quoteth this
Scripture, of not tempting God, it is added, as ye tempted him in Massa, Deuteronomy.
6.16. But we have already showed, that the Israelites in Massa tempted God, not
with excess of trust, but with defect of it. The like words in the like sense
are used by Peter, Acts 15 10. Now therefore, why tempt ye God, to put a yoke
upon the neck of the Disciples? etc. q.d. Has not God already given us
experiments and arguments enough, and sufficient, that we should not impose
upon the Disciples the yoke of legal Ceremonies? seeing he has given the holy
Ghost to them as well as to us; seeing he has made no difference between us
and them, purifying their hearts by faith; why therefore, as if the thing were
not already apparent enough, do ye require more arguments and tokens of it, and
so tempt God?

9. When your fathers tempted me] Me, here is referred to God whom the
Israelites tempted; for here, according to an usual form in Scripture, the
person is changed, and God himself is brought in speaking of himself; whereas
in the words before David spoke of God in the third person, but now brings in
God speaking in the first person of himself. In the Original it is not when
but where; for here the circumstantiall particle is not temporal for the time
when they tempted, but local for the place where they tempted; and that place
has reference to the wilderness immediately before mentioned. For in the
wilderness they tempted God, not only at that time, but afterward also at
diverse other times, and in other particular places of that wilderness. For at
Cadeshbarnea, whence the twelve spies were sent to search the land of Canaan,
and upon their return, the people bad stone Caleb and Joshuah, because they
discented from the other ten, who had brought up an evil report upon the Land;
then the Lord complains that they had provoked him long and often; that they
had long distrusted him, notwithstanding all the signs he had showed amongst
them, Numb. 14.11. And again at ver. 22. he complains that they had tempted
him now ten times, i. very many times. Proved me] He expresses the same thing
in another word. For, as to tempt a man, argues distrust and doubt of him; so
also to prove him. And saw my works:] The particle and is by an Hebraisme put
for although; q.d. If they had not seen my wondrous works, it had been less
wonder that they tempted me; but now although they see them, yet they doubt of
my power and goodness toward them; what a strange diffidence and distrust is
this? What works God wrought, both in Egypt and in the Wilderness, to certify
the people of his promise, and to gain faith for their passage into Canaan,
are largely described in the books of Exodus and Numbers. Forty yeares] This
space of forty years, as the history it self, and the Hebrew text, and this
Author also signifies at ver. 17. must be referred forwards to Gods
indignation, whereby he was grieved with them for the space of forty years.
Yet it is true also, that this space may be referred backward (as the
Septuagint have pointed it) to the peoples tempting of God, and seeing his
works for the space of forty years; for so long the people tempted him, and so
long saw his works. For, even at the expiration of those years, when Miriam
was dead, in Cadesh, they again murmured against Moses and Aaron for want of
water, as their fathers had done before at Meriba and Massa, and that place
also was branded by the name of Meriba, or waters of strife; where the
diffidence or distrust in God was greater then any formerly, for it was
extended even to Moses and Aaron, who were also infected with the sin of it.
Numb. 20. And this seems to be cause of the Greek pointing and reading, which
this Author followed having fallen upon it, that he might not seem to make any
alteration in it, though afterward at the 17. verse he plainly shows, that he
was not ignorant of the true reading as it was pointed in the Hebrew. But here
is meant that other tentation, mentioned Numb. 14. upon which God swear the
people should not enter into his rest, as appears by the verses here
following. Hence appears their error who from hence conclude, that the holy
Ghost is that God who was tempted of the Jews; therefore because here God
himself speaks, and says he was tempted of their fathers; and the Author
affirms that the holy Ghost spoke these things. These men mark not, that from
the first words of this place, and so from the former of the whole Psalm,
wherein David himself speaks in very deed in his own person, and professes
himself one of Gods people, to worship and serve God, it will by the same
reason follow, that the holy Ghost is also David. For the former words wherein
David is brought in speaking, are no less attributed to the holy Ghost. When
the sayings of holy Writers are attributed to the holy Ghost, we are not
thereby to understand, that the holy Ghost is that person who indeed speaks, or
to whom those things really agree, which he attributes to himself that
speaks, or is brought in speaking; but only that those sayings were uttered
by the virtue and motion of the holy Ghost, and not only by the will and
pleasure of men, whosoever the person be that speaks, as Peter teaches, 2
Pet. 1.21. For otherwise there must be one only person always brought in
speaking, namely, the holy Ghost, to whom alone all sayings must be attributed,
which he attributes to himself that speaks; then which nothing can be
further from the truth. For the Prophets for the most part use to speak in
their own persons, sometime they bring in God speaking, whose Spirit the Holy
Ghost is, sometime they bring in other persons. Besides from this, that the
words of God are attributed to the Holy Ghost, we cannot rightly conclude that
therefore the Holy Ghost is God himself: Are they not rightly attributed to
him therefore, because God speaks by him? as we read that the words of Christ
are attributed to the Spirit, Rev. 2.7. although the Spirit be not Christ. So
Paul, Romans 11.4. attributes the words of God to the oracle; and this Author,
cap. 12.5. attributes the words of God to the Exhortation; not that either the
oracle or the exhortation is God, but because God is supposed to speak by the
oracle and the exhortation.

10. Wherefore I was grieved with that generation] That is, a Generation
according to Scripture which comprehends the men that live within the period of
one and the same age. And that generation wherewith God was grieved, were those
persons of Israel, whom he brought out of Egypt, who saw his mighty works,
and received the Law at Mount Sinai. This generation provoked and tempted God,
and therefore God was grieved with it. God is not passively grieved as man, but
then he is said to be grieved, when he does such actions as persons grieved use
to do; especially being thereto provoked by the sins of men. And said they
do always err in their hearts.] They have a kind of frenzy or madness
upon them, that is not accidental to fall on them sometimes, but natural and
radical, rooted and fixed in their very hearts, so that it continues upon them
to hold them always. They always meditate and agitate in their mind, that
which is averse from my will, and from the way whereto I labor to persuade
them. They always refuse to obey me, and follow the erroneous thoughts of
their own minds, and are wedded to the counsels of their own wills. And they
have not known my ways.] By the ways of God we may understand both the
works of God, and the Laws of God, especially his singular commands for such
or such an action in particular. For the acts and works of men are in Scripture
called their ways. That generation is justly said to have known neither of
these ways of God; for though they had seen his works and heard his laws, and
received many particular commands; yet they carried themselves so, as if they
had neither seen, heard, nor received any thing. For they neither believed Gods
promises, though confirmed with such mighty works, nor obeyed his Laws and
Commands. Of this their gross stupidity there is a notable passage, Deuteronomy.
29.2,3,4. Ye have seen (says Moses to them) all that the Lord did before your
eyes in the land of Egypt, unto Pharaoh, unto his servants, and unto all his
land; The great temptations which thine eyes have seen; the signs and those
great miracles: yet the Lord has not given you a heart to perceive, and eyes
to see, and ears to hear unto this day. They saw Gods mighty works like brute
beasts, not considering how great the Agent was, and of how great power; how
worthy he was to have all credit given to his promises, and all obedience to
his commands. Some such like accident befell the Disciples of Christ as we may
read it, Mark. 6.52. They considered not the miracle of the loaves, for their
heart was hardened.

11. Sol swear in my wrath.] God seldom swears, for the Scripture does not
bring him in swearing often: but it must be a matter of weight and moment that
makes him to swear: And motives whereupon he swears are chiefly two; either
in mercy, to confirm his gracious promises made to his children: or in his
wrath to establish his judgment against the wicked. And the forms whereby he
swears are chiefly two. 1 Surely, (for surely with God is a form of swearing)
that is, the thing which he affirms and whereto he swears is no way
uncertain or doubtful for the event, as if it might not come to pass, but
shall most surely and certainly come to pass. In this form God swear to
Abraham, that he would bless and multiply him; for so this Author reports it,
cap. 6.14. 2. As I live; that is, let me not be accounted for the living God,
if I perform not what I say. In this form God swears, that he has no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, Ezekiel. 33.11. And as among men there be
degrees of oaths, in that some are more obligatory and binding, lest the
Israelites might think that God would not fully bind himself, for their not
entering into Canaan; therefore to divert that flattery of themselves, God did
swear it by both these forms of oaths. For first he swear it by the first form.
Surely they shall not see the land which I swear unto their fathers. Number.
14.23. And afterward he swear it by the second form. As I live, your carcasses
shall fall in this wilderness. Numb. 14.28. Thus God swearing in his wrath,
did iterate his oath and aggravate it. They shall not enter.] In the original
it is, if they shall enter. The particle if, after a verb of swearing is an
Hebraisme put for not: they shall not enter. So the people swear for the
rescue of Jonathan, As the Lord lives, if one hair of his head should fall to
the ground, 1 Samuel 14.45. So the Psalmist brings in God swearing, Once have I
sworn by my holiness, if I lie unto David, Psalm. 89.35. So Christ swears,
that a sigre shall not be given to the Jews: Verily I say unto you, if a sign
shall be given to this generation, Mark. 8.12. yet this use of the particle if
did first arise from those forms of swearing, whereby if was properly taken,
by adding some imprecation or curse, either expressly uttered, or tacitly
employed. For men being moved do commonly in their anger use an abrupt speech,
and many times silently suppress the imprecation or curse whereby they devote
themselves, and leave it to be collected by him to whom they speak. Among many
others we have David swearing with an imprecation or curse expressly added: So
and more also, do God to the enemies of David, if I leave of all that pertain
to Naball by the morning light, any that pisseth against the wall, 1 Samuel
25.22. And Job in like manner, if my heart have been deceived by a woman, or if
I have laid wait at my neighbors door; Then let my wife grind unto another,
and let others bow down upon her, Job 31.9. And ye have this curse suppressed
in David also, Psalm. 132.2,3,4,5. They that shall not enter, are that
generation that had provoked, tempted and grieved God. God had sworn to the
Patriarks (the forefathers of that generation) that their posterity should
enter that land, this God had sworn at several times to Abraham, he had
confirmed the same oath to Isaac, and reconfirmed it to Jacob. And God had
determined or designed which generation of his posterity should enter; namely
the fourth, for so particularly God covenanted with Abraham, Genesis 15.16. And
this people now brought out of Egypt into the wilderness for to enter, was
that fourth generation: yet to them now God swears again that they shall not
enter. Yet notwithstanding there is no contrariety in Gods oaths, neither does
this latter swearing any way cross the former. For the promise of God to
Abraham and so the oath confirming it, for this entrance of his posterity, was
conditional that his children should walk in the steps of the faith and
obedience of Abraham; for the Covenant of God was made with Abraham and his
seed; and therefore not only he in his own person, but his posterity also in
their generations were bound to keep it. But this generation whereof we speak,
was diffident and disobedient, for they provoked and tempted God, and thereby
brake the Covenant: And the Covenant being broken on their part, or the
condition not performed, God in all equity on his part is free both from his
promise and the oath confirming it; and therefore as the case now stood might
justly take an oath for their not entering. Now that faith and obedience was
required as a condition for their entering, appears clearly by the last verse of
this Chapter, where it is said, they could not enter because of unbelief. For
if the cause of their not-entring were notbeleeving; then it must necessarily
follow, that Belief was the condition of their entering. But as this oath
proceeded from the wrath of God, touching the non-entry of this generation: so
it was tempered and mingled with mercy for the next generation who were the
children of this. For concerning those children this generation had provoked
God, in saying they should be a prey and dye in the wilderness. But God makes
it a part of his oath, to the contrary, that their children should not be a
prey in the wilderness, but they shall enter the land and possess it, Numb.
14.30,31. Into my rest.] The land of Canaan is called a Rest; because the
Israelites were to reside and rest, after their hard servitude for many years
in Egypt, after their tedious pilgrimage and travel through the vast
wilderness where they wandered for the space of forty years; and after their
several battles with their enemies which they were to conquer and extirpate
from that land. Although there be another mystical use of the word in the
Chapter following. And God calls it his Rest; because the people got it neither
by their power not by their desert, but by Gods mere benefit and donation to
them, in performance of the promise he had sworn to their forefathers, Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob. For God by his mighty arm and power, brought them out of
Egypt, carried them through the wilderness, and cast out their enemies before
them, that they might possess the land; not for any righteousness in them,
but for the wickedness of the Cananites, thereby to perform his word sworn
to their fathers, Deuteronomy. 9 4.5.6.

12. Take heed brethren.] Here he begins another Exhortation, to diss wade them
from Apostasy from the Christian Religion, from the which they were declining,
and departing. For the desertion of God must needs be a greater sin then the
tentation of him. Take heed. i. Bethink your selves well, and have a great
care, because the matter is very dangerous; for when dangers are at hand, we
use to be heedfull and careful. Lest there be.] Lest there be now at this
time, or if it be not yet, lest it creep upon you in time to come; for
Apostacy is as a serpent that will insinuate into your minds at any time; for
it is easily introduced by diffidence and obstinacy. In any of you.] He
means not this distributively for any one single person among them; but
collectively of them all, that all might have a care of all, and each one of
another. An evil heart of unbeliefe] An evil heart is an intractable or hard
heart, that is contumacious and refractory against God and his word. And then
the heart is especially evil and hard, when it is incredulous and unbeleeving;
q.d. a heart so evil that it will not believe. In departing from the living
God] Here he limits the unbelief whereof he spoke before, designing
particularly what unbelief he meant. For there is a double unbelief, one of
them who never yet did believe in God; another of them who cease to believe,
and turn Apostates to their former belief in departing from it, and
consequently from God. Now he departs from God, who departs from Christ, and
his Religion; as in the former Covenant, he that departed from the Law,
departed from God himself. For as he that believes in Christ, does not finally
believe in Christ, but in God by Christ; as Christ himself declares it, John
12.44. So on the contrary, he that departs from Christ, departs not only
finally from Christ, but from God who sent him, and ordained him to be our
Lord and Savior. And God is called the living God, in opposition to the Idols
and false gods of the Gentiles, who were as destitute of all life and sense, as
were their images and statues wherein they were worshipped. This Epithet is
added here to God, thereby to strike so much the greater terror into them,
that they might never think of departing from so great a God; Therefore he
says afterward, chapter 10. ver. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God. For he must needs have an infinite power, who is the
true and living God. Yet positively God is called the living God, because he
not only lives truly and perpetually, but also lives from himself, and is
the fountain of life to others, from whom all living things have their life.

13. But exhort one another daily,] Here he shows the ordinary way and means,
whereby they may remedy this evil heart of unbelief; namely, if they mutually
admonish and exhort one another; yet that must not be done seldom at distant
times: but daily, that their mutual exhortations may be fervent and frequent.
While it is called to day.] As long as that day lasts, whereof mention is
made in the Psalm before cited, To day if ye will hear his voice. Whereupon we
noted above, that in the literal sense; it signified, that festival and
solemn day, wherein the people resorted to the Temple, to perform the worship
and service of God, where also the Law of God used to be read unto them. To
this festival day in the mystical sense, does answer our Christian festival
or time of Grace, wherein we are invited to lay hold of eternal salvation,
whereto by the Gospel the passage is opened unto us. While this day or time of
the Gospel does last, we must exhort one another from unbelief in departing
from God. Lest any of you be hardened,] A man is then hardened, when he has a
will, not to believe the promises of God, or not to obey his precepts. Through
the deceitfulness of sin.] He shows the cause of this hardness, to be
sin; and the manner how sin hardneth, by deceaving us. For therefore we are
refractory to the voice or word of God, because we are deceived bysinne; for we
are entrapped by the baits and snares of sin, by preferring the whispers of sin
before the voice of God; for so the Serpent beguiled Eve, and so does sin
deceive us still. Yea, even from the word of God, and from his Commandment:
whence we should take occasion to obey him, thence will sin take occasion to
deceive us. Romans 7.11.

14. For we are made partakers of Christ.] He seems here to answer a tacit
objection. For these Hebrews might think that these admonitions concerned not
them, that they need to take heed of unbelief, and consequently of Gods wrath,
seeing they did already believe in Christ, and so were estated in Christian
happiness. To this he answers, by granting that they were already made
partakers of Christ; that is, of that happiness which Christ bestows upon the
faith full, yet upon that condition, that they persevere in the faith of Christ
to their lives end. For this partaking of Christ or Christian happiness, as it
referres to this life, consists in a full right or title to happiness: but
this right or title is presently lost, when we recede or depart from the faith
of Christ. If we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end.]
These words are correspondent and respective to the sixth verse of this
chapter. For to be the houses of God and Christ, what is it else, then to be
partaker of Christ? This at least every man may easily perceive, that these two
are so connexed, that they cannot be severed one from another. And in like
manner, to hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end, is the
same (if we respect the Authors mind) with, To hold fast the confidence and
the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. The original for confidence, is
(...), which properly signifies subsistence; and our spiritual subsistence
stands in this, that we believe in Christ and obey his precepts. For as long as
we continue in the state of faith and obedience unto Christ; so long we have
our spiritual subsistence. Yet it is well translated confidence, figuratively
from the effect of it; because confidence is a subsistence of things not
subsisting: for it does as it were represent unto our view, or set before our
eyes, a thing not yet seen, or not yet existing, by making us as certain of
it, as if we saw it before our eyes, or did already really enjoy it. Hence
afterward the Author notifies confidence or faith to be the substance or
subsistence of things hoped for. Heb. 11.1.

15. While it is said to day,] By these words cited out of the Psalm, he would
show, that the matter is so, as he said in the former verses; namely, that they
who persist in the faith to the end, they only are partakers of Christ and his
happiness: but they who depart from the faith, shall undoubtedly perish, what
ever were their happiness and condition heretofore: Harden not your hearts,]
against the voice of God, who now speaks to us by Christ. As in the
provocation.] Hence it plainly appears to every man, who they are that hearing
the voice of God, harden their hearts against it, and provoke; namely they that
unbeleeve the Gospel, and depart from the Covenant of it. For as the Author
adds in the next verse.

16. For some when they had heard did provoke.] Let us now see who hearing the
voice of God, did provoke him, and who did not; and let us compare them one
with another: For then we shall easily discover, That they hardened their
hearts against the voice of God, and provoked him, who would not finally
believe him to the end: and that they did not provoke him, who were constant in
their faith, as were Caleb and Joshua. Who came out of Egypt by Moses] He
shows that both these kinds who provoked, and who provoked not, came out of
Egypt by Moses. i. Who followd Moses, and by his leading forsook Egypt, and
for some time adhered to him: Whereby it appears, that they who have followed
Christ their captain, and for some time have adhered to him, do harden their
hearts against the voice of God and provoke him if they forsake Christ their
Captain, and will return back to the spiritual Egypt of the world. But
contrarily, they who having followed him, do adhere to him unto the end, as
Joshua and Caleb did, who never forsook Moses, they shall enjoy that
happiness and eternal rest.

17. But with whom was he grieved forty years.] Now the Author from the
remaining words of the Psalm does prove the very same thing; namely, That they
who have followed Christ their Captain, must take heed of offending and
sinning against God; or as he delivered it before, of being hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin, for thereby God will be so grieved and provoked
against them, that thereupon they must needs perish. Was it not with them that
had sinned,] i. God was grieved and provoked only with them that unbeleeved,
provoked and tempted him. Whose carcasses fell in the wildernesse] All that
came out of Egypt, excepting only Joshua and Caleb, died in the wilderness,
and heir carcasses were not carried into the land of Canaan. From which words
of the Psalm he in like manner concludes, that God will be grieved and
provoked with Christians, sinning against him and transgressing his precepts.
For, that he was offended with those offenders for the space of forty years,
it hence appears, in that their carcasses fell in the Desert, i. every one of
them to a man from twenty years old and upward perished in the Desert, and
entered not into the promised land. For this wrath of God continued upon them
forty years, till they were all consumed either by natural death, or by
diverse plagues. See Numb. 14.29,33,34.

18. And to whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them
that believed not.] As the former words show, that those Christians shall
perish, who are indulgent to sin, and will not obey Gods precepts: So these
in like manner make it evident, that they also shall perish, and never enjoy
that heavenly and eternal rest, who incline to diffidence, and will not
believe Gods promises, or after they have believed, recede from their faith.
For what induced God to bind himself with an oath, that the Israelites should
not enter into his rest, but their unbelief, in despairing they should never
attain the Land that had been promised them? See Numb. 14. from the beginning
of it.

19. So we see, that they could not enter in, because of unbelief.] From the
former passages he inferres this conclusion, That the Israelites though they
came forth out of Egypt, yet they could not enter into the promised Land, by
reason of their unbelief. From whence in like manner we must conclude, That
Christians also having followed Christ their Captain, shall not enter that
heavenly rest, unless by the example of Joshua and Caleb, they finally remain
faithful to their Captain, and fall not into unbelief. From hence it
appears, that the Author would in a manner say, what just cause he had to
admonish them, that they should take diligent heed, lest in any of them, though
now they did believe, or seemed to themselves to believe, there should be found
an evil and unbeleeving heart, that was thinking to depart from the living
God. Which exhortation of his, thus drawn and demonstrated from the former
passages, he more fully repeats and presses in the entrance to the next
Chapter.

The Contents of this third Chapter are three.
1. A Doctrine. Christ is no way inferior, but much superior to Moses. Reason
1. Because Moses was only a Prophet, and not a high Priest, but Christ was
both, ver. 1. 2. Moses was in Gods house but as a servant, but Christ as a Son
and heir, ver. 5, 6.
2. An Exhortation. We must not harden our hearts against the voice of God in
the Gospel. Reason 1. Because thereby we provoke and tempt God, as the
Israelites did in the wilderness. 2. Because thereby we shall never enter
into eternal rest, ver. 11.
3. An Exhortation. We must not apostate and depart from the faith of the
Gospel. Reason 1. Because we are no longer partakers of Christ and his
happiness, then we persevere in the faith. 2. Because thereby we provoke and
grieve God. 3. Because thereby we are barred from entering into eternal rest,
v. 19

CHAPTER IV.
1. LEt us therefore feare] Because we have already seen, that our Ancestors
by reason of their unbelief were not admitted into the rest of God; and that
their example is proposed unto us, as a caution to make us the more wary;
therefore let us fear, that we run not upon the same rock. Lest a promise
being left us] So our last Translation reads it; as if God had also left a
promise unto us; hereto induced as it seems, by the following words of the
Author, where he inferres and concludes, That there remains a rest to the
people of God, ver. 9. But we cannot approve of this reading, neither does the
Author use altogether the same word in both places; wherefore we conceive this
the true reading, Lest the promise being relinquished] i. lest we neglect,
relinquish, leave, or forsake the promise. For, a promise is then relinquished
and left, when it is no longer credited and believed, as our forefathers did,
whose example (as we have seen) was formerly proposed unto us. They for a time
did embrace and accept of Gods promise, for upon that ground and hope they went
out of Egypt, but afterward in the wilderness they did relinquish and leave
the promise, by their unbelieving it. Of entering into his rest] He expresses
the matter of the promise which we must not leave; God has promised us an
entrance into his eternal rest, we must not desert and leave it, by
unbelieving it. Any of you should seem to come short of it] This is the effect
and fruit of our deserting or leaving the promise, that thereby we shall come
short of the rest promised. To come short, signifies either to remain behind,
or to return back; for in this latter sense, the word is used afterward, chap.
12.25. Both these senses have an elegant agreement with the point. For as the
Israelites, after they no longer believed Gods promise for the giving of them
possession in the land of Canaan, would go no further forward in following of
Moses, but would rather choose themselves new Captains for their return back
into Egypt. So they who will no longer give faith to the promises of Christ,
will follow his standerd no further, but endeavor a return into the Egypt of
the world, from whence by faith they had once departed. Yet he says not
simply, lest any of you come short, but lest any should seem to come short;
This latter of seeming is far less then the other. For we must be so far
from this sin of stopping or returning from the Gospel, that we must give no
man any just occasion to think it of us. For such an opinion of another,
carries somewhat of truth with it; and if a man do not yet plainly revolt, yet
at least some inclination or likelihoods of it, are wont to be in him. And this
opinion a man may raise in others of himself, if by little and little he remit
and abate of his practice and fervency in godliness, not serving Christ with
such alacrity as is fit.

2. For unto us it was preached as well as to them] It was preached, i. the
promise of entering into Gods rest, the message of which promise was sent unto
us also. Herein the Author meets with an objection. For some man might say, The
promise of entering into Gods rest, was it not made to our forefathers of old,
and long since performed unto them, in giving them possession in the land of
Canaan? What does this promise pertain to us? The Author answers; That this
promise does pertain to us, and the joyful message of entering into Gods rest,
was no less sent to us, then of old to our forefathers. But what kind of rest
is promised to us, he expresses afterward. But the word preached did not
profit them.] In the original, it is the word of hearing by an Hebraisme, for
the word heard. And by the words is figuratively meant the promise of entering
into Gods rest: for every promise of God is his word. Here he tacitly shows the
cause, why he admonished them to believe the promise of God by Christ, because
otherwise it would profit us no more, then anciently it did the Israelites,
whom it so far profited as to bring them out of Egypt; but it profited them
not to bring them into Canaan, which was the land promised. Not being mixed
with faith in them that heard it.] The reason why the hearing of the word of
promise did not profit them, was because it was not mixed with faith in them;
it was not thoroughly engrafted into their m^es, nor turned into a sap or blood
to do them good. For this work is done by faith, by a firm assent yielded to
the word and promise of God, to assure the promise, that the thing promised
might take effect.

3. For we which have believed do enter interrest.] He adds a subreason of
his former assertion. Because they only among us who believe, enter into rest;
and therefore they who believe not, do not enter into rest; neither can enter.
For the particle only or some other such exclusive must be here understood;
because faith is the condition of entering Gods rest, which restraines the
entrance only to the faithful. As he said, As I have sworn in my wrath, if
they shall enter into my ^est] By this oath of God, Psalm. 95. ult. as we noted
in the former Chapter, it plainly appears, that they which believe not shall
not enter into Gods rest; for want of says is the cause, why men are stricken
with the thunder of Gods wrath, and debarred from the promised entrance into
his rest. As the promise of entrance proceeds from Gods mercy, and is confirmed
by his oath to the believer: so on the contrary, the menance of non-entrance
proceeds from Gods wrath, and is consi med by his oath to the unbeleever.
Although the works were finished from the foundation of the world.] Here the
Author teaches, what kind of rest it is, that from those words of the Psalm
must be understood in a mystical sense. And this he does therefore, that
thereby we may understand the truth of those things which he had asserted in
the first and second verses of this Chapter, concerning a rest of God promised
to us, and a passage thereto made open to us. Which the Hebrews could neither
understand, nor would admit to be true, while their minds ran upon an earthly
rest in Canaan, first promised and afterward performed to their forefathers;
unless it be explicated what the rest is that is promised to us, and so their
minds be drawn from an earthly to an heavenly rest. First, therefore the
Author expresses somewhat of that rest, and says it is a Rest from works;
from works that were finished, and finished long since, even from the
foundation of the world. Which Rest is proper to God himself, as it is
intimated in the words of the Psalm, wherein God calls this rest, his rest.
For the Rest proper to God himself, wherewith he himself rested, is by a far
better title called the Rest of God, then that whereof God was only the donor,
such as was the Rest of the Israelites in the land of Canaan. Not that this
rest proper to God is numerically the very same, with that future rest which
God has promised us; but because generically it is a Rest of the same kind.
For as Gods Rest was a perpetual Rest in resting from his works for ever: so
shall our Rest be perpetual in resting for ever from all our labors and
troubles, wherein we shall have an eternal festival.

4. For he spoke in a certain place of the seventh day.] Here he shows the
reason why he understands that rest of God, to be his Rest from his works
which he had finished from the beginning of the world; namely because the
Scripture or the Holy Ghost speaking in the Scripture, speaks in that manner
of the seventh day as Genesis 2 2. and Exodus 20.11. And God did rest the seventh
day from all his works.] In these words we have showed us the Rest of God,
neither in the whole Scripture to which only we must look here, is mentioned or
named any other rest of God, whereof the people should come to be partakers.

5. And in this place again, If they shall enter into my rest.] q d. Wherefore
seeing here again in these words of the Psalm, there is mention made of Gods
rest, whereof Gods people shall partake, therefore with good reason in a
genuine and mystical sense do we understand it, of that only rest of God
specified in the Scripture. But that this rest also belongs unto the people,
the very festival and rest of the Sabbath commanded to Gods people, is a clear
argument, wherein there is not only a commemoration of Gods rest past; but also
a Representation of the Rest of Gods people to come. Whereof we shall speak
further at the ninth verse following.

6. Seeing therefore it remains that some must enter therein.] After he had
showed, that by the words of the Psalm in a mystical sense, we must
understand the proper rest of God, or that wherein God himself rested; now he
proceeds on, to show that that rest of God mentioned in the words of the
Psalm, does appertain unto us, and that a passage thereto is opened unto us.
And first, he lays certain grounds for this doctrine, and then removes the
obstacles that may seem against it. The first ground is, That some must enter
into the rest. 2. That they to whom it was first proposed and promised, entered
not into it. For from these two grounds it will follow, That some other after
that time must enter it. But because it might be objected, That though those
Israelites who came our of Egypt, entered not that rest, yet their children
entered it by the conduct of Josuah their Captain. And therefore it cannot be
concluded, that Christians are they that shall enter it. This Objection or
rather Exception he dissolves by showing, that in those words of the Psalm
whereof he yet treats, for some several ages after the Israelites were
possessed of the land of Canaan, there is another time appointed, wherein an
entrance into Gods Rest was to be opened; whence it follows that by the
conduct of Joshuah, Gods people have not yet attained the true rest. Whereupon
the Author at length concludes, That as yet there remains a Sabbatisme or rest
for the people of God. This being done, he repeats the exhortation begun at the
beginning of this Chapter, and so returns to the point from whence he had
digressed. This is the sum of all that is said unto the end of the 11 verse.
Now let us consider the several words in order. That some must enter therein.]
Seeing it is the will and good pleasure of God that a passage should be open to
that rest, and that some should enter into it; for this the Author supposes as
a thing well known and no way doubtful. For that those first people that fell
in the wilderness were by their own fault excluded from it, this nothing
derogates from Gods promise, whereby he assured this rest by oath upon the
posterity of Abraham, to be fulfilled in other persons better and more worthy
then those first that failed of it. But under the cover of carnal promises and
an earthly rest, there lay hidden spiritual promises of an heavenly rest
pertaining to the spiritual seed of Abraham. And the entrance of the
Israelites into that earthly rest obtained by the conduct of Josuah, what is it
else but a type and shadow of Christians future entrance into a heavenly rest
by the conduct of Jesus Christ? And they to whom it was first preached entered
not in because of unbelief.] First preached in the original; they that had
the first good message for the entering of it. This is the other point that he
confirms, and by occasion whereof the Holy Ghost leaves us the following
admonition, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. For
because those first of our fathers to whom God had sent the message by Moses
for the entering of that rest, deserved by their diffidence and disobedience to
be excluded from it; therefore the Holy Ghost has in these words appointed to
their posterity another day or time wherein they may and must ente into Gods
rest; and withal exhorts them to it, lest following the like disobedience to
their forefathers, they incur a like issue of their impiety.

7. Again he limiteth a certain day,] This is very good cause, why another
day should be limited for entrance into Gods rest, if some must enter it at
all; and they who were first invited, entered it not. For if either none were
to enter it, or some had already entered it, then there were no necessity why
another day or time should be limited or appointed for entering it. But in
these words of the Psalm, that the holy Ghost in a mystical sense shows,
there is such a day limited, which pertains to the times of the Messiah, these
following arguments declare. 1. Because by these words the people are
admonished, to shun the example of their forefathers, that came out of Egypt,
that they may not be like them in their sin. But their forefathers sin was
chiefly this, that they would not rest in Gods promises for their entrance
into his rest. Therefore if we must truly be either like or unlike to them,
we also must have Gods promise for our entrance into Gods rest, and therefore
this day here is limited unto us for our entrance into it. 2. Because in this
Psalm is proposed to the people, the judgment or punishment of God whereinto
their fathers fell, that they being terrified thereby, and fearing the like,
would not imitake their fathers: But that punishment was a rejection from
entrance into Gods rest; which penalty no man can incur but he, that has
had first a power to enter it, and was thereto invited. Seeing therefore that
in these words of the holy Ghost, the people are admonished to avoid that
punishment, it is consonant to reason, that a day or time of entrance should be
limited to them, that we at this day might do what anciently our fathers would
not. But that this Psalm pertains also to the times of the Messiah, this is
an argument, That it clearly appears, there is a respect therein to some solemn
and seltivall time, wherein the people were accustomed to assemble in the
temple of God, and employ themselves about his worship; for this is plain from
the words of the people cohorting one another to praise God, and from the word
to day, which the holy Ghost uses. All which seem not to note out some common
day, but some notable day, deputed for the worship and service of God,
especially for the hearing of his word or voice, such as were the festival and
solemn days. But what day is more solemn, what time more festival, what
greater celebrity and concourse of people, then that which in the times of the
Messiah was to be, and was of all expected? From these considerations therefore
it may well be collected, That by those words of the holy Ghost, in a mystical
sense, the people are warned to open a ready ear to the voice of God, who in
his due time will call and invite them to his true and heavenly rest by the
Messiah; which their forefathers would not do, when they heard Gods voice
promising them the earthly rest by Moses. In the literal sense, this Psalm
pertained to the Israelites, who lived before the times of Christ, wherein they
were admonished, that upon the day when they were to hear the Law of God, they
should be obedient unto him, lest following the disobedience of their
forefathers, they should be debarred from Gods rest, or otherwise punished and
plagued of God. But who sees not, that this sense, wherein the sin and
punishment are made of one kind? does better square with it, then that wherein
both of them are made of a diverse kind? Aster the Author had showed, that God
had limited another day for entrance into his rest, lest any man should take
this day, to be that day wherein God granted the children of those fathers a
power to enter into the land of Canaan by the conduct of Joshua, therefore the
Author inserts these words, Saying in David, To day after so long a time. He
says the holy Ghost limiteth this day in David. i. speaking it by David; After
so long a time, namely, wherein God had debarred those fathers from entrance,
by reason of their unbelief, and admitted their children to it. To day if ye
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts,] Whence it appears, that here is
not appointed a day for entrance into the land of Canaan, neither is thae
entrance here aimed at. For David lived many ages after the entrance of the
Israelites into the land of Canaan; yea, in the time of his reign the
Israelites did most entirely possess it, and flourish in it. Seeing therefore
the day of entering into Gods rest, cannot be understood of the earthly rest,
which the people obtained by Joshua; therefore there must needs be another rest
besides that earthly rest; which yet remains to the people of God, and a rest
of far greater perfection.

8. For if Jesus had given them rest, then would he not afterward have spoken
of another day.] Joshua is called Jesus by the 70. Interpreters, and by other
Greek writers; for both those names signify the same thing, namely, Savior,
and they differ only in dialect. Had given them rest] Joshua did give them
possession in the land of Cannan, and thereby rest; yet not that perfect rest,
that was yet remaining for Gods people. He would not afterward have spoken of
another day.] If Joshua had given them a perfect rest, beyond which there was
none further to be expected; then certainly the holy Ghost, after the people
once entered and seated there, would not have spoken of another day, wherein
the people must enter into his rest.

9. There remains therefore a rest to the people of God.] From the former
passages he concludes, that there remains for the people of God another rest,
after the rest obtained in Canaan: for the happy state of Gods people does not
stay at that earthly rest. This rest he calls not (...) as by the word he used
hitherto: but he calls it a Sabbatisme; thereby to make us understand, that he
had respect to the seventh days rest, wherein God himself rested, and
commanded the Israelites to rest in memory of it, and was therefore
distinguished by the name of Sabbath, which signifies rest also; and also
further to the teach us, what kind of rest remains to the people of God,
namely, a Sabbaticall rest. i. a rest like to that wherewith God himself
rested, whereof the festival Sabbath of the seventh day is a most slender
shadow: for therein the Israelites rested from their cares and labors, after
and during their earthly rest given them by Joshua.

10. For he that is entered into his rest] By these words he proves, that
there remains to us a Sabbatisme. i. such a rest as is denominated from the
seventh days rest, in Commemoration and Representation whereof, the perpetual
observation of the weekly rest was commanded: But this rest consists in a
cessation from all works, as God also ceased from his works. This he proves
from this reason, because we must enter into Gods rest, as appears by the
words of the Psalm. But to enter into Gods rest, what is it else, but to rest
after the same manner that God rested, and kept the Sabbath? He also has
rested from his own works, as God did from his.] Has rested is an Hebraisme,
for does rest; for the Hebrews many times put the tense praeter for the future.
When Joshua had given the Israelites an earthly rest in the land of Canaan,
they thereby had quiet possession and rested from their enemies; and they had a
Sabbath also to rest from their labors: but their Sabbath was not continual
and daily, but weekly only upon the seventh day of it; for the first six days
of the week they rested not, but followed their labors: so their Sabbatisme
was not a total and final rest from labors, but their labors were to
return upon them after one days rest in a week. But the Sabbatisme that is
after the image of Gods rest, is a total and final rest from all labors,
never to be wearied with labor or work any more, but is an eternal festival
that shall never expire. For these words may be construed with the word
remains in the former verse, thus. Therefore I affirm, that there yet
remains a rest to the people of God: because the Israelites did not so rest
from their works, as never to be exercised with more labors afterward. But he
that has entered into Gods rest, whereinto (as we have already seen) the
people of God must enter, he has so rested from works as God rested from his.
For as God in making the world, dispatched all his works in the space of six
days, never to make any more works, so he that has entered into Gods rest,
or the like rest with God, he also has dispatched and finished all his works,
his labors, pains, cares, and troubles, and whatsoever is wearisome to man in
this life, and he enjoyes an eternal rest and quiet, joined with eternal
happiness.

11. Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest,] Having showed that there
remains a rest for the people of God, and that in the best and highest degree;
he now repeates his admonition at the beginning of the chapter, exhorting them
to strive with all labor, that they may enter that rest. The original word
for labor signifies also haste, to work with haste and dispatch. For we must
make haste in this our spiritual journey which leads and determines in an
eternal rest; that is, we must be diligent and quick in tracing the path of
faith and holiness, not lazy and slow. Because we must always have an ardent
and earnest affection after so great a blessing, and therefore must use all
diligence to hasten our selves onward and toward it, as they do that are in a
journey toward their own country, or toward a place most desirable and
acceptable to them. Into that rest] Not into any earthly rest, but into that
heavenly rest proper to God himself, and by his infinite grace communicable to
his people, and is yet remaining to them. Lest any man fall] We must therefore
diligently labor after that rest, lest we fall into the like destruction with
those fathers, who perished and were destroyed in the wilderness; for fall
here is put for perish, lest any perish as they did. After the same example of
unbeliefe] If we fall after their example into the same sin, we shall also fall
after their example into the same judgment, and perish as they did. We have
seen their unbelief, and we know what a world of miseries it brought upon
them: Let both these be examples unto us, and let us therefore endeavor to
shun the rock that is showed us. The Original word (...) signifies both
unbelief and disobedience, and this latter more usually; for those two sins
are so near allied in nature, that one word will serve to signify them both:
for unbelief and disobedience are either wholly the same, or mutually
consequent one to another.

12. For the word of God is quick] By this word of God here, many think Christ
is meant; but that cannot be. 1. Because Christ is called the Word of God only
by John, as is observed by diverse. 2. Because this word here is said to be
powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword; both which qualities agree
rather to things then to persons. Others by the word of God here, understand
the Scripture; which cannot be neither, because then there could be no genuine
connection, nor congruity of reasoning in these words from the former; For how
should this be coherent? Let us labor to enter into that rest, lest following
the example of our fathers unbelief, we should follow them also in their
destruction; because the Scripture is quick and powerful. By the word of God
therefore is meant the Decree of his Judgment, or the Menace of God, whereby
he threatens and ordaines unbeleeving and disobedient persons to destruction
and punishment; Of which kind is that very Oath of God, whereby he swear to
exclude those fathers, and all such like as they from entering into his rest.
For by this sense, there is an elegant coherence between this verse and the
former. Therefore let us labor to enter into Gods rest, and let us take heed
of falling into the disobedience of those fathers; because the word of God, and
his oath whereby he debarres disobedient men from his rest, and devotes them to
destruction, is quick and powerful. This exposition is easily confirmed, from
diverse other passages of Scripture, wherein the Decrees of God, whereby he
wills and commands something to be done, are called by like terms of his word,
and have the like attribute of being lively or quick, and the like resemblance
to a sharp and two edged sword, and diverse the like effects. See Psalm.
105.18,19. and Psalm. 107.20. and Psalm. 147.15. and Isaiah 40.8. and Isaiah
55.11. which last place Peter applies to the word of the Gospel, because
therein also is contained the decree of God for the saving and condemning of
men, 1 Pet. 1.23,25. See also Isaiah 66.2,5. and Jerem. 23.29. and Joel 2.11.
Now this word or Decree of God is called quick or lively, because it dies not,
neither is exolete or frustrated with any tract of time or age. And it is
called effectual or powerful, because it is not only firm and stable, in
regard God never revokes it, or willingly changes it, or suffers it to fall,
as Princes often suffer their words or decrees to fall, either by oblivion,
negligence, or inconstancy: but also, because it is of full power and force to
execute and effect all the will of God therein contained. Hence it is compared
to rain and snow. For as the rain comes down and the snow from heaven, and
returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and
bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: So shall my
word be that goes forth out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void,
but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it, Isaiah 55.10,11. And sharper then any two edged sword] It
strikes and wounds more fearfully and deadly then any sword how sharp soever.
And in other places of Scripture, the Decree of Christ against ungodly and
disobedient persons is compared to a two edged sword going out of his mouth, or
at least is signified by such a sword. For God and Christ do destroy all their
enemies by their word going out of their mouth, i. by their powerful and
effectual command. Piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow] The sharpness of this sword has first
this effect, that it pierces deeply, and the effect of that piercing is to
divide and cut asunder soul and spirit, joints and marrow. By which words it
appears, that Gods Decree and command is far more sharp and piercing then
any sword; because it does not only pierce and cut the body of man, but also
his soul and spirit; yea, it pierces the body in such manner, that it cuts
not only the skin and flesh, but also all the joints and bands of the member,
yea the very bones themselves, and consequently the marrow contained in the
bones. So that this sword pierces into the most secret and inmost parts of
man, even the soul, spirit, and marrow. In this sense is signified, that this
sword does not only cut the outward parts that lie open to the eye, but also
the inward parts that are hidden from it, i. The force of Gods decree and
sentence reaches not only to those crimes which are notorious and public,
as the decrees and Judgments of Magistrates do, who therefore have the power
of the sword, and therewith do execution upon malefactors: but his decree also
takes vengeence on those sins, which are most secret and hidden, bordering as
it were upon the confines of the soul and spirit, and lie closed up as it were
between the joints or within the marrow, then which places nothing can be
devised more secret. Now the soul is the inferior faculty in us, containing
the affections or passions, as lust, and wrath, respecting only those things
which please and content the body. Hence they which follow this faculty and
suffer themselves to be governed by it, are called in Scripture animal men.
But the spirit is the superior faculty, which discerns between things lawful
and unlawful; drawing us to things lawful and honest, and driving us from the
contrary, whereby we understand, know God, and his will and our final
happiness. Although the spirit may also be taken for that part of us, which
does first vivifie the body and remains after death. And the soul may be
taken for life it self, or for that faculty which flows from the spirit over
the whole body. And is a discerner of the thoughts and intentions of the
heart.] This he adds, that what he said concerning the word of God, might
be further pressed and the better understood. God does both take knowledge of
the thoughts and intents of men's hearts, and also decrees them to be punished
if they deserve it. This he therefore says, lest any man should think, that
he may lie hid from Gods decree and escape the force and sharpness of his
sentence; if he only nourish his unbelief in his heart, and reserve it in his
secret thoughts. So that no thought of ours though never so secret, no wavering
in our faith can be concealed from God.

13. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight.] Now he
speaks that more generally, whereof before he spoke but in particular. God does
not only discern and know the thoughts of our hearts; but there is nothing at
all in the world that can escape the sight of his eye; for by creatures he
understands all things in general. But all things are naked and opened unto
the eyes.] He illustrates what he said before by the contrary to it. There is
nothing so covered or hidden but the sight of his eyes can discover it. And
eyes are attributed to him, because he clearly sees all things be they never
so remote, and so leaves nothing unpunished. Opened (...). This word is
diversely expounded; some thus; the whole face from head to shoulders is
discovered and exposed to the eyes of all. Others thus; The skin is drawn
over the shoulders from head to tail. Others; the creature is flayed and
hanged up by the heels, having the belly and bowels opened to the chine of
the back, that all lies open both without and within. But all these come to
one sense; namely that there is nothing so covered and hidden, which lies not
open to Gods word or decree; for the sight of his eyes does not only fall upon
the outward covering of things, but pierces inwardly all over their substance.
Of him with whom we have to do.] In the original of that whereof we speak, i.
of that word whereof we speak. Hereby he shows, that he understands not any
word of God in general, but some certain word; namely that quick and
powerful word, whereof we have hitherto spoken; and which is to be understood
in all this matter of piercing, dividing and discovering.

14. Seeing then that we have a great high Priest.] This is the second part of
this Chapter, wherein he returns to treat of the dignity of Christ's
Priesthood, from whence he had digressed to fall upon the exhortation hitherto
explicated. Now therefore he resumes his former argument, and from thence
draws another admonition for constancy in the Christian Religion. The
Priestly office of Christ, that here we may speak of it a little more fully,
consists in this, That Christ expiateth all our sins before God, and
administreth all matters concerning Religion, as the chief President over holy
things. Therefore we say, Christ has expiated all our sins, because it was
the office of the high Priest to expiate the sins, not of one single person
only, but of the whole people. But for the manner, how Christ expiates our
sins, there is a great difference between him and the legal high Priest; so
that in this respect Christ is like God, yea in a manner supplies the part of
God, and not of the Priest: For Christ remaining in heaven, does so expiate our
sins, that by power granted him, he removes all punishment from us, and
abolishes all things that may involve us in any punishment. Whence it appears
that Priestly office differs not really from his regal office, but rationally
only. For Christ does not now really execute any thing about God, or perform
any condition, upon the deed whereof there follows by the decree of God a
purgation of our sins; as anciently the legal Priest was wont to do: For he
entered into the tabernacle of God with blood, and there appearing before God,
did sprinkle the blood after a form prescribed him, and offered it unto God;
which being done, there followed the expiation of sin upon it. For although
Christ shed his blood upon earth, and by afflictions prepared himself for the
execution of his office, to the end, that by a sense of our infirmities, he
might be the more readily affected toward us; all which conditions, were
prerequired of God and were first to be performed by Christ: yet being now in
heaven, and fullier administering his Priestly office, in procuring the
expiation of our sins, he really performs no further conditions. For in
that, after his bloodshed upon the cross, he entered into the heavenly
tabernacle, and by this means offered himself to God; this was not any true
condition upon which God decreed the remission of our sins; seeing that
entrance and oblation of himself was a great benefit of God bestowed upon him:
but it was only a means whereby Christ obtained supreme power both in heaven
and earth, from whence followed the expiation of our sins, and which being
granted unto Christ, God did openly testify, that he would not punish any of
their sins who did belong to Christ. This indeed is true, that this entrance
of Christ into heaven and his appearance before God, have a resemblance or
likeness with the entrance of the legal Priest into the Sanctuary, and his
appearance before God, as God anciently required it. Which resemblance or
liknesse is the cause, why Christ is compared with the legal Priest, and
carries his name, as we shall declare a little afterward. Neither must we
think, that Christ now inhabiting heaven, does (to speak properly) intercede
or pray for us; for that were repugnant to his supreme dominion and power over
all things. Wherefore his Priestly office lies in this, that having power given
him of God, he takes away the punishment of our sins, and by all means
procures our salvation. And therefore this Priestly office of Christ is really
the same with his regal office, as we said before. Hence Christ as a Priest is
said to save us perfectly, or rather for ever, cap. 7.25. he is also said as a
Priest to succor us being tempted, cap. 2. ult. and in this chapter, v. 16.
Both which actions are regal. Hence it is that other holy Writers make no
express mention of Christ's Priesthood: but this Author, chap. 3. v. 1.
included the regal office of Christ in his Priestly; and chap. 5. v. 5. he
interprets that testimony of Scripture to be meant of his Priestly office,
which treats of his regal. Christ therefore is called a high Priest, not that
this office is really diverse from his regal, but because of diverse
resemblances which Christ has with the legal high Priest, and of diverse
properties and circumstances in his regal office; upon which that resemblance
is grounded, and which that Metaphorical appellation of high Priest does
better insinuate into our minds, then the proper appellation. The resemblance
lies chiefly in this, That Christ having first shed his blood, entered into
heaven to expiate our sins, or to take away the punishments which by our sins
we had deserved, and appeared before God: as the legal high Priest, having
shed the blood of the sacrifice, was wont to enter the Tabernacle, and there
appear before God, to expiate sins, by taking away the guilt and penalty of
them. But because the high Priest performed this by bringing the blood of the
slain sacrifice into the sight of God, and offering it unto him with certain
rites, and so interceding for finners with God, from whom the forgiveness of
sins proceeded. Therefore also it is said of Christ, who was himself slain
like a sacrifice, and had shed his own blood, that entering into the heavenly
Tabernacle, he offered himself to God, and appearing in his sight intercedeth
for us. Not that he does properly intercede, but that as we said he is like
to the high Priest offering and interceding; especially because he forgives
sins, not of his own authority, but by power received from God; whereby he is
not unfitly compared with him who obtained forgiveness of sins from God by
his intercession. From hence in some measure may be gathered those properties
and circumstances of Christ's regal office, which his appellation of high
Priest does better represent unto our minds, then his name of King, though
this name be proper to him, and the other Metaphorical. His Kingly name
shows not that he saves sinners; but his Priestly does. That shows not that
he is a man (for God both is, and is called our King) but this does; for in the
beginning of the fifth Chapter, the Author shows, That every high Priest is
taken from among men, and is ordained for men. That shows not that he received
his authority and power from another; but this does, chap. 5. 4. That shows
not that he is touched with a sense of our miseries; this does. That shows not
that he shed his blood to expiate our sins, but this does; for a Priest must
offer sacrifices for sins, which cannot be offered without shedding of blood:
but Christ shed no blood besides his own. That shows not, that he shall come
forth from heaven; but this does. Hence therefore it is that the Holy Ghost
gives Christ the name of High Priest. A great high Priest.] Christ is called a
great high Priest, not only to distinguish him from the ordinary and inferior
Priests, but also from the chief high Priest under the Law, who compared to
Christ is very little; yea but a small and slender shadow of Christ. For he
must needs be a great high Priest indeed, who is immortal; who expiates all
sins even the most heinous: who has power in himself, to take away all
punishments of sin, among which eternal death is one; who has right and
power to give eternal life, to succor men in all their afflictions, and to
comprise all with the Author in a few words, who is set on the right hand of
the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, chap. 8. 1. which thing he intimates
also here when he adds in the first place; That is passed into the heavens.]
Therefore among other respects, he is great, because he has passed through all
the heavens. By heavens are understood all those regions of heaven, which are
interposed between God and us; namely: 1. The whole region of the air, which
in the Scripture is called the heaven. 2. The heavens wherein are the Sun,
the Moon, and the rest of the Startes or lights of heaven; above all which
Christ is now exalted, Ephesians. 3.10. and Heb. 7.26. 3. After all these, is that
heaven which is the habitacle of immortality, wherein God resides, and
whereinto Christ our high Priest has entered. Jesus.] Here he names this great
high Priest, and shows who he is; although in this be tacitly contained, that
which afterward he utters expressly, namely, that he is touched with a feeling
of our infirmities. For when he called him Jesus, he called him also that man,
whose sufferings and death were evident. But because he intended to set first
clearly before our eyes his transcendent excellency; therefore that it might
better appear how great an high Priest he is, he adds in the second place; The
Son of God.] He calls him not a Son of God, but prefixeth the specifique
article, calling him the Son, to show that he is no ordinary Son of God in
a vulgar sense, but that singular and eminent Son of God, even he of whom he
spoke in the first chap. whom God appointed heir of all things, who is become
far more excellent then the Angels. For so it ought to be, that the singular
and only Son of God, should obtain Gods greatest love, should be in highest
dignity, and have right and dominion over all his fathers goods. Even him we
have for our high Priest. Whence it appears, that Christ can effect all things
with his Father, by reason of the great love and authority which he possesses.
Wherefore as the Author adds; Let us hold fast our confession.] Here he
infers his admonition; that seeing we have so great an high Priest of our
Confession; therefore let us hold our confession fast: i. let us not only
embrace the Christian Religion in our hearts but constantly profess it with
our mouths.

15. For we have not an high Priest,] He clears an objection. Some man will
say, What can this great high Priest help me when I suffer misery for the
confession of my faith, who the greater he is, and the more remote from me, the
less is he touched with any care of us? To this he answers by saying, that he
is not such a high Priest, Which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities,] Our infirmities here signify our sufferings and troubles both of
mind and body, wherewith we are afflicted for the profession of our Religion.
These are called our infirmities, because our natural infirmity gives way unto
them; or else from the effect, because they make both our mind and body
infirm. For our mind does languish with grief as with a disease. And the
Author uses this word the rather, because the legal high Priest was to have a
feeling of the infirmities of Gods people; although those infirmities were
humane lapses and errors. Now to have a feeling of our infirmities is to be
touched with an affection and sense of them. i. with mercy which is a sense of
another man's misery. That cannot be touched, does not simply here signify the
faculty of compassion; for any Angel may have the faculty of compassion: but
to have both the power and readiness and will to compassionate, as we
explicated the same word, chap. 2. at the last verse. And it is as much as if
he had said, we have not an hard hearted high Priest, who is not easily moved
with the evils and troubles of another; as commonly such are who themselves
never had experience of evils and troubles. But was in all things tempted like
as we are.] He illustrates what kind of high Priest we have by the contrary,
or rather by the cause of a contrary effect. Because he was tempted in all
things, therefore he can and will be moved with all our infirmities. By
temptations are many times signified afflictions; because a man is tempted by
afflictions; for they make a trial of the strength and patience that is in
him. See Jam. 1.2,3. In all points. He was afflicted with all kinds of evils;
for he had the trial of calumnies, reproaches and bonds, of diverse anguishes
in soul, and tortures of the body; yea of a fearful and shameful death. Like
as we are. There is no difference between his sufferings and ours; for both are
all alike, as he said before that he must be made like his brethren in all
things. Yet without sin.] Christ was altogether innocent, and no way deserved
the evils he suffered. This he said, partly to answer their calumny, who gave
it out, that he deserved the punishment of the cross; partly to admonish other
Christians, to follow innocence, and to take heed they suffered not as
malefactors; but rather strive to be like Christ, who suffered for no fault of
his own, neither should they refuse to undergo diverse calamities for the name
of Christ, though they be innocent; nor make it a marvel, if such measure fall
upon them that happened unto Christ their Lord and leader; and should think
that Christ will much the sooner succor them, when they fall into
persecutions, torments and death innocently; for the more innocence they bring
with them to their sufferings, the more ready he is to help them. It is a
vulgar error, to think, that in this place, Christ is said to be like us
simply in all things sin only excepted. For neither the words of the Author,
nor the truth of the thing will bear this sense. For Christ was much unlike to
all us in many other points besides sin, as in divine power and wisdom, and
the admirable manner of his birth. For because we should not think, that he
speaks here, of likeness in nature only, therefore sin is mentioned, which
can no way be referred to nature.

16. Let us therefore come boldly,] From the saying before he infers another
exhortation, which notwithstanding is subservient to that he made at the 14.
verse, and is to second it. Seeing we enjoy such a high Priest, that has
himself had trial of all sorts of evil, let us implore his help boldly. In
the original it is (...), with boldness, or rather with free liberty of
speech, for here he treats of praying, and it signifies not only a confident
hope of the mind to obtain our desires; but an audacity or undauntednes
flowing from an inward confidence, whereby we are imboldned to have our access
to his throne, to speak and pray unto him. For a liberty of speech then
appears in us, when neither the authority, majesty, or severity of another,
nor the fear of offense can deter us from speaking; which does excellently
suit with this place. For seeing there is a great Majesty of that throne, where
we must become supplicants; it might easily fall out, that a man being afraid
thereof, and also conscious of his own unworthiness, might not dare to
approach that throne, and supplicate to him that sits upon it. Wherefore the
Author endeavors to encourage our minds and raise us to a freedom of speech,
when he shows us, that with so great a Majesty there is joined clemency,
favor, and mercy, toward distressed Christians. Unto the throne of grace.] He
names not him to whose throne we must come, or that sits upon the throne; but
because he commands us to come to this throne, therefore in that we have such a
high Priest who can have a feeling of our infirmities, and thereupon is ready
to pity and help us; and we must come for this end that we may find mercy
and help; from all these it appears, that it is the throne of our high Priest,
as it is said, Psalm. 45.6. Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever. But he
names a throne, that he may represent unto us, his exceeding great Majesty and
power; that our freedom of speech there should not lessen our reverence, and
that we should fully conceive him, not only merciful to be willing to help
us, but also powerful to be able. And again, lest the high throne and Majesty
of Christ should appale our minds, he calls it the throne of grace] that we
may conceive, though our high Priest, sit in a throne, vested with great
Majesty, yet he is full of love and mercy toward us. That so the throne and
Majesty of Christ might raise in our minds due reverence, and his grace and
favor toward us, might cherish our confidence and freedom of speech to him.
They who say, This is the throne of God himself, oppose not us, seeing Christ
sits in the throne of God; unless happily they say it therefore, that they may
exclude Christ from this throne, against so many clear testimonies of
Scripture; and the force of this passage also, thereby to wrest from us this
argument for the invocation of Christ. This we easily grant, that here we may
understand God, no less then Christ; and it is very likely that this Author
did rather call it the throne of grace in general, then either of God or
Christ in particular, that he might leave us an equal right and liberty to
approach either to God in the Name of our high Priest, or immediately to our high
Priest himself. For whether we go to God in the name of Christ, or to Christ
himself, we shall either way find the Throne of grace: That we may obtain
mercy and find grace] The final cause of our approach to this throne, is here
expressed to be twofold; whereof one is a mean to the other, the former to the
latter; The former is to obtain mercy and find grace; the other is, opportune
help in time of need. To obtain mercy is nothing else, then to get that
another have compassion on thee; which is easily got from a merciful person,
such as this our high Priest. To find grace, is to be gracious with another,
and to be favored with a peculiar affection of love. In this sense, the Angel
tells Mary, that she had found grace with God, Luke 1.30. And it is an easy
matter to find grace and favor with him, who is most gracious and favorable.
To help in time of need.] In the original it is, for opportune help. The last
final cause of our approaching this Throne, and finding grace there, is for
opportune help; That Christ may help us in our conflicts of godliness and
patience, that we sink not under our temptations and afflictions; especially,
that at our last gasp, he may receive our spirits into his hands, preserve
them for us, and restore them at his coming; whereof see the following
chapter, v. 7.

The Contents of this fourth Chapter are,
1. An Exhortation. Let us not forsake Gods promise of entering into his rest.
Reason 1. Because this promise is made to us as well as to the Israelites. 2.
Because, they who do believe, have already a right to enter.
2. Doctrine. Gods Rest is his Cessation from works after the Creation.
Reason. 1. Because Gods rest has reference to the seventh day, wherein God
rested from his works; as Scripture testifies. 2. Because God swear the
Israelites should not enter into his rest; which could not be the rest in
Canaan.
3. Doctrine. There yet remains a Sabbatisme, or Rest from labors for the
people of God. Reason. 1. Because some must enter his rest; and they did not,
to whom it was first promised. 2. Because God limits another day of entrance,
a long time after the former, saying in David, To day if ye will hear his
voice. 3. Because Joshua gave not the true heavenly rest, which is Gods rest;
and therefore that still remains to be given.
4. Exhortation. We must labor to enter Gods rest, verse 11. Reason. 1.
Because if we take example of their unbelief in the wilderness, we shall be
made examples of their destruction. 2. Because Gods penal Decree, is very
active and powerful to take heavy vengeance upon unbeleevers, verse 12. 3.
Because Christ our high Priest, is passed into that heavenly rest before us, v.
14. 4. Because we have free access by prayer to his Throne, which is a Throne
of Grace and Mercy to help us thither. verse. ult.

CHAPTER V.
1. FOr every high Priest is taken from among men,] Here he expresses some
general requisites of a high Priest, which afterward he applies to Christ in
a reverse order. The first requisite of a high Priest is this, that he is a Man
singled out from among other men; and that, for this following reason, because
he is ordained for men. i. for the benefit and good of men. This first property
of a high Priest, he touches only by the way, and by occasion of the following
property; and withal seems to reflect upon some former passages wherein he had
proved that Christ must be a man and not some angel. And therefore when
afterward he applies the following properties of a high Priest unto Christ,
he makes no mention of this, as having sufficiently discussed it already in
the second chapter. Is ordained for men] The dignity and office of high
Priesthood is created and constituted for the commodity and benefit of men. In
things pertaining to God] Divine and holy things pertaining to God, are the
matter or object of his function or office; that he may procure and administer
all things belonging to the worship of God, and to make him propitious to them
that worship him. That he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins] These
particularly are the things whereby God is worshipped and propitiated. Gifts
are free will offerings, such as the people were accustomed to offer of their
own accord; for the Law did not command the act of these offerings, but when
they were freely offered, then the Law prescribed the matter and manner of
their offering. Of this sort were those sacrifices which were called
Peace Offerings, whereof we may read in the three first chapters of
Leviticus. These were offered, either to procure the favor of God, and as it
were to obliege him with a present, or to testify their mindful and thankful
hearts for some benefit received. Yet sometime the word Gifts are taken more
largely for all sorts of sacrifices, and then it includes the sin offerings.
For, Christ under the name of gifts, seems to comprise all things that were
laid upon the Altar, and offered unto God, Mat. 23.18. Sacrifices for sins,
were living creatures, which by prescript of the Law were offered to God, to
take away the guilt of sin, whereof we may read, Levit. 4. and elsewhere.
The words [ for sins] may be so taken, as to be construed only with the
sacrifices immediately forementioned. Yet there is no incongruity, if we
refer them also to the remoter word of gifts] For although sins might be
expiated, and their guilt taken away without such gifts; for otherwise they had
not been truly gifts, but debts: Yet there can be nothing said to the
contrary, but that besides the sacrifices ordained of God for the expiation of
sins, there might be offered for sins also voluntary gifts and free will
offerings. For, hence we read, that expiation of sin was attributed to the
Holocaust, which was reckoned among the peace offerings, Levit. 1.4. And hereto
David had respect, when speaking of the expiation of his sin, he said he would
have given Holocausts, or whole burnt offerings, if they had been any thing
availeable to expiates such sins, Psalm. 51.16. This therefore is the chief
property of a high Priest, to negotiate the cause of men with God, especially
of such men as had sinned, and to provide that God might be propitiated and
pacified, not left angry and offended. And this is the second property required
in an high Priest.

2. Who can have compassion on the ignorant] This is the third requisite. A
compassionate man, as some Interpreters note, is he that carries himself
humanely, moderately and gently. Therefore he has compassion on the ignorant,
who bears himself gently toward them, not despising, nor disdaining them for
their falls; but does friendly and courteously raise them, not unmindfull of
his own frailty. The Ignorant are they who sin through ignorance; and
ignorance as it is vulgarly distinguished, is either of the Law, or of the
fact; and this latter is held to make the fact excusable, and not the former.
But indeed there is also an ignorance of Law, that deserves some excuse;
namely, when the number of Laws are become so great, that they can neither be
comprehended in mind, nor retained in memory; and especially when the Laws are
not grounded upon natural honesty, or the dictates of right reason, but upon
the sole will and pleasure of the Legifer. For, in such Laws the mind and
memory does easily fail, especially seeing all men's capacities are not equal.
Now both these considerations took place in the Laws of Moses; for their
number was so great, that it exceeded six hundred; and the ground of them such,
that most of them depended not upon natural honesty and right reason, but upon
the sole will and positive pleasure of God. Therefore all sins committed
through ignorance of Law, if any way they were excusable, were expiated under
the Law by prescript of Law, and without doubt are here by the Author called
Ignorances. And on them that are out of the way] On the Errant. The word Errant
is either the same with the ignorant; or if it differ, the difference is this,
that the ignorant are such as mistake in the Law; and the Errant such as
mistake in the fact, or the circumstances of it; and the sin thence proceeding
is called an Error. Or rather by Error is noted not so much the error of the
mind, as the error in the action. So that by errors are meant, not only
those trespasses that proceed from some error of the mind; but also those
which flow from humane frailty, though there precede no error in the mind,
and are committed in matters that in their own nature are but of light
importance. And there is no doubt, but the Author by these two words of
Ignorances and Errors, would comprehend all lighter trespasses, not committed
out of mere malice of mind, or (as the Scripture terms it) by a high hand;
but were done either out of excusable ignorance, or of humane frailty in things
of less moment; for which only the benefit of expiation was granted under the
Law. This affection and compassion toward them that sin of ignorance or
frailty, (and not of malice and contempt) though it be no less in Christ our
high Priest, then anciently it was in the Legal high Priest; yet in the
reddition of this comparison wherein he speaks of Christ, this compassion is
concluded to be in Christ; neither is the comparison brought for that purpose,
but only it is to show the compassion and pity that Christ bears toward the
afflicted and distressed. And this appears plainly from that which is here
subjoyned touching the efficient cause of this compassion; for it follows,
For that he himself is compassed with infirmity] He shows the cause and
fountain of this compassion, which in the Legal high Priest, was his
infirmity in sin; but in Christ it was his infirmity in sufferings; i. the
Legal high Priest was infirm, because himself also might fall through
ignorances and errors: but Christ was infirm, because he was subject to
afflictions and trials no less then another man. That infirmity in the Legal
high Priest bred in them compassion and gentleness toward the ignorant and
errant; this in Christ our high Priest, bred in him a compassion toward the
afflicted and distressed. Besides, the Legal high Priest was encompassed with
infirmities always; but Christ only for some time; and there was good cause
for both. For the Legal high Priest, because he was yearly to renew his
offering for the sins of the people: but Christ, because by one oblation he
expiated for ever all the sins of the faithful, therefore he was compassed
with infirmity but once only, and that before his own oblation. For that a
man should be prone to pity, he need not be perpetually in misery; for it is
sufficient, that once he made trial of misery: but to the end he may help
those that are in misery, and having delivered them from their misery, might
actually make them happy for ever, it is necessary that he himself be pressed
with no further misery, but that he be blessed, to the end he may be able
always to help others. And this ability is not a simple faculty to help or
have compassion, but a will and readiness to do it, as was before explicated,
chap. 2. ver. 4.

3. And by reason hereof,] The fourth property of a high Priest is taken from
his own infirmity; for by reason thereof, he must offer no less for his own
sins, then for the sins of the people. By reason hereof, i. By reason of his
infirmity; for the high Priest through his infirmity might fall into ignorances
and errors; and therefore it is likely, yea almost necessary, that he did
often fall into then. He ought as for the people, so also for himself to
offer for sins.] His infirmity in falling into sins of ignorance and error,
was a cause to make him offer for his own sins, not only at particular
times, when he stood guilty in his conscience of some particular sin; but
yearly also at the solemn time, though then his conscience were touched with
no particular sin, yet then he must offer for those sins whereof his conscience
never took notice. In like manner, the infirmity of Christ, i. not only his
passible nature, from whence sufferings flow not necessarily; but his state and
condition of suffering, whereinto he was put by Gods decree, was a cause that
he also should offer for himself, while he was in his afflictions and
miseries. And these afflictions in Christ, are in this comparison answerable to
the finnes of the ancient high Priest, and therefore by a little abusion of the
word, are tacitly comprehended with them under the sole name of sins. That
the Legal high Priest was to offer no less for his own sins, then for the
peoples; yea first for his own sins before the peoples, it plainly appears,
Levit. 16.6,11,17. etc. His offering for his own sins was a young Bullock,
and for the peoples, a Hee-Goate. And therefore it is said afterward, that he
was to enter the Sanctuary by the blood of Goats and Calves, chap. 9.12. But
how Christ offered for himself, is explicated in this chap. ver. 7.

4. And no man takes this honor unto himselfe] The fifth property of the high
Priest, that no man must arrogate the office to himself, and usurp upon the
rights of it of his own authority. This office here is called an honor,
because of the dignity of it; for offices are of diverse kinds: some are
merely servile, others profitable only, a third sort are honorable, that
draws dignities and precedence with it. Now the office of the Priesthood is of
this last sort, and therefore is called an honor. But he that is called of
God] He only has a right to administer in the honorable office of
Priesthood, that is designed and called by God to take it upon him. This he
illustrates by the example of Aarons calling. As was Aaron.] Aaron did not of
his own accord intrude himself into the office of high Priesthood, but being
thereto enjoined and commanded by God, he accepted of it by way of obedience to
him that enjoined it. For God first did choose Aaron, and after him his eldest
son, and by proper Laws determined the rights of succession in this office,
which were always observed, while the state was administered by the Laws of
God. Hitherto he has specified several properties of the high Priest, all
which may be reduced to three heads. The first is, that he offer for sins,
and negotiate the cause of men with God; to which this may be referred that he
must be a man. 2. That he must be merciful and propense toward sinners;
whereto this belongs, that he himself be compassed with infirmity, and
thereupon offer for his own sins, as well as for the peoples. 3. That he
must be called to this office of God himself. Now in an order retrograde or
reverse, beginning with the last, he demonstrates that all these agree with
Christ. Whence it follows, that Christ has a truly Priestly dignity, which he
received from God; and is touched with singular compassion toward the
afflicted, and will afford his own people, not only opportune help, but
eternal happiness.

5. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high Priest,] He
begins now with the last property of the high Priest, and shows that it agrees
with Christ; because Christ did not arrogate to himself the honor of this
office. This he does to no other end, then thereby to show, that the Priesthood
of Christ was true and lawful; and that Christ had not been a true Priest, if
he had assumed this office of himself, and not been called of God to receive
it. If I (says Christ) glorify my self, my glory is nothing; it is my Father
that glorifies me. By the like reason, willing to assert the truth of his
doctrine, he denies that he spoke of himself, but refers his doctrine to his
Father, and professes that he received it from his Father; thereby intimating
that his doctrine had not been true, had he spoken it of himself. That which
the Author says here of Christ is so much the more remarkable because the
Priesthood which Christ sustaineth is of that nature, that no man can possibly
take it upon him, no man can possibly have but he upon whom God collates it.
But some man under the Law might arrogate the legal Priesthood, and some did
arrogate it, when their state was corrupt. But this high Priesthood of Christ,
to minister eternally in the Sanctuary of heaven, to have absolute power and
authority to take away from us all punishments of our sins; to succor and
help us in our miseries; to deliver us from death, and translate us to
eternal life (for these are the functions of his high Priesthood) no mortal
man can challenge this Priesthood, or usurp it, or execute the functions of
it, unless God himself qualify and raise him to such high faculties.
Therefore also the Author, speaking of Christ and his high Priesthood, used the
word glorified, that Christ glorified not himself; because the Priesthood of
Christ is a most glorious office, containing most glorious functions, all
tending to eternal glory. Hence it is manifest, that Christ is not supreme
God; for if he were so, from whom else could he receive this glory but from
himself? But this the Author plainly denies, showing that otherwise he could
not be a true and lawful high Priest; and therefore he was not the supreme
God. And we will pass by this point also, that the supreme God can no way be
a Priest. But he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee.] The Author says not barely, that Christ was made a high Priest by God,
but presently produces Gods edicts, wherein he ordained Christ to be a high
Priest; from whence it manifestly appears that Christ did not arrogate the
Priesthood to himself, but was ordained into it by God himself. The first of
these edicts is taken out of Psalm 2. The other Psalm. 110. That these words
were spoken of God himself, no man can be ignorant: but in these very words
Christ is ordained high Priest; whence it manifestly follows, that he took
not this dignity from himself, but received it of God. Concerning the former
of these testimonies we have spoken sufficiently, chap. 1.5. We shall here note
only three things. 1. That the God who or dained Christ to be high Priest, was
the Father of Christ. For the Father only has power to call Christ by the name
of his Son, as in these words he did. Whence it appears that Christ in this
place how great soever he be, yea as he is the Son of God, is opposed to God;
and it and of him it is denied that he took the Priesthood to himself. 2.
That the Priestly office of Christ is not really distinguished from his Kingly;
because these words of the Psalm, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee; which as we saw in the first chap. treat of Christ's Kingly dignity, in
regard whereof he is chiefly the Son of God, are by the Author in this place
applied to his Priesthood. We may further add here, That Christ performed not
his Priestly office, at least not perfectly, at the time when he suffered the
death of the Cross; neither was his death a perfect oblation expiatory; for
these words of the Psalm are clearly interpreted by St. Paul of his
resurrection and glory, Act. 13. and here above, chap. 1. But Christ in his
death was most deeply humbled and debased. Whereas in these words of the Psalm
he is declared the Son of God, and withal became far more excellent then the
Angels, as appears before chap. 1.4,5. But in respect of his death, most
especially, he was much less then the Angels. As Christ suffered death, he
exercised not his Kingly office, but only did that, whereby he might attain
it: but when he administers his Priestly office, he withal executes the parts
of his Kingly function. Wherefore he did not execute it actually in his death,
but was thereby prepared to execute it. 3. In those words of the Psalm, Thou
art my Son, to day have I begotten thee; there is no intimation of any
generation or begetting of Christ from the essence of his Father before all
worlds; but of such a generation whereby Christ was ordained a high Priest of
God; and therefore of such a one as was done in time; for Christ was not made
our high Priest from all eternity, but from a certain time; namely upon his
Resurrection.

6. As he says also in another place,] The other testimony of Scripture
showing the decree of God, taken Psalm. 110. He says, i. God says. Thou art a
Priest for ever,] In this testimony, there is express treating of Christ's
Priesthood. Whence it appears, that it was also treated of in the former
testimony; seeing both the testimonies are alleged for the same thing. Some
men (that they may elude the true sense of the former testimony, which the Holy
Ghost shows to be in the words, Thou art my Son, To day have I begotten
thee) say, that those words are not alleged as a testimony of Gods collating
the Priesthood upon Christ, but as a description of him, who conferred this
office upon him. There men do a manifest injury to the truth and to the words
of the Author. For how should these following words agree with the former, as
he says also in another place? does he not by these latter words manifestly
declare, that now another place or Psalm is cited by him; wherein the same
point is proved, for which the former testimony was produced? For ever.] The
Priestood of Christ shall last for ever in the person of Christ, without ever
having any successor in his office; for his office shall last as long as there
needs any expiation for sins, even to the end of the world; and so long he
shall continue in that office. After the order of Melchisedeck.] The duration
or term of Christ's Priesthood shall run out like the duration of
Melchisedecks Priesthood; or as the Author expresses himself afterward, chap.
7.15. after the similitude of Melchisedeck. But of these words we shall speak
further, chap. 7. where the Author explicates this likeness more fully. But
here he tacitly meets with a doubt which some man might imagine touching the
Priesthood of Christ, in that Christ descended not from the family of Aaron or
tribe of Levi, to which tribe the Priesthood was limited by the Law of God. For
the type of Melchisedeck does not only require an eternal Priesthood, but also
requires, that no respect of tribe or family should be had therein; as we shall
show hereafter.

7. Who in the days of his flesh,] From the third property required in a high
Priest, and concluded to agree with Christ, he ascends now to the second
property, and says that Christ also was compassed with infirmity, and by
reason thereof offered for himself; This he shows in this 7. verse, and then
at the 8. verse, he inferres, that from this infirmity Christ learned to be
merciful toward the distressed and afflicted. In the days of his flesh.] By
flesh he understands the infirmity of Christ; for flesh is the subject of
infirmity, and in a manner the cause of it. And the days of his flesh are the
days wherein he suffered, for in that time chiefly his infirmity most
appeared. For then it most appeared that Christ was flesh. When he had offered
prayers and supplications.] Now he shows, that Christ offered also for
himself. Of which his oblation, his infirmity, and afflictions were the cause;
the sense whereof how deeply it struck into his soul, and how greatly it
exercised him, appears from the things which he offered. For he shows
distinctly both what he offered, and to whom; as also the adjunct of his
offering, and the issue of it. The matter of his offering was Prayers; This is
a general word to signify all petitions, or rather all kind of speech unto
God. And supplications; which are the prayers or petitions of supplicants,
whose manner is to fall upon their knees, casting themselves at the feet or
touching the knees of them to whom they make their prayer. The original word
is, (...), which as some Interpreters note, does properly signify an
olive branch, wrapped about with wool, which supplicants held in their hands.
Hence we may easily imagine, in what anguish of soul Christ was, and what
pangs of pain he felt, when he was driven to such earnest prayers and devout
supplications. But what prayers and supplications the Author means, will
appear from the words following; wherein the person to whom he prayed is
described in such manner, that thence we may easily understand what he prayed;
although the adjunct of his prayer does partly also declare it. Unto him that
was able to save him from death,] In these words he shows, not only the person
to whom Christ offered, but also the cause why he offered him prayers, and what
the thing was for which he so earnestly prayed. And this is the cause, why he
would describe God after this manner, rather then simply name him; for
therefore he so devoutly supplicated to God; because God only is he that can
save from death; which Christ by his prayers chiefly requested. He indeed
requested some other things besides; for in the garden he petitioned that the
cup might pass from him, i. he there was an humble supplicant prostrate upon
his knees, and afterward on his face, praying again and again with great
ardour of mind, that he might be delivered from the great anguish and
heaviness which he felt in his soul. And hanging upon the cross, he poured
forth this lamentation unto God, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?]
Wherein he prayed that God would put an ease and an end to his extreme pains.
But the sum and breviate, or at least the head of all those prayers, was
this, for his delivery from death: For he that is delivered from death, in
that sense that Christ here desired, he has found an end of all pains both
of soul and body, and has obtained supreme happiness. This delivery Christ
prayed for, in commending his Spirit to God, when he was ready to expire. For
to commend the spirit to God, or to pray that God would receive it into his
hands; what is it else but to pray that he would preserve it, and afterward
restore it, and consequently to recall him from death to life, whose spirit it
is? That the Author had respect to these prayers of Christ, it may appear by
their adjunct, which he also mentions in saying, That his prayers were offered
up, With strong crying and tears.] The holy History of the Evangelists do
testify, that Christ hanging upon the Cross, complained in the words of the
Psalm, with a great cry that God had forsaken him, and afterward being ready
to expire, he commended his Spirit to God. But the Sacred History mentions not
any tears of Christ shed at that time; yet notwithstanding it appears that it
was so, and was known to the Author to be so. Now this cry and tears do
further show how deeply the sense of pain was impressed into him, when it
forced him to express such cries and tears. Hence it appears further, that
Christ thus exercised with so great a sense of pains himself, cannot but be
moved at the miseries and pains of his people, cannot but willingly hear the
doleful cries and complains, and afford his opportune succor and help in
their afflictions and distresses. From these words of the Author it appears,
how Christ offered for himself, namely, that he offered not himself, but his
prayers for himself, and then he offered them, not when he became immortal in
his heavenly Tabernacle, but in the days of his flesh or infirmity. For when
he became immortal, he could not then offer for this end, that he might be
saved from death, which (as we have cleared from the words of the Author) was
indeed the end of his offering. Besides, being in heaven he offered himself
immaculate, and therefore had no need to offer for himself there. Wherefore
Christ offered one way for himself, and another way for us: for for himself
he offered prayers on earth; for us he offered himself in heaven; for
himself when yet he was mortal, or in the days of his flesh: for us, when he
was made an immortal and eternal Spirit. And was heard] The effect and issue
of these prayers offered, was this, that he was delivered and saved, not from
death; for he suffered it and dyed, but out of death from whence he was
raised. For whom God hears praying in that manner, him he delivers and frees,
though not from his misery before he suffer it, yet out of it after he has
suffered. So speaks David as a type of Christ, Psalm. 22.21. Thou have heard
me from the horns of the Unicorns. i. as learned men have noted, thou have
heard to save me from extreme dangers. So that the word heard is taken here
Metonymically, to include the effect of his hearing; he was heard and saved.
In that he feared] He was saved from, or, out of the thing he feared, namely,
out of death. The original is (...) which some take for a passionate fear,
the object whereof here in Christ was death, and so by a Metonymie fear, is
here put for death, the act for the object, or thing to be feared. For of all
terrors death is most terrible and fearful: and this fear was the cause of
his prayers and supplications, at least of the cries and tears wherewith they
were offered. And then this example of Christ may teach us, partly with what
fervency of soul we must implore the help of God in the times of our
distresses; partly what things especially we must pray for; partly wherein that
opportune help chiefly consists, (whereof the Author spoke in the end of the
former chapter) namely, in this, that Christ saves us out of death, into
eternal life. Others take (...) for a reverentiall or religious fear: for
this sense is set in the margent of our last translation: that he was heard for
his piety. And then the object of his piety, reverence or fear, was God to
whom he prayed. And so this fear of God, was the proper motive to this
offering of Christ, and to all the circumstances of his offering. His offering
it self proceeded from his piety or fear of God; for every offering is an
act of piety. His prayers and supplications proceeded from it; for prayer also
is an act of piety; his cries and tears proceeded from it; for they also are
concurrents of piety and fervent devotion. His exaudition in being heard of
God proceeded from it: for Gods hearing of our prayers is the fruit of our
piety and devotion; seeing God hears not impious and sinful persons, but
such as are pious to reverence and worship him, and do his will, those he
hears, John 9.31. The prayers of Christ were supplications. i. (as before is
noted) petitions exhibited upon the knees with great worship and reverence
given to God. His prayers in the garden were such supplications performed with
great worship and reverence, bowing toward God; for first he fell upon his
knees, and afterward he went more humbly and fell upon his face. And his
prayers on the cross were supplications also (as the Author terms them) and
therefore performed with reverent bowing also; such as was possible for Christ
to use in that case being stretched and nailed upon the cross; where because
he could not bow his knees, therefore (as the Sacred story relates it) he
bowed his head, when he cried and commended his spirit unto God. Which bowing
of his head was not a simple act of a dying man, (as some Interpreters slightly
pass it over) but an act of worship and reverence of a pious man, that was
making his offering unto God by prayers and supplications, adding cries and
tears, and all religious means, for exaudition that God might hear him.
Wherefore it carries a very congruous sense to say that Christ was heard for
his piety, i. for the fear and reverence he used toward God in his prayers
and supplications; for fear is the inward motion of the soul, from which the
outward worship and reverend bowings of the body do proceed. And these outward
reverences of bowing the head, bowing the body, and bowing the knees, are acts
of worship unto God; which have been used by Gods people in all ages of the
world. For bowing the head, See Genesis 24.26.48. and Exodus 4.31. and Exodus 12.27.
and Exodus 34.8. and 1. Chro. 29.20. and 2. Chro. 20.18. and 2. Chro. 29.30. and
Nehem. 8.6. Hence it appears also from this example of Christ; that our
prayers and supplications unto God, should proceed from inward piety and fear
of God; and should be offered unto him with outward worship and reverence,
accompanied with cries and tears in times of extreme distresses; if we mean to
have exaudition, that God should graciously hear us.

8. Who though he were a son] Christ by the evils which he suffered, became
such a one, as to have compassion on those, who labor to obey God through
difficulties and sufferings. He learned obedience] He learned what it is to
obey God; what a difficult and harsh duty it is, how bitter and unpleasing to
flesh and blood. For in this place he takes obedience for that part of
obedience, which is seen in difficult and hard cases, such as are these, to be
afflicted and suffer death for the justice and truth of God. Yet I conceive the
word obedience is here to be understood more literally and derivatively from
audience; for a giving of audience. Christ, who upon his prayers and
supplications made to God, with cries and tears to save him from death, had
audience of God, and was heard therein, did thereby learn to give audience and
hearing to his people, when in their distresses they offer up prayers and
supplications with cries and tears to him; thereby to have compassion on them,
and deliver them from their distresses. For (...) which is here fitly renderd
obedience, does carry an elegant symploce of sense, both of audience to hear
another what he would have done, and of obedience to do the thing which he
has heard. And that very act of compassion in Christ in hearing the
distressed, though it be his audience to them; yet it is his obedience to God,
who ordained a high Priest for that function. By the things that he suffered.]
In the original it is (...), of or from the things that he suffered; so it is
rendered, Mat. 24.32. Learn a parable of the figtree. Christ by or from his
own evils and sufferings learned what bitterness and trouble there lies in
suffering persecutions for righteousness sake; and therefore cannot but be
affected with like sense of trouble, at the troubles and pains of the innocent,
that suffer for his sake; and therefore when they pray and cry unto him, he
will be ready in obedience to God to give them audience to hear and help
them. Though he were a Son,] He illustrates the matter ex adversis. So great a
conjunction of Christ with God, such a fatherly love of God toward him as being
his only Son, might seem to be against this way of exercising him upon the
stage of afflictions, yet it was not against it. God might have taught his
Son the lessons of obedience in some other school then that of afflictions;
yet it pleased God to choose this way, and not spare him from the common
condition of his brethren. Hence it is manifest, how greatly God loved
mankind, who would handle his own Son so hardly to this end, that having
trial of suffering in his own person, miseris succurrere discat, he might
thereby learn to succor those in misery. Hence it appears also, that Gods
fatherly love to the faithful is no way impaired, when he exercises their
faith and patience to make trials of them in sufferings. For whom he loves he
chasteneth and scourges every Son whom he receives, chap. 12.6.

9. And being made perfect] In the last place, he comes to the first property
of an high Priest, and applies it also to Christ; namely, that Christ procures
the salvation of men, and negotiates with God, to be propitious to them, and
forgive them the punishments of their sins. Which property in respect of
Christ, he expresses in these words, that he is become the Author of eternal
salvation. Made perfect. This state of Christ in being made perfect or
consummate, is opposed to his state in the days of his flesh] For then when
Christ was infirm, and himself wanted another help, he could not perfectly
and finally help others in all things. But after that he was consummated or
perfected, i. after he had attained to immortality, or a nature incorruptible,
and was invested with supreme power in heaven and earth, so that nothing
further was wanting to him; or after he was thoroughly consecrated of God, and
fully installed into his Priesthood (as some think the word perfected to mean)
then he became the author of eternal salvation,] For then he was a most
perfect cause of salvation. In the days of his flesh he was indeed the cause
of eternal salvation; for then he was the great Legate or Apostle of God to
preach it: but being perfected, he becomes the most perfect cause of it; for
now he is our high Priest and heavenly King, to give that, which before he
preached. He is therefore the most perfect cause of eternal salvation, because
he gives it in a most perfect manner; for he wants nothing, neither for faculty
or power, nor for desire and will to perfect our eternal salvation. For by his
power, he takes from us all punishment of our sins; he gives us everlasting
life; he receives our spirits into his hands; he speedily succors us in our
afflictions, lest our faith should fail, and we thereby fall into punishments
due to our sins. The Author made choice of general words to describe the
power and efficacy of Christ's Priesthood, in the procuring of our salvation,
that he might express it with terms more proper to it. For Christ is not the
cause of salvation, in the very same manner with the legal high Priest; who
gave not salvation or pardon to the people himself of himself as Christ does,
but only procured God to give it, by propitiating him with offerings. And there
is a great difference between Christ and the legal high Priest in the
salvation procured; for he procured only a temporary and transitory salvation,
but Christ gives an eternal salvation. Furthermore this place affoords us an
example of a rule in Scripture, that some things are said to be simply done,
when they are more perfectly done. We have an instance hereof in that passage
of John, 2.11. where the Disciples of Christ, who did already believe in
Christ, are notwithstanding said to believe in Christ upon sight of the miracle
of water turned into wine; because then they believed in him much more
steadfastly and perfectly then they did before, or because then their faith
received a great increase. So Christ himself (John 15.8.) says to his
Disciples, that if they did bear much fruit, so they should be his Disciples;
because by this means, they should become his Disciples in a more perfect
manner. This we therefore notify, lest to any it should seem strange, that
the Scripture notes diverse times wherein Christ became the Son of God; namely
because he became so in a more perfect manner and higher degree; although from
the beginning of his conception he was truly the Son of God; though not so
perfectly as afterward. Unto all them that obey him.] Here the persons are
specified to whom Christ is the author of salvation; namely to the obedient,
and to them universally, to all that obey him. For Christ is an high Priest
properly to such, and is ordained of God to expiate their sins. Whence it
appears, that all who will have their sins expiated by Christ, and obtain
eternal salvation by him, must obey him. Christ indeed is the cause of
salvation even to them, who as yet obey him not, in that he first makes them
obedient, and consequently saves them: but to such he is but the remote cause;
but he is the immediate cause of it to them that actually obey him; for therein
his Priestly office is actually exercised. Not unlike to this is that saying of
Peter, Act. 5.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and
a Savior; what else is this, then to be the author or cause of salvation? and
by what means Christ does work and cause salvation, Peter expresses in the
words following, to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. This
latter way of saving, as being the perfecter, is contained in this place.

10. Called of God an high Priest,] Christ becomes the author or cause of
eternal salvation by this means, in being ordained an high Priest of God; for
when God calls him an high Priest, thereby he makes him so. After the order of
Melchisedeck.] Christ is such a high Priest unto us, that withal he is also
our heavenly Lord and King, having supreme power to pardon all our sins and
to free us from the punishment of them. But of this point we shall speak more
largely, chap 7.

11. Of whom we have many things to say,] He passes to another point, wherein
he reproves the slownesse and dullness of them to whom he writes; to this end,
that he may excite and prepare them to receive those mysteries which he had in
his mind to open concerning the Priesthood of Christ. Of whom, i. of Christ
our high Priest, either in reference to his Priesthood absolutely, or
respectively as it is compared with the Priesthood of Melchisedeck. We have
many things to say,] We have in our mind plentiful and copious matter, which
we would express concerning his Priesthood. And hard to be uttered,] Not hard
to the Author to utter simply, but hard for him to utter so plainly, that they
might easily be apprehended and understood of them to whom he should utter
them. And this hardness proceeded partly from the greatness and sublimenesse
of the matters to be uttered, and partly from the incapacity and dullness of
them to whom they should be uttered. Seeing ye are dull of hearing.] q.d. The
difficulty of uttering these things, is not so much in regard of the things
themselves, or in regard of me, to whom the things are sufficiently known, as
in regard of you, by reason of your dullness. For if ye were of a ready and
quick capacity, it were easy for me to utter all, and for you to conceive
them. Dull is he, that does not easily hear, or attend, or not apprehend and
consider things uttered unto him, especially in the holy mysteries of salvation.

12. For when for the time ye ought to be teachers,] Their dullness of hearing
holy mysteries is here declared from the effect of it, namely that they were
yet unskilful and rude in the first principles of Christian Religion, when
notwithstanding they had spent so much time in the School of Christ, that they
were not only competently to know the Christian Religion themselves, but also
ought to teach it unto others; which was a great argument and sign of their
slownesse and dullness. Ye have need that one teach you again, which be the
first principles of the oracles of God,] For a man to be taught, is not
strange, neither does it argue idleness or dullness; but to be taught over
again and anew, especially the first principles and elements, this is a sign
of a heavy and dull spirit. There is an elegant opposition between him that
should teach, and him that needs teaching, especially the elements of any
discipline, and the first elements of all. The principles of any discipline,
are those verities, which have no reasons, and cannot be proved, but are the
reasons or causes to prove other verities; and therefore are learned in the
first place, because they are known of themselves without the knowledge of
other verities: but other verities cannot be known without the knowledge of
them. These of some Divines are called fundamentalls, in allusion to the
foundations of buildings; because the foundations are first laid, and can lie
without the buildings, but the buildings cannot be made without them; for the
buildings are supported by the foundations, and not the foundations by the
buildings. The oracles of God.] All the verities of Christian Religion, whether
they be principles that prove, or doctrines that are proved from the principles
are the oracles of God; because they are the words of God proceeding from his
mouth, and revealed unto men by his holy Spirit. And are become such as have
need of milk, and not of strong meat.] This is but a circumlocution of their
ignorance and childishness in Christian verities. Ye are become such, that ye
have need of principles which are the most simple verities and easiest to be
understood, as known of themselves; and not of abstruce and recondite
doctrines, the truths whereof appear not, but by the means and trace of many
principles, and foreknowne doctrines; the apprehension whereof does agitate and
labor both the understanding and memory. The principles of Christianity are
resembled unto milk, because as milk is a nourishment most easy of digestion
and concoction, because it has a near affinity with blood wherewith we are
finally nourished, for milk is but elaborate blood: so the principles of
Religion are most easily apprehended and understood; because they have a near
affinity with the Spirit, whereby we are finally saved, for the principles are
spirit and life. And abstruce doctrines are resembled to strong meat; because
strong meat is hardly digested, and therefore is not nourishment for all
stomachs: so abstruce doctrines are hardly understood, and therefore are not
verities for every capacity: And as strong meat not digested breeds crudities
and diseases in the body: so abstruce doctrines not understood, breed
controversies and distractions in the Church.

13. For every one that uses milk,] He had tacitly affirmed before that
strong meat must not be given to them that need milk; and therein, that
abstruce doctrines must not be proposed to novices and weak minds. This
assertion he proves by this reason, because he that uses milk is unskilful
in the word of righteousness; and he confirms this reason by another proof,
because he that uses milk is a babe. Seeing therefore a babe is unskilful in
the word of righteousness; therefore also he that uses milk must needs be
unskifull in the same. He that uses milk,] is not meant by him that eats
milk and other meats also; for so do many persons of full growth; but by him
that eats only milk, and can receive no other nourishment. Unskilful is he
that has yet made no trial, nor entrance into the principles of any
discipline; for such a one is altogether unskilful. The word of
righteousnesse] is an Hebraisme for the right word; that is for the true and
perfect word, that is right and fit for them to know; for true right and
perfect are either the same, or equipollent, or adequate; as mutual
consequents one to another, and concurrent properties to the same subject.
Hence in Scripture they are often confounded or substituted one for another. So
David Psalm 4 1. calls God, the God of his righteousness; i. his true right
and perfect God, in opposition to the heathenish gods, their idols and images,
which were not true and right gods, but false and wrong gods. So our Savior,
Luke 16.11. opposes the riches of unrighteousness to the true, right and
perfect riches. He therefore that yet uses milk only, has not yet attained
to the true right and perfect word of God for a solid knowledge of Christ, nor
has ever made trial of tasting and digesting it in his mind, and therefore
is not capable of it, but his mind would instantly be oppressed with it. For a
man must first make trial of his stength, and the mind by small exercises
must be prepared for greater matters; as infants and babes, as long as they
suck milk only, and by little and little use no solid meats, are all that
while incapable of them. The words of the Author are a contracted similitude,
or a transition from the simily to the matter it self; for the subject of his
assertion shows in part the proposition of the simily, and the predicat makes
the reddition of it. As among other places, we have the like contracted simily,
Luke 9.62. For the simily explicated must run thus: As he that yet has used
only milk, is incapable of solid meat; so he that is yet in the principles of
Christianity is unskilful of the mysteries and right doctrines of it.

14. But strong meat belongs to them that are (perfect) of full age.] Having
said that strong meat must not be given to babes; now on the contrary he shows
to whom it must be given; namely, to them that are adulted or perfect in age.
For the perfect or adulted who are of age, are here opposed to infants and
babes; and so they are opposed, 1. Cor. 14.20. and Ephesians. 4.13.14. Even those,
who by reason of use have their senses exercised,] Those, is not any note of
distinction, to difference some perfect or adulted persons from others: but a
note of explication, to show the cause of his assertion. For the Author shows
the cause or reason, why only strong meat is to be given to the perfect, or
them of full age, and to them only. The reason is, because they only have their
sensories, or organs of their senses exercised, as their eyes, tongue, and
palate, whereby they can easily discern and judge of strong meat, which is
good and wholesome for them, and contrarily, which is evil and hurtful. These
sensories of their eyes, tongue, and palate, they have exercised through
practice and custom, in seeing, touching, and tasting of meats. To discern
both good and evil.] These words are not to be taken in a Moral sense, but a
Physical. He that is of perfect or full age, and has been accustom to make
several trials of several meats, can easily find by experience what meats
do agree with his stomach, and what not; for they that are agreeing and
nourishing to him, they are good and wholesome for him; they which do not, are
evil and hurtful. Which difference of meats being first tried inwardly in his
stomach, he will afterward easily discern by his outward senses, and
particularly by his eye; which upon sight of any meats will easily judge of
them before he taste them. To these perfect or full aged persons, they are
resembled, who have their minds exercised and trained, with frequent and daily
meditations of things divine, who have tasted diverse doctrines, as it were
several meats, and have digested the knowledge of many divine mysteries; who
have gotten a custom or habit of mind, whereby they can easily discern and
judge, what doctrine is true and what false, which is consequent to Christian
religion, and which is repugnant. This discretion they only have attained, who
can comprehend in their mind as it were a body of Christian religion, and
stick not only in the first principles of it.

The Contents of this fifth Chapter are,
1. Every high Priest is ordained for men. v. 1. Reason 1. Because he is a
Mediator for men to God in things pertaining to God. eod. 2 Because he must
offer gifs and sacrifices for the sins of men. eod.
2. Every high Priest must have compassion on men's ignorances and infirmities.
v. 2. Reason 1. Because he himself is subject to ignorances and infirmities.
eod. 2. Because he must offer for his own ignorances and infirmities, as well
as for the peoples. v. 3.
3. No high Priest must take the High Priesthood to himself. v. 4 Reason 1.
Because he must be called of God as was Aaron. eod.
4. Christ is truly a high Priest. v. 5. Reason. 1. Because he took not this
Priesthood to himself, but was called of God to be a perpetual high Priest,
after the term of Melchisedec. ver. eod. and 6. 2. Because Christ offered for
his own infirmities in sufferings. v. 7. 3. Because being saved from death, he
becomes the Author of eternal salvation to all that obey him.
5. The Mysteries concerning Christ's high Priesthood, were hard to be uttered
to the Hebrews. v. 11. Reason. 1. Because they were dull of hearing. eod. 2.
Because though long taught, they had not yet learned the principles of
Christianity. 3. Because the Mysteries of Christ's Priesthood, was too strong
meat for their unexercised minds.

CHAPTER VI.
1. THerefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ] There is a
double sense of these words found among Interpreters, and thereupon a double
way of their coherence with the former Chapter. For it is plain that the words
are inferd from thence, as the particle therefore shows: Both senses of the
words seem to require, that they be taken in a Rhetorical communication: but
in a contrary manner. For either the Author speaks personally here of
himself, and says, that himself in this place, will leave the principles of
the Doctrine of Christ, and proceed to explicate more sublime Mysteries
comprehended therein: or else he admonishes them to whom he writes, that
they leaving those Principles, would proceed to a fuller knowledge in
Christianity. We rather approve of the former sense, as followed by many
learned men; yet because the latter is not to be despised, therefore we shall
explicate them both. If therefore we receive the first sense, the Author seems
to say; Therefore I will leave to speak further of the principles of
Christianity, and draw toward the perfection of it, and propose deeper
mysteries in it; for I will not lay again the foundation of Repentance to be
practiced, and of Faith to rely on God; neither will I deliver the doctrine of
Baptismes, of Imposition of hands, of the Resurrection of the dead, and of
eternal life: Upon which verities as upon principles and foundations, the
doctrines of Repentance and faith in God is raised and built up. These
principles I will not handle again, for it is enough that they have been
propounded once; although I refuse not to handle them again, if God permit.
Which I therefore speak, because it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, etc. to renew them again unto repentance. If we follow this sense,
all points will agree well enough: yet in the coherence only there will seem
some difficulty. For some man may object; Seeing the Author said in the former
chapter, that those Hebrews had need to be taught again the very principles
of Religion, to be nourished with milk, and not with meat; How can he from
this infer, that therefore he will leave the principles, and the milk, to
propose strong meat and deeper mysteries, seeing rather he should infer the
quite contrary? This difficulty may easily be salved, if we say that the
coherence of these words must be referred to the eleventh verse of the former
chapter, where the Author said, He had many things to say and hard to be
uttered of Christ his high Priesthood; That in reference to these words, he
might infer, Therefore leaving the principles, let us go on to perfection. So
that all the intermediate verses between the eleventh of the former chapter,
and the beginning of this, which were added occasionally, to excite the
Hebrews to a diligent attention, must be read as it were in a parenthesis. If
then we follow this sense, we must say, that the Author in the first part of
this chapter does affirm, that he will proceed in explicating the mysteries of
Christ's Priesthood, notwithstanding the Hebrews by reason of their slownesse
and dullness, were not very capable of them; and that he would not now spend
any labor in delivering the principles of Christian Religion. Thus of the
former sense, now for the latter. The Author had reproved the Hebrews, for
being so slow and dull in their study of Christianity, that when for the length
of their time spent therein, they should become teachers of others, themselves
had need to be taught again the first principles of it; and like babes, must
yet be nourished with milk, and not with strong meat; Therefore he
admonishes them, that casting off this drowsinesse of spirit, they would leave
at last those principles, and launch themselves into a deeper knowledge of
those divine mysteries. Therefore, that which before he had objected unto them,
that they had need to be taught again the principles of Christianity, must not
be so understood as if they had now wholly forgotten or lost them; for this, to
speak generally of them all, could hardly be; but because by their negligence,
they did not well remember them, but had need to have them renewed, and
reinforced upon them. For, it plainly appears from passages which are read of
them, both in this chapter, and other parts of this Epistle, that they began to
doubt of the Christian faith and truth. Now they that are such, have need that
Christian principles should be anew inculcated and confirmed unto them. Neither
is it his meaning, that they should altogether leave and neglect the
principles, and so go on to perfection, for this neither could nor must be
done; but they should not stick and dwell wholly upon the principles, without
proceeding any further; for they that proceed further, do pass by the places
whereat they are already arrived. So a man may say to a boy, leave your
Accedence and your Grammar, and pass on to other Authors. The principles of
the doctrine of Christ] They are the fundamental verities, which being first
learned, do help us to proceed in Christian Religion. Let us go on unto
perfection] The principles rightly understood and applied, will by degrees
carry us on from one verity to another, till we come at the deepest mysteries
of Christianity, and into a full body; where being once arrived, we are at
perfection, even at a fullness and ripeness in the knowledge of Christ. Not
laying again the foundation] The foundation is the first principles of
Christianity, which are as it were a foundation of that edifice of doctrines,
wherein the perfect knowledge of God and Christ consists. Now to lay this
foundation, is either to teach these principles, if we follow the former sense,
or to learn them, if we follow the latter. And to lay this foundation againe]
is to initiate these principles anew from the beginning, and for a man to
become the Disciple of Christ a second time, after once he had deserted the
verities of them; whereof (supposing the latter sense) he would have the
Hebrews to beware; for they were near approaching to this mischief, and lest
they should fall into it, the Author excites them very seriously. For they had
not as yet altogether deserted the Christian faith, as appears partly from
this whole Epistle, and partly from a passage at the ninth verse of this
chapter, where he says, that he is persuaded better things of them, then of
those (he means) who after the knowledge of the truth, have relapsed and
revolted from it; and lastly, in that he continues to exhort them to constancy
in Christianity. Of repentance from dead workes] He being to explicate this
foundation of Christianity, and lays several parts of it, whereof the first
is repentance. But because in this place (as we have said) he treates of laying
the foundation not in regard of Christian life, but of Christian doctrine; as
it appears by the words following, of resurrection of the dead, and eternal
life, which may be repeated again in respect of the doctrine or learning of
them: Therefore here to lay the foundation of repentance, is either to teach or
learn the doctrine of repentance; and in like manner the doctrine of faith in
God, of the resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment. All which
doctrines are the principles of Christian discipline, and as it were the
foundation of all other Christian verities. Dead works, are deadly works,
such as bring and continue death upon the agent. And repentance from these
deadly works which is a principle of Christianity, includes not only a sorrow
of mind, that thou have committed deadly works, but also and much rather, the
effect of that sorrow, which is a course of mind and life far diverse from the
former. For repentance is sometimes distinguished from that sorrow as the
effect from the cause. See 2 Cor. 7.9,10. And of faith toward God.] What that
is, the Author shows afterward chap. 11.

2. Of the doctrine of baptismes, and the laying on of hands,] These words may
be taken two ways, either as they signify some part of the foundation,
distinct from the parts, both preceding and following, namely from the doctrine
of repentance and faith, of the resurrection and eternal judgment; or else as
added by way of apposition for amplification sake. q.d. which doctrines of
repentance and faith, belong to those that are baptized, and that receive
Imposition of hands. If we follow the former sense, and take them for parts of
the foundation, to signify the doctrine of Baptismes, and of Imposition of
hands; then first it may be demanded, what that doctrine is? The Answer is,
that doctrine consists chiefly in showing, what baptismes and imposition of
hands signify, and to what ends they are used. And these doctrines are
therefore accounted among the principles of Christianity, because they were
used from the beginning of the Church to initiate men into Christ, and
therefore it was needful that the Disciples of Christ, should at first be
instructed in them, and be taught their end and scope. Secondly, it may be
demanded, why he mentions baptismes in the plural number, as if he intended
many, (although the Syriake translation render it baptism in the singular
number) seeing Christians received but one baptism of water for repentance.
Resp. This was therefore done, either because he spoke in respect of them that
were baptized, who because they were many, made also many baptismes; or else
because he respected both the baptism of John, who was the forerunner of
Christ, and the baptism of the Apostles the followers of Christ, especially
that wherewith the Apostles baptized after the Resurrection and Ascension of
Christ. For the Baptism of John was the baptism of Repentance for the
remission of sins, which was used as a sign and a pledge of future
repentance for the forgiveness of sins; because by washing it resembled
repentance and remission of sins. For both these are a washing from the filth
of sin; repentance is a washing from the acts of it, and remission from the
guilt and pain of it. Repentance was signified as the baptism of those that
were baptized of their own accord was an action. Remission was signified, as
the action of John himself, who in a manner represented the person of God, as
his legate or messenger, and in the name of God did promise men the remission
and purgation of their sins, and declared this by the sign of washing. But
the Baptism of Christ, does not only represent repentance and remission of
sins, or is not only received as a sign of future repentance and remission;
but over and above it is a sign of putting on Christ; and with him, of dying
to sin and rising to newness of life, that at last with him also we may
attain everlasting life; for baptism does elegantly shadow out our death and
burial with Christ by our immersion into the water, and our resurrection with
him by our emersion out of the water. This Paul has taught us, in some
passages of his Epistles. See Romans 6.3,4. and Col. 2.12. And of laying on of
hands,] Some by this understand, that Imposition of hands, which was in use
anciently in the Christian Church, whereby the Elders laid their hands upon
such as were admitted to the communion and society of the faithful; which use
as it seems was derived or drawn from the Apostles, who were wont to lay their
hands upon such as were to receive the Holy Ghost. But if we follow the former
sense of these words as we have already explicated them, it is better to take
them for that Imposition of hands which the Apostles used for this end, that
the Disciples of Christ might receive the Holy Ghost. See Acts 8.17,18,19. and
2 Timothy 1.6. Yet the sense will be no less elegant, if we take the words the
latter way, to signify the doctrine which belonged to those that are baptized,
and have hands laid on them. As if the Author had said, Let us not return to
learn the doctrine of repentance and faith in God, which uses to be proposed
to them that are baptized and have hands laid on them. For we were long since
baptized and had hands laid on us. Let us leave these matters to novices, and
to such as come newly to the discipline of Christ. This sense has pleased some
learned men; and if we admit it, we must read the words as it were in a
Parenthesis. And of resurrection of the dead,] The two remaining points are
fundamental: And by the resurrection of the dead in this place and many
others, he seems to comprehend immortal life, as the reward which the godly
attain after death. And of eternal judgment.] Which is the punishment
ordained for the ungodly. For seeing in this place the word judgment may
signify two things, either the sentence or decree in general touching men; or
damnation and punishment in particular: the latter of these is more consonant
to reason, because of the word eternal attributed to judgment. For this is
more proper and usually called eternal punishment, then the passing of the
sentence, which in it self is not eternal, though in the effect of it, it be
eternal. If therefore eternal judgment signify eternal punishment, then
the resurrection of the dead in this place must signify an eternal reward, i.
a blessed and immortal life; which also a Popish Interpreter upon this place
has observed, by saying: "Among other things, these two were principally
delivered to the catechized, the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, and
of eternal judgment, that by hope of the resurrection they might willingly
expose themselves unto all dangers for Christ, and for fear of the judgment
never return to their former sins."

3. And this will we do, if God permit,] i. If God permit, we will lay the
foundation again. As if he had said, Although by all means we should take
heed, that the matter fall not to this pass, as to cast a necessity upon us to
lay the foundation again; Yet we will do so, if God shall please to permit
us; whereby he tacitly intimates, that God would not always suffer this to be
done: yet the Authors words are so carried, that as he did not altogether hope
it, so neither did he wholly despair it. For, in the words following, he
seems to respect both these cases; the former of them in the next words, ver.
4. and the latter at the ninth verse, where he is persuaded better things of
them, and things that accompany salvation; of which his persuasion or hope, he
alleges a reason drawn from the righteousness and goodness of God.

4. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightned] In these words the
Author brings a reason, partly of what he lately intimated, touching Gods
permission, and partly of what he had openly said, of not laying again the
foundation; namely, because it is impossible that effect should follow, which
hereby may be intended. Besides, as we noted before, it appears, that the
Author speaks here properly of Apostates, who condemn Christian Religion as
false, and thereupon desert it. Of these he says, It is impossible for them to
be renewed unto repentance] Which impossibility partly depends upon the
natural difficulty, that such should be again converted unto Christ, who have
once forsaken him; for, it is an easier labor to retain the Christian
Religion being once attained, then to recover it being once lost; but if those
men have not performed the easier work in retaining it, much less will they
perform the harder in recovering it. And if Christianity could not so work
upon them, as not to reject it, how shall it gain upon them to re-embrace it,
and receive it for true, when it stands rejected? And the impossibility partly
depends upon Gods will and decree; who, when men become so ungracious, as to
stain their souls with such an incredible wickedness, is wont to judge them
unworthy of his grace, and thereupon to reprobate and curse them, (which word
the Author uses afterward at the eighth verse, by a simily drawn from a
barren soil.) Whence it comes to pass, that (as the Scripture speaks) God
hardens them, and holds them captives to his judgments. Which notwithstanding
must not be so understood, as if God would never release this just rigor and
severity, but only that he uses not to release it. For the Civilians say.
That which depends upon the pleasure of the Prince, is deemed impossible] i.
That which by the common course of Law cannot be done, unless the Prince grant
it by virtue of his prerogative, is not thought possible and seasable,
especially if the thing be such as the Prince uses not to grant. Renovation
therefore is impossible, unless God as it were make use of his prerogative to
extend his singular grace and favor toward such a man, not only not to harden
him, and oppose himself against his conversion, but also to further him by his
special assistance, and supply him with most effectual remedies for his
reclaiming. For, otherwise the saying of Jeremy must stand good, Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, then may ye also do good,
that are accustomed to do evil. The man accustomed to evil cannot ordinarily
recover from his evil custom; but if he do, the case is extraordinary, by an
extraordinary influence of Gods grace upon him. Who were once enlightened.] He
begins to describe those men, that have been converted unto Christ; In which
description he declares what graces such men have received from God. Whence it
is no mervaile, if upon their neglect and contempt of so great graces, God do
afterward reprobate and reject them. Men converted are enlightened with the
light of the Gospel, wherewith (as the Apostle speaks) Christ has brought
life and immortality to light, 2 Timothy 1.10. whereby he has expeld all errors,
all darkness and blindness of mind. And have tasted of the heavenly gift]
The article the added to gift, does design and specify some extraordinary and
notable gift. Yet he means not the gift of the holy Ghost, because he mentions
that particularly by it self presently after. And therefore he rather means,
that which arises and follows in the mind after it is enlightened with the
Gospel; such as is the tranquillity and peace of mind, which grows from the
knowledge of a plenary pardon of all our sins; and the pleasing joy which
issues from the hope of eternal life. For these are truly heavenly gifts,
which men converted unto Christ have tasted, by feeling the pleasantness and
sweetness of them in their souls. And were made partakers of the holy Ghost]
Men converted unto Christ, are made partakers of that divine power and
efficacy, whereby their minds are yet more clearly and certainly enlightened;
whereby those heavenly gifts are enlarged and increased unto them for the
greater beauty, ornament, and comfort of their souls; whereby they are sealed
unto the day of redemption, whereby they receive an earnest, a pledge, and an
assurance of their heavenly inheritance; and whereby they perceive the certain
truth of their Christian faith, which procures such great benefits from God
unto them.

5. And have tasted the good word of God] The good word of God, although it may
signify the whole doctrine of the Gospel, which is very fair and good; every
way consonant to reason and honesty: yet by use of Scripture, it seems to
signify particularly that part of Gods word, which contains Gods promises;
because when God makes us a promise, he therein gives us his word; And as Gods
other revealed verities are his true word, so his promises are his good word;
because they always entitle us to some good which is conveyed in his promise.
So Gods promise to the Jews for the release of their Captivity, is called his
good word, and his performance of that promise is called the performance of his
good word; because both the promise, and especially the performance of it
brought a great good to the people of God. Thus says the Lord, that after
seventy years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my
good word toward you in causing you to return to this place, Jer. 29.10. This
promise or good word was given unto them before, as ye may read, Jer. 25.12.
And so Gods promise of Christ, in raising a Branch of righteousness unto
David, was his good word; and the performance of it is called a performance of
that good thing which he promised, See Jer. 33.14,15. And the powers of the
world to come.] These powers seem to be those eminent qualities of that world
and life to come; such as are everlasting pleasure, glory, beauty, dignity,
strength, and force; a total freedom from all evil, and a total fullness of
all good: Of these powers or qualities, men converted unto Christ have tasted;
because they are not only enlightened with the knowledge of them, and delighted
with the hope of them, but also affected with an unspeakeable sense of them.

6. If they fall away] We have noted before, that the Author treats not here
of a simple falling into sin: but of a falling away which is Apostasy, whereof
he before also made mention, chap. 3.13. This may be proved from 2. grounds. 1.
Because God does not use to reprobate men converted unto Christ, and put in
that state which the Author formerly described, if after their conversion
adhering still to the Christian religion, if they fall simply into whatsoever
sin. For the Apostle says. If any man sin (any man that has given himself
to Christ) we have an advocate with the Father, Jesu; Christ the righ^eous. 1
John 2.1. From these words it is plain, that men converted unto Christ, shall
obtain pardon of God, even of those sins which they have committed after
their conversion, in case they forsake them, and wholly cast off the yoke of
sin, and follow Christian virtues. For if they were not pardoned for such
lapses, then Christ were not their advocare. 2. The Author speaks here of such
as crucify the Son of God again, and put him to an open shame, as appears in
this verse. But this can agree to none but Apostates, as we shall see in the
explication of those words. Yet there are some sins, which by way of analogy
may be reduced to Apostacy; as those that are committed presumptuously with a
high hand, after knowledge of the truth, i. casting away all fear and
reverence of God. For he that yet retains and embraces the doctrine of
Christ in his mind, cannot let himself so loose unto sin; Or if a man after
the knowledge of the truth, and reception of the Christian faith, have no
serious thoughts of repentance and amendment of life, but indulge himself to
sin as freely and as loosely as he did before; Or having cast off the yoke of
sin, do again deliver up himself to the servitude and bondage of sin; The
miserable and doleful condition of such men is described by Peter, 2 Pet. 2.
For such men seem little to regard the holiness of Christian Religion, which
they had embraced; and therefore come not much short of them, who altogether
reject it. But he that in hope of retaining the reward promised by Christ, does
always carry a mind to forsake sin, and seriously endeavors it, though for
some time he cast not away the custom of some vice, or make himself guilty of
some heinous sin through infirmity, is not therefore so wholly reprobated and
accursed, that it should prove impossible for him to be recovered from such
sins, and after recovery to be justified and saved. To renew them again unto
repentance,] To renew is a verb of active signification, and notes the act of
another upon one so fallen away. From whence it appears, in his former words
verse 1. where he said, not laying again the foundation, etc. and at the 3.
verse, and this will we do, does really speak either of himself alone, or at
least as including himself as the renewer of such. For in these words he
shows the cause of those, q.d. Take heed, that we be not forced to renew you
again to repentance; because it is impossible to renew again to repentance
those that have once been Christians, and have ceased to be so. Unto
repentance,] So as they perform the acts of repentance, by changing their
mind into a better frame, and by condemning their former resolution to resume
that Religion again, which once they have wickedly rejected, and then to
compose their life according to the rules of it. Seeing they crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh,] In these words he shows the matter
wherein this falling away consists, or rather the foul wickedness cleaving to
it, and therefore what good cause there is, why God will not have such persons
renewed to repentance. To crucify the Son of God is a damnable wickedness;
how much more is it so, to crucify him afresh, after he is now become
glorious, immortal, and Lord of all things? To themselves,] They do not
crucify him afresh really and properly, for that cannot be, but to themselves.
In respect of themselves they do it; for their falling away from the Christian
Religion, is all one as if they crucified Christ; for by their falling away,
they judge and condemn him again to have been a seducer, a teacher of false
doctrines, and so to have been deservedly crucified. And put him to an open
shame,] They cast a public ignominy and reproach upon him, as is done to those
who undergo a public and infamous punishment. This very wickedness the Author
expresses in other words, signifying the same thing, chap. 10.29. where he
says, They tread under foot the Son, and account the blood of the Covenant
an unholy thing.

7. For the earth,] He illustrates and withal confirms his former assertion
by an argument partly of similitude and partly of contrariety. For while he
shows what is done to good men that are fruitful of good works, he shows
withal what befalls men forgetful of Gods benefits conferred upon them, and
ungrateful to him. This simily he proposes in a concise and contracted form
of speech, confounding and mingling the members of it, as is frequently done
both in Sacred and profane Writers. For hereupon he seems to say of the earth,
that because it is fruitful, therefore it receives blessing from God; which
cannot be said properly but only by way of compatison. For God does not bless
the earth with fruits as a reward of her fruitfulness; for the blessing of God
upon the earth is the enriching her with fruits; as appears by the words of
Isaac to Jacob, Genesis 27.27. See the smell of my son, is as the smell of a
field, which the Lord has blessed. But because a fruitful soil is tilled the
more diligently; hence it is that it more plentifully abounds in fruits. And,
as we have noted, the Author spoke in this manner, because in the reddition
this simily it is properly true. For when a man becomes like a fruitful soil
and abounds in the fruits of good works, then he receives ablessing from God,
in reward of his godliness. Which drinks in the rain that often comes
upon it,] The rain that often moisteneth the earth, is like the gifts of God
showred down upon men, whereof he treated, ver. 4.5. which are therefore fitly
resembled to the rain often falling on the earth, because they are manifold
and plenteous, sufficient to moisten the soul of man, and make it spiritually
fertile to produce diverse fruits of good works. The rain may also resemble
the frequent and daily preaching of Gods word; which when it is preached, is
like a shower streaming down from heaven to water and fructify the soul of
man. But the former resemblance is more full and more fit to the point. And
brings forth herbs meet for them for whom it is dressed.] The various fruits
of virtue, and works acceptable to God, done according to his Laws, do
resemble those herbs which the earth brings forth, meet for them that dress
it; or rather meet for them, at whose charge and for whose sake it is dressed,
namely for the Lord of the soil, to whom the fruits and revenues of it do
belong and accrue; who in the reddition of the simily, is God. Hence the
Apostle says, We are Gods laborers; ye are Gods tillage, ye are Gods
building, 1 Cor. 3.9. Is dressed,] The earth, besides the falling of rain upon
it, must have a diligent tilling or dressing. For the rain alone is not
sufficient to make the earth fruitful in herbs meet for the Owner of it,
unless it be also dressed by plowing or digging, weeding and dunging. Hence
the vine-dresser pleaded for the barren fig tree, Lord let it alone this year
also, till I shall dig about it and dung it, Luke 13.8. So also God does not
only water our souls with his gifts, as with frequent and seasonable showers,
but also affords us a diligent and various dressing, by the labor of his
Ministers, to instruct, exhort, reprove and comfort us. Receaveth blessing from
God] Why the Author speaks thus of the earth, and what that blessing is in
reference to the earth, we have showed already in the entrance of this verse.
But in reference to men fruitful in good works, this blessing of God
signifies, both a multiplying of his spiritual gifts in this life (for to him
that has shall be given, says Christ, and every branch that bears fruit,
God prunes it, that it may bring forth more fruit, John 15.2.) and also chiefly
the gift of eternal happiness in the life to come. For then God blesses a
man when he makes things to go well with him; but better things can never go
with us, then when he makes us eternally blessed and happy.

8 But that which bears thorns and briars.] That earth which is watered with
frequent rain, and diligently dressed, does not withstanding bear thorns and
briars. Whence it appears, that here the Author has reference to men, who
have received the knowledge of divine truth, as the assertion it self
requires: for proof whereof, he alleges these words; and to such men who for
no small time have been endowed with diverse gifts, and diligently dressed of
God. These thorns and briars are all sorts of evil works, which have no use,
but for evil; for hence the Apostle calls them unfruitful works, Ephesians. 5.11.
Among which, Apostasy or defection from Christ, leads the first rank. And
from this simily it is manifest, that the judgment or punishment which expects
apostates, does also wait for them, who have affinity with apostates (whom we
mentioned before) who after knowledge of the truth, and after so many gifts and
benefits bestowed by God upon them, are yet indulgent to their sins, and
without all endeavor of a better life conformable to Gods laws. Is rejected,]
In the original, is reprobated: For no man is willing to labor in vain, and
to weary himself with fruitless works. When a piece of land has been
dressed and dunged with all labor and care, and yet in stead of fruits,
brings forth nothing but thorns and briars, and other weeds, that yield no
profit to the husbandman; the manner is for men to meddle no more with such a
piece of land, but to reject and leave it. That which the husbandman does to an
evil ground, the same does God to men that resemble evil ground; for God will
bestow no more labor and care upon them, but will reprobate, reject and leave
them. And is nigh unto cursing.] The husbandman can hardly forbear from cursing
such an evil piece of ground; for it cannot be far from a curse. So such men
as are like evil ground, are not far from the curse of God, but are like the
barren fig tree which Christ cursed, when he found no fruit upon it; Let no
fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever, Matthew. 21.19. If this curse fall upon
fruitless men, then there remains no hope of repentance and amendment. But
the Author would rather say, that such ground is nigh unto cursing, then
already cursed. For though fruitless men deserve Gods present curse, yet God
does not presently lay his curse upon them, but for a long time delays their
punishment, and expects fruits of repentance; as in the parable of the barren
fig tree, the Lord of it stayed three years without any fruit of it, and yet
forbear it a fourth year at the request of his vine-dresser; Luke 13. Whose
end is to be burned.] When a piece of ground fails of his croppes, and brings
forth thorns and briars, or light straw without corn, the manner of husband
men is to kindle fires upon it and burn it. So men barren of good works,
shall at length have a fire kindled upon them, and be burnt with everlasting
torments. Of which fire the Author speaks afterward, chap. 10.27. Now that
barren land by burning is not impaired, but amended; this in this simily is not
regared: For it is sufficient to the Authors intent, that both are burned, and
land is burned for the barrenness of it, as it were to punish the
fruitlesnesse. But herein is the difference, that the burning betters the
barren land, but it finally destroys fruitless men, and makes them most
miserable. For in every similitude, as we say, there is also some dissimilitude.

9. But beloved] In these words he seems to meet with a tacit objection, and
withal returns to what he had before intimated, that if need were, they
should not altogether despair of his laying a foundation again. The Hebrews
might think, or gather from his words of falling away, etc. that he had no
hope at all of their salvation. Therefore he shows, that he does not account
them for reprobates and accursed persons, who are for no other purpose then to
be punished with eternal fire; neither does he believe them in so miserable
and deplorable ^n estate, but that he has a better opinion of them; and
therefore wrote not the former words, as if he esteemed them such: but only to
cast some fear into their minds, and diligently to warn them of taking heed,
that they became not such. Beloved] This place was very seasonable for that
term, lest they should imagine themselves in his hatred; but thereby might
perceive that he carried a Christian love toward them, and love makes us
always imagine the best of them we love; and when we let fall a sharp word, it
is not done with intent to hurt, but to reform them. We are persuaded better
things of you] Better things then to think you reprobates and rejected of God,
so that God should for the present curse them, and for the future ordain them
to be burnt with fire unquenchable. And things that accompany salvation] Here
he opposes salvation to malediction or cursing, q.d. I am persuaded that ye
are yet in that state, that ye may be saved, if ye have a will to it. Though we
thus speake] q.d. My former speech of those which fall away, and are like
barren and fruitless ground, in a miserable and unhappy state, does nothing
let, but that I am persuaded you are in a better estate; which is not
therefore, as if that which he had affirmed were less certain and true. So
that in these words he would tacitly mollify, what he seemed before to have
said a little too severely. But that either those Hebrews were not fully
fallen into the state of such as fall away, because they yet ministered to the
Saints, were endued with excellent virtues, and had not yet cast off the
Christian Religion, but did cleave unto it. Or else that God (as appears by
his following reason) had great cause to release unto them that severity; and
therefore, seeing he is not unrighteous, but full of all equity and kindness,
it might well be hoped that he would release it. For although these Hebrews
had not yet plainly revolted from Christ; yet they were fallen into such
negligence, that in a manner they had need to be taught again the first
principles of the Christian Religion. Whence it appears, what cold and dull
Disciples of Christ they were; for which offense, if God would deal severely
with them, they were worthy to be reprobated, and finally rejected. But because
it is Gods manner to deal mercifully and kindly with men, and to moderate his
penal Laws with equity and mercy; therefore the Author hoped better things of
them.

10. For God is not unrighteous] Here he shows the reason why he is persuaded
better things of them, then that God should reprobate and reject them. And the
reason is, because God will not forget their work and labor of love. And this
he confirms by this, because God is not unjust; whence it would follow, that
God should be unjust, if he should forget them. Some man may here demand how
this can stand with what God has testified of himself, Ezeck. 33.13.? If the
righteous commit iniquity; all his righteousness shall not be remembered: but
for his iniquity that he has committed he shall dye for it. We answer, that
God in a diverse respect is said to forget a man's former virtues, and in a
diverse not to forget them. He forgets them, in respect that he justifies or
frees from punishment no man by reason of his former virtues if he recede from
them; in which case Ezekiels words are to be understood. And God does not
forget them, in regard he spares a man the longer for his former virtues, and
does not instantly reprobate or reject him, but expects and assisteth him for
repentance; especially if he be adorned with some eminent virtues, such as
charity and bounty toward the godly, as these Heb^ewes were, by the
acknowledgement of the Author. But should God be unrighteous or unjust, if he
had no consideration of this? We answer. Righteousness, as also
unrighteousness may be taken two ways. For righteousness may be taken,
either for that equity which consists in giving every man his proper right;
and contrarily unrighteousness may signify that iniquity which infringeth
another man's right. Or righteousness may denote such an equity, as inclines
rather to be neficence and kindness, and consists in giving those things,
whereto a man has properly no right; yet there may be some causes which may
sway him so to grant something, that if he grant it not, we may well say he
deals unequally and hardly. In this latter way God may seem to be said
unrighteous, if he should be so unmindfull of virtues both past and present; if
he should presently reject men, though otherwise worthy of reprobation, if God
should deal with them according to his Law; and no way expect their
repentance, but wholly exclude them from all address to his clemency and
mercy; especially if it appear not, that there are some prevalent causes which
restrain God from showing mercy; as in case he be to show herein some example
of his judgment. For God must not presently be said unrighteous, if he deal
somewhat severely with one or two; but then, when he usually does it, or does
it with whole Churches. Wherefore the Author brings not here any demonstrative
or convictive reason, or such as that God might not lawfully do otherwise
without the aspersion of unrighteousnes or iniquity properly so termed; but
only a reason very probable, drawn for the most part from the clemency and
mercy of God, which is voluntary in him. To forget your work and labor of love]
To speak properly forgetfulness is not incident unto God; but figuratively he is
then said to forget, when he has no regard of a thing, or does that which men
forgetful do. Their work as it seems, was the conflict they had in suffering
afflictions, from their first entrance into the faith of Christ, as the Author
speaks of them afterward, chap. 10 32. Unto which work or conflict he subjoyns
the labor of love; for in the place last cited, after that conflict which they
endured, the Author mentions their offices of charity, which they exercised
toward the Saints. And it is not likely that in this place, where especially
their good works were to be mentioned, the Author would pass over their
noblest act, which consisted in suffering for Christ's cause. For Paul has joined
these two together, the work of faith and labor of love, 1 Th. 1 3. where by
the work of faith, he seems to understand their many sufferings for the truths
sake. For such a work grows immediately from faith; as labor and bounty toward
the Saints springs only from love, and is therefore called the labor of love.
And that patience which proceeds from hope is called the patience of hope,
because it argues constancy in suffering afflictions under hope of reward, and
is there added to the work of faith and labor of love. Their labor of love
was another act of theirs no less acceptable to God, and no less remarkable
in it self. Labor of love, is that labor which proceeds from love; or that
labor whereto love puts us; and love makes any labor light and easy; for
nothing is more powerful, nothing more imperious then love. And this labor is
seen, in helping him whom we love, with all our strength, power and endeavor.
Which ye have showed toward his name] Their love toward God, made them so dear
to God, that it would not suffer him to reject them, and wholly exclude them
from salvation. And this love was showed toward the name of God, because they
showed it to no other end, but with respect to Gods name. How this was thus
effected he presently declares. In that ye have ministered to the Saints, and
do minister] We show love when we minister; and we show love toward the name
of God, when we minister to the Saints, merely therefore because they are
Saints, and consecrate unto God. For he that ministers to the Saints and shows
love to the Saints, therefore because they are Saints and bear the name of
God, he shows love toward the name of God; as he that ministers to a Disciple
of Christ, because he is his Disciple, he ministers to Christ himself. As
much as ye have done it (says Christ) unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me, Mat. 25.40. This Ministry consisted
herein, that in the afflictions of the Saints, the Hebrews were wanting to them
in no good office, but helped them in all things to their power; as he
expresses it afterward, chap. 10.33. that they became their companions in
their afflictions. And this is done, when we esteem the affliction of an other
to be in a manner our own; when we have a singular care of him, and perform
those offices unto him, that we would have performed to our selves, if we were
in his case. And do minister.] This virtue of ministering to the Saints was
not yet quite ceased in them, albeit it may be somewhat abated.

11. And we desire] Here he passes to the other part of the chapter; wherein
he exhorts them to a diligent and constant course of godliness; and
admonishes them never to faint in their faith and hope. And he seems here to
take away a tacit objection, that might settle in their minds. From his last
former words; they might be too much advanced in hope, to believe that now all
must needs go well with them; seeing God without being unrighteous could not
forget the things they had done and suffered, and did yet do and suffer for
Gods cause. Lest they should fall to imagine this, the Author shows them what
he would have them yet do, and what he yet finds wanting in them; if they
meant to retain and assured hope of salvation. He proceeds very prudently
with them, when a little before, he seemed to have terrified them too much,
and to debar them from all hope of salvation; he again erected them, and
showed that he did not so conceive this, but that he was persuaded better
things of them. And now again, lest they should be too confident of themselves
and be pussed up in mind, and flatter themselves with an infallible hope of
salvation; he shows them their wants, that being thus reduced to a temper, that
they might neither despair of salvation nor presume of it. That every one of
you, do show the same diligence] He calls not only upon the whole Church in
general, but upon each person singly, to continue the same diligence and
endeavor, that they had done from their first reception of the Gospel. To the
full assurance of hope] To be assured of a thing is to have a knowledge of it,
that it is thus or thus. And a full assurance is a full and certain knowledge,
or as we vulgarly speak, it is a certainty. And a full assurance of hope is a
certainty of those things that are the object or matter of our hope. And the
hope here meant, is the Christian hope, whose object is eternal salvation;
whereof our Christian hope is an expectation. And this hope is advanced and
augmented by our constancy in faith and good works; whereby it is daily more and
more assured; and the assurance of it daily made more full. They had a hope of
salvation grounded upon the promises of God, and quickened by the work they had
done and yet did for Gods cause: but a full assurance of hope they had not; for
they had not yet fulfilled the measure of Christian duties, whereof how much
was wanting, so much they wanted of full assurance, because so much their hope
was the less. Unto the end.] These words may be referred to their diligence,
that they should continue that to the end. Or they may be referred to their
assurance of hope, that it might last to the end. For a man may gain a full
assurance of eternal life, and yet lose it again.

12. That ye be not slothfull] Slothfulness is then when a man becomes more
remiss in the ways and works of godliness. Wherefore his desire is, that
they would constantly hold on to the end, the same course of godliness which
they held at the beginning. For a remissenes and slownesse arises from the
remissenes and faintness of our faith. And this is the same fault in them
which he reproved before in the 4. chap. ver. 1. and chap. 5.11. But followers
of them who through faith and patience] To their slothfulness he opposes
faith and patience, because faith and patience are as a remedy to cure their
slothfulness in the course of godliness. Faith is a trusting to Gods
promises; and patience in this place signifies perseverance and constancy in
faith; or a constant and lasting expectation of his promises, although they
seem to be deferred. This patience requires not only, that no delay of time
should weaken our faith; but also that no evils or adversities should
discourage it: for if by faith we mean to attain Gods promises, we must look
for many sufferings to intervene in the mean while. For in this sense the
Apostle uses the word patience, Jam. 5.7,8. who those men be, of whom they
should be followers in faith and patience, he shows in the following verse,
namely that they are the Patriarchs, whereof he names Abraham as the
principal. Inherit the promises.] This is the fruit of our faith and patience
to inherit the promises of our faith: And this he adds the more to excite them
to a constancy in faith and patience to the end; because thereby they shall
reap the excellent fruit thereof by inheriting the promises. He faith inherit,
in the present tense, because the present tense is commonly put indefinitly for
any time, that the minds of the readers might be drawn as it were to a thing
present.

13. For when God made promise to Abraham] In these words he gives not a
reason, why they should be followers of such as inherit the promises: but he
only gives a reason why he makes mention of such. For some man might demand
whether there were any such to be followed, and who they were? In these words
therefore for an example thereof, he produces Abraham the father of the
faithful, who was most patient and constant in his faith, and reaped the
greatest fruit of his faith. And first he shows that Abraham had the promise
of God, upon which his faith relied; then at the 15. verse, he mentions the
constancy of his faith, and also the fruit of it. Upon the mention of Gods
promise made to Abraham, he mentions also the oath of God; whereby God would
confirm his promise to him. This he therefore does, because the same promise
belongs to us also in a mystical and better fence, as a little after we shall
show; and therefore we should apply the greater and stronger faith unto it; and
therein be followers of Abraham, and other Patriarks that followed him. And we
must note the manner of speech which the Author here uses; he says not that
God promised Abraham before he swear, but when he made promise, or in promising
he swear; that the truth may appear of what we noted before, that indefinite
Participles joined with a Verb of the preter tense, must not always be
understood of the time past, but often of the present; So afterward, chap.
9.12. Christ is said to have entered into the holy place by his own blood,
having obtained eternal redemption for us; Not that Christ obtained that
redemption before he entered; but that he obtained it at his entrance: whereof
we shall speak further there. But by the way, the Author shows the cause, why
God did swear by himself; when he says, Because he could swear by no
greater, he swear by himself.] Therefore he swear not by another, because
then he, by whom he was to swear, must be greater then himself, as such a one
that must be invocated as an avenger of his violating of his oath, and whom by
this means the swearer must revere and adore. But God has none whom he should
fear as an avenger, none whom he should adore as a Deity to him; and
consequently has none greater then himself; where fore if God will swear upon
any occasion (as the occasion is expressed, verse 16.) he must needs swear by
himself. And when the Author says of God that he did swear, he respects the
words whereby God made promise to Abraham, saying, By my self have I sworn,
Genesis 22.16. But the solemn form whereby God uses to swear, is, As I live] q.
d. Let me not be accounted for the living God; for all other forms are
referred and reduced to this. As when he is said to swear by his soul, by
his life, by his holiness, by his arm (that is his strength and power) and by
his right hand, (that is his faith.)

14 Saying,] He rehearses the sum of Gods promise made to Abraham. Surely,]
In the original it is a men, or e men; which is an Adverb of sweating;
commonly put after a Verb whereby we do assevere, that a thing is true or
shall be done. For as an oath is a Confirmation of some thing asserted or
promised; so every Confirmation is an assurance to him who receives it; and
therefore the word Surely is properly an Adverb of swearing. Yet in many
passages of Scripture, the word Surely is but an Adverb of Asseveration, which
is a less and lower Confirmation then an oath. Blessing, I will bless thee,
and multiplying, I will multiply thee.] This promise in some places of
Scripture, is indeed delivered in other words: but these make up the general
sum of it. And the gemination or doubling of the words, according to the idiome
of the Hebrews does intend and magnify the thing; I will greatly bless, and
greatly multiply. This promise is described. Genesis 22.16. But we are to note,
that this promise pertaines not only to Abraham, but also to his seed; Or if
we respect the literal or carnal sense of this promise, Abraham is promised
to be greatly blessed in his seed: for the blessing consisted in this, as God
himself declares, that God would multiply Abraham's seed as the stars of
heaven, or as the sand upon the seashore; that his seed should possess the
gates of their enemies; and all nations should be blessed in him. i. He should
have a posterity most numerous and most happy: All which particulars pertain to
Abraham no otherwise then by his seed. But if we respect the spiritual sense
of that promise, the blessing of Abraham must be distinguished from his
multiplying, and the blessing will consist in his justification, as the Apostle
teaches us, Gal. 3.8,9. wherein we must include his eternal happiness: which
blessing pertaines not only to Abraham, but also to his spiritual seed, which
is Christ. i. all Christian people; whereof, see Gal. 3.16. But the multiplying
must be referred to the innumerable multitude of believers; for all that
believe in Christ, are the children and posterity of Abraham, Romans 4.16,17.
and Gal. 3.9.

15. And so after he had patiently endured, he obtained the promises.] Now he
mentions the constant faith of Abraham, and the fruit of his faith. For that
Abraham did long expect the promises of God, and expected till his death, and
died in the faith, is well known from the history of Moses, and the Author
declares it afterward, chap. 11.13. And his posterity could not be ignorant,
but that he obtained the promise in a literal sense. But the spiritual
blessing which consisted in his perfect justification and eternal salvation;
as also in the multitude of believers, how this was performed unto him, we see.
For we see him the Father of so many nations, and we see that God was not
ashamed to call himself his God, even when he was dead; whereof hereafter,
Chap. 11.16.

16. For men verily swear by the greater] Here he gives the reason, why he
said, that God did swear by himself and not by another greater then himself.
Because men when they swear, they swear by another greater, but God seeing he
has none greater then himself, swears by himself. The Author therefore
shows the difference between divine and humane oaths; for God swears otherwise
then men do. Men when they swear, swear by a greater then themselves,
because they have another greater then themselves, namely God. But God, who
has none greater then himself, when he swears, must needs swear by
himself. And an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife. Here he
shows the certain force and use of oaths, that an oath does determine and end
every controversy arising between men; when one affirms and another denies,
and the point cannot otherwise be certainly known, for then in such a case an
oath is rightly required. An oath for confirmation. An oath required in
controversy does confirm the saying of the one party, and thereby it
determines and ends the strife. For that is accounted firm and certain, which
is affirmed and proved upon oath.

17. Wherein God willing more abundantly] Wherein, i. For which cause or by
reason whereof. For because that an oath does confirm and certify a thing
uncertain and doubtful; and by the interposing thereof, the controversy is
ended; therefore and for that reason God being willing to show more abundantly
the immutabilitie of his counsel, interposed his oath. More abundantly to show
the immutability of his counsel.] The end of Gods oath was to show the
immutability of his counsel and purpose in blessing Abraham and his seed. He
says not simply, that God was willing to show his immutabilitie, but to show
it more abundantly; because God by a simple asseveration without any oath,
could have abundantly shown, with what an immutable counsel he had decreed to
bless Abraham and his seed; but that he might show it yet more abundantly,
and so fully that nothing might be wanting to the confirmation of it, therefore
over and above he added his oath. Unto the heirs of promise] The persons whom
God would show this so abundantly, were the heirs of promise, to whom the
things promised do appertain. And to whom else do they appertain, but to
Abraham Isaac, Jacob, and their seed; which being twofold, spiritual and
carnal, therefore the promises pertain to the carnal seed in a carnal
sense, and to the spiritual in a sense spiritual. To Abraham and to his seed
was promised an inheritance and blessing, and an entrance into Gods rest,
whereof he treated above, chap. 4. In a carnal sense we must here understand
the Inheritance of the land of Canaan, and an earthly happiness, which long
since was performed to the carnal seed of Abraham: but in the spiritual
sense, it is perfect justification and immortal life, which is performed to
his spiritual seed. Confirmed it by an oath.] Or rather as it is in the
margin, he interposed it by oath. God interposed and engaged his oath as an
hostage or surety, that the faith of his promise might be secured to the heirs
of the promise.

18 That by two immutable things. Gods promise and his oath are two things
immutable, whereof neither can fail, for Gods oath is immutable; and makes his
promise irrevocable, and and so both become immutable. In which it was
impossible for God to lie.] Not that it is possible for God ever to lie, though
he speak not upon oath; but that, howsoever to some man it may seem possible
in other matters, yet in his promise, and that confirmed by oath, wherein man
may possibly lie, yet it is impossible for God to lie; yea, (as I may say) it
is most far from all likelihood or show of possibility. God descends thus to
our infirmity, when according to the manner of men that would be credited, he
binds his faith unto us, not in bare words, but with the bond of an oath; that
if we believe men upon the bond of their oath, much more should we think it an
impiety not to believe the most holy God upon his. And there are some learned
men, who think that the word lie in this place, has somewhat a larger extent,
to include also that which seems to have any show of fraud or deceit; as when
he that swears conceales some condition, the nonperformance whereof may
frustrate the event of the oath, in respect of his intention or expectation to
whom the oath was made. We might have a strong consolation] Consolation or
comfort then arises to us, when we have a hope of some happiness: but a
great and strong comfort proceeds from a hope of the highest happiness, when
our hope thereof is most certain and infallible, such as is the hope of
eternal salvation, assured upon the promise and oath of God. Who have fled for
refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us.] He speaks not of every hope,
but of the hope of Christians; and of that hope which is set before us, namely
the hope of eternal life; which hope God himself has set before us by
calling us unto it, and giving the means to attain it, namely his promise and
oath, high pledges and seals for our assurance of it. And we have fled for
refuge to lay hold of it; for as if we had been driven down with some surious
storm or tempest, wherein otherwise we should have perished, we have fled to
this hope as to a sacred anchor, to lay hold upon it: To lay hold, is to graspe
a thing fast with our hand; which shows how closely and firmly we should apply
our mind to this hope, because it is the only refuge we have in all our
dangers and distresses. In all these words the heirs of the promise are
described.

19. Which we have as an anchor of the soule] He now explicates the simily
which before he had but intimated. Our hope of eternal salvation he compares
to a firm and strong anchor; and our soul supported by this hope, he likens
to a ship riding at anchor. Our hope of eternal salvation is an anchor to our
soul; because, as long as our soul is held by this anchor, it is not beaten
with any tempests of miseries, nor broken with rocks and flats, and therefore
in no danger of being wrecked. Both sure and stedfast] These be the chief
qualities of a good anchor; first that the cable be sure and break not, and
then that the anchor be steadfast and come not home. For, if the anchor fail in
either of these respects, the ship is in danger to be lost. And an anchor
indeed does many times fail, for either it comes home, or the cable breaks:
but the anchor of our hope can never fail, and therefore we may assure our
selves upon it. And which enters into that within the vaile] That an anchor
may be sure and steadfast, this also is required in it, that being fastened to
the ship, it sink down to the bottom of the sea, and that there it lie not
upon the face of the ground, but pierce deep within the ground. The like
quality is in the anchor of our hope; all the difference is, that the anchor of
the ship falls downward, but the anchor of our hope flies upward, and reaches
unto heaven it self, and pierces inwardly into the very closets of it. The
Author would rather signify heaven by the word veil, then call it by the
p^oper name, because he would prepare himself a passage, or rather a return
to his intended treatise of Christ's Priesthood, from whence hitherto he had
digressed. For, having made mention of the veil that hanged in the Sanctuary,
and parted it from the Oracle or most holy place, he presently takes occasion
to speak of the high Priest, whose p^oper office it was to enter within that
veil into the most holy place. And therefore he adds.

20. Whither the forerunner is for us entred] Thus he speaks of Christ, that
withal he may tacitly show the cause, why our hope should fly so high and
enter into heaven; namely, because our forerunner Jesus Christ is entered there,
and entered there for us. He calls Christ our forerunner, because he is the
guide of our journey thither, and goes before, leading thither the whole Army
of Saints. He as soon as he entered heaven, drew thither our hope with him.
Neither did he enter heaven as a bare guide to us in our journey thither, to
show us the way thither only by his example, that we might not stray or fail
of the right path; but he entered heaven also as a ha^binger, there to prepare a
place for us that should follow him; for so he testisies of himself, in
saying, In my Fathers house are many mansions etc. I go to prepare a place for
you. And if I go and prepare a place for you I will come ag^ine and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also, John 14.2,3. This the
Author also teaches us, by saying for us. Christ is entered heaven for us, even
for our sakes, to procure unto us eternal salvation and happiness there. Even
Jesus made a high Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. In that
Christ is made our heavenly and eternal high Priest, therefore eternal
salvation is obtained for us. For it cannot be, but so great a high Priest does
fully expiate our sins, does turn away from us all Gods wrath, and whatsoever
punishments we have deserved, does procure us eternal life, which is the
promised effect of Gods favor; especially seeing our salvation is in his hand,
and left to his dispose. For hence it comes to pass, that our hope does raise
it self up unto heaven and hides it self with Christ in the mansions of it;
and therefore does so firmly support our souls, that they cannot be wrecked
with any storms of evils. And so the Author makes entrance to his intended
treatise of Christ Priesthood, which follows in the next Chapter.

The Contents of this sixth Chapter are,
1. Doctrine. Christian Religion has her principles, verse 1. Reason. 1.
Because she has some doctrines, that are foundations, that must be laid as
grouds, eod. 2. Because she has doctrines that are Initiations, wherein they
are instructed that are initiated into Christ, by Baptism and laying on of
hands, verse 2.
2. Doctrine. The notions of a true Christian are several, verse 4. Reason. 1.
To be enlightened with saving knowledge. 2. To be sensible of peace of mind. 3.
To partake of the holy Ghost. 4. To be affected with Gods promise of salvation.
5. To be delighted with the endowments which eternal life brings with it,
verse 5.
4. Doctrine. Apostates that fall away, cannot be restored by repentance, v. 6.
Reason. 1. Because they crucify Christ again, v. 6. 2. Because such are
reprobated and rejected by God, as barren ground is by the husbandman, v. 8.
5. Comfort. The Hebrews were in the state of salvation, v. 9. Reason. 1.
Because they showed works and labors of love in ministering to the Saints.
6. Exhort. We must be diligent to assure our salvation, v. 11. Reason. 1.
Because we must be followers of those that did assure themselves, by faith and
patience, as Abraham, v. 12, 13. 2. Because God has assured it by promise to
the faithful, who are the spiritual seed of Abraham, v. 13, 14. 3. Because
God has assured it by his oath wherewith he confirmed his promise, and
consequently it is assured us by two things immutable.
7. Doctrine. When God swears, he swears by himself, v. 13. Reason 1.
Because he has none greater then himself by whom to swear, eod.
8. Doctrine. Hope is an anchor to the soul, v. 19. Reason 1. Because hope
keeps the soul sure and steadfast in all the troubles and storms of this life,
ibid. 2. Because it enters into heaven, where Christ is fore-entred for us.

CHAPTER VII.
1. FOr this Melchisedec] The particle for shows, that the Author would give a
reason, of his last words in the former Chapter, why Christ is said to be made
a Priest after the order of Melchisedec; namely, because between Melchisedec
and Christ there is a great convenience and likeness. For, Melchisedec had a
name and a kingdom most agreeable to that of Christ; he was a person of so
great dignity, that he exceeded the Patriarch Abraham himself; and lastly, in
the order of his Priesthood he was like unto Christ. King of Salem] It is
manifest that Salem was a City so called wherein Melchisedec reigned. For, we
cannot assent to them who say, that he was not truly king of Salem, but only
called so, because his name signified so, as it also signified King of
righteousness. But if this had been only an appellation of him, the Author
would not have said king of Salem, but Melechsalem; as he said not King of
Sedec, but Melchisedec. For, who in relating of a man's name, will deliver it
partly in a strange language, and partly in the proper language. Wherefore,
when Melchisedec is in Scripture called king of Salem, it is apparent; that the
name of King does note his royal office and dignity; and Salem notes the place
wherein he did reign. And many beeleeve, that this City Salem, was the same
with Jerusalem, which at the first was called only Salem, and afterward by the
adjection of the word Jeru, Jerusalem, as a man would say, the sight of peace.
Priest of the most high God] For so the Scripture calls him, Genesis 14.18. And
though the word Cohen signify also a Prince, as the Sons of David are said to
have been Cohenim, 2 Samuel 8.18. which our Translation there renders chief
rulers; yet being attributed to Melchisedec, it notes him a Priest. 1. Because
of that addition here made of the most high God; for this addition takes away
all ambiguity of the word, and declares him to be a Priest of God, and not a
Prince of God. 2. Because this is brought as a reason, why he blessed Abraham
in an especial manner, as shall be showed afterward. 3. Because Abraham paid
him tithes, which were usually paid to Priests. Whence it appears, that the
same word Cohen, which is given to Christ as he is compared with Melchisedec,
Psalm. 110.4. does not simply signify a Prince only, as the Jews contend, but
properly a Priest. For, it is manifest that those words of the Psalm have
respect to the place in Genesis, where Melchisedec is called Cohen. And it is
no strange thing, that anciently Melchisedec was both a King and a Priest; for
anciently Kings were wont to perform Sacred rites; which custom grew from
hence, that in every family the principal person or ruler of it, did officate
in holy functions. Whence it came to pass, that they who afterward became
Princes or Rulers of a whole City, became also the public Priests of that
City, and executed the sacred Ceremonies for the safety of the people: For it
made most for the honor of God, that the most honorable person should
minister unto him. Who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings]
The Author mentions not this meeting, as if in that, there were any Mystery:
but because he would show how Melchisedec blessed Abraham, and reciprocally how
Abraham gave tithes to Melchisedec. In which two points as he shows afterward,
the chief dignity of Melchisedec appeared. And he mentions this meeting
only to design the occasion, the time and circumstances of the action:
whereof the History is particularly related. Genesis 14. And blessed him] Him, i.
Abraham; for so says the Scripture, He blessed him and said, Blessed be
Abraham of the most high God, possessour of heaven and earth, Genesis 14.19. that
is, Let the most high God bless Abraham, and heap his gifts upon him in great
abundance. And lest any man should think that this was but an ordinary
blessing, such as commonly is among friends when they mutually pray and wish
all happiness one to another; therefore he prefixed these words before it,
that Melchisedec was a Priest of the most high God; thereby to make us know,
that this was a singular blessing, as proceeding from a person that was a
peculiar Minister of God. Whence it appears, that when Melchisedec is said to
be a Priest of the most high God; thereby is not showed the reason why he
brought forth bread and wine, as they would have it, who say that Melchisedec
offered bread and wine to God, and was therefore called a Priest: but in those
words is showed the reason why he blessed Abraham, and why (as it presently
follows) Abraham gave him tithes. But the error of these men, who thereby would
strengthen their own opinions may manifestly be convinced from hence, that the
Author who most diligently prosecutes the likeness between the Priesthood of
Melchisedec and Christ, makes not any the least mention of offering bread and
wine, wherein notwithstanding they think, the greatest likeness between
Christ and Melchisedec does consist, and certainly must consist, if both
offered bread and wine. Either therefore the Author omitted that which was the
maine point in so accurate a comparison of Christ with Melchisedec, or else
that Melchisedec, or Christ, or both of them offered bread and wine to God, is
but those men's dream. Melchisedec brought forth bread and wine, that he might
refresh Abraham and his company, that were weary after their victory and
journey: but he offered none to God; for this is refuted by the very word of
bringing forth, which is never used of offerings: and besides the place and
time, when this is said to have been done, refutes it also. For we use not to
meet men upon the way, there to celebrate divine services or perform holy
Ceremonies. Also Christ is never read to have offered bread and wine to God:
but only to have instituted a holy Ceremony, wherein bread is broken and
eaten, and wine is drunk out of a cup: yet not to perform any offering; but to
celebrate the memory of Christ, whose body was broken for us, and his blood
shed for us. As for the expiatory offering of Christ for our sins; that was
not performed on earth, but in heaven. Hebrews 8.4. Neither does it consist in
offering of bread and wine, but in Christ's offering of himself; as this
Author testifies in sundry places; neither was it to be iterated often, but
once only to be performed, as the Author clearly delivers it afterward in
this Chapter, verse 27. and Chap. 10 14. For that single oblation perfects all
the Saints.

2. To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all] The fifth particular that
the Author observes in Melchisedec, was, that Abraham gave him the tenth part
(as is related in his history;) whence a little after, the Author collects, how
far Melchisedec exceeded the Leviticall Priests. The gift that Abraham gave him
was a part of the spoils; for so it is expressed, at the 4. v. following, and
the portion he gave was a tenth part of them; and there were none of the
spoils excepted and reserved, for he gave him a tenth part of all. By these
words he partly explicates some things related in Scripture of Melchisedec,
and partly observes other things, whereby to make it appear, how great a
person Melchisedec was, and how properly he was a type of Christ. First, being
by interpretation king of righteousness.] First he ponders the name of
Melchisedec, and teaches that there was an omen in his name. For the Hebrew
name Melchisedec being interpreted or translated into another language, does
signify a king of righteousnesso.] There are some who tell us, that this name
signifies, my righteous king: but it is very usual with the Hebrews in Nownes
compounded to add 1 to the first Nowne, for sweet sounding and ornament, as
Adonisedec, Adonibesec, Abimelech, Achimelech, Haminadab, Abisag, etc. and the
same is done also in Melchisedec. From these words it manifestly appears, that
this Epistle was not written in Hebrew but in Greek; for either these must be
the words of a Greek interpreter, or of the Hebrew Author; of a Greek
interpreter they cannot be; seeing they are a part of the Text it self, and of
the reasoning therein. The words of an Hebrew Author how can they be? For
what could be more vain; then first to interpret the name Melchisedec and
Salem to the Hebrews, seeing none of the Hebrews could be ignorant of the
sense of these names? and then to interpret Melchisedec Melechsedec, and
Melechsalem Melechsalem. For so these names must needs be interpreted, if this
Epistle were written in Hebrew; unless an Hebrew Author, writing Hebrew names
to the Hebrews, should interpret them by another language then the Hebrew. It
is therefore apparent that the Writer of this Epistle was a Greek, who
interprets the Hebrew name Melchisedec and Salem; and from these very
appellations does tacitly draw an argument, to show that Melchisedec is a most
elegant type of Christ, who is a King, of all others the most righteous and
most peaceable. Whence Esaias 9.6. he is called the Prince of peace, because he
especially hates and abhors wars, neither cares he to be famous for
wars, as the Kings of this world do, but only for peace; and withal is most
happy in himself, and the author of true happiness to his people. For, as it
is well known, the word peace among the Hebrews signifies also all happiness.

3. Without father, without mother] He has showed that Melchisedeck was a
Priest of the most High God; now he further declares what manner of Priest he
was, and in that respect how far he was unlike to the Leviticall Priests; and
contrarily how like unto Christ. In the Leviticall Priest, especially in the
high Priest, the chiefest regard of all was, to know of what father, what
mother, and of what family he came. But in the Priest Melchisedeck, it is
apparent, there was no regard at all had of this; seeing the Scripture which
testifies of him that he was a Priest, has declared neither his father, nor
mother, nor family. Melchisedeck therefore is said to be without father and
mother, not that he had no father or mother; but because neither his father
nor mother are declared or mentioned in the annalls of the Scripture. For even
among profane Writers they whose pedigree and parentage was unknown, were
said to be of no family, and to have neither father nor mother. Theodoret
speaks very well upon these words of the Author. "The holy Scripture (says
he) relates the Genealogy of Abraham and many others, as well who went before
him as followed after: she mentions his father, grandfather and great
grandfather, and all his direct ancestors; she adds also that when he was so
many years old he begat a son, and when so many that he dyed. But she shows
not the father nor parentage of Melchisedeck, nor how long he lived, nor when
he dyed." Besides, in ordaining the Leviticall Priesthood it must be known of
what family he was; for of necessity he must be of the family of Aaron, as
Aaron himself was of the tribe of Levi; unto which tribe Jacob the Patriarch
had Prophetically designed the Priesthood, as he had the Kingdom to the tribe
of Judah. Regard also was had of his mother; for she must be an Israelite one
of the twelve tribes; otherwise the son borne of her, being a stranger though
married to the high Priest, was illegitimate for the Priesthood; and also the
high Priest must necessarily be borne of a woman that was married to his father
when she was a virgin, or was the widow of some other Priest; and one that was
not of a plebeian and vulgar family; whereof see Lev. 21.13. Without descent,
or pedigree] Whose genealogy or pedigree is not declared in Scripture. For a
pedigree is a declaration of a man's parentage or descent: He is not without
descent or parentage that has no parentage at all; but because his parentage
is not mentioned or extant, and therefore not known. And by this word it may
appear in what sense the Author said that Melchisedek was without father, and
without mother; namely, because as there is no mention in Scripture of his
pedigree and ancestors, no neither of his parents; whereof the former is
consequent to the latter. For he whose parents are unknown, how should his
pedigree and descent be known? Having neither beginning of days nor end of
life] Days may here be taken, not for the time of his life, but for the time
of his Priesthood when that began or ended; for so the Scripture mentions the
days of Herod and of John Baptist. And in this sense Melchisedeck is said to
have neither beginning of days, nor end of life, because the Scripture
declares not, at what time his Priesthood began, nor when it ended; to make it
hereby appear, that in his Priesthood there was no respect had either of his
predecessor or successor. For therefore in every Priest the beginning and
ending of his Priesthood is noted, that it might thence appear what
predecessor and what successor each Priest had. And further the end of life is
fitly opposed to the beginning of his Priesthood; because the Priesthood
expired not but with his life. But if by Days we understand the time of his
life, then we must acknowledge, that the beginning of his life is mentioned
only for opposition and amplifications sake: For it was enough for the Author
to show that Melchisedeck had no known successor in his Priesthood; that in
this respect he might be a type of Christ, which he expresses by saying, he
had no end of life. But being willing to say yet more for illustrations sake,
he affirms, that as he had no end of life, so he had no beginning of it; and
therefore no marvel if the end of his life were not mentioned, when the
beginning of it was concealed. But made like unto the Son of God, abides a
Priest continually] But compared or likened unto Christ, abides a Priest
perpetually, and without any successor. He does in these words further yet
illustrate the point from the contrary. Melchisedec has no end of life, but
remains a Priest perpetually or for ever. And when he would signify where
the Scripture testifies this, he says, made like unto the Son of God; q.d.
There the Scripture testifies it, where she compares and likens him to Christ.
For the Scripture no where expressly says of Melchisedec alone by himself,
that he abides a Priest for ever, but only in comparing him with Christ, in the
very words spoken of Christ, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec. In which words the Scripture does withal insinuate tacitly and by
force of the comparison, that Melchisedec was a Priest for ever, and takes it
as it were for granted. For unless she first suppose the perpetuity of
Melchisedecs Priesthood, how could she in this respect make Christ like unto
Melchisedec? The Author says, that Melchisedec was like unto Christ, when it
seems he should rather have said, that Christ was like to Melchisedec. Yet the
Author not only might speak so, but in a manner must. He might say so, because
things alike are mutually so, and each is like the other. And he must, because
when the Author would speak roundly, and refer the words of the Psalm, Thou
art a Priest for ever, directly to Melchisedec himself; Melchisedec must be
named in the first place, and not the Son of God; and therefore he is rightly
inferred to be like the Son of God, and not the Son of God like him. For
otherwise either the words of the Psalm must seem to be referred to the Son
of God, as the Psalm it self referres them, and not directly spoken of
Melchisedec by the Author; or certainly the perpetuity of Melchisedec must be
asserted by this testimony of Scripture some other way yet not so roundly and
briefly. And besides, the Author would tacitly show by this manner of speech,
that the perpetuity of Melchisedec, was but typical and umbratilous compared
to the eternity of Christ; and therefore in this respect, Melchisedec was
rather to be likened to Christ, then Christ to Melchisedec. Abides a Priest
continually] That abides continually, which has no intermission or cessation
from being; which being applied to time signifies perpetuity. How Melchisedec
is a Priest abiding perpetually and for ever, the Priesthood of his antitype
who is Christ, may teach us. Christ is therefore a Priest abiding for ever,
because his Priesthood lasts a long time, and so long as there is any use of
a Priesthood, or so long as the state of things shall so continue that there is
no further need of any Priesthood: And then there shall be no further need of
any, when the people of God are translated into heaven, and shall need no
further expiation of their sins. So also Melchisedec was a perpetual Priest,
because his Priesthood lasted a very long time, and together with it the
knowledge and worship of the true God among men was extinguished; so that there
was no further place or use of that Priesthood that was dedicate to the true
God. For a thing is said to abide for ever, which both lasts a long time, and
also so long as the nature of the thing will bear. So David says, that he
will praise God for ever; so the Law is said eternal; and the Gospel in this
sense is called eternal; and many other things in like manner. This way
Melchisedec is called an eternal Priest, though in reference to Christ his
Priesthood compared to the Priesthood of Christ has but an umbratilous
eternity, as the shadow to the body. For if the likeness were in every
respect, then there would not be a figure and a truth, but either both figures
or both truths. Therefore the likeness between Melchisedec and Christ in this
place, consists in three things. 1. As in the Priesthood of Melchisedec there
was no respect had of his parentage or family; for he is said to be without
father, mother and descent: so neither in the Priesthood of Christ, who
according to the flesh descended from that Tribe, who had no title to the
Priesthood. 2. That both were perpetual Priests for ever; Melchisedec in an
umbratilous and figurative way, but Christ solidly and really. 3. As
Melchisedec in his Priesthood had no predecessor nor successor; so neither had
Christ in his.

4. Now consider how great this man was] Here begins another part of the
Chapter, wherein the Author shows, how far Melchisedec surpasses in dignity
the Leviticall Priests. That from thence it might appear, how far more
worthy that Priest is, who is after the order of Melchisedec, and of whom
Melchisedec was but a shadow; for such a Priest must needs far surpass any
Priest that is after the order of Aaron. For, if the shadow were so excellent,
what shall we attribute to the body it self? Now that Melchisedec was a more
worthy person then the Leviticall Priests, he proves by three reasons. 1.
Because Abraham gave him tithes. 2. Because he blessed Abraham. 3. Because
hereupon the Scripture testifies, that he lives for ever. He calls therefore
upon the Hebrews to consider this man, that he might stir them up to ponder
and weigh the dignity of Melchisedec, q.d. I have briefly declared unto you
from Scripture, how far she speaks or is silent concerning Melchisedec. Now
consider and ponder the particulars well, that thence ye may know how far he
excells the Leviticall Priests. Unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the
tenth of the spoiles] The dignity of Melchisedec above the Leviticall Priests,
appears first from this, that even Abraham gave him tithes. The particle even
may be referred to Abraham; and then it seems added to exaggerate and amplify
the dignity of Melchisedec from the person of Abraham; that not some vulgar
person, but even Abraham himself gave him tithes. And to this opinion it
elegantly agrees, that to the name of Abraham is added the title of Patriarch,
and that with the article the] the Patriarch Abraham: For when we would
amplify the honor of a person we put an addition of title to his name. Or as
the order of the words require, the particle even may be referred to the
tithes; and then it aggerates and amplifies the dignity of Melchisedec from the
gift of Abraham, that Abraham gave him tithes, which is no vulgar present, but
a solemn and sacred portion. So that the great dignity of Melchisedec is
illustrated and magnified from two particulars, as well from the person of
Abraham, who was the Patriarch, as from the gift of Abraham, which was a tenth
of the spoils. The article the prefixed before Patriarch, does not evince that
Abraham only was a Patriarch, and no other men so: but it notes that he was
some principal and renowned Patriarch, as indeed he was; for he was the father
and Prince of the Patriarcks, and the first founder of the Jewish Nation, for
whose sake the Jews became a Nation, because they were the seed which God
promised him to be multiplied unto him. Now from all this, that so great a
person as Abraham, the father and founder of the Jewish Nation should give a
tithe to Melchisedec; from all this, I say, appears the great dignity of
Melchisedec. For he that receives tithes is greater then he that gives them:
and therefore Melchisedec must needs be greater then Abraham, who yet was the
greatest of all the Jewish Nation; and consequently Melchisedec must needs be
greater also, then all the Jewish Nation.

5. And verily they that are the sons of Levi] He amplifies and illustrates his
former argument; and compares Melchisedec with the Leviticall Priests in the
point of taking tithes. In which respect, he acknowledges a great dignity and
prerogative in the Levites, in that all the rest of the tribes though
descendants with them from the same Abraham, yet were bound to pay them tithes.
And so the dignity of Melchisedec far exceeded theirs. Who receive the office
of the Priesthood] He says not, that the sons of Levi receive the office of
Priesthood; but they of them who receive it. For all the Levites had not right
to the Priesthood, but only some of them, namely the posterity of Aaron, as ye
may see at large, Number. 3. and Number. 18. The rest of the Levites were joined to
the Priests, to minister unto them in the holy things, to keep the Temple and
the holy vessels, to be^r the A^k when need required (which notwithstanding
they might neither touch nor look upon, till it were wrapped up) to slay the
ordinary sacrifices brought by single persons, and to perform such other
services. Have a commandment to take tithes of the people] This right and
privilege was granted them from God, to claim tithes of the people: For to
speak properly, the commandment to take tithes was not laid upon the Priests,
but the people were bound by Gods commandment to give tithes; and thereupon
the Priests had a right to require and exact them. According to the Law] The
manner how tithes should be paid, the matter from what things, the persons to
whom, and the times when, are all determined by Gods Law. For first the people
must give tithes to the Levites, Numb. 18 21. Then the Levites must give tithes
of their tithes to the Priests. Numb. 18.28. And herein the dignity of the
Priests appears far the greatest, because not only the rest of the Tribes,
but also the Levites themselves who were of the same Tribe, gave tithes unto
the Priests. That is their brethren though they came out of the loins of
Abraham.] Certainly a great dignity. Which would not have been so great, if
some other men had been bound to pay them tithes; but that their own
brethren, who came as well as they from the loins of the same Abraham, should
be bound to it by the Law of God; this was a great argument of the dignity and
eminency that rested in the Priests.

6. But he whose descent is not counted from them, received tithes of Abraham]
He shows how much in this respect Melchisedec is greater then the Leviticall
Priests, whom first he described in such words, as most elegantly agree to
Christ his antitype; that he might tacitly show, that it nothing hindered
Christ from the dignity of his high Priesthood, that he came not from the Tribe
of Levi. For it is as much as if he had said, The Leviticall Priests have this
right and dignity, that they take tithes of their brethren though they descend
from the same Abraham: But how much greater is it, that he, who as he comes not
from the same stock, so neither does he count his kindred from them, took
tithes of Abraham himself? For it is much more, and more worthy to have
Abraham himself tributary to him, then those who come from the loins of
Abraham. Wherefore the Leviticall Priests have no cause to boast, as if to
their line alone this right and privilege were granted of taking tithes from
the people; seeing he who neither belongs to their line, nor accounts himself
of it, did (as the Author speaks) decimate Abraham himself. And blessed him
that had the promises] We have said before, that the Author preferres
Melchisedec before the Leviticall Priests for three reasons; whereof the first
is bipartite, whose former part the Author has hitherto produced; and
referring the latter part to the end of the proof, he comes here to the second
full reason, taken from the act of Melchisedec in blessing Abraham. Yet that
the great dignity of Melchisedec might the more evidently appear in this act
of blessing, he does not name Abraham, but describes him under this notion, him
that had the promises, q.d. Melchisedec blessed him, whom God was to bless,
and had bound himself by promise to bless him, and make him a blessing. For
God had already said unto him, I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will
bless thee, and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing. And I will
bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee; and in thee
shall all families of the earth be blessed, Genesis 12.2,3. To bless this man
that had such promises of blessing, and those so great, that there were none
greater known upon earth; and to bless him also, not by way of charity or
good will, by praying for all happiness upon him; but in a singular way
according to his office, as he was the Minister and Priest of God; to whose
prayer and wish God would in a manner obliege himself, which certainly is an
evidence of high preeminence and dignity. And from thence he means to conclude
that Melchisedec was greater then Abraham.

7. And without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the greater. He had
before expressed the Assumption, that Melchisedec blessed Abraham; and now he
adds the Proposition, leaving every man to frame the conclusion, that
Melchisedec is greater then Abraham. And if he be so much greater then
Abraham, much more is he greater then the Leviticall priests. Without all
controversie] These words show that his assertion is so evident and manifest;
that no man can well deny it, and that with good cause. For every kind of
apprecation or blessing, is not here to be understood; for even the least and
meanest person may bless and pray for the best and greatest, and many times
does so: but as we have often noted, a singular and sacerdotall blessing. For
he that gives another a blessing, as the Priest and especial Minister of God,
to whom God has committed the right and office of it, in such manner, that God
will second the blessing of the Priest with his, and in a manner be obliged to
perform it: certainly that person that thus gives the blessing, is greater and
worthier then he that receives it. He is greater and worthier, if not in estate
and civil power, as if he bless a King, when he himself is none, (which
notwithstanding had not place in Melchisedec) yet certainly in regard of
sacred function: For he is nearer in degree to God then the other, as a mean
person between God that blesses, and the party blessed; to whom he gives a
kind of right to obtain from God the things he prays for. Therefore we
read, Numb. 6.27. That God, after he had commanded that Aaron and his sons
should bless the people of Israel, and had prescribed also the form of the
blessing, does profess that he will second the blessing, and confirm it upon
the people. They shall (faith God) put my Name upon the children of Israel, and
I will bless them. Hence the son of Syrach, when he supplicated God for the
people, and endeavored to move him by his prayers, he forgets not this
blessing of Aaron, saying, O Lord, hear the prayer of thy servants, according
to the blessing of Aaron over thy people.] Ecclus. 36.17.

8. And here men that die receive tithes] Now follows the third reason,
whereby he proves that Melchisedec is greater then the Leviticall Priests;
namely, Because the Leviticall Priests receive tithes; yet one of them dies
after another, and they succeed one another in the Priesthood: but Melchisedec
has a testimony of Scripture for him that he lives. Here, i. here under the
law and among us. But there he of whom it is witnessed, that he lives.] There
where we read that Abraham gave him tithes, he then received them, whom the
Scripture witnesses that he lives. But we must note that the Author opposes
not Melchisedec to mortal men, but to dying men only; neither does he say
that he is immortal, but only that he lives. For life is not opposed to
mortality, but properly to death. And there the Scripture says, That
Melchisedec does live, where she affirms him to be a Priest for ever. And
she affirms it in her comparison of him with Christ, when she says, Thou art
a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec, Psalm. 110.4. as we
explicated it before in this Chapter, verse. 3. Where we showed that Melchisedec
was called a Priest for ever, because he exercised his Priesthood a long time,
even for the full term of his natural life; and that he lived so long a
Priest, as there was any knowledge of the true God among the men of his time,
and any place for the Priesthood; so that Melchisedec in his Priesthood,
resembled for his continuance all the Leviticall Priests, who succeeded one
after another; which eternity of his was but umbratilous and figurative (as we
said) of Christ's eternity. And therefore the life of Melchisedec was nothing
but a shadow of that life which is in Christ. And if we respect the scope of
the Author, it makes not to the matter, that Melchisedec did at last yield to
the law of nature and die; for he speaks not of Melchisedec for himself, but
for Christ, who truly lives for ever. It suffices in Melchisedec, that the
eternal life of Christ was in some manner shadowed, and signified in the
Scripture. And this is the reason why the Author opposed Melchisedec to dying
men, and said he lives for ever. For when we speak of the type, as of the
antitype, we many times so speak of it, as of the antitype it self: although
the words must be applied figuratively to the type, and properly to the
antitype.

9. And as I may so say, Levi also who receives tithes, paid tithes (or was
decimated) in Abraham. Here at last comes in, the other of the first reason,
which we said was bipartite; and wherewith the Author now confirms the dignity
of Melchisedec; namely, that when Melchisedec took tithes of Abraham, he
tithed also Levi, and all the Priests sprung from his loins, who were
themselves to receive tithes. To show the great dignity of Melchisedec, it was
not enough for the Author to say, that he tithed Abraham himself, but Levi
also, who took tithes, was by him tithed in Abraham; For it is as much as if
he had taken tithes of Levi, when he took them of him, in whose loins Levi
was yet latent. Therefore in a figurative way of speech the Author says, that
Levi was tithed through Abraham. For because he could not say properly, that
Levi gave tithes to Melchisedec through Abraham, therefore lest his words
should seem harsh, he mollifies them thus, (as I may so say) whereby he
plainly declares, that what he spoke here of Levi, must not be taken
literally and properly, but in a certain sense and form of speech. Levi also
who receives tithes] not in his own person, but in his posterity; so that it
is not strange, that he is said to have given tithes in his father, who is
also said to have taken them in his children. But now let us see, how the
Author proves this.

10. For he was yet in the loins of his father when Melchisedec met him] Here
he proves that Levi gave tithes to Melchisedec through Abraham, thus. If at
that time Levi had been a person severed from Abraham and had enjoyed his
estate apart to himself, this fact of Abraham in giving tithes to Melchisedec
had nothing concerned him. But because Levi was then so united and joined with
Abraham, that he yet lay couched in Abraham's loins; therefore he also is justly
accounted to have given tithes to Melchisedec in or through Abraham. Which
sentence notwithstanding must not be transferred to all the actions of a
father; but only to those which properly consist either in the increase or
decrease of his estate, which uses to descend to his children by right of
inheritance; and the payment of tithes is such an action, for it so much
decreaseth the fathers estate. For they are paid out of the fathers goods,
which thus far are already the childrens, in that the right of inheritance
thereto belongs to them; especially if it be certain that the father has or
may have children to succeed him in his estate, as Abraham had, to whom God had
for certain promised a posterity. For as the heir after his fathers death
does in a manner represent the person of his father, by his succeeding to him
and possessing his estate: so likewise the father before his children be
severed from him and have a right to dispose of his goods as their own, does in
a manner also represent the person of his heir and of all the rest of his
children: and what he then orders or does in his goods, the same in a manner
his heirs are accounted to do. I say in a manner, because properly this
cannot be said, neither does the Author himself say properly, that it was
done, but acknowledges an impropriety in his words as we noted before. Hence
may easily be understood that which together with the Author we affirm; that
such acts of the parents must be extended only to those of their successors or
posterity, to whom the inheritance or some notable portion of their goods shall
descend, either for certainty as here to Abraham's posterity, or at least in all
probability. For otherwise that force of inheritance whereof we speak, will
expire; and what any man orders concerning his estate cannot be attributed to
his children and posterity.

11. If therefore perfection] After that by comparing Melchisedec with the
Leviticall Priests, he had showed that Melchisedec was a Priest, and a Priest
much differing from the Leviticall, as a person far greater and worthier then
they. Now he proceeds to the third part of the Chapter. And in regard that
after those Leviticall Priests, there must be another Priest ordained according
to the order of Melchisedec and not according to the order of Aaron; therefore
he thence argues and proves the imperfection of the Leviticall Priesthood, and
also of the Law it self, upon which that Priesthood was ordained; and upon the
imperfection of that Priesthood and Law, he proves the abrogation of both. If
perfection were by the Leviticall Priesthood] By perfection here he understands
nothing else, but a true and perfect expiation of sin, whereby the guilt not
of some sins only but of all, even of the most grievous offenses and crimes
is taken away; whereby all punishments of sin not only temporal concerning
this life, but the eternal punishment of death it self is remitted and
forgiven; whereby a right to eternal life is granted unto men: and lastly,
whereby not only all guilt of all sins, but all sins themselves are taken
away from men. For in these things consists the true perfection of men before
God. If therefore this perfection could have been brought to men by the
Leviticall Priesthood, certainly there had been no need nor use of a new
Priesthood after the order of Melchisedec; for every Priesthood is ordained for
the expiation of sins. But if a perfect expiation of sins could have been
effected by the Priesthood after the order of Aaron, what need a new Priest be
super induced after the order of Melchisedec, to perform those actions which
might have been done by the former? Wherefore seeing God would ordain a new
Priest, and also now has ordained him; hence it appears, that by the
Leviticall Priesthood, no man could obtain perfection or perfect expiation,
and certainly no man did obtain it. For by that Priesthood some sins only
were expiated; namely, as we showed before, ignorances and infirmities: but
great offenses as crimes and villainies were punished with death. Neither had
that expiation any force to take away eternal death, but only to release some
temporal punishments proper to this life. Neither in those sacrifices was
there any power to withdraw men from sin it self; all which particulars the
Author prosecutes in the passages following. Yet the Author uses not the word
perfection in one sense only, for there are diverse perfections of a thing; and
therefore we must still gather from the matter handled what perfection he
means. Here because he speaks of perfection flowing from the Priesthood,
therefore no other can be understood but that which is seen in a perfect
expiation of sin; namely, that a man be wholly spotless and blameless,
subject neither to pain nor loss by any sentence of condemnation in the sight
of God. In which sense he uses the same word, chap. 10. 14. For under it the
people received the Law] For what purpose the Author inserted these words into
his former argument, we shall see afterward; and for the present shall speak
of their explication. Under it, i. under the Priesthood, as if the people had
received the Law under the Priesthood; and so most Interpreters affirm. But
this sense is contrary to the words in the original, which are (...), and do
not signify under it, but upon it; and contrary to the truth of the thing; for
the Law was not given under the Priesthood as if the Priesthood had been extant
before the Law given; but rather contrarily a great and principal part of the
Law was already given before the Priesthood was ordained; so that it might be
more truly said, the Priesthood was given under or after the Law, then the Law
under or after the Priesthood. And lastly, this sense is contrary to the mind
of the Author, and makes nothing to the purpose: For what makes it to the
purpose in hand, that the Law was given in the time of the Priesthood? For
would it thence follow, either that perfection must be by that Priesthood; or
if perfection were by it, that there were no need of another Priesthood? or
lastly, if the Priesthood were abrogated, that then the Law were abrogate?
Wherefore as the Greek words sound, it is said in this place, that the people
received the Law not under the Priesthood, but upon the Priesthood. And to
receive the Law upon the Priesthood, is nothing else but of the Priesthood,
concerning or touching it. Which sense some Interpreters do acknowledge, as
Junius and Tremellius and Piscator. For the Greek particle (...) answers the
Hebrew Hal; which often notes the object or matter of a thing. Now therefore
these words may seem to cohere with the mind of the Author three ways. 1. If
we say, that in them he shows the cause, why he named the Leviticall priesthood
and no other; q.d. therefore I name the Leviticall priesthood, because the
people received the Law of it. 2. That in them he shows cause, why it might
seem, that perfection came by that Priesthood; namely, because the people
received the Law of it. 3. That those words contain a confirmation or peculiar
reason, why if perfection came not by the Leviticall priesthood, there must not
be another Priest ordained diverse from the Leviticall. For though this would
be sufficient of it self to exclude another Priest; yet it follows so much the
more, if not only perfection be by the Leviticall Priesthood, but also that
Priesthood was established by the Law: and of this reason we most approve.
Therefore it is as much as if the Author had said, If perfection be by the
Leviticall Priesthood, especially seeing concerning it, Laws were given to the
people; what need is there, for the ordination of another Priest? for many
times in Scripture a reason of a sentence is inserted, before the sentence be
fully uttered in all the parts of it. Whereof among other places we have an
example, 1 Pet. 4.1.2. in these words, For he that has suffered in the flesh
has ceased from sin, which must be read as in a parenthesis. For they contain
the cause, why Christians must suffer in the flesh with Christ; i. crucify the
flesh, because he that has suffered in the flesh; i. whose body is put to
death, he has ceased from sin. And the reason is general, agreeing to all
the dead. Therefore the words which follow from the beginning of the second
verse, That he no longer should live, etc must not be joined with the words
next preceding, Ceased from sin; but (they being included in a parenthesis as
a general reason) they must be referred to the former words, arm your selves,
as to their final cause. The mind of the Author in this place will be more
plain, if we transfer these words, to the end of the verse, thus. Therefore if
perfection be by the Leviticall Priesthood; what further need was there that
another Priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called
after the order of Aaron; especially seeing of that Priesthood the Law was
given to the people? For thence it presently follows, that together with this
Priesthood the Law must be abrogated, when a Priest ordained according to the
order of Melchisedec; which should not be abrogated unless there were some
default in it. That another Priest should rise] From his former grounds he
inferres, that a Priest after the order of Melchisedec, must be another and a
different Priest from those Priests that are after the order of Aaron. For
Melchisedec was both a King and a Priest; the Levites were only Priests; he
had no Priestly pedigree, these must have so; he had neither predecessor nor
successor: these succeed one another; he is an eternal Priest; these dye:
lastly, he is greater and worthier then Abraham himself, and therefore much
more so then the Leviticall Priests. After the order of Melchisedec] The order
of Melchisedec is a little otherwise taken then the order of Aaron: for by that
is signified a likeness only with the Priest Melchisedec, as the Author
speaks afterward, ver. 15. but in this is contained not only a likeness with
Aaron, but also a natural succession into his place and Priesthood.

12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also
of the Law] He brings a reason, (which notwithstanding was before tacitly
showed in the parenthesis which we explicated) why a Priest must be ordained
according to Aaron, and no other rise according to the order of Melchisedec, if
by the Aaronicall Priesthood men's sins could have been expiated perfectly. The
reason is, because the Priesthood could not be abrogated or changed, unless
the Law whereby it was established were abrogated and changed also Wherefore
either to preserve the authority of the Law it self, if not for the dignity of
the Leviticall Priesthood, a Priest must have been ordained after the order of
Aaron, if perfection came by that Priesthood. But because this was not done,
therefore it is manifest that perfection could not be given by that Priesthood;
and consequently for the imperfection of it, there was good cause it should
expire. He says the Priesthood was changed, not only for that it was
translated to another Tribe (diverse from that of Levi) wherein a Priest was
ordained after the order of Melchisedec: but also in that the Priesthood it
self was altered and changed into another kind different from the former.
Although to the end the Author might use this word in this latter sense for
altered, therefore from the former sense of changing the Tribe he might take
occasion consequently to use it of the Law, thereby to signify the abrogation
of the Law. For hence afterward at the eighteenth verse, when he speaks of the
Law alone, instead of the word changed, he puts disanulling, or abrogating. And
the abrogation of the Law, though in this place it properly be referred to that
part of the Law, whereby the Aaronicall Priesthood was established, yet we must
know, that upon the abrogation of that Sacerdotall Law, all the force and
authority of the Law of Moses was disanulled also, especially concerning
external rites and ceremonies. For together with the Priesthood, not some one
Law fell alone, but many Laws and diverse rites fell with it; neither is there
any cause to think, but that upon the expiring of so many Laws, all the rest
of the same kind and nature died also. And besides, upon the abrogation of one
Commandment of Moses Law, is not that bond of the Law dissolved, which lays a
curse upon him, that continues not in all things that are written in the book
of the Law: but upon the dissolution of this bond, the whole frame of the Law
must needs fall asunder. For from that bond it appears that it was the mind
of the Lawmakers, that all the precepts or commandments of that Law should
either stand together, or by the fall of one, the authority of the whole Law
should fail.

13. For he of whom these things are spoken] Here the Author proves, that the
Priesthood being changed, or another Priest after the order of Melchisedec
being ordained, the Law thereupon must needs be changed or abrogated. The
reason is, because the person designed by these words Thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedec] descended not from Levi, but from another
Tribe; out of which no person descending might lawfully approach to the Altar,
to offer sacrifice as a Priest. But the Law which ordained the Priesthood of
Aaron, did expressly provide, that no man not of the Tribe of Levi, and no man
of that Tribe not of the family of Aaron, should exercise the Priesthood.
Whence it is manifest, that a Priest after the order of Melchisedec could not
be ordained, unless the Law were violated. Pertaining to another Tribe, of
which no man gave attendance at the Altar] Attendance at the Altar, is the
performance of the Ceremonies, by officiating at the Sacrifices, and ordering
those things that appertained to the Altar and to such other services. And
attendance here must not be taken for the act of doing it, but for the right to
do it: for it is well known, that some Kings did dare de facto to approach unto
the Altar and burn Incense there, but by usurpation, and without any right to
do it.

14. For it is evident our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which Tribe Moses spoke
nothing concerning Priesthood] Here he confirms his former reason, that Christ
our Lord of whom these words were spoken, that he was a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedec, pertained to a Tribe, of which no man gave attendance
at the Altar, or performed the office of Priesthood. The reason is, because it
is evident that he sprang out of Judah, of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing
concerning the Priesthood; and therefore by the Law had no right to the
Priesthood; for this follows upon the former. And the Author takes it for
granted, that he of whom the words of the Psalm are spoken, is our Lord Christ
the anointed of God. That Christ sprang out of the Tribe of Judah, he says it
is evident, i. generally known to all men; for no man was ignorant that Christ
came from the line of David. And he had good reason to take this for granted,
because these words of the Psalm, Thou art a Priest for ever] are spoken of
him, whom David in the beginning of that Psalm calls his Lord, speaking of
him in the spirit: but he that is the Lord of David, must needs be our Lord
also; who seeing he is mentioned of the Lord Jehovah, or the most high and
only God, as a distinct person to whom the words were spoken, from him that
spoke them, Sit thou at my right hand, and Thou art a Priest for ever,
certainly he can be no other then Christ our Lord the anointed of God. For
that this was acknowledged of the Masters and Doctors among the Jews, it is
manifest from hence, that Christ disputing with the Pharisees, supposes it, as
a thing no way doubtful but confessed of all, when he demanded of them, How
David could call Christ his Lord, seeing as they had answered him, he was his
son. For unless they had all acknowledged it, the answer had been easy to
say, that Christ was neither that Lord, nor so called of David. The Author also
supposes it for granted, that our Lord Christ sprang from the Tribe of Judah;
because he wrote to them who were already persuaded that Jesus of Nazareth was
Christ. And Christ, though he was conceived by the holy Ghost, without the act
of any man, yet is said to spring from Abraham, from Judah, and from David;
because he was borne of Mary the wife of Joseph, who was of the posterity of
David, of Judah, and of Abraham. For any son, that is borne of a man's wife,
which is accounted her husbands body, though it be not begotten by the husband,
so it be not begotten by any other man, is his son who is husband to the woman.
For God has free liberty to give a man a son any way, whether naturally by the
husband, or supernaturally without the husband. For by the Law of God it was
ordained of old, that when the husband died without issue, his brother if he
have any, should marry the widow, and as soon as he had any child by her, it
should be called the seed of her husband that was deceased. With how much more
reason may Christ justly be called the son of Joseph, and therefore of David,
Judah, or Abraham? because, though he were not begotten by Joseph himself; yet
he was begotten in his life time, not by the act of any other man supplying the
part of Joseph, but by the work and power of the holy Ghost; and by him
begotten upon Mary the espoused wife of Joseph. The points by some disputed on
this place; whether Christ by his mothers side were not of the Tribe of Levi?
are doubtful in themselves, and impertinent to the matter. For among the Jews,
no man was referred to any Tribe, but by his father. Hence in all the
genealogies or pedigrees mentioned in Scripture, men only are named: but the
genealogies of women are never described, or no otherwise but by the men, as
the genealogy of Judith, chap. 8. But if in any genealogy a woman be
mentioned, her parents are not inserted, as Matthew. 1. Boos begat Obed of Ruth;
Judas begat Pharez of Thamar. David begat Solomon, of her that had been the
wife of Vrias. The reason is, because it mattered not for the tribe or pedigree
of what woman the child were borne, whether of one or other. For the father
always gave the tribe and family to the child. Wherefore the genealogy of
Christ, whether by Matthew, or Luke, is not framed from the ancestors of Mary
but of Joseph.

15. And it is yet more evident, for that after the similitude of Melchisedec,
there arises another Priest.] By another argument taken from the nature of the
Priesthood, he shows, that by the rising of another Priest after the order of
Melchisedec, the Law is abrogated. q. d. If it be evident, as it is, that upon
the translation of the Priesthood to another tribe or family, contrary to the
precept of the Law, the Law it self is thereby abrogated: much more is the
abrogation of it evident, upon the rising of another Priest after the order of
Melchisedec. If the Priesthood had been only translated to another tribe or
family, and remained in the former quality of it, without any other
alteration, certainly less violence had been done to the Law: but seeing the
Priesthood is translated into another family and tribe, upon which the Law no
way settled it; and also altered into a new kind of Priesthood; much more is it
evident, that by this translation and alteration of the Priesthood, the Law it
self is changed and abrogated. After the similitude of Melchisedec, there
arises another Priest.] Another Priest, notlike Aaron, to be either of his
family, or of his continuance: but like Melchisedec, to continue a Priest for
ever.

16. Who is made not after the Law of a carnal commandment: but after the
power of an endless life.] The Priest after the similitude or likeness of
Melchisedec, is not like the Priests after Aarons order, who are made after the
Law of a carnal commandment; neither is he a temporary Priest to live for a
time only as they did: but an eternal Priest for ever. After the Law of a
carnal commandment. By Law of commandment, he means those particular precepts
in the Law, for the election and ordination of the Priest, which are called
carnal, because they had respect only to the flesh, and considered only the
lineage, birth, and death of the Priest; binding the Priesthood to a certain
tribe, namely, of Levi, and to a certain family in that tribe, namely, of
Aaron: and providing for the mortality of the Priest, by determining the
rights of succession; all which considerations are carnal, respecting only
the flesh. For the Law commanded that upon the death of one Priest, another
should succeed him; to the end, that though the Priests dyed, yet the
Priesthood might not die. According to this carnal commandment or Laws
respecting the flesh, that Priest was not to be ordained, who was to be made
after the order of Melchisedec: For he had neither predecessor nor
successor, neither came he from the family of Aaron. The particle after does
here note the manner of the Priesthood, for the constitution of it, as applied
to some certain rule or Law; for though the word sometime signify otherwise,
yet this is the most usual sense of it. So that here is proposed unto us, the
quality of that Priest, who is after the likeness of Melchisedec, and a
quality contrary to the quality of the Priests after Aarons order; because as
we have often noted, every Aaronicall Priest was but temporary only for a
time: but the Priest after Melchisedecs order is perpetual and eternal for
ever. The words following do enforce this sense, especially if we regard the
proof contained in the verse following. But after the power of an endless
life] The Priest after Melchisedees order, is such a one, as has the power of
perpetuity, such as an endless life requires to be. He is not a carnal,
mortal, and frail Priest, that after a little time should need a successor:
but a most potent Priest that has an absolute power; an eternal Priest that
has an endless life: For to this sense, that which follows does excellently
agree.

17. For he testifies, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedec. q.d. Therefore I say, that the Priest after the order of
Melchisedec is an eternal Priest, because God openly testifies it, when he
says, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.

18. For there is verily a disanulling of the commandment going before.] He
had said before, that if the Priesthood were changed, then the Law also must be
changed; and hitherto he has proved that consequence. Now he shows the reason
why the Law must be antiquated, changed or abrogated: For he seems to look
backward to the principal purpose, and the scope of the former words, partly
expressed, verse 12. and in a manner repeated, verse 15. and so again, verse
16. where he says, that Christ is not made a Priest according to the Law of a
carnal commandment. In which words he showed, that the commandment of the Law
for ordaining of the Priest, was neglected in Christ, and therefore abrogated.
Therefore now lest any man should marvel at this; he shows the reason why
the Law was justly abrogated. For the weakness and unprofitablenesse thereof.]
This is the cause why the Law was abrogate, because it was weak and
unprofitable. For all Laws use to be abrogated and disanulled, when by
experience they are found to be ineffectuall, weak, and unprofitable; for wise
men have found out no other causes, why Laws should be disanulled and
repealed. Now the infirmity of a Law appears in this, that it cannot perform
the matter for which it was ordained: which infirmity or wickedness of the
Law, he either explicates or amplifies by the word unprofitable; for the
weakness of a Law makes it useless.

19. For the Law made nothing perfect.] Here he proves that the Law is weak
and unprofitable; whereof he gives this reason; because it made nothing
perfect. i. it contained no perfect expiation for sin, as we heard before,
verse 11. and shall hear it again, Chapter 10. verse 1.14. Now perfect
expiation consists in a total taking away all guilt of all sins, and of
all punishments, not only temporal but eternal. Such an expiation the Law
conferred upon no man. For if (as we saw at the 11. verse) the Priesthood
could not do this; how could the Law do it, seeing the Law could do nothing
this way, but by virtue of the Priesthood? The Law did condemn men, but not
justify them; it granted expiation to some small sins, and that only in
regard of temporal punishment; but for heinous offenses, upon which it
ordained the punishment of death, it left no pardon; but laid a curse upon all,
that offended highly. In this perfect expiation, is contained antecedently, as
I may say, an obduction from sin. For perfect expiation comes to us upon that
condition, as we shall see, by the opposition following. Made nothing perfect]
Nothing here is put for no man, the neuter gender for the masculine; and so
likewise at the seventh verse. If therefore the Law could bring perfect
expiation and justification to no man, it is justly said to be weak and
unprofitable; namely, in regard it could not produce the true and perfect good
of men. But the bringing in of a better hope did] q.d. The Law perfected no
man: but the superinduction of a better hope does perfect men; for here is an
illustration from the contrary. By a better hope, he understands the hope of
eternal life, joined with a plenary remission of all sins, granted from God
to all penitent persons; without which remission, the promise of eternal life
made to mankind, had been ineffectuall and unprofitable; seeing we have all
sinned, and thereby made our selves unworthy of eternal life. Therefore the
Author describing afterward the new Covenant in the words of the Prophet, and
showing that it is established upon better promises, mentions only the
remission of sins granted in the new Covenant. And by the new Covenant or
Gospel, and the Priesthood of Christ adjoined to it, this better hope is
superinduced upon the Law. For the new Covenant brings a better hope, because
it is established upon better promises; but not without the Priesthood of
Christ, which does not only confirm and establish the promises of the
Covenant, but does also perfect and perform them. For the perfect remission of
our sins depends upon Christ's Priesthood; and therefore the Priesthood of
Christ spoken of in this place, must here be joined with the new Covenant; as
also the old Priesthood and sacrifices must be joined with the Law. Therefore
the superinduction or bringing in of a better hope, that is, the new Covenant
containing the Priesthood of Christ, which gives us an assured hope of eternal
life, and of perfect forgiveness of all our sins, does most perfectly expiate
men, and purge them from all guilt of all sin. By the which we draw nigh unto
God.] Here he gives a reason why this hope is better and does perfect us,
because it makes us to approah and come near unto God, by suing for his
favor, by serving him with all our heart, and obeying him in all things
commanded us. For he that has this hope in God, purifieth himself even as he
is pure, 1 John 3.3. And because we approach unto God, therefore reciprocally
God also approaches and draws nigh unto us, i. does embrace us with a strict
bond of love, that so being purged from all sin, he may deliver us from
eternal death, and invest us' with eternal life. Hence says St. James. Draw
nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto you, Jam. 4.8. The Law therefore
because it wanted this hope, could not make us draw nigh unto God; and because
it could not do that, therefore it could not make us partake of a perfect
expiation. For our approach unto God, is the way to perfect expiation; seeing
while we approach unto God, we cast off sin and live godly: and while God
approaches unto us, we are thereby perfectly expiated and justified. As
therefore this bringing in of a better hope, makes us approach unto God, so far
it justifies us: Which the Law could not do, but for the rigor of it, whereby
it excludes penitents from a full remission of sins: and also for default of
any open promise of eternal life, which ministers unto men great power and
courage for obedience unto God.

20. And in as much as not without an oath, he was made Priest] After the
Author had showed that by the Priesthood of Christ, the Law was abrogated, and
added the cause of that abrogation, and taught that in the room thereof there
succeeded a far more excellent Covenant, that makes us approach unto God. Now
by a new argument he shows how much Christ our Priest is greater then the
legal Priests, and how far the new Covenant excels the old. And he draws his
argument from hence, that Christ was made a Priest with an oath; but the old
legal Priests without an oath: from whence it plainly appears, that Christ is
better then they. For an oath declares the truth and the strength of a thing.
Now the things that God will have to be firm, strong, and unchangeable, must
needs be better then those things which have not that firmity and strength;
such as are the things whereto no oath is added, but God will have them to
depend upon his will and pleasure; that he may either remove or retain them,
as it shall seem good unto him. And besides, look how much better the Priest
is, so much is the Covenant better. For the Priesthood takes all the dignity
and excellency of it, from the Covenant of God; and by the Priesthood the
effect of the Covenant is performed. And therefore from hence that Christ was
made a Priest by oath, by so much he was made a surety of a better testament,
as the Author rightly collects it, ver. 22. that is, by how much Christ, who
was ordained with Gods oath, is better then the Priest who was ordained without
an oath: by so much is the new Covenant better then the old.

21. For those Priests were made without an oath; but this with an oath] This
whole verse must be read in a parenthesis, because it contains an opposition
between the old Priests and Christ; in as much as they were made Priests
without any oath of God, but Christ with an oath. By him that said unto him]
namely by him that said those words unto him, Thou art a Priest for ever, etc.
And by him that said those words to Christ, God himself seems to be understood,
although the words next cited, The Lord swear and will not repent him] seem
not to be the words of God himself, but of the Prophet, who relates this oath
of God. But because the words following, Thou art a Priest for ever] are the
words of God; therefore by him that said unto him, the Author might well mean
God. For although in these words, there be no oath of God expressed; yet it is
as much as if it had been expressed, seeing the Prophet testifies, that God
uttering these words did swear, which therefore the Author would not omit,
though he were to relate the words of God himself and not of the Prophet. But
if by him who said these words unto Christ, we understand not God but the
Prophet, as some Interpreters upon that Psalm do, who so expound these words,
as if the Psalmist had said, The Lord swear, etc. Thou art a Priest for ever,
then the Prophet must be meant, by a common form of speech, that Christ was
made Priest by the Prophet, because the Prophet by these words did foretell and
declare that he should be made Priest. For many times in Scripture the
declaring of a thing is said to be the doing of it. In this sense Jeremy is
said to have been appointed, to root out and to destroy, to build and to plant,
Jer. 1.10. So the Prophet Esaias is said, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, to
restore the preserved of Israel, and to be given for a light to the Gentiles,
because he prophesied and foretold of these things. The Lord swear and will not
repent] this oath argues that the matter of it was great, certain and
unchangeable; and because God will not repent it, therefore it was very good
and acceptable to God. So that the thing must not be altered or undone, both in
regard of the oath and of the goodness of it. Unless by not repenting we
conceive the settled constancy of God, never to revoke or alter the matter. For
repentance attributed to God, signifies only a change of the fact: by way of
resemblance from men, who if they repent, do commonly alter the thing, if it
lie in their power.

22. By so much was Jesus made the surety of a better testament] These words
are clearly answerable to the beginning of the 20. verse, as appears by the
particles of relation there and here, in as much, and by so much. Jesus is
called the surety of the Covenant or Testament, because he contracted it with
us in the Name of God, and ratified it on Gods part, making faith of it unto
us, that God would keep the promises of his Covenant. Not therefore, as if he
became our surety to God, and took upon him the payment of our debts. For, we
sent not Christ unto God is our name, but God sent him to us in his Name. And
Christ came to us from God, made a Covenant with us, became surety for the
promises of it, and undertook they should be performed. And therefore he is
not called a Surety simply, but the Surety of the Covenant. And he undertook
for the truth of Gods Covenant diverse ways, as by his perpetual testimony in
words for the force and strength of it, by proving the faith of his function in
it in many documents; by his perfect innocence and holiness of life, by
several divine works and miracles which he wrought, by suffering a grievous
death, to assert the truth of his doctrine. Hence his Apostle John produced
those three witnesses of undoubted faith, to confirm the truth of Christian
Religion; namely, the Spirit, water and blood, 1 John 5.8. Where by Spirit he
understands that divine power in Christ, which he showed in his admirable
works; by water, the blameless and spotless life of Christ; and by blood,
his bloody death. For Christian truth approves it self by such witnesses. That
divine Spirit, testified by so many wondrous works, does it not evidently
declare, that Christ was a divine man, sent from God; and therefore that he
preached nothing forged of himself, but only that which he had received from
the God of truth? Would that God who is most holy replenish an impostor with
such and so great gifts of his Spirit? The most pure and holy life of Christ,
is it not an open testimony, that Christ respected no earthly thing, that he
sought no worldly wealth, no honors nor pleasures? but had reposed all his
hopes in God, and in those heavenly goods which he promised unto others. From
whence otherwise could so great holiness of life proceed, and so great
contempt of all worldly things? For Impostors use not to trust in God, and to
expect from him the rewards of heaven. Impostors use not to pass their life in
such holiness and abstinence from all sin. For why do they labor to delude
men with their impostures and deceits? Do they it only to deceive without any
advantage to themselves, and to expose themselves to nothing but diverse
dangers and troubles, which commonly accompany such impostures, and making
themselves guilty of this one thanklesse wickedness, to follow piety in all
things else? certainly nothing less. Such kind of persons seek their own
commodity, to gain wealth, to get a vain glorious name, and to abound in
pleasure; which whosoever aims at, cannot lead a life innocent and void of all
blame. Hence the Apostle speaking of Impostors or false teachers does justly
affirm, that they have their belly for their god, and mind earthly things;
that they are enemies to the Cross of Christ, and have their conscience seared
with a hot iron, Phil. 3.18,19. and 1 Timothy 4.2. And Christ warning his
Disciples to beware of false prophets, tells them, that such may be known by
their fruits, i. by their works, which are an infallible sign of their deceit.
Do men (says he) gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? an evil tree
cannot bring forth good fruit. Mat. 7.16. For however for a time they may
dissemble and make show of godliness, yet they cannot do it constantly. For
feigned holiness lasts not long, and covert wickedness lies not long hid.
The life therefore of Christ being carried on in one perpetual tenor of
innocence and holiness, does wholly vindicate him from the crime of any
imposture. Hence Christ himself contends with the Jews by this argument. Which
of you convinces me of sin? and if I say the truth why do ye not believe me?
John 8 46. q.d. Either convince me of sin, or if ye cannot do that, but that my
innocence acquits me from all crime, why do ye reject me as an Impostor and a
counterfeit, and do not rather acknowledge my doctrine for truth? Lastly, the
Blood of Christ, i. his cruel and infamous death, which he suffered with such
constancy, that he might assert his doctrine, and especially that he might
testify himself to be Christ, and the Son of God; what possible suspicion
can this leave of the least fraud or falsehood? For if Christ had been
conscious to himself of any fraud or falsehood, would he have cast himself
upon so infamous and fearful a death? and endure it with such patiency and
constancy of mind? If he had an intent to get himself a name by lies and
deceits, would he have cast himself so freely uponextreame reproach and
disgrace, and get fame by no other means but by an infamous death? for being
condemned to the Cross, what could he else hope for, if he were an Impostor?
But if Christ were no way conscious to himself of any fraud or falsehood, but
suffered death to assert his doctrine, who sees not but he must needs be void
of all offense? For if his doctrine were false, it must needs be fained of
himself. For he publicly professed, that he had seen the Father, had
received commands from him, and was sent from him into the world, that he was
the Son of God, and the King of Gods people, which God had promised long
before. Now if these things were false, how could Christ be ignorant of their
falsehood? but if he knew them to be false, whence could he have such a contempt
of death for the asserting of them? whence could he have such an invincible
constancy and courage of mind? Seeing therefore we have Jesus a surety of the
new Covenant, attested with so many documents of the truth, shall we doubt to
join our faith unto him, to rest upon the hope of those heavenly blessings
which he has promised in this Covenant, to cast off the yoke of sin, and to
give our name up to God and his righteousness. Some man may marvel, why the
Author treating of Christ's Priesthood both before and after, should suddenly
call him the surety of the new Covenant, and not the Priest of it? Why did he
not say by so much was Jesus made a Priest of a better Testament?] For the
whole context of the Chapter seems to require this. It is very credible, that
in the word surety, the Priesthood of Christ is also understood. For it is the
part of a surety not only to promise something in the name of another, and to
interpose his faith for another; but also if the cause require, to perform the
thing he promised in another name; and among men, there is cause, if the
principal perform it not, for whom the surety interposed: but here it
proceeds upon a contrary cause, (for the former cannot here take place) namely,
because he for whom Christ interposed as a surety, does perform his promises
to us by Christ himself; in which action the Priesthood of Christ does chiefly
consist. For Christ as he is a Priest, does now in heaven nothing more
intentively, then to perform Gods promises unto us, i. he takes away all
punishment of our sins, he endowes us with Gods gifts and graces, and at last
translates us into heaven.

23. And they truly were many Priests, because they were not suffered to
continue by reason of death.] Here he brings a new difference between Christ a
Priest after the order of Melchisedec, and the Priests after Aarons order; and
withal proves him far more excellent then they. And this difference is, that
they were many, but Christ was but one himself only. The reason of both is
taken from the 16. and 17. verses, because they were mortal, and one being
dead, another must succeed; but Christ is immortal and lives for ever.

24. But this man, because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood]
The Priesthood of Christ is said unchangeable, because it is not transitory to
change the person, and pass from one to another; for seeing he lives for ever,
and has no successor, therefore the Priesthood does always remain in his
person. For, because his person is unchangeable and continues for ever,
therefore also his Priesthood is unchangeable and continues for ever in his
person.

25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost.] From the former
verse, he draws this as a consectary; wherein appears a great difference
between Christ and the legal priests, and his great pre-eminence above them.
Namely, that Christ is able to save for ever, and at all times; which none of
them could do. To the uttermost, in the original, (...), to the uttermost of
time, at all times, and for ever; for uttermost must be referred to the
perfection or fullness of time, and not of his saving. For although the
salvation it self, which Christ our Priest brings unto us, be in all points
perfect and complete; yet this in this place is not deduced from the former
verse, but the other only: So that to the uttermost, is all one with
continually and perpetually, as appears by the latter words of this verse,
wherein the Author shows the reason of this, as we shall show there. Able to
save] This salvation in reference to Christ, is in it self (as we said) most
perfect and absolute: For Christ saves us, as he takes away all the guilt and
punishment of all our sins; as he succors us in our infirmities, from
sinking under them, and consequently from falling into punishment for our
sins thereupon; as he receives our souls into his hands, which he restores
us in due time, invested with eternal glory and happiness: Whereof we
treated; chap. 2. and 4. and 5. That come unto God by him.] Christ does not
save all men actually, but them that come unto God by him. To come unto God, is
to worship God and serve him with all our heart, by offering sacrifices unto
him; as the Author speaks afterward, chap. 13.15. Let us offer the sacrifice
of praise to God.] And to come to God by Christ, is to worship God in
confidence of Christ, trusting upon him; and in obedience of Christ following
his Commandments; and to worship him in worshipping of Christ, by adoring,
praising and praying to Christ. For he that does this, does not so much worship
and serve Christ, as God himself by Christ. Seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them.] In these words he expressly adds the reason of the
Consectary, at the beginning of the verse. Christ is able to save to the
uttermost, continually, and perpetually, because he lives to the uttermost,
continually, and perpetually; for he lives ever. Christ is said to make
intercession, by way of resemblance, to the legal Priest, who by entering and
offering in the most holy place, did make intercession: So also Christ, by his
entrance into the heavenly tabernacle, by his own blood, and by his perpetual
residence there, in procuring our salvation, and the expiation of our sins,
is said to make intercession for us. But as he has all power given him by his
Father, as he himself saves us, and expiates our sins, as he bestows all
happiness upon us; so he cannot be said to make intercession for us: although
these actions differ rationally rather then really: seeing in them he conveyes
that to us, which he receives of his Father for us, and therefore cannot
properly be said to intercede or sue for that, which he has full power to
give of himself; for God has freely given him that full power.

26. For such an high Priest became us.] He brings a reason, why Christ was
made a Priest to live for ever, to make intercession for us; because such a
Priest did become us, or was convenient for us. Whence it appears that the
following attributes given unto Christ, do not notify the innocent life of
Christ, which was indeed spotless and blameless; but his happy and blessed
state, whereby it comes to pass that he ever lives, and ever has a care of
us. For although those attributes are most true of Christ, if we understand
them of his life and innocence: yet being so understood in this place, they
make nothing to the present purpose of the Author. Who is holy,] In respect of
his immortal nature, which does make him a Saint, by sanctifying and hallowing
him. Harmless,] Not actively to do no harm, but passively to have no harm,
by freeing him from all evil and misery. Undefiled,] His state is purely
happy and blessed, not stained or blotted with any adversity or evil. Separate
from sinners,] both in place and condition, not conversing any more with them,
as once he did upon earth. And made higher then the heavens.] He is now exalted
above the two lower regions of heaven, and seated in the highest region, at the
right hand of God. All these are said of Christ in some manner by way of
resemblance to the legal Priest. Although in these again there be a great
disparity between Christ and him, as we shall show presently. Yet if we
respect the dignity of Priesthood, the legal Priest was a venerable and holy
person; he was harmless and inviolable; and as his providence and care could
lead him, he was undefiled, and he was separate from sinners, not conversing
with them, but residing in the Sanctuary, which resembled heaven. But all these
could not be perfect in the legal Priest, by reason of his infirmities; or if
they had been most perfect, yet they had been but a shadow of those most divine
qualities, which were showed before in Christ. Now that such a Priest became
us, the thing it self declares: for unless he were such a one, he could not
be perpetually vigilant and intent over our salvation, to save all that should
come to God by him. For the contraries to these qualities, would either trouble
the functions of his office, or wholly hinder them: for even the legal Priest,
if at any time he were defiled, might not perform the holy services to offer
for others, or sacrifice for their sin, till first he had made some entrance in
sacrificing for his own.

27. Who needed not daily as those high Priests, to offer up sacrifice, first
for his own sins and then for the peoples] He shows another difference
between Christ and the legal Priests, depending on the former diffrences and
consequent from them. For the legal Priests must offer sacrifices yearly,
first for their own sins, and then for the peoples: but Christ did this only
once. Daily; i. upon the determine and set day for the yearly sacrifice, which
was the day of expiation. For that the Author means that yearly sacrifice, it
appears from his saying, that those Priests must offer first for their own
sins and then for the peoples. But we read not that either he did or was to
do this at any other time, then at that yearly sacrifice of expiation. For at
other times he must either offer for himself alone, if he stood guilty of some
sin; or if he were partaker of sin with the people, he must expiate it with
one only sacrifice for himself and them together; and not sacrifice first for
himself, and after for them. See afterward chap. 10. v. 11. where daily is
likewise taken for the appointed and set day. For this he did once] He speaks
of Christ our Priest. What did Christ once? certainly nothing else, but what
the old high Priest did yearly upon the set day. But it is manifest from the
former passages, and from the context of the reasons, that he speaks not here
principally of the offering for the peoples sins on that day; but especially
for the offering for the sins of the Priest himself. Sins are properly
transgressions of Gods Laws, which seeing they had no place in Christ, for he
knew no sin, therefore there must needs be an impropriety in the word sins
here, for by them must be meant the infirmities and sufferings of Christ,
whereof we spoke before chap. 5.2,3. For we have already seen that the
contraries to these infirmities and sufferings, were in the next verse before
described by the names of holiness and harmlessenesse: for these two verses do
mutually illustrate each other. When he offered up himselfe] He shows when
Christ offered for himself, namely prayers and supplications, as we heard
before, chap. 5.7. And then he offered for himself, when he offered himself
for God, when he prepared himself for the offering of himself; i. when he
was slain as a sacrifice. For the offering of Christ in this place must be so
far extended, as to comprise his death, as a necessary antecedent, or a kind
of beginning and entrance to it. Therefore Christ, because he now lives happy
and blessed for ever, and nothing can interrupt or hinder his happiness,
therefore I say, he is now secure of himself, and need no more offer for
himself, but is only careful for us and our salvation. Yet because the time
was once, when he was forced to offer for him self, therefore being well
acquainted with sufferings, he will so much the more readily succor the
distressed. But seeing this verse depends upon the former, and is inferred from
thence; it appears therefore that the former verse speaks not of the manners of
Christ our Priest, but of his blessed state and condition. For Christ needs not
therefore not offer any more for himself, because he was holy and harmless in
respect of his manners and actions here upon earth, seeing he was always so,
but because by his Resurrection to Immortality, he was freed from all harms
and evils for ever. As therefore the sins of our Priest signified his
sufferings and pains: so the contraries to these his holiness and
harmlessenesse in the former verse declare him exempt and free from all such
evils.

28. For the Law made men high Priests which have infirmity] He adds the
cause of this difference between Christ and the legal Priests, because the Law
made men high Priests which have infirmity; i. such as can never depose their
infirmity, which always held them in this condition, that after expiation for
their sins and errors, they again fell into the like sins and errors,
which required again another expiation. But the word of the oath which was
since the Law] The word containing the oath, whereof he spoke before, verse. 20.
That oath whereby Christ was ordained Priest was since the Law; and therefore
the Priesthood of Christ is no way depending or established by the Law. For
here the word of the oath made since the Law is opposed to the Law. Makes the
son who is consecrated for evermore] Makes the son Priest. The son is
here put eminently for the Son of God, and opposed to common men, who have
infirmities, as those men had whom the Law made Priests; so in many places of
Scripture Christ is opposed to the rest of men. See Gal. 1.1. and Ephesians. 2.7.
Consecrated for evermore.] Christ is expiated for evermore; not in respect of
the time past, as of old under the Law, under which the Priests by reason of
their infirmities were forced to renew their expiation every year. But Christ
by his one single expiation upon the cross, was freed from all further
sufferings and pains for evermore; so that he has no further need to expiate
or offer for them any more for ever. And hence again it appears, that Christ
was not fully perfectly our high Priest, before he was consecrated, expiated,
and perfected, for evermore. That is, before he became immortal.

The Contents of this seventh Chapter, are,
1. Melchisedec was a Priest, v. 1. Reason. 1. Because he blessed men
sacerdotally; for so he blessed Abraham. v. 1. 2. Because he received tithes;
for Abraham gave him a tenth, v. 2.
2. Melchisedec was a singular Priest, v. 3. Reason. 1. Because there were no
more Priests of his order; for he was without father or mother, without
predecessor or successor, v. 2. 2. Because he was a perpetual Priest: for he
had neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but remained a Priest
continually, v. eod.
3. Melchisedec was greater then Abraham, v. 1. Reason. 1. Because he blessed
Abraham sacerdotally, v. eod. 2. Because he received tithes from Abraham, v. 2.
3. Because he was in a manner an eternal person, that had no parentage,
neither beginning of days, nor end of life.
4. Melchisedec was greater then the Leviticall Priests, v. 5. Reason. 1.
Because he blessed them in Abraham, who had the promises of them, that they
should be his seed, v. 6. 2. Because he tithed them in tithing Abraham, for
they were then in the loins of Abraham, v. 5. 9. 10. 3. Because he was a
singular and an eternal Priest: but they were many and mortal, for they dyed
and succeeded one another, v. 8.
5. Christ is not a Priest after the order of Aaron, v. 11. Reason. 1. Because
Christ sprang not from the tribe of Levi as Aaron did, but from Juda, another
tribe. v. 13. 14. 2. Because Christ was not ordained by virtue of any carnal
law, that respected his birth and parentage, as Aaron and his successors were,
v. 16. 3. Because Christ was made with an oath, to make his Priesthood
immutable and irrevocable, but they without an oath, v. 20. 21. 4. Because
Christ was a singular and eternal Priest, whose Priesthood is unchangeable:
but they were many and mortal, and their Priesthood transitory, changing upon
death from one person to another, v. 23, 24. 5. Because Christ is in a divine
and blessed state; for he is inviolable, unharmable, undefileable, separate
from sinners, and seated in heaven: They had not the substance of this state,
but only some shadow of it, v. 26. 6. Because Christ needed but one offering
for himself, whereby to expiate and put off his infirmities for ever: they
needed yearly a new expiation for their infirmities, v. 27, 28.
6. Christ is a Priest after the order of Melchisedec, chap. 6. v. ult. Reason.
1. Because Christ is a Royal Priest, both a King and a Priest, as Melchisedec
was, v. 1. 2. Because Christ is a singular Priest, having no other Priest after
his order but himself, for he was without predecessor and successor, as
Melchisedec was, v. 3. 3. Because Christ is an eternal Priest, who lives for
ever, as Melchisedec is said to have done.
7. The Leviticall Priesthood is expired, v. 11. Reason. 1. Because Christ
another Priest is raised up, who is not after Aarons order, v. eod. 2. Because
the Priesthood is translated from the tribe of Levi, upon whom the Law had
settled it, v. 13, 14. 3. Because that Priesthood was ruled by a carnal law,
with respect to the birth, life and death of the Priest, v. 16. 4. Because it
made no perfect expiation for sins, for thereto it was weak and
unprofitable, v. 18, 19.
8. The Leviticall Law is expired, v. 12. Reason 1. Because that Priesthood is
abrogate and changed, v. eod. 2. Because the commandments and precepts of it
were carnal, touching the line, the birth and death of Priests, touching
washings of the flesh of men, and sacrificing the flesh of beasts, v. 16. 3.
Because it made no perfect expiation for sin, but to that effect was weak and
unprofitable.

CHAPTER VIII.
1. Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum. We have such an
high Priest] He had before spoken many things concerning Christ our high
Priest, both for his quality what manner of person he is, and for his dignity,
how far he exceeds the legal Priests: Now being partly to add something
further, and partly to repeat something formerly spoken, he calls this
repetition the sum of what he had spoken. Now the sum may signify either
the breviat of what he had spoken, or else the maine head and principal
point, which last sense is most agreeable to this place: q.d. Of all those
things which have been or may be spoken concerning Christ our high Priest, the
main head or principal point is this, That we have such an high Priest who is
set on the right hand, etc. Who is set on the right hand of the throne of the
Majesty in the heavens] Of these words we treated chap. 1.3. And by them is
signified unto us so great a dignity and Majesty in Christ our high Priest,
that there was scarce extant any shadow of it in the ancient legal Priests;
seeing none of them did ever sit at the right hand of that throne, which was
placed in the oracle of the Sanctuary, namely of the Mercy-seat or covering of
the Arc, which was all over shadowed by the wings of the Cherubines, and
called the Throne of God; whereupon God was said to sit between the Cherubines:
But all those legal high Priests, when they entered into the oracle (or most
holy place of the Sanctuary) were forced to stand before the Arc, and so
before the Mercy-seat upon it. But Christ is so great an high Priest, that he
sits on the right hand of the throne of Majesty, and that in heaven. The throne
of the Majesty, is the Majesticke and stately Throne, whereon he sits, who is
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only is Almighty, who only has
immortality, and dwells in a light unapproachable.

2. A minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle] The Epethite or
Attribute true, must be added both to Sanctuary and Tabernacle; that Christ is
a Minister of the true Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle; which is Gods
heavenly habitation. This is called the true Sanctuary and Tabernacle, not in
reference to false and fained Sanctuaries, but in respect of umbratilous and
terrene Sanctuaries, which did but represent and signify the true, perfect,
solid, and heavenly Sanctuary wherein God himself does really and truly
dwell; and whereto the name of the true and right Sanctuary does perfectly
agree. Of this true and heavenly Sanctuary Christ is the Minister, as anciently
the legal high Priest was the minster of the terrene Sanctuary. For these
words serve somewhat to declare the residence of Christ at the right hand of
Gods throne. Now to be a Minister of the Sanctuary is nothing else, but to
Minister unto God in the Sanctuary, to officiate and be busied about the
Sanctuary, to procure and order the things that pertain to the worship of God
in the Sanctuary. And Christ recideing in heaven does Minister there, by
executing Gods decrees, by ordering heavenly things, and whatsoever pertaines
to Gods heavenly worship and service, prescribed and commanded in the new
Covenant. The word Leiturgist or Minister does not always signify a simple
officer, waiter, or hand-servant: but many times such a one, who with special
authority and power does execute some charge; as the legal high Priests in the
Tabernacle had the chief authority and presidency over all things pertaining to
divine worship. Which the Lord pitched and not man] Either these words contain
the cause, why that heavenly Sanctuary is called the true Tabernacle, because
it was erected, not of man, as that was under the Law, but God himself, who is
our Sovereign Lord. For that Sanctuary must needs be the true and right one,
which the hand of man did not frame for God, but which God raised for himself
by his own hand. Or else these words are added, to amplify and illustrate the
point, to make it the more evidently appear, how much this heavenly Sanctuary
differs from the earthly, and exceeds it. So also Paul to the earthen and
frail tabernacle of our mortal body opposes that heavenly building of our
glorious body made of God, and not by the hand of men. Ye have the same
opposition afterward in this Author between the earthly Sanctuary and the
heavenly, chap. 9. verse 11.24. in like manner between cities made by the hand
of men, and that heavenly city prepared for the godly, whose Architect and
Builder is God himself, Chapter 11.10.

3. For every high Priests is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices:] He
proves that Christ our high Priest is a Minister of the Sanctuary; because he
is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices; for this function is natural to the
office of a Priest; and he that offers gifts and sacrifices must needs be the
Minister of a Sanctuary. Wherefore it is of necessity this man have somewhat
also to offer.] The sense of these words is not so to be taken, as to leave a
scruple in us; as if Christ had only somewhat that he might offer; and yet we
might doubt whether he would offer, or must offer, or does indeed offer; but
that according to the nature of his office, he does actually offer: For in
this sense we often say, I have something to give, or to say unto you. i. I
will, or must give, or say something unto you. From these words of the Author it
is most manifest, that Christ does now offer in heaven; for as the Author will
show afterward, he offers himself to God. For he proves (as we have said)
that Christ does minister in the heavenly Sanctuary, as appears by the
precedent and subsequent passages. And this he proves from hence, because
every Priest, and therefore Christ, is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices;
and therefore if he will perform his office, he must indeed offer; which if
he do, then it follows that he is a minister of the Sanctuary.

4. For if be were on earth, he should not be a Priest.] Here he confirms
the other part of the second verse, that Christ is a Minister, not of the
umbratilous and terrene Sanctuary, but of the true and heavenly; because if he
were on earth, he should not be a Priest at all. Hence it appears that Christ
is a Minister of the heavenly Sanctuary, and does offer unto God there. Whence
it necessarily follows, that Christ while he was upon earth, did not finish his
perfect expiatory offering, whereof the Author treats in this Epistle. For
could he perform and finish it, being out of his proper Sanctuary which is
heaven? Seeing that there are Priests that offer gifts according to the Law.]
He gives here a reason why Christ should not be a Priest, if he ministed on
earth; because there are already other Priests ordained of God, to Minister on
earth, and to offer gifts; of whose number Christ is none, nor can be, as was
showed in the former Chapter. These terrene Priests are said to offer according
to the Law; because the Law has granted them only, this right and privilege,
that no other person beside themselves without breach of the Law, should usurp
the office of offering upon earth, or ministering in the earthly Sanctuary.

5. Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things.] In these words,
either the Author gives a reason, why Christ if he were on earth, could not be
a Priest; namely, because those Priests who offer here on earth, serve but for
a shadow of heavenly things: but Christ our high Priest, must not serve for
such a shadow. Or else he illustrates from the contrary, that Christ is a
Minister of the true Tabernacle: but the legal Priests did only serve as
paternes and shadows of the heavenly Sanctuary. By heavenly things, he means
the Sanctuary and holy functions, wherein Christ does minister in heaven. As
Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the Tabernacle. For see
(says he) that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in
the mount. He proves from a testimony of Scripture; that the ancient legal
high Priests served but as a pattern and shadow of the true and heavenly
Sanctuary. And he cites the words wherein Moses is commanded to make that
ancient Tabernacle, and all things pertaining to it, according to the model or
pattern showed him in the Mount. Exodus 25.40. Therefore the Tabernacle showed
him in the Mount, was the type or model; and the Tabernacle made by Moses was
but a sample or copy of that model. Now that model showed by God in the Mount,
according to the pattern and fashion whereof, Moses should take order to frame
the Tabernacle, as near as the art of man's hand could work it, and as the
materials would bear, was without all question for the fashion of it far
more excellent then that which was framed to the likeness of it out of gross
and earthly materials. And because it was showed him upon the Mount, it was
therefore in a manner heavenly, in respect of that Tabernacle which was to be
made below the Mount. Although that original pattern or model also was but
an empty shadow of that true Sanctuary whereof Christ is the Minister. So that
the ancient Tabernacle was but a pattern of a pattern, and the shadow of a
shadow.

6. But now has he obtained a more excellent Ministery] The particle now here
notes not a difference of time, but is an adverbe adversitive, to express the
dignity of Christ's Ministry above the Legal Priests. They served as shadows
of heavenly things: but Christ our Priest has obtained a more excellent
Ministry; because he is the Minister of a far more excellent Sanctuary;
which also requires a more excellent way of administering, convenient and
suitable unto it. By how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant] He
proves yet further that Christ has obtained a better Ministry; because he is
the Mediator of a better Covenant, and so much better, by how much the
Covenant is better. For, look how much the Covenant, whereof Christ is the
Mediator, is better then the former Covenant; so much is his Ministry under
it, better then theirs, who ministered under the former Covenant. For the
Covenant and the Priesthood must correspond in dignity; seeing (as we said in
the former Chapter) the dignity of the Priesthood does chiefly depend upon the
end and use of it. And the end and use of the Priesthood depends upon the
Covenant; for Gods promises are settled by the Covenant, and we obtain them by
the Priesthood. And here begins another part of the Chapter, wherein is
contained a comparison of the new Covenant with the old. To be the Mediator of
Gods Covenant, is nothing else, but to be the Interpreter of God, or the
Intercessor, passing between God and men with mutual messages, to make and
finish up the Covenant on both parties: by which Inter-messenger God declares
and testifies his will to men, and they again informed in the knowledge of Gods
will, do comply with God and contract with him, are reconciled with him, and
enjoy their peace afterward. For what is here employed, that Paul expresses,
Gal. 3.19. where he shows that there was a Mediator also of the old Covenant,
even Moses. And we must take notice, that even in this respect Christ has
surpassed the Legal Priests; because they were Priests only to the old
Covenant, and not Mediators of it: but Christ is both Priest and Mediator of
the new Covenant, that is far more excellent then the old. Which was
established upon better promises] In these words he proves that the Covenant
whereof Christ is the Mediator, is better then the former; because it is
established upon better promises. Every man sees, that any Covenant is so much
the better, by how much the promises are better therein contained. Seeing
therefore, that in the new Covenant, whereof Christ is the Mediator, there are
contaiend better promises; therefore it must needs be better then the old; and
be so much better, as the promises are better. Hence it is appearent, that
eternal life was not openly promised in the old Covenant, nor a full
forgiveness of all sins. For, seeing nothing can be found better to men then
these two things; if both these were promised in the old Covenant, how can the
new Covenant be said to be established upon better promises? But we urge this
principally concerning the full remission of sins; for this only is epresly
mentioned in the description of the new Covenant; and we deny not but that
eternal life was occultly and secretly comprised in the promises of the old
Covenant; as Paul does manifest it, who interprets and takes the words of the
Law, promising life to them who exactly keep all the precepts of it, to be
understood of eternal life and justification, such as we obtain by Christ.
See Romans 10.5. and Gal. 3.12. The Law therefore did promise life eternal in a
secret and hidden sense; but withal under condition of exact and absolute
obedience in all points, and therefore granted no expiation in respect of
eternal death; and the expiation which it granted for some temporal
punishments, did not extend to all sins, but only to errors and frailties, or
such lapses whereinto men are prone to fall. Notwithstanding, when the whole
Nation had been severely punished of God, and by that punishment were brought
to a sense of their sins, and to return to the service of God, then the Law by
an everlasting Covenant, granted them forgiveness of all their grievous
offenses, in respect of all temporary punishments for this life without any
Sacrifices intervening, See Levit. 26.40. to the end of the Chapter. But the
new Covenant contains a most open and clear promise of eternal life; and
therefore is truly said to promise eternal life. For a hidden promise and
unknown to the party to whose benefit it is made, or being such that no man
can be certainly assured of it, or at least does not appear to be certain,
must not be truly called a promise, especially in that fence wherein a promise
is here to be taken, when we speak of the promises of the Covenant. Besides,
the new Covenant requires of no man an exact and absolute obedience in all
points; but is content with true repentance and with such an amendment of life
as carries a will never to offend God more; and therefore trusting to the
assistance of Gods Spirit, we accustom our selves afterward to no sin, but
walk in the ways of all virtues; although it may fall out, that afterward
through humane frailty we may sometime slip; in which point is contained the
forgiveness of our sins. They who think the contrary to what we have
asserted, do affirm, that the promises of the new Covenant are therefore
called better, because they are cleerer. But we thereupon demand, whether they
think the old promises so clear that men may certainly know and believe them
by virtue of the Covenant, or not? If they say the first that they are so
clear; then we deny it, not only of the remission of sins, which the very
nature of Moses Law requiring the merit of works does reject, but also of
eternal life. Neither could the Author call the promises in the new Covenant
simply better therefore, because they are therein proposed either somewhat more
clearly or much more clearly; much less could he gather from thence that he
dignity of the new Covenant was greater then that of the old; and yet again,
much less could he thence infer, that the Priesthood of Christ is better
then the Legal: neither was it any way convenient that therefore the old
Covenant should be abrogated and a new one made. For a declaration of an old
Covenant is not a new Covenant, diverse from the old; neither does such a
declaration abrogate the old, but rather illustrate and establish it. And a new
Covenant does require, not a declaration of the old, but new conditions, and
new promises made of Gods Name. Neither had Christ been the Mediator of the
new Covenant, but only an Interpreter and explainer of it. But if they say the
latter, that they were not so clear; we willingly grant that, of eternal life:
but not of a full remission of all sins given to such as amended their ways;
for this was no way contained in the old Covenant, either openly or covertly,
but was altogether repugnant to that Covenant. And (as we have already said)
such a covert promise, must not be truly accounted for the promise of a
Covenant, but only such a promise as every man may understand, and be assured
of it from the Covenant, if he perform the conditions. Was established] In the
Original it is (...), i. was enacted or ordained as a Law; because every
Covenant is a Law upon the parties between whom it is made; and the new
Covenant is most justly so, because it contains diverse precepts, which every
man is bound to observe, if he mean to obtain the promises therein made to
him.

7. For if that first Covenant had been faultlesse, then could no place have
been sought for the second] Here he proves, what he formerly affirmed, that
the new Covenant was established upon better promises; because the old Covenant
was faulty; not that it was absolutely evil, but only respectively, because
it had some imperfections and defects which might be bettered. Whence it
plainly appears, that so good promises cannot be therein contained; for if it
did contain them it could not be justly blamed, nor truly said to be faulty.
For how can that Covenant be justly blamed, which both contains the best
promises, and also prescribes the best conditions whereby those promises may be
attained? But that it was indeed blameable, and was not faultlesse, he proves
from hence, because there was place sought for a second] God promised to make a
second and a new Covenant with his people. But why should God abrogate the old
Covenant and make a new, if the old were without all fault, and contained both
promises and conditions equal in goodness to the new? For old Covenants use
not to be abolished but for their defects and faults, as above he said of the
Law, that it was disanulled for the weakness and unprofitablenesse thereof,
chap. 7.18.

8. For finding fault with them, he saith] He proves by the words of the
Prophet, why the old Covenant was faulty, and therefore place sought for the
second; because God found fault with it. With them] must not be referred to the
persons of the Jews in this place, though otherwise God did find fault enough
with them; but to the promises of the old Covenant, for God finds fault with
them; for the Author seems to reflect upon the last words of the sixth verse
before, where he says that the new Covenant was established upon better
promises; now because the promises of the old were not so good, therefore God
finds fault with them. Behold, the days come, says the Lord] He relates the
words of the Prophet, Jer. 31.31. wherein God promises to make a new Covenant
with his people, different from the former Covenant; which God mentions in such
a manner, that he apparently reprehends and blames it; as afterward shall be
declared. When I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel and the
house of Judah.] The house of Israel is the posterity of Jacob; and the house
of Judah the posterity of Judah one of Jacobs sons. He distinguishes these two
people, not that the posterity of Judah was not also the posterity of Israel or
Jacob: but because at that time the posterity of Jacob was divided into two
Kingdoms; in one whereof were ten Tribes, who therefore were called by the
common name of the Israelites; in the other Kingdom were only two Tribes,
Judah and Benjamin, which two were denominate from Judah only; because he was
the more illustrious Tribe, wherein the race of the Kings descended: as the
other Tribes were sometime called Ephraim, because among them, that was the
Tribe Royal.

9. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers] He proves
here, that the second Covenant should be a new Covenant; because it should not
be like the former, or not according to it, but different from it. In the day
when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt] Day is put
for time, an especial word for a general; in the time that I brought them out
of Egypt. This plainly designs the Covenant made by Moses at Mount Sinai.
Because they continued not in my Covenant] Here he opens the cause, why God
would make a new Covenant with his people, different and unlike the former.
Because that old Covenant was not of force, to contain the people in their
duty. For hence it came to pass that the people continued not in it, but
transgressed it. For he lays down this consequent, to make us understand the
antecedent of it, which is the faultiness and weakness of that Covenant. For
if there had been no fault nor flaw in the Covenant, but only in the people,
the Covenant it self must not have been abolished for the fault of the people
only. And therefore it appears, that not only the people, but also the
Covenant it self was in fault, why it was not observed. And I regarded them
not, says the Lord.] This is necessarily consequent from the former. For he
that continues not in Gods Covenant, he is neglected of God; i. deserted and
forsaken, and not only deserted, but punished, for God lays those judgments
upon him that are specified in the Covenant, in case it be not observed. Hence
it is manifest, that that former Covenant was infirm and unprofitable, seeing
it could not effect, that the people who were parties to it, might worship God
duly and constantly, and obey his Laws; that reciprocally they might be loved
of God, and graced with his blessings.

10. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel (says
the Lord) He brings a reason why he said, that this new Covenant is not
according to the former, but unlike and different from it. Because it was to be
such a one, as must have sufficient power to continue the people in their duty.
And this he signifies unto us by the words following. The house of Israel is
taken here a little more largely then before, not now opposed to Judah, but
including it, and signifying the whole people of God. For it is usual in the
holy Scripture, for the same words to be taken sometime more largely and amply,
sometime more strictly and narrowly; and therein also the same things are
expressed sometime more amply, and sometime more briefly. Whereof we must take
notice for the better understanding and reconciling of several places. So the
word Faith, is sometime taken so narrowly, that salvation and justification is
ascribed to it alone; and sometime again more largely to comprise other virtues
in it, sometime more, sometime fewer, according as the sense of the word is
extended or restrained. I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in
their hearts] Here he begins to describe the new Covenant: q.d. In the old
Covenant I wrote some of my Laws in tables of stone, and Moses wrote other
some in a book, and they were put in the Arc to be kept there. But my new
Covenant shall not be according to that way; but by it, I will write my Laws in
their hearts, and put them in their minds to be kept there. They shall not be
arbitrary and positive Laws flowing from my sole will and pleasure; whereof
their hearts can conceive no reason, and whereof their memories may easily
fail, such as were most Laws in my former Covenant: but they shall be only
natural Laws grounded only upon natural honesty, and upon the dictates of
right reason, that their minds may easily conceive them, and their memories
retain them. And their own consciences shall acknowledge them to be
convenient, just, right and good. And besides, they shall not have a bare
understanding of my Laws to know them, but an hearty affection to do them.
Now because Gods Covenant is described in these words, therefore hence it
appears, that this writing of Gods Laws in men's minds and hearts dependes and
proceeds from the nature of the Covenant. And therefore these words must be
taken within their force and efficacy, and not necessarily extended to the
very effect of the writing, which is always left in the free power of man. For
this is intimated unto us by the following words of God at the 12. verse;
wherein God opens unto us the cause, manner or means of this, which contains
wonderful grace and mercy of God offered to his people; for by this means he
says, it would come to pass, that they would serve him and keep his Laws with
so great fervency. But this way Gods Laws are written upon none but willing
hearts. The sense therefore is. I will make such a Covenant that shall have
sufficient force and power to contain my people in their duties. For to have
Gods Laws written in our minds and hearts, is nothing else, but to be so
knowing, so mindful, and so affected with them, that we never decline from
them, but always observe them with all our endeavor. And I will be to them a
God] This follows from the former; as the former clause opposite to this, [ and
I regarded them not] followed from the peoples not continuing in his Covenant;
which in like manner is opposed to the writing of Gods Laws in men's hearts. For
God to be a God unto us, is to be our sovereigne Protector to defend us from
all evil, and to be our sovereigne Benefactor to accumulate us with all his
blessings. And they shall be to me a people] Either this is really the same
with the former, and an amplification of it, consisting of a mutual relation,
such as we had before in these words, I will be to him a father, and he shall
be to me a son, chap. 1.5. Or else, it is as much as if the Author had said;
And they shall deal by me as my people ought to do, both of us shall perform
our parts respectively: I by protecting and benefiting them, they by
worshipping and serving me.

11. And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying. Know the Lord] They shall not need to admonish and exhort one
another, first to know my laws and decrees, and after upon knowledge thereof
to observe them: but all of them shall be carried with such alacrity of mind
to know and obey me, that none shall need any remembrancer to put him in mind
of it. Neighbor and brother are taken here for the same; for in the Law these
three names are coincident, neighbor, brother and friend. See Lev. 19.18. For
all shall know me from the least to the greatest.] Here again God speaks of
the efficacy of this Covenant, and not of the effect it self; for it shall be
able to produce an universal knowledge of God, though in some single persons
it produce it not actually. All of al sorts, from the least age to the
greatest, young and old, from the least state to the greatest, poor and rich;
and from the least degree to the greatest, low and high.

12. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and
their iniquities will I remember no more] Here God opens unto us the cause of
his ardent affection toward us, and withal unfolds the nature of this
Covenant; namely, that therein he will be merciful to all the sins of his
people, to their unrighteousnesses, their transgressions and iniquities, and
will never remember them more. This so great a benefit must needs oblige all
men's minds, and in a manner constrain them, to consecrate themselves wholly
unto God, and constantly to persist in the daily observation of his Laws.
Which effect, seeing every remission of sin cannot produce, therefore we must
here understand such a one, as has the power to do it; namely, a plenary and
perfect remission, whereby such as are truly and seriously penitent, and
afterward live holily, are released from the guilt or bond of all their former
sins, not only in respect of temporal punishment and death, but also of
eternal death, and withal eternal life is ordained for them. For this
remission of sins, adding the condition of repentance, has this virtue and
power in it, to withdraw men from sin, and for the future to devote
themselves to God. The words unrighteousness, sins and iniquities, do in like
manner teach us, that this remission is plenary and perfect, extended to all
manner of sins, even the most heinous. Hence we see, that this plenary
remission of sins is a promise proper to the new Covenant. For in these words
is evidently proved, what he said before concerning the new Covenant, that it
was established upon better promises then the old. This is the mystical sense
of those words of the Prophet; the literal sense was, that God would deliver
the people of the Jews from the captivity of Babylon, and would so blot out
their former wickedness and foul sins, that he would acquit them from all
further temporal punishments for them; for which so great benefit the people
must needs be marveilously bound to God, and induced to serve him constantly
for ever after. But this sense is far too slender to answer fully and solidly
unto words of so high a nature. For at that time, to speak properly, God
neither made any new Covenant different from the former, neither was that
benefit of such efficacy and power, as to contain the people in their duty
perpetually after. And therefore it is apparent, that the Holy Ghost intended
some other sense far more excellent. In the literal sense then, that
remission, must be understood to be really performed for the taking away of
their temporal punishment: but in the mystical sense, it must be understood
of Gods promise to be performed in due time, for the releasing especially of
eternal death, under condition of repentance, as the nature of the new
Covenant requires it. And hence it is, why the Jews being afterward forgetful
of this divine benefit, as of a thing past, did again fall into diverse sins,
and forsake Gods law. But the Christian, or the people of the new covenant, may
be excited to do their duty perpetually, and serve God cheerfully, to the end
they may at last really obtain the blessing promised them, a right whereto
they now enjoy, and not make themselves unworthy of it by their own fault.

13. In that he says a new Covenant, he has made the first old.] By these
words he shows that the old Covenant is in a manner condemned and rejected:
For when God says he will make a new Covenant, he thereby antiquates and
abrogates the old. Whence it plainly appears, that the old Covenant was in it
self blameable and faulty; and therefore contained no great and excellent
promises in it. And from hence it is most manifest that the new Covenant is
clearly different from the old: neither differs it, only in perspicuity and
cleernesse (as many men beleeye) but in the very promises and conditions of it.
Now that which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away.] From the
former words he inferres by the way, that the old Covenant, although at that
time it seemed to be of force among the Jews, and to stand while their Temple
and their state were standing; yet by little and little it grew to decay, as a
thing waxing old, and already antiquated of God. For that which waxes old,
though it be yet for a time extant and appear; yet after a while it will
wholly decay and vanish; seeing to wax old is nothing else, but by little and
little to be destroyed and abolished. This the Author does ominate of Moses
Covenant, and the event was answerable to his prediction. For not long after
the Temple and State of the Jews was overthrown, whereupon the Mosaic
religion, and the public worship of God prescribed in the old Covenant did
fall and vanish; so that at this day, there appears nothing of it, but only
some relics and shatters, in the tolerated Synagogues of that scattered Nation.

The Contents of this eighth Chapter, are,
1. Doctrine. Christ is a greater Priest then any of the legal Priests, verse
1. Reason. 1. Because he is set at the right hand of Gods throne, whereas the
legal Priest stood before the Mercy-seat, which was but the shadow of Gods
throne, verse 1. 2. Because Christ Ministers in the true heavenly Sanctuary,
whereof the legal Sanctuary was but a shadow, verse 2. 3. Because Christ
offers himself to God a gift and sacrifice; whereof the legal offerings were
but shadows, verse 3. 4. 4. Because Christ is the Mediator of a better
Covenant, established upon better promises then the former, verse 6.
2. Doctine. The Gospel or new Covenant, is better then the old legal
Covenant. verse 6. Reason. 1. Because the Gospel has a better Mediator, so
much as Christ is better then Moses, verse eod. 2. Because the Gospel is
established upon better promises, eod. 3. Because the old Covenant was faulty,
for God found fault with it, as weak and unprofitable, verse 7. 8. 4. Because
the Gospel has better Laws, for they are written in the minds and hearts of
the faithful, ver. 10. 5. Because the Gospel breeds an universal knowledge of
God in all men from the least to the greatest, verse 11. 6. Because the Gospel
allows an universal pardon of all sins whatsoever, v. 12. 7. Because the
new Covenant does antiquate and abolish the old, v. ult.

CHAPTER IX.
1. THen verily the first Covenant] The particle then, for therefore, shows,
that these words so follow the former, that in a manner they are deduced or
inferred from them. Yet they seem not inferred from the words immediately
preceding, though they have some connection even with them also: but rather from
the words near the beginning of the former chapter where the Author made a
comparison of Christ with the legal Priests, and affirmed, that their
Tabernacle, their Ministry, and offerings to God, were but terrene shadows of
that heavenly Sanctuary, wherein Christ does minister and offer himself to
God; and therefore, that the Priesthod of Christ was far more excellent then
theirs. To this point he seems now to return, and to handle a little more
largely, what before he had but briefly touched concerning the ministry and
service of the legal Priests. The word first in the original has no
substantive with it, wherewith to agree; yet must not be referred to the
Tabernacle, as some copies translate it: for it has a clear reference to the
Covenant, which in the last verse of the former chapter, is called the first,
and here again repeated so: for by this reference of it, all things will most
rationally correspond, and comply both with the preceding and subsequent
passages. Had also ordinances of divine service] Ordinances are institutes. i.
Arbitrary and positive Laws or precepts depending on the sole will and
pleasure of the Lawmakers or ordainer; to determine any action for the manner
and other circumstances, which in it self, and by the Law of nature is
indifferent and may be done many ways, to be notwithstanding performed after
some one way. For Gods Covenant does not contain promises only, which are to
be performed on Gods part solely: but they also comprehend Commandments and
Precepts of services and duties to be performed on our part, which we if we
enter the Covenant must promise and covenant to perform, as God on his part
does covenant to perform his promise. The matter or subject of these
ordinances was divine service, how God should be publikly worshipped and
served. The true nature of divine worship and service.
The original word here is, (...); which properly signifies worship, and not
service; for worship and service in reference to God, though by most
Interpreters on the holy Scriptures they be confounded and put indifferently
each for other: yet indeed their natures are very different and contradistinct.
For worship properly signifies any holy reverence, which by some lowly gesture
we perform to God, as by standing up, bowing down, kneeling down, or falling
down before him; whereof the Scriptures afford us many examples. But service
properly signifies any holy action performed immediately to the honor of God;
as prayer, praise, thanksgiving, and sacrificing; whereof also the examples are
frequent in Scripture; and particularly, all the Ministry of the legal
Priesthood by offering gifts and sacrifices, and incense, are commonly termed
the services of the Sanctuary. See Exodus 35.19,21,24. and Numb. 4.4,19,24,27.
and Numb. 8.11,15,22,24,25. and Numb. 18.4,6,7,21,23,31. Thus the public
honor of God, has two maine branches; namely, worship, by holy reverences;
and service, by holy actions: and each of these again have their particular
kinds under them. And in many passages of Scripture these two generals of
worship and service are joined together, thereby as well to include all the
ways of honoring God, as to exclude all the ways of honoring Idols and
Images. See Exodus 20.5. and Deuteronomy. 4.19. and Deuteronomy. 8.19. and Deuteronomy. 11.16. and
Deuteronomy. 30.17. and 1 Samuel 1.3. and 2 King. 17.36. and Jer. 13.10. and Mat. 4.10.
And we are to note that the worship of God is in a manner determined by the Law
of nature; for it is generally the same in all Ages, and among all Nations, who
before, under, and since the Law have worshipped God with gestures of holy
reverences almost alike; so that God has prescribed no particular ordinances
to regulate how we should honor him in respect of worship, because the light
of nature does sufficiently instruct us that this is to be done with most
humble, lowly and reverent gestures. But for the service of God, God has made
especial provision, by diverse particular Ordinances under the first Covenant;
for therein are several Laws and Precepts for all the several services of the
Sanctuary, how the offerings of incense, gifts and sacrifices should be
performed. For men must not serve God after their own will and pleasure, but
after his: seeing service must not be done after the servants pleasure, but
after the Lords pleasure to whom the service is done. But now that first
Covenant being abrogated, the divine services thereunto appropriated, are also
abrogated. And we'are further to note, that when these two words of worship and
service are not conjoined in one sentence, but either of them is put singly
alone; then many times it is ampliated and extended, so generally as to
signify the whole honoring of God, and to include the other; for we find
worship put for it self and service; and service for it self and worship. And
many times they are interchanged, and by a Metonymie of the adjunct, either is
put for the other; as here, though the original be latria, which is properly
worship; yet it is here put for service, and therefore rightly so translated;
for the Ordinances of the first Covenant prescribed nothing for divine worship,
but only for divine service. Hence manifestly appears the true and proper
difference between latria and doulia, whereof the first properly signifies
worship, and the other service; yet both are honor; and when these honors are
divine (for they may be used humanely and civilly; seeing honorable reverences
and honorable services may be due to a Landlord by tenure of a Fee) then they
are so proper unto God, that divinely they cannot be communicated either to
Saints or Angels. And they are so concurrent or connexed each with other, that
the right of the one cannot be separated from the other; but to what person
soever the one is due, to him the other is due also: so that if we grant unto
the Saints or Angels cultum douliae; i. divine service, we must also
necessarily grant them cultum latriae; i. divine worship. Neither can divine
service be performed without divine worship; for then the service is without
reverence, seeing worship is nothing else but that reverence which is used at
or during our service. And a worldly Sanctuary.] A Sanctuary is a divine or
holy place where divine and holy honors are to be done; where divine worship
and divine service are by divine ordinance to be performed. And the legal
Sanctuary under the first Covenant is called a worldly Sanctuary, because it
was seated in this present world, and stood in opposition to the Sanctuary of
the world to come, whereof it was a figure and a shadow. So that by worldly
Sanctuary is properly meant a temporary and earthly Sanctuary; whereas the
other is eternal and heavenly.

2. For there was a Tabernacle made] Having specified two principal things
contained in the first Covenant; namely, Ordinances for divine service, and a
worldly Tabernacle; he severally explicates these, showing the defects of both:
but he begins first, with that which he named last, to wit the Tabernacle: for
Orders were first for the erecting of the Tabernacle, before any Ordinances
were prescribed for the services of it. For the materials, frame and coverings
of the Tabernacle, see Exodus 26. The first wherein was the candlestick, and
the table, and the shew-bread] The Tabernacle was but one single edifice for
the fabric or frame of it: yet there were in it two partitions, divided by a
rich hanging called the second veil, in opposition to the first veil at the
door of the Tabernacle. In the first of these partitions, which for
distinction from the inward partition is here called the first Tabernacle (and
first for entrance only, not for dignity) was the Candlestick, whose matter,
frame, parts and use are described, Exodus 25.31. etc. and the table, whose
matter, frame, measures and parts are described, Exodus 25.23. etc. and the show
bread, which were twelve flat loaves or cakes, set upon the table in two rows
with frankincense, and changed every Sabbath, whereof see the making, Levit.
24.5. Which is called the Sanctuary.] This first partition of the Sanctuary,
was for distinctions sake from the other, called the Sanctuary or holy place.

3. And after the second veil, the Tabernacle which is called the holiest of
all.] That partition or room of the Tabernacle, which was inmost, and
separated from the outward partition or room, by the second vail, was called
the Oracle or the most holy place. The Hebrews called it the holy of holies;
for because their language has no superlatives, therefore they used to
express a superlative sense, by a repetition of positives.

4. Which had the golden censer] The golden Altar, because the use of it was
for incense to be burnt upon it, is called here the golden censer. So that for
the frame or fashion of it, it was an Altar, and for the use of it, a censer.
For the matter, form and measures of it, see Exodus 30.1. This altar or censer
was indeed in the fust Tabernacle; but because it was placed close up to the
veil, which parted the second Tabernacle from the first, and the insense burnt
thereon, was principally to perfume the second or inmost room, therefore the
Author attributes it to the second or inmost room of the Tabernacle. For we
read nothing either in the books of Moses, or else where, that besides that
altar of incense, there was any other censer in the oracle or most holy place.
Neither can it stand with reason, there should be any; for it was not lawful
for the Priest to enter into the oracle or most holy place without burning
incense before he entered; and therefore the altar or censer whereon he was
first to burn incense, must needs be without the oracle, or else he could not
first come at it. And the arc of the Covenant overlaid round about with gold]
The Arc was a strong chest or coffer, the matter, form and measures whereof,
see Exodus 25.10. This was called the Arc of the Covenant for the use of it,
which was to enclose the tables wherein the first Covenant was written. Wherein
was the golden pot that had Manna] Wherein] must be referred to the Arc, as
appears by the beginning of the next verse; for in this verse the Author would
show what was in the Arc, and in the next what was over it. This pot of Manna
was gathered before the building of the Tabernacle, and commanded to be laid up
before the Testimony, there to be kept when the Tabernacle should be built. See
Ex. 16.33.34. And Aarons rod that budded] Concerning Aarons rod, how it budded,
and upon what occasion, and for what purpose it did so, See Number. 17. And the
tables of the Covenant] There were several parcels of the old Covenant, for
there were the tables of the Covenant, which the Lord wrote with his own
finger in stone, containing the Decalog: and there was the book of the
Covenant which Moses wrote and read in the audience of the people, and
sprinkled it with blood, when the Covenant was confirmed with a solemn
sacrifice. See Exodus 24.4. and afterward in this Chapter, verse. 19. Now we
find none but the tables of the Covenant to be laid up in the Arc; yet not
those tables that were first written, for they were broken, upon the
indignation which Moses had at the worshipping of the golden Calfe; but the
tables written afterward were there reserved. But how could the pot of Manna
and Aarons rod be in the Arc, when we read expressly, that nothing was in the
Arc save the two tables of stone, 1 King. 8.9. and 2 Chronicles. 5.10? The Answer
is, Either we must say that in success of time, the pot of Manna and Aarons
rod, came to be put into the Arc, which before were not so; Or we must say,
that the particle In here must be a little extended in sense, to include those
things that were adjacent to the Arc, being near or about it. So John is said
to baptize in Bethabara, because he baptized near or about it, John 1.28. So
Joshua is said to be in Jericho, when he was by or near it. Josh. 5.13. And in
this sense the Author first expresses those things which were by or near the
Arc, as the pot of Manna and Aarons tod; then the things in the Arc, as the
tables of the Covenant: And lastly, in the following verse, the things over the
Arc, as the Cherubims. And this might happily be the cause, why under the
particle in he would first comprise the things by the. Arc, before those in
it, that he might make use of this gradation.

5. And over it, the Cherubims of glory, shadowing the Mercy-seate] The
Cherubims were two Images of solid gold fashioned like winged men, whose wings
did over shadow the Mercy-seate: being one at the one end of it, and the other
at the other; having their faces looking one toward another. Of them see,
Exodus 25.17. And they were called the Cherubims of glory, by an Hebraisme; for
glorious Cherubims, because of their luster and brightness, which in Scripture
is often called glory. The Mercy-seate had two uses; one to be a Cover for the
Arc, to shut up the Tables of the Covenant: the other to represent the seat or
throne of God, where God would speak with Moses to give answers for the
people, and to show himself merciful. And the original word in the Hebrew
carries a twofold sense, to answer and fit this twofold use; for Capporeth
derived from the verb Caphor, which signifies to cover a vessel, and to cover
sin, which last is the proper act of mercy. Therefore though the Hebrew word
might have been simply and fully enough rendered the Cover, yet the Septuagint
following the other signification of the word, have translated, Hilasterion, i.
a Propitiatory or Mercy-seate, which distinguishes this cover from all others,
as a peculiar use and property of it. And it is very consonant to reason, that
by the ambiguity of the word, the Spirit of God would signify so much. Of
which we cannot now speak particularly] Though each of these particulars
concerning the first Covenant, might require particular explication, and serve
highly for advancing the dignity of Christ's Priesthood, and of the new
Covenant; yet the time will not now permit it, because our purpose calls us on
to other matters.

6. Now when these things were thus ordained] Having briefly described the
Tabernacle and the several furniture of it; now he comes to describe the way
of divine service therein; which according to the two partitions or rooms of
the Tabernacle was twofold, whereof he touches the first in this verse, and
handles the other in those following. The Priests went always into the first
Tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God] The ordinary Priests went only
into the first Tabernacle, for none but the high Priest went into the second.
And into the first they went always, that is, every day daily; for herein they
are opposed to the high Priest, who went into the second Tabernacle once every
year. The daily services of God accomplished by the Priests in the first
Tabernacle, were to burn Incense on the golden Censer, and to light up or mend
the Lamps of the Candlestick, etc.

7. But into the second went the high Priest alone; once every yeare] The high
Priest went in alone, and therefore he only; yet he went not in daily, but
yearly once every year, at the solemn fast of Expiation; whereof see Levit.
16. Not without blood which he offered] Not without blood, is with blood; and
with blood only; for the high Priest offered in the second Tabernacle nothing
else but blood. For he must enter thither with the blood of a Bullock and of a
Goat, and offer it, by sprinkling it with his finger upon and before the
Mercy-seate seven times. Whence it appears that this offering of the high
Priest did not consist in the slaughter of those beasts whose blood he offered;
and therefore neither did the offering of Christ answerable thereto, whereof
the Author treates, consist in the death of Christ, but by his entrance into
heaven after his death. Indeed the death of Christ is called an offering and
sacrifice; yet it is so called for the resemblance of it with the free will and
peace offerings, and therefore especially, because it was most grateful and
acceptable to God: in which respect also other notable works of piety may be
and are called in Scripture offerings and sactifices unto God. For himself,
and for the errors of the people. Here is a little trajection of the words;
for the right sense is thus; for the errors of himself, and of the people;
For in this sacrifice the Priest offered no otherwise for himself then for the
people; for so we read it before in this Epistle, chap. 5.3. Now the cause of
this his offering for himself and the people, in that anniversary and yearly
Sacrifice, was only for the errors of both. And by Errors we must here as
we did before, understand such sins, as proceed either from the ignorance or
forgetfulness of some divine Law, (for in such a multitude of Laws, and so
various, respecting not only matter of natural honesty and true morality, but
of positive Ceremony, something might easily escape from men's knowledge or
memory) or from the ignorance of some fact and the circumstances of it; or from
humane frailty or infirmity, which might make the fact as excusable, as
ignorance does, especially that ignorance which is of the Law. And therefore
those universal words in Levit. 16. ver. 16. where in this yearly sacrifice
of Expiation, the Priest is commanded to expiate all the sins of the people,
and to purge the Sanctuary from them, must be restrained only to these sins of
Errors.

8. The holy Ghost this signifying, That the way into the holiest of all, was
not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing.] In
these and the following verses, the Author declares, both the imperfection of
the old Covenant, and the infelicitie of those times, wherein the Tabernacle
and that carnal service of God lasted. For first he shows, that during those
times, the way into heaven was not yet manifested and opened; and then he
shows the infirmity of those sacrifices for the expiating of sin; the
latter of these he does afterward, but the first is delivered in this verse.
For here he teaches, what was the meaning of this. That no man might enter
into the second Tabernacle or most Holy place, except the high Priest, nor he
neither, but only once a year. To this he says, That the holy Ghost; by whose
instinct all this was ordered, would thereby declare unto us, that the way was
not yet open into the holiest of all, namely, into the true and heavenly
Sanctuary, as long as that earthly Tabernacle was yet standing, and continued
in that state of holiness, which God for a time had assigned unto it. But the
abrogation of that Tabernacle, or as I may term it, the profanation of it,
when the veil of it was so rent and opened, that any man might lawfully enter
it, this did declare that the entrance of the heavenly Sanctuary was now open
to all. The opening of the way, and the liberty of entering that Tabernacle,
being granted unto all (which was then done, when God would have that
Tabernacle to be holy no longer) does design unto us a liberty and fredome
granted unto all, of entrance into the heavenly Sanctuary, which is truly and
indeed the most Holy place of all. For hence it was, that as soon as Christ
had given up the Ghost and was dead, whereby our passage into heaven was made
open, the vail of the Temple was rent from the top to the bottom, that it
might no longer keep any man from entering into the holy place. That none are
yet actually entered into the Sanctuary of heaven, beside Christ our high
Priest, the cause is not, that the faithful have not a right and a liberty to
enter, but because they must first put off the rags of their mortal nature,
which being done, then in their due time, namely, at the coming of Christ,
they shall enter by multitudes into that heavenly Sanctuary, the palace of
Immortality, and then take possession of that inheritance, whereto now they
have but a title.

9. Which was but a figure for the time then present] He teaches here the
maine use of the Tabernacle, and of the divine service annexed unto it; that
all was but for a figure or a show, a mystery, or a mask of something to be
further understood by it; which as before we have expressed, was the true
heavenly Sanctuary, and the true worship and service of God to be performed
there by Saints and Angels. And it was but a temporary figure to last only for
a time, during the time present, as it is opposed to the time to come, or as
the Author determines it in the next verse, until the time of Reformation.
Wherein were offered both gifts and sacrifices] He intimates here that the
divine service by gifts and sacrifices was also figurative as well as the
Tabernacle; and thereupon he declares the time which was assigned for this
figurative Tabernacle, how long it should continue and when it should
determine: Namely, that the figurative Tabernacle must last as long as the
figurative service, for whose sake it was ordained, as long as gifts and
sacrifices were to be offered. Whereby he yet further intimates, that with
great reason it stood, that the Tabernacle (or Temple in the room of it) stood
not now in force; for seeing the figurative services of offering gifts and
sacrifices were but temporary, ordained only till the time of Reformation;
therefore those figurative services being abolished, the figurative Tabernacle
also which was but subservient to those services must needs be abolished. Which
could not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the
conscience] By him that did the service, is not meant the Priest only who made
the offering, but also any other person, who brought his offering for a gift or
sacrifice, thereby to worship and serve God; who thereupon might justly be
called the worshipper and servitor of God. The services therefore by offerings
of gifts and sacrifices, could not make the servitors perfect. To make perfect,
here, is fully to expiate sin, as we heard before, chap. 7. ver. 11.19. And
to perfect as pertaining to the conscience, is nothing else, (as appears by
the opposition of those sins, which in the verse following are said to be
expiated by the Legal sacrifices) but to purge away, or expiate those sins,
which polluted and burdened the conscience it self, and not those only which
defiled the flesh and made the party outwardly unclean; nothing else but to
abolish all guilt even of the most heinous sins; and so to abolish it, that
thou shall not fear not temporal punishments only, but not eternal also:
and besides that thou may hope for eternal life, and be assured, that thy
sins past, though they have been very grievous, shall not exclude thee from
salvation; upon condition, thou change the course of thy life, and carry thy
self holily for the time to come; and as much, as such a tried hope of
salvation can draw thee, and so great a favor of God can excite thee, and thy
trust in his help can support thee, to endeavor by all means to keep thy
self unblameable and free from all sin.

10. Which stood only in meats and drinks] He shows what sins the Legal
sacrifices did expiate, and for what purposes they were ordained; namely, for
the sins of Legal impurity or carnal uncleanness; as if a man had eaten or
tasted any of those meats which by the Law were declared unclean, and
forbidden to be eaten; for which see Levit. 11. or if a man had drunk in an
unclean vessel, or had tasted of any water, wine or liquor whereinto some
unclean thing had fallen; for see Levit. 16.32,33. And diverse washings and
carnal ordinances] Or if a man had neglected to wash himself or his clothes,
after he was casually unclean, either by touching some unclean thing, or by
an issue, or by the Leprosy: And carnal ordinances] and such other
Ceremonies, ordained of God after an arbitrary and positive way pertaining not
to the conscience, but to the body and the flesh, as the touching of a dead
carcass, or of any other unclean thing. For although some moral sins
committed against the moral Laws as we call them, were expiated by
Sacrifices; yet none such as were committed presumptuously or with a high hand,
and in contempt of Gods Law, and thereupon truly polluted the conscience: but
only such (as we have already noted) wherein some excusable ignorance or
infirmity had place, being lapses and falls very familiar to man, and not
unworthy of Gods pardon. Besides, these sins were expiated by those Sacrifices
only thus far, that after a full restitution in case of injury, no other
punishment of those sins was thereby taken away, but that which pertained to
the flesh or body in this life; for to take away eternal punishment those
Sacrifices were not able. Imposed on them] It is true, that meats and drinks
and diverse washings were imposed upon Gods Legal people for a time only: yet
the word imposed has not reference to them here, for the Greek text will not
bear that construction: but it referres to gifts and sacrifices in the former
verse; for they were imposed to expiate the sins touching meats and drinks
and diverse washings. Hence we see plainly, for what sins principally under
the Law, those Legal sacrifices were ordained, and what sins were thereby
expiated. We see also what force those sacrifices had in expiating those sins,
that they could not reach unto the consciences to wash away the true and foul
spots that had stained it; neither could they free them whom they expiated from
all fear of divine punishment; for they chiefly washed away the stains of the
flesh, whereby men were accounted unclean, and thereupon forbidden civil
conversation and public commerce; so that these impediments from conversation
and commerce were expiated by those Sacrifices, than men might pass about
their worldly affairs. Until the time of reformation] The gifts and
sacrifices imposed on the people to expiate their corporal or carnal stains,
were not perpetual ordinances, but temporary only for a time; and the term
of that time expired at the time of Reformation. Which is a general correction
or amendment of all things whatfoever pertaining either to the service of God,
or to the happiness of Gods people, whereby things should be brought to an
excellent state and condition. The time of this Reformation or correction is
also called the fullness of time, and that time was fully come at the coming
of Christ; who as the woman of Samaria said of him, at his coming would tell
us all things; she meant, all things concerning the true worship and service of
God. For at the time of his coming, the carnal service of God was turned into
spiritual; and such a sacrifice ordained that by the benefit thereof men might
be thoroughly expiated in their consciences; so that freed before God from the
guilt of all their sins whatsoever, and delivered from the fear not only of
temporal but of eternal punishment, they might exult and rejoice in the hope
of immortal life; and then being inflamed with such high graces and favors
from God, and with a care never to lose the fruits of them, might burn in love
of God and godliness, and forcibly be carried to every good work.

11. But Christ being become an high Priest of good things to come] Hitherto we
have had the proposition of the comparison between the old Covenant and the
new, in respect of the Tabernacle and divine service; Now follows the
reddition of it, wherein the high Priest is opposed to the high Priest, the
Tabernacle to the Tabernacle, the service to the service, the Sacrifice to the
Sacrifice, the Offering to the Offering, and the Expiation to the Expiation.
And all this he comptiseth in two verses, this and the next; which afterward
in the rest of the Chapter, he amplifies and illustrates. Christ was ordained
an high Priest long before, and that by oath, as we have heard before, but he
did not actually execute the office of it while the Tabernacle or Temple was
yet standing and in force: but when the veil of the Temple was tent, that the
Tabernacle was disanulled, and the time of Reformation was come, then Christ
entered upon his office and became an high Priest, to execute it for ever after
the order of Melchisedec. And Christ is a high Priest of good things to come,
in opposition or difference to the old high Priest. By good things to come may
be understood, either those that were to come in respect of the Law, or those
to come in respect of this world. In respect of the Law; a perfect expiation of
sins was to come; and in respect of this world eternal life is to come,
which is the super-perfection or complement of perfect expiation. Now Christ is
our high Priest for these good things, because we attain them by his sacrifice
and offering; for he it is, who provides and takes order for them, as the
Legal Priest did to procure unto the people the good things present for this
life. By a greater and more perfect Tabernacle] If these words depend upon the
verb entered in the next verse; how can Christ be said to enter into the holy
place by a Tabernacle that is greater and more perfect, for then he must enter
into a Tabernacle by a Tabernacle? Therefore, either the particle by in this
place is put for in; and so referred to the preceding words of this verse,
considering the Tabernacle as an adjunct to Christ's Priesthood, wherein he does
minister; as if the Author had said, Christ is become a high Priest both of
better things, and of or in a better Tabernacle, greater and more perfect, then
that wherein the legal Priest ministered; Or else we must say, that the Author,
because he mentioned a double Tabernacle terrestrial, with two partitions or
rooms in it; therefore also he considers a double Sanctuary celestial, in a
manner answerable to the two holy places of the old Tabernacle, the first and
the second. The one of those celestial Sacraries is larger and more common,
wherein the Angels abide: the other is more inward and most sacred, wherein is
the throne of the divine Majesty. For although happily the one be not so
separate from the other, as the two holy places were in the Tabernacle and
Temple disjoined by a veil and a wall: yet it suffices if they differ in
beauty and glory; as in the Courts of great Kings, we may distinguish the
place where the Kings throne or chair of State is seated, by the foot-pace
Canopy and furniture of it, from the rest of the room, though it be not
severed by any partition. In the old Tabernacle the inmost and most holy place,
was at first continuous with the rest of the Tabernacle, and not severed but by
avail; for without some such cross material, the one could not be severed
from the other: But in heaven the difference of brightness and glory serves
for a veil. Christ therefore being to enter into the inmost and most holy
place of heaven, to sit at the right hand of Gods throne, must needs pass
through the large and common mansion of heaven; as the Legal high Priest
entered the second Tabernacle by passing through the first. There are three
things that seem to favor this opinion. 1. Because the Author did mention and
describe a double Tabernacle before; therefore the resemblance of the
comparison does require, that to a double Tabernacle on earth, there should be
answerable a double place in heaven, one a holy place, and the other the most
holy. 2. Because these words do indeed seem to depend upon the verb entered
in the next verse, as appears by the particle neither at the beginning of that
verse, for that particle does use to couple those things that are contained
under one verb, which is here the verb entered. 3. Because the high Majesty
of the Deity seems to require, that in his heavenly Mansion, which (no
question) is most ample and spacious, there should be some most holy place,
sparkling and glittering with the brightness of unapproachable light, where
the most high God and supreme Lord of all things has his throne and residence,
answerable to the most holy place in the Tabernacle, wherein the throne of God
was said to be seated. This first Tabernacle of heaven through which Christ
passed, is said to be greater and more perfect; i. then the terrene Tabernacle
under the Law; and it is greater and perfecter not only in quantity but in
dignity. Not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building.] He would
give one instance at the least to declare the dignity of Christ's Tabernacle to
be greater and more perfect then the legal, because it is not made with
hands, or by art of man, as the legal was. Yet because the Author would show,
that by these words he comprehends something more, then appears at the first
sight; therefore he declares, what he means thereby; namely, that Christ's
Tabernacle is not of this building. It is not only not made by the hand or art
of man, but also it is not of the number of visible creatures; which though
they be not made by the hand and industry of men, yet they are like to handy:
works, because they are visible and corruptible as handy-works are. In which
sense, the Apostle opposing the house of our glorious body to this of our
corruptible and frail body, says of it, that it is no handy-worke made with
hands, 2 Cor. 5.1. Or rather, the Tabernacle of Christ is said, not to be of
this building or creating; because it is not framed of visible materials or any
other stuff subject to the eye, whereof all handy-works wrought by man's art,
are made. Therefore these words, not of the building, must be extended more
largely, then the other, not made with hands, do properly signify. For it
does not presently follow, that if it be not made with hands, therefore it is
not of this building; unless as we have said, we take a handy-worke made by
hand; to signify metaphorically, that also which is like to a handy-worke made
by hand; as are all things of this building or creating, which have been made
from the beginning of the world; or else so (which comes all to one) as to
comprehend all things, which in respect of their matter are of the same kind
with handy-workes, as are all things made of God from the beginning of the
world; for of these are all handy-workes framed. Hence it appears, that there
is another building or creature of God, far more excellent then the building or
frame of this world, whose form and matter is of another kind, far more
fair, pure, sublime, and stable, then this which we see. And to this building,
pertaines that heavenly Tabernacle of Christ our high Priest, which is the
Temple and residence of the most high God.

12. Neither by the blood of goats and calves] Here he opposes the sacrifice
of Christ to the sacrifice of the old legal Priest. The old high Priest
entered the most holy place by the blood of goats and calves. But Christ
entered, not by such base blood, but by most precious blood, which could be no
other, besides his own; for as his person was most precious, so must needs his
blood be. The blood of man is more precious then the blood of a beast: but the
blood of Christ is far more precious then the blood of all men besides. Seeing
Christ himself is far more excellent then all other men, yea then all other
ereatures; for he is more dear and near unto God then all, as being his
unigenit and only begotten Son. But by his own bloud] We are to note, that
the Author to suit the elegancie of his comparison, did in the first member of
it use the particle by; although the legal high Priest entered the holy place,
not only by the blood of goats and calves, i. having first shed the blood of
those beasts, or after the shedding of their blood; but also with their blood,
which he carried into the holy place with him and offered it by sprinkling it,
upon and before the Mercy-seat. But in the sacrifice of Christ the resemblance
could not be extended so far, seeing Christ shed not the blood of an other
creature but his own blood; neither in his heavenly Tabernacle did he offer
his blood after his death but himself, when he was become immortal, and had
cast off the rags of flesh and blood, because they cannot possess the Kingdom
of God. And therefore he entered the holy place of heaven not with his blood,
but only after he had shed his blood. Now because Christ entered thus,
therefore the Author said less of the legal high Priest then indeed the thing
it self was, and used the particle by to fit the comparison. For in the
sacrifice of Christ, the matter was in part somewhat otherwise, then in the old
expiatory sacrifice. In that old sacrifice, as also in other sin offerings, the
beast it self that was slain was not offered unto God, nor burnt as a sweet
savor unto him (as the Scripture terms it) but the kidneyes and the fat of it
only; neither was the carcass brought into the holy place, but the blood of it
only. But in the sacrifice of Christ, not his blood which he shed when he was
slain, but he himself must be offered, and he must enter the holy place of
heaven by himself. For hence afterward at the 14. verse it is said, that
Christ offered himself to God, and not his blood; although otherwise the
comparison with the expiatory sacrifices seem to require this latter
resemblance. He entered in once into the holy place] The entrance into the most
holy place is necessarily required to that sacrifice; for the Offering (wherein
the nature of the sacrifice chiefly consists) could not be performed before
the entrance, because it must be made in the holy place, by sprinkling upon and
before the Mercy-seat. Hence it is manifest that the offering and sacrifice of
Christ our high Priest was not made upon the Cross, but was performed in
heaven, and is yet in the performing. Into this true holy place of heaven
Christ entered but once, not often and yearly as the legali high Priest did.
Having obtained eternal redemption] Now he opposes the Expiation obtained by
the offering or sacrifice of Christ, to the old Expiation obtained by the
legal Priest. By Redemption he understands expiation or deliverance from the
guilt of sins. For to be guilty of sin, and thereupon bound over to death
and damnation is a grievous captivity and slavery. When he calls this Expiation
eternal, he tacitly gives a reason, why he said before, that Christ entered
once only into the holy place; namely, because by his entrance and offering of
himself he expiated or atoned men for ever; as it is said chap. 10.14 Christ
therefore obtained an eternal redemption, because he has fully expiated all
the sins not only past, but to come, of all men believing in him, who have
lived heretofore, or do now live, or shall live hereafter to the worlds end. So
that this expiation does pertain to all sins, of all times and of all men,
who truly pertain to Christ. But the legal expiation performed yearly every
year, did not extend to all sins, but only to Ignorances and Infirmities;
nor to all times, not at all to the time future, but only to the time past
within the circuit of one year; nor to all persons, but only to those who were
then living when the expiation was made; and therefore it was not eternal, but
only annual. The word having obtained, must not be understood preteritively,
as if Christ had obtained the redemption before he entered; but presentively,
that he had obtained it by and upon his entrance; or when he entered then he
obtained. See what we explicated before concerning indefinite participles,
Chap. 6. ver. 13.

13. For if the bloud] He confirms his former assertion, That Christ by his
one oblation of himself has obtained an eternal expiation for us. And that
he might compass this the better, he proves by an argument, a minori ad majus,
that Christ has purged away those sins that pollute our consciences. For the
expurgation of these does produce this effect, that laying aside all sin, we
shall serve God ever after in all holiness and righteousness: and if we do
this, we shall need no further offering for our sins. As on the contrary, if
we finally forsake not our sins, but after expiation of them relapse into
them again (which we then do when this expiation does not so far prevail
with us, as to withdraw us from our sins) then we have need of another
offering and sacrifice, to obtain remission of our relapses. For it stands not
with reason; that men should be expiated with one only sacrifice, and yet be
still enslaved to the same sins, and be nothing the better for their
expiation. Therefore either the expiation is prevalent and of force to withdraw
men from sin, and make them live holily ever after; or else as men always
return to their sins, so the expiation must be always iterated, and then it
cannot bring eternal redemption to them. It is therefore manifest, that the
offering of Christ, seeing it is but one, can really profit no man, but him
that having received the faith of Christ, does shake off the yoke of sin, and
wholly devote himself to God, to live in a holy course of life ever after. Of
bulls and goats] He calls those Bulls which in the former verse he called
Calves; as well for their age being of a middle grouth between Calves and
Bullocks, in which sense also a Heifer is sometime put for a Cow; as by a
synecdoche putting either of these indifferently for any beast of the herd, as
opposed to those of the flock which were goats or sheep. For in the yearly
sacrifice for the sins of the whole people, to which the Authors words refer;
to speak properly, there was no Bull slain, but only an heifer (or as our
Translation renders it, a Bullock) for the sins of the Priest, and a goat for
the sins of the people. And this is the reason why the Author joins these
beasts here, as likewise he does it afterward, Chap. 10.4. And the ashes of an
heifer, sprinkling the unclean] How the water of separation was made of the
ashes of a burned heifer, and sprinkled upon the unclean; see Numb. 19. It is
not necessary for the concluding of the Authors argument, that the ashes of the
heifer should be put here for a type of the blood of Christ; for the argument
here is not drawn from the type to the antitype (unless it be accidentally)
but from terms of disparity, and excellency of Christ's offering. This we
therefore note, lest any man should think it might be gathered from hence,
that the Author compares this sacrifice of Christ, with any other legal
sacrifices, besides the anniversarye, at which the high Priest entered the most
holy place. Although we willingly acknowledge, that those ashes were a type of
Christ's blood, and a most lively type; because those ashes were a kind of
perpetuity, and must always be in a readiness, and had force at any time to
cleanse any person sprinkled therewith from his legal uncleanness of the
flesh; and this force or effect of it depended not on the pleasure of any man,
but only from the decree of God alone. So the blood of Christ is a perpetual
and standing remedy, that has force and power at any time to cleanse men from
the guilt of their sins, if they be truly sprinkled with it, by being washed
from the filth of their sins; i. if they cast them off for the time to come;
and this force the blood of Christ has from the good pleasure of God. These
ashes are said to sprinkle, not efficiently, as if the action began at them,
and they sprinkled themselves; but instrumentally because the unclean was
sprinkled with the water wherein they were infused; as we say, the sword
wounds, because the sword is the instrument wherewith the wound is made.
Sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh.] To sanctify is to cleanse; for
sanctified is commonly opposed to polluted; as polluted and common and
promiscuously used, is easily polluted, and cannot be clean; seeing then a
thing is clean when it is separated from ordinary and common use. For this
sanctifying (as the word following shows) consists only in purifying of the
flesh. All the sanctifying that proceeded from the offerings of the blood of
calves and goats, or from the sprinkling of the ashes of an heifer, was but a
carnal purifying to cleanse the flesh. The Ceremonial uncleanness wherewith
men by chance were defiled, were expiated by these offerings and sprinklings;
and the party predefiled became purified; so that now it was lawful for him
to converse with other men, to come to the Temple, to be present at divine
servivices, and to partake of the Sacrifice; from all which his former
uncleanness debarred him. So that this Purity or cleanness of the flesh, was
both the end and effect of the offering of blood and sprinkling of ashes.

14. How much more shall the blood of Christ] Some man may think, that the
Author should not have drawn his argument a mirori, but rather a pari; seeing
there seems an equality of reason on both sides, that as well the legal
sacrifice, as that of Christ had a like force to produce their effects; the
blood of beasts to purify the flesh, and the blood of Christ to purify the
conscience. But we must note, that the blood of beasts and the offering of it,
is not altogether of like nature to purify the flesh, as the blood of Christ
offered to God by the spirit, is to the cleansing of the conscience: For if we
look upon the nature of the thing, what force has the blood of beasts offered
in the Sanctuary, that thereby it should cleanse the flesh, or be reputed to
cleanse it? Was not this effect of purifying the flesh, tied to the shedding
and offering of that blood; only by the decree of God? and that it might be
accounted to have this effect, must they not have a knowledge of Gods decree by
some other means? But for the blood of Christ, after the shedding of it, there
followed the offering of Christ himself in the heavenly Tabernacle; or the
shedding of Christ's blood joined with the offering of Christ himself (as the
Author considers the blood of Christ here) seeing Christ therefore shed it,
that he might offer himself in the Sanctuary of heaven, both as a Priest and
as a Sacrifice; The blood of Christ, I say, if we respect the nature of the
thing, has a potent force to purge our consciences, or is the true and
effectual cause of their being purged. For in the offering of Christ, as we
have already said somewhat, and more shall afterward, is contained his singular
and only care of our salvation in heaven; from whence the purifying of our
consciences, and the plenary remission of our sins, does flow and proceed, as
from the proper cause of it. Furthermore, that the blood of Christ may be
known to have so great force, looking on the nature of Christ's death, and the
circumstances of it, every man may easily be admonished of it; For Christ by
his blood did strongly maintain the truth of his doctrine; having shed his
blood he entered into heaven, the habitacle of immortal life, that what he had
promised by his words he might testify to all men by his example; having shed
his blood and entered into his heavenly Sanctuary, he offered himself an
immaculate sacrifice to God for us; having shed his blood he obtained all power
both in heaven and earth, all judgment and arbitrament of our salvation.
Neither to obtain this was the bloodshed of Christ a bare condition, that of
it own nature and proper efficacy conferred nothing to it: but seeing it
contains so hard a work of virtue and obedience, a work so acceptable to
God, and so advancing to his glory, even of it own nature it had force and
power to procure this power unto Christ, and to produce in us the cleansing of
our conscience. He that ponders all this in his mind, can he doubt, but that
by the blood of Christ he is expiated from all stain of sin, if he embrace
the faith of Christ with all his heart, and afterward as far as the hope of
eternal life can encourage him, keep himself undefiled and pure from all
stain of sin? Thus the nature and force of Christ's death being considered,
the Author with very good reason does draw and conclude this his argument, not
from a parity of reason but from a disparity, or from the less to the greater.
The blood of Christ] There seems an Emphasis in these words of the Author, to
make it yet more fully appear, how great force his blood has in cleansing our
consciences; As if he had said, The blood, not of an ordinary man, which yet is
better then that of beasts, but of Christ, who is the unigenit son of God,
feated in heaven at the right hand of God, and reigning over all creatures:
Shall not this blood have much more force to purge the conscience, then the
blood of beasts had to purify the flesh? Now, that we may a little prevent the
words of the Author, the cleansing of our conscience is attributed to the blood
of Christ, both as it is the blood of the Covenant, whereby the new Covenant is
established, and as it is the blood of the sacrifice which is offered for us in
that heavenly Sanctuary; both which the Author has conjoined, saving that he
explicates the first last, and the last first, because it belongs to his
Priesthood, as the former is referred to his Mediatorship; which two functions
of Christ were fitly conjoined in the mention of his blood; for they are both
coupled in the death of Christ; for his Mediatorship ended in his death, and
his Priesthood began there: But how the blood of Christ purges our
consciences, as it is the blood of the Covenant, we shall see hereafter. Yet
now we shall add thus much, that the new Covenant was established by the blood
of Christ, not only as appointed so by God, in manner as the blood of calves
and goats was of old appointed for the establishing of the old covenant: but
even the very nature and condition of his blood, was of great efficacy thereto.
For who can doubt of the truth of that covenant, for confirmation whereof the
blood of Christ was shed, who made this covenant in the name of God, and
afterward became our heavenly King? Who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot to God] Here the Author clearly expresses, by what
means the blood of Christ as it was the blood of the sacrifice, had so much
power and force as to purge our consciences; namely, because Christ having shed
his blood, did through the eternal Spirit, offer himself without spot to God
in the heavenly Sanctuary. Hence it is manifest, that the blood of Christ had
so far power to expiate our sins, as the shedding of it was seconded by Christ
his offering of himself in heaven; which could not follow unless Christ had
first shed his blood: For the blood of Christ, not only as it is the blood of
the Sacrifice, takes efficacy and force to purge sin from the subsequent
oblation of Christ in offering himself in heaven: but also as it is the blood
of the Covenant, it received great force from the subsequent resurrection and
glory of Christ. For the death of Christ is as it were animated and quickened by
his Resurrection and glory, and then are the mighty effects of it, when he
that suffered death to confirm the new covenant, is thereupon acknowledged to
be the Son of God, and the Christ: which certainly could not have been
without his Resurrection and the subsequent glory of it. For then we plainly
perceive the boundless love of God in delivering Christ to death for us; and
the boundless love of Christ in dying for us: from both which we may easily
draw an undoubted hope of our salvation. And then also we see from his most
shameful death, a passage open to immortal life; and lastly, then we esteem
the Covenant most sacred, that was confirmed by a death so precious. But if
Christ had not risen from the dead, who therefore died that he might appear to
be the Christ, and the King over Gods people; his death had thereby lost all
the force of it; yea, it would have been of force to nullify the faith of all
his promises. But he had promised us eternal life in the Name of his Father,
and that he himself would give it us, by raising us from the dead; yea, he
openly said of himself that he would rise the third day, thereby to confirm
his doctine; wherefore unles the event had been answerable, his doctrine had
been stripped of all authority. But let us return to the offering of Christ,
which the Author opposes to the offering of the old high Priest for several
respects. 1. In that Christ offered through the Spirit, and the eternal
Spirit: but the high Priest under the Law, did enter the Holy place, and offer
through his infirmity; a weak man compassed with the flesh. But Christ was
filled with the eternal Spirit, i. with the power of God, which clarified him
from all mortality, and made him eternal, subject to no destruction. Now this
Spirit seems to be called eternal, not only because it eternally resides in
Christ, but because it makes him to become eternal. Of which Spirit, if Christ
had been destitute, he could not have offered himself in that heavenly
Sanctuary, to have remained there for ever. Therefore in these words, (about
which Interpreters have diverse disputes, as men must needs do, when the
genuine sense of any place is either not perceived or not allowed) is expressed
the cause, how Christ being before not only of a mortal nature and compassed
with flesh, but also slain as a sacrifice, could afterward enter the heavenly
Sanctuary, the palace of immortality, and there as a Priest offer himself to
God. This he says was effected by the benefit of the eternal Spirit, who
thoroughly consecrated Christ, and divested him from all natural and terrene
infirmities. That which he had spoken before, chap. 7. ver. 16. that Christ
was made a Priest after the power of an endless life; now he says again in
other words, that Christ offered through the eternal Spirit; for if we look
into the thing it self, what is the power of an endless life, other then this
eternal Spirit? In a like manner Paul treating of Christ, as he is ordained
and declared the Son of God with power by the resurrection from the dead, i. as
God after his resurrection made him the celestial and eternal King of his
people with supreme power, mentions the Spirit of holiness or sanctification,
Romans 1.4. and he says, that Christ was declared the Son of God according to
the Spirit of holiness as he was made of the seed of David according to the
flesh. For, seeing he opposes this Spirit to the flesh of Christ, i. to
whatsoever was humane in his nature, what can he else understand, but the power
of Gods Spirit powered upon Christ, which abolishing from him all his mortal
condition, did thoroughly consecrate him unto God, made him a person most
divine, and most like unto God in nature and power, and rendered him fully
capable of a celestial and eternal kingdom? Hither also must that of Peter
be referred, where he says, (as it is in the Greek) that Christ was mortified
in the flesh, but vivified by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. where as the flesh of
Christ is made the cause of his mortality, and consequently of his death: so is
the Spirit, (namely of God in Christ) made the spring and fountain of his
vivification or life. 2. He opposes the offering of Christ to that of the old
high Priest, in that Christ offered himself; but the Legal Priest offered not
himself, but the blood of slain beasts: but what force could that blood have
being offered and sprinkled before the Mercy-seate for the purifying of the
flesh, if we respect the nature of the thing? But Christ himself being offered
for us in the heavenly Tabernacle, was he not a most acceptable sacrifice to
God? Is there any sin of those that are truly faithful in Christ, which by the
offering of so holy a Sacrifice, and by the authority and care of so great an
high Priest with his heavenly Father could not be expiated? 3. In that he
offered himself without spot or blemish. For the old sacrifice must be very
pure and free from any spot; wherefore seeing our high Priest himself was the
sacrifice, he must needs be void of all spot or blemish. But the old high
Priest when he entered the most holy place and offered, was not without spot or
blemish; for even then he was to procure the expiation no less of his own
sins then of the peoples. But Christ when he entered the heavenly Sanctuary,
and offered himself to God, was then free from all spot, not only in respect
of his most innocent life, which he passed without the least spot of sin; but
also, which as we said in the seventh Chapter, the Author chiefly respects,
in respect of his immortal nature; which he obtained free from all spot of
infirmity, when he was quickened with that eternal Spirit, whereby he entered
the heavenly Sanctuary. But what is meant by this offering of Christ, we have
declared before. For these things are not properly spoken of Christ: but only
comparatively and allusively to the ancient high Priest. So that by this
offering of Christ is signified, his singular and only care for the expiation
of our sins, and for our salvation. Yet it is a care worthy and suitable to so
great an high Priest, who is not destitute of power in himself to confer
salvation upon us, but is forced to obtain it from another, as the old high
Priest was: but is one, that enjoys all command both in heaven and earth, one
that exercises all Judgment delivered over unto him from his Father; and one
that by his own proper power does release us from all guilt of our sins, frees
us from all punishment, and lastly makes us capable of eternal life. Whence it
so much the more appears, how the purging of our consciences does certainly
follow upon the blood and death of Christ, and upon his subsequent offering in
heaven. Purge your conscience from de^d workes] How much more shall the blood
of Christ purge? Shall is so the future tense here, that it carries the force
of the time present. For, in such arguments drawn from comparison, we love to
use the future tense in the consequent member of it. If this be so, much more
shall that. For herein we respect not any futurity of time, but a futurity of
consequence and of truth; for many times we conclude in that manner of things
past. The conscience here is opposed to the flesh; for as the blood of beasts
offered did purge the flesh, so the blood of Christ offered through the Spirit,
does penetrate unto the conscience and purge it. And sins are called dead
works, not formally as if they had no life or activity in them: but
effectively, because they are deadly works, that brings death to the sinner,
and of their own nature keep the sinner dead for ever. These deadly works are
the spots and blots that defile our conscience; and from these our conscience
is purged by the blood of Christ; not only in that we are freed from the guilt
of them in the sight of God, and consequently from all punishment of them; but
also in that we are delivered from the sense of that guilt, and from the fear
of punishment, and so our conscience is cased of a grievous burden. And it was
not for nothing that the Author would rather say, purge our conscience, then
our mind, the inward part of us, opposite to the flesh; Because thereby he
would show, that the blood of Christ does also cleanse away, that misery and
torment of the conscience, whereby men conscious of their wickedness, do
tremble and quake for fear of Gods Judgments. This is most certain, that
true and solid peace of conscience in them that have sinned, does ground it
self upon this, that God has declared his will, they should be free from all
the guilt of their sins; And yet it may be, that men freed in the sight of
God from the guilt of their sins, may not enjoy a peaceable and quiet
conscience, because they are destitute of the knowledge or faith of it.
Therefore the blood of Christ offered to God through the eternal Spirit, does
not only abolish all the guilt of our sins, but also does certify and make
faith thereof unto us; as we heard before. Whence it comes to pass that
there arises a great calm and quiet of conscience in their minds, who have
tasted the efficacy and virtue of Christ his blood and sacrifice; and we may
well say that though formerly their conscience were oppressed with many crimes;
yet then their conscience is wholly disburdened, and they find no guiltiness
in it. And this is the scope which God proposed unto himself in the death of
Christ and the things following thereon. For he would not therefore bind
himself by the blood of Christ and establish a new Covenant, because there
might be danger, that he would not stand to his promises who is most true and
faithful of his word; but because we should want no assurance of his grace and
mercy toward us. And hence also it is, that when Christ was raised from the
dead and invested with immortality, God exalted him into heaven, and committed
unto him the whole care and arbitrament of our salvation. For the efficacy and
force of Christ's death and the consequents upon it, must be distinguished from
their scope whereat God aimed; although that efficacy were subservient to this
scope, and effectual to the compassing of it. The efficacy of Christ's death
and the consequents upon it, was very great, both to obliege God to perform
his promises, and to produce the real effect of them upon us: but the scope
is, (as we have said) to make assured and undoubted faith unto us, of so great
grace of God, of so great salvation and remission of sins; to the end that we
being fully certified thereof, might again on our part perform our duty, and
wholly devote our selves to God. Whence the Author adding afterward this end or
effect of purging our conscience, to be performed by us on our part, does
thereby teach us, that in this purging of our conscience he included, not only
an Immunity from punishmen^, arising from the abolishing of our guilt before
God, but also a security from them, proceeding from our certain knowledge that
our guilt is abolished. Now for the matter of our Impunity or freedom from
punishment; our punishment is not only temporal, but also eternal, opposite
to life eternal. From the punishment of eternal death, those sacrifices (...)
the Law were so far from freeing any man, that they could exempt no man from
temporal death, or capital punishment, for they only took away some other
light penalties or inconveniences of this life. Neither did God write all his
Laws in blood, ordaining death for every offense; but moderated the rigor of
his Law with singular justice and equity. Upon some offenses he laid the
penalty of death, which no sacrifice could release; upon others he laid a fine
and a sacrifice. The mulct or fine was to be paid to the party grieved; but
the sacrifice to himself, for thereupon he remitted the penalty due to
himself; but would have restitution made of the injury done to man. So for
example for theft, the penalty was a restituon of the double, triple or
quadruple, to be paid to the party thereby damaged: but besides this
restitution, the theft was expiated by sacrifice, which was instead of a
penalty to the most merciful God. Lastly, there some things totally void of
all true offense: as for example, if any man had touched a dead body, though it
were of duty to bury him (which was rather a matter of piety then of offense)
yet because this and other such like cases were condemned by the Law of
uncleannes, therefore they were to be expiated either by some sacrifice, or by
the holy water of separation. Therefore all the use of those sacrifices was to
expiate some lighter faults or uncleanness of the flesh; but great offenses
were punished with death. Hence David acknowledging his sin exiable by no
sacrifices of beasts, says to God, Thou desire not sacrifices, else would I
give them: but thou delightest not in burn: offerings, Psalm. 51.16. He means in
the expiation of such crimes as his was; and therefore he flies to the sole
mercy and clemency of God; and resolves to pacify God with the sacrifice of a
broken and contrite heart. The force of which sacrifice, if it be made
seasonably, and abound afterward in the fruits of good works, is established
and ratified by the Law of the Gospel. Now the blood and sacrifice of Christ
takes away all guilt and penalties of all sins, even of the most heinous, in
them who having tasted the force of that sacrifice, do afterward live holily: I
say, all kind of penalties not only of temporal death but of eternal, which
by force of the law all incurred, that had truly and morally sinned. For
temporal life opposed to temporal death proceeded from the observation of the
Law otherwise, then eternal life did opposed to eternal death. For to attain
or preserve temporal life it sufficed to keep the Law taken in an open and
literal sease (as they call it) and to expiate certain offenses by certain
rites and sacrifices. But the latter could no man attain by force of the Law,
unless a man had kept the precepts of it, taken in a mystical sense. i. most
fully and perfectly as the Gospel proposes them. For seeing eternal life was
not contained in the promises of the Law, but in a mystical sense; it was
great equity, that he who would attain it by the benefit of the Law, should
likewise keep the precepts of the Law in a mystical sense. Neither only so;
but it must be kept exactly, and without any sin: so that there should need
no sacrifices or expiations. For no sacrifices were of such force as to take
away the guilt of eternal death; and so estate a man in a right to eternal
life; neither did the Law open any other way to arrive at a plenary
justification joined with the reward of eternal life, then by the merit of
works. To serve the living God] Here is the effect of this Expiation wrought
in us by the blood and offering of Christ. For when our conscience does clearly
acknowledge, that in respect of God, it is freed from all guilt of all sin
even the most grievous, and nothing can hinder us but our selves, from enjoying
the real effect of our being acquitted from all sin; it comes to pass here
by that we must needs have strong motives to carry us on to the worship and
service of God, and to receive the faith of Christ; to the end we may
effectually enjoy so great a blessing, and having once enjoyed it never lose
it, but afterward abstain from all sin with all our possible endeavor,
knowing well that so great a blessing is attained and preserved with true
piety. Hence it appears that this purging of our conscience gotten by the
blood of Christ, must be so understood in this place, that for the real effect
of it, it depends upon our duty on our part; i. then it begins to have it
effect in us, when our faith and obedience begins toward God and Christ; and is
continued by the continuance of our faith and obedience, and by constancy and
perseverance in faith and godliness to the end, is at length consummated, and
does rest in a full and immutable right to eternal life, the effect whereof
will most certainly follow in due time. For unless this effect and complement
of our expiation depend reciprocally upon our duty, and our duty and will to
serve God flowed immediately from it, what one man among a thousand would serve
God upon the expiation of his finnes, if he knew that without this, he could be
expiated effectually, and released from the guilt of all his sins, and enjoy
a full right to eternal life? because therefore this offering of Christ does
withdraw us from sin, and makes us afterward serve the living God; hence it
comes to pass, that Christ does expiate us by one only offering, or that our
expiation flowing from the offering and sacrifice of Christ is eternal and
lasts forever. For what need the offering be iterated, if men once expiated,
sin no more? For although sometime by error or infirmity the true worshippers
of God may offend; yet because the offering of Christ does not so properly
intend to expiate such light offenses, as sins that are more heinous; as
appears by the proper nature of the new Covenant, as it stands distinguished
from the old; therefore the oblation of Christ must not be iterated for our
light infirmities and lapses. Therefore for the removing of the guilt of such
light offenses, the perpetual residence of Christ our high Priest in his
heavenly Sanctuary, and his intercession to his Father for us, is abundantly
sufficient; so that for them he need not shed his blood again, and after the
shedding of it enter into his Sanctuary. The word (...) does not always
signify all kind of obedience and service done unto God, but chiefly that
divine service done to God publikly and most properly, as has before been
showed, those holy reverences which we perform in the worship of God* Yet the
Author uses it here by a Metonymie, for all divine service that is joined with
the worship of God; for worship and service are mutual adjuncts connexed each
to other. For so great a benefit of God as the expiation of all our sins should
easily move us to perform divine services unto God, by praises and
thanksgivings and wholly to devote out selves to worship to good a God; for
then we take courage to approach unto God to worship and serve him, and to hope
that the honor we do him will not be unacceptable unto him, when we feel our
conscience clean and quiet, as purged from all sin. Or else the word here is
taken by way of Metaphor, whereby all good works pleasing unto God and done for
his sake, are accounted for sacrifices and offerings acceptable to God; and
that wholly endeavors them may fitly be said to serve God. God is here called
the living God according to the ordinary phrase of Scripture; which
notwithstanding in this place wants not an emphasis: Not only because hereby
the true God is distinguished from all the feigned gods of the Gentiles, which
because they were nothing but wooden or stony Idols, and therefore wooden and
stony gods, were called vain and livelesse gods, and are opposed to the living
God. But also to show the cause, why we should worship and serve God, and
withal the happiness of those that devote themselves unto him. For seeing he
is the living God, he is also the true God, who can reward his worshippers and
servitors with great benefits, and recompense them with fearful judgments who
neglect him. To this end Paul writing to the Thessalonians says, Ye are
turned from Idols to God, to serve the living and true God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. And
the word there is (...), which properly signifies to serve. And God is
eminently called the living God, not only because he truly lives, but also
because he is the fountain of life to all other things which do live. In which
sense sometimes, he alone is said to live, or to have life and immortality in
himself.

15. And for this cause] Here the Author confirms his former assertion by a
new argument, in that Christ is the Mediator of the new Testament, or that
Christ made the New Testament and sealed it with his blood. For this is the
nature of the New Testament (as we showed in the former Chapter) to contain
the remission of all our sins, even the most heinous, and consequently to be
of force to purge our conscience. And because it is a Testament, therefore it
was first to be confirmed by death, which here neither can nor must be any
other then the death of Christ. Whence it is manifest that the death or blood
of Christ, as it confirms the New Testament, does purge our conscience from
dead works. The particle and shows that a new argument is alleged; and the
words for this cause note the final cause, for which Christ died. He is the
Mediator of the New Testament.] We now use the word Testament and not
Covenant, because the Greek word (...) properly signifies a Testament and not a
Covenant (though sacred Writers use it to signify also a Covenant.) And the
ambiguity of the word did well serve the Author to draw his argument from that
which must needs be done in a Testament. And to speak a little yet more
accurately, Testament and Covenant differ but alternly, as genus and species.
For every Testament is a Covenant, though not e contra; for though the heir
do not covenant with the Testator at the making of the Testament, because that
may be done altogether without his knowledge, which is necessarily required in
him that covenanteth: Yet he covenants at the validity of the Testament; for
when the Covenant takes effect by his acceptance of the condition specified in
the Testament, and by his entrance upon the Inheritance, then (though before he
were free) he covenants ex Lege, to perform the will of the Testatour. So that
every Testament at least when it is consummate and valid, is a kind of
Covenant; and it is the best kind of Covenant; 1. Because it is most solemnly
testified by sealing and witnessing, from whence it is called a Testament. 2.
Because it is most preciously confirmed, even by death, and the death of him
that makes it, who establishes his own deed by his own death. 3. Because it
contains an extraordinary benefit, in conveying the Testators inheritance and
whole estate to the heir. And lastly, because it proceeds with the greatest
freedom, in leaving the heir to his liberity, whether he will accept of the
Inheritance or not. Now this New Testament is the last will of God, which must
stand for ever, because it is already confirmed, and therefore cannot be
revoked. But how Christ is the Mediator of it has been partly showed before,
chap. 8.6. and is partly to be showed afterward; yet his Mediatorship
consists chiefly in these two acts, first in declaring or publishing it, and
then in confirming or establishing it by his death, as a Testament ought to be.
That by mean, of death for the transgressions that were under the first
Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance] Here is a file of final causes linked one to another, whereof the
last end is, the obtaining of an eternal inheritance; the intermean is the
redemption for the transgressions which were under the first Testament; the
prime Mean to these two former subordinate ends whereby they are successively
atrained, is death, which in a Testament must necessarily intervene. Hence we
may see, that the redemption of transgressions does properly depend and flow
from the New Testament; and the death of Christ does give force and strength to
this Testament. The word Redemption is put for Expiation, as was showed ver.
12. For Expiation is one kind or sort of Redemption; both because the effect
of expiation is a delivery, and because also the means or it whereby it is
wrought is an expense, for it commonly costeth blood. Hence some Translators in
this place render it Expiation. But because the word Redemption carries the
sense of Expiation, therefore it both follows the construction of it, and is
simply called the redemption of transgressions; either for their expiation, as
we have said. In which sense the Scripture speaks elsewhere. For Prove 16.6.
where the vulgar Latin reads it, By truth iniquity is redeemed; there our
English translation has it, By truth iniquity is purged, i. expiated; Or for
redemption from transgressions. For Cicero himself in a sense not unlike,
says, Liberationem culpa, for a culpa. And he uses the word Transgressions,
whereby grievous sins are commonly signified, to show us, what sins chiefly
are remitted in the New Testament; namely, heinous and grievous sins; for
which in the Old Testament there was no expiation allowed, but the punishment
of death imposed. Wherefore he adds, Which were under the first Testament] He
means which remained in force, or could not be expiated, or for which no
remission was allowed under the Law. But he seems withal to intimate, that
those grievous sins had their being, and were wont to be committed under the
Old Testament; whereas the New Testament together with their guilt, does wholly
take away their being, in them who cordially believe the promises of it. For
that this is the force and effect of the New Testament, and of the blood of
Christ, we have already showed, partly in the eight Chapter, and partly here.
And he mentions not the expiation of transgressions only or grievous sins
therefore, as if under the New Testament also all lighter sins were not
expiated: but it is as much as if he had said, Yea even of those transgressions
under, etc.] For sometimes the Scripture speaks simply, not to exclude other
things, but to teach us, that those other things whereof there might be greater
doubt are included, and which being thought included, much more is it to be
thought so of the rest. So Psalm. 25.8. David says of God, That he is good and
upright, therefore will he teach sinners in the way, i. Yea even sinners, and
not righteous men only, though he will teach them also, and much rather; for so
he presently adds in the verse following, The meek will he guide in judgment
and teach his way. So Paul, Romans 4.5. says, That God justifies the ungodly;
not that he justifies him only, but that he is so gracious as to justify
him also. Or else the Author mentions only transgressions, or grievous sins,
to show that they chiefly are expiated under the new Testament, and that this
is the proper fruit of the new Testament, and of the oblation of Christ. But if
the guilt of grievous sins be taken away under the new Testament, much more
must it be true of lighter sins. Besides, grievous sins do much more grieve
the conscience then lighter; for to lighter sins there was some expiation
granted in the law, whereby men might imagine that God of his infinite goodness,
would also release the penalty of eternal death; but to the other no expiation
was allowed. Might receive the promise. To receive the promise of eternal
inheritance, does in this place signify, to enter the real possession of the
eternal inheritance which was before promised; and not to receive the promise
of it only. Therefore those grievous sins whereof men stood guilty, and for
which they were subject to eternal death, must first be expiated, before they
can enter and receive the eternal inheritance. For those sins did hinder men
from entering it; which being purged away, now nothing hinders, but they may
take possession of it. But who shall do this? shall all promiscuously? no
certainly, but they which are called]. i. They to whom this eternal inheritance
is offered by the Gospel of Christ, and who accept this great grace of God by a
lively faith? For both of these use to be included in the word called. But he
simply says, they which are called might receive this eternal inheritance;
because all which are called may receive it, if they will, and be not wanting
to themselves; for in God and Christ there is no let.

16. For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of
the Testator.] Here he gives the cause why he said, that by means of death,
this effect of remission of sins, and receiving the eternal inheritance does
follow; because (says he) where a Testament is, there of necessity the death
of the Testator must intervene, which reason he confirms by a Super-reason in
the verse following. But here some man may object, that the Author does but
sophisticate with words, and not draw a real argument from the thing it self.
Seeing Christ was not the Author of any testament properly, but only the
Mediator of the Covenant; although the Greek writers use the word Testament
to signify a Covenant: But the ambiguity of the word, must not confound the
natures and properties of the things; so that what is true of one thing which
the ambiguous word signifies, should forthwith be transfered to the other,
signified by the same word. We answer, That the speech is here of such a thing,
as is common to both the significations of the word, the proper and improper,
or rather the general, and the special; i. that is Covenant, and Testament,
for we said before, that every Testament is a Covenant, an especial and best
kind of Covenant. For Covenant is a general name whereby those things are
called, that are more properly named leagues and testaments; both which are
Covenants: And indeed, almost throughout the old testament, the original word
which our English translation renders Covenant, does properly signify a
League, and were better so rendered; for because God is a public person, and
so is mankind also, therefore all Gods Covenants with man are properly
Leagues. Hence the Latin translations, both vulgar and others, constantly
render them Faedera. So for a testament, if we consider the nature of it
accuratly, then any solemn act of any person testified by his death is
properly a testament; and he who testifies another act, though he be no
Author, but only the assertor of it, is properly the testator of it. For hence
the Civilians have borrowed their terms of Testament and Testator, which
commonly concur in the same person; yet not necessarily, but accidentally:
for whatsoever witness will testify, upon his death, the verity and certainty
of another man's last Will and Testament, such a witness is truly a testator
to that Testament. And he that mediats to certify a man's Testament, and
mediats so far as to testify it with his death, he is both the mediator and
the testator of that Testament: so that a mediator and a testator, in respect
of the same Testament, are not functions incompatible, but consentaneous, that
may easily concur in the same person. Yea, he that in this sense is the
testator of a Testament, is necessarily thereupon the mediator of it. So that
Gods two solemn Covenants, or rather his Leagues, the old and the new, are
truly and properly called Testaments; because they are both testified by blood
and death, to certify, confirm, and establish them; for the old Testament was
testified by the blood and death of calves and goats, which was therefore
called the blood of the Testament, as it is declared in the verses following.
But because the new Testament was testified, certified, confirmed, and
established, by the death and blood of Christ, therefore Christ, though he
were not the Author of it, yet is most truly and properly the testator of it.
And because Christ did mediate for this Testament, to certify and publish it
to the world, that the old and former testament was abrogated and revoaked, and
that this new one was the last Will and Testament of his Father: therefore also
be was most truly and properly the Mediator of it. And he was so constant
and earnest a Mediator, to certify the truth of this new Testament, that
thereupon he became the testator of it also, to testify and confirm it with
his death and blood. Nay, because Christ was the Testator of it, therefore he
must necessarily also be the Mediator of it; for no man will testify that
truth or that cause with his blood, for which he no way mediats; seeing he that
no way mediats for a thing, will (...) testify it with his blood. Wherefore in
the words of these 16. and 17 verses, though the Author for a while supposes,
and takes it for granted, that not only death, but the death of the Testator
(which here is Christ) must needs intervene to confirm the new Testament; yet
a little after at the 23. verse, and so forward, he clearly demonstrats it.
For there he teaches, that the matter must not, nor could not be effected by
the blood of beasts; because he was both the Mediator and the high Priest of
the Covenant or League; who when he was to appear before God in his heavenly
Sanctuary, and there to perform his offering, certainly he was not to slay
some beast, to bring the blood of it into that Sanctuary: but must shed his own
blood, to make himself his own offering in heaven; thereby to confirm and
establish the new League or Covenant; which as he might do, so he must do it,
for the great dignity and sublimity of the particulars therein contained. So
that in this respect the new Covenant comes nearer to the nature of a
Testament, then of a League, which was the proper nature of the old Covenant.
For what effect could there be in the blood of a beast, to confirm and make
faith unto us of heavenly promises? Such a Confirmation had very ill beseemed
this divine and heavenly Covenant, especially seeing it might be confirmed by
other blood more suitable to it, and by blood that notwithstanding was to be
shed for another cause; which cause has already been showed at the 14. verse.
Whence we may perceive, that in these words in this 16. verse, as they are
also extended to Covenants or Leagues, and to the Authors and Mediators of
them, something must be understood to make the truth of them fully to appear,
which yet is not expressed, because it makes nothing to the point in hand. For
these words of the Author here must be taken, as it he had said, where a
Testament is, there must needs be the death of the Testator, or at least (as
in leagues which in a manner resemble Testaments) the death of some creature,
whereby the League is confirmed by him that makes it; for till death intervene,
a Testament or League, is of no force and strength: which exception, or rather
which correction of his general saying, why it was not added here, the cause
has been already showed. We may also answer the former objection thus. That
his reasoning here is comparative by way of similitude, not explicitly, but
contractedly as is ofen used. And the words are to be taken, as if he had said;
as when a Testament is made, the death of the Testator must needs accede;
because it must be animated by the death of the Testator; for while the
Testator lives, the Testament lives not, or is not in force: So also when the
new League or Testament was ordained, his death must accede that made it, and
was in stead of the Testator, that the Testament might be firm and of force.
For though Christ made not the new Testament as the Author or principal agent
of it, yet because he was the Mediator, and instrument of his Father to speed
it in his Fathers name, therefore he may be said to have made it; for we
commonly attribute the same action both to the agent who is the prime cause of
it, and to the Instrument who is the means of it. From hence it manifestly
appears, what force the blood of Christ has in procuring us remission of
sins; namely these, two forces; first that by it the New Testament was
established or confirmed; and secondly, that thereupon he offered himself to
God for us in heaven. So that his blood was confirmatory to settle the eternal
inheritance upon us; and expiatory to procure an eternal redemption of our
sins: whereof the former is handled in this verse, the latter in those
precedent. Why Christ is called here the Testator, we have before sufficiently
reasoned; namely, because he was the maine witness to certify the truth of
the Testament by his death; and because he was the maine party by whose death
the Testament which till then lay dead, became alive and valid to be of force
and effect. Yet here we shall add one reason more, because it will serve
wondrously to annimate our faith and love toward Christ; and that is, because
the inheritance conveyed unto us by this New Testament, is properly the
inheritance of Christ; for he is the unigenit or only begotten Son of God,
and was ordained to be Lord and heir of all his Fathers estate; and has
admitted us that will accept of it, to be co-heires and fellow-partners with
him in it; and dyed as the Testator to settle the possession of it upon us. Or
to speak in the words of Paul, He has received us to the glory of God, Romans
15.7. And the words of Christ to his Disciples tend to this sense. I appo^nt
unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, Luke 22.29.

17. For a testament is of force after men are dead] This is the reason why the
death of the testator must accede to the testament he has made, because all
the while the testator lives, his testament is dead and of no force to give any
possession to the heir of the inheritance and estate thereby to be conveyed:
but when the testator is dead then the testament takes life and becomes of
force; for then the heir has an actual right and power to enter upon the
inheritance. And therefore he adds, Otherwise it is of no strength at all,
while the testator lives. These are the same words in effect with the former,
and are but a consequence from them, by that rule of reasoning which we call
conversion by contraposition. For if a testament be of force when the testator
is dead; then it must needs follow, that while the testator is not dead, the
testament is of no force. Which kind of reasoning is frequent in Scripture;
yet among many passages we shall instance but in this one, and in this the
rather, because the texts of it are much obscured by Interpreters, who labor
to reconcile them, as if they seemed opposite; whereas no two texts can be more
according, for they are wholly equipollent, and each consequent to the other.
Christ says, He that is not with me, is against me, Mat. 12.30. and he says
again, He that is not against us, is for us; or which is all one, He that is
not against me, is with me, Luke 9.50. This latter saying in Luke is so far
from being opposite or contrary to the former in Matthew, that it is a most
immediate and necessary consequence from it. For if this saying be true as it
is, because the truth has said it, He that is not with Christ, is against him.
Then this also from thence must needs follow for a truth, He that is not
against Christ, is with him. Because this latter saying is the conversion of
the former by contraposition.

18. Whereupon neither the first was dedicated without bloud] What he had said
before in general of testaments, now he declares in particular, and proves by
an example in the first or Old Testament, and makes way for himself to apply
the same unto Christ, and to the New Testament established by him. For because
under the Old Testament it self was confirmed by blood; and because almost all
things were cleansed by blood, at least sins could not be cleansed without
shedding of blood: Therefore from hence, he gathers by way of similitude, that
death and shedding of blood must needs intervene under the New Testament, that
thereby both the Testament it self might be confirmed, and our sins purged.
Was ded^cated. The Greek word is (...); which as Interpreters note is properly
said, when some solemn act is done, whereby a new thing being perfected and
finished, begins to come in use. So the Consecration of Solomon's new Temple,
was called the Dedication of it; and the Consecration of the new Altar erected
by Judas Maccabeus was called the Dedication of it, 1 Maccab. 4.56. And the
annual celebration of that dedication is called the feast of the dedication.
John 10.22. yet this word applied to leagues, signifies nothing else but to
confirm them. And leagues are then confirmed, when they are so ratified, as
thereby they have force and strength to become obligatory and binding to all
parties therein interessed. For the confirmation of a league, is some solemn
act done by the confederates, or in their name, whereby they mutually so bind
their faith, that it shall not be lawful for either party to rescinde or
revoke the league. And although there be many forms of confirmation for
leagues, yet anciently the usual form was by blood, and that of the Old
Testament was performed by the blood of beasts: Wherefore with good reason, the
Author says, that it was not dedicate or confirmed without blood; i. it began
not to come in use among men, and to be of force, before it was ratified by the
bloodshed of beasts. For this blood gave beginning to that testament, in
respect of the force of it. The Author uses the very same word afterward Chap.
10.20. where our English Translation renders it consecrated. By a new and
living way which he has consecrated unto us; whereof in it due place.

19. For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people] That the first
Testament was not dedicated without blood he now proves, by a narration of the
carriage of the action, showing the dedication or confirmation of that
Testament both for the manner and matter whereby it was confirmed; and his
narration hereof is for the most part taken out of Scripture. Exodus 24. Moses
did both speak and read all the precepts to the people. For first he spoke
them by word of mouth, as the Lord had delivered them to him; and upon his
rehearsing or speaking of them, the people gave their unanimous approbation and
consented to do them. Exodus 24.3. Then he wrote them in a book, and read them
in the audience of the people; and the people again the second time gave their
approbation. ibid. ver. 7. The word spoken includes both these actions of
reciting and reading; for all reading is speaking also, because he that reads,
speaks out of a book. The precepts by Moses confirmed, were all those Laws of
the Old Testament, that did bind universally, both persons and times, which
all persons were bound to observe perpetually; for such were properly the
precepts of Gods league with the people, although happily they were not all
assigned to the preceding Chapters in Exodus but are related in other places,
and in the following books of Moses. For those preceps which after the
confirmation of the league or testament, are described in the following
Chapters of Exodus, are not properly Laws, but certain Ordinances of God for
the present, concerning the framing and ordering of the Tabernacle, the
furniture of it, and other things, whereby the worship of God was then to be
performed. And yet there besome, who think, that the passages recited, Exodus
24. concerning the confirmation of the Covenant, are spoken only by way of
historical anticipation. And this opinion is not without some show of
probability. According to the Law] This is a limitation of the universal word
every precept, to show, that he spoke not of all precepts in general, but of
every precept in the Law delivered to Moses, and written by Moses in the book,
and read by Moses to the people. He took the blood of calves and of goats] It
is not expressed in the story of Moses that he took or shed the blood of goats
for that action. Yet it is very credible, that there were goats among the
burnt-offerings and peace offerings then slain unto God. For that Moses names
only calves, it might therefore be, because they are the more worthy creatures:
Unless we should rather say, that first the whole people was sprinkled and
expiated by Moses, which the Author chiefly respected, and might know it some
other way; for the blood of goats was usually shed to expiate the sins of the
whole people. With water and scarlet wool and hysop] Neither do we read this
in the forecited place of Moses; but the Author who undoubtedly was very
skillful in the Jewish customs, does perhaps therefore mention water, because
he knew that water was mingled with the blood, which was sprinkled, as was
usual in other purifyings; for blood, unless it be mingled with water, does
quickly congeale, and being congealed is unfit for sprinkling. But of hysop and
scarlet wool tied to a cedar stick, was made a sprinkler; whereof as of water
mixed with blood, see Exodus 12.22. and Levit. 4.4,5,6. And sprinkled both the
book and all the people.] Of the book being sprinkled, we likewise read not
in Moses. Yet this divine Author knew the certainty of this no less then of
the rest. But all the people is said to be sprinkled; because they among the
people who stood nearest were sprinkled, and in that respect represented the
person of the whole people; so that thereby all the people were accounted
sprinkled.

20. Saying, this is the blood of the Testament] In the Hebrew for this, is
Behold: but the sense is the same. Now the blood of calves and goats, is called
the blood of the Testament; because by means of it, the Old Testament was
confirmed and established. Which God has enjoined unto you] In the Hebrew it
is which God has made with you. God had not yet made it preteritively; but did
then make it presentively: and therefore the preter tense is there figuratively
put for the present. But because God himself in his own person did not
confirm that Covenant with the people, but Moses did it at the command and in
the name of God; therefore the Author expressing the verity of the thing, for
the word made, puts the word enjoined: as if Moses had said, This is the blood
of the Testament, which God has enjoined me to make with you. Yet this
injunction or command did not rest upon the person of Moses only, but was
extended unto the people also; for as the confirmation of the testament was
enjoined to Moses, that he should speed it is Gods name: So the observation of
it, was enjoined unto the people, that they should keep it; because the
Testament for the matter contained Laws and Precepts which God enjoined to the
people; as if Moses had further said, This is the blood of the Testament which
God enjoined unto me to confirm, and has enjoined unto you to observe.

21. Moreover he sprinkled with the blood, both the Tabernacle and all the
vessels of the Ministery] He shows, that not only the Old Testament it self
was confirmed with blood; but also that under the Old Testament diverse
consecrations and expiation were made by blood, especially of sins (as he
mentions it) ver. 22. This he does, that from hence he might gather, that
under the New Testament also the shedding of blood must fitly intervene to
consecrate and expiate the conscience; and a blood so much more precious, as he
is more precious, by whom the conscience is expiated. And the Author does so
join the consecration of the Tabernacle, and the vessels of it made with
blood, with the confirmation of the Testament it self, that he specifies no
difference of time between them. And if the Tabernacle and ministerial vessels
were consecrated at the time, wherein the Testament was confirmed, then without
all doubt the history of confirming the Testament, Exodus 24. is delivered by
way of anticipation; seeing that after that Confirmation mentioned there,
precepts are delivered in the following chapters, for the making of the
Tabernacle and ministerial vessels; and for ordering of the public worship
and service of God; as also the making and consecration of them is particularly
described. But from the words of the Author it cannot be gathered, that both
these were done at the same time; seeing he, to his former words of confirming
the Testament by blood, does simply subjoyne that Moses did also sprinkle the
Tabernacle, and the ministerial vessels with blood; which may as well be taken
of another time, as of the same. Although Moses says not openly, that the
Tabernacle and ministerial vessels, after they were all finished, were
sprinkled with blood, but only anointed with the holy oil. Yet because we
read, that the Altar was not only anointed with oil, but also sprinkled and
consecrated with blood; therefore hence we may gather, that in the consecration
of the Tabernacle it self, and of the ministerial vessels, sprinkling of
blood was joined with their anointing. For Josephus delivers this in plain
words in his Antiquity, lib. 3. cap. 9. Where describing the Ceremony and
form of that Consecration, he says, Then he sprinkled the garments of Aaron
and his sons with the blood of the Sacrifices-purifying them with running
water, and with the ointment, etc. He sprinkled also the Tabernacle and his
vessels with the ointment, and with the blood of bullocks and rams, slain
every other day after their kind.] From this verse therefore it may appear,
that anciently there were many things among the Jews, especially concerning
external rites, of manifest truth, which notwithstanding are not written in the
books of Moses; and therefore we need not marvel, that this Author does
affirm some things, which we find not delivered in the books of Moses; as we
have noted already in this chapter, verse 4. and verse 19.

22. And almost all things by the law are purged with blood.] He amplifies his
former instances, drawing them from particulars almost to an universal, to
conclude his assertion by way of Induction. Not only the Tabernacle and
Ministerial vessels, which were the principal utensils about the worship of
God: but almost all things else were purged with blood. He says, almost all
things; because some things were purged without blood; for some were purged or
cleansed only by the washing of water, as he that carried out the Scapegoat
must cleanse himself by washing his clothes and bathing his flesh in water.
Levit. 16.26. And the Priest who became unclean by the touch of a person or
thing unclean, must cleanse himself by washing his flesh with water. Levit.
22.6. And some other things were first purged by melting in the fire, and
afterward repurged over with the water of separation, as silver and gold, and
all other metals that could abide to pass through the fire. Numb. 31.22,23.
According to the Law. i. According as the Law prescribed, things should be
purged. And without shedding of blood is no remission] How ever other things
were purged, yet this is certain that under the Law, sins were not remitted
without shedding of blood. Whence we may rationally gather, that the shedding
of blood, must also intervene for the purging of our consciences, or to expiate
those sins that pollute our consciences. That which the Author here affirms,
is most certain universally, and suffers no exception, unless in case of
extreme poverty, when the persons to be purged were so poor, that for the
purging of their sin, they were not able to bring for their offering a pair
of Turtles, or a pair of young Pigeons; whereof, see Levit. 5.12. Otherwise the
rule holds universally, not only for a sin of the whole people, but also for
the sin of any single person whatsoever, blood must be shed and a sacrifice
must be offered. See Levit. chap. 4. chap. 5. and chap. 6.

23. It was therefore necessary that the paterns of things (...) the heavens
should be purified with these.] Hitherto the Author has taught, that blood was
required for the purging both of the Tabernacle and of sins. Now some man might
say; Although blood were required for this purifying, yet it was not necessary
that the blood of Christ should be shed for it, but the blood of beasts might
have served the turn, as it did under the Law. To this tacit objection the
Author answers in these words, and shows, that heavenly things were to be
purged with far better Sacrifices, then the Sacrifices of beasts. For the
purging of earthly holy things, the sacrifices of beasts did suffice: but for
the purging of heavenly holy things, which of all other are most excellent,
there needed a most excellent Sacrifice. And none could be more excellent then
Christ. And besides; for the purging of any Sanctuary, there must needs be a
Sacrifice, or at least some thing of the Sacrifice must be brought into it. But
neither beasts themselves, nor their blood or bodies, neither must, nor can be
brought into that heavenly Sanctuary. But Christ himself and his body made
immortal, was brought in thither. Therefore for heavenly holy things, the
blood of Christ must be shed, and not the blood of beasts. Again, the holy
things under the Law were not only purged when they were first made and
dedicated, but also were yearly to be purged by the annual Sacrifice. For they
were accounted pollutted by the yearly sins and uncleanness of the people.
Whereof see Levit. 16.15. How the earthly holy things were paternes of those
things which are in heaven, and for what cause, we have already showed, chap.
8. ver. 5. The things in the heavens are put for the holy heavenly things; from
which the heaven it self, that invisible heaven which is the most holy
Sanctuary, must not be excluded. But the heavenly things themselves, with
better sacrifices then these.] The heavenly things, are the heavenly holy
things, as the verse following shows. But it may be demanded, how those
heavenly holy things can be said to be purged, seeing they never were polluted?
We answer, That this is said of the heavenly Sanctuary, only by way of
Comparison, as a thing very usual. And the nature of Comparisons is, to breed
many abusions. For if we respect the scope of the Author, it is enough for us
to understand, that the Sacrifice to be offered in the heavenly Sanctuary, must
be much more excellent then those, which of old were wont to be offered in the
earthly Sanctuary. For this both the nature of the heavenly Sanctuary wholly
requires, and also the effect of the oblation suitable to heaven. But if any man
yet demand a more near resemblance, it may be said; That heavenly Sanctuary
was indeed purged by the Sacrifice and offering of Christ; First, in as much as
it was so consecrated thereby, that an access is made open for us unto it; and
as I may say, it is dedicated for our use hereafter. As the old Tabernacle and
many things else, were not open and free for men's use, before they were
consecrated; and they for their uncleanness as it was accounted: but this for
our uncleanness, which must be purged away, before a right and an use of that
heavenly Sanctuary can be granted us. So that in this sense, by a contrary way
of speech (and yet not unusual) the Author said that heaven must be purged,
for our perfect purging, that we may enjoy a right to heaven. Secondly, because
by the access of sinful men, who by the doctrine of the Gospel are called to
take possession of the kingdom of heaven, it seems to be polluted; which
Christ himself has expressed in other words, when he said, The kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, Matthew. 11.12. As
the old Tabernacle was accounted polluted by the sins and uncleanness of the
people, who lived round about it. Therefore as the high Priest of old did
expiate that old Tabernacle as polluted by the sins of the people, with
Sacrifices and Offerings, and reconciled it, as it were, to its due holiness:
So Christ as I may say restored heaven to it due honor, when he offered
himself there to God, and thereby took order, that men guilty of sins,
having first deposed their sins by a lively faith and repentance, might not
be thought altogether unworthy of heaven. With better sacrifices then these] He
puts the plural number for the singular, to comply with his comparison, which
included many Sacrifices; so that here also the comparison produced an abusion.
For by those better Sacrifices, is meant that single sacrifice of Christ
offered. I say offered, because by use of Scripture, that only is accounted a
Sacrifice which is offered. For Christ, after he was slain, was himself
offered, and therein is a difference between the old Sacrifices, especially
those that were expiatory, and the Sacrifice Christ; for when the old Sacrifice
was slain the beast it self was not offered to God, but only the blood of it,
and those other parcels that were burnt with fire upon the Altar. But Christ
himself who was slain, and not his blood, was offered to God; and he not
then, while yet he lay dead; but then when he was raised to life, and such a
life as was eternal. Although (as we have often said,) in this sacrifice of
Christ offered, is also included the shedding of his blood and his bloody
death. For although Christ offered to God not his blood, but himself; yet
without the shedding of his blood he neither could nor might offer himself.
And by reason of what we have said, therefore it is, that the Author comparing
Christ with the legal sacrifices, does perpetually shun to say, that the blood
of Christ was offered; and yet that he might comply with his comparison, he
perpetually insinuates the shedding of Christ's blood; which unless it had
preceded, there could not have been so full and so fit a comparison between
Christ and the old sacrifices. From hence therefore it is manifest, that into
those holy places of heaven for their purification and dedication, there must
be brought a most precious sacrifice; and therefore not the blood of calves and
goats, nay not any blood at all, but the very Son of God himself, and he
also stripped of all his mortal nature, then which there could not be imagined
a more precious and more sacred sacrifice.

24. For Christ is not entered] Here he gives the reason why he said, that
the heavenly holy places were purged with better sacrifices; namely, because
Christ our high Priest is entered into no other holy places but those of
heaven. Whereupon it must follow, that be must enter with a far better
sacrifice, and more worthy of those holy places, then the old high Priest
entered into his earthly holy places. Not into the holy places made with hands]
He illustrates the matter by a difference and an opposition between those
heavenly holy places and the earthly; that those were not made with hands;
which difference we have already showed before, ver. 11. Which are the figures
of the true. For figures, the Greek text has (...). Antitypes are the images
or figures imprinted from the mould, as the wax is figured from the seal, or
money from the stamp; which in this place signifies the same that paternes did
in the verse before. Now the holy places made with hands are called antitypes
or figures; not as opposed efficiently to that which does figure them; but as
opposed objectively to the thing whereof they are a figure, or which they are
accounted to represent; as the image or superscription upon a piece of coin,
is not properly the image of the stamp which did imprint it; but of the Prince
whose image it is, and whom it represents: for the person of the Prince is that
verity or truth whereof the coin is but the image or figure. So that antitypes
are here put simply for types, which is an usual signification of the word
among the Greeks. As in this sense (...) is put simply for (...), when Christ
is said to be a ransom, 1 Timothy 2.6. Now the true holy places whereof the
earthly holy places made with hands are said to be types or figures, are the
heavenly holy places; which are called the true (as we noted before) not as if
the earthly were false, but because the earthly were but types, figures, and
shadows in respect of the heavenly; or because those qualities which should
have been in the earthly, were found most truly and perfectly in the heavenly:
And yet those earthly places were called holy, primely and properly, but the
heavenly metaphorically. After this manner, Christ is called the true light,
the true bread, and the true vine. Now the qualities of those earthly places
are these; first, to be most sacred or holy, and wholly separate from all
profane uses: and 2ly, to be an house or dwelling for God. Both which
qualities agreed to those earthly holy places but umbratilously, imaginarily,
and imperfectly: but to the heavenly holy places truly, really, and perfectly.
But into heaven it self. Christ did never enter into the earthly holy places,
which were but the types and figures of heaven; but into heaven it self where
are the right and true holy places. And he is entered into that heaven which is
beyond and above all the visible orbs of heaven, and into that place of that
heaven which is the most holy, even where the Throne of God is, at the right
hand whereof he is seated. Now to appear in the presence of God for us.] He
gives the reason why Christ entered into heaven; and he draws his reason from
the end of his entrance. In expressing whereof he alludes to the ancient high
Priest; and the better to serve his allusion, if we respect the property and
usual signification of his words, he faith less of Christ, then the thing is
indeed, and then the full end of his entrance came to. For the ancient high
Priest entering the most holy place, is said to appear before God, because he
so procured the salvation of the people, that he himself conferred it not,
but obtained it from another, for he sued to God to confer it. But the
appearance of Christ our high Priest before God and his offering of himself,
must be so taken, that it exclude not his sitting at the right hand of the
Throne of the Majesty in the heavens, i. that he himself, by virtue of a
supreme power over all things given him by his Father, does save his own
people; that he himself does release them from the guilt of all their sins,
and free them from all punishments, and at last settle them in the real
possession of eternal blessedness. In these words thus transferied from the
old high Priest unto Christ, the metaphor is so much the neater and fitter;
because this way Christ is so said to procure and perfect our salvation, that
withal it may appear what difference in that regard there is between God and
Christ: and because Christ is thus far like to one appearing and interceding
for others, in that he is very desirous and careful of our salvation, yet has
not the power to save us from himself, but has received it all from God. So
that in this respect, Christ may be said to be and is our Intecessour and
Advocate; and God of his mercy to confer salvation upon us. Besides in the
Legal high Priest, his appearance was a thing different and distinct from his
offering; though both were done at once and united in time; because the high
Priest was one and the offering another; for the high Priest appeared, but the
blood of the sacrifice was offered. But in Christ our high Priest, the offering
and appearance as also the intercession were really the same; if his appearance
and intercession be taken, not for his bare coming to his Father, but for his
coming joined with his procuration of our salvation, as here they must be
taken; because in Christ the Priest and the offering were the same. For Christ
by his appearance offers himself: and by offering himself he appears; and by
offering and appearing he intercedes. The particle now, is opposed to the times
past, especially to those of the Old Testament, wherein no such high Priest and
Advocate appeared in the presence of God for the people of God. O the hard
condition of those times! and contrarily, Happy we, who have an high Priest,
and Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the
whole world, 1 John 2.1,2.

25. Not yet that he should offer himself often] The particle nor yet shows,
that the Author delivers two negatives concerning Christ our high Priest; One
is, that he is not entered into the holy places made with hands, but into
heaven it self; for this he taught in the former verse. The other when he
entered into heaven, yet he did not so enter, that he should iterate the
oblation of himself and offer himself often; contrary to the manner of the
legal high Priests under the Law, who were by Law constrained often to iterate
their offering of blood in the holy place. This he teaches in this verse;
which he therefore seems to do, that hence also it may appear, how far the
sacrifice of Christ excelled the Legal sacrifices; which must needs be often
offered, for no other cause but by reason of their imperfection. From which
respect he gathers in the next Chapter, that they did not please God, and must
at length be abrogated, and were abrogated by the sacrifice of Christ. And
Christ should be said to offer himself often, if once he should break off his
first appearance before God, and going out of his heavenly Sanctuary, should re
enter in thither to iterate his offering. For his oblation once begun, is not
iterated and multiplied by the duration or continuation of it; for then, seeing
Christ does perpetually appear and intercede for us, and therefore perpetually
offer, the Author could not affirm that Christ has offered himself only
once, and by one oblation of himself to perfect for ever those that are
sanctified. There was not required a double entrance into the earthly holy
place to make a double oblation, when there are two things that are offered,
and a double slaughter preceded, if those things were living creatures. But
when the thing to be offered is but one, the offering of it cannot be iterated,
unless the entrance, and the slaughter before the entrance be also iterated.
For the slaughter must not be made in the holy place it self, neither can it
be in heaven; but without the holy place. Therefore the Author says, That
Christ has not so entered into the holy places of heaven to perform his
offering, that he should often iterate it. As the high Priest enters into the
holy place every year with blood of others] It was the manner of the Legal
high Priest, to iterate their oblation often. And in this opposition between
Christ and the Legal high Priest; that Christ should not offer often, but the
Legal high Priest every year; that Christ entered heaven to offer himself:
but the Legal high Priest entered into the holy place with the blood of
others, every man sees that the offering of Christ, and the entrance of the
Legal Priest do answer one another. Whence it is manifest that the expiatory
offering of Christ, as well as that of the Legal Priest, was performed by
means of his entrance into the holy place. Enters. He seems not to use the
present tense therefore, as if he had respect to a thing yet in being and
practice among the people of the Jews: but rather in an accustomed manner of
speech, to draw the mind of the reader to a thing as it were present; after
which form he spoke also before, ver. 22. And in the Gospel of Mark we often
meet with the like manner of speech. That the Legal Priest entered with blood;
has the same sense with the saying before, that he entered by blood, ver. 12.
yet in the Greek here it is in blood; which for the sense of it is truly
translated with blood. So John writes, that Christ came in water and blood, i.
with water and blood, though there our English Translation render it, by water
and blood, to suite the particle by going immediately before, 1 John 5.6. But
the Author shuns to say, That the Legal high Priest was wont to enter the holy
place with blood; though this were the proper saying; left the fitness of the
comparison between Christ and the Legal Priest should in this respect be
lost; whereof see what we have said before, ver. 12. Of others. The blood
wherewith the Legal Priest entered into the holy place was not his own, but
the blood of other creatures; for he entered with the blood of Goats and
Calves; as it is before, ver. 12.

26. For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world] He
proves why Christ must not offer himself often, by an argument from an
absurdity that would follow upon it if he did so; because then he must often
have suffered; seeing the oblation of a living creature cannot be made without
slaughter and suffering; and he must have suffered also from the foundation of
the world. But why from the foundation of the world? Of this one of these two
reasons may seem to be given. The first, that the oblation of Christ should
therefore be iterated, that it might have so much the greater force in
expiating men's sins. But if the oblation of Christ have it force from number in
the iteration and frequentation of it, then it must have begun from the
beginning of the world; because the sooner it began, the greater would be the
number of his oblations, and thereupon a greater force would result from them.
The other reason is; that if Christ should often iterate his oblation, he must
do it in this regard after the likeness of the Legal high Priest, whereby to
some it may seem reason, that Christ also should often offer himself. But if
we must respect a likeness to the Legal Priest, and from thence reckon the
nature and number of Christ's oblations, then Christ must have made the
beginning of his oblations from the beginning of the world. For by this means
there must arise a kind of analogy and just proportion between the number of
oblations of Christ and the Legal Priest. For seeing the people were under the
Law for the space of about fifteen hundred years, it is an easy matter to
reckon how often the Legal Priests offered; for, seeing they offered every
year, therefore it must needs follow, that they offered about fifteen hundred
times. That therefore the offerings of Christ might in some just number be
answerable to so great a multitude of Legal sacrifices, must not Christ begin
his offerings from the beginning of the world? For, though he should so often
offer as the Legal Priest did according as the analogy required, yet he must
offer often, and so often, as there might be a just proportion between the
iteration and frequentation of both their offerings. But this proportion would
not be, if Christ should offer only some certain times, though they were a
hundred. For he must iterate his offering by spaces or distances of time
answering to a less number of offerings, which distances must not be small,
but great, and those set and equal as of old under the Law, as imagine once in
every several age of man. But if this were done, must he not have begun from
the beginning of the world, and not now at last when the world declines toward
an end? For, seeing this is the last age of the world, wherein Christ appeared,
it is not likely that it shall last longer then the former? But for so many
offerings to be performed at spaces of time answerable, as we have said, it
would scarce and nothing near have been enough to have begun at the beginning
of the world. The Author therefore does beat down the argument drawn from the
multitude of the Legal offerings to conclude the frequency of Christ his
offerings; and shows, that if this resemblance or likeness were to be
attended, then of necessity it must follow, that Christ must not only often
suffer, which of it self is absurd and inconvenient (for men have but one
death before Judgment and cannot die often, as is declared in the following
verse) but also must have begun his sufferings and offerings from the beginning
of the world. The words since the foundation of the world, are not necessarily
to be taken from the first Creation of the world: but are only opposed to the
consummation or end of the world, as appears by the words immediately
following. But this end of the world here, does not signify the extreme and
final term of the world, nor yet some small space of time, wherein the world
must have an end, but only the old age, or last age of the world, as opposed to
her infancy and first age. Wherefore also the foundation of the world in this
place, must be so extended as to signify the infancy or first age of the
world. So Christ says, Luke 11.50. That the blood of all the Prophets which
was shed from the foundation of the world, should be required of this
generation.] Although the first blood that was shed of the Prophets was done
for the space of many years after the Creation of the world. But now once in
the end of the world has he appeared. Here the Author removes the former
consequent that was inconsequent and absurd, by affronting it with the
contrary, and by inferring the contrary from the remotion of it. Christ then
did not begin his sufferings and offerings from the beginning of the world; but
now in the end of the world, and therefore in the end of it, has he appeared;
and that once only, by one Sacrifice of himself. The word appeared in this
place, may be taken either to signify the appearance of Christ before God in
his heavenly Sanctuary, whereof the Author spoke before, verse 24. or to note
his coming into this world to perform his office. But there are chiefly two
things that seem to withstand the former sense. First; because these words may
be better opposed to the words immediately preceding, then to those said in the
former verse; which latter notwithstanding the former sense of the word
appeased requires. For to the offering often to be made, the appearance in
heaven once made should be opposed. But that it should be opposed to the words
immediately preceding, it seems both by the words in the end of the world,
manifestly opposed to those since the foundation of the world, which go
immediately before; and also it seems so by the manner of arguing, which the
Author here uses. For as the thing it self declares, he uses an
Hypotheticall syllogism, whose proposition is in the words immediately
preceding, and the assumption in these words; for he argues from a remotion of
the consequent, which is this, Christ must often suffer from the foundation of
the world, to the remotion of the antecedent, that Christ must often offer
himself. And he removes that consequent by the position of the contrary, as we
said, namely, that Christ has appeared once only in the end of the world, to
put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. Wherefore he seems to speak of
that appearance, which preceded both his suffering and offering; namely, of
that appearance whereby Christ first manifested himself unto the world, for
the performance of his office upon earth, whereby he began to be known to the
world; and that appearance once made, is rightly opposed to the suffering often
to be made; for as often as Christ must suffer; so often he must come into the
world and appear. The other thing that seems to withstand the former opinion,
is, that the word (...) here used by the Author, is no where read for the
appearance either of the legal Priest or of Christ before God, to procure
expiation; but when it is absolutely spoken of any one, as here it is, it
notes nothing else but his manifestation among men. But he says that Christ
has appeared in the end of the world, least any man should think that there
were yet time enough for Christ to iterate his offerings, and by a just
proportion equal the number of the legal offerings: although he began not to
suffer and offer himself from the foundation of the world. For because he
suffered and offered himself in the end of the world; hence it appears, that
there is not time enough yet to come to serve for the multitude of his
sufferings and offerings. But the time wherein Christ came, is therefore called
the end of the world, because it is the last age of the world, and as it were
the old age of it, and because the other coming of Christ, which is joined
with the consummation and end of the world, is always supposed to be at hand;
which could in no wise be, if the offering of Christ were to be iterated
answerably to the just number and proportion of the old Legal offerings. But
the holy Ghost would have us perpetually wait for the expectation of Christ's
coming. For that his coming and together with it, the end of the world is yet
deferred, and that so many ages have passed since his first coming into the
world, and seating upon his heavenly throne; this in a manner is accidental,
by reason of the long suffering of God, who is not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. To put away sin by
the sacrifice of himselfe] He shows the final cause of the coming and
appearance of Christ; which is for the putting away of sin; which is done when
all the force and power of sin is destroyed. Which destruction of sin is
effected two ways; the one is, when sin has no power to condemn men; the
other, when it has no power to subdue men; by enthralling them under the yoke
of it. That both these effects might be produced, Christ has appeared; both
that he might deliver men from the punishment of sin; and also from the
dominion of it, even freeing them from sin it self. Now the means whereby
Christ has put away sin, in destroying the power of it, is by the sacrifice
of himself. For this act may be joined as well with the word suffered, as with
appeared; as other Interpreters also have observed. How the sacrifice of Christ
purges away our sins.
For Christ by the sacrifice of himself has cashired and put away sin, by
taking from it all it power to condemn and to reign; which though we have
declared before, yet are we willing to repeat it again, because the matter is
of such moment, that if it may be, we might drive and fasten it thoroughly into
men's minds. For as concerning the guilt and punishments of sins, can there
be any sins (so that we do our duty) which a sacrifice so acceptable to
God, offered in the Sanctuary of heaven, and by so great an high Priest, cannot
expiate? Can there be any danger, that he will deal negligently in our cause,
who offered up himself as a sacrifice for our sins? and who having himself
suffered all those miseries and pressures that can possibly befall us, has
assumed a mind so prone to pity us? Has not yet the wished effect been
answerable to so holy a sacrifice, and to so careful a provision of our high
Priest? Is not the power of our salvation in the power of our high Priest, and
in his hand to release whom he will of sin, and to bestow eternal life and
whatsoever good thing besides upon whom he will? Does he not negotiate the
matter with his most dear Father, who himself burns with a desire of our
salvation, who himself has made a sacred Covenant for the remission of our
sins, who himself ordained the holy Sacrifice for our sins, who himself
would have it offered unto him, and caused it to be offered, who himself
ordained our high Priest with an oath, and committed unto him the whole care of
our salvation? Now concerning the dominion of sin, for the excussion of the
yoke of it; can it possibly be, that when we perceive so great and so certain
causes and proofs of our eternal salvation, and of plenary remission of our
sins, that we should not with all our souls embrace the faith of Christ, and
devote our selves wholly to him? when by this means, through the grace and
mercy of our God we are effectually purged and justified from the guilt of all
our sins, shall we not contend with our whole force to abandon sin for ever
after, and wholly addict our selves to holiness? shall we not labor to the
utmost to preserve this great grace of God entire and whole to our last gasp,
that at length we may enjoy the full fruit of it, in our deliverance from
death, and inheritance of eternal life? And shall it not mightily encourage us
to shake off the yoke of sin, in that our heavenly high Priest will perpetually
support us with his Spirit, and supply us with power enough to live holily, if
we will live so, and will strive to do it. This therefore is the manner after
which Christ by the Sacrifice of himself has put away sin, that neither it
might hurt us, nor reign in us. The Sacrifice of Christ is Christ himself
sacrificed; being first slain and then raised to immortal life, that he might
enter his heavenly Tabernacle, and therein offer himself, and appear for us for
ever. The word (...) here rendered a Sacrifice, though it come from (...), which
signifies to slay; yet it uses not to be taken in Scripture abstractedly for
the slaughter, but concretly for the creature slaughtered, or rather for that
part of it which is offered to God. But if any man keeping the same sense will
join these words by the sacrifice of himself, with the verb appeared, then the
particle by must be taken for with; and in that sense as we have noted before,
that John says, Christ came by water and blood, i. with water and blood; not
that at his first coming into the world, he shed his blood, but because he
therefore came that he might shed his blood, though not forthwith. So Christ
may be said to appear with the sacrifice of himself; not that as soon as he
appeared he was made a sacrifice, but that he so appeared, that in his due
time, he might be made a sacrifice. But we best approve of that sense, which
joins these words by the sacrifice of himself, with the words immediately
preceding, to put away sin. For the final end of the appearance or coming
of Christ, was to put away sin; and the means whereby he abolished it was, by
the sacrifice of himself. Seeing therefore Christ came in the end of the
world, that he might abolish sin by the sacrifice of himself; therefore
hence it appears, that he must not often iterate his sacrifice after the manner
of the legal high Priest; for otherwise he must have begun this action more
early, and not have deferred it to the last age of the world.

27. And as it is appointed unto men, once to dye] He brings a new argument to
confirm and illustrate the single or only sacrifice of Christ, drawn from a
similitude or comparison of the death of Christ, with the common law and
condition of men, who dye but once, and not often. The Greek word (...), is
well rendered by some learned men, befalls; as one death befalls all men.
For it seems not that the Author intended, that this word by it self should
signify some divine decree; although he thereby excludes it not; for this word
may have such a latitude of sense as to signify, both that which is appointed
unto men by the law of nature, and that which by Gods decree is destinated to
some particular man. In the first particle of these words, which speak of
death, he seems to respect rather what is done by the force and course of
nature, then what follows by force of Gods decree. For that death must be here
understood that is common to all men, even to the godly, and is temporal;
because it is that death after which judgment follows which kind of death is
due unto us rather by our natural condition, then destinated to us by force of
any divine decree. And besides, we must understand, that the Author speaks not
here so much of the necessity of death, that men are simply appointed to dye
(for that gives no help to his argument) as of the singularity of death, in
that men dye but once and not twice, or more often, to the end he might from
thence conclude, that Christ also must dye but once only; and therefore must
offer himself but once only. But the singularity of men's death, that they dye
but once, proceeds merely from nature, and depends not from any peculiar decree
of God: but for a man to dye a second time or more often, cannot be, but from a
peculiar decree of God. And therefore by these words nothing else is signified,
then that one only death is allotted unto men, or that they dye but once only.
But after this the judgment.] This indeed depends from Gods decree; therefore
the word appointed (as we said) must be taken in his latitude and generally, to
signify only a thing whose event is certain; whether it flow from nature it
self, as once to dye; or whether it follow upon Gods decree, as the future
judgment. But that judgment does not so much consist in pronouncing the
sentence upon all men both quick and dead, as in executing the sentence
already adjudged. For this is no humane judgment, but a divine; for the
dispatch whereof, there needs no witnesses, no prooffes, no accusers or
advocates, no tedious disquisition of the truth. For to Christ who is the
supreme Judge, all things are already evident, and he has already determined,
who is to be condemned, and who to be justified, before he does actually
condemn or justify any one; i. either destroys or saves any one. As
therefore one death befalles men, and after that, will come the judgment,
wherein all shall appear again to be judged; i. either to be rewarded or
punished according to every man's deeds, 2 Cor. 5.19. So also Christ once only
suffered death, that he might once only perform his offering; but he shall
appear again in judgment, and shall show himself to be seen of them that
expect him to salvation.

28. So Christ was once offered] His offering answers to his death; not that
his offering consists in his death, for that is untrue (as we have showed
before:) but because the offering of a creature that has life cannot be
performed without death: And therefore Christ was offered but once, because he
must dye but once, and but one single offering could follow one single death.
To bear the sins of many] The end whereto his offering was a mean, was to
bear the sins of many. The word (...), to bear; though it properly signify
to lift or carry something from a lower place to an higher, or at least from
one place to another: yet in this place, it simply signifies to take away. For
things lifted up are first taken away from the place where they were before;
and things taken or carried away from a man, must first be raised and lifted
up. But in that sins are said to be taken away, is a metaphor. But that the
word to bear here does simply signify to take away or put away, as we have
said, we can make it plain by diverse examples extant in the Septuagint; see
Jof. 24.32. and 2 Samuel 21.13. and Ezra 1.11. and Psalm. 102.24. where the word
(...), has this sense. But in this place this sense is necessary, seeing this
is the end for which Christ was once offered: but the offering of Christ as we
have showed, was performed in heaven. Whence it follows, that this word no way
signifies, that Christ took upon himself the punishment of our sins; because
that cannot be done in heaven, seeing heaven is no place for punishment.
Besides, it is most reasonable, that these words should have the same sense
with the former, that Christ appeared to put away sin; seeing these are
correspondent one to another, and the end of Christ's offering is showed in
both. But he faith to bear the sins of many. Not simply of all, partly
because this benefit for the effect and issue of it, pertaines not by Gods
purpose promiscuously to all, but only to those that believe in Christ and
obey him, partly because all will not believe in Christ and obey him; whence it
comes to pass, that all are not in effect eased from the burden of sin,
which notwithstanding in respect of Gods purpose is but in event; because all
to whom soever God offers his grace, and calls, both may and ought to believe
and obey. The same also we say for the taking away of sins, whose end is,
that men should be no longer addicted to their sins; for if we respect the
event or effect it self, Christ by his offering has put away the sins of many
only, not of all, and thereby has effected that many and not all do live
holily. For in respect of the force and efficacy of Christ's offering, Christ is
to be supposed to have taken away the sins themselves, and the punishment of
sins from all men. He shall appear the second time without sinne] The second
time is in Judgment, and the words without sin may be taken two ways.
First, as they may signify without an offering or sacrifice for sin, which
according to a common use of Scripture is called sin; in which sense this
appearance without sin, may fitly be opposed to his former appearance with
sin, that is, with an offering for sin, ver. 26. And by reason of this
opposition, it will not seem amiss, to join the words by the sacrifice of
himself, with the word appeared, unless we had rather make this latter part
of the verse opposite to the former part; that so the going of Christ from us,
and his return unto us may be opposed to his offering, which was performed by
his bloody death, and after it by his entrance into heaven; for thereby Christ
was taken from the eyes of men and ceased to be seen: but by his return he
will again show himself to be seen, and then the words without sin, are
opposed to those to bear (or take away) the sins of many; and the words the
second time shall be opposed to the particle once; and yet the second time may
in this place be all one with afterward; that it may answer the words of the
former verse after this the judgment; so in the Epistle of Jude, ver. 5. the
words once and afterward are opposed. Secondly; the words without sin may be
so taken, as thereby to show, that when Christ shall appear the second time,
there shall be no more guilt of sin in the people of God, as there was when
first he appeared, which therefore he must take away by his sacrifice. For
undoubtedly the Author here alludes to the return of the Legal high Priest
out of the holy place, who went into the holy place to take away the guilt of
sins, and returned from thence without sin; for he had taken away the guilt
of sin by his offering. So Christ entered into heaven that there offering
himself to God, and appearing in his presence, he might purge his people from
the guilt of their sins: but having abolished the guilt of sins, he shall
return out from heaven, and appear unto his people, to give them the effect
of that guilt taken away, not in words only, as the Legal high Priest gave
the people his benediction and prayed for them; but in very deed; for he shall
vindicate them from death, and estate them in eternal life. Unto them that
look for him unto salvation] The words unto salvation may agree either with he
shall appear, or with the words to them that look for him] And the Author
seems to have placed them so on purpose, that they might be referred to both.
For both Christ shall appear to give his people salvation; and the people of
Christ shall look for his coming out of heaven to receive salvation from him.
For as Christ is here tacitly compared with the Legal high Priest entered into
the boly place: so his people are resembled to the people of Israel expecting
without the Tabernacle. For of old the people looked for the Legal Priest,
after their manner to salvation, namely, that by him they might obtain
remission of their sins which were then expiated, and might hear his
benediction to them in the Name of God: So the people of Christ, being without
the heavenly Tabernacle upon earth, do look for Christ their high Priest unto
salvation, that he coming forth out of his heavenly Sanctuary, they may by him
obtain eternal salvation. The Author in these words does elegantly describe a
Christian; for this expectation does comprehend faith in Christ; for unless
men believe in Christ, they will never expect his return from heaven as their
heavenly high Priest; And this expectation does either beget holiness of life,
or is begotten of it; for these afford each other their help. The expectation
of salvation upon condition of obedience does beget piety; and piety brought
forth does reciprocally bring forth a daughter like to her mother, that is, a
most certain and ardent expectation of salvation. Hither belong the words of
Paul to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1.9,10. where he describes all Christian
people and their whole duty, saying, Ye have turned to God from Idols, to serve
the living and true God; and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised
from the dead, even Jesus who delivered us from the wrath to come. After a like
manner he designs all believers in Christ, by the name of them that love his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8.

The Contents of this ninth Chapter, are,
1. Doctrine. The tabernacle under the first Covenant was imperfect. v. 1.
Reason. 1. Because it was a worldly manifacture; for beth in the first and
second place of it, there were only bandiworks. 1, 2, 3. 2. Because the most
holy place of it was always shut to all, except to the high Priest and always
to him, except once a year v. 6. 7. 3. Because under it, the way to the holiest
of all in heaven, was not yet manifest, v. 8. 4. Because it was but a figure
and resemblance of the heavenly Sanctuary v. 9.
2. Doctrine. The services, or sacrifices under the old Testament were
imperfect. v. 9. Reason. 1. Because they could not expiat the consciences of
them that brought the sacrifices. v. 9. 2. Because they were only carnal
ordinances concerning fleshly things, as meats, drinks, and washings. v. 10. 3.
Because they were temporary imposed for a while, until the time of
Reformation. v. 10.
3. Doctrine. The Sanctuary wherein Christ is a Priest, is more excellent then
the old Legal Sanctuary. v. 11. Reason 1. Because it is no worldly building,
wrought by the hands of men, v. 11.
4. Doctrine. The expiatory Sacrifice of Christ is more excellent then the old
legal expiations. v. 12. Reason. 1. Because the blood shed for his sacrifice
was his own blood, and not the blood of bulls and calves. v. 12. 2. Because his
death and bloodshed does purge the conscience; whereas the bloodshed under the
old legal sacrifice, did but parge the flesh, v. 13. 14. 3. Because his death
and bloodshed does expiate those transgressions which were inexpiable under the
law. v. 15.
5. Doctrine. Confirmations made by death are the surest. v. 15. Reason. 1.
Because the New testament was confirmed by the death of Christ. ver. 15. 2.
Because all men's testaments are confirmed by the death of the testator, ver.
16. 17. 3. Because the old legal testament was confirmed by the blood and
death of goats and calves. v. 18, 19. 20. 4. Because all Consecrations under
the law, were confirmed by blood and death. v. 21. 5. Because all Expiations
and Remissions under the law were confirmed by blood and death. v. 22.
6. Doctrine. The sacrifice made by Christ was singular, one only once
offered. ver. 12. Reason. 1. Because he entered into his holy Sanctuary by his
blood, and the blood of any living creature can be shed but once. v. 16. 2.
Because by his sacrifice he obtained an eternal expiation, and things eternal
cannot be iterated. ibid. 3. Because then he must have suffered often, and have
begun his sufferings since the beginning of the world. v. 26. 4. Because he
died before his offering it, and men are subject to death but once. v. 27.

CHAPTER X.
1. FOr the Law having a shadow] He had said before, that the Legal high
Priest entered yearly into the holy place, not with his own blood, but with
the blood of others: contrary to what Christ did, who offered himself once
only. Now here he gives the reason thereof; because the Law by a continual
offering of the same sacrifices yearly; can never make the comers thereunto
perfect; for therefore it is that those offerings are iterated year by year.
This reason he does by the way confirm by another reason; because the law has
only a shadow of future blessings, and not the very image of them. Therefore
the causal particle for, has not reference to what was said immediately before,
but must in this place be referred to his principal doctrine, though more
remote: which was; That the legal high Priest offered year by year, but Christ
once only. A shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the
things.] Those good things to come, may be understood more largely or strictly.
First largely; to comprehend both eternal happiness it self, promised or
bequeathed us in the new Testament, and also all the helps and means for the
acquiring of it, affoorded us under the same Testament, and pourtrayed in the
legal shadows; such as are Christ himself our high Priest, his Blood, his
Offering, his Sanctuary, and such like; for these were future and to come in
respect of the Law, Or they may be taken strictly, only for the happiness
promised us. Neither of these senses are disagreeing to the text; yet the
latter is more probable by reason of those words in the former chapter, verse
11. wherein Christ is said to be a high Priest of good things to come; and so
the Priest and his Priesthood are manifestly distinguished; and if ye mark it
well, so is his Sanctuary and his Sacrifice. But seeing there is no open
mention of these good things to come, but only in that text, and this which we
have now in hand, and that in both the same thing is handled; it is most
agreeable to reason, that the good things to come in this place should be taken
strictly, for the happiness only promised us in the new testament, which
comprehends our perpetual deliverance from all punishments of all our sins, and
our eternal inheritance of eternal life. For by the admitting of this sense
we shall the more easily interpret the words following, concerning the very
image of the things. For this condition seems plainly taken from the Law, and
attributed to the Gospel. Of those things which are not so much the parts of
our happiness as the means and adjuncts of it, the Gospel does not exhibit
unto us the image, but the substances themselves: but of those promises, it
proposes to us in this life rather the image then the substance; although our
deliverance from the punishments of our sins do in some measure begin in
this life. But it exhibits unto us the very image of them, in as much as it
describes and promises them most openly to us; so that are may seem in a
manner to see them before our eyes. But the Law had only a shadow of those good
things, from whence we could but conjecture very darkly and imperfectly, what
and what manner of things they were. To that shadow contained in the Law were
proportionably answering both the sacrifices, by means whereof those good
things were attained, and also the high Priest, the Sanctuary, and such like.
But now seeing a clear and perfect image of those celestial goods is proposed
unto us, and promised us in plain and open terms, therefore there are
required other sacrifices, which have an apparent and manifest virtue and
efficacy to procure those goods unto us, which can beget in our souls a most
assured hope of them, and can draw us to a course of life suitable to them. Can
never by those sacrifices which they offered year by year continually] The
words year by year, do not seem to cohere with offered; for then there is a
great and hard transposition of the words: but agree rather with those
sacrifices, for so the sense is facile and usual; as if he had said, the same
sacrifices recurring year by year: whereby he would intimate, that under the
Law the same sacrifices were offered, yet not every day, and month, but every
year: and every year sacrifices were offered, yet not diverse, but the same;
the same kind year by year. The space of time whereby those sacrifices were
distant one from another was a year; and when the year came about, the
sacrifice was of the same kind. Which they offered] The persons who did make
the offering were the high Priests, to whom the Law enjoined it. But here the
words are put in a passive sense to signify the sacrifices which were offered.
For ordinary it is, that an active form of speech does carry a passive sense.
So Luke 12.20. The words are active, This night shall they require thy soul:
But the sense is passive; this night thy soul shall be required. Continually]
In this there is more signified then in the words year by year: for it
intimates, that the course of years wherein year by year the same sacrifices
were iterated, was not interrupted nor intermitted, but constantly continued;
and the continuance of this custom was not short for the space of some few
years successively; but a long continuance for many ages. Can never make the
comers thereunto perfect. Although the same sacrifices were year by year
iterated without intermission for a long continuance: yet the Law by means of
those sacrifices could never perfect the Comers thereto. The Comers were all
such amongst Gods people as came to worship God and serve him by means of those
sacrifices: and therefore in the verse following, the same persons in the same
respect are called the worshippers. For in the peoples access or coming to
the Tabernacle, is also included that divine worship and service which there
they performed. Seeing their Access and Coming thither was but for worship
and service; and seeing again, that worship and service might be done no where
else but by coming there; for the Law forbad the people to offer sacrifice in
any other place but the Sanctuary. To perfect signifies to expiate or purge
from sin, and to expiate so fully and finally, that the party once expiate
shall want nothing else; shall need no other oblation of any other sacrifice,
nor no iteration of the same; and consequently shall feel no further
conscience of his sins.

2. For then would they not have ceased to be offered] This sentence should not
be rendered negatively, then they would not have ceased] for this negation is
quite contrary to the sense and reasoning of the Author. But affirmatively
thus, for then would they have ceased to be offered. For because the same
sacrifices were year by year offered continually; therefore from thence he
proves, that they could not perfect the worshippers or comers to the
sacrifices; and this their imperfection he further confirms ab absurdo; for if
the same sacrifices could have perfected the comers thereto, they would have
ceased from being iterated and offered again year by year continually. For
what need the same sacrifices be iterated year by year, if they could perfect
the comers to them, by expiating their sins fully and finally? for if the
sacrifices had done this, then they must have finally determined and ceased.
But seeing they could not do this, therefore they ceased not, but were offered
and iterated year by year continually. Because that the worshippers once purged
should have no more conscience of sins] Here he gives a reason of the former
affirmation, why the same sacrifices should have ceased to be offered; namely,
because the worshippers once purged and expiated perfectly should have no more
conscience of sins. To have conscience of sins signifies two things; whereof
the one is consequent to the other, as to know himself guilty of sin, and to
acknowledge himself guilty of punishment. The maine doctrine which the Author
teaches is this: That those sacrifices had not force to effect, that men
should know themselves not guilty of sin; which is then done when they
abstain from sin; and then, that men should not acknowledge themselves guilty
of punishment, which is then done when they are not afraid of it: Therefore
they were iterated year by year continually for a long succession of many
ages, that year by year they might heal the sore of the conscience, which
broke out again year by year. For where health is fully recovered and
settled, the medicine is not iterated: but if there be relapses and the disease
have recourses, the use of the medicin must be often applied: either therefore
that Sacrifice being once offered must expiate the future sins of all the
future years and ages to come, although it withdrew not men from the acts of
sin; or if this be absurd, then, seeing it could not withdraw men from the
acts of sin, there was good reason, it should be iterated yearly, to heal
the conscience yearly wounded with sins. But it had been very absurd that the
sins of so many men and ages should be purged by the blood of one goat.

3. But in those sacrifices is a remembrance again made of sins every yeare]
Here he teaches the contrary to the last consequence; namely, that after those
Sacrifices the consciences of the people were again guilty of sins: And this
he proves thus, because at those Sacrifices year by year, the high Priest did
year by year, rememorate and confess the sins of the people. For he must
lay both his hands upon the head of the Scapegoat, and confess over him all
the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all
their sins, etc. Levit. 16.21. For to this place the Author here has
reference. In those sacrifices; i. then at that solemn Fast Day, when those
Sacrifices were offered; the sins of the people were also remembered and
confessed. For though the year before they were all laid upon the head of the
Scapegoat and banished into the wilderness together with the goat: yet the
next year and successively year by year another goat must be banished,
because the people had more sins to be banished.

4. For it is impossible that the blood of bulls, and of goats should take a
way sinnes] Here he gives a reason of his principal assertion, That those
Sacrifices could never perfect the comers thereto, by an argument taken from
the very nature of those Sacrifices; because they were but the blood of bulls
and goats, which has no possiblity to take away sins; i. it cannot effect,
that men should afterward abstain from sin, and so have no further
conscience of sins, and consequently fear no punishment of them. For what
force can the blood of beasts have to produce this effect? But the blood of
Christ has this effica^ie and force; and all men may easily acknowledge it if
they will: of which point, we have formerly treated in several places. Yet the
Author says not, that the blood of those beasts had no force at all, in no
measure, and for no time to take away the guilt of those sins, for which by
the Law of God it was to be offered: seeing this is evidently false, for if it
expiated not sin at all in no measure; to what purpose was it offered year by
year? Why does the Author himself affirm that the worshippers for whom it was
offered, were once purged by it? Certainly then, they did purge some sins for
some time; namely, sins of error for a year: Therefore the mind of the Author
is (as we have explicated it before) that the blood of bulls and goats has not
any force, and impossible it is, it should have any, to withdraw men from their
sins, and to effect, that afterward they should not sin, and so to free them
from fear and guilt of all future punishment.

5. Wherefore when he comes into the world] From the imperfection and
infirmity which he has showed to be in the Legal sacrifices, the Author
gathers or rather affirms, that therefore God has rejected them, and in their
room has elected the only offering of Christ. This he proves by a testimony
taken Psalm. 40.6. Where David, and under the person of David Christ himself is
brought in, speaking hereof. But in this place there is a great question, what
should be understood by this coming of Christ into the world. Yet the thing it
self shows, that they are much mistaken, who interpret this coming of the
nativity or birth of Christ. For it is apparent that we must understand these
words to be spoken of Christ, then when he prepared and addressed himself for
his sacrifice, and to perform his offering in stead of the Legal sacrifices.
Lo I come (says he) to do thy will, O God. This coming therefore of Christ
into the world must be so understood, as to be joined with the execution of
Gods will. But this cannot be said of Christ's nativity, for Christ presently
upon his birth did not perform this will of God, which the Author designs;
seeing then he could not do any will of God at all. For when he was newborn
and yet an Infant, how could he do the will of God? or could he then say these
words? For it is apparent that the Author speaks here of Christ as man, which
we therefore intimate, that no man may think here to fly to the destinction
of his natures. Besides, this phrase of coming into the world, does no where
signify his nativity. For they who for this sense of the phrase bring the
place, John 1.9. do not observe, that the Greek words (...), if we respect
the Grammatical sense, may as well be referred to the preceding Noune (...)
which signifies light, as to the Noune (...), which is man: but if we respect
the phrase of Scripture, then coming into the world, must much rather be
referred to the word light. So that the participle (...), must not be rendered
in Latin venientem, in reference to man, as the vulgar Latin edition has it:
but veniens as referred to the light. And so the sense made to be thus; That
Christ who is the true light, rising upon the earth like the Sun, and coming
into the world, does enlighten every man with his light, yet not presently at
his first rising, but in process of time; as the Sun carries his light from
one part of the world to another, and by degrees dispels the darkness. Compare
this place with John 9.5. and John 12.46. There remain two opinions, which
strive, as I may say, for the mastery of the truth. The one is, that this
coming of Christ into the world should be taken, for that his coming when he
made his first entrance among men to perform his ministerial office; The
other is, that it be understood of his entrance into the future world to come,
whereof this Author made mention before, chap. 1.2. and chap. 2.5. and which is
called by the single name of the world, Romans 4.13. Now the arguments which
seem to persuade us for the taking of it, not for this present world, but for
the future world to come, are chiefly three. 1. Because God did not abrogate
those Legal sacrifices and offerings, before Christ entered and came into that
future world: but here the Author speaks of their abrogation. 2. Because
Christ says, A body have thou prepared me. For, how can this be applied to
Christ's first entrance upon his ministerial function in this world among men?
Did Christ receive from God a new body, and another different from what he had
before, then when he was first made known to the world by preaching of the
Gospel? And if we should here understand that mortal body in which Christ
first preached the Gospel, what would this make to the abrogation of the Legal
sacrifices? Certainly, either nothing at all, or no way else but by many
turnings and windings. But if by this coming of Christ here, we understand
his entrance into that future world to come, then these words will much conduce
to the matter. For, unless God had given Christ a new and incorruptible body,
he could not have entered that dwelling of immortality, and there have offered
himself to God, and appear before him, neither could he have sitten at the
right hand of this throne. Therefore seeing God would abrogate and abolish
those earthly sacrifices by the heavenly Sacrifice of Christ, for that purpose
God fitted him a body proper for that heavenly Sanctuary. For that the Author
in citing this testimony, had a respect to these words, is plain by his words
a little after at the tenth verse, where he mentions the offering of the body
of Christ. By which form of speech, seeinghe uses it no where else, he seems
as it were to point at these words in this testimony, wherein God is said to
have prepared a body for Christ. 3. Because in an other passage of the 40.
Psalm, a little before this testimony cited by the Author, David does sing a
song of thanksgiving unto God for his deliverance from a grievous calamity,
saying, He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and
set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings; and he has put a new song
in my mouth, etc. Psalm. 40.2,3. If therefore Christ may be thought to have
sung these words of the Psalm with the rest cited by the Author, after his
deliverance from death and the grave; then might the Author well affirm, that
Christ said both these and the rest by him cited at his coming or entrance
into that future world to come. Now these words cannot be meant of Christ's
coming into the world by his Resurrection from the dead; because when the
Scripture speaks of his coming into this world, she thereby usually
understands his being made known unto the world: but Christ after and by his
resurrection was not made known unto the world, but was seen of a few only,
who were to be witnesses of it to the world. And therefore when the time of his
death drew near, and of his departure to his Father after his death, he
himself affirmed that he should be no longer in the world. He says, sacrifice
and offering thou would not] Of the words themselves we shall speak upon the
next verse, wherewith they wholly agree in matter. But here let us enquire, why
the Author affirms, that Christ then, when he comes into the world, says
these words? The Author seems to affirm this, from the following words which
Christ alleges presently after, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, ver. 7.
For to what purpose did Christ come into the world, whether we understand this
world or that to come? If we understand this world, we must say, that Christ
then when he came into this world, (or as the Author speaks before, chap 9.26.
when first he appeared) said these words unto God his Father; Because the
Legal sacrifices and offerings please thee not, therefore Lo, I am come, to
do thy will, i. to offer thee such a sacrifice, that is, wholly according to
thy good will and pleasure. But if ye please to understand the future world to
come, then we must affirm, that Christ said them, when he entered in thither;
Seeing, O God, thou do no longer approve the Legal sacrifices, Lo, I come to
do thy will, i. to offer up my self unto thee, that so I may wholly expiate
the sins of thy people. For this is the will of God, and the pleasure of the
Lord that shall prosper in the hand of Christ, Isaiah 53.10. That every one who
sees the Son and believes on him, should be freed from the guilt and pain of
all his sins, and have everlasting life, John 6.40. But a body have thou
prepared me] It is not necessary we should think, that the Author mentioned
these words in respect of any sense proper to his purpose, but cited them only
because they stood connexed with the other words of the testimony which were
pertinent to his intention. This he himself seems to intimate at the eighth
and ninth verses following, where in the repetition of this testimony, he
leaves out these words, and takes only the rest that serve for his scope, which
is this. That the Legal sacrifices are abrogate, and in their place the
Sacrifice of Christ is established. Though at the tenth verse following the
Author speaks of the offering of the body of Christ; yet it is not altogether
necessary, that we therefore should say, that he had reference to these words;
seeing the body of Christ might by an Hebraisme be put for Christ himself.
Again, the Author might have no respect to the proper sense of these words
for this reason; because in the Hebrew, other words are read for them. But
because the Author followed the Greek Translation, therefore he alleged the
words as they stood in the Greek, lest men well accquainted with the Greek
Translation should conceive that he had corrupted or changed the text; a rule
that this Author has observed in other passages also (as has been noted.) The
Hebrew text has it, Mine ears have thou opened; wherein there is a manifest
allusion to the custom commanded by God; when any man would give up himself
to perpetual servitude, Exodus 21.6. A servant who at the end of seven years
service would not be free, was by his master brought to the door or door-post
of the house, whereto his Master fastened him by boring his ear through with an
awl; that this action might be a testimony, that the party must perpetually
remain a servant to that house and family; And this Ceremony was performed by
the ear, that the servant might remember to be always ready to hear and obey;
for by the ear we hear, and hearing in the Hebrew signifies obeying; for as
the Master has power to speak and command, so the maine duty of a servant is
to hear and obey. David therefore signifies by these words, that because he
had received from God those extraordinary benefits which before he had reckoned
up, therefore he would not offer unto God the sacrifices of beasts, wherewith
God was not much delighted, but would dedicate himself for ever to the worship
and service of God; for this does excellently well agree with the following
words of the Psalm; seeing in them there is nothing else said but to this
effect. This text and this sense may fitly be applied to Christ coming into
that future world; seeing also the Lord Jesus is as it were fastened of God for
ever to that heavenly Sanctuary; whereof (as the Author has showed before)
he is the Minister, there to execute the will of God, and to procure both the
service of God, and our salvation. Here a man may well wonder and demand, why
the Septuagint in their Greek Translation, should have it a body have thou
prepared me, so differing from the Hebrew text both in words and sense. For
whatsoever other men think, it seems no way reconcilable with the Hebrew
reading, which is now extant, and which we have now interpreted; for why is the
word body put for ears, and prepared for opened; especially when in the
Hebrew words there is so clear, so neat and elegant an allusion to that custom
among the Jews, whereby a servant was bound to a perpetual servitude? We must
therefore herein say one of these two things; that either there was anciently
some other reading in the Hebrew, then what is now extant, especially if there
be some neernesse of words, which in Hebrew signify ears and body; Or that
the Greek translation of the Septuagint is altered in this place as in many
other. The former of these two ways we rather approve, especially because,
though it be not necessary, yet it is very probable, that the Author in
mentioning the offering of the body of Christ a little after here, which he
no where else does, might have a respect to these words; For it is scarce
credible he would have done so, if his words had wholly receded from the truth
in the Hebrew. But although we would willingly leave it to them who are more
skillful in the Hebrew tongue, to conjecture what the Hebrew reading might be,
that was so near this which is now extant, and induced the Septuagint to
render it thus in their Greek translation: yet we must not so cast this
labor upon others but that we also endeavor somewhat in the matter, and
submit our conjecture to the judgment of others. Concerning therefore the word
(...), prepared, we need not much trouble our selves, seeing the Hebrew word
Carah, may also signify to cut or carve; and by a Metaphor to fashion, shape
or fit the whole into his parts and members; by a similitude taken from
Statuaries, Carvers or Gravers, who by cutting, carving, graving, and punching,
or (as I may say) by digging, do prepare, fashion and shape Statues or others
pourtraits; which in Greek is rightly termed (...). Now if to this Verb there
be adjoined a Noune, which may note a body, then the sense will be very
proper. Wherefore now we must think of the Greek word (...) a body; for
which in the Hebrew we now read oznaim, ears. And to this, the word geviah
often mentioned in Scripture, and signifying a body, is of near affinity. For
from the word oznaim take the first letter Aleph, which might easily slip away,
and the letters remaining are very like those which make geviah signifying a
body; as they will easily acknowledge, who will please to write both these
words in Hebrew characters. But let the more learned in the language consider
further of the matter. For there is no repugnancy, that both their readings
might be consonant to the mind of the holy Ghost, and both anciently received.
And if the Hebrew text had this reading which we have signified, or some other
like it, then with much elegancy these words may be taken of that incorruptible
body of Christ, which he received of God. The word (...) does not signify to
adapt, by joining and fitting one thing to another, as they would have it, who
say that these words do signify the adaption and joining of Christ's body to
his divine nature in his mothers womb: but the word properly signifies to
fashion or shape a thing, by giving it all it due members and joints,
proportioning them so fitly one with another, that thereby the thing is
perfected and finished. Sacrifice and offering thou would not.

6. In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin, thou have had no pleasure]
These words with the other of like nature in the former verse, conduce mainly
and properly to that purpose here of the Author, for which he cited this
testimony out of the 40. Psalm. The literal sense, David would show himself
most really thankful unto God, for an extraordinary benefit and deliverance,
which the Lord has conferred on him, in bringing him out of an horrible pit,
and setting his feet upon a rock. Yet he would testify his thankfulness and
memory of so great a benefit, not with sacrifices and offerings of beasts, but
with obsequies and services of his person. The mystical sense is: Christ
brought in, speaking the like words, has no intent thereby to testify
thankfulness unto God; but only to show, that he would offer unto God another
kind of sacrifice, which should be most acceptable and agreeable unto God,
seeing God had no pleasure in the legal sacrifices. And yet there is also
another difference; for in the literal sense David says not that God was
absolutely displeased with those legal sacrifices, and would offer unto God no
sacrifices at all of any beast; for such a saying during those times had been
false and evil: but he speaks comparatively; as if he had said, Thou art not, O
God, much delighted and pleased with the sacrifices and offerings of beasts:
but there are other things that delight and please thee more; for thou would
rather have obedience then sacrifice: Therefore I will rather offer my self
unto thee, and be a servant for ever to thy will. For to like purpose Samuel
spoke to Saul; Has the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and
sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold to obey, is better then
sacrifice; and to hearken, then the fat of Rams. For disobedience is as the
sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as wickedness and Idolatary, 1 Samuel
15.22,23. But in the mystical sense, Christ says absolutely, that God had no
further will to them, and took pleasure in them no longer, but his will and
pleasure was they should be antiquated and abrogated. Of this mystical sense,
this is a good argument, that Christ is here brought in, to mention not only
sacrifices of thanksgiving, which only were pertinent to David's purpose; but
also expiatory offerings and sacrifices for sin: whereof if we respect
David's intent, there should here be made no mention. For David's intent was a
testification of his thankfulness unto God, and not an expiation of his sins
at that time. But because the Holy Ghost would wrap up a mysticke and deep
sense in these words; therefore the Author does here specify and reckon up all
kinds of sacrifices and offerings whatsoever, which are reduced to three
sorts. 1. By sacrifice and offering in the fifth verse, he seems to understand,
all offerings eucharistical or of thanksgiving; whereof a part went to God, as
the blood and the fat; part was a Fee to the Priest, and the rest returned to
him that offered it. 2. By burnt offerings in this verse, are understood those
which were wholly burnt and went wholly to God; which are sometime called
sacrifices of praise, because they were offered wholly in honor of God, as he
was the Lord Almighty, and not by way of special thanksgiving for any
particular benefit then received from God; which was the proper consideration
for a sacrifice of thanksgiving. 3. By sacrifices for sin, are meant all
expiations or offerings to put away the guilt and punishment of ignorances and
infirmities; for which kind of sins only those sacrifices were allowed, and in
the Hebrew are oftentimes called simply sins.

7. Then said I, Lo I come] This word of coming does show a mystical sense.
For how did David come, when he spoke this word in the literal sense?
Therefore in the literal sense, it signifies only, Lo I am at hand, or I am
ready; I have prepared my self to do thy will. But in the mystical and proper
sense, it signifies the appearance of Christ in that future world, to execute
the will of God. In the volume of the book it is written of me] In these words
David shows the cause, why he is ready to do the will of God; or if ye please,
the manner and way of his obeying God; q. d. I am ready to do as it is written
of me in the volume of the book; or else, for so it is written of me that I
should do thy will. Therefore in these words we must understand, either some
particle of likeness, as, according; or some casual particle, for, because,
or seeing: for such particles are oftentimes concealed or silenced. But here
again, we meet with another difference between the Greek translation, and the
Hebrew text. In the Hebrew it is, in the volume of the book, which has a
plain and an open sense; for by the book he eminently understands the book
of the Law, which is called a volume, because unciently the Law was wont to be
written in skins of parchment or velum, one glued to another, and so rolled
up and unrolled in the form of a Court-role, which in Latin is properly
called Volumen, from the rolling of it; and hence books are called Volumes. A
famous Expositor among the Romanists, preferres the Greek reading in this
place before the Hebrew; and writes, that it is a vain repetition to say in
the volume of the book for that is all one as to say, in the book of the
book. This is a vame cavil; for all volumes or rolls are not books, but
there are volumes and rolls of many other things besides. So that the word
book is fitly added to volume, to specify the differences of volumes. We meet
with a like phrase, Jer. 36.2. But why does the Greek translation read it, in
a Chapter of the Book? The reason may be, because the Hebrew word Megillah,
does not only signify a whole book consisting of many skins, but also any
one single skin, which may contain only some Chapter of the Book. And
therefore the Greek Translator conceived, that he should not go from the sense
of the words, if for the whole volume, he should put only some part or certain
Chapter of it; especially because by this means the redundancie in words would
seem the less or none at all; yet some there would seem to be, if he had said
the volume, and that had been taken to signify the whole book. Wherefore
these words must be taken as if he had said, In a Chapter of the book, namely
of the Law it is written of me. By which means, not only all show of
redundancy is taken away, but also a more special place is designed, where the
thing is written, that is here spoken. Now let us a little enquire, what
Chapter this might be? Certainly other Chapter it can be none, but that,
wherein the very thing is handled, which David said, he came to do; i. that
David should do the will of God. For we have said, that in these words is
showed the cause why David said, he came to do Gods will, or the manner how
he should do it. But where is it said, that David must do the will of God?
Namely there, where the Kings of Gods people are commanded to do so; which is
set down in the last parcel of the 17. Chapter of Deuteronomy from the 13.
verse to the end. For David in a peculiar way was ordained of God himself to
be the first King over Gods people, and the Kingdom was to remain in his
posterity for ever. And therefore he says, that there it is written of him;
not that it is there written of him by name as David, but written of him as a
King. And here also the Holy Ghost seems to have left us some footstep of a
mystical sense. For it might be said of Christ properly, that there it is
written of him by name; for the Holy Ghost does every where aim chiefly at
Christ. Hence it appears, that they are in an error, who by a Chapter in the
Book, understand the beginning of Genesis; because as they think there it is
written of Christ, that he created heaven and earth. But is there also any
thing written of David? or of Christ there, that he should do the will of
God? But in the 17. Chapter of Deuteronomy before cited, among other things
which God willed to be observed by the future King of his people, this is also
delivered, ver. 18. And it shall be when he sits upon the throne of his
Kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this Law in a book, out of that
which is before the Priests his Levites; And it shall be with him, and he shall
read therein all the days of his life; that he may learn to fear the Lord his
God to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes to do them: That his
heart be not lified up above his brethren; and that he turn not aside from the
Commandment to the right hand or to the left. All Gods Laws are his will, for
they are that will of God which God would have done; he therefore that does
Gods Laws, he does his will. And seeing all the future Kings of his people were
to do Gods will, as here it was written of them; therefore David also when he
was become King was to do the will of God as in this Chapter of Gods Book it
was written of him. And therefore David again, was to write himself a copy of
the Law in a book; he must read therein all the days of his life; he must
keep all the words of it, and not lift his heart above his brethren; for in
doing these things he did the will of God, as it was written of him in a
Chapter of the Law. But some man may hereupon demand, how shall this belong to
Christ? must he write out a book of the Law of Moses and perpetually read in
it, and never depart from it? The Answer is easy, That for the mystical sense
we must not tie our selves to every single word, but only to the breviat and
sum of the matter, and that which is spoken properly of the type, must be so
applied to the antitype, as the nature of the antitype requires. The sum of the
matter in this place is, That the King of Gods people must be obedient to Gods
will; particularly to that will of God which God would have him to observe, and
consequently to that Law of God which God would have stand in force. As long as
the Law of Moses was in force, so long the Kings over Gods people must observe
that Law. But that Law being by God abrogated, no man is bound to observe it,
much less is the King of Gods people bound to it. And a new Law being
surrogated, Gods people and their King must observe that new Law. Wherefore the
Law written in the Chapter of that book, must be so taken or understood of
Christ, as the nature of the thing will bear it, and as the Majesty and
divinity of Christ requires. Many things are said of the shadow, which the
perfection of the body does reject. But we must further observe, that the sense
of the words in this Psalm may yet be further extended; seeing in the Hebrew
text, to the sense whereof the Author might have more regard then to the Greek
Translation, it is simply said, In the volume of the book, i. of the Law; and
although according to the Greek Translation, we understand that Chapter of the
Law, which we cited in Deuteronomy; yet that very Chapter has reference to the
whole Law of God; or it referres the King to all the words and precepts of the
Law, which the King of Gods people was to exccute. Wherefore in a mystical
sense we may understand all those things, wherein Christ was to perform the
will of God; and particularly those that belong to his expiatory Sacrifice,
which here is the thing in hand. Whence it is in a manner yet left doubtful,
whether Christ said these words, when he came into this world or the world to
come. For, if by this will of God we understand nothing else but the sacrifice
of Christ strictly and properly taken, excluding his death from it, then we
must affirm, that Christ said these things when he came into that future
world. But if we extend the sacrifice or offering of Christ more largely, and
include his death, the necessary antecedent unto it, as in this place it seems
we must do, and as we have before intimated, that we may not set aside the
excellent and proper act of Christ himself, pertaining to his offering and
sacrifice most acceptable to God, seeing he says that he came to do the will
of God, and that we know that Christ himself had also his part herein; then
the thing it self declares, that these words must be attributed to Christ when
he came into this world. And it is no obstacle to this, that both according to
the Greek Translation, and according to the literal sense of the Hebrew words,
we respect that place, wherein the office of the King is described, whence
Christ as now made a King seems to speak these things, as David also did.
For, besides that the Hebrew words of the Psalm are more large, as we have
said, and therefore (especially in the literal sense) may justly be more
largely extended, this also must be marked, That Christ although he were not
yet a King actually, yet because he was for certain to be one, and ordained to
a Kingdom by Gods immutable Decree, he might very well even then refer to
himself, the precept wherein the King of Gods people is commanded to do Gods
will.

8. Above when he said] From the words of Christ, the Author further inferres,
that the legal sacrifices and offerings were abrogated, and in their place the
sacrifice and offering of Christ was instituted. And he shows this to be
manifest from the very manner of Christ's words, and from the clear opposition
of the things therein specified. Above, i. in the first place, when he spoke of
sacrifices and offerings to be rejected, before he spoke of his coming to do
the will of God. Sacrifice and offering and burnt-offerings and offering for
sin thou would not, neither had pleasure therein, which are offered by the
Law] The words which are offered by the Law] must be read as included in a
parenthesis, whereby the Author specifies that the legal sacrifices and
offerings are abrogated; because the sacrifices and offerings, which Christ
says here, that God would not have, neither had any pleasure in them, and
therefore must be taken away, are no other but the legal sacrifices which were
instituted by the Law of Moses, and were offered according to that Law.

9. Then said he] Christ after he had spoken the former words for the
abrogation of the Legal sacrifices, then he added these that follow. For
these are the words of the Author, relating the words of Christ. Lo, I come to
do thy will, O God] Because Gods will was to abrogate the Legal sacrifices,
therefore Christ comes to do that will and pleasure of God, which God should
surrogate in stead of the Legal sacrifices. He takes away the first that he
may establish the second] q.d. What is this else, but to abrogate the former,
that he may establish the latter? But that former thing was the Legal
sacrifices, which Christ abrogates; the latter is the will of God, which he
establishes.

10. By the which will we are sanctified] Here he shows what benefit we gain,
by this will of God, performed by Christ, and establishes in the place of the
Legal sacrifices. For, it might be demanded, what does this concern us and
the expiation of our sins, that instead of the Legal sacrifices Christ says
he will do or has done the will of God? Therefore the Author shows, that this
will of God and the execution of it, does consist in the sacrifice and offering
of Christ made for us: whence also this will of God is tacitly compared with
the Legal sacrifices, and withal is preferred before them, as far more
excellent and acceptable to God. Therefore he says, that we are sanctified by
it; even we, who (as he presently adds) are sanctified by the offering of the
body of Christ] In which words, he withal teaches what that will of God is,
namely; that it is the offering of the body of Christ once for all; or at least
that it is altogether concurrent with this offering. For, how else should we be
said to be sanctified or expiated by this will of God, seeing we are sanctified
by the offering of the body of Christ. For this will of God seems to be opposed
thus far to the legal sacrifices, that by it we are truly sanctified. For
while our sanctification is attributed to the will of God, as it stands opposed
to the legal sacrifices, it is tacitly taken from them. As if the Author had
said: By which will of God we are sanctified, andnot by the old legal
sacrifices. The will of God is here put, not for the action of his will, but
for the object or matter of his will, for the thing he would have done, which he
approves, and wherein he has pleasure; for it is opposed to the legal
sacrifices; which he would not have done, which he approves not, and wherein he
has no pleasure. And therefore it signifies the sacrifice and offering of
Christ, as the object or matter, which is now his will, as the words following
teach us. Sanctified, is explated, purged, and cleansed from our sins: for
which, see chap. 9.13. Through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
for all] The offering, not of legal sacrifices often made, and yearly
iterated, and therefore ineffectuall and imperfect; but of the body of Christ
once made, is that offering, which greatly pleases God, and is wholly
conformable to his will, and truly sanctifies us.

11. And every Priest stands daily ministering, and offering oftentimes the
same sacrifices] Hitherto he has compared the offering of Christ with the
legal sacrifices, chiefly in respect of the iteration, that the legal
sacrifices were offered often, that is, year by year for the whole people:
but that of Christ but once only. Now he begins to compare the high Priests
together, namely, the old with the new, the legal Priests with Christ; that
they offered and ministered year by year, but Christ once only. For where
there are many sacrifices successively iterated year by year, there the high
Priest also must necessarily minister and offer year by year: but where there
is but one sacrifice or offering to be made, there the high Priest ministers
and offers but once only. For hitherto the author has intended only this, to
show that Christ entering into his heavenly Sanctuary; not to offer often
according to the manner of the legal high Priests, but to make one only
offering; as appears in the former chapter, verse 25. For to this point as to
his main scope all his arguments are directed. The high Priest being en tered
into the holy place, did not sit there, but was wont to stand there before the
Mercy-seat, as before the Throne of God. And he stood there daily; which must
not be so understood, that he did so every day in the year: but upon a set and
certain day of the year, which had it circuit, and came about year by year;
namely, at the solemn anniversary fast for the universal expiation of the
whole people; for he daily offered upon that day; whenever it had recourse.
For in this sense he used the same word before chap. 7.27. where he openly
spoke of that solemn annual sacrifice upon the day of Expiation; whereto he
has reference in this place also, as particularly appears from the third
verse of this chapter; where he mentions the Commemoration of sins every year,
which were constantly confessed by the whole people at that sacrifice. Which
can never take away sins. The cause is here showed, why the legal high Priest
must offer those sacrifices often; namely, because they could never take away
sins. i. They could never so effectually free men from their sins, that
they who were once expiated thereby, should have no further conscience of
sins. And what this is, has been already explicated in this chapter, verse 2.

12. But this man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins, for ever, sat
down at the right hand of God.] Here he opposes Christ to the legal high
Priest in three particulars. First, in that Christ offered for sins but once
only; for he so offered, that he never iterated his offering more. Secondly,
in that after his offering, he sat down at the right hand of God. Thirdly,
that he continued his seat there for ever, even unto the end of the world. And
these two latter particulars are a reason of the former; for because Christ
sits at the right hand of God; and sits there for ever to the worlds end;
therefore he shall never offer sacrifice more. For how can it beseem, or
rather how can it befall so great a Majesty, to offer again another
Sacrifice, that is, to die again, and then again to enter into heaven? For
seeing Christ sits at Gods right hand for ever, therefore the Majesty of
Christ must continue for ever also; and then how can Christ ever offer again?
For then a thing lasts for ever, when it has a continual duration through
all times and ages without any intermission.

13. From henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstoole] Here he
shows the issue or effect that will follow upon Christ's sitting at the right
hand of God. For thereupon it will follow, that at the last, all his enemies
shall be put under his feet, and made his footstool. So far shall Christ be
from offering again, to be violated and put to death again by his enemies,
that he expects their subjection to him, to be made his footstool. And when
all the enemies of Christ (among whom death is the last and chiefest) shall be
made his footstool, i. shall be wholly mastered, yea abolished, what cause can
there be why he should iterate his offering? That this subjection will follow,
the Author gathers it, from this saying of God unto Christ, Sit thou at my
right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool,] Psalm 110.1.
Therefore Christ sitting at the right hand of God does expect this. And he
says, that Christ expects this, fitting his words to the words of the
Psalm, wherein God himself does vindicate this subjection of Christ's enemies
unto him, by putting them under his feet. But because we know, that Christ
himself neither heretofore has been, neither now is, nor hereafter shall be
vacant or unoccupied in this action; neither is this subjection attributed to
God, otherwise then as God does it by Christ, or gives power and strength unto
Christ, whereby he may and does effect it; therefore in the word expecting we
must acknowlegde a trope, and the signification of it must be admitted only
thus far, as it argues; that Christ by the gift and benefit of God, does reign
and subdue his enemies to him: so that in this respect not Christ, but God is
said to subdue his enemies, and Christ expects only till it be done. Besides
in regard of the time, wherein at last all the enemies of Christ shall be
subdued unto him, Christ may be said thus far to depend upon his Father, as
it is in his Fathers own power to order the times and seasons of things, or
Christ himself does testify.

14 For by one offering.] He brings another reason why Christ offered only but
once; because by one offering he perfected or finished all things. As on the
contrary the legal high Priests offered often, because they could never
perfect all things by all their oblations. He perfected for ever them that are
sanctified] Perfected, is thoroughly and wholly expiated, see Chap. 7. ver. 11.
For ever; is in respect of all future times and ages to come; not, as it was
under the Law, only for the time past, and that time but for the space of one
year. They that are sanctified, are they that are expiated, purged or cleansed
from sin in their conscience: and the word must not be restrained to the
present time only, but extended and dilated to all differences of time, to
those that ever have been sanctified, or now are, or ever shall be. For Christ
may be said to perfect or expiate men for ever in a double sense. First, as
every man that is expiated, is not expiated for some certain time, but for
ever: and secondly, as his offering is of efficacy and force to expiate all men
of all times and ages to the end of the world; so that it shall never need be
iterated either for the same men, or for any others.

15. Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us] After that he had proved
by several reasons, that the offering of Christ must be made only once: now
he further proves the same by a testimony of the Scripture, wherein the Holy
Ghost witnesses the same thing. For this truth is so evident and so material,
that it has not only the reasons formerly alleged to confirm it; but has
also a testimony of Scripture wherein the Holy Ghost does testify it. The Holy
Ghost is said to witness a thing, when the Scripture says it; because as
Peter teaches us, that holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. After that he had said before] After the Holy Ghost had
said before; which saying follows in the next verse.

16. This is the Covenant, that I will make with them, after those days (says
the Lord) I will put my Laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I
write thm] Of these words of the Holy Ghost, we have treated before, Chap. 8.10.

17. And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more] Between the former
verse, and this something must be understood, that is silenced; namely, then he
said, as the Author himself speaks at the ninth verse before. For at the
fifthteenth verse upon which this depends, the Author had written, for after
that he said before] namely the Holy Ghost; therefore here must be understood,
then he said; namely, the Holy Ghost again said the words of this Text, And
their sins and iniquities, etc.

18. Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sinne] From
these words of the Holy Ghost, wherein the remission of sins and iniquities
is promised to Gods people; now the Author inferres, that the offering of
Christ must be but one only. Namely, because the Holy Ghost does testify,
that God under the New Testament, and so by Christ and his offering, will remit
unto his people all sins and iniquities even the most grievous for ever. Now
where there is such a remission of sins, proceeding from Gods Will and
Covenant, and that universally in respect of time for ever, and also
universally in respect of persons to all men, there can be given no other
sacrifice for sins, and therefore one sacrifice only for sins is
sufficient. But that no further sacrifice is allowed for sins, where such a
remission of them is granted by Covenant, it appears from hence, because
otherwise remission should be granted and ordained also by Covenant to them
that persist in their sins; which were a thing very unfit and unworthy of
Gods grace. For if men repent and change their mind and ways into better
courses, partly they abstain from sin with all care, and partly by virtue of
the new Covenant, and so by the one single offering of Christ, they have ready
prepared for them a remission of all those sins, which either went before
their true repentance, or to follow it, that they neither lose it, nor make it
void. Anciently under the Law, when remission was granted only of ignorances
and infirmities, it was no marvel, if upon the stay or return of the same
sins, for which offering had been made, the offerings were often iterated;
and instead of them another offering were introduced far better and perfecter
which is that of Christ: but now seeing the most grievous sins are expiated
by the offering of Christ under the New Testament, what place can be yet left
for any other offering? For either a man engaged by so great a benefit does
afterward lead an holy life, or not. If he live holily, there needs no other
offering for to expiate his sin, seeing he commits it not: if he live not
holily, there must be none.

19. Having therefore brethren boldnesse] Here the Author does in a manner
sum up those things, which hitherto he had spoken of the Priesthood and
sacrifice of Christ; and from thence infertes his following admonition. By
boldness here he understands an assured hope, and confidence flowing from the
faculty and liberty granted us of entering into heaven the most holy Sanctuary.
So that by the word boldness is signified unto us both our faculty or liberty
of entering into heaven, and also our confidence or assurance of mind issuing
from our knowledge of our faculty or liberty to enter; which liberty is opposed
to that restraint under the Law, whereby it was lawful for no man to enter
into the holy place under pain of death, except the high Priest once a year.
And for fear that any one should attempt it, all were forbidden it. To enter
into the holiest. Heaven is that Sanctuary whereinto on Gods part we have
liberty that we may enter, and on our own part we have confidence that we
shall enter. And of all Sanctuaries the heavenly is absolutely the holiest;
wherein it is opposed to the legal Tabernacle, whereof one of the rooms was
the most holy, yet not absolutely, but comparatively only in respect of the
other, which was called the first Tabernacle and the holy place, because it was
less holy then the second, as the second was far less holy then heaven,
which is far the holiest of all. By the blood of Jesus.] For from the blood
of Jesus, we draw our boldness both for our liberty and confidence to enter;
because both the New Testament, whereby is granted unto us not only leave, but
a right to enter into the holiest, is confirmed by the blood of Jesus: but also
the new sacrifice once only offered and never to be iterated, for the offering
whereof Christ entered into the holiest, was prepared by the blood of Jesus.
For by the entrance of Jesus into the holiest, who is our leader and our head,
we have liberty that we may, and we take courage that we shall enter: seeing
whither soever our leader and head whom God himself has appointed unto us,
does enter and arrive, thither also a right and liberty of entering is granted
unto us: for not only the same issue of the journey is promised to us, that was
granted to our Captain and Head; but also therefore our Captain entered heaven
and obtained all power there, that both from his example and from the power he
has there, we might have an assured faith and hope of those heavenly
blessings, and in due time might really enjoy them.

20. By a new and living way which he has consecrated for us] Here the Author
seems to declare whence it is, that we have our liberty and confidence to enter
heaven; and he says we have it hence, That Christ has consecrated for us a
way to it. Consecrated here is initiated or dedicated; for the Greek word is
the same, that before we rendered dedicated, Chap. 9. v. 18. Now Christ is said
to consecrate or initiate this way unto us; not only as he was the first that
entered heaven after death, and a death so fearful and shameful; but also
because he has procured us a right to the same way, that we may lawfully
pass along in it, and trace the steps of Christ to immortality: For Christ
has consecrated this way for us, by using it himself first, and then leaving
the use of it free to us; for consecration is the first use of a holy thing,
before which it might not lawfully be used by any other. Before Christ opened
heaven by his entrance thither, and consecrated the way leading thither, it was
lawful for no man to enter it, especially after death. But now this way being
consecrated, dedicated, or initiated, any man that will, may enter it, and by
it pass safely unto heaven. This way is called new, not only because it was
lately or newly consecrated or initiated, but especially because it was lately
discovered and newly opened, even in the latter times and last age of the
world; and besides, because it is an appendent and concurrent with the New
Testament; for during the Old Testament and the old Tabernacle the way to the
holiest was not open: The way into the holiest of all, was not yet made
manifest while the first Tabernacle was yet standing, Chap. 9.8. This new way
is so marked with the steps of Christ, that no length of time can deface it;
especially seeing so many thousands of the godly have heretofore followed and
hereafter will follow Christ their leader in that journey; and the way by their
steps is continually renewed and kept open. And it is called a living way; not
formally, but finally, because life is the end of it whereto it leads; for so
bread is called the bread of life and living bread; because effectually it does
vivifie and make us live. He seems herein to have a tacit reference to the
entrance into the holy places under the Law, which was a mortal and deadly
way, because it was death for any man to enter them, excepting only the high
Priest, and he but once a year, upon a prefixed day, to perform solemn
ceremonies. And therefore he opposes the way to the heavenly holy place, to
the way of the old legal holy place; in as much as this latter is a deadly way
that brings death, but the former is a living way that leads unto life.
Besides, this entrance and way leading to the heavenly holy place is commonly
made by death, and sometimes by a horrid and cruel death, and so may seem
rather to lead unto destruction; and therefore he called it a living way very
seasonably, to comfort us by teaching us, that it has a far different issue
from what it seems at the first sight. Through the veil, that is to say his
flesh] He alludes to the veil that was spread between the two holy places of
the Tabernacle, and disparted the one from the other: To which veil he says
the flesh of Christ is answerable. For as the old legal high Priest could not
enter into the most holy place unless the veil were withdrawn: So Christ
could not enter into the heavenly holy place, before his flesh was withdrawn,
and as I may say, rent and broken. Therefore the high Priest entered by moving
the veil aside, and Christ by laying his flesh aside; so Christ entered
through the vail. An open sign whereof was in the death of Christ, whereby his
flesh was dissolved and laid aside. For when Christ yielded up the ghost,
suddenly the vail of the Temple was rent in twain. And this renting of that
veil, what does it portend else, then that by Gods appointment, those holy
places should be no more shut, but open and common, and become in a manner of
public use; so that any man might lawfully either look into or enter them?
And hereby what else was signified, but that the flesh of Christ being rent and
broken by the death of the Cross, thereupon the passage unto the heavenly holy
places was unlocked and set open to Christ, and to all that believe in him? so
that not only Christ himself might enter, but all that are Christ's may enter
also, and before they enter actually, may look in by faith and hope. While the
mortal body of Christ was entire and whole, both Christ himself was debarred
from the entrance of those heavenly places, and we both from the entrance and
prospect of them: but after that this veil of Christ's flesh was by death
dissolved, then both Christ himself did enter heaven, and procured us a right
and power to enter, and before we do enter actually, to view the happiness of
it by faith, and taste the sweetness of it by hope. For the entrance of
Christ into heaven following upon his death, does make us certainly to see and
hope for the inheritance of heaven; which was hidden from us by Christ as by a
veil, till he was withdrawn and taken from us by his death and Resurrection.

21. And having a great high Priest] Christ is called a great high Priest, not
only in respect of the faithful who are but a kind of less Priests compared
to Christ; as of old under the Law among the Priests one was great and head
over the rest: but in respect of the high and great Priests under the Law, who
as we have heard, compared with Christ, were not only little, but in a manner
very small and dim shadows. Over the house of God] By this house of God, we
may understand both that heavenly Sanctuary, wherein our high Priest performs
his holy offices, answerable to the Legal Tabernacle, and also the Church or
people of God, who are the spiritual house of God. For Christ is president
over both these houses, both that heavenly and this spiritual on earth.

22. Let us draw neere] Here begins the other part of the Chapter, containing
an admonition drawn from the former doctrines. They were said to come or draw
near (as we heard at the first verse) who while the Priest was officiating,
were intentive to the divine service, for which they approached to the
Tabernacle, whereby they also came near or drew near to God. The Author does
call upon us, That seeing we have a high Priest truly great resident in the
Sanctuary of heaven, who there performs holy offices and offerings for us,
therefore we also should approach and draw near in soul and spirit unto that
heavenly Sanctuary intentively minding the worship of God. Which is nothing
else, but to apply our selves to the worship of God, and never make doubt to
draw near unto him in confidence of Christ our high Priest. With a true heart]
He shows what manner of persons they must be, who will exercise this spiritual
worship of God, and apply themselves unto it; They must have a true heart. And
a true heart is opposed to a seined, deceitful and dissembling heart, which
makes only an outward show of holiness, and thereby endeavors to deceive. In
full assurance of faith] A full assurance of faith is opposed to a wavering and
doubting faith; for look how much doubt is mingled with faith, so much is
wanting to the perfection and fullness of it. Therefore then we have a full
faith, when we doubt nothing of the truth of the Christian Religion and
discipline. Having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience] He alludes to
a Ceremony ordained under the Law, whereby they who had touched any unclean
thing, must be sprinkled with the holy water of separation, before they might
enter into the assembly of Gods people at the Sanctuary, to perform the
worship of God; for if they did otherwise they must dye for it. This purging or
cleansing of the flesh by sprinkling, the Author transferres spiritually to the
spirit and soul, whereby the soul is cleansed from the guilt and stain of
conscience, and the body from the filth of sin. Now the sprinkling or purging
of the heart from an evil conscience may be taken two ways; either to
signify that cleansing whereby we get a full remission of our sins by the
blood and sacrifice of Christ, and are freed from an evil conscience and from
fear of Gods punishment, in which manner he said before, that our conscience
is purged from dead works: or to signify the cleansing of our soul from
inward and secret sins. For by an evil conscience in this place, by a metony
my of the effect, he seems to understand the hidden and secret vices of the
soul; as opposed to the filth of the body, which as in the words immediately
subsequent, he teaches must be washed away. For, what else can the filth of
the body signify, then those outward sins which are committed by the body it
self? not as if these did not also defile the conscience, but because open
sins are exposed to the eyes and censures of other men: but the secret and
inward sins of the soul, though they make no man else conscious to them, yet
they agitate and burden the conscience. Therefore by the former sense of these
words is signified the great benefit of God, which we attain by the blood and
sacrifice of Christ; and by the latter is intimated our duty whereto we are
excited and obliged by so great a benefit. And our bodies washed] We have
already said, that this washing of the body must be referred to the washing
away of that filth, whereby our body stands defiled before God; therefore if we
receive the last sense of the former words, then the Author here puts us in
mind of the same thing, whereof Paul remembers us, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having
therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
And the Author shows, that it is a most fit and convenient thing to wash the
body in this sense, because anciently under the Law, they who approached to the
Sanctuary for the performance of Gods worship, must wash their bodies; all the
difference is, that there men understood the carnal stains of sin, but here
the spiritual. With pure water] There is no necessity we should by this
allegory think any thing answering by name to this water; seeing the Author
seems to speak in allusion to the custom used under the Law of washing the
body with pure water. For, comparisons as we have often intimated are subject
to many abusions. Yet if any man desire a full resemblance, we may say that
hereby is meant, the spirit and doctrine of Christ, or that spiritual water,
wherewith Christ sprinkleth his people, not excluding his blood. For this is
the pure water for the soul, and by it only the filth of sin is washed away.
They that here understand the water of Baptism are mistaken. For the water of
Baptism is but only an outward sign and shadow of this washing which here
the Author understands, wherewith neither can our hearts be sprinkled, nor the
filth of our vices really washed away. Therefore that spiritual Baptism which
does truly save us, must be here understood, even that Baptism which as Peter
says, is not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, or the outward
washing of the body, but the answer of a good conscience toward God, 1. Pet.
3.21. Which is not effected by any elementary water, but only the heavenly and
spiritual which washes the conscience.

23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith.] He exhorts them to
constancy in the profession of the Christian religion; because it is not
sufficient for us, to serve God in heart and other works, unless we also
confess him with the mouth. In the Greek it is, the profession of our hope;
and by the word hope, the Author seems to comprise the whole Christian
religion; for the Christian religion consists chiefly in hope, and in a hope
most excellent, even the hope of immortal life, and eternal happiness; and all
the parts and heads are directed and concur to breed in men's minds this
hope, and a holiness of life suitable to it. Hence Peter under the same name of
hope seems to comprehend all the heads of our Christian profession, 1. Pet.
3.15. Without wavering. We must hold this hope so fast, that we neither
decline from it our selves, nor suffer our selves to be beaten from it by any
engines of temptation or affliction. For he is faithful that promised.] He
inserts the cause, why we should hold fast the profession of our hope without
wavering; namely, because this hope is grounded both upon a promise, and a
promise of him that is faithful to perform it, namely, of God himself. God
is therefore termed faithful, because he keeps his faith, i. He always
performs whatsoever he has undertaken for his part; and never disappoints
his people of his help and favor. Therefore we are never to doubt of Gods
faith, so we keep our own, and perform our parts with all care and diligence.

24. And let us consider one another] This may be understood, that we should
look unto both one another state and condition of life, and also one another
behavior and action: And for what end we should do this, he presently
shows, in adding. To provoke unto love] To provoke, is to intend or increase
the force of a thing: and love is then provoked, when it is quickened and
increased. And it gathers increase from our mutual consideration and
inspection, either in our selves or others. In our selves it is increased, when
we are either stirred up by the notable examples of other men, or moved by
their state and condition, to embrace them with more ardent affection and good
will: if their estate be prosperous, that we do not only envy them, but use
our endeavor to defend and advance their happiness to our power: but if they
are in distress, that we succor and benefit them in what we are able. In
others love is increased, when we look into their lives and manners for this
end, that where they grow negligent in their duties, or suffer their love to
decay, there by our admonitions and exhortations, we excite to good works, and
to repair the decays of their love. Therefore this provoking to love, may be
taken either passively, when the increase of love is made upon our selves, or
actively, when we increase it upon others. And to good workes] Then we are
provoked to good works, when we follow them with an ardent affection, or as
Paul would have us, when we are zealous of good works. He adjoynes good
works to love, to teach us that our love should not be barren, but fruitful
of works; although works may be taken more largely, and extended to all
works of holiness, as well concerning God as our selves.

25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together.] Namely, for this
especial end to retain and preserve, the communion of Saints, and the unity
of the Spirit. Which is then done, when Christians meet together to perform
the worship of God, to hear his word, to power forth unanimous prayers unto
him, to exercise that censure of manners, which Christ and his Apostles have
prescribed, to celebrate the memory of Christ's death, by sacred breaking of
bread according to his own institution; to make a common supply for the poor
and distressed as occasion requires, and with all their forces and advices, to
promote the affairs of the Church. As the manner of some is. It is apparent,
that in those times there were some, who though they had not forsaken the
Christian religion, yet had forsaken the assemblies of the faithful; that they
might the better lie hid, and thereby more easily avoid dangers and
persecutions. And it is apparent also hence, that they sin grievously, who
withdraw themselves from the company of the faithful, and from the assemblies
of the Saints. But exhorting one another] To the neglect of assembling, he
opposes this mutual exhorting or admonishing. Whence it is manifest that
Christian assemblies were ordained among other ends for this also, to exhort
and admonish one another; which may be done most opportunely, when men are
assembled into some one place. And so much the more as ye see the day
approaching.] The words so much the more must also be communicated to the day
of approaching, as well as referred to the exhorting; By how much the more ye
see the day approaching, by so much the more let us exhort one another. By the
day, as the article the does intimate, must be understood some certain day,
and that well known; i. the day of judgment, and punishment for the
disobedient: Which judgment seeing it is twofold, we must needs understand a
twofold day or time of it. For we may take it both for the time of Gods taking
vengeance upon the Jews in the final destruction of Jerusalem; and also for
the last day of the whole world at the final destruction of the world. The
approach of that former day, they might easily perceive, both from the signs
foretold by Christ, and also from the predictions of those Prophets, who lived
in those times in the Church of God. The approach of this latter day, every man
sees, though not in respect of the whole world, and of the present age, yet
every man sees it in respect of himself. For as death is always approaching
unto every one of us, and the term of every man's life draws nearer: so also
thereby every man's last day does approach and draw nearer; not only because
after death there shall be no change in respect of our salvation and
damnation; but also because that whole time intercurrent between the last
moment of our life and the last judgment, is none in respect of the dead. For
when we are dead, and thereby void of all sense of time, the last moment of our
life departing, and the first moment of our life returning (for return it
shall at the last judgment) will seem one and the same to us at our rising
again to life. They who lie in a deep sleep are not sensible of the time that
passes, though the time be very long; and death is a deeper sleep then any
sleep of those that sleep alive. And this is the cause why the holy Scriptures
do sometime speak so, as if we should wholly live till the coming of Christ,
or were presently after our death translated to the Lord, and so to the joys
of heaven: For they have no regard of the time intercurrent between the last
end of our life, and the coming of Christ, and the future happiness of the
godly; see 2 Cor. 5.8. and Ephesians. 4.30. and Phil. 1.6,26. and 1 Timothy 6 14. and
Jam. 5.7,8. and some others.

26. For if we sin wilfully] He brings a cause or a motive, why they should
diligently exhort one another, because otherwise it might easily fall out, that
after knowledge of the truth received they might sin wilfully, in which case
how miserable and unhappy their condition would be, he presently declares. To
sin in this place may be taken in two senses, either largely or strictly.
Largely, as it is extended to diverse sins which are committed against the
Commandments of Christ. Strictly, as it eminently signifies the most grievous
sin of Apostacy, which is a falling away from the Christian Religion, or
rather infidelity in general; whereto if by way of difference, ye add what
the Author presently adds, after knowledge of the truth received, ye have the
definition of Apostacy: For Apostacy is an Infidelity that follows after
faith; or a desertion of the faith, and a rejection of the truth once known
and received. So John 16.9. Christ by the word sin seems eminently to
understand Infidelity. The latter sense is favored, 1. In that the Author,
ver. 28. following, being to prove that men sinning after the manner here
specified, shall by no means escape the judgment of God, seems to draw his
argument from them, who wholly rejected Gods Law, and turned to false Gods; of
whom we read, Deuteronomy. 17. and whom no men resemble nearer, then they who fall
away from Christ, and his most holy Religion. 2. In that it seems proper to
Apostates, to tread under foot the Son of God, and to account the blood of the
Covenant an unholy thing; for this is incompatible to them who constantly
adhering to the Christian Religion, are notwithstanding fallen into some single
sin or vice. 3. In that this place seems most alike to that, Chap. 6.4. where
we have said the Author speaks properly of Apostates. But the former sense is
also favored; 1. In that the word Sin has a general signification, and
perhaps every where; for words must not be restrained within the use of speech,
when no reason constraines it. And the word Sin in the place of John 16.9.
has of it self a general signification, though afterward it be specified and
explicated in particular what kind of sin he there understands. 2. From the
occasion and scope of the Author: For before he had admonished them to exhort
one another; and now he shows, what great danger will or at least may come of
it, if this action be neglected; namely, that they may wilfully sin after
they have received the knowledge of the truth; and so involve themselves into a
heavy judgment. And seeing the Exhortation is at large, as must be used as a
remedy against all kind of sins; why therefore should not that sin which the
Author faith might easily arise from the neglect of exhortation, be extended
largely also? Now in answer of the reasons brought for the other sense. To the
first: we say that the Authors argument seems drawn from all them who sinned
against the Law with a high hand; of whom there is a place, Numb. 15.30,31. But
the soul that does ought presumptuously (whether he be borne in the land, or a
stranger) the same reproacheth the Lord, and that soul shall be cut off from
among his people; Because he has despised the word of the Lord, and has
broken his Commandment; that soul shall surely be cut off, his miquity shall
be upon him. For to despise the Law here in this Author, is the same with
despising the word of the Lord, and breaking his Commandment with Moses in
Numbers. Here, to sin wilfully, and there to do presumptuously are all one.
And here, shall dye without mercy, and there, he shall surely be cut off, are
all one, for what is this else, but not to spare, not to show any mercy. To the
second we say, That he does tread under foot the Son of God, and account the
blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, who dares violate the Covenant, which is
published by Christ, and established by his blood, or dares as much as in him
lies to irritate or dissolve it, that it may be void and of no effect; by
committing those sins, which by the Covenant are punished by death and
damnation. To the third we say, That this place is not so altogether like that
Chap. 6.4. but that there appears a plain unlikenesse. For there both the
scope and occasion of the words, and the word it self of falling away,
compared with the matter preceding do all declare, that the Author properly
speaks of Apostacy; but here as we have seen, the scope and occasion of the
words tend another way. Wherefore we must conclude, that the former acception
of the word Sin, which includes in it also the latter, is rather to be
received. Although amongst those sins Apostacy holds the first place, and
thereto the Author has reference chiefly, but not only. The word wilfully as
we have said, seems to signify the same sin, that the Scriptures of the Old
Testament call presumptuously; and so committed in contempt of Gods Majesty, or
by hautinesse and pride of mind; and this kind of sin, is opposed to sins
committed either out of ignorance or infirmity: Wherefore it notes unto us
those kind of sins which are wittingly, advisedly and purposely; and so
argue a mere malice of mind. Such under the New Testament are accounted all
vicious habits and customs of sinning, and persevering in evill-doing; as also
all heinous and foul wickednesses, done wittingly and advisedly. For
infirmity, or humane frailty cannot be pretexed for such sins especially
among Christians. After that we have received the knowledge of the truth.
Sins wilfully and wittingly committed before the knowledge of the truth, are
of another nature, then those that follow that knowledge; for the Sacrifice of
Christ was ordained to expiate the former; but for the expiation of the latter,
there is no other sacrifice to be expected, as we shall hear afterward. For
crimes or foul sins committed after the knowledge of the truth, are far more
heinous then those done in ignorance of it; and the malice of man appears far
greater in those then in these, though otherwise the facts may be equal.
Therefore it more agrees with the equity and wisdom of God, to grant a means
for the expiation of those, then of these, and consequently to pardon those,
and not these. There remains no more sacrifice for sins. In these words is
expressed the miserable estate of those, who after knowledge of the truth
received, sin in the manner we have said; namely, that seeing the sacrifice
and offering of Christ did not profit them, there remains no other whereby
their sins may be expiated. But the sacrifice and offering of Christ profited
them not, because they are relapsed into their former sins, and bring not
forth fruit worthy of faith and repentance. For upon this condition only it is,
that the sacrifice and offering of Christ brings salvation to them who live
after their knowledge of the truth, and their reception of the Christian faith.
For sins committed before the knowledge of the truth, may be washed away by
faith only in Christ, and the profession of it, and a purpose, and as it were a
covenant of living holily afterward: but sins done after such knowledge are no
otherwise washed away, but by an actual and total desertion or forsaking of
them, and by inducing in their room all Christian virtues as fruits of the
Spirit and of faith. For this is it which the Apostle has left written unto
us, Gal. 5.18. But if ye be lead by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law. Now
the workds of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery fornication,
uncleanness, tasciviousnesse; Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I
have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, weeknesse, temperance, against
such there is no Law. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the
Spirit. Now what can be more clear, then that these words do openly teach,
that all they, who after they have received the faith of Christ, do follow the
works of the flesh, and are not lead by the Spirit of God, shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God, nor avoid eternal damnation? And therefore if they will
aspire to salvation, they must with all speed lay aside their vices, and be
effectually adorned with Christian virtues. For in this place here, the Author
seems not to teach, that men sinning wilfully after knowledge of the truth,
should have no hope at all lest of pardon and salvatoin; but only that they
have none, till they actually put off their sins, and qualify themselves
with such virtues as become Christians. For unless they do this, he says
plainly, that the sacrifice and offering of Christ will no way do them good.
Seeing besides, that one only sacrifice and offering of Christ, there remains
no other to be expected; as his words fully declare, in that he says, there
remains no more sacrifice; q. d. besides that one only offering of Christ
whereof we have treated hitherto, there remains no other for them. Whence
further it seems that by these words, all hope of conversion is not cut off to
such as sin wilfully after their knowledge of the faith; but only all hope of
pardon and salvation is so long cut off, as they forsake not their sinful
courses, and do not the works of true piety worthy of Christian repentance.
Although it is most true, that some sins are so foul, among which is
Apostacy, and such as have near affinity with it (whereof we spoke Chap. 6.)
that if we look into the nature of the New Covenant, we may well say, that
there is no hope of coversion from them; because without the special mercy of
God, not comprehended in the Covenant, the yoke of such sins cannot be loosed
and cut off. Sacrifice for sinnes] is sacrifice whereby sins are expiated, as
appears by the following verse, whereto this sacrifice for sins is opposed a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation. Wherefore as
in these last words punishment is signified; so in the former is pardon
intimated.

27. But a certain fearful looking for of judgement] Here he illustrates his
former negation, by an affirmation of the contrary. To them who after knowledge
of the faith sin wilfully, there remains no more sacrifice for their sins, but
there remains for them a fearful looking for of judgment. Judgment is here
as in many other places taken by a metonymy, for punishment; because by
judgment punishment is decreed. It is not necessary we should take
expectation or looking for properly here; seeing men given to sin, if we
respect their minds and thoughts, do for the most part expect or look for
nothing less, then punishment and damnation. Therefore such men are said to
look for judgment metaphorically, because for certain a judgment remains
unto them; or metonymically, because they ought to look for it. This
expectation or looking for is called fearful in regard of the object, because
the judgment or punishment looked for, or remaining to them, is for the
greatness of it, horrible and fearful. And fiery indignation] In these words
he expresses what the fearful judgment or punishment shall be, that
remains to such as sin wilfully after their knowledge of the faith; namely
they shall be caught and devoured by an extreme hot fire, whereinto God will
cast them in his indignation. There is no doubt, but by these words is
signified that last judgment or punishment which in the last judgment must be
inflicted upon all evill-doers. For we know, they shall be tormented, with
mighty flames of fire, and destroyed for ever; although we exclude not other
punishments of God in this life, which use to be the forerunners of that
horrible vengeance to come. For of all punishments, that by fire, is most
fearful and horrible; and therefore is used to signify the most grievous and
wrathful punishments. In the Sermons of the Prophets, when there is speech of
some grievous judgments or punishments of God, many times fire is mentioned,
See Deuteronomy. 32.22. and Job 15.34. and Job 20.26. and Psalm. 11.7. and Psalm. 21.9.
and Psalm. 78.21. and Psalm. 97.3. and Psalm 140.10. and Isaiah 10.16. Isaiah
26.11. and Isaiah 30.33. The anger also or wrath of God is in Scripture called
a fire; and among other passages in the 12. chapter following, God himself by
reason of the wrath wherewith he burns against the ungodly is called, a
consuming fire. And in this place, by fiery indignation, which shall devour
the adversaries of God, is understood the wrath of God. Which shall devour the
adversaries] The adversaries of God are they that always were his enemies and
never submitted unto him; or they that having once submitted, do afterward
rebel against him. Such are they who constantly reject the Religion of Christ,
or having once received it, afterward forsake it, or receiving and retaining
it, do not submit their souls to the precepts of it.

28. He that despised Moses Law] He confirms his former assertion by a
comparison of this case with the like under the Law. To despise a Law is to
oppose the being power, and execution of the Law, that it may be void and of no
force; or so to disobey it, that he may overthrow it. And he was said to
despise Moses Law, who did presumptuously violate any commandment of that Law;
for which the punishment of death was ordained without mercy. And this was
framed especially against them, who despised the first precept of the
Decalogue, and revolted to the worship of false gods. For the first
Commandment is the foundation of all the rest, and he that despises or
opposes it, does seem thereby to overthrow the whole Law of God, and to
revolt from it. Hence we may gather, that among wilful sinners (as appears by
their description added in the verse following) they hold the first rank, who
revolt from Christ. For they who forsake Christ the Son of God, do also forsake
God himself, and manifestly offend against the fundamental Law of the
Christian Religion. Died without mercy, under two or three witnesses] i. must
dye or be put to death; for here is not considered what was done, but what by
the Law of Moses ought to be done.

29. Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy] Here
is the reddition of the former comparison; which as the words themselves show,
was drawn from the less to the more. For it is a far fowler offense to
despise and reject the Son of God, then Moses, the Gospel, then the Law.
Wherefore if to those who wilfully offended against Moses and the Law, there
was granted no pardon, nor no place left for mercy; much less must they hope
it, who despise the Son of God; and much more are they to fear a more heavy
judgment. And therefore he can have no hope in the mercy of God, that is found
to be in so high an offense, and in so wicked a state of life. Who has trodden
under foot the Son of God] They tread the Son of God under foot, first
who are obstinate enemies of the Gospel; then Apostates, who forsake the most
holy Religion thereof, either in their judgment and their profession, or in
their profession only: and after those, who in profession adhere to the Son of
God, but in their lives and manners do trample upon his holy ordinances and
tread them under their feet. And there is a great emphasis in the word
treading underfeet, for thereby is signified the most high contempt of the Son
of God, who is most worthy of all honor; that the great wickedness whereof
such wretches are guilty, may appear more evidently. And has counted the
blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, and unholy thing. He
aggravates the wickedness of these men, especially of Apostats; who count the
blood of Christ, a vulgar and common thing, and therefore unholy and profane.
For profane is opposed to holiness, especially to such holiness which is in the
blood of the Son of God, who being in his person most holy, his blood also
must needs be holy. Now they profane the blood of Christ, who either forsake
Gods Covenant consecrated and hallowed by the blood of Christ; or else esteem
it not of that value, as for his sake whose blood it was, to abolish their sins
and afterward lead an holy life. Wherewith he was sanctified; Sactified here is
not referred to Christ as he had been sanctified with his own blood, but to
the wicked sinner, who by his Apostasy profanes that blood wherewith he was
once sanctified. For the blood of Christ is so far from being an unholy
thing, that it is most holy, and so holy, that thereby every man is sanctified
or hallowed; yea, they themselves were thereby once sanctified, who afterward
through their foul ungodliness counted it unholy. And we are said to be
sanctified by the blood of Christ, because by it our sins are expiated
through faith in Christ. For they who receive the faith of Christ, and so
incorporated into the new Covenant, they obtain pardon of all their former
sins, by virtue of the Covenant, and therefore also by virtue of that blood
wherewith the Covenant was establisted. For an Impunitie, wherein the remission
of sins does properly consist, is here by attained in such a manner, that they
have not only a right to it by virtue of the Covenant, but do actually enjoy
it, as long as they persist in the faith, on condition their faith be lively
and working by love: because so long God does neither really punish them,
unless it be by way of correction to further their salvation; neither has he
any intention to punish or destroy them, but rather ordains and orders them to
eternal salvation, by removing all obstacles that may hinder it, if they be
not wanting to themselves. And all this depends upon the new Covenant, and the
blood of Christ, wherewith it is confirmed and established. And therefore no
Christian given to vices, can have any hope from the blood of Christ, as long
as he changes not his life and manners. For that is most true which the
Apostle has written; If we walk in the light as he is in the light, we
have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son,
cleanses us from all sin, 1. John 1.7. Hence it appears, that we are
sanctified and cleansed by the blood of Christ for the time to come, yet upon
this condition, if for the time to come, we walk in the light as God is in
the light. i. If we endeavor to be like God in holiness and righteousness,
persisting therein constantly to our lives end. Yet the word Sanctifying in
this place, may signify that separation of Christians from other men, whereby
through the knowledge of Gods truth, they are sequestered from the profane and
common sort of men, and consecrated for the service of God. For by the blood of
Christ, wherewith the new Covenant is established, men are moved to embrace
Christian religion, and receive it for the true. And has done despite unto the
spirit of grace.] By the Spirit is understood that holy Spirit powered into the
faithful, which is called the Spirit of grace, because it is given by the
singular grace and goodness of God. To this Spirit he does despite, whosoever
rejects the Religion of Christ; or esteems it not so much as therefore to
live holily, according to the direction and suggestion of that Spirit: For he
gives not that credit to it that he ought, and besides he does in a manner as
much, as if he accounted it false.

30. For we know him that has said, Vengeace belongs unto me.] He confimes
here, what he said before of their fearful punishments, who wilfully run
into these sins. And for this purpose he cites here the words of God, Deuteronomy.
32.35. wherein God challenges to himself recompense, vengeance and judgment:
or professes of himself that he will execute it. Although God speak it there
of vindicating his own people, and punishing those that oppressed them: but
the Author here applies them to that punishment, which God himself will inflict
upon his own people, if they rebel against God and Christ. The meaning is,
that God will lay a heavy vengeance and judgment upon those that are
rebellious and obstinate against the Son of God. For we all know how great,
how powerful and how terrible he is, that has reserved recompense and
vengeance to himself. Yet in these words, Vengeance belongs to me, and I
will recompense.] The intent is not so much to show who the person is that has
this right to take vengeance; as to leave it to our consideration, how great
and potent the person is, who challenges the execution of it to himself: that
hence it may appear how grievous and how certain the punishment of the wicked
shall be. Says the Lord,] Here the person is expressed, who challenges to
himself the execution of vengeance, yet not so much for the designing of his
person, as for the notifying of his power, that he is the Lord Jehovah, the
most high, only and Almighty God, maker of heaven and earth. And again, the
Lord shall judge his people.] Again, is in the same place, which was cited
before. And in the word Lord, lies the Emphasis and force of the argument. For
if the Lord himself who is the most high God, shall judge his people; who sees
not but that the judgment must needs be most heavy and fearful? To judge
here, signifies to condemn and punish. In Deuteronomie (as we said) is
signified by these words, that the Lord would avenge his people upon their
enemies from the oppressions and wrongs done to his people. But the Author
following the more frequent use and sense of those words in other passages of
the Scriptures, has applied them to the punishment of Gods people falling from
their faith and obedience, For it is no less true, that the Lord will punish
his own people if they be refractory and rebellious against him, then that he
would judge and avenge their cause, and vindicate them from injuries, if they
were wrongfully oppressed. And the words his people, do also argue the
fearfulness of the judgment. For it is great reason, that the people of God,
if they shall presume to be rebellious and obstinate against God, should suffer
a heavier punishment then other men. And they are here called the people of
God, who are disobedient and obstinate, because they have received the
knowledge of God, and of his truth; and in that respect stand obliged to God in
a peculiar manner. Besides the appellations or names of things do often
remain, when the true ground or cause of the name is altered and gone.

31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God] This is
as it were the major Proposition of the Authors Argument, whereby he would make
it appear, that the punishment of the persons forementioned will be very
grievous and fearful. For he reasons thus, To fall into the hands of the
living God is a fearful thing: but these men fall into the hands of the living
God, seeing (as we have heard already) God himself will do judgment and
execution upon them: And therefore their punishment must needs be fearful. But
he puts the conclusion in the first place, then the assumption, and now he
adds the major proposition, which is of a known verity. For what man is he,
that will not acknowledge, how fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of
the living God? because the living God can punish far more fearfully then
mortal men can do. Why God is called living, we have showed before Chap.
9.14. But we must note, that the Author speaks here of that punishment, whereby
God puts men to everlasting destruction, and does it in his wrath, and not of
that chastisement which God sometime inflicts for the good of his people. For
it is far better to be chastised and corrected from God himself, and from
his own hand, then to be left to the pleasure of wicked men; as David
testifies, 2 Samuel 24.14.

32. But call to remembrance the former dayes] He brings here a new argument,
whereby he persuades the Hebrews to constancy and perseverance in the
Christian Religion; and he draws it from their former constancy and virtue,
which they showed at the beginning when first they received the Christian
Faith. In which after ye were illuminated] Christ is several times called the
light and the true light, because he brought into the world by the publishing
of the Gospel that knowledge of God which does truly illuminate and enlighten
us; not only in respect of that natural ignorance that grows up with men
concerning God, but in respect of that revealed knowledge which under the first
Covenant was but dark and shady; for the Gospel does reveal unto us those
mysteries which did before lie hid: for since the veil of the old Sanctuary
was rent, we now have liberty to look into the heavenly Sanctuary, where by
faith we see and know many mysteries, especially touching the expiation of our
sins, and salvation of our souls. Of which truth, when we receive the
knowledge, we are said to be illuminated. And this illumination is the first
act of our entrance into Covenant with God; for thereby it is, that we are made
acquainted with the sacred contents of the Covenant. So that Illuminated here
is all one with receiving the knowledge of the truth, before, ver. 26. Ye
endured a great fight of afflictions] To endure afflictions for Christ, and not
decline them, but patiently and stoutly to go through the trial of them, is a
great conflict or fight.

33. Partly while ye were made a gazing stock both by reproaches and
afflections] Reproaches and afflictions, are put for all sorts of persecutions,
whereof these two are the chief kinds; for reproaches are those persecutions
whereby a man's reputation, credit, or good name is vexed; and afflictions are
those whereby men suffer in their bodies and goods, as by sines, imprisonments,
and punishments. And reproaches and afflictions are the means whereby Gods
people are made a gazing stock, or a spectacle for men to look at. Yet it is
not necessary we should take this word properly, as if the Hebrews had been
condemned by public decree of the Magistrate, and in the sight of all men
brought upon a Scaffold, there to suffer punishment, or to be branded with
reproaches; which notwithstanding did many times befall the Christians: But it
may be taken metaphorically, for those reproaches and afflictions in general,
which were publicly known to all, or were in a manner in all men's mouths; as
for example, when a Christian was openly reviled, or beaten, or dragged through
the streets, or had his house by public authority, and open force plundered
and rifled. And partly when ye became companions of them that were so used]
This is done, when we take care and make provision for them who are reproached
and afflicted; when we harbor them, help and cherish them, make their case
our own, and profess our selves their brethren and companions. Men are used
to reproaches and afflictions, when they many times and often suffer them, and
by reason of them are agitated, vexed, and tossed too and fro, from place to
place; for so much is here signified by the Greek word (...).

34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling
of your goods] Here he declares both those particulars which in the verse going
before he had expressed and attributed to them; saving that he puts the latter
in the first place, and the former in the latter. For the compassion they had,
belong to their accompanying of those who were reproached and afflicted;
because true compassion (as in this place is meant) signifies not a bare grief
of mind proceeding from another misery, but therewithal includes the effects
and deeds of a mind truly compassionate; And the spoiling of their goods, is
referred to the reproaches and afflictions which they suffered. Knowing in your
selves that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance] He expresses
the cause why they took the spoiling of their goods joyfully, namely, because
they had learned from the Religion of Christ, and thereby knew for certain,
that a far better estate, and more lasting possessions, yea everlasting, were
reserved for them in heaven; for which these earthly and transitory goods are
very gainefully exchanged, especially when they are made away for Christ's sake.
And the place where this excellent and everlasting estate is reserved is in
Heaven; which does further argue the excellency and eternity of it; for though
Christians are sometimes spoiled of their goods which they have upon earth, yet
of those they have in heaven they neither shall nor can ever be spoiled. For
that in heaven can be no spoil, neither by moth, rust, nor thief, Christ
teaches us. Mat. 6.20. Lay up for your selves treasures in heaven where
neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through
nor steal. And this everlasting estate, though it be in heaven, yet the
faithful even while they are upon earth have it already, though not for the
possession of it, for flesh and blood cannot possess it: but for the
expectation of it, by faith and hope as sons and heirs unto it; for now they
have the same right that the heir under age has to his inheritance, whereby
they know, believe and hope with full assurance that they shall possess it.

35. Cast not away therefore your confidence] From the words precedent he
inferres an exhortation, that seeing they have gotten such a good report for
their courage and constancy, therefore they should not now be overcome with
miseries and distresses, and so turn from the right course of godliness
whereinto they were now entered. By confidence here he means either an
undaunted courage of constancy of mind in professing the Christian Religion;
or else a full trust in God, whereby we so rely upon him, and are so certain
of our heavenly inheritance, that we refuse the suffering of no evil. Which
has great recompense of reward] He brings a motive whereby to persuade his
former exhortation, that they should not castaway their confidence; namely
because their confidence should have a great recompense of reward; and
therefore it must not be idle and vain, least it should lose the reward; for
to idleness and vanity no reward can in equity be due: but their confidence
must be effectual and painful in the exercises of holiness and good works,
that thereby they hold and keep their title to the reward. For though faith
and not good works do create as the title whereby we have the reward: yet
good works do preserve or maintain that title which was created by faith,
and by good works we hold our right to the reward; and without them we shall
certainly lose the reward. And besides these words have reference to the former
verse wherein he showed, what this recompense of reward is; namely an excellent
and enduring substance in heaven.

36. For ye have need of patience] Here is another motive to persuade the
former exhortation, why they should not cast away their confidence, but be
patient under reproaches and afflictions, even to the spoiling of their goods;
namely, because they have need of patience. Which may be taken in a double
sense; either with a check, as if they wanted patience; or without a check; for
to have need of a thing does sometime imply a simple necessity of that thing
whereby to attain somewhat, whether we have that thing or have it not;
sometime it implies a necessity joined with the want of that thing. That after
ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise] He expresses the
use and end of patience, that he might show, to what purpose they have need of
it. And the use of patience is two fold; the one more near, the other more
remote; which in respect of us is the last. The nearer or former use of our
patience is, To do the will of God; seeing patience it self is not the least
part of Gods will, and without it the other parts of godliness, and
consequently the rest of Gods will cannot thoroughly be performed. The other use
and last end of patience, which follows from the former, and without which
this cannot subsist, is to receive the promise, or rather the matter promised;
which is the inheritance of the ever-enduring substance. For they only do at
last receive the promise of God who first perform the will of God. Wherefore
without patience and constancy in suffering evils, it is impossible, as to
perform the will of God, so to receive the ever-enduring substance which is
the promise of God.

37. For yet a little while] Another motive to stir them up to patience in
suffering, urged by way of preventing an objection. Some man might say; It is
an hard case, for a man to lie under afflictions so long a time, and to expect
the promise whereof you speak after many ages. To this the Author answers,
that the time allotted for our patience, is not long, but short; for after a
little while, we shall receive the recompense or reward of our patience
promised unto us; and seeing this promise though it be delayed, yet the delay
is but for a little while, therefore the delay of it should discourage no man,
or dishearten him under afflictions. And he that shall come will come and will
not tarry] The time remaining for the coming of Christ is but a little while,
but very certain; for very certain it is, because he shall and will come; and
but a little while, because he will not tarry. The reward promised cannot be
far off, and therefore we must not be wearied with the expectation and stay
of it: for there is but a little while yet remaining for the coming of Christ;
and at his coming is the coming of the promised reward; for he will bring the
reward with him, and they shall receive it, who have done the will of God. That
the time to the coming of Christ is but a little while, is gathered from
hence, because that the time of each man's life is but a little while; and at
the end of each man's life is the coming of Christ to him, as we have showed
before, verse 25. Hence Paul says, That the burden of our afflictions is but
light, and the time but for a moment, compared with the eternity of that glory
which shall follow upon it. 2. Cor. 4.17. And Peter to abate the force of our
temptations and afflictions says, That we are now for a season in heavines
through manifold temptations. 1. Pet. 1.6. And he says again, That after we
have suffered a while, the God of all grace, will exalt us by Christ into his
eternal glory. 1. Pet. 5.10. Yet when the Author says, yet a little while, he
tacitly grants, that there shall be some space of time intervening; as
appears by the words of the Prophet, to whom herein he has reference. For
the Prophet says, If it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it
will not tarry. Hab. 2.3. Some tarrying therefore there will be, yet short and
small; and therefore we ought to expect it without weariness.

38. Now the just shall live by faith.] The Author proceeds in alleging
further words of the Prophet; wherein is contained a new motive to constancy in
faith, on which our patience and sufferings of evils depends. For from these
words it appears, what great fruit grows from an invincible faith, that will
not be beaten down by any afflictions; and on the contrary what great
mischief follows upon a mind born down with afflictions, and falling from
the faith. Now the fruit of faith is life; even everlasting life: For the just
shall live by his faith. i. He therefore shall live, because he wholly trusts
upon God, and relying upon his goodness, power, wisdom, and promises, do
never let fall their courage, what ever difficulties and impediments they meet
withal in their obedience to Gods precepts; he is not dejected with any
storm of evils; he is not wearied with any waiting for the stay of the
promised reward; and therefore he perseveres in righteousness to his last
end. For faith in this place is considered, as it is accompanied with patience,
constancy, piety and justice, and as it is a living and a lively faith that
is exercised and delighted in good works. For life is not promised to every
man upon faith, but to the just and righteous man; and to this faith is opposed
drawing back in the words following. But if any man draw backe] To draw back
from God, is nothing else, but in despair of his promises to cease from our
duty; and to depart from the hard conflict of patience, justice, and piety;
and in a word to acquit the Christian warfare, and steal from the Army of
Christ. My soul shall have no pleasure in him.] Thus the Septuagint have
translated the Hebrew text, of the soul of God, and not of his soul who
draws back, of whom the Hebrew text may be understood. For in that it is, his
soul is not right in him. If therefore according to the Hebrew text, the words
be taken of his soul who draws back, then the meaning is, the soul of that
man is not right in him, his soul has not a sincere and true love to virtue;
because his soul being weary of virtue and good works takes thence an
occasion to doubt of Gods promises. And because such a soul is not right, but
perverse, therefore it pleases not God. Wherefore seeing the just who lives by
his faith, is opposed to the man that draws back, and the just man's condition
to this man's condition, therefore the adversative particle but, is by the
Author rightly applied, even to this latter clause; but in the Prophet the
clauses are transposed, and this latter put in the former place, vid. Hab. 2.4.

39. But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition.] Having declared the
condition of the just man, who is constant in his faith; and of the man who
draws back, or wavers in his faith and piety, he now shows that not this
latter, but that former must be the condition of Christians, whose state does
require from them that they be constant in the faith, that by this means they
may save their souls, and not waver in faith, to withdraw themselves from the
conflicts of piety and patience, and so bring perdition to their souls. For
the Author speaks not of what actually is done, but what in justice ought to
be done, and is agreeing to the calling and condition of a Christian. The same
sentence in a manner is contained in those words of the Apostle, where
describing the condition of Christians, he says, God has not appointed us to
wrath, but to obtain salvation, 1. These. 5.9. Now the end of drawing back is
perdition or destruction; as the issue of faith is the saving of the soul; for
perdition and salvation are opposed. But of them that believe to the saving of
the soul. The soul in this place does either signify only our life, or our
spirit, which is the principal part of us; and being preserved for us, and
restored unto us, Our life remanes in safety. And we save our life or spirit,
when we are delivered from destruction, unto such a life that can never be
destroyed.

The Contents of this tenth Chapter, are,
1. Doctrine. The legal Sacrifices could never perfect the worshippers of God.
Reason. 1. Because the Law had but a shadow of perfect expiation, and not the
very image of it, ver. 1. 2. Because they were offered year by year
continually; for if they could have perfected the worshippers, then they would
have ceased to be offered, ver. 1. 2. 3. Because there was a new Remembrance,
guiltiness and confession of sins every year, v. 3. 4. Because the matter of
them was the blood of bulls and goats, which cannot possibly take away sins,
ver. 4.
2. Doctrine. The Sacrifice of Christ is substituted in the room of the Legal
sacrifices, ver. 5. Reason. 1. Because it was not the will and pleasure of God
that the Legal sacrifices should be any longer of force, v. 5. 8. 2. Because
God had called Christ, and fitted him a body for an expiatory sacrifice, ver.
5. 3. Because Christ most willingly accepted of Gods will and pleasure to
perform it by making himself a sacrifice, ver. 7. 9. 4. Because we are really
expiated and sanctified by the will of God through the offering of Christ, ver.
10.
3. Doctine. The Sacrifice of Christ was singular, one only once offered, ver.
10. Reason. 1. Because he did not offer year by year, as the Legal Priests
did, but once for ever, ver. 12. 2. Because after he had made his offering, he
sat down at the right hand of God, till his enemies were made his footstool,
ver. 12. 13. 3. Because by one offering he perfectly expiated all that are
sanctified. 4. Because by virtue of the Covenant, whereof he was the high
Priest, his one offering wrought a plenary remission of sins.
4. Duty. We must worship God with a true heart, a full assurance of faith and
a good conscience, 22. Motive. 1. Because we have now liberty to enter into
heaven, by a new and living way which Christ has consecrated for us, 19. 20.
2. Because we have Christ a great high Priest over the house of God ver. 21.
3. Because we are washed and sanctified with the Holy Ghost, v. 22.
5. Duty. We must be constant and steadfast in the profession of our faith
without wavering, ver. 23. Motive. 1. Because God who has made us the promise,
is faithful.
6. Duty. We must provoke one another to love, and good works, 24. Motive. 1.
Because we see the day of the Lord approaching, 25.
7. Duty. We must take heed of sinning wilfully after we have received the
truth, ver. 26. Motive. 1. Because there is no other Sacrifice for sins besides
that one offering of Christ once made, 26. 2. Because thereby we make our
selves adversaries to God, and so liable to his judgment and indignation, 27.
3. Because thereby we tread under foot the Son of God, we count the blood of
the Covenant an unholy thing, and do despite to the Spirit of grace, 2. 4.
Because if he that despised Moses Law dyed without mercy, much more shall he be
punished that despises the new Covenant. 28. 29. 5. Because the Lord reserves
vengeance for such, and to fall into his hand is a fearful thing, 30. 31.
8. Comfort. The Hebrews needed not fear falling away, and sinning wilfully.
Motive. 1. Because after they were illuminated, they endured a great conflict
of afflictions, ver. 32. 2. Because they did accompany and confort themselves,
with such as suffered for the Gospel. 3. Because they had compassion on this
Author in his bonds. 4. Because they had taken the spoiling of their goods
joyfully. 5. Because there was a great recompense of reward remaining to them.
9. Duty. We must not cast away our confidence in Christ, ver. 35. Motive. 1.
Because it has great recompense of reward, ibid. 2. Because we have need of
patience, that after we have done the will of God, we might receive the
promise. 3. Because Christ will not tarry long before he come. 4. Because the
Just shall live by faith, to the saving of the soul. 5. Because drawing back
tends to perdition.

CHAPTER XI.
1. NOw faith is the substance of things hoped] The Author having in the former
Chapter spoken of faith, does thence take occasion to make a digression in this
Chapter, for a further explication of the nature of faith; whereof he
collecteth and produces many examples in diverse holy persons, that the Hebrews
incited by their examples, might address themselves for imitation of them, and
finally relying on Gods promises, might not decline any conflict either of
piety or patience. These words are not a definition of Faith whereby faith is
defined; as those words afterward, Chap. 12.29. where God is said to be a
consuming fire, are not the definition of God. For faith is a thing indefinite,
and cannot be defined; or if it were definable, yet these words, that it is the
substance of things hoped, are far too narrow to lay out the true boundaries of
Faith. Neither are these words an attribute of faith, for they are not
consequent to follow upon it; but quite contrary. Faith is an attribute or
consequent to them. For they are a notion, an element, or an argument of faith,
whereby faith may be notified or made known, and whereby it may be
demonstrated or proved to be in such or such a subject, or in such a person.
For though the vulgar affirmation be according to the Author, that Faith is the
substance of things hoped; yet the true natural and rational affirmation
runs thus: Now the substance of things hoped, is faith. For the scope of the
Author is to produce many persons whom he would declare and demonstrate to have
been faithful; and for that purpose he lays out two notions or principles of
faith, whereby he would infer and conclude the affection of faith to be in
such or such a subject; the first whereof is this, That every substance of
things hoped, is faith; as if he had said, where things hoped are subsistent,
there is faith; where things to come are present, there is faith. Now things
hoped, and things to come, are not actually subsistent and present: but when
the soul apprehends things hoped and to come, as certainly as if they were
already subsistent and present, then that soul believes, and is endued with
faith. And this principle or argument of faith, is taken from a partial object
of faith, which is of some good to come, because hope arises only from such an
object. The evidence of things not seen] This is the other principle or notion,
or argument of faith, whereto faith is always consequent. For where there is
an evidence of things inevident, or a sight of things unseen, there is faith.
And for evidence some Translations render it argument; because where there is
an argument persuading a man for things not seen, there is faith. And this
principle of faith is taken from the total object of faith, which is always
of things not seen, or absent, whether it be for distance of place, or of time,
either past or to come. And therefore this principle must needs be more large
then the former, and more serviceable to infer the affection of faith to be
demonstrable of more persons, as the proper subjects of it.

2. For by it the elders obtained a good report] The two former principles or
notions that argue and infer faith, had also a further end, which is to show
the excellency of faith: which here he confirms by the effect which faith
wrought unto the Elders their forefathers. For to them their faith brought this
benefit, that by it they obtained a good report. The original is, by it they
had a testimony, which is well translated a good report; for so the word does
frequently signify, though it stand single and alone without any other
attribute joined to it, see Act. 6.3. and Act. 10.22. and Act. 16.2. and Act.
22.12. This testimony or good report the Elders obtained from the Scripture, or
of God by the relation of Scripture, which has left it upon holy record, how
graciously God dealt with those elders by reason of their faith, how greatly he
favored them for it, and commended their piety issuing from it. The elders.]
i. Their progenitors and ancestors, whom the Scripture mentions to have lived
from the beginning of the world down to that age wherein this Author lived.

3. By faith we understand] He begins here to show the efficacy and virtue of
faith, by certain examples or instances, which he demonstrates from the
latter principle or argument of faith, in that every evidence or sight of
things unseen is faith. For all men that ever had, or ever shall have faith in
God, do thereby understand that God framed the world by his word; and because
we understand this by an evidence or sight of things unseen, therefore we
understand it by faith. We understand] i. We perceive and know for certain;
and the argument or mean whereby we know this, is our faith; and the argument
or mean whereby our faith attaines this knowledge; is our evidence or sight of
things unseen; for by the things which are now seen, we have a sight of those
things which we never saw, because they were done long before our times. Though
it may be evinced by strong arguments that the world was created; yet neither
those arguments and the framing of them, are obvious to all men; neither are
they such, but that a perverse spirit will oppose against them; because we saw
not the work of the Creation: but by the Scriptures we have an evidence or
sight of that Creation, which to us was unseen; and therefore we believe it,
for our evidence or sight of it in the Scriptures makes faith of it unto us.
And the Scriptures make faith unto us of the Creation, not only for the act of
it, that such a work was done, but for the manner how it was done (as Moses
describes it) even by the word, and sole command of God; and for the matter
whereof it was made, in that the things seen, were made of things not seen.
That the worlds were framed] Worlds, for world, the number plural for the
singular, by a Grecisme, where originally it is ages, putting the adjuncts of
the world for the subject. By the word of God] by the only fiat or command of
God; God used no other instrument for the framing of the world besides his bare
word. For God only said the word, Let there be light, and there was light, Genesis
1.3. And by the word of the Lord, even by the breath of his mouth, were the
heavens made and all the host of them, Psalm. 33.6. And as the heavens, so also
the earth was framed and settled by his word; For he spoke and it was done, he
commanded and it stood fast, Psalm. 33.9. So that things which are seen were not
made of things which do appear. The particle not seems to be transposed, for it
should affect the word appear, because the mind and sense of this clause is
not negative, but affirmative, thus: So that things which are seen were made of
things which do not appear, though for the matter it come all to one; because
a term finite denied of any subject is all one with the same term infinited
and affirmed; yet this latter expression leaves in our minds a clear
apprehension of the matter. The Author seems as his manner is, to follow and
reflect upon the Greek Translation of the Old Testament, wherein at the
beginning of Genesis, it is said, that the Earth was invisible, for that which
we from the Hebrew translate, that the Earth was without form and void. And
the Author made choice rather to say, things not appearing, then things
invisible, when he would show us the prime materials whereof the world was
made: For that is properly invisible, which naturally cannot be perceived by
the sight; and that is rightly termed not appearing, which though it be
naturally visible, yet really it appears not; especially then when it lies
hidden and covered with thick darkness. Although in this place the word
not-appearing seems to have yet a more ample sense, and to comprise that want
of form and force noted by the Hebrew words, for which the Greek Translation
reads invisible. Wherefore by things not appearing is meant that chaos or
elements of the world, which at the beginning were confused; because partly
that chaos wanted form, shape, and outward beauty, in regard the several
parts of it were not yet digested and disposed into that elegant order, figure,
and proportion, which afterward was given it by the Creation; and therefore the
Scripture says, it was without form; and partly because it wanted virtue and
force to produce those creatures, and adorn it self, that afterward God by
the Creation gave it power to produce; but to any such purpose it was wholly
feeble and barren; and therefore the Scripture says it was void; and partly
again because it wanted light to manifest and make it visible to the sight
that it might be seen; for though in it self it were visible and appearable;
yet actually it appeared not, and therefore the Scripture says, that
darkness was upon the face of it. Wherefore when God entered upon the work
of the world, the first perfect creature that he made was the light, and that
being finished, he framed all the other parts of the world in a most beautiful
order. And this chaos is in the Scripture called the Deep, because it was vast
both for quantity and quality, for it wanted the three beautiful qualities of
form, force and light, which afterward were induced into it. Yet sometimes the
Scriptures express it by names Synecdochicall, which signify only a part of
it, calling it sometime the heaven, sometime the earth, and sometime the
waters, because it was a Deep or chaos composed and confused of all these
together, or at least of those materials whereof all these were afterward
produced and created; as in the same tub of milk there lie confused together
those three materials from which are afterward produced the distinct white
meats of butter, cheese, and whey. Hereby the Author plainly declares, and it
sufficiently also appears from the history of the Creation described by Moses,
that God, when he began the Creation or frame of the world, as it is delivered
in the beginning of Genesis, did not produce it merely from nothing, but from
that Chaos or Deep, which positively was confused of the three materials,
whereof afterward was made the three elements of heaven, earth and water; and
privitively wanted the three qualities of form, force and light. And this
opinion was anciently received among the people of God, as it appears by the
Author of the book of Wisdom, chap. 11.17. where speaking to God, he says,
For thy almighty hand, that made the world of matter without form; for so it
is in the Greek; and the vulgar Latin has it, of matter unseene. But of the
creation of this matter, there is no mention made in the Scriptures; for to the
holy Ghost it seemed good to conceal it. By things which are seen, are here
meant all those creatures which we see in this world, as this beautiful order
and posture of all things, whereby those things which before were confused and
blended together, are now digested into their several ranks and places for the
use and benefit of man and beast; and all the rest of the Creatures both
animate and inanimate, both in heaven, earth, and waters, were produced by the
word or command of God. For in these words of the Author is signified, not
only that change whereby things not appearing became appearing, by virtue of
that light which God made, and made to shine upon them, (which change God made
first of all by his creation of light) but also that change, whereby the things
which now appear, were made of things not-appearing, as from the informed
matter of the Chaos or Deep, which wanting form, force, and light, was so
rude, so weak and so dark, that from it self, of it self, nothing would
ever have been produced, but by the access of Gods almighty power.

4. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain] Now he
begins to reckon up special and particular examples of persons endued with
faith; and withal he declares both what they performed by virtue of their
faith, and also what blessings they obtained from God by it: that by so many
illustrious examples he might win the Hebrews to an imitation of those
persons. First of all he mentions Abel, as a person nearly approaching to the
beginning of the world. He mentions not our first Parents; either because
concerning them there is nothing read memorable in the Canonical books of the
Old Testament, pertinent to his purpose; or because he thought them not to be
mentioned, by reason of that sin whereby they made themselves and their
posterity subject unto death; especially seeing in those Canonical books we
no where read that God ever pardoned our first Parents for their sin;
although the Author of the book of Wisdom in the beginning of the tenth
chapter affirms, That Wisdom preserved the first formed father of the world,
that was created alone, and brought him out of his fall; that is, she freed him
from the guilt and punishment of his sin. Therefore he begins with Abel their
son, placing him in the first place as the first person among those whose piety
toward God, and Gods love toward them is celebrated in Scripture, and then
shows what Abel obtained by his faith. Of him therefore he says, That he
offered a more excellent sacrifice then Cain] Some render it a more bountiful
sacrifice, others a more valuable; thinking the Author intended to note, that
Cain as an ungrateful and a distrustful person, offered only a few fruits:
but Abel to testify his affection and faith offered things of more value,
namely the firstlings and fattest of his sheep. But the more simple and
certain meaning is, that Abels sacrifice was not more bountiful or more
valuable of it self then the others, but more acceptable unto God, who
accepted and esteemed it better and more excellent, by reason of the
righteousness and godliness of the person that offered it; for upon that
ground it is that God esteems and values all offerings made unto him. Now
there was no other cause of that godliness, and consequently of Gods
acceptance of Abels sacrifice, but only Abels says, whereby he stood
persuaded, that God was, and was a Rewarder of those that seek him, and sue to
him for his favor by godliness and righteousness. And there was no other
cause of his faith, but that he had in him, the substance of things hoped for;
for his hope of Gods favor and of Gods reward, did breed this faith of God in
him. Furthermore he whose offering God has in esteem, his person must needs
be in more esteem with God; for from this root grows the true happiness of
every man. But that Cain offered the fruits of the earth, and Abel the
firstlings of his cattle, the reason was because Cain was an husbandman, and
Abel an heards-man: So both of them offered their sacrifice to God, out of that
substance wherein each abounded. And that the word sacrifice which properly
signifies an offering from the Herd which is slain, should be tacitly referred
to Cains offering, which was only of fruits; this must be attributed to the
run of the comparison, the fitting whereof does many times make way to some
abusions or improprieties. By which he obtained witness that he was righteous.
The words by which are better referred to Abels faith, then to his sacrifice;
for the following words and by it he being dead, yet speaks, are in like
manner referred to his faith, for they express a peculiar fruit of it. But
where did Abel obtain this testimony of his righteousness? even in that
passage of Scripture where God had respect to him and to his sacrifice, but not
to that which Cain offered: as we read it, Genesis 4.4,5. or as the Author
declares himself in the words following, God testifying of his gifts] For
therein God testified of his gifts or offerings, that they were acceptable unto
him, in that he had respect unto them. And very probable it is, that God showed
his testimony and acceptance thereof, by some fire sent from heaven, which
consumed the sacrifice and offering of Abel. And when God does accept of a man's
gifts and offerings being graciously pleased to receive them; he does thereby
testify and witness that man to be a righteous person; seeing no gifts or
offerings are acceptable to God, but such as come from a righteous man: for the
sacrifice of fools or sinners is an abomination to him. And when God in his
discourse with Cain, rendered him a reason, why he had no respect to his
offering, he showed clearly enough, that both Cain did not well, and that Abel
did well, which is to be just, See Genesis 4.7. And by it be being dead, yet
speaketh] Another fruit of Abels faith; which was the cause that God would be
an avenger of his innocent blood, to persecute and banish from his presence his
brother that had murdered him. Abels blood is said to speak or cry unto God by
way of metaphor, because God thereby is vehemently incited and moved to take
vengeance for the murder of a person that was righteous and acceptable to God,
as if his blood had cried and sued to God for justice to be done upon the
murderer. So in the Revelation, the souls of them that were slain for the
word of God, are said to cry with a loud voice, How long O Lord, holy and true,
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth.
Revel. 6.10.

5. By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was not
found, because God had translated him.] In the second place, he brings the
Example of Enoch, and shows what he obtained by his faith. Into what place
Enoch was translated, the Scripture expresses not: but from what the Author
adds, that he should not see death, it appears, he was translated into such
a place, wherein men see not death. i. Are exempt and free from dying; which
seems to be no other, or at least no other known to us, then that heavenly
habitacle of Immortality, wherein God, and Christ, and the holy Angels dwell.
But because the Scripture expressly says not, that Enoch obtained this favor
by his faith; therefore the Author proves it, by adding; For before his
translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God] The reason may run
thus. Enoch was translated, because he pleased God (which the thing it self
shows, and the Scripture testifies that before his translation he pleased
God.) But without faith it is impossible to please God; therefore Enoch was
translated by his faith. The consequence of this argument shall be defended
afterward. Or rather the reason may thus be gathered, Enoch was translated,
because he pleased God; and because he pleased God, therefore he had Gods
testimonial of it; And again, because he pleased God, therefore he had in
himself some substance of things hoped for, and some evidence of things not
seen; and because he had in him this substance and evidence of things hoped
for and not seen, therefore he had faith; and because he had faith, therefore
by his faith, he was translated. For in affirmative arguments, that which is
first in nature, is last in course of reason. He had this testimony; namely,
either from the holy Scripture, or from the holy Ghost, by whom the Scripture
was indicted. But the giving or the taking of this testimony must not be joined
with the preceding words, before his translation, as if this testimony were
made of him before he was translated; but must be only referred to the matter
of the testimony, which is this, that before his translation he pleased God;
and after his translation, the Scripture testified, that he pleased God before
it. And Enochs pleasing of God, may be understood two ways; either that he
pleased God in endeavor, by studying and laboring to please him: or that he
pleased him in effect, by an actual service of God, which latter is consequent
to the former. And the testimony of this is given in Scripture, where it is
said, that Enoch walked with God. Genesis 5.22.24. For he that walks with God,
certainly he endeavors to please God, and either in effect does actually
please God, or at least God is pleased with his endeavor. So likewise of Noah
it is said, That he was a just man, and perfect in his generations, and that he
walked with God. Genesis 6.9. For this walking with God, which in the following
verse, the Author expresses, by coming to God, and by seeking of God, does
signify a conversation of man with God, whereby in a manner he does always
reverence God, as being always in his presence, and (as I may say) never
departing out of his sight, but having ever his mind and thoughts fixed upon
him, and is so addicted to Gods Laws and Commands, that in all his actions
through the whole course of his life, he has God for his leader and
companion, whom he follows and accompanies. He that is such a man, must needs
endeavor to please God, and cannot choose but actually please him. For the
Greek translation, which (as has been often noted) the Author follows,
does render the Hebrew words of Enochs walking with God, by Greek words which
properly signify his pleasing of God.

6. But without faith, it is impossible to please God.] Now we come to the
defense of that argument, which formerly we mentioned; for here the Author
expressly confirms, and proves it by the following words, For he that comes
to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them, that
diligently seek him.] He proves I say, what before he had affirmed, by this
explication of faith, or rather by two specifications of it: whereof the first
is, to believe the existence of God, that God is; and the second, to believe
the righteousness or equity of God, that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. For is it not wholly necessary, that he who comes to
God, i. He who does worship and serve him, he who perpetually addicts himself
to observe his Laws and Commands, he who heartily endeavors to please him,
and actually does please him; should believe both these points, and be strongly
persuaded of them? For if he believe not the existence of God, that God is, how
should he worship and serve him? if he believe his existence, and yet doubt of
his goodness and righteousness, whether he will be a Benefactor to his
worshippers and servitors, how shall they subject themselves to his worship and
service? Now to believe that God is, is to believe, that there is really
existent such a person in being, who has the supreme power or command over all
things, who depends on no other person, but all other persons and things depend
on him. For by the single appellation of God, this is commonly signified both
here and elsewhere. And he that believes such a Dietie, must thereupon withal
necessarily believe, that it is both eternal and singular; for if it were not
eternal and singular, it could not be supreme. To seek God, or enquire after
God; is nothing else, but to sue for his grace and favor; as we are admonished
by the Prophet Esaias, chap 55.6. Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found, call
ye upon him while he is near; let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him. Here he shows us the way, how to seek God, Namely, by
calling upon him; and the way to that (at least to do it effectually) is to
forsake our unrighteousnes, and sinfulnes, and turn to the Lord observing his
laws and commands. Hence it appears what is the nature of that faith which
commends us to God; for the Author teaches it unto us in this Chapter; and how
far such faith differs from their faith, who place faith in the apprehension
and application of the merits of Christ. It further appears that faith in
Christ is not contained in all faith in God, in respect of all times; for in
this description and illustration of that faith which the Author shows to have
been in these ancient elders, there is no mention of faith in Christ. Yet from
the nature of faith in God it is easy to collect, wherein the faith in Christ
consists; namely, that we believe that Christ is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that seek him; or rather to express it in the words of this Author, It
is to believe that Christ is become the author of eternal salvation to all
them that obey him, chap. 5.9. For from this faith arises a true confidence in
Christ, which naturally draws with it innocence and holiness of life: and by
these we come to please God and Christ, and then being justified by his grace,
we attain the inheritance of eternal life. And this also may be noted, as it
will further appear by many of the following examples, That Faith, if we take
it properly and strictly, does differ from obedience from coming to God and
seeking him; because faith must necessarily be in a man, before he can
actually come to God and seek him; yet indeed the word faith is oftentimes so
ampliated and enlarged, as to comprehend in it all the effects and fruits of
it, even all the works of godliness and righteousness. And in this
argumentation of the Author (for we are also to take notice of it) there is not
more in the conclusion then was in the premises. For from the premises, as the
Author explicates them, it seems nothing else would follow, but that Enoch was
not translated without faith, and not that he was translated by, or through,
or for his faith, which is more, and is also concluded by the Author. But
seeing without faith we cannot please God, for faith is the true cause of our
pleasing him; and seeing Enoch was therefore translated because he did please
God; hence most rationally it must be concluded, that Enochs faith was the
cause of his translation; and consequently he was translated by, for, through,
or because, and by reason of his faith. For whatsoever is the cause of any
effect, is also the cause of all things that follow that effect. Now from this
argumentation of the Author, concluding Enochs faith to be the cause of his
translation, it manifestly appears, That good works, and an ardent endeavor
of them, whereby Enoch became to please God, are not only the cause of eternal
salvation, but in some respect a cause of it more immediate and nearer then
faith. For, for what cause was Enoch translated? Was it not because he pleased
God? But how came he to effect this? I suppose by his righteousness, or as the
Scripture expresses it, by his walking with God: But what was the cause that
made him to walk with God, and really endeavor with all his heart to please
him? Certainly his faith caused this; and further yet, What was the cause of
his faith? Certainly one or both those principles whereof we treated in the
first verse of this Chapter; Enoch had some evidence or sight of something
unseen, and he had some substance of something hoped; And what were they?
Certainly the same two points whereof the Author spoke in the fifth verse; for
he had a sight of God who is unseen, that he is; and secondly he had a
subsistence of hope, that God is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
This is the chain, and these the several linkes whereof Enochs translation
depends. For his evidence or sight was the cause of his hope, his hope the
cause of his faith, his faith of his walking with God, his walking with God of
his pleasing God, and his pleasing God was the cause of his translation. Now if
we go back by way of Resolution, through the several linkes of this chain,
we shall easily perceive, that without the first link none of the rest can
subsist, and so consequently no one that follows can be without the former;
and therefore the Author with good reason faith that without faith, it is
impossible to please God; and by the like reason it will as necessarily follow,
that without good works or walking with God, it is impossible to please him
also; as also without an evidence, or without a sight of God; who is unseen, it
is impossible to have faith. True it is, that faith is the cause of our
pleasing God, and also of that eternal salvation which we have from God; for
what can be more pleasing to the supreme Lord of all things, then to see a man
of whom God was never seen, to rely strongly and without any doubt of mind,
upon his fidelity, bounty, goodness, righteousness, power and wisdom? But
faith has yet another virtue no less then the former, whereby it procures our
salvation as it were at a great distance; namely, in working in us good works
or walking with God, and causing us to come to God, and seek him, by suing to
him for his favor and grace in all our desires, and all our deeds.

7. By faith Noah being warned of God] The third example is the faith of Noah,
in that he believed the oracle of God, warning him of things, whereof in the
course of nature there was not the least appearance. Of this man's faith he
teaches us both what good is wrought in him, and what good it brought unto
him. The word faith here must not be referred to the words immediately
following, as if he had been warned of God of things not yet seen, by his
faith; but including those words with a comma, his faith appeals and coheres to
the words moved with fear, and to the words following, he prepared an Arc,
etc. This oracle or warning of God given him is extant, Genesis 6.13. unto the end
of the Chapter. Of things not seen as yet] That is, of the future flood that
was to come upon the world, which then as yet was not only not seen, but there
appeared no likelihood or possibility of it, but what was drawn from Gods
warning. Moved with fear, prepared an Arke] These were the effects of Noah's
faith; first, in that he feared or was moved with fear, that God would bring
upon the world the punishment he had threatened; then from the faith of the
punishment and the fear of it, he was further induced to frame the Arc as God
appointed him, that by means thereof he might escape the punishment by drowning
the world, and so save himself and his family from destruction; and therefore
the Author adds, To the saving of his house] When the flood came, Noah and his
family to the number of eight persons entered into the Arc whereby they were
saved, and all the rest of the world was drowned; all men and beasts that were
not in the Ark perished by the flood, see Genesis 7. This faith of Noah is a good
example to us for our imitation, that we may learn to apply our selves to a
firm faith and belief of Gods oracles and predictions, whether they be
promises concerning the future blessedness of the godly, or whether they be
menaces concerning the future punishment of the wicked, and the miserable
destruction of the whole world: And further, that we timely provide our selves
of an Arc, that is, of means whereby we may escape the judgments of God, and
be saved for ever. Now the Arc whereby we may escape from the final
destruction of the whole world, and enter into the Tabernacle of immortality,
is the Answer of a good conscience toward God, as Peter teaches us, 1 Epist.
3.21. By which he condemned the world. It is somewhat doubtful whether the
relative which should be referred, whether to Noah's faith, or to the Arc, for
the sense seems most inclining to the former; but the words run rather for
the latter, partly because the word Arc stands nearer it, and partly because
of the words following, which say, And became heir of the righteousness which
is by faith. Now if the word by which be referred to faith, the sense will be
this: That Noah by his faith became heir of the righteousness which is by
faith; but this seems not proper: For can any man think, that Noah by his
faith could have obtained any other righteousness then that which comes by
faith? Neither does the matter it self any way cross this sense. For although
Noah condemned the world by his faith, yet he also condemned it by the Arc; in
as much as the Arc was a manifest proof of his faith. For unless he had
believed the coming of the flood, he would never have prepared the Arc, to
have lost his labor therein, and make himself ridiculous to all the world.
But he is said to condemn the world, because by his faith in believing the
flood, and by his fact in making the Arc, he convinced the world of
obstinacy, and thereby took away all excuse of sin from them who would give
no credence to God, by a metaphor taken from accusers, who are said to condemn
a guilty person, in that they convict him of his crime, and by that means are
the cause, that he is condemned; for properly to condemn is the act of the
Judge. In this sense also Christ says, That the men of Nineveh shall rise in
judgment with this generation and condemn it. And the Queen of the South
shall rise up in the judgment and condemn it, Matthew. 12.41,42. For by the
fact of the Ninevites who reponted at the preaching of Jonas; and by the fact
of the Queen of the South who came from far to hear the wisdom of Solomon, the
contumacie and obstinacy of the Jews is convinced, who despised Christ that
was present among them, and by many degrees greater and wiser then either Jonas
or Solomon. Whence it came to pass that they were most justly punished of God.
In like manner Noah, by his Faith and by his Arc which was an evidence of his
faith, convicted the obstinacy of that world, and brought it to pass that
with very good justice God punished it. And as by his faith, and the effect of
it, which was the Arc, he procured condemnation to the world: so to himself
he procured righteousness; for so it follows: And became heir of the
righteousness which is by faith] Righteousness is not here taken in a moral
sense, for that righteousness which flows from good works; but in a jurall
sense, for that right whereby a man has a title, to have hold and enjoy some
benefit or blessing from God; or for a right of liberty whereby a man stands
exempted and freed from those burdens and punishments whereto others are
liable; for so it is taken in diverse passages of Scripture, especially in Paul's
Epistles, and so it must be taken here, as plainly appears from two grounds:
First, from the opposition of it to the word condemned, in the former clause:
For as to be condemned, is to be adjudged to be deprived of some benefit, and
to lose that right which a man had before, whether it be loss of life, limb or
goods; so on the contrary to be justified, is to have some benefit adjudged
unto him, or be invested in a right to that whereto before, he had no right nor
title. And as the condemnation of the world, consisted in the judgment of God
sentencing the people of it to lose their lives by drowning in the flood: so
the righteousness or right of Noah consisted in the grant of God, whereby God
gave Noah a right, that he and his house should be saved from that flood by
means of the Arc, and Noah accepting of this grant by his faith to believe it
and rest upon it, had thereby a right of salvation to himself and his House.
2. From the consequence of it to the word heir: for men are not heirs of
moral righteousness, because such righteousness is not a thing transient to
be conveyed from one person to another, and consequently, is no way
inheritable, but men are heirs of jurall rights, to those persons that have
the property or power to dispose, convey, and grant such rights unto others.
God granted Noah a right and title for him and his family, to be saved from the
flood by means of the Arc; and because Noah accepted of this grant by his
faith, and testified his acceptance of it by his fact in preparing the Ark,
therefore he was heir to this right, and did inherit or possess it; for heir
is a jurall word, and signifies one that has a right, whether in posse only,
or in esse. But from this right of being saved, all the rest of the world was
disinherited. i. They were condemned to be drowned. And it is called a
righteousness or right by faith, because the right he had thus to be saved,
proceeded from Gods special grant, of Gods mere grace and proper motion,
without any desert of it, or suit for it on the part of Noah. For it is opposed
to a right by works, or to that right which is due by desert of works or
service. The Author therefore would intimate unto us, that Noah had no right by
any works of his, to deserve this benefit of saving to him and his house: but
all the right he had came by his faith on his part, but from the grace and
favor of Gods grant on Gods part, which Noah accepting by his faith was
thereby settled upon him. And it is opposed to a right by petition or suit,
which has the first motion from the party that petitioneth or sueth for it,
and thereupon is granted, though then also it be granted of mere grace and
favor in him that conferres it. And thereby the Author would further intimate
unto us, that Noah on his part made no petition or suit to God for this
benefit, for him and his family to be saved, and therefore the first motion to
have this right, proceeded not from Noah: but God of his mere and proper
motion without any suit made to him, proposed this benefit unto Noah, and
promised him the grant of it freely and primely from himself; as appears in
the sacred story where the thing is at large related, Genesis 6.13. where we
read, that first God told Noah of the sin of the world, and then foretold him
of the drowning of it; next taught him to frame the Arc; and lastly Covenanted
with him to save him and his family in it. Thus we see the faith of Noah, and
the effects of it; but what were the causes of it, to effect and breed this
faith in him? We shall find by inspection into the words of this verse, that
Noah had in him the two principles of faith, whereof we spoke in the first
verse. For he had an evidence or sight of a thing unseene; for God had revealed
and forewarned him of the flood, which thing to him was yet unseen. And he had
in him a subsistence of a thing hoped for; for God had Covenanted with him, and
promised him to save him and his family in the Ark, which salvation he hoped
for. So his foresight of the flood to come, and his hope of being saved from
it by the Arc, were the causes to produce in him that faith, whereby he was
moved to fear the flood, and to prepare the Arc.

8. By faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place, which he
should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out not knowing
whither he went.] The fourth example is of Abraham, the Father of the
faithful, upon whom the Author does much enlarge himself, relating many
evidences and proofs of his faith. To Abraham he subjoynes Isaac and Jacob in
those particulars that were common to them. And of Abraham's faith he mentions
diverse effects and benefits, as his invincible courage and constancy, that we
might labor to imitate him, and express the nearest resemblance of it we
can, as it becomes them who profess themselves the children of Abraham. The
first effect of his faith was his obedience; for when God called and commanded
him to go out of his country, unto a place which God would show him; Abraham
obeyed without any scruple or delay and went out, not knowing whither he went.
And the causes or reasons of this faith, were as in the former persons; First,
an evidence or sight of a thing unseene, for God told him of a place or
country which was yet unseen of him; And secondly, a subsistence of a thing
hoped for; for God had promised him, that he should receive that place or
country for an inheritance. So the foresight of that country to come, and the
hope to have it for an inheritance; were the causes to produce in Abraham that
faith, whereby he obeyed the call of God, and thereupon went out of his own
country, not knowing as yet whither he went. There were many reasons on the
contrary, to withdraw Abraham from this obedience, and to remove him from so
strange a journey. For it was very hard especially upon no urgent necessity,
for a man to forsake his country, his house, and lands, and possessions; to
leave his kindred, friends, and acquaintance, to wander without any certain
abode, and become a stranger in a foreign country. It seems a rash
enterprise, for a man to prepare himself for a journey, before he knows
whither he should go, or to what place he should travail. But the faith of
Abraham was so firm and strong, that it admitted none of these thoughts, but
vanquished, and banished them all; being fully persuaded, that no man could
possibly miscarry in his obedience to God, whatsoever the command might be, and
how rash soever the enterprise might seem. But we must note that Abraham did
not leave his country to become a pilgrim and wanderer in the world, upon any
rash or unadvised motion of his own, but he was called to go out] i. He was
appointed and commanded to go out; and the person calling him to it was God:
at whose word and command, he thought it fit for him to leave his country and
acquaintance. Whereby he becomes to us an example, that when God commands and
requires any thing of us, we should refuse no burden, labor or trouble, no
loss of country, friends or fortunes, that we might fulfill his will. Yet
when there is no just cause, we should not by any rash or foolish humor,
either deprive our selves of those blessings that God has given us, or involve
our selves in any calamity or misery by an unprofitable piety. For it is a more
certain trial of our faith, and a thing more worthy, to do and undergo that
at the command of God, or as our duty requires, which otherwise we would not
do. Of this fact of Abraham, See Genesis 12.

9. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise as in a strange countrey]
Another effect of Abraham's faith, common to him with Isaac his son, and Jacob
his nephew, which withal shows us, how constant they also were in it. He
sojourned, by living there as an alien or a stranger; for sojourner in this
sense is opposed to a native who lives in the same place where he was borne,
enjoying it by birth or right of inheritance. So we find Paul opposing
strangers and forraigners to fellow-citizens, Ephesians. 2.19. And the land wherein
he sojourned was a strange land unto him, partly because he was not a native of
it, but only a sojourner or forraigner there; but chiefly because he had no
right of inheritance for any present possession there: for God gave him no
inheritance in it, not so much as to set his foot on, Acts 7.5. But it was
only the land of promise to him; for God had promised to give the inheritance
and possession of it to him and his posterity after him, while yet he had
neither posterity nor child, See again, Acts 7.5. Dwelling in tabernacles]
Here is expressed the reason why, and the manner how Abraham is said to
sojourne in the land of promise; namely, because he dwelt there in tabernacles;
for this argues that to that land he was a sojourner or stranger, and that land
to him was a strange country. For though God had promised to give it to him
and his seed, yet he for his own particular never dwelt in it, as his own
demaine, but as a stranger dwells in a strange country among the natives of it.
For he built himself neither City nor house to inhabit, but only lived in
Tabernacles or tents, as strangers do, who have no certain residence, nor
make no long abode in any place, but being always ready to remove are for the
time of their stay covered only with tents, and when they journey from one
place to another carry their houses with them: for to them that have no
possession of their own where they may make themselves a fixed and certain
seat, tents are the most commodious dwelling, because they may suddenly and
easily transport them at their pleasure. But hence is drawn an evidence of
Abraham's faith and his constancy therein, in that, to show his obedience to
God, he lead a traveling life all his days; and though the land were promised
unto him, yet he neither founded City, nor built house, neither did he either
purchase or possess any: but as a flitting inhabitant; removed his tent from
place to place, and wanting the right of a native, lived there only by tenure
of courtesy. Yet he possessed an assured hope, that after some few ages his
posterity should possess that whole land, because it was the land of promise
which the Lord had promised him. With Isaac and Jacob the heirs with him of
the same promise] Isaac and Jacob are not therefore joined with Abraham, as if
Abraham had lived in tents all that time with both of them. For Isaac being
borne many years after Abraham's coming into that land, could not all that
while live in Abraham's tent; and Jacob dwelt in the land after Abraham's death.
But they are therefore joined with him, because they also never came to the
possession or inheritance of that land, but lived like sojourners and strangers
there as Abraham had done; for as they were heirs of the same promise, so they
lived in the same manner. And hence is manifested their faith and their
constancy in it; because their sojourning in that manner moved them not at all
to doubt any thing of the faith and truth of Gods promise, though the
performance of it were so long delayed.

10. For he looked for a City which has foundations] Here the Author gives the
reason, why Abraham though he had a promise of that land from God, yet was
never put in possession of it, but dwelt there all his days in tents as a
sojourner and a stranger. The reason hereof was, because he expected or looked
for a City having foundations. Some man may doubt whether these words are to be
understood of Abraham's intent and purpose, or of the event that afterward fell
out. Certainly as we will not deny, but that Abraham hoped to have from God
some life and happiness after his death, in regard he knew the great goodness
of God toward his servitors, and the great power of God, that he is able to
raise even the dead, and can give his servants a blessing or reward after their
death: and withal did easily perceive the vanity of earthly happiness,
especially now in his declining years; and might have a desire of a
re-surviving life to befall him after his death, a thing that seems natural
to all men living: Yet he that shall consult the Sacred history and shall
diligently both read and relect it, shall find nothing either written or any
way intimated concerning that matter. But this divine Author, relating examples
from the holy Scriptures upon their authority and infallibility, seems not to
say or affirm any particular concerning those holy Elders, but what is
grounded upon the holy Scriptures. Yet that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, had a
hope not only of some life and happiness after death, but also of a City
which has foundations, that is, of heaven it self, and that heavenly
happiness which shall never determine or have end; and upon that hope did
undergo all the travels and troubles of a continual pilgrimage, to lead
always an uncertain and flitting life, this the holy Scriptures have no where
discovered. Yea rather, what hopes Abraham sometime had in this respect, it may
hence appear, in that while he was yet destitute of children, when God spoke
to him and said, Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield and thy exceeding great
reward, Abraham answered, Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go
childlesse, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus; and behold
one borne in my house is mine heir? Genesis 15.1,2. Does it not hence appear
that the sum of all Abraham's desires came to this, that he might leave
behind him a son and heir of his own body, seeing he abounded already in
all other goods and riches. For if at that time he had with any firm hope
conceived of heaven it self, and the everlasting happiness thereof, when God
promised him an exceeding great reward, would he have answered, Lord God, what
will thou give me? For in these words he signified, that God had already
abundantly rewarded him, and given him goods in a full measure, and to promise
him more was to no purpose, seeing he had no child of his own to whom he
might leave his estate. Whence it appears, that Abraham extended not that
exceeding great reward which God promised him, beyond the goods and happiness
of this life. Wherefore it is more likely, that in these words of Abraham's
expectance the Author intended not to give a reason, why Abraham endured with
such constancy the toils of a continual pilgrimage, and of a life always
unsettled; but rather of the event (as we said) why God gave Abraham no
possession in that land to inherit as his own proper right; granted him no
City to dwell in, nor seat where to settle himself: but would have him dwell
in tents with his son, and grandchilde: Namely, because (as afterward at the
sixteenth verse the Author says) God had prepared for him a City infinitely
greater and better then all the land of promise, with all the Cities in it. And
the promises of God made to Abraham and his seed do in the mystical sense
contain this spiritual happiness and heavenly inheritance. And in the same
sense the seed of Abraham, does signify the seed of all the faithful, who
follow the faith of Abraham. For both these senses are taught us by the
Apostle, Romans 4.11,12,13. and Gal. 3.7. and Gal. 4 22. Therefore Abraham
expected or looked for a City which has foundations, rather by reason of the
event and purpose of God, then from any intent and purpose of his own, whereby
he might seem to fore know it. For in this sense we many times attribute
expectation to a thing: so this Author, Chap. 10. ver. 27. says, that to them
who sin willingly, there remains a certain fearful expectation or looking
for of judgment; whereas if we refer this to their intent and purpose of
mind, sinners most times expect and look for nothing less then the
punishment of their sins. Abraham then is therefore said to look for this
City, because this City was by Gods decree reserved and appointed for him; and
because his faith was so constant in God, neither broken, nor shaken with any
travels or troubles, and his whole course of life was such as theirs is, who
relying upon Gods promise do really expect this heavenly City, as a reward of
their labors: Whereof the first is spoken by way of Metonymie, putting the
effect for the cause; and this latter is said by way of Metaphor. This City the
Author opposes to Tabernacles and Tents; and the matter is not great to live a
while in a Tent, that afterward we may live for ever in a City. And it is a
City that has foundations; By which attribute, Heaven is opposed not only to
Tabernacles or Tents which have no foundations; but to all Cities, which though
they have foundations, yet in comparison of Heaven they have none, because they
have none such. And hereby is signified unto us the firmness and strength of
our heavenly City; which no force, no tract of time, no change of things can
possibly shake or move; which shall not be ruined by the ruin of that heaven
and earth, which to us is visible; whereof see the Author afterward, Chap. 12.
ver. 26, 27, 28. Whose builder and maker is God.] Certainly that City must
needs be most stable and ample, most beautiful and plentiful of all
happiness, which had such a builder and such a maker as God to found and raise
it. He opposes God to men, who are the founders and builders of all earthly
Cities. And therefore this City must needs be so divine and heavenly, so firm
and strong, that no hand of man can prevail against it. Cities built by men,
by men may be destroyed, and many times are so: but the City whereof God is the
builder and maker, is secure and safe from all hazard.

11. By faith also Sara her self received strength to receive seed, and was
delivered of a child when she was past age] It may here be doubted, whether the
Author does speak here of the faith of Sarah or of Abraham, as he first began,
and afterward goes on. The former of these seems to be gathered first from the
words of the Author, when he says, Sarah her self. For it seems as much as
if he had said, Not only Abraham, but also Sarah her self, by faith received
strength: So that he joins Sarah with Abraham in respect of her faith.
Secondly, because the words, She judged him faithfull] which follow in the next
clause of this verse, seem to be referred to the next antecedent which is
Sarah. But the latter opinion seems perswasible; First, because the Author
first began, and afterward proceeds to speak of the faith of Abraham.
Secondly, because the sacred History, mentions not the faith of Sarah, when
Isaac was promised; but rather the Scripture seems to mention something
contrary to her faith; for she laughed within her self, saying, After I am
waxed old, shall I have pleasure, my Lord being old also? and the Angel
questioned Abraham upon it, to know the cause of it, saying, Wherefore did
Sarah laugh? Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Genesis 18.12,13. Whence also
Paul discoursing upon the same point mentions only the strength of Abraham's
faith, Romans 4.19. Thirdly, because in the next verse following, where the
effect and fruit of this faith is described, no mention is made of Sarah, but
only of Abraham; namely in these words, Therefore sprang there even of one, and
him as good as dead so many as the stars of the sky in multitude] Whereupon we
may well doubt, which of these two opnions should be embraced, seeing the
reasons brought on either side may easily be answered. For to the first reason
for the first opinion we may say; That the Author therefore says, Through
faith Sarah her selfe] to show us, that by the faith of Abraham it came to
pass, that not only himself should have power to beget a son, though he
were then old and barren; but also that Sarah her self should conceive, who
was by nature always barren even in her youth, and besides was then spent out
with years and age, yet she should both conceive and bring forth beyond all
course of nature. To the second reason we may answer, That is is not necessary,
that the words judged him faithfull] should be referred to the next antecedent;
but rather to that which is the principal antecedent, though it be more
remote; as we see it done in the verse following, wherein the reference is
manifestly made to Abraham. Neither is the answer difficult to the arguments of
the latter opinion. To the first, it may be said, That the Author, as a little
before he joined Isaac and Jacob with Abraham for dwelling in tents as a thing
common to them all; so also here he might join Sarah with her husband Abraham
in a matter common to them both. For in mentioning afterward the special fact
of Abraham in offering Isaac, therein the Author would seem to observe the
order of actions and of time. For first he must handle Isaacs birth, and the
faith of Abraham concerning it, before he come to the offering of Isaac and
Abraham's faith about that. To the second, Although from Sarahs laughing, and
from the cause of it, which is there expressed, and from the answer of the
Lord, wherein he reproved Sarah for laughing, it appears, That the promise
made her for the bringing forth of a son within the compass of the year,
seemed at the first hearing ridiculous to her, and a thing not credible;
especially seeing she seemed not yet to know who the prison was that promised
it; (for if we look into the context of the History, it is plain, that
Abraham himself did not mark that the persons who spoke with him were Angels
of God, till their speech touching Sarah his wife) yet it follows not, but that
afterward, when she had recollected her self, and had observed the divine
Authority of the speaker, and perceived that the cause of her doubtfulnesse was
strongly refuted by him, she continued no longer in her ^ancie and doubting;
yea the contrary is more probable both in it self, and collectively from
hence, that upon her hearing of the Angels reproof, she was terrified, and for
fear denied she had laughed. For from whence came this terror and fear upon
her, but because she now had observed, that she had not to deal with a man,
but with God, whose sayings and promises to laugh at, or distrust, was
altogether unlawful for her, though to her judgment they surpassed the whole
force and course of nature? We see that Abraham himself laughed also for the
same cause, when first God promised him a son by Sarah; as we may read, Genesis
17.17. not that he doubted any thing of the faith or power of him that promised
it; for in the forecited place to the Romans, Paul openly testifies the
contrary; but because the matter in it self considered, especially heard upon
the sudden and at unawares, seemed to him in a manner absurd and ridiculous,
and scarce credible. But when he had intended his thoughts upon God that
promised him, and perceived his promise to be serious, he became certain of
the power and says of God, and doubted not at all. And the Virgin Mary, when
first she heard it from the Angel, that she should conceive and bring forth a
son, she replied, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? Luke 1.34. From
which words it appears, that at her first hearing of the Angels words, there
arose some scruple and doubt in her mind, which when the Angel had removed by
his answer, she rested wholly satisfied: For which cause Elizabeth afterward
calls her blessed, And blessed is she that believed, Luke 1.45. To the third;
The following verse therefore treats of Abraham, because this verse treats not
of Sarah alone; but Abraham is joined with her, in these words, Through faith
also Sarah herself. For the particle also shows, that besides Sarah he
intends some other person; namely, Abraham whom he named before.
Notwithstanding all this; yet to us it seems more probable, that these words of
the Author should be referred to Abraham's faith, as well as the rest; and that
his faith is herein also commended, in that it produced so admirable an effect
not only in himself, being now old, but also in Sarah his wife, who was not
only old, but had been hitherto barren. Although it seems, the Author did so
temper his words on purpose, as that Sarah might be admitted into the
fellowship and glory of that faith with her husband Abraham. Because she
judged him faithful who had promised.] Hence it appears that God is not only
pleased with our obedience to his commands, but also with our faith given to
his promises; when we by our faith judge him to be faithful, i. constant and
true of his word, always certain to perform the thing he has promised.

12. Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as
the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea shore
innumerable.] As if he had said, The faith of Abraham was so effectual and
fruitful, that by reason thereof it came to pass, that not only Sarah
conceived and bare a son; but also by this son, who was but one, and came from
Abraham one man, and he a barren man, as good as dead, there was propagated a
posterity innumerable. The Author in this verse, has relation to Gods promise,
wherein Abraham was promised a seed and a posterity answerable in number to the
stars of heaven, and to the sands of the sea, Genesis 15.5. and Genesis 22.17. The
Author expresses the effect of Gods promise, which might be seen with the
eye, that by experience it might appear, what faith and force there is in the
promises of God.

13. These all dyed in faith, not having received the promises] He declares the
constancy of their faith, in that all these departed this life under faith, i.
holding the faith of the promises, and certainly believing the future
performance of them, though themselves obtained not the effect of the promises
or the things promised. For the promises were to be fulfilled not only after
their death, but many ages after. The word promises is here by way of a
Metonymy put materially for the matter of the promise or the things promised.
In like manner, we must endeavor to be constant in the faith to the last gasp
of our life; and not only be in certain hope of those things which God has
ordained for us here in this life; but of those also which are to accrue to us
after our death, and it may be many ages after. But having seen them afar
off] They saw not the effect of Gods promises actually fulfilled, or near to
their fulfilling, but they had as it were a prospect of them a far off. They
foresaw in their mind the performance of them far remote from themselves by
a great distance of time, to be fulfilled in their posterity after many ages.
So they saw the performance by faith, because they had an evidence or sight of
the performance not seen. As it befell unto Abraham, who in a deep sleep saw
in a vision, that four generations must expire, and that his posterity must
endure a heavy servitude, before they should take possession of the inheritance
promised. And without all doubt Abraham imparted that vision to his son Isaac,
and Isaac unto Jacob. And were persuaded of them, and embraced them] Though
they saw that these promises for their effect and performance were for the
future very remote from them for several ages to come, yet they no way doubted
of their performance, but were fully persuaded they should be performed,
because they were fully persuaded that God who made the promises was faithful
to perform them. And they were not only persuaded of them, but they embraced
them; for which the word in the Original is, they saluted them, and so some
Translations render it. Now saluting is but a Metaphor for embracing; because
salutings are commonly performed by way of embracing. The sense therefore is,
that those Patriarchs did in their soul embrace and kiss those promises of
God, and with an undoubted faith conceiving them already present, did salute
and embrace them, as friends use to salute and embrace their friends that after
a long travail return from a foreign country. For by this word, nothing
else is signified, but that they nothing doubted of the performance of Gods
promises, but did welcome them in their souls, as if the things they looked
for, were already come. And confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on
the earth] The intent of these words is to prove, that those Patriarcks while
they lived, did not receive those promises, by possessing any inheritance in
the land promised; for otherwise they would not have confessed themselves
strangers and pilgrims in the land. But that they did confess themselves
pilgrims and strangers in that land, it appears both by the words of Abraham,
who requesting to have a sepulcher in the land of Canaan, wherein to bury his
dead, spoke thus to the sons of Heth. I am a stranger and a sojourner with you,
give me a possession of a burying-place with you, that I may bury my dead out
of my sight, Genesis 23.4. And by the words of Jacob to Pharaoh; for when the King
asked him how old he was, Jacob answered, The days of the years of my
pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years; few and evil have the days of my
life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of
my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage, Genesis 47.9. In which words he
affirms, that he and his Ancestors, Abraham and Isaac were pilgrims all the
time of their lives. On the earth.] This must not be restrained to the land of
Canaan only, promised to them and their posterity: but it is in effect as much
as if he had said, that they had no proper country at all upon earth, no place
which was their own by possession and proper right.

14. For they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a Countrey]
If the particle for may be thought in this place to retain it force, then the
Author shows the consequence, why from this their confession it appears, that
during their life they received not the promises. And the reason is, because
they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a country. For if
they sought a country, certainly then they had no country: But a Country
was promised them, and a land which they should possess by a proper and
hereditary right, and not by courtesy only as strangers and sojourners. But
it is more probable, that the particle for is here set for but; as if the
Author had something more to speak of these Patriarcks, besides what he had
already said, and would conclude something further from this their confession,
thereby to make way for what follows concerning their seeking of a heavenly
country. And they are said to seek a Country, because they wanted and
desired a country, as appears at the sixteenth verse following. For they who
live a pilgrims life upon earth, having no settled abode, and are touched with a
sense of their condition, cannot choose but be weary of their flitting and
tossing from place to place, and thereupon be desirous of a country, i. some
proper soil of their own, where they may settle themselves and live at rest.
Besides, they undertook these pilgrimages and sojournings at Gods command,
that at last they might have a residence in a country and a land appointed to
them by God. After the Author had proved that they sought and desired a
country, now he proceeds further to show, what country they sought and
desired.

15. And truly if they had been mindful of that country from whence they
came out] Before he specify what country they sought and desired; first he
shows that they sought not, nor desired, no nor minded that country from which
Abraham departed by Gods command. For if they had had any mind or thought of
that country, or had desired it, when they confessed themselves pilgrims, they
might have returned, seeing they had time enough for a return. But they minded
it not, and therefore desired it not; for what we desire we do not only mind,
but we grieve for the absence and want of it. Abraham alone only with his wife
went out of the country which was properly his as being a native of it: but
Isaac his son, and Jacob his grand child may in a manner be said to have gone
out in him; in as much as they continued in the purpose and resolution of
Abraham and would not return thither. They might have had opportunity to have
returned] Because therefore they returned not into their country, for they
sojourned from it for some hundreds of years, wherein they had opportunities
and time enough for such an enterprise, hence it plainly appears, they were no
way mindful or desirous to return to that country from whence Abraham
departed.

16. But now they desire a better countrey] Here the Author inferres that now
they desire a better country then the former, and do seek it with all their
souls. The particle but now is commonly adversative only, and all one with
but as we have formerly noted; but here in this place it carries also with it
a sense and force conclusive; as if he had said: Seeing therefore they seek
and desire a country, yet neither seek nor desire the former whence Abraham
departed, it must needs therefore now follow, that they seek and desire a
better country then that. For if it were not better, but only as good or
worse, there could be no reason, why they should desert the former, and with so
great labor and care seek another. Yet the Author used in this place the
adversative particle but, by reason of the opposition between these and the
former words. They desire] the tense present for the preter tense they did
desire; as is commonly use in argumentations, and many times in narrations;
especially when the history regards not the point of time, but keeps close to
the matter, and that she may the better represent things to our view, speaks
of them rather as present, then past. That is an heavenly] Here the Author
expresses in his own judgment, as well knowing the purpose of God in that
point, what better country it was which they desired. For it is not necessary,
we should think, that those Patriarchs did expect this heavenly country by
intent and purpose of mind, as has been already declared before, ver. 10.
but it suffices, that this should be the event of their expectation and
desire, from the Decree of God, who in a mysterious and concealed way, had
promised them this heavenly country; and that it should not thus far come to
pass without their desire, in as much as they desired a better country then
that which they had relinquished. For a better country then this heavenly,
which by Gods appointment was reserved for them, and should in time accrue unto
them, there could be none. Whence also if a thing befall a man suitable to his
desires, though it be, or prove much better then he hoped or imagined, yet we
usually say, he sought and desired, it: especially if the course of his life
and endeavors be so composed, that the issue and event might well be such;
which certainly was performed by those Patriarchs. For their very pilgrimage
upon earth, this very thing, that they had no proper and settled abode of their
own upon earth, though they were most dear to God, the supreme Lord of all
things, how fitly does it suit with this issue and event, that being pilgrims
and strangers upon earth, they should at last by Gods goodness be settled in
heaven as in their country? For why else did not God give them a settled
country, and a certain abode upon earth? Therefore even those words, whereby
they confessed themselves pilgrims and strangers upon earth, were not uttered
but by the Spirit of God; because by them was signified, that they were not
citizens of earth, but of heaven, which was their country. Because therefore
this heavenly country was in the purpose of God, to be better then that
country, which the Patriarchs desired, therefore with good reason are they
said to desire this heavenly country. But if we look into their intent and
purpose, the country which they desired, was the possession of the land of
Canaan ordained for their posterity. Of so great advantage it was, to leave
their petty dwellings in their own country, that they might settle their
posterity in possession of a whole kingdom, and place them in the eternal and
peculiar favor of God. Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God.]
God therefore was not ashamed of them, because after they were dead, God both
calls himself their God, and suffers others to call him so, yea he would be
called so. Certainly it is a great matter, that the most high God, who is the
maker of heaven and earth, would be called the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and would not be ashamed of that title. For what is Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob? men dead and rotten long since; who while they lived were exiles fom
their country, and vagrants upon earth, having no certain abode all their
whole life. From these men's names, the only Lord and ruler of all things,
disdained not to take his surname. But to be the God of some person, especially
when God utters it himself of himself, signifies that he is the chief Patron
and Protector of that person, who will defend his client and worshipper from
all evil, and benefit him with his best blessings: but when man utters it of
God, it often signifies that God is his supreme Lord, whom he worships and
obeyes in all his commands with all his soul. And this inference of the Author
from his former passages, is an argument, that he spoke of the event of the
desire and vote of those Patriarchs, and not of any intent and purpose in their
mind to seek and expect that heavenly country. For it appears not from
Scripture, that God was therefore not ashamed of them, because they had an
intent and purpose of mind to seek and desire that heavenly country: but
because God had decreed to restore them to life, and to put them in possession
of that country, as the Author willing to explicate himself, and to show
more clearly the consequence of what he inferres, does therefore subjoyne; For
he has prepared for them a City. For he brings not here a new reason, why
God was not ashamed to be, and be called the God of those Patriarchs; but he
only proposes his former reason more openly and clearly. For we use not, when
we have concluded a truth, and inferred it as firm and certain from former
principles, to confirm it abruptly with an argument and reason, as if it were
not yet proved, so as to leave no mark, that we bring a new reason different
from the former; because then God had ordained that heavenly country and
kingdom for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, therefore with good right and reason
does he call himself their Lord and Patron. This the Author without doubt had
learned from those words of Christ, whereby he proves the Resurrection of the
dead from hence, because God calls himself the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, who then were long dead. For hence Christ does gather, that seeing God
cannot be the God of the dead, namely, if they never be restored to life; (for
how can God benefit the dead, unless he first raise them?) therefore it must
needs follow, that if he call himself the God of some dead, as he did of those
dead Patriarchs, then some of the dead must at length be recalled to life, that
God may be their God in very deed, by accumulating and furnishing them with his
benefits and blessings. But as in the same place Christ says a little before;
They which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage; neither
can they die any more; for they are equal unto the angels, and are the
children of God, being the children of the resurrection. Luke 20.35,36. What is
all this else, but to be an heir and a citizen of that heavenly country and
city? We see then that a heavenly country and city is prepared and ordained
for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and therefore why should we doubt, but that the
very same is reserved also for all us that are the worshippers and servitors of
God? which right of ours we need not stand to evict from diverse evidences and
dark consequences; seeing hereof we have not only most open and clear
promises, which to those Patriarchs were never declared; but also we know for
certain, that Christ our head does now enjoy the possession of that country
and city. This only remains for us, that following the example of those
Patriarks, and much rather of Christ our Captain, we should finally carry our
selves obedient unto God, and extending our hopes beyond our death, should do
our utmost endeavor, that our life should first fail us, before we fail of our
faith and allegiance toward God.

17. By faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac.] The Author here
mentions an example of Abraham's faith, which of all other was most illustrious;
namely, his offering up of Isaac; the circumstances whereof the Author does
but lightly touch, as a thing sufficiently known, and at large described in the
sacred Scriptures. Offered; Abraham offered him not really and actually but
(which is all one with God) purposely, with an unchangeable and constant
purpose of mind, with as much endeavor as lay in his power, and proceeding so
far in the action, as had not God recalled him, the effect undoubtedly had
followed. Thus he offered him; and not only slew him; for the slaughter should
have preceded, and then the offering must have followed by fire for a
burnt-offering; for so God had commanded. When he was tried.] For of his own
election or accord it would never have come into his heart, to have sacificed
unto God, who does most abhor cruelty, with the blood of man, muchlesse of
his own son, unless he had been commanded of God to it: And he was commanded
to do it, not that he should actually perform it; but that by his willingness
to perform it, and by obeying Gods Command, as far as in him lay, he should
give an assured trial of his faith. And he that had received the promises
offered up his only begotten sonne] What a strange fact was this of a strange
faith? where not only the father offered up his son, but his only begotten son;
and what father was it? even he who had received the promises, who from the
same mouth of God had received the promises of a seed and a posterity to be
propagated by Isaac, and had confidently believed it, he now received a command
to slay Isaac before there was any issue from him. Therefore truly here also
Abraham may be said to have believed in hope against hope, that we use the
Apostles words speaking of another point of his faith; who as a little after we
shall show, doubted not to reconcile together two things clashing and crossing
one another, namely the life and death of the same person, because it was God
who had spoke concerning both. We may further add here other circumstances
expressed in the history, as that three days journey with his son to a place
assigned him by God; with that thoughts and cares shall we think the soul of
the poor father was agitated, journying toward the resolved slaughter of his
dear and only son, whom he drew on along with him, ignorant of his destined
calamity, to become a sacrifice and a burnt-offering? what spirits were in him
may we imagine, when upon his assent up that fatal Mount, he laid the wood
upon his son wherewith a fire should be kindled to burn him after his father
had slain him? what thought he, when his son perceiving no sacrifice besides
himself, and marvelling at the matter, did gently demand of his father, where
was the Lamb for the burnt-offering? what thought he, when seasing upon his
son with his own hands expecting no such dealing from so dear a father, he
bound him, and laid him on the Altar upon the wood? when he drew his knife, and
standing over him eyed his throat, and stretched forth his heavy hand that
shook and trembled with fatherly love? which of us all reading and considering
all these, finds not his soul melting in him? yet the invincible faith of
Abraham conquered all these. And Isaac is called the only begotten son of
Abraham, or as it is in the Hebrew his only son, not that he only was his
son (for Ismael also was his son) but because he was his only son by
Sarah the true wife of Abraham; and because he was his only beloved son,
that was borne to his parents in their extreme old age, by the singular gift
and wondrous power of God; and because he was to be the only heir of his
fathers estate, and of Gods promises; and because the seed of Abraham was to
be called in him only, for the children of Isaac only were to be accounted the
true posterity of Abraham. And he that received the promises] The pronoune he,
whether we think it relative to Isaac, or to Abraham (which is better) yet the
sense is the same, does notify unto us a notable circumstance of this fact,
that makes the faith of Abraham to appear yet much greater. Certainly that
faith is very great, which is seen and tried in hard cases, as was the offering
of an only son. But how much greater is that faith which staggereth not at
such an action, as naturally would utterly overthrow it? Yet such was this fact
of Abraham: Abraham had received promises from God, whereof one was that a
numerous posterity should be borne of him; the other, that the land of Canaan
wherein he was a sojourner and a stranger should be given in possession to his
posterity. These promises Abraham had from God and he believed both of them
with all his heart, as it is signified by the word received; and believing
these promises he showed himself obedient to all Gods commands, that he might
not fail of his hope from so great blessings. Now what command does God lay
upon him? God commands him to take Isaac his son, in whose posterity all
those promises were to be fulfilled, and from whom as yet he had no grandchild,
yet him he must offer up, that is, he must slay and burn him for a sacrifice.
If Abraham must do this, and look into the nature of the action, could he
possibly have any hope of those promises?

18. Of whom it was said that in Isaac shall thy seed be called] This is
therefore added, lest any man should think, that Abraham might imagine, though
Isaac were extinct, yet the promises might have their issue in Ismael. For
Abraham could not imagine this, because God had said unto him, in Isaac shall
thy seed be called; that is, the children to be borne of Isaac, shall be
accounted thy seed and posterity; namely, that thy posterity for whom I have
ordained my blessing, and the possession of that land: and therefore Isaacs
children only shall be called the posterity of Abraham. In this perplexity then
and contrariety between the promise and the command, what issue could Abraham
find for his faith? To doubt of Gods promises and of their performance, he
thought it impiety, and therefore he obeyed Gods command for the offering up of
Isaac. But then considering, that this sacrifice would in the eye of nature
overthrow all his hope, therefore he builds a new and high faith upon the
ground of his former faith; namely,

19. Accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the daed] This way
only the passage was open, for Abraham to believe, that God was able to raise
Isaac even from the dead. This point he did believe, though he had no president
or example for it. For he would rather ascend up to the highest pitch of faith,
then relapse or retire in any degree; and would rather cumulate a high faith
with a higher, then make the least doubt of Gods promises. Accounting, is in
the Greek reasoning; after he had reasoned within himself, casting up all the
ways possible, how to salve up Gods command with Gods promise, at last he
determined and concluded a possibility this way. And which way was that? that
though he should slay Isaac, and offer him up to God as a burnt-offering, yet
God was able to raise him up even from the dead. This was the sum of his
account and the conclusion of his reasoning, that God was Almighty and able to
do, not only all other things that are easily done, but even to raise from the
dead; which is an act so difficult, and so remote from humane reason, that man
might account it an act altogether impossible. That God was able] He reasoned
and concluded of Gods power only, because he had no reason to doubt of his
will, seeing he had received the promises of God, wherein God had sufficiently
declared his will. The only doubt therefore rested upon Gods power, which doubt
he solves by his faith. From whence also he received him in a figure] Abraham
did not only believe that God was both able and willing to raise Isaac from the
dead, but in a manner saw him raised from the dead, and in a manner received
him again from God as raised from death. In a figure.] In the Greek it is in
a parable, or in a similitude; In a figure is opposed to the propriety and
truth of the thing. For truly and properly Isaac was not raised nor received
from the dead, because he was not dead: but in a figure and in a manner, he
was both raised and received. For Abraham accounted his Isaac for dead; and
therefore seeing now he remained alive, and beyond all hope was rescued from
the stroke, which his father had aimed at his throat, it was in a manner all
one to Abraham, and all one to Isaac, as if Isaac had been dead and raised
again from the dead. For hence we use to say of those that are delivered from
some extreme danger, wherein they were given for dead, that they are as it were
revived and recovered from the grave. Holy David many times makes such
expressions of himself; and Paul, when God had delivered him from an extreme
danger, wherein he wholly despaired of life, says, We had the sentence of
death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but God which
raises the dead, who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver; in
whom we trust; that he will yet deliver. 2. Cor. 1.9,10.

20. By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come.] Now the
Author mentions the peculiar faith of Isaac with an example of it; in blessing
Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. He prayed to God for blessings to
come upon them that should have their event, after many ages to come. For this
blessing of Isaac was no ordinary or vulgar Benediction, as that of Parents
commonly is; who when they bless their children, express only the wishes and
desires of their mind; but whether the blessing will succeed according to their
wishes and desires, they are no way certain (although such blessings of theirs
may proceed from some faith) but Isaac so blessed his sons, and so prevailed
with God for the things for which he prayed, as if in a manner he had simply
foretold them, nothing doubting of their event, but certainly persuaded, that
God would do no otherwise then as he had wished and prayed. For when he
perceived his error in the person of his sons, yet he said, I have blessed
him, yea, and he shall be blessed.] Genesis 27.33. In which words he plainly
signified, that the blessing he had given was so confirmed, that he could not
recall it. But the Author names Jacob first, though Esau was the firstborn,
because Jacob had the first and the best blessing, albeit he obtained it by a
wile, God so disposing the matter. For before either of them were born, God
using his own freedom in bestowing his blessings upon whom he will, had
appointed to prefer Jacob before Esau, the younger before the elder. Therefore
God suffered not Isaac to bestow the best blessing upon Esau, that neither the
decree of God, nor the blessing of Isaac might fail: especially seeing Esau
had already voluntarily and freely sold away his birthright, which (as the
Scripture says) he despised. We say he sold it voluntarily and freely, because
he was not driven to that sale by any destiny or decree of God. For Esau might
have kept the honor and benefit of his birthright, and yet as God had
decreed, his posterity might have become younger, or subject to have served the
posterity of Jacob.

21. By faith Jacob when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph.]
Now he mentions the particular faith of Jacob, which appeared in this blessing
of the sons of Joseph. And he adds the circumstance of time, that Jacob did
this when he was a dying, that hence it might appear, how he persisted in the
faith to his last breath, and how constantly he believed the promises of God,
whereby God had settled his blessing and the possession of the land of Canaan
upon his posterity. The History hereof is in Genesis 48. But we may wonder,
why the Author mentions only the sons of Joseph, seeing with the very same
faith Jacob gave blessings to all his children, was it because he showed a
particular faith, in believing that Ephraim though the younger, should be
afterward preferred before Manasses the elder, and therefore crossing his hands
otherwise then Joseph expected and had placed his sons, laid his right hand
upon Ephraim who stood at his left hand, and his left hand upon Manasses who
stood at his right? Or was it, because he believed that these sons of Joseph
should be accounted as his, and be adopted into the number of the twelve
Patriarchs, to give name and be heads to two of the Tribes? And worshipped]
Here is mentioned another argument or proof of Jacobs faith, in that he
worshipped God, after that he had bound Joseph, to carry his body after his
death into the land of Canaan, as we read it, Gen 47. For by this worshipping
he declared that he wholly confided in God, who had promised that land to his
posterity, and would in due time give them the possession of it. Upon the top
of his staffe] The vulgar Latin renders this perversely, that he worshipped the
top of his staff. As if Jacob had worshipped the Scepter of his son Joseph,
that is, Joseph himself, by reason of the high office and power that Joseph
had in Egypt. Which interpretation neither agrees to the words of the text, in
leaving out the particle upon; nor to the scope of the Author. For what makes
this to the declaration of Jacobs faith? nay the thing it self scemes no way
probable. The end is the extreme part of a thing: but if one end of a thing be
the highest, and the other the lowest, the highest end is the top. Which sense
must be here understood, as partly appears by the thing it self, and partly
by the Hebrew word, Genesis 47. In the Hebrew for top we read head, which by a
metaphor signifies the top, because the head is the end and highest part of
man, and consequently of any thing else. And for staff we now read in the
Hebrew, bed; which fell out because the word Mittah, there extant, pricked with
other vowels, signifies a staff; for in the Hebrew Matteh is a staff, and
Mittch a bed. The Septuagint whom our Author follows, read it Matteh, and so
translated it staff, otherwise then we now read it in the Hebrew text. Both
these readings have a commodious sense. For if we give way to the authority of
the Septuagint, the sense will be, that Jacob when by reason of his age and
weakness he could not lift up him self by his own strength, stayed and
raised himself by the top of his staff, the common aid of old men, that he
might worship God, by bowing his body before him. But if we follow the Hebrew
text, as it is now extant, the sense will be, That Jacob, because he could not
raise his body out of his bed, therefore he bowed his head forward upon his
beds head, and so worshipped God. For among the people of God, it has been
always the manner of worshipping God, by bowing the body, or at least the head
unto him.

22. By faith Joseph when he dyed, made mention of the departing of the
children of Israel, and gave commandment concerning his bones] Now he mentions
the particular faith of Joseph, who when he was dying, mentioned the departure
of the Israelites out of Egypt, and to testify his belief and assurance
thereof, gave commandment concerning his bones, that when they departed out of
Egypt toward the promised land, they should carry his bones with them. He gives
commandment concerning his bones, and not concerning his body, because he knew
for certain, either by the spirit of Prophecy, or else by the Oracle of God,
as Abraham his great grandfather did, that the Israelites should not very soon
after his death depart out of Egypt to take possession of the land of Canaan
which God had promised, but between his death and their departure there would
pass such a distance of time, that nothing of his body would remain besides
his bones. Which thing does greatly commend the faith of Joseph, because though
he saw the performance of Gods promises deferred for a long time yet to come,
yet he neither despised them, nor doubted any thing of their verity.

23. By faith Moses when he was borne, was hid three months of his parents,
because they saw he was a proper child.] The Author being about to bring an
example of the faith of Moses, does begin it with the mention of his parents
faith; which appeared in their hiding of Moses when he was newborn. For hence
it is manifest that they confided in God, that by his help the child should
be preserved. And their motive to this faith was, because they saw the child
was comely or proper, that is, such a one in whose countenance there appeared
an extraordinary and excellent towardness; and whose very aspect seemed to
presage and promise some great matter. In the seventh chapter of the Acts, ver.
20. it is said, that he was exceeding fair to God, which some Translations
render by God; that is, his beauty came from God, or God in a singular manner
had made him very fair and beautiful. When therefore his parents saw him so,
they imagined that God would not have it be in vain, that an Infant should be
borne of so beautiful and comely countenance. And therefore they doubted not
but he should be preserved by the singular providence of God, so as they also
provided as much as lay in their power. And the event was answerable to their
faith. And they were not afraid of the Kings commandement] King Pharaoh by an
Edict had commanded the Egyptians, to kill the male children borne of the
Israelites, after that the Midwives who feared God, had refused to execute the
like command. This command of the King, the parents of Moses feared not,
because they feared not, but trusted upon God and his providence, that the
child which they had hidden, should not be discovered and produced to be slain
by the Kings command.

24. By faith Moses when he was come to yeares] Here he begins to treat of
Moses his own faith, and to mention the effects of it; whereof the first is,
that when he was come to years, he refused to be called the son of Pharoahs
daughter. Which fact of Moses he further illustrates and amplifies in the
following verses. In the Greek for come to years, it is, when Moses was become
great Which greatness may be understood of that dignity which Moses attained
in Egypt, where he was bred up in the quality of the son of Pharoahs
daughter. For he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was
mighty in words and in deeds; as we read it, Acts 7.22. But this greatness
seems rather to be referred to the stature of Moses, and consequently to his
age of man's estate; partly because Moses come to years is here opposed to
Moses when he was borne; and p^ly because the Scripture relating the same fact
of Moses, says that when he was grown up he went out unto his brethren, Exodus
2.11. Or as Stephen (...), When he was full forty years old, it came into his
heart to visit his brethren, the children of Israel, Acts 7.23. This fact of
Moses in refusing to be called the son of the Kings daughter, was a hardy
attempt; not only to despise and reject so great a dignity, such riches and
pleasures, but also thereby freely to cast himself into that great calamity,
under which the people of God then suffered in Egypt. Therefore the Author
willing further to illustrate and more amply to describe this notable fact
(...) Moses, does add in the verse following.

25. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season. The riches and dignity which Moses did
possess with sin, that is, with the denial of Gods people, and so of God
himself, (for otherwise enjoy them he could not) he thought to be but a
temporary use of sin; and he therefore thought so, either because he saw how
transitory and fading these things are; or else because he thought, that God
who is the avenger of sin, would not suffer him long to enjoy those riches
and dignities together with such a wickedness, and that some vengeance of God,
would suddenly strip him of all his riches and power, and c^st some sad
punishment upon him for so foul a sin.

26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt] The Author proceeds yet, further to illustrate and amplify this fact of
Moses. But seeing by the reproach of Christ is signified that calamity
whereinto Moses cast himself and which he esteemed greater riches then the
treasures of Egypt, there must needs be some trope in those words. For properly
the Reproach of Christ is that which Christ himself suffers. But by way of
Metaphor, it may signify a Reproach like unto that which was sometime suffered
by Christ or his people, who are sometime termed by the name of Christ: or the
Reproach which he suffers who bears the type of Christ or his people. Such was
the Reproach of the Israelites in Egypt, that is, their extreme affliction and
oppression joined with much shame and disgrace. Now Moses would rather become a
partner of this calamity, by professing himself an Israelite, then to possess
the treasures of Egypt. For whereas some imagine, that Moses is said in this
place to have suffered for Christ's sake, this is a fond conceit. As if Pharaoh
had ever thought of Christ, or had therefore persecuted Moses, because he
professed himself a Christian, and not rather an Israelite. Yet we are to
take notice, that this metaphor here, either in both the words joined together;
namely, the reproach of Christ] or in the single word of Christ; so as Christ
in this place may be taken for the type or image of Christ. And Christ whose
type and image is here signified, will be either Christ himself, or the
people of Christ, who as we have said, are sometime noted and included in the
name of Christ, as 1 Cor. 12.12. So also is Christ, and Gal. 3.16. and to thy
seed which is Christ. In which places it is most certain, that by the name of
Christ is signified the people of Christ jointly with Christ their head. But
that people of Israel were a type of both these, both of Christ himself and of
all Christian people. For hence it is, that in a mystical sense, that is
referred to Christ, which in a literal sense was spoken of the Israelites, Out
of Egypt have I called my Son] Hos. 11.1. and Mat. 2 15. Therefore this people
of Israel in bearing this type both of Christ and Christians, might very fitly
by this Author be called Christ. But as we said, there may be a Metaphor in
both the words conjoined, the Reproach of Christ; and so the reproach of the
Israelites in Egypt may be called the reproach of Christ; because in like
manner it bears a type and image of the reproach both of Christ and of
Christians, by reason of Christ. For so the Author was pleased to speak, that
he might speak with reference to the afflictions of Christians, who must
properly and truly bear the reproach of Christ for the hope of an exceeding
reward from God: which phrase the Author uses afterward, Chap. 13.13. For
comparisons and allusions as we have often noted, are subject to many abusions
or improprieties. For he had respect unto the recompense of the reward.] Here
he shows the cause and ground from whence the faith of Moses grew, was one or
both the principles of faith mentioned in the first verse: he had an evidence
or sight of something unseen; he saw the unseen recompense of reward, which God
would bestow on him, for his esteem of the Reproach of Christ; and he had a
subsistence of a thing hoped for, in that he hoped for the recompense of
reward; which sight and hope composed and framed his faith, and are both
signified in the word respect, whereby he both saw and hoped for the recompense
of reward. And his faith built upon these two grounds made him do and suffer
hard things for Gods sake from whom he expected his reward; for such is the
general nature of faith to encourage and support us under hard and heavy
attempts.

27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King] He mentions
here another effect of the faith of Moses. And this may be understood, first
of that flight of Moses out of Egypt, after he had professed himself an
Israelite, not only in words, but by the slaughter of an Egyptian doing wrong
to an Israelite, Exodus 2,15. In which flight especially the faith of Moses
appeared, because by his flight he hoped, that by Gods help he should escape,
and that the wrath of so great and so potent a King, who as one said truly,
have long hands, should not hurt him having avoided the danger by flying; and
being at a great distance out of the Kings reach, he feared not the wrath of
the King; for so only we must understand his not fearing of the Kings wrath.
For otherwise in the forecited place of Exodus 2.14. it is written that Moses
did fear, and because he feared, therefore he fled. But after that, when he
was fled, then he feared not. For he endured as seeing him who is invisible.]
Here he more fully declares the faith of Moses, and to show the perfection of
it, does explicate both the effect and the cause of it. The effect of it was,
that thereby he endured; that is, he voluntarily underwent a grievous
banishment, and constantly bore it, and cared not so much to be reconciled to
the King, as to live in banishment despoyled of all his former dignity, though
he could no where subsist safe or secure. And the cause of his faith was, his
evidence or sight of a person unseen, for he saw God who is invisible, which
sight built up his faith in God. Yet this whole verse may be referred to that
fact of Moses, when returning by Gods command from his flight and banishment
into Egypt, and doing there so many strange miracles, that the King mastered
with diverse plagues and at last hardly dismissing the people, he departed out
of Egypt with all the Israelites as their Leader and Captain; which act he did
by faith, because he feared not, that the King incensed with wrath, as is
usually done in the like case, should collect all his forces, and pursuing him
and the people should assault them by force of arms, and utterly destroy those
with war and slaughter, whom before he could not keep in bondage. And this
will be the more fitly done, if we refer it to his purpose and preparation
for his departure out of Egypt with the people. For in the verse following the
Author mentions the keeping of the Passover, which preceded the departure of
the Israelites from Egypt. And it is very probable that the Author observed the
order of time. He endured; that is, he was not discouraged at the troubles and
crosses which hindered the departure of the people out of Egypt, partly by the
offense of so great a King, and partly by the complaints of the people, who
were thereupon the more oppressed. For to endure does properly signify
perseverance and constancy in matters of difficulty and trouble. All this he
performed with such a courage of mind as if before his eyes he had seen that
God who cannot be seen; that is, as we have said, so fully confiding in God,
that neither doubted the assistance of God, nor the success of the action.

28. Through faith he kept the Passover and the sprinkling of bloud] Another
proof of the faith of Moses, in performing and keeping the Passover. For to
what end and purpose did he this, but because he was most certain, by his
rest upon the promise of God, that by this means all the firstborn of Israel
should be preserved from that destruction which should fall upon the firstborn
of Egypt. The sprinkling of blood, was done by the blood of the Lamb slain
for the Passover, which being taken in a basin, and a bunch of hysop dipped in
it, was sprinkled upon the lintell and the two side-posts of the doors to those
houses where the Passover was eaten: whereof see Exodus 12.13.33. Lest he that
destroyed the firstborn, should touch them.] The destroyer was that Angel of
God, who by Gods command was to destroy in one night all the firstborn of
Egypt throughout their single houses. For although in the 12. Chap. of Exodus it
be several times said, that the Lord would pass over the land of Egypt and
destroy the firstborn; yet in the same Chap. ver. 23. God is manifestly
distinguished from that destroyer; whereby it appears that God brought this
destruction upon Egypt by the Ministry and service of an Angel.

29. By faith they passed through the Red sea, as by dry land] Hitherto the
Author has produced examples of faith from single persons only: but now he
would show the effects and fruits of faith in a more popular and public
consideration, as it may be seated in the Church or people of God; yet not
universally so as no single person should have no defect of faith; but
generally for the most part, or major part. And although of the faith here
mentioned, the Author speak impersonally, they passed] not naming who they
were; yet the context does clearly show us, that the impersonall they must be
referred to the persons of Moses and the Israelites; because they only were the
persons that passed through the red Sea. So the faith here specified was seated
in Moses, yet not in him singly and exclusively, but in Moses jointly with the
Israelites, or people of God, whose faith herein concurred with the faith of
Moses: though therein the faith of Moses was singularly eminent; for he smote
the waters so faithfully with his rod, that upon the stroke they were divided;
and he was the leader and perswader of the people to their passage. But the
faith of the people was but general for the most or major part; for some of
them did hardly or very weakly believe. Of this public or common faith the
Author mentions two effects; whereof the first is, the passage of the
Israelites through the red Sea, as by dry land] That arm of the Sea, which
they passed, is in the Hebrew called Suph, that is the Rushie sea, because of
the Bul-rushes therein abounding: but why among other nations it is called the
red sea, Interpreters agree not; whether it be from the redness of the water,
or the redness of the sand, both by the shore and in the deep. or from king
Erytha, whose name signifies red, and sometime possessed that Sea: neither is
the knowledge of the thing any way material. This Sea, the waters of it being
divided on each hand, they passed as by dry land.] The word land is not in the
Greek, but must be understood according to the Hebrew phrase usual amongst
them; as it is in diverse passages of the Psalms, and Mat. 23.15. The causes of
this their faith was, their evidence or sight of a thing unseen, and their
subsistence of a thing hoped for; for God had promised them a passage through
the midst of this Sea, as safe as on dry ground. Exodus 14.15,16. The truth of
this promise being unseen, they saw and hoped for, and therefore they believed
it. Which the Egyptians assaying to do were drowned.] The other effect of their
faith upon the Egyptians; or rather an effect of defect of faith in the
Egyptians; who having in them no true faith at all, but presumption enough and
too much rashness, would needs imitate the fact of Gods faithful people, and
in their presumption assaying to pass the red Sea, as the faithful had done
before them, were therein drowned. And that fact which to the faithful was a
means of their salvation, was destruction to unbeleevers, who would seem to
be faithful. For the drowning of the Egyptians in that Sea, was an effect of
the Israelites faith; because they had a sight of it unseen; for God had
promised the Israelites upon their passage through the red Sea, not only
salvation to themselves, but destruction to the Egyptians, whom they should
never see more. Exodus 14.13. For hereby the Israelites saw that destruction of
the Egyptians which was not yet seen, and therefore did believe the truth of
it, whereupon followed the effect of it.

30. By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about
seven days.] Having amply exemplified the faith of Moses, who was the first
Captain over Gods people to bring them out of Egypt: now he seconds Moses with
the faith of Joshua, who was the second Captain of that people, to give them
entrance and possession in the land of Canaan: yet this is so intended of
Joshua, as the people also are joined in faith with him; for they also did
partake both in the action and benefit of this faith. The action or fact of
this faith was, the Compassing about of Jericho seven days.] Jericho was a
fortified town, so strongly defended or shut up, as the Scripture terms it,
that it was impregnable, and the Israelites had no hope to take it by assault:
and because it was a frontier town to the land of Canaan, therefore unless
they first take Jericho, they can have no passage to march further into the
land of Canaan, but are there wholly intercepted and stopped from all entrance
into the land promised. Jericho therefore must needs first be taken: and
because it cannot be conquered by force of arms, therefore it shall be taken
by force of faith, after compassing about the walls of it seven days.] God
who is so powerful that he could create the world in six days, could have
destroyed. Jericho in less then seven: yet God who is so merciful, that he
gave the great City of Ninivie forty days, would give little Jericho seven
days; for God who sent Jonas to them of Ninivie, had provided Rahab for them
of Jericho, as a Prophet and a Preacher of repentance unto them. For she who
for her self had such faith to believe in God, would gladly have preached the
like faith to the City, that God who is the God in heaven above and in earth
beneath, had given that land to his own people, as she her self had before
acknowledged to the spies of Israel. Josh. 2.9 11. But because they of Jericho
were so wicked, that she durst not preach this faith among them, and so
obstinate, that if she had preached it, yet they would not believe it,
therefore by the faith of Gods people, after seven days compassing, the walls
of Jericho shall fall down. Now the cause of this faith in the people of God,
was their evidence or sight of things unseen, and the subsistence they had of a
thing hoped for; for God had promised them by the mouth of Joshua, that upon
this fact of compassing the City seven days once a day, and the seventh day
seven times, the wall of it should fall down flat. Josh. 6.4,5. The truth of
this promise being yet unseen, they saw and hoped for, and thereby grew their
faith to believe it.

31. By faith the harlot Rahab] There are that think that Rahab was not an
harlot, but an Inkeeper, or Taverner; which because they are wont sometimes to
be harlots, or to receive harlots that frequent their houses, therefore among
the Hebrews, the name of harlot is applied to hostesses. But this signification
of the Hebrew word Hazzonah they prove not by examples. Neither is it for
nothing, that the Scripture whenever she mentions the example of Rahab, to
whom God showed so much favor and mercy, forgets not to give her this
attribute of harlot. For it seems to do this, thereby to show, the great
force of a true and lively faith, because by virtue thereof, many attain to
justification and impunity, who otherwise by their life little deserve it. Now
if the Hebrew word Hazzonah signified only a public hostess, when it is
uttered of Rahab, and not an harlot properly so called, this singular
commendation of Rahabs faith were utterly lost-which notwithstanding James and
this Author endeavor to express. Perished not with them that believed not]
The inhabitants of Jericho are called unbeleevers, because they would not
believe, that the God of heaven had granted to the Israelites the possession
both of their city and of the whole land of Canaan, or because believing this
grant of God yet they would not obey it, by giving way to it; for the word
(...), signifies as well unobedient as unbeleeving. And they were disobedient,
because they would not admit but opposed the people of God, whom they knew were
approaching, and had heard what strange works God had done for them, and
consequently would not submit to Gods way. For if herein they had joined with
Rahab, to have believed as she did, they might with her have escaped the
destruction of their City and their own ruin. For that Law of God which had
appointed so many Nations to the slaughter, was by collating it with another
Law to be understood to take place, with the exception of those that should
freely submit to things commanded them, and should renounce the worship of
their Idols and false gods. All which appears by the example of Rahab and of
Solomon who took the remnant of the Canaanites to his dominion under tribute,
1 King. 9.20,21. When she had received the spies with peace] She abstained from
all injury toward those spies her self, and from all treachery in discovering
them to others, and defended them from the violence of those that made
inquisition after them: For these were the expressions of that peace wherewith
she received them. And this her faith was not idle and empty, but testified
with a notable action of trial. For she did not only receive those spies with
the danger of her life, but she hid them, and afterward dismissed them with
many difficulties. Which fact of hers, how availeable it was to her
justification, both the thing it self declares, and S. James openly testifies,
Jam. 2.25. Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works when she
had received the messengers and had sent them out another way.

32. And what shall I more say?] As if he had said; Why should I stay longer in
relating of single examples of those whose faith is testified in Scripture? For
the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, Barac, Samson, and of Jephte, of
David also, and Samuel, and of the Prophets. He places David, though latter
in time before Samuel though elder, not only for the greater dignity of David,
but also because Samuel came nearer in quality to the Prophets with whom he
closes; And David came nearer to those Heroes forenamed, as Gedeon, Barac and
Samson; for he was a middle person between the Heroes and the Prophets, and
was indeed both.

33. Who through faith subdued kingdoms.] This is principally referred to
David who subdued some kingdoms. But this was done by faith, because when God
promised him victory over his enemies, he believed it, and upon his belief
thereof did make war upon them; whereof we may read several Psalms of
David, composed by him to that purpose; and among others, Psalm. 2.18.20. and
21. Wrought righteousnesse] Such were also the same David, Samuel and the
Prophets. Here in like manner it appears, that faith taken strictly and
properly differs from the working of righteousness, as the cause from the
effect; because righteousness is the effect of an effectual faith. Obtained
promises] These seem rather to signify, that by faith they obtained new and
extraordinary promises; such as that promise made to David, that the Kingdom
should be settled upon his posterity for ever, and that Christ should be borne
from his line; then that they obtained the effect of Gods solemn promises. For
if that effect be taken for immortal life, it is false, as it is taught
afterward, ver. 39. But if we take it of the blessings of this life, they
scarce seem any other, then victories and triumphs over their enemies. But
these are particularly related in the verse following: unless we say that
those promises which they obtained are specified and reckoned up in the verses
following; and so after he had said, that by faith they wrought righteousness,
he rightly adds, they also obtained the promises, namely those which presently
he would specify in particular, even unto those words of verse 35. Others were
tortured] And so as from thence it follows; where after he had reckoned up
diverse calamities which the servitors of God supported by their faith in God,
had endured, at last, he adds, that they received not the promise. It may seem
therefore the Author would say, that some by their faith obtained the effect of
Gods promises, as namely they before mentioned, who in this life attained those
great benefits of God which he reckoned up: but others afterward mentioned,
though they had no less faith in God then the former, yet enjoyed not the
performance of Gods promise, because they were deprived of their lives for
their righteousness and faith in God. Stopped the mouths of Lions] As Daniel
did, the history whereof is extant, Dan. 6.

34. Quenched the violence of fire] As those three young men, in Babylon, who
seem in a manner to be accounted among the Prophets, see Daniel 3. Escaped the
edge of the sword] As many of the Prophets did, whose lives were attempted by
the Kings and the people, as Elias, Elisha, Jeremy, Micheas. Out of weakness
were made strong] By recovering from dangerous and deadly sicknesses, as
Ezechias, 2 King. 20. Waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies of
the aliens] As Sampson and David; though we may refer this valor, not only to
their courage of mind, but to their strength of body. Of Sampson, see Judge.
14. and the Chapters following: Of David, Psalm. 18.35.37. etc. And hither we
may refer those several Worthies of David, of whom we read, 2 Samuel 23. and 1 Chronicles 11.

35. Women received their dead raised to life againe] Namely by the faith of
the Prophets Elias and Elisha, see 1 King. 17.19. and 2 King. 4.21. and in the
latter of these two miracles there was an access of the mothers faith also.
And others were tortured] The word others does show that the Author now speaks
of another sort of persons eminent also for their faith: Namely, of such whose
faith was not conspicuous for victories or warlike exploits, which belong not
so much to Christians; nor for the sole works of righteousness, or other
notable gift of God, as their faith was of whom he spoke hitherto; but of a
faith whereof trial was made in suffering persecutions and grievous
afflictions for God and Righteousness sake; which is more properly a Christian
Faith. For of the same faith the effects are diverse. The torture here mentioned
is in the Greek tympanized; which is a torture whereby a man is distended or
stretched alive like a drum, and then beaten with cudgels as a drum is; which
kind of torture is in use at this day among many Nations. And it was inflicted
upon Eleazer that reverend old man, in the time of Antiochus the persecuter, 2
Maccab. 6. For without doubt the Author in this place had respect to those
times. Although some of the afflictions which he afterward mentions,
happened in the time of Elias under Ahab and Jesabel; see 1 King. 18.4.13. and
Chap. 19.10. Not accepting deliverance] When deliverance or release from their
tortures was offered them upon condition to renounce Gods Law, they would not
accept it, see the history of Eleazer, 2 Maccab. 6.19,30. for to those words
there, the Author seems to have relation here. That they might obtain a better
resurrection] He shows with what faith, and with what hope they endured their
tortures; namely, because they believed and hoped, they should obtain from God
a far better resurrection. But whence did they gain this faith and hope?
Certainly, not from any open or clear promise of a resurrection, extant in the
Law of God: but only trusting upon the sole goodness, righteousness, and
power of God. For seeing they did strongly believe, that God is, and that he is
a rewarder of them that seek him; and yet saw, that unless with extreme
wickedness they would forsake the Law of God, they must suffer heavy
calamities, as banishment, imprisonment, tortures and cruel deaths; they were
hereupon raised into this hope, that there were rewards laid up for the virtue
and piety of Gods worshippers to be received after this life; and that it could
not possibly be, that God who is most gracious and righteous, should have no
reward in store for that virtue and piety which of all other is the greatest,
and does cost men the loss of their lives, then which nothing can be dearer
unto them. Thus therefore God, even under the Old Testament, did with such
rudiments by little and little exercise his people toward the hope of another
life: although there can be no doubt, but that the servitors of God were under
those hard and sad times of persecution inspired by the Spirit of God, and did
thereby so much the more taste and swallow this hope in their souls. Now if
they, by hope of the future Resurrection, whereof they had no open promise of
God, and knew not in any certainty the future quality and blessedness thereof,
did suffer such grievous calamities for their constancy to Gods Law. How much
more should we, who have an open promise of the resurrection, and know both the
future qualities of it, and the great happiness that will accompany it, fear
no terrors, no banishments, no torments nor punishments for Christ and for
righteousness sake. As it is usual in comparisons, he tacitly calls their
deliverance from punishment, a resurrection, by way of abusion, while he
opposes it to the true resurrection as to a condition much better. Therefore
they despised deliverance, which was but an umbratilous and transitory
resurrection, to obtain the true resurrection accompained with eternal life
and happiness.

36. And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings] As the mother
with her seven sons, 2 Macab. 7. Yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonments.]
While Antiochus did rage in his persecution, there must needs be a great number
of those, who because they would not forsake the Law of their God, were cast
into bonds and prisons; from whence a while after diverse of them were drawn
forth to diverse punishements, which are presently mentioned.

37. They were stoned, they were sawne asunder, were tempted, were slain with
the sword] He recounts diverse kinds of punishments, which of old the
worshippers of God endured, trusting and relying upon God; that by their
example he might stir up the followers of Christ to the like constancy in
their sufferings. Were tempted] In the Greek it is (...), which some suspect to
be corrupted, and to be read for (...), they were burned. And indeed, if this
word were usual, there could seem no doubt of this reading; for it might
easily be written by changing the vowell into the dipthong, seeing the sense i
very agreeable to the place. For here are recounted diverse kinds and means of
death, as stones, sawes, axes, swords, and among which fire also may well be
placed. But tempting seems not any of the number. For temptation is a thing
general and common to all who suffer persecutions for righteousness sake. And
withal temptation does imply the constancy of them who are tempted. But if we
must needs read it they were tempted, then we must understand it of some
particular kind and form of temptation, wherewith persons in distress might
easily be overcome, and drawn from their constancy; as for example, when a
man is follicited to some fained act, or to some ambiguous words, by promising
him safety, and some good rewards besides, to condescend to this, that though
he will not truly recede from his former way, yet that he seem to recede from
it. For after this manner we read Eleazer was temped. Now for a man to overcome
such a temptation by lending no care nor mind unto it, but rather dye a cruel
death, then to stain the reputation of his confession and constancy with the
least show of dissembling, is a great and a brave conquest. They wandered about
in sheeps skins and goats skins] For they had no means to procure other garment
or covering for their body; and therefore he presently adds, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented. This is the reason, why they wandered about, and why in
sheeps skins, and goats skins, because they were destitute of all worldly
provision, and in all places where they came were afflicted and tormented, and
therefore they wandered from place to place in that despicable and poor manner.
All which miseries happened unto them in the times of the Maccabes under the
persecution of the cruel Antiochus.

38. Of whom the world was not worthy: they wandered in deserts and in
mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth] The Author interposeth the
former words of this verse, to show the indignity of the usage and foulness of
the injury, which the wicked inflicted upon the true servitors of God. As if he
had said, these good men were constrained to wander like wild beasts, and to
hide themselves like wild beasts in deserts and mountains, in holes and caves
of the earth: but among men in Towns and Cities, they could have no abode,
though for their piety and faith toward God, they were of such worth and
respect, that the inhabitants of the whole world were unworthy of them. Of this
carriage, Christians especially ought to take notice, when they see worthy
persons to be vexed, banished, afflicted and slaughtered of the unworthy, good
men of evil, and the innocent of the wicked. For as the Author would intimate
unto us, it may be, that the world herein did in a manner punish her self, in
that she persecuted and banished such holy persons, and drove them away from
her, of whose conversation and company she was altogether unworthy.

39. And these all having obtained a good report through faith, received not
the promise] The word all seems in the intention of the Author, to be chiefly
referred to those persons last mentioned, who for the love of Gods Law suffered
such great calamities. For the former persons mentioned before them, obtained
some promises of God as rewards of their faith: but these latter that were
persecuted and slain for the testimony of Gods Law, had none. And yet, all
their faith who were mentioned in the former place, was not such a faith, as to
be of it self a saving faith, or such an one, which could procure them eternal
life, which the Author here understands by the name of the promise, unless
something else were added, particularly that faith which concerns only wars, or
had some certain thing proposed for the matter of it, as the recovery of their
health, or the raising of their dead children to life, and which was perpetual
in them, working in them that had it, true righteousness and piety; for there
is no cogent reason constraining us to affirm, that it was such a faith: See
what the Author has affirmed, ver. 33, 34, 35. A good report part through
faith] They obtained the praise and commendation of their faith in the
Scriptures, See ver. 2. through faith] Partly because their faith was the
cause, why they performed such worthy acts, as deserved great praise and
commendation. Partly, because such a notable faith in God, was of it self the
cause and matter of that good report and commendation. Received not the
promise.] The article the does show, that some excellent promise is here
designed out; namely, that which is peculiar and proper unto Christians, which
has none greater and more excellent then it self; the promise I mean, of
that truly blessed and eternal life; which though it were not openly promised
to them, but only to us, yet it shall be given to them as well as to us. But
the word promise is taken here materially for the thing promised.

40. God having provided some better thing for us] He adds here the cause why
they have not yet received the promise. For the Hebrews might think, that God
in this respect had not dealt so well with them, that they had not yet received
the reward of their faith, works and sufferings. The Author therefore meets
with such surmifes, and shows it was done for this reason, because God had
provided some better thing for us. A question.
But here it may be demanded, wherein our condition is the better, in that they
might not receive that promise, nor be perfected without us? For if they had
received eternal happiness before, would the sum of our happiness have
been any thing the less? Or is our happiness any thing the greater, because
they are made to stay for it? The Answer to this may be twofold, and according
to the twofold Answer, there will arise a twofold sense of these words. Answer
1.
The first Answer is, That God would herein provide for our dignity, and make
our happiness the more illustrious. For although if we regard the thing it
self, nothing would either be taken from our happiness, if they had obtained
eternal life without us or before us; or will now accrue unto it, that they
have it not without us, but together with us; yet respectively and
comparatively, we should have been far inferior unto them, if they without
staying for us, had been long since invested in heavenly joys. But now, seeing
they are constrained to stay for us, and may not enjoy that promise before us;
hence appears, that the dignity of Christians is very great, and that their
happiness is made much more conspicuous; seeing there are none who can seem
to obscure it, by preventing it with a fuller or more early happiness. And
certainly very convenient it was, that God should so provide for it, that they
who had obeyed him, only according to the ordinances of Moses, should not
prevent in happiness those who compose their lives and manners according to
the perfect Law and discipline of Christ; and that they who never had any open
promise of eternal life, should enjoy that life before them, who had an open
and clear Covenant for it. But rather, seeing by Gods goodness they were to
be made equal to Christians in the reward of that happiness, should in this be
made inferior to Christians, in staying for them to receive Gods promises; and
that as secondary guests, who were not openly invited to the banquet, they
should have their access, by, and with them, who were truly and first
invited; and not enjoy those heavenly banquets so long a time before these. And
therefore the words some better thing] may be taken two ways; either as our
state compared with their state, may be said to be better; or as our present
state compared with our future state may be said better, if they had received
Gods promise long before us. But because that in it self does neither increase
our future happiness, nor in like manner does decrease their future happiness,
therefore the Author seems to say some better thing to show, that he
understands some such better thing, which only in some sense and in some
respect is better. For the word some thing is often used in such forms of
speech, to diminish the signification, and detract somewhat from the propriety
of the word whereto it is adjoined. Answer. 2.
The other answer which happily is more suitable to the fense and words of the
Author, is this. The Author therefore speaks thus, to intimate that the end of
the world is at hand, when the reward of eternal life shall be given to the
godly that believe in God; wherefore, if those ancient worshippers of God had
long since enjoyed it, we that were not then in being might have failed of it.
Therefore lest we should be excluded of it, God did defer both the end of
the world, and the reward of his worshippers; and by this means provided
something better for us, then otherwise should have been, if they who went
before us, without staying for us, while we were yet unborn, had alone by
themselves attained eternal happiness. For the reasons why we rest not in
the former sense, are. 1. Because by admitting that sense, it does not
sufficiently appear, how God has truly and really made our condition better
by this, that they who went before us, were not long since rewarded with
eternal life, but are made to stay for our salvation; whether our state be
compared with their state, or with our own future state. For certainly by
this means our state is not made better then theirs, but only each of our
states is made equal. Also how is our present state made hereby better then
our future, if God had otherwise determined it? For what was it, that God had
appointed unto us? was it not the reward of eternal life to be bestowed upon
us at the end of the world, in the consummation of this present age? but this
remains whole and entire unto us, neither is it really decreased if we suppose
them long since saved: neither is it increased, if we suppose them not saved.
They lose much by it, in that they yet enjoy not Gods promise of eternal life;
but what do we really gain by it? you will say, their condition would have
been better, and ours worse; which because now it is not worse, but equal to
theirs, therefore it may be said to be better now then otherwise it would have
been. But all this is rather subtlety of words, then solidity of matter. If
this had been the intent of the Authors mind, could he not, nay, must he not
have spoken much more clearly, thus? that God therefore has not yet given them
the reward of eternal life, lest they should be far superior unto us; and
so much the rather, because it does not forthwith follow, that our state is
therefore truly better, because it is not worse then theirs. For this would
indeed be true, if nothing were abated them: but seeing all that portion of
happiness whereby they were ancienter then we, is abated them; certainly by
this means our happiness is nothing more, but theirs only something less. And
the former sense requires that the particle without in the words of the Author,
should signify all one with before, that is, not to exclude us from perfecting
simply, but only from the same time of perfecting. But if this were the mind
of the Author, he might as easily have said before as without; yea, he should
have rather said it; seeing the usual force of the latter particle is simply
to separate and exclude that, whereto it is adjoined, who sees not, if we
respect the proper and native signification of the Authors words, that it is
all one as if he had said, they should not be perfected excluding us, or we not
being perfected? And howsoever the particle something does sometime diminish
the signification, yet the matter it self in this place seems to require,
that it signify no small or respective good, but some singular advantage
greatly necessary to our condition, which is the usual force of that particle.
For such a thing it must needs be, that was the cause, why such holy men, so
dear unto God, and dead so many ages past, should not to this day enjoy the
promise of God, and receave the reward of their labors and sufferings. And in
this argument, wherein we debate the causes, why God should for so many ages
defer the effect of his promise, what either may, or can, or must be brought
of greater moment, then that by this means, God in the mean time has
exceedingly provided for us, who should otherwise have been excluded from that
eternal happiness, if the time appointed for the perfecting of the godly, had
been long since expired? Piscator a good Interpreter had seen this sense, and
rightly explicated it, if he had not referred the word promise to the first
coming of Christ upon earth, contrary to the mind and scope of the Author,
but had related it to the reward of eternal life as he ought to have done.
Neither has any man cause to object, that persons yet unborne are
non-entities; and non-entities as we say, have neither affections nor
conditions, and therefore nothing can be done to them either better or worse,
nothing ordained or provided for their good or evil: or if all should be
continually borne, then we must fall upon an infinite proceeding, and so no
time would be fixed for the godly wherein to attain their reward. We
therefore answer, that non-entities are of two sorts, either such as actually
only have not being, although afterward they shall or may have it, or such as
necessarily neither have being, nor ever shall or can have it. Of these latter
nothing can be truly said or affirmed: but of the former non-entities many
things may and commonly are said, and their state may sundry ways be better or
worse; for hence both Philosophers and Lawyers call them possibilities. So
Christ said of his betrayer; It had been good for that man, if he had never
been borne, Mat. 26.24. For when Judas was a nonentity or yet unborne: yet
even then he was a possibility and might be borne; but his nonentity had been
better, if it had been an impossibility, never to have been borne. So
sometime we call them happy, who were not borne in troublesome and sad times;
whereto also in a manner we may refer the words of Christ; Behold the days
are coming, in the which they shall say. Blessed are the barren and the wombes
that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck, Luke 23.29. In like
manner, they who by their death have prevented some calamities by dying before
they suffered under them, are in that respect commonly called happy; because
they might have lived so long as to have suffered them. And in this sense a
Philosopher said, That it was best for a man not to be borne; and it was next
to best, to dye presently after he was borne. Contrarily, we often call them
unhappy, who dyed before they had brought their state to some happy condition,
or lived not to see those happy times that immediately succeeded their death.
Therefore in the number of these non-entities, they may be reckoned, who though
they were yet unborne, yet might have been borne. Hence with very good reason,
as we may call those unhappy who shall never be borne, but are intercepted by
the end of the world, and therefore shall never attain that heavenly and
eternal happiness: so much more are we happy and blessed, who are already
borne because by the providence and goodness of God the perfection of the
godly is deferred to our times, whereby there remains to us a passage and
entrance to it. And to comprise the matter in a few words and answer briefly.
In that decree of God, whereby he is said to have provided some better thing
for us, who were not yet borne, then it would have been, if he had long since
perfected the godly, we must be considered, neither as already borne, nor yet
as to be borne after infinite ages to come; but as they who might be borne,
while yet the end of the world was not for many ages to be deferred; and Gods
decree being passed, must be borne. Happy therefore we are by virtue of this
Decree; but otherwise we should have been unhappy. Better for us] that is,
for us that are Christians; for this must not be restrained only to the
Hebrews, to whom this Epistle was written: but must be extended to all men
under the same covenant, namely to all Christians. Whence in a manner it
appears, that the former examples of those who suffered such various
afflictions, belong to the Jews under the old Covenant, and not to the
Christians under the new. God having provided] Gods Decree is here signified.
For the thing here specified, depends only from the decree and ordinance of
God; as if he had said, God having procured; for to provide, is to procure.
That they without us should not be made perfect] How variously the Author uses
the word perfecting in this Epistle may appear from our former explications:
and here he takes it in a sense different from all the former. He said in the
last verse preceding, that they received not the promises; and now he iterates
the very same thing, and says in other words, they are not made perfect. And
therefore in this place to receive the promise, and to be made perfect, that
is, finally to attain eternal blessedness, is all one thing. And in this
sense it seems he used this word of Christ, before chap. 5.9. where he opposed
Christ being made perfect, to Christ subject unto sufferings. Now they who do
receive that promise of eternal life and happiness, are fitly said to be
perfected; first, because before they attain it, whether they are living or
dead, they are many ways imperfect; and secondly, because when they have
attained it, they have filled up the measure of their happiness, and made it
so absolute, that it neither has any defect, neither can it receive any
access, but is for ever finished.

The Contents of the 11. Chapter, are,
Notions. The principles of Faith are two. 1. Every subsistence of a thing
hoped for, is faith. 2. Every sight of a thing unseene, is faith, ver. 1.
The necessity of faith is, that without it, it is impossible to please God
ver. 6. The chief points or specialties of faith are two. 1. To believe that
God is. 2. To believe that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him,
v. 6.

1. Doctrine. By faith we know the world was made by God, v. 3. Reason. Because
in the things that are seen we have a sight of things unseene, ibid.
2. Doctrine. By faith the Patriarchs obtained a good report, ver. 2. Example.
As Abel, Enoch and Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Moses, Josua and Rahab, etc.
Reason. 1. Because they had a sight of things unseene which God had promised
them. 2. Because they had a subsistence of things hoped for, for they hoped for
the things promised.
3. Doctrine. The Patriarchs have not yet received the promise. Reason. Because
God has so provided that they without us should not be made perfect.

CHAPTER XII.
1. WHerefore seeing we also] He enters upon an exhortation to the Hebrews, to
be constant in the faith, especially not to be discouraged by reason of the
afflictions which they suffered. And this exhortation he inferres from the
examples specified in the former Chapter, and confirms it with new arguments,
for their better encouragement. We also, q.d. Let not us show out selves
inferior to them, whose examples were formerly mentioned: but let us also
perform the same things which they did. Are compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses] The Author adds this, because it is of great force to stir
us up unto the course and conflict of our faith. And in this his exhortation,
he uses an elegant allegory, drawn from the simily of a race which was a
thing then much in use. He brings us in, as it were upon a spacious theater,
whereunto a multitude of spectators are collected, which having filled all the
seats and rooms does encompasse the runners round about like a thick cloud:
and he makes us to be runners, having the eyes of such a multitude of
spectators upon us. And as anciently such a multitude of spectators did add
courage to the runners, and was a mighty spur unto them to contend for the
victory; so also to us, so many witnesses, who have themselves formerly
labored in the same race, should add courage, that we might run the race
begun to the utmost of our strength and breath. He calls them witnesses not
only in allusion to the spectators at a race (as we said) who are a kind of
witnesses of their activity that run; but also and much rather, because they
testify of God, of his righteousness and goodness, and all of them with one
voice, as it were, say, that God is, and is a rewarder of them that seek him;
and that he as the supreme depositary keeps the prize for them that run well;
that he is most faithful in his promises, and can even after death make them
happy, who have spent their life for his sake. For by witnesses in this place
we must chiefly understand them, who testify Gods faithfulness and goodness
with their blood; and hence are eminently called Martyrs, i. witnesses. A cloud
of witnesses] That is, a great multitude of witnesses, which carry the show and
bulk of a cloud. Hence God himself comparing the multitude of our sins to a
cloud, says, I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a
cloud thy sins, Isaiah 44.22. Let us lay aside every weight] He recedes not
from his simily proposed. For they that will contend in the running of a race,
must free themselves from all weights, and lighten themselves as much as they
can. By weight in this spiritual race of faith, we must understand the love
of this life, and the care of things pertaining to it; wherewith our souls are
burdened and pressed downward to the earth as it were with a great weight. And
the sin which does so easily beset us] He seems to allude to long and loose
garment, which unless they be laid aside, are a great hinderance to runners,
about whose legs such garments do easily wave and wrap themselves. By sin he
seems to mean all outward vicious acts, as before by weight, he signified the
inward vices of the soul. For vicious acts do easily insinuate themselves
upon us in our race of faith, and greatly retard us in our course begun,
unless we cast off all our love to sin; for as often as we commit an actual
sin, so often we fall as it were in our course of godliness. And let us
run with patience, the race that is set before us] This race, is the course
it self wherein we strive by running: for in the Greek it is (...), whereby is
signified all kind of strife in this manner, whether it be by running,
wrestling, hurling, or any other way: but here he speaks of running. Therefore
to run the race is nothing else but to strive by running; and by this strife
in running he means especially the strife of our faith; which consists in
this, that we never be cast in our hope of Gods promises made by Christ,
especially when we are to do or suffer some hard matter for Christ's sake. To
this strife particularly Paul exhorts his Timothy, when he calls upon him, to
fight the good fight of faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. And the very same is signified by
this Author, when in the next verse willing to excite us to this strife, and to
strengthen us for it, he requires us to look unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of our faith. For this we must therefore do, least we should waver in
our faith, fainting and failing under it; for this is opposed to the strife of
faith, ver 3. This race is said to be set before us, namely by God and Christ,
because the price or reward of eternal life is appointed us upon no other
condition, but of our running this race. And we are commanded to run with
patience] either because without patience it is impossible to keep our faith
with God: or rather because this race or strife of faith appears and shows it
self in nothing more, then in a constant suffering of adversities, in so much
that he who with an invincible courage does suffer all evils for Gods sake and
Christ, is thereby truly said to run the race of faith, things does strive
with afflictions, and will not be conquered or foiled by them.

2. Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of the faith] Here he shows,
from whence especially we must procure courage and strength for our race of
faith and patience; and what should incite us to run stoutly, and bear all
things patiently for righteousness sake? Namely, the example of the Captain
of our faith, upon whom we must cast and fasten the eyes of our mind;
considering seriously, both what he did and what he suffered; what a race he
ran, and what a prize he obtained having finished his course. But he calls him
not the Captain of faith simply, but of the faith, adding the article the, to
specify unto us some particular and singular faith, which is denominated from
him, and called the Christian faith, because Christ was the Author and Captain
of it; not only because he was the first that taught it, but also the first
that performed it, or the first that did run the race of it. And he is also
called the finisher of our faith, because as he was the first Author that began
it, so he is the finisher thereof to bring it to an issue and put an end unto
it; for a thing is then finished when it has attained the proper end. In like
manner, our faith shall be finished, when it is come to the issue of it,
whereby we attain the salvation of our souls, which as Peter says, is the
end of our faith, 1 Pet. 1.9. And this end is attained through Christ. For the
like reason it was, that this Author before Chap. 3. ver. 1. called Christ
Jesus the Apostle and high Priest of our profession. For the appellation of
Apostle, though it rather note that Christ was the first teacher of our faith,
then the first sufferer for it; and contrarily the appellation of the Captain
of our faith, which here the Author uses, notes rather the latter then the
former, yet both these appellations do tacitly include both. But Christ is our
high Priest especially therefore, because it is his office to procure the
expiation of our sins, and the eternal salvation of our souls: in which
point (as we said) consists the finishing and ending of our faith. For to
this present purpose this appellation of Christ is very suitable, and of great
force to strengthen our minds and confirm them against all afflictions. For
with what face should we forsake that faith, which has so great a Captain to
it, and has him for the finisher of it who is the Author of it? Who for the
joy that was set before him] Christ to obtain the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, and counterpoised the pain of death against the joy of
eternal life. Hence it appears, that the joy of heaven, cannot be gotten at
any less price then the cross, if need require. And he says this joy was set
before Christ, in allusion to the prize that is proposed to them that run in a
race, or strive at some other game. By Joy he understands that supreme and
heavenly happiness which Christ attained; and he calls it joy from the adjunct
of it, because it is accompanied with unspeakable and perpetual joy; and
withal is opposed to the pain of the Cross which he suffered. Of such high
advantage it is for thee, to endure trouble and torment for a small time, that
thereby thou may attain heavenly joys and pleasures for ever. Endured the
crosse] The cross has in it two things extremely bitter; extreme pain and
extreme shame: yet the shame of it, is to a noble spirit far more bitter then
the pain of it; and therefore the Author adds, Despising the shame] It was a
great shame and disgrace to the Son of God, who well knew the high dignity of
his person, after he had delivered so many gracious doctrines, and wrought so
many admirable miracles, after so great hope and expectation raised of him, to
be seized upon by hangmen, dragged to execution, nailed to a cross, lifted up
on high, to endure the faces and eyes of all men upon him, and be set as a
mark for the spears and darts of bitter tongues. Yet Christ despised all this
despite, all this shame and this disgrace, that for a momentany shame, be might
attain everlasting glory, and for a temporal pain on earth, eternal joy in
heaven. And is set down at the right hand of the throne of God] This is added
to show, that Christ was not frustrated of his hope, but that he received a
large reward of his faith and patience. To teach us, that if we also follow him
in this race, we shall have the like issue of our faith and patience. But the
great dignity and glory to Christ, that is signified by his sitting at the
right hand of Gods throne, is before explicated, Chap. 1. ver. 3. From this
place and the other Chap. 8.1. it appears, that when Christ is said to sit at
the right hand of God; by Gods right hand is not understood his power and
strength, as elsewhere it is; but in this phrase by a simily drawn from men,
is signified, that the place at Gods right hand is more honorable then that at
his left. For otherwise it were not rightly said, the right hand of the throne
of God; because a throne has no hand nor is supposed to have any, but only a
right side of it. And many times in the same sense, Christ is said to sit in
the plural number at the right hands of God, or his power. For when the power
of God is understood, or a right hand is attributed unto him by way of
analogy, it is not called the right hands of God in the plural number, but
his right hand in the singular. But when the right or left place is signified,
it is commonly expressed plurally by right or left hands, though it be uttered
in respect of one person only; See Mat. 20.21. and Mat. 25.33,34 41.

3. For consider him that endured such contradictions of sinners against
himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds.] He expresses the end
and use of the example of Christ, why we should diligently consider it;
because we are to make this use of it, that our minds may not be tired with
adversities and afflictions, and so we become wearied and faint in the course
of our faith and patience, which here by profession of Christ we have begun to
run.

4. For ye have not resisted unto blood striving against sin.] He exhorts
them with a new argument, to an invincible courage in bearing the afflictions
which they suffered. For it seems, he would make them somewhat ashamed, that
seeing the miseries wherewith they were pressed, were not so grievous, as that
hitherto they had drawn blood from them, yet they begun to fail in courage and
strength, contrary to Gods express monition. Here also he alludes to strifes,
yet such as were by fencing or fighting, and not by running. For sin would
beat us from our constancy of faith and piety toward God: but among the
afflictions which come to be suffered of us for the love of Christ, is the
abnegation or denial of sin, against which we must fight. In this fight
therefore, while the combat is but upon our goods, our credit and reputation,
the matter is not yet come to blood; but when cruelty, torture, and death
charge upon our bodies, then the business is in good earnest, and the fight
is in the heat. These Hebrews as it seems, were not yet in danger of their
lives for Christ: but their sufferings were only mockings, reproaches, and
spoiling of their goods, as appears, chap. 10. ver. 33.34. The Author
therefore shows what a shameful thing it is, to turn the back and fly at
the first skirmish, as it were, and entrance of the fight. But when he brings
in sin for their enemy with whom they are to deal, he does therein by a most
effectual argument, encourage them to an holy valor, lest they should fail in
their combat with an enemy so base and dangerous.

5. And ye have forgotten the exhortation.] And for and yet, by way of a
particle adversative. As if he had said. Though ye have not yet spent your life
and blood for the love of Christ: yet the divine admonition or exhortation is
slipped out of your mind, wherein ye are commanded to receive the chastning of
the Lord with a ready mind, and to bear it patiently. And consequently, ye
have forgotten your duty contained in that exhortation. For the Author does
not reprehend them merely for their memory that they had forgotten the words of
that exhortation: but for their negligence, in not performing the duty therein
commanded. We have said elsewhere, that he is said to remember a person or a
matter, who has a care of it: and therefore he that has not such care,
though otherwise he remember him in mind, does forget him. This has place
chiefly in commands, counsels, and exhortations, which are not given
therefore, only to remain in our memories; but they must so remain in our
memories, as that they be put in execution and actually performed. And when the
authority of the commander or admonisher is so great, that it is not likely,
but that he who does but only remember the command or monition, would obey it
with great reason, they may be said to forget it, who though they retain it in
a lively memory, yet obey it not. Which speaks unto you as unto children] The
Author commends this exhortation from the quality of it, that it is very
gentle and fatherly, in regard it terms them children to whom it is directed.
For who but a froward and obstinate person would not give way to such an
exhortation? The exhortation is said to speak by way of Metonymie, because he
that exhorts speaks by it, or rather because it is the very speech of him
that exhorts. Now the person who exhorts, is openly Solomon, but secretly
God, by whose instinct Solomon uttered this. Pro. 3.11. Therefore in this
exhortation God himself calls us his children; from whence it follows that
we should receive it readily, and observe it diligently. My son, despise not
thou the chastning of the Lord.] When we make God himself to speak and not
Solomon, then the name or Nowne of the Lord, must be supposed to be put for
the Pronowne my, after the Hebrew phrase. To despise, or (as it is in the
Hebrew) to reject the chastning of the Lord, is nothing else but an
unwillingnesse to bear it patiently, but to kick against it as against a prick.
By the chastning of the Lord, the Author understands the afflictions, which the
Hebrews suffered for Christ's sake: because many times God is wont to use such
afflictions, not only to make trial of men, but to make men good, and to
amend them by a fatherly correction. And we must conceive that this had then
befallen those Hebrews. Nor faint when thou art rebuked of him.] Another abuse
of Gods chastening quite contrary to the former; and that is, to faint and
sink down under it. For some when they are chastned of God, are of a
stubborn and impatient spirit: others are soft natured, or have no spirit at
all; whence it comes to pass, that being overcome with afflictions, they faint
and forsaking their trust and hope in God, turn aside from the paths of
righteousness.

6. For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth] The reason expressed in the
exhortation it self, why we should be obedient unto it, is because chastening
is an effect and an argument of Gods love toward us: And what proceeds from
Gods love, must not be despised or rejected, but be held in high esteem;
neither must it deject our minds from faith and hope in God, but rather raise
and encourage us to receive it. But we must note, that chastisement, that is,
that correction or punishment which God inflicts upon us for our amendment, is
a token and effect of Gods love; and not every punishment, which oftentimes is
laid on men for their destruction: for this is the effect of Gods wrath and
indignation, against which David supplicates in the sixth Psalm. Besides, this
reason must be taken with a limitation; for God does not chastise every one
whom he loves (if we take chastising not simply for affliction, but for a
punishment) but then only when they deserve chastising, as for the most part
they do. But it appears by the scope and intent of the Author, that these
words must be taken, as if it had been said, Whom the Lord loves, he at last
chastises, or sometime chastises. Which sentence is more fully expressed in
the Hebrew text, if we look upon the following words, as we shall see
presently. For otherwise we could not hence gather, that chastising is always
an effect and token of Gods love. For saving the truth of the words in the
text, a man may imagine, that whom God loves, he chastises, but not
conversly, that whom he chastises he loves: so that it may be doubted,
whether chastising proceed from Gods love or hatred. Neither are these sayings
repugnant, Whom the Lord loves he chastises; and whom he loves not, he
chastises; seeing God may chastise both these; unless as we said, we
understand the particle at last in the latter part of the former saying; which
in such sayings falls out very frequently. And scourges every son whom he
receiveth] This is but a repetition of the same saying. In the Hebrew it is,
even as a father the son in whom he delights; which is nothing else but the
converse of the former saying; as if Solomon had said, whom God loves, he
chastises, and whom he chastises, he loves. So that chastising is a most
certain and undoubted effect and token of Gods love. Whom he receives, i. whom
God adopteth, acknowledges and accounts for his Son. For God does not
acknowledge all for sons, who call themselves the Sons of God.

7. If ye endure chastning, God deals with you as with sons.] From the former
divine exhortation, the Author frames in a manner a new argument, to excite
them unto patience in suffering of afflictions; because then God deals with
them as with sons. Ye have this commodity by your patience, that God offers
himself unto you as unto children, and he on his part performs the office of
a Father; so thereby ye have God for your Father. And God delights in him
whom he chastises as a father in his son. For what son is he whom the
father chastises not? It is the office of the father to chastise the son
that deserves it; and he always does it, unless many and great injuries have
overcome his patience; and there be something that he fears, more then he
blames.

8. But if ye be without chastisement] To be without chastisement in this
verse; is opposed to endure chastening in the former verse: whence it appears,
that the word endure in the former verse does not signify the virtue of
patience which is a duty belonging to the godly; but only the suffering or
sense of pain which concerns their state and condition. He shows on the
other part, illustrating the thing from the contrary, what an inconvenience it
is for a man to be without chastisement, and to receive no trouble nor evil
from God. And the inconvenience is this, that such go not for sons, but are
reputed of God as bastards and children of adultery, and changelings; which of
all inconveniences is to man the greatest. We must therefore needs choose one of
these two, either to be acknowledged for the sons of God, and so undergo
chastisement: or if we will not be chastised, we must be accounted bastards.
Whereof all are partakers] To be the Son of God, and to be chastised (at least
as often as need requires) are conditions so connexed and coupled between
themselves, that all the Sons of God must needs undergo this Law, all must
needs feel their Fathers hand, and be partakers of chastisement. All must
needs be partakers hereof, yet not universally, but generally; because there
are few sons, or rather but one only, who deserved not chastisement, neither
had any need of it. And yet even he was exercised with hard conditions, not
that he was partaker of chastisement properly; that is, of punishment; for
what place could punishment have in him that was most innocent: but that by his
stripes and wounds we might be perfectly healed? Hence the chastisement of our
peace, or that brought us true peace and happiness, is said to have been upon
him, Esaias 53.5. in which place, the word chastisement must by way of synecdoche
be taken for affliction. Then are ye bastards, and not sons.] Ye are not
truly borne of God, not such whom God acknowledges for his sons and
children; but ye are bastards and changelings. For they are bastards who go
for the sons of such a man, yet indeed were not begotten of him; and such are
not always acknowledged of their carnal fathers; but our spiritual Father
cannot be deceived, for he knows all that are not borne of him, and
acknowledges them for none of his, and thereupon vouchsafes not to bestow any
fatherly care and chastisement for the framing of their manners and behavior.

9. Further more we have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us] He shows
by another argument, which is yet of affinity with the former, that we must
endure Gods chastisements, and so endure them, that thereby we become corrected
and amended; for such as do this, they only receive chastisement as they ought.
The fathers of our flesh are our carnal fathers, that begat us according to
the flesh, and produced us into this carnal life; for they are opposed unto
the Father of spirits, as it presently follows in this verse. And we gave them
reverence] By the chastisements of our carnal fathers we were often made
ashamed, both by the punishment and by the fault, and were ashamed of both. For
chastisement brings with it, not only pain but shame: But if we refer this
to our fathers, the sense will be, that by their chastisement we were so
affected, as to reverence them, and for shame and fear of them, durst not
offend against them. But if our carnal fathers who were the authors of our
carnal life only, could by their chastisement effect this in us; how much more
convenient is it, that the chastisement of our spiritual Father should produce
in us the like effect? Shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the
Father of spirits?] To be in subjection, is in this place, to receive and
endure that chastisement which proceeds from God with a ready and patient
mind; and thereupon to show our selves tractable and obedient unto him in all
those things for the amendment whereof he chastised us. The Father of spirits]
That is God, who is opposed to the fathers of our flesh; to show us, how much
more it becomes us, to be in subjection unto him, then unto these, because the
spirit is far more noble and excellent then the flesh. For God is not therefore
called the father of spirits, and opposed to the fathers of our flesh, as if we
had received our spirit only whereby we live and understand from God, and our
flesh only from our parents; seeing God is no less the Author and Creator of
the one then of the other. But by spirit is meant all that which pertaines to
our spirit, and makes us to be spiritual; for this we owe to no other person
but to our heavenly father. But he is called the father of spirits, because he
has begotten us according to the spirit, and he alone has begotten all of us.
And live] He shows the fruit and end of our subjection, the more to incite us
thereto. And this fruit is eternal life, which to attain is truly to live.
Whence oftentimes it is eminently called by the sole name of life.

10. And they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure]
Because he had said we should live, if we would be in subjection to the Father
of spirits, tacitly intimating, that this effect would not follow upon our
subjection to our carnal fathers; therefore now he shows, what great
difference there is, between the end and scope whereat our carnal fathers
aim, as they are opposed to our spiritual father, and in this respect are not
subservient unto him, and that end which God proposes in the chastisement of
his children. Whereupon it also follows, that we should far more willingly
submit our selves to endure the chastisements of God then of them; in regard
they are intended for a far greater good unto us, then the chastisements of
our carnal fathers. For a few days, the good or benefit of their chastisement
is of use unto us, but for a few days, that we may pass over this life which
is concluded within the compass of a short time, the more conveniently and
honestly. For the Author by these words intends not to say, that the
chastisement of our fathers lasts not long: but passes away together with
our childhood and youth; for what does this make to the purpose? Must we
therefore be rather the more in subjection unto God, because his chastisement
lasts a long time or through all our life? Besides, the mind of the Author
is to inculcate into us, rather the shortness of Gods chastisement, then the
length of it; as we might perceive before, chap. 10. ver. 37. after their own
pleasure] They in their chastisements of us did not always seek our benefit,
but were many times indulgent to their own humors and passions; or if in some
measure they sought our benefit, yet they did not always use a right judgment
therein. They did therein as it seemed good unto them, sometime after our
desert, and sometime after their own pleasure; and oftentimes erred through
mis-affection or indiscretion. But he for our profit] But God is such a father
that when he chasteneth his children, he always directs his eye to our benefit
and profit; neither does ever miss of his intent. That we might be partakers
of his holiness.] Here he specifies in particular the profit we gain from
Gods chastisement; that thereby we are sanctified in so great a measure as to
partake of his holiness; for the holiness thereby wrought in us, is in a
manner divine, resembling the holiness of God. Wherein is also contained by
way of Metonymy the fruit of this holiness, which is everlasting happiness.

11. Now no chastening for the present] He seems here to take away an
objection. Some man might say, that all chastisement of it own nature is
unpleasing and bitter; and therefore it is an hard matter to endure it with
patience. The Author confesses this to be true, in respect of some time, that
chastisement for the time present, all the while the affliction of it lasts,
seems not so good, as indeed it is. Seems to be joyous] It does not appear
or seem unto us to tend unto joy; or the present sowrenesse and bitterness of
chastisement, while the smart of it is upon us, does not seem to us, of that
quality, that it should determine and end in great joy and pleasure. But
grievous.] It seems to bring nothing else unto us but smart and grief; for
all chastisement brings grief or pain, else it should not be chastisement;
for therefore we are chastised, that the pain of the punishment might repel
the lust of sin. Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousnesse] The fruit of righteousness signifies the fruit that is
righteousness, by a genetive of the difference. And the word righteousness
does in this place signify both the habit of doing righteously, and by way of
Metonymy, the effect or reward following it, which is Justification, or the
having of a right to life eternal: as in the former verse holiness signified,
both holiness of manners, and the happiness following upon it. And this fruit
is called peaceable, not only in respect of righteousness properly taken,
which brings us peace, that is, happiness: but in respect of our justification
to life eternal; because that consists in true peace which is our final
happiness, and brings it with it. In a sense not unlike, Paul said, that
blessed hope, Tit. 2.13. for hope is there taken materially for the thing
hoped, which is eternal life; which is called blessed, because it is
blessedness it self, and makes them blessed who attain it. Unto them which
are exercised thereby.] He specifies here the persons to whom this peaceable
fruit accrews, and they are such as are exercised by chastisement; for
chastisement is an exercise to godliness and righteousness. And they are said
to be exercised by chastisement, who either simply have been agitated and
afflicted with corrections, yet so as tacitly it must be supposed, that the
persons thus exercised, did profit in the course of virtue and piety as much as
need required; or who by their chastisements unlearned to do evil, and whose
mind by that means was framed to every good habit of well-doing; so that
withal is also signified the effect of that chastisement, together with the
persons profited by it.

12. Wherefore lift up the hands which hang downe] After the Author had showed
the great profit which we receive by the chastisements of God; he from thence
inferres an exhortation, that therefore we should not let fall our spirits, but
rather raise them up, and with all alacrity proceed in the work and course of
Christian piety. He terms their hands hanging down, because they had been
remiss in the works of Christian duties, being tired as it were with diverse
afflictions. He would therefore have them, not yield to afflictions, but raise
up their courage and stoutly go on in their works began of Christian piety;
considering they saw that their afflictions proceeded from Gods love for their
great benefit and profit. And the feeble knees] He draws a comparison from a
man wearied with running or laboring, when the strength of the sinews is so
loosened, that the hands hang and the knees totter, and all the members seem
as it were out of joint. The strength of these parts both of hands and knees
they must resume, and proceed afresh in the course of Christianity till they
have finished the race of it.

13. And make straight paths for your feet] By paths he understands our
accustomed actions, which are frequently used of us, as paths use to be. And
our paths are then straight, when they answer the rule of Christian precepts
and are agreeable unto it. The Author in these words seems particularly to
admonish the Hebrews, that they should deal heartily and openly in the
profession of Christian verity, and not seek any by-ways of hypocrisy and
dissimulation: For they are said to walk straight, who deal heartily and
openly, which Paul reproving Peter, calls walking uprightly, Gal. 2.14.
Contrarily, they who deal not heartily, seem to walk in bypath and by
turnings and windings. Lest that which is lame be turned out of the way] He
halteth or goes lame, that in professing of the truth, or in his life and
manners deals not so, as becomes him. The Author intimates, that among them
to whom he wrote, there were some who halted in the way of Christian verity
and piety; and did incline sometime one way, sometime another; who indeed did
not wholly forsake the Christian Religion, yet were greatly propense to the
Jewish; or to avoid dangers and persecutions, seemed propense. In which sense
Elias long since demanded of the Israelites, who to comply with Ahab joined in
a manner the worship of Baal with the worship of the true God, and yet adhered
firmly to neither. How long halt ye between two opinion? 1 King. 18.21. Be
turned out of the way] The Greek word is (...), which may be taken in two
senses; either for the luxation or sprayning of some member or joint necessary
for walking, which being dislocated will not suffer us to walk at all, but
wholly takes away all use of walking; or else for straying from the way, which
to most Interpreters seems most probable. The former of these agrees best with
the Metaphor of halting and healing, which the Author mentions presently
after: but the latter suits best with the preceding words, wherein we are
commanded to make straight paths for our feet; and that to the end, that he
who halteth in the path of Christianity might not be turned out of the way, so
that, to make straight paths, and be turned out of the way are in a manner
opposed. For if he, who in the right way makes straight paths, or goes
straight on, does not err from the right way; then certainly he that erreth
or turns out of the way, makes not straight paths, But it easily falls out,
that he who halteth in the path, does at last wholly forsake it, and turns
aside to the by-ways of vices. But it is not necessary, that the healing which
he mentions in the words immediately following, should be properly and directly
opposed to turning out of the way, but only that not turning out of the way,
should be somewhat less then healing. For it is clear, that the Author
compares things unequal between themselves, as appears by the particle
rather; when he says; But let it rather be healed.] This healing here is
opposed to the halting before, thus. Let him that halteth or goes lame, not
turn out of the way of piety; or if he have turned our of it, let him return
into it again, and leave his lamenesse or halting therein, which is to be
healed of it: that being healed, he may walk on uprightly and strongly,
lifting up the knees that were feeble, and fill his mind with alacrity in the
service of God and Christ; for for want of this alacrity, the spiritual
lamenes or halting comes upon him.

14 Follow peace with all men] Having finished his former exhortation to
constancy in the faith, he now adds some precepts of Christian piety; whereof
the first is, to follow peace with all men. Which precept is especially most
necessary to be observed of Christians, being persons exposed to all men's
hatred, not only for the attaining of salvation, but also for the avoiding of
diverse calamities; as Peter teaches us. 1. Pet. 3.13. And holinesse] Some
think that the word holiness in this place, signifies only chastity, as we
see Paul understands it. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. and 1. Tim. 2.15. But there is no just
reason, why we should restrain a sentence which may have most conveniently a
general sense, and streighten it to design only chastity; seeing other
Christian virtues pertain no less then it to Christian sanctification, and
separation from the profane multitude of the world. See Ephesians. 5.26. where the
word sanctifying or hallowing is extended to signify the way of all piety.
Without which no man shall see the Lord.] Because in the Greek the article the
is prefixed before the Lord, therefore according to the common language of the
new Covenant, we must here understand the Lord Jesus Christ, whom he that
shall see, shall also see God himself. And to see the Lord, and by him to see
God, contains all our future happiness of immortality; seeing, see him we
cannot before we are made like him in nature, by being made immortal. For this
sight of God must be understood of a clear sight, and such an one, whereby, as
John speaks, 1. Epist. 3.2. We shall see God and Christ as they are; and of a
continual sight that shall last for ever; and a sight that shall flow from our
conversation and company with the Lord. Wherefore he that desires the
everlasting sight of God and Christ, let him seriously endeavor to be holy,
that is, to sequester and separate himself from the profane multitude of the
world, not only in profession, but in life and manners. For he to whom this
holiness is wanting, does in vain, poor wretch, flatter himself with the hope
of happiness.

15. Looking ailigently] Another part of our duty is here declared; Namely,
that we should not only have a diligent care of our own lives, but we should
also be as it were visitors and overseers one of another; that carrying a
mutual and common care for our common salvation, we might so much the more
easily and certainly attain it. Left any man fall of the grace of God,] This is
the thing against which we must provide and look diligently that it happen not
amongst us. By this grace is understood the grace of the Gospel, which is
conveyed unto men, by Christ, then which no greater grace could possibly be
done to mortal men. That man is said to fail, who either stands still under
this grace, or draws back from it; as we saw before, chap. 4.1. Such are all
they who forsake the most sacred Religion of Christ, and will follow his
Standerd no longer. Lest any root of bitterness springing up, trouble you.]
The Author here alludes to the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.18. Wherein he
likewise speaks of Apostats. By root of bitterness (which is an Hebraisme
for a bitter root) he understands Apostats; who are called bitter, because both
they themselves are bitter and unsavory to God, and to the godly, and also
because they bring forth fruit like themselves, that is, very bitter and sour.
This root springs up, or grows, when a man dares utter unto others that
Apostacy which he had before, but conceived in his mind, and only cherished
in his own bosom: or when it so increases and gathers strength in one
person, that at last it spreads the infection of it upon others. For the manner
of it is for the most part to grow up and get strength by degrees; as faith
does, which is contrary to it; for that which at the first is but small and
weak, does afterward increase and strengthen. And Apostasy does breed trouble,
when it opposes the growth of faith and a good life in others; as plants and
trees set too near, hinder one another growth, or as weeds hinder the growth
of corn. Although the Greek word (...), does properly signify to trouble and
hinder a man's rest; which Apostats also commit, for they trouble the quiet and
peace of the Church. And thereby many be defiled] Pollution or defiling in this
place, seems to be put for infection; for many times by defiling, a thing is
infected. So a garment defiled by the flesh, is said to be infected or spotted.
Jude 23. by a Metaphor taken from the body, and a garment thereby infected with
the plague. And hither we may refer that which is said of the tongue,) that
it defiles the whole body. Jam. 3.6. where defiling, seems to be put for
infecting; for in this sense the Metaphor is the more elegant; whereupon it is
said a little after at the 8. verse, that the tongue is full of deadly poison.
The same therefore might be intended in this place, if we respect the sense
of it. For things properly are not defiled by roots, but infected; for plants
sometime do infect plants by their mutual contagion or touch of one another,
yea by their very shadow which they cast upon other plants. But it may be the
Author receding from the Metaphor of roots does relate unto the persons of
whom he spoke, who by another Metaphor are said to be defiled, as often as they
are infected with error or sin.

16. Lest there be any fornicator or profane person as Esau.] It is doubtful
whether both these, the fornicator and profane person be to be referred to
Esau. Of Esaus fornication we read nothing in the holy Scriptures, unless we
refer hither his marriage with the women of Canaan, against the manner and
custom of those holy men, who would not mingle their sons seasoned with the
true worship of God, with their daughters, who were destitute of the knowledge
of God. Therefore they might account such marriage unclean and incestuous. And
certainly we see God was provoked in this case, and thereby induced to bring
the flood upon the whole world. Genesis 6.2. etc. Besides, we read in particular
of the wives of Esau, that they offended the mind of Isaac and Rebecca, in so
much that Rebecca said to Isaac, I am weary of my life, because of the
daughters of Heth. i. (The wives of Esau) if Jacob take a wife of the daughters
of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land, what good shall
my life do me? Genesis 27.46. And Isaac calling Jacob to him, charged him,
saying, Thou shall not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan; Arise, go to
Padan aram to the house of Bethuel thy mothers father, and take thee a wife
from thence of the daughters of Laban thy mothers brother, Genesis 28.1.2. See
also in the same Chap. ver. 6 7.8. For although Esaus wives might be
unpleasing and distastefull to Isaac and Rebecca by reason of their rudeness,
insolences, and other vices, yet it is more likely, it was because they sprang
from wicked parents and came from a profane stock, wholly allien from the
Religion and worship of the true God, and were superstitiously addicted to
religions false and impious. It appears also indeed that the family of Bethuel
and Laban himself, whose daughters Jacob afterward married, was with all his
household given to Idolatry and the worship of false gods, and was so bred from
his very ancestors; as appears, Genesis 31.19,30,32. and Joshua 24.2. yet it
sufficiently appears also, that in that family the knowledge and worship of the
true God also was not wholly extinct, as in the time of Ahab it was not wholly
extinct in the Kingdom of Israel, see Genesis 24.50,51. and Genesis 29.32,33. and
Genesis 30.6,27. and Genesis 31.16,24,49,50. But the Canaanites where wholly ignorant
and void of the true God. And what difference there is between those, who
wholly renouncing the worship of the true God, serve only false gods and idols,
and those who join the worship of the true God, with idolatry and the worship
of false gods, does easily appear from 2 King. 17.24. and so on to the end.
Wherefore although Labans daughters were not free from the worship of false
gods, as appears from the passage formerly cited, Genesis 31.19,32. and Genesis 35.2.
yet seeing they were also seasoned with the knowledge of the true God, they
were therefore the less profane, and came from a stock the less wicked, and
seeing there could be found no women better, who were addicted only to the
true Religion, it was therefore most fit as the case stood, that the sons of
holy men should take their wives from these, and wave the women of Canaan, who
were wholly profane and wicked. The Author therefore might tax these
marriages in Esau as profane, unclean and incestuous: which also are most
carefully to be avoided of all Christians; and so much the more, as they are
more holy then the sons of the Patriarchs. Notwithstanding the Author seems
properly to brand that fornication, which was so grown into custom among the
Gentiles, that it was scarce accounted any vice or dishonesty, as it plainly
appears by the holy Scriptures, see Acts 15.20,29. Romans 1.29. 1 Corinthians. 6.13.
And this sin he would have to be far from Christians. And in the prohibition of
fornication is included also the prohibition of adultery, and of all kind of
unclean pleasures, because they are greater sins. Or profane person] That
person properly is profane, who esteems nothing holy, who either despises
things holy, or discernes them not from things common. How this should properly
agree to Esau, it does not equally appear. For the birthright which he
despised and sold for so base a price, was not a thing properly holy, though it
were a singular privilege, and not to be despised: either therefore it is not
Esau who is called profane, but only he is proposed for an example of a
profane person, in regard he did an act resembling profaneness. Or if he
himself be called a profane person, he deserved that appellation by his
likeness to a profane person, especially seeing his fact seems to be a sign
of a profane person. Who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright.] The
first borne both seemed in a manner peculiarly sacred unto God, and were the
first and chief heirs of then parents, and by a natural right had a
prerogative and preeminence above their brethren. Whence under the Law the
first borne was to have a double portion out of his fathers inheritance, which
came to as much as any two of his brethren, Deuteronomy. 21.17. Hence we read that the
dignity royal was devolved from Reuben the firstborn of Jacob unto Judah,
passing by also Simeon and Levi who were elder then Judah; because all these
had defiled themselves with wickedness. Reuben because he had gone up to his
fathers bed; and the rest because they had stained their hands with the murder
of the Sichemites, and had made themselves incapable of that dignity. If
therefore Esau were filthy and profane, because he sold his birthright for a
morsel of meat; how much more are they filthy, profane and wicked, who being
chosen and adopted for the Sons of God in Christ, do esteem so basely of
their rights to heaven, which God through his infinite mercy has conferred upon
them, that they countervalue them with fornications, gluttonies, and other base
pleasures and sins?

17. For ye know that afterward when he would have inherited the blessing, he
was rejected] That we might learn what great calamity is incident to profane
persons such as Esau was, and consequently how much it concerns us to shun
profaneness; therefore the Author here shows what great incommondity it
brought unto Esau, that afterward when he would have inherited the blessing due
by the right of nature to the firstborn above others, and sued to his father
Isaac for it, he was rejected, because he had already sold it unto Jacob, and
Jacob had already gotten that blessing, God so ordering the matter; the same
calamity therefore remains to all those, that by lusts and unclean pleasures,
and such like sins disable themselves from the right of that eternal
blessing, whereto God of his great mercy had admitted them by adopting them for
his sons. For he had no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with
teares] The Author therefore adds this, lest any profane person should
think, that he could move God afterward by his tears and cries, not to deprive
him finally of that blessing which is heavenly happiness. For the same
condition will befall them that happened unto Esau, who found no place for
repentance, though he sought it earnestly with tears and cries as the
Scriptures testify. From this place it clearly appears, that to enjoy the
birthright and the chief blessing otherwise due of course to the firstborn
were things distinct. And Esau though he had not sold his birthright, might
notwithstanding, God so willing and disposing, have failed of the chief
blessing, because it was already settled upon Jacob. For if Esau having now sol^
and lost his birthright, would yet have gotten the chief blessing, and did
sue with prayers and tears to his father for it; why might not Jacob though he
had not gotten the birthright, aspire to the blessing? was it not free for God
to bestow it rather upon Jacob then Esau? Although therefore without the
rejection of his birthright, Esau might not be preferred before Jacob for the
blessing, yet seeing he had for merly despised his birthright, he was
altogether worthy to lose the fruit of it also, that so he might fail of the
blessing not only by Gods decree and pleasure, but by his own fault and
demerit. The pronoune it though it may be relative to the blessing, yet it
rather seems referable to repentance; and yet not to the repentance of Esau,
but of Isaac: For Esau must be supposed to seek that which he found not; for
the Author does manifestly oppose these two one to the other, but he found not
repentance, and therefore he sought repentance. For to find no place of
repentance is all one with not to find repentance, that the form of the
opposition may the better appear; unless we say that one thing was sought,
and another was not found; for the thing whose place cannot be found, that
thing cannot be made existent. But now seeing Esau sought not his own
repentance, for he did repent of his fact, and testified his sorrow with tears
and cries, it remains therefore that by that repentance whose place could not
be found, we understand the repentance of Isaac; whereto Esau by his weeping
and complaints would move Isaac, that he would revoke the blessing given to
Jacob, and translate it upon himself. But he was therein disappointed and
frustrated; for his tears and cries came too late and did not help him. And
this point the Author leaves to the consideration of all profane persons, that
after they have rejected or neglected their right to eternal salvation, their
tears and cries will avail them nothing, if they come too late, as all those
do, which only then are powered forth, when the time is past for amendment of
life, and the time already come for judgment and punishment; or else their
tears are not serious enough, and effectual to a new course of life, and to
true holiness for the recovery of that right which they had lost. For the
Author had determined it before, that without holiness no man should see the
Lord, ver. 14. And therefore a matter of this consequence must not think to be
gained only with cries and tears; wherein profane persons can be as abundant,
and commonly are more fluent then the true Saints of God. Hence it is manifest,
what we are to think of that repentance and sorrow of mind as they call it,
which appears in persons dying; who while they lived and were healthy, followed
their sins, or as the Author said before, sinned willingly after they had
received the knowledge of the truth. For upon their deathbed, the time of a
true fruitful repentance is past, and they are called as it were to the
tribunal of Gods judgment. For although it is better even then, to sue also
for Gods mercy with tears and cries, then by casting away of all hope, to do
nothing at all for the compassing of mercy; yet by force of the new Covenant,
it death follow, and no time granted them for the putting off the old man with
his works, and putting on the new, they cannot be saved. Therefore such have
need of some extraordinary grace and favor from God, which we have reason to
think befalls but a few, and to none of those who lived profanely as Esau did.

18. For ye are not come] Here begins another part of the Chapter, wherein the
Author uses a new argument to persuade them, from falling from the Grace of
God, and Religion of Christ, and from being so profane, as to be more
indulgent to fornications, uncleanness and other sins, then to enjoy that
happiness whereto they have gotten a right by their faith in Christ. For he
shows, of what great privileges they are made partakers, by receiving the
Religion of Christ; and this he does by framing of a comparison of them with
those things which long since befell to their ancestors in the publishing of
the Law at Mount Sinai. And withal he does tacitly disparage that glorious and
terrible manner wherein the Law was proclaimed, which happily was no small
motive to the Hebrews, to think that they were not to forsake the Law; whose
proclamation was performed with such Majesty. Having showed the great benefits
accruing by the Gospel, he thence infers, that they ought with all their
endeavor to obey the voice of the Gospel; otherwise they shall fall upon
terrible and infallible judgments, not amoveable by any tears and cries.
First, therefore he mentions the things that of old happened to the Israelites
at the publication of the Law; and afterward to them he opposes the things
happening to Christians at the publication of the Gospel. For (says he) ye
are not come to the Mount that might be touched] Ye came not, namely, then when
ye were initiated unto Christ, and were made members or subjects unto him, as
our ancestors came long since, when they became bound to the rules of the Law.
And the things whereto the Israelites then came, he shows to be partly
contemptible, partly terrible. Mount Sinai was a thing contemptible, which he
therefore terms the tractable Mount, or the Mount that might be touched; not
only because it might be so, but because it often had been so; for many times
it had been both touched and trampled on both by men and beasts, whereto it was
no less exposed then any other Mountain. The Israelites came to this Mount
because by Gods command they were assembled at the foot of it, that there they
might hear God delivering the Law from the Mount. And that burned with fire]
But the rest of the things that hereupon he mentions are very terrible; for the
Mount burned with fire, which was so great and so high, that it burned up unto
heaven, as the sacred History relates it. Nor unto blackness, and darkness,
and tempest.] By blackness we may understand that thick cloud, wherein God is
said to have descended; and the darkness was the great shadow which was caused
by the overspreading of that cloud, which being extremely thick must needs
induce an extraordinary darkness. And the Tempest was not by any violence of
winds and rain, as by lightnings and thunders, which rush with as much
violence as winds in a tempest, and many times are accompained with a tempest.
All things were composed and suited to inject fear and terror; for from the
thick cloud and the darkness that it caused, there issued forth a horrible
burning of fire, the lightnings shined out, and the thunders clapped; and
besides the thunders was a noise more fearful; for the noise of a trumpet
that sounded long and loud, and by degrees rose louder and louder filled the
whole air; and that nothing might want for rerrour, the whole Mount from the
top to the bottom trembled and quaked, to the extreme amazement of the people.

19. And the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words] The words were the
commandments of the Law, and the voice was the voice of God, wherewith the
words of the Law were uttered from the top of the Mount out of the midst of the
fire. For after that the whole multitude summoned by the sound of the trumpet
stood at the foot of the Mount ready to hear the Law, then God with a voice
undoubtedly no less terrible then the sound of the trumpet, published his will
in the Law. For how terrible Gods voice was, hereby it appears, in that the
Israclites supplicated that God would speak no more unto them. For so it
follows in the rest of the verse. Which voice they that heard, entreated that
the word should not be spoken to them any more] The voice of God was so
terrible to the people, that thereby they were afraid of their lives; and
therefore entreated Moses, that if there were any more to be spoken, he would
speak it, and not God, lest (say they) we dye. See Exodus 20.18,19. and Deuteronomy.
5.25,26.

20. For they could not endure that which was commanded] If these words cohere
with the words immediately following in the verse, and if so much as a beast
touch the Mountain it shall be stoned, etc. So that these words be taken for
that which was commanded, and which the people could not endure; we may well
doubt, how this agrees with the Sacred history, from whence no such things
seems to appear, that the people therefore deprecated Gods further speech
unto them, because they feared that command of not touching the Mount, and
could not endure it as a thing too grievous and dangerous to them: but rather
therefore, because they were terribly afraid of that fire, out of which God
spoke; and because they imagined that God could not long speak with man, but
that man, unable to bear the voice and majesty of God, must needs dye; as
appears by their words to Moses, See Deuteronomy. 5.24,25,26. Yet because by their
words there it is manifest, that they feared to be consumed by the fire out of
which God spoke; it seems that it could proceed from no other reason, but
because they were afraid they might easily offend God and provoke him,
whereupon that fire would take hold of them. For why otherwise should they be
so afraid of that fearful but harmless fire, which hurt Moses nothing at
all? And wherein could they sooner and more easily offend God, then if any of
them should pass the bounds set them by God and touch the Mount? especially
when it was also to be feared, that for the sin and rashness of some one or
a few, many might suffer, that might seem in some manner involved. For the
like had elsewhere fallen out in such offenses committed against the Majesty of
God; especially if the command were laid upon all, that no one might dare to
attempt, as here it was. Therefore it is credible, that the Israelites greatly
in fear of this command, of not touching the Mount, nor passing their bounds;
and of not touching them that did transgress herein, but killing them afar
off with stones or darts, did entreat that they might not be drawn out of
their tents to hear the Law proclaimed, and thereby put in danger of
transgressing that command and offending God; for while they kept within their
camp, they were safer from sinning; and if any rash person should go forth,
and dare to pass the bounds that God had set, he should do it at his own
peril only, and not endanger the people by it, who were innocent of it. But
being out of their camp, and drawn so near the Mount, it might easily fall
out that some beast or man, either pressed forward by the multitude, as it
often happens, or carried on with his own rash and curious desire to see God,
would hardly contain himself within the bounds limited; and having once
passed them, no man might follow him to draw him back, but they must kill him
afar off with stones and darts. And commonly in other men's dangers,
especially theirs who stand allied unto us, we forget our own; and therefore
it might easily fall out, that the father willing to save his son, and the son
his father, one friend another, and one neighbor another, many might involve
themselves in the common danger. What marvel therefore is it, if the
Israelites could not endure that which was commanded, for not touching the
Mount, nor passing their bounds, and therefore entreated that God would speak
to them no more, in regard of the great danger wherein they stood to hear him?
To him whom this way satisfies not, we may say, that the words they could not
endure that which was commanded, need not be referred to the words following,
but may be read in a parenthesis, to declare what was spoken next before. But
the following words, and if so much as a beast touch etc. being put by
themselves serve to amplify the great terror of that spectacle; as also does
the whole verse following. If we follow this way, then the Author seems to
have uttered these words in a double sense. One is historical according to the
ordinary construction of the words themselves: the other is typical, which is
as it were a figure or shadow of the things historied. The historical sense
is, that the Israelites could not endure that voice of God, whereby he gave
his Laws and commands. But this sense though it agree with the history, yet it
hardly complies with the words. The other sense shows not what was really done
of the Israelites, but what was represented or shadowed out by what was done.
The people entreated, that the word might be spoken to them no more. Why so?
Because (says the Author) they could not endure that which was commanded; for
the burden of the Commandments was too heavy for their shoulders. They do not
indeed say this, neither do they feel it, but by their fact and refusal they
intimate and shadow it. For as that voice wherewith the commandments were
published, being grievous and terrible, was a sign of the gravitie and
weightinesse of the commandments of the Law: so the peoples not enduring that
God should speak to them and command them, was a secret token that the people
could not bear the burden of the commands of the Law. For the sacred
Scriptures of the new Testament, when they speak of a thing which happened under
the Law, do commonly so speak of it, as if the thing were then done, which
then was only typically signified. Whereof we have an evident example in Paul,
when he says, that Moses put a veil over his face, that the children of
Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished. 2.
Cor. 3.13. when yet, if we look into the History, that was done for another
cause, namely, because the Israelites could not endure the luster of Moses his
face for the brightness of it: But because that vailing of Moses his face, was a
type and shadow of the thing which Paul mentions, therefore the thing it self
is said to be done. In a like manner of speech, the names of the antitypes are
sometime attributed to the types. So before chap. 11. ver. 26. we see that the
reproach of the Israelites in Egypt, was called the reproach of Christ. And
that we may go no farther, even in this chapter a little after, at the 25.
verse, this very refusal of the people, wherein they entreated, that God would
speak no more unto them, is taken for that, which in like manner was signified
by another type, namely for contumacy and disobedience against God. For when
the Author at the said 25. verse says, that they escaped not punishment, who
refused him that spoke on earth; it is manifest that he has relation to that
refusal, which he mentions in this place. But the refusal, which caused the
Israelites to incur Gods displeasure and be punished, and which we also must
by all means avoid, as by the Author we are admonished at the 25. verse, was
not their refusal to hear God speak unto them without an interpreter (for
that was wholly pleasing unto God, as we read, Deuteronomy. 5.28,29,30.) but the thing
that under that refusal was covertly shadowed, and tacitly presaged, namely,
that in future time it would come to pass, that they would indeed refuse to
hear, that is, to obey the voice of God. In like manner therefore in this
place the Israelites are said to refuse, that God should give them more
precepts, or speak further unto them, because they could not endure more, yea,
not them which they had heard already; not that this was their mind and sense,
but that this was the sense of their fact, as afterward the event showed. Shall
be stoned or thrust through with a dart.] This latter clause is not extant
either in the old Latin translation, nor in the Syriak: yet it manifestly
agrees with the History. Exodus 19.13. This was therefore commanded, because (as
we said) it was not lawful to recall or reduce either man or beast, that had
transgressed the bounds set, but it must be dispatched or slain a far off
with stones or darts. If so much as a beast] As if he had said, much less
might any man touch the Mount, who is the proper subject of sin and offense.

21. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and
quake. The Author amplifies the terrors of that sight; as if he had said; the
spectacle or sight that appeared, was so terrible and horrible, that not only
the promiscuous multitude stroke with extreme terror, entreated they might
not be constrained to stand and hear any more: but even Moses also who was the
Mediator and Messenger between God and the people, said, I exceedingly fear
and quake, That ever Moses said this, we no where read in the sacred History:
but without doubt the Author affirmed it, as known to him by some other
means. See chap. 9.19.

22. But ye are come] Here follows the other part of the comparison which the
Author had framed; wherein he shows, how far the things, whereof we are made
partakers by means of the Gospel, exceed those, which of old befell the
Israelites at the promulgation of the Law. This access or coming must be
understood of a spiritual access or approach, as unto things and persons
spiritual; for it is opposed to that carnal access or coming of the
Israelites to the earthly Mount. Yet this access must further be understood
diversely, according to diverse things and persons, which are here mentioned. In
general, it consists in a kind of conjunction, which we have with those
things and persons, as in some measure thence forward pertaining to us:
although also this conjunction be diverse according to the diversity of those
things and persons. Unto Mount Sion.] He opposes Mount Sion unto Mount Sinai,
whereto the Israelites came when the Law was published. But Mount Sion even
taken properly, was far more beautiful and comely then Mount Sinai, neither
was it seated in the wilderness, but in the land of Promise. And there can be no
doubt, but by Mount Sion in this place, that must be understood, whereto the
Mount was but a figure and a shadow. For as the thing figured is sometime used
for the figure, as was showed a little before: so much more often is the figure
taken for the thing figured. And although sometime by Sion and the holy Mount
the Church it self be shadowed; yet because Jerusalem the City of the living
God, which the Author mentions in the second place, may more fitly be referred
to signify the Church, therefore by Mount Sion, we may better understand
heaven it self, or some spiritual Mount, whose top is heaven the dwelling of
everlasting blessedness. For we read more frequently, that heaven is signified
by mount Sion then the Church. For as in one head of mount Sion, which was
called Morea, the temple of God was built, wherein God was said to dwell: there
was also in another head of it, the palace of David, who was a type or shadow
of Christ the king of Gods people: so in heaven truly is, the temple of the
most high God, and there is also the palace of Christ our heavenly king.
Therefore we say that in this place may be signified some spiritual mount,
whose top is heaven; because by the heavenly Jerusalem (as we shall show
afterward) the Church may seem to be understood, as it is now existent upon
earth. But the allegory will be more full, if by Mount Sion we understand, not
only heaven it self; but conceive in our mind some spiritual mount, whose
top is in heaven, and his foot reaches unto earth, that as of old Jerusalem
was seated at the foot and forward upon the side of Mount Sion: so also the
Church as it is now on earth, may be said to be built and so forward on the
side of a Mount which has his top in Heaven; that is, has a great vicinity
and contiguity with Heaven, and is already in some degree raised up into
Heaven; as they who dwell at the foot and side of some Mountain, are nearest
neighbors and borderers to that Mountain, and have not only liberty to ascend
it, but in regard they already possess the sides of it are in some degree
promoted toward the top. We therefore are come to heaven it self, or to that
spiritual mount or state, whose top is heave; as we are made neighbors unto
heaven, and have a right and liberty to ascend it, yea in some sense we may
well be said inhabitants of it; for from the Church there is a near and open
passage even to the top of heaven. Hence it appears, that not only this Mount
whereto we Christians are come by the preaching of the Gospel and by our faith
given unto it, is by infinite degrees, and without all comparison far
surpassing Mount Sinai: but that our access also or coming to it, does far
surpass the access or coming of the Israelites, who stood near that Mount,
but had no right to ascend it, nor liberty to touch it, unless they would
presently be overwhelmed with stones, or struck through with darts. And unto
the city of the living God] What City this is, he presently declares by saying,
the heavenly Ierusalem] The attribute heavenly does manifestly show that here
he treats of that Jerusalem, whereof that earthly City, the head of the
Kingdom of Israel, was but a type and a shadow. Hence also it appears, that
this City whereof the Author treats, is by far greater reason called both the
City of God, and Jerusalem; that is, the sight of peace (by which word the
Hebrews use to understand happiness.) But this heavenly Jerusalem may be
understood to be the City of the living God in a double sense. First so, as it
signifies some stately place, destined for the dwelling of the godly; and so
wholly different from the Church, that is the City having foundations whose
builder is God, and which God has prepared for Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
for their spiritual posterity, whereof we spoke in the former Chapter. And
these buildings and palaces ordained for the habitation of the godly, are
situated (as I may say) in Heaven, as the City Jerusalem possessed the spaces
of Mount Sion. This City he understands in the Chapter following, ver. 14. when
he says, Here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come] And this
sense seems most proper to this place. But secondly, this City of the heavenly
Jerusalem may be taken for the structure of the Church it self, which
consiseth not of any houses, but of single persons joynted and composed one
with another in a peculiar order and frame. And that is in a manner twofold.
For one structure of the Church is upon earth, though that Church be heavenly
also: the other shall be hereafter in heaven; both of these are understood by
the heavenly Jerusalem in the Revelation of St. John, chap. 21.2. etc. and ver.
9.10. For that the Church or her structure is there meant, it appears by this,
in that she is called the Bride of the Lamb, and the twelve foundations of her
wall are said to be signed with the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb,
and many things there read of her, declare that she is there considered, both
as she is for the present on earth, and as she shall be for the time to come in
heaven. For the present, in that she is said to descend from heaven, and that
Kings and Nations are said to bring their glory into her, and to walk in her
light. For the future, in that they only who overcome, and who are written in
the Lambs book of life, have the promise of entrance into that City, and
possession there. So that the great splendour and magnificence as it is there
described, is much more appliable to express the future state and happiness of
the Church, then the present. But yet notwithstanding, that some men as
inhabitants are separate from this structure of the Church, (though the Church
consist of men, seasoned with certain qualities and joined one to another in a
due order) that is only in respect of single persons considered apart by
themselves. So Paul said that Timothy was in the house of God, which is the
Church; and Peter when he had said, that we must be built into a spiritual
house, he presently adds, that we must be a holy Priesthood; that is, as it
were a holy College of Priests: But Priests must remain in the house of God,
and intend the service of God, and so do much differ from the house of God.
But the same persons considered in a diverse respect, are both the house and
the Priests, yea and in a manner the sacrifices. How ever therefore this
Jerusalem be taken, it is the City of the living God, and heavenly. This is
manifest of that heavenly City built by God himself, wherein we shall sometime
dwell, and of the Chuch as hereafter it shall be in heaven; and it is true of
the Church as it now is on earth. For it is a City, because it is built or
composed of single persons notably qualified and excellently ordered; and by
this City may be also understood the very society of men. It is the City of the
living God] not only because the living God has thus built it; but also and
much rather because God dwells in it in a far more peculiar, and more divine
manner, then ever formerly in the City of Jerusalem. For God inhabits it not
only by his Angels, but by his holy Spirit, who is the maine bond between God
and his Church. And also because it is wholly proper and entirely consecrate
unto God, and no person has right to dwell in it, but such as belong to God,
such as fear and worship him. It is heavenly, because the Church has her
original from heaven (whence in the Revelation that new Jerusalem is said to
descend from heaven) and the form or fashion of her is heavenly, and not
earthly. She has her original from heaven, because whatsoever is requisite
for the constitution of her, proceeds not from elsewhere, but only from God
himself out of heaven; her form is heavenly, because her doctrine is
heavenly, her holiness of life is heavenly, and that charity whereby her frame
is chiefly compacted, is heavenly. Lastly, the order and rank of her members,
whereby some stand before or after others either in respect of Ecclesiastical
offices, or in respect of divine gifts, is heavenly, and not earthly. And God
is called the living God, as he is opposed both to false gods and to true gods:
To the false gods, because he lives; whereas the false gods, saving what men's
opinion attributes to them, are nothing but statues of wood, stone or metal,
and so things wholly inanimate and void of life: and he is opposed to the true
gods, because he has life from himself, and is the author of life to all that
live, so that he is eminently called the living God; as hereof we have spoken
elsewhere. And to an innumerable company of Angels] He alludes to that
multitude of Angels, which in Mount Sinai were assistent to that Angel, who
sustained the name and person of God; as it appears Psalm. 6.68.17. where
twenty thousand signifies a plurality of myriads, for every ten thousand makes
a myriade; and thousands in the plural number uttered indefinitly may signify
that innumerable company, or the universal and infinite army of Gods Angels.
To the company of these, Christians come, as they are incorporated into one
family and fellowship with them, as the Angels become fellowservants with them,
to worship and serve one common God and Lord with them. So that the Angels
carry themselves no longer as superiors unto men, especially unto Christians;
neither when they are seen of men, much less unseen, do they suffer any
worship or divine homage to be done unto them. Also as the Angels are always
present with men, as sent to minister for their sakes: and lastly, as men have
a right to the same immortality, which the Angels enjoy, and shall in time so
certainly attain it, that they shall become like unto the Angels.

23. To the general assembly, and Church of the first borne] So all the Greek
copies have it; though the vulgar Latin, Erasmus and the Syriack, place the
word assembly in the former verse, and refer it to the innumerable company of
Angels: But whether this Assembly be taken relatively to the angels, or
collectively for that great corporation or society composed of Angels and
Christians, it comes all to one; because these conjoined make up a general or
rather an universal assembly of all the worshippers and servitors of God. By
the first borne we must understand the firstborn of God, for of whom else
should they be the firstborn? and there is no doubt but these signify
Christians, and not those who lived before Christ; for the men of those times
are not wont to be called simply and absolutely the Sons of God in the
plural number, much less the firstborn of God; unless their rulers and
such as have received some singular benefit of God, are sometimes called Gods
and the Sons of God. But this appellation is in a manner proper to
Christians, who only are endued with that filial spirit, wherein so boldly and
confidently they cry, Abba Father. Besides (as afterward we shall see) that
company of the godly who lived before the times and faith of Christ, is
signified by another name and called the just men made perfect.] Now if the
firstborn signify Christians, and yet cannot signify all them, as the word
and distinction of firstborn between them and those that are come in unto
them, declares; whom by this name shall we better understand, then those who
first in every place received the Christan Religion, and went before those that
afterward followed them? who also are sometimes called the first fruits of that
place wherein they lived; among whom the Apostles and Prophets of the New
Testament lead the first file, being the first fruits of Judea it self, and in
a manner the firstborn of all the Sons of God or faithful in Christ,
especially the Apostles. But why we think that the Author spoke not of these
only, we are persuaded by the word general assembly (for hither we conceive it
should be referred, following the common authority of the Greeks) which
signifies an universal concourse or huge company of people met together, which
could not be made up only of the Apostles and Prophets of the New Testament:
Wherefore this general assembly must be further extended; which if it be, then
nothing is more probable, but that by firstborn is understood in this place
(as we have said) the first fruits of the faithful in every place. For they
were worthily of greatest esteem among the Christians, they had the double
portions as it were of the Holy Ghost, or to speak in the words of the
Apostle, they had the first fruits of the Spirit, and were endued with divine
gifts above other men. But some may demand, whether the Author alludes in the
word firstborn, if he allude at all, which if he do, it seems it is either
unto the firstborn under the Law, into whose place the Levites were chosen,
to minister in the Sanctuary: or to the universal assembly of the Israelites
when they stood at the foot of Mount Sinai to hear the Law. For the former
opinion it makes, first from the word firstborn; for firstborn are most
fitly opposed to the firstborn. Secondly, in that these Hebrews, to whom the
Author writes, being seasoned by the Apostles with the doctrine of Christ,
seem answerable to that first assembly of the Israelites at Mount Sinai to
hear the Law. Which if it be so, then the first borne can scarce signify the
universal multitude of the first Christians or the first common Church: seeing
there must be some who had access, and other some to whom the access was had:
unless we say, that these Hebrews are considered as some part of the
primitive assembly of Christians, answering to that part of the Israelites
assembly which first received the Law delivered from God himself. For if by
the heavenly Jerusalem the Church be signified, these Hebrews can be said to
come unto it, no otherwise then as the part to the whole. Thirdly, because by
these firstborn some excellent and eminent men in the Church seem to be
understood, as put in a mean between God and Angels; for these very fitly
answer the firstborn, and to the Levites and Priests chosen into their room;
as are the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists and other excellent and eminent men,
who went before all that followed them not only in time but in gifts. And it
is probable that the Author would make particular mention of them; and then,
they were not expressed in other words then these. The other opinion is
favored by the word general assembly, which signifies an universal meeting;
and likewise the word Church. For that general assembly of the Israelites who
met at Mount Sinai to hear the Law, was called the Church, Acts 7.38. Hence it
appears, of what great dignity they are, who have received the Religion of
Christ, because they are incorporated as it were into one body and into one
Church with that Church of the firstborn; and who as S. Peter says, have
obtained like precious faith with them, 2 Pet. 1.1. and enjoy the same right
with them of happiness and salvation. He calls them the general assembly and
Church of the firstborn, because though all these first borne did never yet
assemble in any one place upon earth, for this shall be done hereafter only in
heaven, yet because of the spiritual conjunction and likeness of dignity and
condition that is between them, they are considered as one assembly and in a
manner as one company. Which are written in heaven] He seems to allude to the
number-rolle or list of the names of the firstborn, or of all the Israelites;
for God commanded Moses to taken the number of both these: but both these were
written on earth: but the lift of Christians is written in heaven, and written
by God. So that by these words their dignity and happiness is notified. But
the Greek word is (...), which signifies not simply written but recorded; for
(...) signifies a list upon record; for their names use to be lifted upon
record, who are the citizens or members of a commonwealth. By these words
therefore is signified, that Christians are citizens of heaven, and have the
right of a heavenly commonwealth, that their God is always mindful of them,
seeing he keeps their names as it were written in a book; and therefore it
cannot be but in due time he will put them in possession of his heavenly
kingdom. Whence also they that come unto them, or are aggregated to their
number, are reckoned with them for citizens of heaven, and members of that
heavenly commonwealth. And to God the judge of all] But some may here say,
that the Israelites came long since unto God, and therefore here is nothing
said, that concerns Christians in particular. I answer. 1. That they when they
came to Mount Sinai, did not really and truly come to God himself, but only to
an angel who sustained the person and Name of God. 2. That they came not in
that manner that Christians do unto God, who as S. John says, come into a
communion and fellowship with God, 1 John 1.3. and into such a communion, that
they are reckoned the sons of God, and in time to come shall be his heirs; in
witness whereof they have received the earnest of his holy Spirit, Ephesians.
1.14. 3. The Israelites came not unto God as unto him whom they knew to be the
Judge of all; or rather who then carried himself as the universal Judge of all
men, of all countries and nations both quick and dead. Now the name of Judge
may be here taken either largely for any Lord and governor: or strictly for
him, who according to men's merits decrees and pays rewards and punishments.
Anciently God took the peculiar charge and government over the people of
Israel only: but now he has a fatherly care equally over all men of what
Nation soever, so they be Christians, yea he provides that they become
Christians. Also he ordaines rewards and punishments for all men not only in
this life, but also after it; which to those first Israelites was not known,
especially in regard of those transcendent rewards to be collated after this
life upon the godly, without any difference of Nation. And to the spirits of
just men made perfect] He seems now to mention these that he tacitly may show;
what a great happiness it is, to come to the Judge of all men, both the living
and the dead. By the Just he understands those men deceased notable for their
righteousness, whereof he reckoned up no small number in the former Chapter
treating of faith in God. And he says that Christians are come to the spirits
of the just] because there is now nothing left of them but their spirits, which
God has received into his faith and custody, as the Judge of all. And the just
or righteous deceased, are said to be made perfect, not that they now enjoy
final happiness, and really possess the final promise of God (for otherwise
Christians had not come to their spirits only but rather to them themselves;
and in the former chapter he denied that they had already received the promise
of God, and were made perfect) but that their state and condition is such, that
perfection and eternal happiness is now remaining to them in a way immutable;
so that the certainty of attaining it is such, as if they did already really
enjoy it. In this very sense Saint Paul uses the same word of himself, when
he says, Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect.]
Phil. 3.12. that is, not that I am now in that state, as if I could no way
fail of that blessed resurrection (for of this it was, that he spoke in the
former verse;) for otherwise that he had not yet really attained eternal life,
no man could be ignorant, and it were a fond thing to affirm it. The Author
therefore shows that those just ones, though they had not attained eternal
salvation in perfection, in regard now nothing of them was extant but their
spirits, yet without all doubt should certainly enjoy it, by the immutable
decree of God. Hence it appears, what it is for God to be Judge of all, and
what happiness is therein contained, if a man come both to the Judge, and to
the spirits of the just, and be admitted into their society. For thereby he is
certain, though his life here-faile him, yet he shall not fail of the reward
of eternal life.

24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament.] The Israelites
heretofore came to Moses the Mediator of the old Testament: but Christians
come to Jesus the Mediator of the New. But how much Jesus is better then
Moses, and the new Covenant better then the old, we have showed before, chap.
3.8. and chap. 8.6. The word Mediator is in a manner proper to the holy
Scripture; and peradventure no where used among profane Authors, as others have
noted. Yet it is found out of the Sciptures, in Philo, who being a Jew, used a
form of language that had some affinity with the sacred writers. And what this
word signifies being used of Christ, we are easily taught by the example of
Moses, to whom that name was first attributed. For although of it own nature,
it may signify any one who intervenes as a mean between two parties: yet the
example of Moses and the name of Covenant added, that thereby is signified no
other but an herald, or he who intervenes as a mean between God and men to
make a Covenant, for the joining of them in a mutual and firm peace and
friendship. For the effecting whereof, it is not forthwith necessary to appease
and mitigate the mind either of one or both parties; when it may be either
both parties, as it was in the making of the old Covenant, or one of them as it
was under the new, namely God, does freely incline to peace and friendship, yea
does alone, seek, offer, and procure it. And to the blood of sprinkling] An
Hebraisme for the blood which is sprinkled, or wherewith aspersion is made. He
alludes to that blood of the old Covenant, wherewith Moses, after he had
rehearsed all the precepts of the Law, sprinkled both the book of the Law, and
the whole people; whereof he said, This is the blood of the Testament, which
God has enjoined unto you; as we had it before, chap. 9. verse. 19, 20. We
Christians are in like manner sprinkled with blood, and that with the most
precious blood of Christ himself. And we are sprinkled with the blood of
Christ, when in our hearts we conceave and embrace the force of that bloody
death which he suffered, to confirm the new Covenant; in such manner that
thereby we have an infallible assurance made us of the promises comprehended
in the Covenant, whence it comes to pass that we are made parties to the
Covenant, and obtain a right of attaining to all the blessings promised
therein. That speaks better things then that of Abel.] He commends this blood
wherewith Christians are sprinkled, by mentioning the force and effect of it;
that they may joy the more for their aspersion with it, and may moreover more
carefully endeavor, that they wash not the drops of that blood from their
souls; that is, that they never fall away from the new Covenant, nor cease to
feel the force of the blood of Christ, and so deprive themselves of that great
blessing, which they gained by the shedding of it, namely, a right to eternal
happiness. To the blood of Christ he ascribes speech (in a figurative sense)
as likewise to the blood of Abel. Both their bloods speak, or as the Scripture
says, of the blood of Abel, both cry unto God: but Abels blood cries for
vengeance upon his fratricide: but Christ's blood cries for remission and pardon
even upon paricides; for they may justly be called paricides, who murdered
Christ. And unto these no less then unto all other sinners, the blood of
Christ begs pardon from God of all their sins, if they will repent and be
converted from them. And he begs it, as he engages God to grant forgiveness
of sins to all penitent persons, whatsoever their sins have been. And he
engages God, as he was employed of God to confirm and establish the new
Covenant, which is so remarkable for that promise.

25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks.] To his former passages he now
subjoynes an Exhortation, and fortifies it with new reasons. And herein he
seems to allude to that fact of the Israelites whereof we spoke before, when
they were stricken with such terror of Gods Majesty, that they entreated, that
God would speak no more unto them; which fact of theirs was a kind of presage
or token, that afterward they would not carry an ear and mind obedient to the
voice of God. He therefore admonishes Christians, that now, after they have
given their ear and mind to the voice of God in the Gospel, they would not
again turn their ear and mind from it; which is done both by Apostasy and by
disobedience. See, i. take diligent heed; for they who take diligent heed, cast
about their eyes every way, that they may escape the danger imminent. For if
they escaped not] By an argument of comparison, he shows that if they do
otherwise, they shall not escape a grievous punishment; for they the Israelites
escaped not, namely, the punishment and avenging hand of God, whereof we
treated, chapters the 3. and 4. where we saw that the Israelites for their
unbelief and disobedience, were debarred from entrance into that land of
Promise, wherein they should have rested after their grievous servitude in
Egypt, and perished in the wilderness by diverse destructions. Who refused him
that spoke on earth; much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him
that speaks from heaven.] He opposes him who spoke on earth to him who spoke
from heaven; Now there can be no doubt, but by him who spoke from heaven, he
understands God himself; for presently after he adds verse 26. Whose voice
then shook the earth: but now he has promised, saying, yet once more I shake
not the earth only but also heaven. For here it is manifest that the whole
verse is meant of God. But who shall we say is understood by him, who spoke on
earth? By him may be understood both God himself, and that single Angel who
bare the name and person of God in Mount Sinai. If by him we understand God
himself, then here will be no opposition between diverse persons, but only
between diverse places, from whence God delivered the Law, and from whence the
Gospel; Namely, that the Law was published on earth from Mount Sinai, but the
Gospel was published by God from heaven. You will say, that God then no less
published the Law from heaven, then afterward he did the Gospel; seeing God
himself descends not from heaven, but as he sent Christ from heaven to preach
the Gospel; so he sent an Angel from heaven in his name to deliver the Law. To
this I answer; There is a great difference between the mission or sending of
Christ from God, and of that Angel. For Christ being sent from God carried
himself always as a person diverse from God (which the thing it self
declares, for he was the son of man) and called himself Gods messenger sent
from God, did manifestly profess and testify that his doctrine was not his
own but his who sent him, that he spoke nothing of himself, but what he had
received and heard from the Father. But that Angel so descended from heaven,
that he bare the person and name of God, and therefore he always speaks as if
he had been God himself. And this was the cause why Christ had not such
Majesty and visible glory about him, as had that Angel. For Christ had but that
Majesty and glory, which became Gods legate or messenger, and he a man, and a
mortal man. But that Angel had that Majesty and glory, which was suitable to
God himself, if God himself had descended from Heaven. It may therefore be
well said, that God himself descended in that Angel, and must be considered
as if he himself had spoken upon earth. Contrarily, because God sent Christ to
preach the Gospel as his Apostle or messenger, and sent him from heaven as a
person distinct from him; not as of old he sent Moses from the earth, that is,
but from Mount Sinai; therefore now with good reason he is said to deliver his
oracles, and to publish his pleasure to us from heaven. But it is a far greater
matter to deliver oracles from heaven it self then from earth, or from some
earthly mountain, seeing heaven is far higher and worthier then any mountain.
Therefore although the manner which God used in publishing and revealing his
Gospel, was not, if we respect the outward show and splendor of it, so
illustrious, as that wherewith he published the Law: yet indeed it was far more
divine and perfect, and in all respects most beseeming the perfect discipline
of Evangelicall truth. For what else did it signify, that God descended on
earth to publish the Law, but that the precepts of the Law were earthly and not
heavenly. For they that speak from a low place seem to speak but low matter,
and they earthly that speak from the earth; as we read in the Gospel of John,
chap. 3.31. But contrarily, that God remaining in heaven, and not descending
himself on earth either in his own person, or in the person of another, has
spoken to us by Christ sent from heaven, as his Interpreter and messenger; what
else can this signify, but that he has spoken heavenly things, and that
Christ is far greater then Moses? For as it is written in the forecited place
of John; He that comes from above, is above all; and he that comes from
heaven is above all. In this sense therefore, that Angel representing God,
must stand for God; and Christ must not be compared with that Angel who
represented the person and name of God, but with Moses; and the difference
between Christ and Moses must stand in this, that God spoke to Moses on earth,
but to Christ in heaven; and that God sent Moses from the mount to the
Israelites, but Christ from heaven to Christians. If this be displeasing to any
man, which yet we believe to be most agreeable both to the truth, and to the
Scripture, and to the Text, we may say (which is our other answer to the
question proposed, and another sense of the words) that by him who spoke on
earth, must be understood that Angel, who in Gods name published the Law on
Mount Sinai; and by him who spoke from Heaven, must be understood the most high
God himself. For he that by himself delivers Laws on earth, does thereby show
that he is not the most high God. For the Majesty of the most high God, permits
not, that the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords should depart from his
inaccessible light, and from his heavenly throne to descend down upon earth.
But he that offers himself as God to be heard from heaven, he by far greater
reason must be reckoned for God himself. But you will say, when did God
himself publish the Gospel from heaven? I answer, This was done then, when by
his voice uttered from heaven, he testified that Christ was his beloved Son,
and therefore his Ambassador, and withal commanded us to hear him. For shall
not God himself be thought to speak to us from heaven, when we hear that
doctrine which God himself authorized by his voice uttered from heaven? For
although by the wise determination of God, the promiscuous multitude heard not
this voice with their ears; yet it was heard and published by them, whose
testimony is irrefragable. But in the publishing of the Law was no such thing.
Whence it is manifest that even in this sense, the Authors argument wants no
force. For it is a greater crime to turn away from God, who spoke from heaven,
then from an Angel, who spoke on earth, though he sustained the name of God.
He turns away from God, and as it were turns his back upon him, who
refuses either to believe or obey the voice of God.

26. Whose voice then shook the earth] From these words it seems to be
gathered, that the Author by him who spoke on earth understands God himself.
For here he mainifestly attributes to God himself the shaking of the earth; i.
of Mount Sinai, which happened at the publishing of the Law from thence: But
nothing hinders, why this action may not be ascribed both to God and to the
Angel who in publishing the Law sustained the person of God; as likewise that
speaking or uttering the oracles a little before mentioned. For the Angel
properly and immediately did both shake the earth or mountain, and also spoke;
and God did it mediatly by that very Angel. But in these words there is a
tacit answer to an objection, and withal a strong reason, why Christians must
obey the voice of God published by Christ. For some man might say, that the Law
was published with great terror, insomuch that the earth was shaken with the
voice of God: whence we may easily gather, what a fearful punishment remains
to the forsakers of the Law. To this terror of the Law, he Author opposes a
far greater terror, and shows that under the Gospel matters will be far more
terrible, for not only the earth but heaven it self shall be shaken. From
whence any man may easily perceive, that there shall be no place of escape from
Gods punishments for them who have been disobedient against the voice of the
Gospel. For whither shall they fly, if the heavens themselves which do
encompasse the earth round about, shall be shaken, yea shall fall and perish;
as we are taught in the following verse. Whose voice] The thunder called the
voice of God.
By the voice of God we may understand those thunders, by whose cracks the
Mount quaked and trembled; for in several places of Scripture the thunder is
called the voice of God; See Job 37.4,5. and Psalm. 18.13. and Psalm. 29. per
tot. Shook the earth] Some part of the earth, as Mount Sinai and the plain
adjoining. Whence it appears, that under the times of the Gospel there will be
another manner of earthquake; when not only some one mountain, or some small
territory, but the whole universal earth shall be shaken and broken to the
lowest foundations of it. But now he has promised saying. The word now does
not express the time of the promise, but the time of performance of the thing
promised; namely the time wherein God will shake both heaven and earth. So that
now must be referred to the times of the Gospel, as the shaking of Mount Sinai
was to the times of the Law. Therefore the mind of the Author is to say, Now
under the times of the Gospel, God will shake not only the earth, but the
heaven also, as he promised by the Prophet, saying, Yet once more I shake, not
the earth only, but also heaven] This Prophecy is extant, Hag. 2.6. But the
Author would speak briefly, and speedily express the thing in the words of
God himself; as in many passages St. Paul also does. In the Hebrew, it is, yet
once, it is a little while; i. there yet remains but a very small time for the
fulfilling of that which God there promises for the moving of heaven and
earth. But in the Greek translation of the Septuagint, whom hitherto our Author
has followed in the testimonies he has cited out of Scripture, we read it,
yet once. It may be the Septuagint did not read the Hebrew word mead, a little
while, but only achath, once. But we need not marvel, why here the Author
would rather follow the Greek translation, seeing it suiteth better with the
mystical sense of the Prophets words. For in the literal sense, these words
contain a Prophecy, that it should come to pass that God would move heaven
and earth, by raising up diverse countries and nations, who should come to the
Temple at Jerusalem, and bring with them the desire of all Nations; that is,
that which is desirable and precious among all Nations, namely silver and
gold, to adorn the Temple of God; as it is explicated in the words following.
But because these words of moving heaven and earth are more magnificent, then
only to contain so narrow a sense; therefore we must needs conceive, that they
carry some other more proper sense; namely, that God shall really shake heaven
and earth; to which sense the Greek translation as we said better agrees. For
it cannot be but in a qualified manner, that the time should be called a little
while, which is extended from this Prophecy to the end of the world. If any
demand, how it can be said, that God will yet once more shake heaven and earth,
seeing he never shook heaven before? We answer, It is said, because the
earth is there mentioned, which God did shake before, namely at the publishing
of the Law. Not the earth only, but also heaven] The Hebrew text has it
simply, the heaven and the earth; but the Author would rather speak thus, that
he might more fitly and evidently oppose that shaking, which shall come to
pass in the times of the Gospel, to that shaking which fell out at the
publishing of the Law; that now under the Gospel not the earth only as then it
was, but also the heaven it self shall be shaken.

27. And this word yet once more signifies the removing of those things that
are shaken] From the words yet once more, the Author gathers what manner of
shaking shall come upon heaven and earth; and says, that those words do
signify or declare, the removing of the things that are shaken. By removing is
signified the abolition or destruction of heaven and earth; for those things
that are wholly abolished and destroyed, are extremely removed, not only from
their former place, but from all place; See chap. 7. ver. 12. That are shaken
is put for, that shall be shaken, the present tense for the future, a form of
speech usual among the Hebrews, especially the Prophets. But how do the words
yet once more signify, that heaven and earth shall be so shaken, that by
their shaking they shall be removed or abolished? They signify it by this
reason, that if heaven and earth should remain after this shaking, it scarce
seems possible, but that they must be once shaken again, yea it must
necessarily be so, if, as it appears from other words of the Prophets, heaven
and earth must one day be abolished; for then at the least, when they are
abolished they must be shaken, and so they shall be shaken not yet once more,
but twice: It is therefore manifest that these words yet once more, do signify
such a shaking of heaven and earth, as shall be accompanied with their removing
or abolishing. And hence also it is plain that this Epistle was written in
Greek, seeing this collection of the Author is grounded only upon the Greek
translation; for in the Hebrew text it cannot take place, unless as we said,
the word Mead a little while be expunged, which at this day is read in all
copies, and seems necessary to the literal sense. As of things that are made]
He inserts the cause which argues and shows the removing or abolishing of
heaven and earth, that in due time it shall certainly come to pass; namely,
because they are things made. But the words things made in this place must
needs be taken somewhat strictly. For even that heaven which shall not be
shaken, was made; and our future glorious and heavenly bodies shall be made.
Therefore things made do in this place signify those things that were made of
some gross and corporeal matter, as are all things of this creation, as the
Author speaks before, chap. 9.11. or else which were made of such matter which
receives a foreign form besides and beyond her natural inclination; for
matter receiving such a form suffers a kind of violence, and thereupon
naturally of her own accord inclines to the removing and abolishing of it; as
are all things artificial that are made by art, from which the Author seems
here to draw a tacit resemblance. So the form and beauty of this whole world
was by the power of God induced into that Chaos which is described by Moses in
the beginning of Genesis; seeing therefore that heaven and earth were made by
inducing a foreign form into a gross matter that was before rude, void and
dark, beside and above her natural capacity, therefore their form shall be
shaken off and removed, and consequently they shall be abolished. That those
things which cannot be shaken, may remain.] That things immutable only may
remain alone by themselves. Now they are, not only things immutable which
cannot be shaken, but also mutable which shall be shaken. But after that all
things mutable which are to be shaken, shall be shaken and removed: then shall
remain only things immutable which are not to be shaken, nor shall be shaken.
By these words is noted of things mutable not the proper end for which they had
being, but the event or end of their being, whereby their being shall cease.
And the Author added this to show, that when heaven and earth shall be removed
or abolished, yet there shall be remaining a most ample and spacious mansion
for the righteous, as S. Peter also testifies and calls it, a new heaven and
a new earth wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. But by these words
the Author makes way to a new argument, whereby he excites and exhorts the
Hebrews to faith and constancy in the Christian Religion, by subjoyning.

28. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved or shaken] The
kingdom here is both the place it self, and also the blessed state or
happiness of them that inhabit it. And this kingdom cannot be moved or
shaken, not in respect of Gods power; for God who is Almighty has might and
power sufficient to move and shake even that new heaven and new earth as Peter
calls it: but because God has no will ever to shake, yea it is his will it
should never be shaken; and because of it own nature it is no way propense or
inclinable to be shaken, but is finally immutable; and what is so? of that it
may well be said, that it cannot be shaken; in which sense the Angels are
immortal, and so shall we be one day. We receiving] i. accepting and
embracing it with our soul, and bearing a firm faith to the promises of it,
which are contained in the Christian Religion; and so apprehending it as it
were with our hand upon Gods offer of it unto us. Let us have grace] Have is
here put for retain or hold; unless by grace here some man would understand a
thankful mind; which sense notwithstanding does not so well fit the place,
especially seeing in the holy Scriptures to have grace does not signify to
have a thankful mind, but rather to give thanks. See 1 Timothy 1.12. and 2 Timothy
1.3. which sense does not so well agree with the words following, Whereby we
may serve God. Grace.
Grace therefore in this place, as also elsewhere, does rather signify, either
the doctrine of Christ full of Gods grace, as when John says, that grace came
by Jesus Christ, John 1.17. where he opposes grace to the Law: and S. Peter
writes, that he testifies, that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand,
1 Pet. 5.12. where he means that the doctrine which they had received touching
the grace of God, was true: Or it signifies the favor of God, whereto God
admitted us under the new Covenant, promising us eternal life and his heavenly
kingdom; which divine favor is termed by Paul, the grace of God, that
brings salvation to all men, Tit 2.11. which in the following Chapter, ver.
4. he calls the kindness and love of God. So that to have grace, is to
retain the doctrine of the Gospel which contains the grace and favor of God
toward us. Whereby we may serve God acceptably] That is, according to his
prescript, if by grace we understand the doctrine of Christ: or by his
instinct, if we will have it signify the favor of God. May serve] In the
Original it is (...), may worship: which word sometime in holy Scripture is
taken largely and generally, for all that honor which by holy offices we
perform publicly unto God, whether by way of worship with holy reverences,
or by way of service, with prayers, praises or thanksgivings and such like; yea
sometime this word is further amplified and extended to all works of piety;
because under the new Covenant all pious works are accounted spiritual
sacrifices. But how the word worship is sometime taken more strictly, and so
opposed to service, and what are the differences between them two, we have
formerly explicated, chap. 9. ver. 1. and see chap. 9.14. Acceptably] Our
worship and service of God, and our works of piety, must not be done loosely
after any manner: but in such a manner only as is acceptable and pleasing to
God; because all service must be pleasing to the person to whom it is done, for
otherwise it is disservice. Therefore our worship and service of God must not
now be legal, by carnal sacrifices, which while the Law was of force were not
very pleasing unto him, (as has been showed) but spiritual and evangelicall,
by holy reverences, prayers, praises and thanksgivings: neither must it be
perfunctory lame or may med, but entire, serious and ardent. With reverence and
godly feare] He shows the manner and way, how to make our worship and service
acceptable and pleasing unto God; namely, if we worship and serve him with
modesty and reverence. In the Greek it is (...), which properly signify with
modesty and reverence. Modesty or bashfulnesse is an affection whereby we fear
to displease a man, and thereby to diminish his good esteem of us; and it
extends it self to the least circumstances that seem to contain any
appearance of indecency, even to those things which deserve neither punishment
nor blame. For modesty requires us to avoid all indecencies, or if they cannot
be avoided, but either are or have been done, to cover them, that they may not
appear to others; least thereby we lessen our esteem with them, to whom they
appear. But be case modesty, though it be a very tender affection, yet for the
most part does not incite and move us so vehemently, therefore to modesty the
Author adjoynes reverence, which is a more potent affection; for reverence is
an intense or graduated fear, when fear is in some degree augmented beyond
his ordinary state, as Charity is an intense love more then ordinary. And this
reverence does properly respect a person that is superior unto us, and either
has power to benefit us, or at least a right to punish us. For fear as it
respects a person is properly that affection, whereby we beware of punishment
and other evils eminent: and Reverence is this fear redoubled or graduated as
we have said. The manner therefore how to make our worship and service of God
acceptable and pleasing unto him, is by seasoning our souls with these two
affections of Modesty and Reverence; which are the true and firm foundations
whereupon are framed those holy gestures of standing up, bowing down, and
kneeling down to him, which are the proper acts whereof Gods outward worship
does consist; as we have formerly specified. For if the use of reverend
gestures be decent and due to any person upon earth, much more is the use of
them decent and due to the most high God of heaven. Seeing of all other persons
in the world, we should most fear to displease God by any appearance of
indecency in the least circumstance; and seeing God above all others has all
power to benefit us, and all right to punish us. In which consideration the
Author immediately subjoynes.

29. For our God is a consuming fire.] Here he adjoyns the reason, why we must
worship and serve God in this acceptable manner with modesty and reverence;
namely, because God is a consuming fire. God is a fire of anger,
So God is called by reason of his anger and wrath, wherewith he is so provoked
by finne, that he grows hot and burns against it; and as often as he burns
with wrath, he consumes and destroys ungodly men as suddenly, and as fiercely
as does a most vehement fire. And it seems that Moses, from whom the Author
took these words, took occasion to call God by this name, Deuteronomy. 4.24. because
that God descended down upon Mount Sinai in a great flame of fire, the smoke
whereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace. Exodus 19.18. and because God spoke
out of the midst of the fire, that they who heard his voice, saw no other
similitude of him. Deuteronomy. 4.11. and because a fire proceeding from God burnt up
some, who in his worship and service carried not themselves toward him with
that modesty and reverence that was acceptable unto him. So he burnt up the two
Priests the sons of Aaron, who durst burn incense unto him with strange fire,
that was not sacred and fallen from heaven. Levit. 10.2. So he burnt up those
two hundred and fifty men, who being not Priests, durst approach to offer and
burn incense unto him. Numb. 16.35,39. Hence also it is that God appeared unto
Moses in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush. Exodus 3.2. And in the
Psalms of David, God is sometime introduced with a fire going before him, and
burning up his enemies round about. Psalm. 97.3. And in that vision of Daniel,
the Ancient of days did sit, whose throne was like the fiery flame, and his
wheels like burning fire; and a fiery stream issued, and came forth from before
him. Dan. 7.9,10. Yet we must not think that God does burn with perpetual
flames of anger. For God is rather charity as Saint John does testify. And of
love.
Therefore God is always a fire of love and charity toward men, especially
Christians, unless it be when men's sins do quench this fire of love and
charity in him, and kindle that other fire of anger and wrath. Seeing then our
God is a fire to consume those who dare presume to worship or serve him
immodestly, or irreverently, or in any manner not acceptable unto him; it
therefore concerns us to be careful, that in all our approaches to his
worship or service, we carry our selves with all modesty and reverence; lest
our God be also unto us as a consuming fire.

The Contents of this 12. Chapter, are,
1. Duty. We must be constant in professing the faith, and patient in bearing
the the crosses of it. ver. 1. Motive. 1. Because we have a cloud of
witnesses, who eye us in our course of faith and piety. ver. 1. 2. Because we
have Christ for an example and pattern, who did endure the cross, and the
contradiction of sinners, and despised the shame of it, for the glory set
before him. v. 2. 3. 3. Because the cross is but Gods chastisement upon us;
which argues his fatherly love to us as his children. ver. 5, 6, 7. for
chastisement is universal whereof all are partakers except bastards. ver. 8.
We take it patiently from our carnal fathers. v. 9. It lasts but a few
days. ver. 10. and it smarts but only for the present. v. 11.
2. Duty. We must follow peace and holiness. v. 14. Motive. Because without
them no man shall see the Lord ibid.
3. Duty. We must be diligent to keep one another from falling away. Motive.
Because Apostasy is a bitter root, that will both trouble and defile many. v.
15.
4. Duty. We must take heed of profanesse. v. 16. Motive. 1. Because Esau who
first despised his birthright, afterward lost his blessing finally, and could
not recover it, though he sought it with tears. v. 16, 17. 2. Because the
Church whereto we come, is not an earthly mount, where a God on earth speaks
all in terror, as it was with the Israelites. v. 18, 19, 20, 21. But an
heavenly mount, whereof the assembly is, God in heaven, and Christ the
Mediator; thousands of Angels, the firstborn of the Church, and the spirits
of the Righteous. v. 22, 23, 24. 3. Because the Doctrine we are to hear was not
spoken on earth, as was the law: but from heaven. v. 25. 4. Because the time
shall once come under the Gospel, wherein God shall be more terrible then ever
he was at Mount Sinai: for he shall shake both heaven and earth to pieces,
even to abolsh them. v. 26.27. 5. Because we receive from God an infinite
benefit, even a Kingdom that is immutable, and inconcussible. v. 28. 6.
Because God is a fire to consume the profane. v. ult.

CHAPTER XIII.
1. LEt brotherly love continue] In the former Chapter he exhorted them to
several duties concerning God, as to constancy in the Faith, and patience
under the Cross, and to Holiness: and also dissuading from the maine contrary
vices of Apostasy and profanenes. Now in this Chapter he proceeds to humane
duties in certain mutual good offices of men one toward another; beginning
with brotherly love; which is our first and chiefest degree of Charity toward
men, particularly such men as are our brethren. They are eminently called our
brethren, who have one common spiritual father with us, and are begotten into
Christ from our heavenly Father, by that incorruptible seed, which is the word
of the Gospel. For if the faithful who are sanctified, are all brethren unto
Christ who does sanctify them, as was showed before, chap. 2.11. with much
more reason are they brethren one to another, because their mutual
resemblances between themselves are much more manifold. And this brotherly love
consists in the inward affect of it, and in diverse outward effects of doing
good; for faith and love also are both dead, if they be ineffectuall. This love
must continue, and remain in that being it had amongst them, it must never
cease to be, nor fail to be less; for he tacitly attributes this virtue unto
them, and supposing it amongst them already, requires the continuance of it.
For he had spoken before of their work and labor of love, that they had
ministered unto the Saints and did minister. And therefore he seems not simply
to exhort them to the duty of love as if it were not yet amongst them; but to
the continuance of it as supposing it, amongst them already.

2. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers] The second good office is that
of hospitality. Hospitality is but love and charity carried upon another
object, when our love is not restrained to our acquaintance only whom we know;
but enlarged toward strangers in general whom we know not, whether they be
our brethren or not. And it consists in receiving strangers into our houses,
and entertaining them will all good offices of humanity and courtesy,
especially according to our abilities and their necessities. And as hospitality
must be exercised toward all strangers, so especially and in the first place
toward Christians who are our brethren, and chiefly to those of them that are
exiles and become strangers for the cause of Christ and his Religion. And to
this hospitality may be referred our humanity toward the poor, by inviting them
to our houses, and cheering them in a kind and comfortable manner. And of
hospitality we must not be forgetful i. We must not neglect it. For those
things that we forget, we also neglect, or as we have said before, we take no
care for them: the contrary whereof we shall see in the verse following. For
thereby some have entertained Angels unawares] He commends hospitality, and
moves us to the exercise of it, in regard that thereby some have entertained
Angels unawares. He has reference to the history of Abraham and Lot, whereof
both were wondrous hospitable, and careful to receive and entertain strangers
into their houses, and both unawares, happened upon Angels sent from God,
carrying themselves in the shape of men, which they received into their houses.
So that by the hospitality of some, namely of Abraham and Lot, it came to
pass, that they received and entertained Angels, not knowing them to be
Angels then when they received them. For if they had evidently known them to
be Angels, it had been no marvel, that they invited them into their houses or
tents, for this they might well have done, though otherwise they had not been
hospitable. For who is so inhospitable, but if he think he may procure Angels
to accept of his entertainment, will delay to invite them, when he finds them
at his door, though indeed this were no hospitality at all? for he that
invites Angels must needs know, that Angels can be in no necessity to stand in
need of entertainment; which hospitality always supposes in the stranger that
she receives. The three men seen of Abraham.
From these words of the Author it is manifest, how vainly they are mistaken,
who think that the three men who were seen and invited of Abraham, Genesis 18.2.
were the persons of the holy Trinity; and because he saw three and worshipped
but one, calling him, My Lord, therefore they gather, that Abraham believed,
that those three persons were one God. These men perceive not, upon what a
fallacious conjecture they rely in matters of so high moment. For this divine
Author does openly declare and testify that they were Angels, and not three
persons of the Deity; which if they had been, he might surely have commended
hospitality with a far higher encomium of praise, and have said, that by reason
of that virtue, not Angels, but the persons of the Deity received
entertainment. And we desire leave to demand of these men, what they think,
whether Abraham, when he saw those three persons and worshipped one of them
inviting him into his tent, did then certainly know that he entertained the
persons of the sacred Trinity, or not know it? If they affirm the first, that
he did know it, then we further demand of them, why Abraham used them as men?
why he dressed meat and caused it to be set before them, and exhibited other
offices of courtesy to them, which are usually done unto men? was he so
ignorant of things, that he knew not, that God wanted no such entertainment?
And why does this Author say that he entertained men unawares? For what can
this signify else, but that he believed them to be men? Did he who did not so
much as imagine them to be Angels, believe them to be persons of the Deity? But
if for the second point these men confess, as the truth is, and as this Author
clearly teaches, that Abraham supposed that he saw and invited no other
persons but men, with what reason do they gather, that because he saw three
and worshipped one, therefore he believed, that they were one God distinct in
three persons? Did he therefore believe it, because he did not so much as
imagine it? But you will say, why then did he worship one, seeing he saw three?
without all doubt he therefore did it, because one of them carried himself so,
as seeming greater and worthier then the rest, and was eminent amongst them.
And surely one of them only is called Jehovah, and is clearly distinguished
from both the other. In the 18. Chapter of Genesis, compare the 17. verse and
so forth, and the last verse, with the first verse of the Chapter following,
where the two other Angels went to Lot in Sodom. For this may be a sufficient
argument, that from this one point of worshipping one, the unity of a common
essence among them cannot be collected; seeing Lot worshipped also the other
two, bowing himself with his face toward the ground, and called them jointly,
My Lords, Genesis 19.1,2. But if that one at Abraham's tent carried himself for a
divine person, why is he alone, both worshipped of Abraham, and called Jehovah
in the Scripture? Were not the other persons worthy of the same honor, and of
the same name? But if that one went for the divine and commune essence, where
shall be the third Person of the Deity? Did therefore Abraham worship the
divine Essence, and neglect the divine Persons? or did one carry himself for
the Essence, and for a Person also? And why not the rest also, if the divine
Essence were equally commune to them all? Eusebius in his first book,
contends, that this one Person was the Son of God, because that after Abraham
knew him, he is called Lord and God. For he will not have him to be the most
high God, because to him it is not incident, to undergo such a change, as to
assume a strange shape, and converse with men under it. (Neither may we think
(to insert this by the way) that those fathers who lived before and about the
times of the Nicene Council, and the whole Church in general held this opinion
of God, to believe, that the Son is that one most high God who is the Father.
For they were far of another mind, who yet if in these times they should
appear, would now of an universal Council be no less condemned then they
then condemned others.) On the other side, Eusebius seeing that the name of
Lord and God was given to that person, he imagined that he could not possibly
be any other but the Son of God, consubstantiall to his Father as he thought,
and therefore partaker of his Fathers divine Name. So multiple and various is
error, that when she has once strayed from the path of truth, wanders
incessantly, and finds no end of erring, and believes none that would direct
her; for there is no blindness so incurable as that of the mind; because it
persuades the soul that she wants no sight but sees most clearly. But
Eusebius might have sufficiently known and been informed, if by no means
else, yet from this one place of this Author, that this person and the rest
entertained by Abraham were indeed Angels. But you will say, why then is that
person called Jehovah which is the proper Name of God himself? The reason is,
because he carried himself for God himself, at Gods will and command. For
such an one (as we heard before,) was that Angel who first appeared to Moses in
the bush, and afterward at Mount Sinai in such high Majesty; both which as it
appears plainly from Scripture were Angels, ^ough they carried themselves as
God and Jehovah; and therefore it can be no marvel that the Name of God was
given (...) absurdity is it, for the Angels to carry themselves as God, and use
the Name of God, when God wills and commands it? Yea, how can it possibly be
otherwise? Are they not minisstring spi^ ^to God, to be delegated by him in
what quality he pleases to (...)? or cannot God will and command them to
minister in this qua^y, to procure their greater authority with those men to
whom they are sent, and that men may be the more certain, that in or by those
Angels they deal with God himself?

3. Remember them that are in bonds] To remember in this place, is to have a
care; for of whom we have a care, them we are wont often to remember. And the
sense of this remembering here is all one with the negation of the contrary in
the former verse, where he required them, that they should not be forgetful;
because not to forget, is to remember. Them that are in bonds; namely for
Christ's and the Gospels sake; for though many were in bonds for other causes as
for crimes and offenses, yet the multitude of those that were in bonds for
Christ, made far the greater number. For afflictions and perse quations are
so incident to the truth of the Gospel, that she produces an army of bondmen,
wherein the forerunner of Christ was also the forerunner: for John Baptist
suffered both bonds and death: but we must look upon Christ as the General
of this Army, who led the way by the Cross, as this Author requires us, chap.
12.2. Of the like bloody cup Stephen drank and James; Peter also lies sleeping
in prison between two soldiers bound with two chains, Acts 12 6. Paul and
Silas are thrust into the inner prison at Philippi, and have their feet made
fast in the stocks, Acts 16.24. Yea Paul was for many years so familiarly
acquainted with chains and bonds, that he makes it his attribute to be the
prisoner of Jesus Christ; for so he styles himself in several of his
Epistles. And this Author does acknowledge himself to be in bonds, and that
therein these Hebrews had compassion on him, chap. 10.34. Yet in this place
his intention is not, that they should remember him alone: but he speaks in
the plural number for their charity in general to all that are in bonds. As
being bound with them] He shows how carefully we should remember those that are
in bonds; namely by thinking our selves to be in the same state and condition
with them; and therefore having assumed their persons upon us, whatsoever we
would have done by our brethren and companions to us in the like case, the same
we should carefully do unto them in their distress. Commiseration.
And from these words it appears that the third duty or good office whereto the
Author does exhort them, is commiseration or compassion; which though he name
not in express terms, yet his words do tacitly imply it. For commiseration is
but love and charity varied yet upon another object, when our love is not
restrained only to our brethren, or to strangers, which (as was showed in the
former verse) is hospitality; but when the bowels of our love are enlarged to
all persons in misery, in what relation soever they stand unto us; especially
when we assume unto our selves and seele in our fowls the like passions that
be in them, of suffering and being bound with them; for then our charity
becomes true compassion or commiseration. And them which suffer adversitie] In
the Greek it is (...), which is a general word that may be extended to all
kinds of afflictions; or if it be restrained it commonly signifies those that
are sick, or suffer bodily pains. And the adversity of sickness or pain is
a sore misery, that does justly require our commiseration. As being your selves
also in the body.] Here he shows a reason or motive why we should commiserate
those that are sick and pained in body; namely, because was our selves are
compassed with a body of infirmity subject unto sicknesses and pains. For
seeing we are men, we must therefore consider that no humane infirmity is
exempted from us; and thereupon seame to commiserate other persons in their
sickness, as if the like misery were already or shortly may be upon our own
bodies.

4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undesiled] The fourth duty or
virtue whereto he exhorts them is Chastity, by avoiding the vice of lust and
uncleanness. The speech of the Author is here illipticall or defective, for in
the Greek there is no verb, is. Yet we must needs understand some verb,
either indicative is, as here our and most vulgar Translations have it, Marriage
is honorable, and the bed undefiled is honorable: Or rather we should
understand a verb imperative, let. Let marriage be honorable, and let the bed
be undefiled; because all the former verses in this Chapter are delivered in
the imperative Mood; as Let brotherly love continue, ver. 1. Be not forgetful
to entertain, ver. 2. Remember them that are in bonds, ver. 3. Secondly,
because the verses following also run in the same imperative Mood; as Let
your conversation be without covetousness, ver. 5. Remember them which have
the rule over you, ver. 7. Be not carried about with diverse and strange
doctrines, ver. 9. etc. Thirdly, because the fith verse next following this is
without any verb in the Greek; and yet the Translators do unanimously supply
it with a verb not indicative, saying, your conversation is without
covetousness: but imperative, Let your conversation be so. Lastly, because the
contents of this Chapter seem not to be matter of Doctrine, but of
Exhortation; whose Mood is imperative, moving us (as we have said) to several
duties and good offices. If then we understand these words Indicatively, by
supplying them with the verb is; Then the sense will be, That marriage is in
all or among men of all sorts and ranks a thing honest, and by it only the bed
is undefiled; so that a man may live in marriage with the safety of piety and
honesty; contrary to what is done in fornication and adultery. But if we
understand them imperatively or preceptively by supplying them with the verb
let be; Let marriage be honorable. Then the sense will be. Let marriage be
preserved in it due honor, and let the means to preserve it so, be, by
keeping the bed undefiled from adulteries; for nothing is more dishonorable to
a married person, then to have his bed stained and defiled by the uncleanness
of another; which is done in every adultery; for the nature of adultery is here
modestly defined to be the defiling of another bed. The words in all may be
referred either to things or persons. If we refer them to things, the sense
will be, that marriage be in every thing observed honestly and chastely, and that
the bed be not polluted with any unclean or strange lust. But if we refer
in all to persons; the sense will be, that marriage must be had in honor and
esteem among all persons of all sexes; that no person should so despise it as
to presume or dare to invade another bed, whether he be a single person or
married. For all persons ought to have such an opinion of marriage, as to esteem
it a thing sacred and not to be polluted; for he that does otherwise, and
transgresses the Laws of marriage, by defiling his bed and body with a
stranger, incurres a heavy penalty, which God himself will one day execute
upon him.

But whoremongers and adulterers God will judge] Here he brings a Motive or
Reason, whereby he would persuade us to the former duty of honoring marriage
by our honesty and chastity; namely, because God will show a judgment upon
whoremongers and adulteres, who are the maine transgressors against marriage to
violate and dishonor it; for to the honesty of marriage and the chastity of
the bed, he opposes whoredom and adultery, as a bed polluted and defiled.
For marriage is dishonored and disgraced two ways chiefly; first by
whoremongers who despise it and will not marry, and secondly by adulterers, who
violate and affront marriage. And the judgment which God has already
denounced, and will certainly execute upon whormongers and adulterers, is, that
they shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. See Gal. 5. verse 19.20.21. and
Ephesians. 5.5. And the Author makes God the Judge to condemn and punish these
whoremongers and adulterers, to the end they might think and consider, that
though they commit their wickednesses secretly, and many times escape the eyes
and judgments of men, yet they shall not evade the avenging hand of God, and
in vain they deal warily, if they live not chastely. For God does severely
persecute uncleannes, especially in them whom he has seasoned with the
knowledge of Christ, sequestered from profane and worldly men, and accepted as
persons sacred to himself. If therefore men would avoid this judgment of God
in the loss of eternal life, let them avoid the defiling sins of whoredom
and adultery. Of single life.
Concerning celibate or single life, here is nothing ordained; because although
a chaste celibate be purer and holier then marriage, yet the necessity of it is
not commanded or imposed upon any man by the sacred Scripture: But Christ does
only persuade it, yet only to them, who can contain themselves. Mat.
19.11,12. and Paul more amply and openly. 1. Cor. 7. ver. 8, 26. and thence to
the end of the chapter. Here therefore we must walk in a middle way. And as
marriage must not be detruded into the number of fornications and uncleanness,
as some anciently did, who esteemed marriage nothing else, but a kind of
licenced whoredom: so again on the other side it must not be equalled to a
chaste celibate, which the Scripture clearly prefers before marriage, as
containing more purity and holiness in it. But as we said, it must be
exacted from no man; lest while we affect extreme purity, either we our selves
fall into mischiefs and uncleanness, or precipitate others into them, who
aspire either to the glory of celibate, or to other virtues and offices
enclosed with the necessity of celibate. Whatsoever is honorable, honest, and
undefiled, as the Author here testifies of maririage, that must be granted
free to any man, especially if there arise a weighty cause, as in this case
there may, to cut off all occasions of whoredoms, adulteries, and other
defilements. And they who debar from marriage those which burn as the Apostle
speaks, do all one, as if a man who cannot hinder the disease, does yet
forbid to use the remedy; for what else can follow upon this, but a soarer
sickness? For marriage is the remedy for burning and lust; which when it is
denied to them that burn, the issue will be, that at length they fall into a
far worse disease, and run into unclean and unlawful pleasures. Besides,
it detracts much from the dignity of celibate, if it cease to be voluntary, and
be forced by law, and arise not from free will. But to return to the words of
the Author. Whoredom is between those parties that are both free from the
bond of marriage: but adultery is between parties, whereof either both, or one
of them at least is married. Anciently under the old Testament, when husbands
might have more wives then one, it was not adultery for a married man to lie
with a single woman unmarried, but only whoredom. But under the new
Testament, where this licenciousnes of husbands is limited by the law of
Christ, and restrained to the company of one wife only; adultery is committed
as well on the husbands part, as on the wives; as may easily appear by the
words of Christ. Matthew. 19.9. where he says, Whosoever shall put away his wife
except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, commits adultery.
Which certainly is not, because of the mariage-bond (for that of it self is
rather to avoid uncleanesse then increase it) but absolutely and simply,
because having a wife before he presumes to lie with another woman, when by
Law the former woman cease not to be his wife, because his divorce was
illegal and a nullitie.

5. Let your conversation be without covetousness.] The fifth duty whereto he
exhorts, is Contentedness, by avoiding the vice of covetousness, which here
the Author disswades next after uncleanness in the former verse. For these two
vices of uncleannes and covetousnes, love to go together, or one to follow
close upon another; for we find them this coupled and joined in several
passages of the holy Scriptures; as the two grand vices of the world, that are
most pernicious, and yet most common. See Ephesians. 5.3,5. and Colos. 3.5. and 1.
These. 4.5,6. and diverse other places of the Prophets. Wherefore of all other
vices, these two unto Christians ought to be most odious, as being so jointly
and fully cried out against in the Scriptures. The word for Conversation in the
Greek is (...), which either signifies a custom and manner; although it be
not usually put in the singular number for a manner: but (...) in the plural
for manners: yet more frequently the word (...) signifies the manners; or
customary actions of a man. Or (...) signifies the means and way of getting
our livelihood. Both these senses come to one, and both agree to the point
proposed. For both our manners and our means of getting our livelihood must
be free from all covetousness and love of money. Now covetousness is an
inordinate desire and endeavor of worldly goods; or as Saint Paul describes
it, 1. Tim. 6.9,10. It is a desire to be rich; for what at the ninth verse he
termed a desire to be rich, he afterward at the tenth verse, calls the love of
money or covetousness; and withal he sets this brand upon it, that it is the
nursery or root of all evil. And be content with such things as you have.] To
covetousness he opposes contentedness as the contrary duty and remedy
against it. So does also S. Paul. 1. Tim. 6.8. Where he limits our
contentedness only to food and raiment; saying, Having food and raiment, let
us be therewith content.] He is content with the things he has for the
present, who does so rest satisfied with that estate he has, though it be
mean and small, that he is neither querulous to complain for the present,
nor sollicitous to care and doubt for the future, though he foresee not
provision of food and raiment for the time to come; because he trusts wholly
upon God, and in cases doubtful constantly hopes for help and aid from him.
To a mind thus composed it is not repugnant, if thou art poor, to desire and
seek more, so thou desire and seek it moderatly, and whether thou get more or
not, art always of an equal and indifferent mind, and can say with Tobias
speaking to his son. Fear not my son though we are made poor, for thou
have much wealth if thou fear God, and depart from all sin, and do that
which is pleasing in his sight. Tobit 4.21. But wealthy thou will never be, if
thou distrustest God, and with an anxious and restless carfulness, give
thy self wholly to gain wealth; if thou neglect the worship of God, the
serious and diligent care of thy salvation, beneficence to the poor and needy
according to thy estate, if thou trace the by paths of thriving by unjust
dealing, without regard to the offices and duties of piety and equity. And
these are the bounds wherewith S. Paul defines contentednes, in having food and
raiment, as was before noted. A godly man does neither refuse more, nor
overmuch desire it. See Phil. 4.11,12. Therefore this virtue may well agree
with labor, industry, and parcimony, by which means if God give his blessing,
we may raise our selves from poverty, using withal a due mean and
convenient measure. For he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.
Here he gives the reason why we should be content with what we have, without
complaint or anxity for the time to come; and he draws his reason from the
promise of God unto us; because God has said, he will never leave us nor
forsake us. A reason very effectual and of great moment to persuade us; for
why should we be anxious and careful, when we have so great a person as God
for our Patron and Protector, who the more to secure us, has engaged himself
by his promise, to provide for us? for he has said it. There is a great
Emphasis in the pronoune He like to that of (...). He who is the most high
God, the Author and Guardian of all things, and the Patron and Savior of man.
Whence it appears how firm and certain his succor is to them that are in
adversity I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.] In the second member of
this clause, there is in the Greek a most strong negation of Gods desertion,
(...). Here is a triple negation, that thereby we might so much the more secure
our selves, that the time shall never come, wherein God will forsake us. The
words are the saying of God to Joshua the captain of the Israelites. Joshua
1.5. Which saying, every Christian as being joined to God in a nearer bond,
then ever Joshua was, may well apply unto himself; especially seeing the
assistance and succor promised in these words to Joshua, was only in
reference to the safety and benefit of the people of Israel, to whom he was
leader.

6. So that we may boldly say] He expresses the effect or fruit, which Gods
promise of never failing to help and succor us, does or ought to produce in
us; which effect is wholly opposite to anxiety and carfulness for the future.
And it is twofold. The first is a full and certain confidence and persuasion
of Gods help; the other consequent hereto, is the confession of the mouth and
as it were a glorying, That God will always be ready to help us; which he
presently expresses in the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is my
helper and I will not fear what man shall do unto me. The words here cited by
the Author, do plainly declare, that God will be an helper and succor unto
us, not only in time of want, but also in time of danger; for many times we
fear dangers more then poverty or want; and we gather wealth not only to
defend us against poverty, but to guard us against men and dangers. And
therefore both out health and our wealth is in God; who will so protect us,
that neither poverty nor dangers shall oppress us; unless sometime it be his
good pleasure to exercise and make trial of our faith by hunger, thirst,
nakedness and want of all things, by dangers, prisons, torments and a
fearful death. But then in such a case no riches will advantage us: but may
much hinder us, for they may easily so work upon us, that for love of them we
will not willingly and readily follow Christ, when he would lead us through
craggy and rough ways. For poverty makes Christians nimble and light, but
riches are a burden. What man shall do. He opposes man unto God, that by this
opposition it may appear what a strong guard God is unto us against men; and
what little reason we have to fear men, when we have God for our protector.
For how great and mighty is the Lord, and what a worm is man?

7. Remember them that have the rule over you] The sixth precept or duty
whereto he excites them, is to imitate and follow their leaders and rulers in
the Christian Religion. These leaders and rulers were such as had taught them
by their doctrine and example of life, going before them in the ways of truth
and godliness; or as the Author here describes them, Who have spoken unto you
the word of God] Namely Gods word of the Gospel; such as first of all preached
the Gospel unto them; among whom without doubt were some of the Apostles, and
those who next succeeded the first. Whose faith follow, considering the end of
their conversation] Having designed out the persons who should be remembered,
namely their rulers who had preached the Gospel unto them; here he expresses
and specifieth the matter wherein or for what their rulers should be remembered;
namely, for their faith and for their conversation. They must consider and
follow the faith and doctrine which their rulers delivered unto them; and they
must consider and follow the conversation of their life and manners; and they
must consider the end of their faith and conversation, what issue and event
both these had. How they were not only constant to the end in the faith and
doctrine which they delivered, and in the conversation and holiness of life
which they practiced: but many of them fealed the verity of their holy Religion
with their blood by a bitter death. These are the things that after due
consideration had, they must labor to follow, by adhering to that faith and
doctrine whereto they adhered, with the same firmity and constancy that they
did: and by professing it so effectually, that by virtue thereof we do not
only abstain from all manner of vice, to live holily in the sight of God; but
also not decline to dye for the truth of it. See the manner and way whereby we
must preserve the memory of the Saints departed out of this life; not by
erecting Tombs and Temples unto them at vast charges; not by consecrating
statues and Images unto them; not by pouring out our prayers unto them or their
Images: For these ways are either superfluous and superstitious, or else
unlawful and impious: But we must always remember their holy ordinances, and
the course of their lives suitable to those ordinances, diligently laboring to
follow them, by imitating and expressing their examples in our practice. For
this way will lead us unto holiness and happiness.

8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day and for ever] Because he had
before said, they must remember their rulers, following their faith and
considering their conversation; wherein (as we said) was also included, that
they should always preserve and retain the doctrine which they had heard from
them, and not decline any thing from it; Therefore now he shows that the
doctrine of Christ both for our knowledge and practice is unchangeable; that in
no tract of time or age, any change must be made therein, either by adding,
subtracting or altering any thing therein. Jesus Christ, namely considered both
in respect of his office and in respect of his doctrine; or rather the doctrine
it self of Christ, by way of Metonymy, the efficient or Author for the act or
effect, as often elsewhere. The same yesterday and to day and for ever] Christ
and his doctrine is the very same, constant to it self, and nothing either
changed or changeable, for it is the same always in reference to all times,
whether past, present, or to come. For as the word to day signifies the time
present; so yesterday notes the time past; yet not long past, but lately a
while since; as then was the first time of publishing the Gospel upon earth.
For among the people of God, yesterday signifies the time indefinitely and
lately past, which vulgarly we express by the other day, See Genesis 31.2. and
Exodus 4.10. and Exodus 5.14. and 1 Samuel 20.27. and 2 Samuel 15.20. and 2 King.
9.26. and Job 8.9. And the word for ever signifies the time to come, not for
some part of it, but for all parts of it successively, while any time shall be
lasting. So that nothing is, has been, or shall be changed in the doctrine of
Christ; as it was of late when it was first delivered and published to the
world, so it is now at this present, and so it shall be hereafter for all times
to come throughout all ages: for though the world should last never so long,
yet to the worlds end there shall be no change nor alteration in the doctrine of
the Gospel; not that there will want men, who shall labor to corrupt and change
the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, or shall indeed corrupt and change it
in diverse particulars (for that such men there shall be, we may gather by the
words of the Author in the next verse following, wherein he warnes them of
declining from the purity of the Gospel, and being carried about with diverse
and strange doctrines) but that the doctrine of Christ considered in it self,
and as it contains the truth and will of God; is no way subject to any
mutation or innovation. Whence it appears what we are to think of those
doctrines and opinions, which have risen since the first times of the Church of
Christ, and were never delivered by the Apostles themselves, nor ever received
in the primitive Church. Of these we are to think as the Apostle has left it
written, Though we or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you,
then that we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so
say I now again, if any man preach any other Gospel unto you, then that ye
have received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8,9.

9. Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines] The seventh precept
or duty whereto he exhorts them, although it were in a manner comprehended in
the former verse, where a ground was laid that will necessarily infer it. And
it is, that they should not suffer them to be persuaded to diverse and new
doctrines, which were neither heretofore delivered unto them by their teachers
and rulers in the Christian Religion, nor were agreeable to the rule of the
truth delivered. Diverse doctrines in this place are they, which are different
and diverse from themselves and opposite one to another. As if he had said. In
matters concerning Christian Religion (for of these only he speaks) see that
ye receive not one while this opinion, and another while that; for to do so,
is their fashion, who are not yet exercised in the knowledge of the truth, or
not yet sufficiently confirmed in it. He adds the word strange, that by this
means they might discern those doctrines. For strange doctrines are new
doctrines, neither delivered by the first publishers of the Christian verity,
nor consonant to those that were first delivered, whose very countenance and
habit, as I may say, does easily discover them to be none of the Apostles
doctrines, as we see it fall out with persons that are strangers. With these
diverse and strange doctrines they must not be carried about; which as it
seems is a Metaphor taken from ships and vessels at sea, which are many times
agitated and tossed diverse ways by diverse and contrary winds. Which
similitude St. Paul also uses, where he says, That we henceforth be no more
children tossed too and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by
the sleight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. And we are carried about with a doctrine as with a
wind, when we give as it were the sails of our souls unto it, by embracing
and following it. For it is a good thing that the heart be established with
grace, and not with meats. To his general exhortation he subjoynes a special
reason or motive. Whence it appears that the Author in this general
exhortation, had chiefly a special reference to some particular doctrines,
whereto the Hebrews bore a great propension of mind, which could hardly be any
other then such as were drawn from the Law of Moses. For there could be no
danger that they would decline from the purity of Christian discipline, to any
other but the ordinances of the Law. And in the first place, the sacrifices and
offerings which were usually made under the Law; if not, to believe that by
them they obtained the expiation of their sins, for they had been
sufficiently taught already under the Gospel that the sins of all believers
were fully purged by the blood of Christ: yet at least, that they might enjoy
the feasts of those sacrifices, and society with the rest of the Jews,
communicating with them in their Religion, and consequently in their whole
state; which thing they supposed might be permitted them especially in their
sacrifices and peace offerings, as being not offered for sin, but either upon
vow, or upon some other voluntary devotion; and which seemed not to be excluded
by the sacrifice of Christ, which was only expiatory for sin. For even in
those sacrifices except the holocaust or whole burnt-offerings, part went to
the honor of God, as the blood and the fat, part to the Priest, and part to
the use of those that offered, whereto they invited one another in the court of
the Temple, and did eat together feasting and cheering themselves before the
Lord. Therefore this holy feasting together, being an argument of their
communion with the rest of the people, might flatter their souls, and make
them desire the legal sacrifices and offerings, if not all, yet at least the
peace offerings, and take it heavily that they were restrained from them, and
withal from the society of the Jews Commonwealth, as unworthy persons,
because of the Christian Religion, especially as it stood pure and refined from
the legal ceremonies. As also, to be inhibited from the Religion and state of
the Jew, was troublesome to the flesh, for to enjoy both was very pleasing
carnally; and to eat the holy meats before the Lord had a show of piety, and
might seem somewhat to prevail with God. With this error therefore, whereinto
they were prone to fall, the Author meets two ways; and withal declares what
sacrifices and what offerings whether for sin or peace we should offer unto
God, namely spiritual sacrifices, wherein there is no use of eating. For
though many are of opinion that the Author here treats of not observing that
difference of meats which was so precisely and carefully ordained under the
Law, yet we think otherwise for these reasons: 1. Because the Author seems to
recall them from the use of meats and not to grant the use of them; for he
speaks not of a liberty to eat, but of a necessity to abstain; and he opposes
grace to meats, because it is good the heart should be established or refreshed
or recreated not with meats but with grace: but the heart is not recreated with
meats not eaten but eaten; therefore grace is here opposed not to the use of
meats, but to abstinence from them. 2. Because the following reason proposed
ver. 10, 11. does openly treat of that eating of the sacrifices; which to
Christians was not convenient; neither can this reason by any means be applied
to the abolishing of the difference of meats. 3. Because from the words spoken
here; the Author infers at the 15. verse (as the particle therefore shows)
that we must offer spiritual sacrifices by Christ. Whence it may be gathered,
that by these words that service and eating of sacrifices anciently ordained
under the Law, is here reprehended and condemned; for that from this is rightly
and immediately inferred: but is not inferred from the abolishing of the
difference of meats. But now let us consider and weigh the Authors argument.
The first way is contained in these words by way of prevention. For they who
desired those sacrifices and holy banquets, might say, It is good to establish
the heart with meats, that is, to recreate it, after the Hebrew phrase, who
call recreating of the heart, establishing of it; See Genesis 18.5. where Abraham
invited the three men, of whom we treated before, to establish their heart with
a morsel of bread; that is, to take some little repast. The Author seems to
have reference to the words of Moses. Deuteronomy. 12.18. who speaking of eating holy
things, says, And thou shall rejoice before the Lord thy God in all that thou
put thine hand unto. To this objection the Author answers by opposing unto
it a greater and more excellent good, by saying, It is a good thing that the
heart be established with grace, not with meats. As if he had said, To
establish the heart with meats is not so good, but to do it with grace is
truly good as he presently demonstrates. By grace he mean; that grace of God,
which is revealed and offered unto men in the Gospel, consisting in a plenary
remission of the guilt and pain of all our sins, even the most heinous; in a
perfect expiation of all our sins by the sacrifice and offering of Christ; in
loosing from the necks of men that yoke of the ceremonial law, wherein are
contained the ordinances for carnal sacrifices; in justifying us not by merit
of works, but by faith; and after justification in giving us possession of
eternal life in due time. This is the thing, the good thing, wherewith not our
bodies, but our hearts and souls are in a wonderful manner recreated and
refreshed; and he that has tasted and relished such grace in his soul, will
no more desire the meats and banquets of sacrifices. And the Author speaking of
grace does very fitly and properly use the phrase of establishing the heart.
For our hearts, that is, our souls which are commonly signified by the name of
the heart, are established and recreated not properly with meats, which reach
not to them, but with the grace of God, and is made active and lively to
perform all Christian duties. Which have not profited them that have been
occupied therein.] Here he brings the reason, why in a manner he denied, that
the heart is established with meats, or that such establishing is not so good a
thing; namely, because they that have exercised therein, have found no profit
thereby. To be occupied in meats or (as the Greek has it) to walk in meats,
seeing here (as we have showed) meats signify the meats of the sacrifices or
of the holy things, is nothing else, but to partake of those carnal
sacrifices, and to accustom the eating of things offered and consecrated, and
placing therein a part of Gods worship and serice. By those who are said to be
occupied in those meats, are meant the Jews, before they were illuminated in
the doctrine of Christ. Which have not profited them. The Jews found no true
profit by eating those meats. For as Christ says of Manna, John 6.49. Your
fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness and are dead: So may it well be said,
of the meats of the sacrifices and things consecrated to God. Your fathers did
eat the meats of sacrifices and are dead. But he that recreates and fills his
soul with that grace of God which is revealed and exhibited to men in the
Gospel, he shall live for ever. Therefore the words not profited do not
simply exclude all profit and advantage wholly; for the meats of the sacrifices
did profit something in respect of that time, to repair the strength of the
body for a short time; but they had not a true profit belonging to the Spirit,
but only a carnal profit, that was transitory and fugitive, not durable and
eternal. In which sense also Christ says of his flesh eaten in a carnal way,
as his Disciples understood it, Joh. 6 63. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the
flesh profits nothing; that is, it furthereth nothing unto life, to produce
in men a spiritual and eternal life. It is the Spirit that vivifies men,
which, as from the spiritual eating of the flesh of Christ slain for the life
of the world, and from the spiritual drinking of his blood, so from that sweet
taste of that divine grace, which was confirmed by the death and blood of
Christ, does distill into our souls and so revives and quickens us. From these
words of the Author it is manifest, that to Christian Religion it is nothing
pertinent or profiting to eat any true meat properly, and consequently not the
flesh and blood of Christ. For if the body of Christ were properly eaten, and
therein consisted a part of Religion; would not the Author have opposed the
meat of Christ's flesh and blood to the meats of those sacrifices? would he have
said, we have an altar, whereof it is not lawful for them to eat, no not for
the Priests, if it be lawful for the Priests to eat the body and drink the
blood of Christ offered every day upon the altar, and unlawful not to eat and
drink it? Would he have left us only the sacrifice of praise and good works,
for the sacrifices and offerings of all animals and other creatures, which
might be turned into meats?

10. We have an altar whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the
Tabernacle] Hitherto the Author has showed that there is very little or no
cause, why Christians should desire those sacrifices of the Law and the meats
of those offerings; or should place some part of Gods worship or service in
them, or should take it grievously, that for the profession of Christian
Religion they are drawn from commerce and communion with the Jews and their
state. Now he shows further, that it is not lawful for Christians to eat the
meats of sacrifices, as was anciently done under the Law. He therefore says,
We have an altar.] Any man may easily perceive that these words are figurative
and improper, taken from the ordinances in the discipline of Moses, which for
the most part cannot be applied to the discipline of Christ, but by way of
abusion and impropriety; whereof we had no few examples formerly, especially in
the comparison of Christ with the Leviticall Priests. For, for comparisons
sake, we many times use such words of a thing, which without respect to the
comparison we would never use. The same impropriety falls out again here. In
the Christian Religion, to speak properly, there is no Altar, no Tabernacle to
serve, no Sacrifices which can be eaten; neither if we respect the eating of
sacrifices or the abstinence from them, is there any such difference between
Christians, as if some were Priests and Ministers of the Tabernacle, and others
were not. Therefore in such sayings we must not weigh every word singly by it
self, as what is signified by the Altar, what by the Tabernacle, and whereto
it answers, but we must enquire for the sense of the whole sentence: Wherefore
these words import nothing else, but that Christians have no other sacrifices,
but such whereof they have no power to eat. By those which serve the Tabernacle
(which under the Law were only Priests and Levites) are signified all
Christians in general. Christians therefore are said to be in that condition,
as if under the Law there had been such an Altar, whereof and of the sacrifices
laid upon it, and offered unto God, it was not lawful for any man to eat, no
not for the Priests themselves and other Ministers of the house of God, much
less for the rest of the people. For if there had been such an Altar under the
Law, then it is apparent unto all men, that the eating of sacrifices and things
offered unto God, should have had no place under the Law. But thus it is under
the Gospel; and therefore the eating of sacrifices must be to Christians
unlawful.

11. For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the Sanctuary
by the high Priest for sin, are burnt without the campe] Here the Author
proves by his assertion in the former verse, why in Christianity the matter is
so ordered, that under the Gospel there is such an Altar, whereof the
Sacrifices are not permitted to be eaten of any man. Yet he proposes his
argument so concisely and briefly that he seems rather to point at it, then
explicate it. And it manifestly appears that the Author takes it as granted
for a ground, That Christians have no other Sacrifice, but what is resembled by
the entrance of the high Priest into the Sanctuary, or by those beasts only,
whose blood was brought into the Sanctuary by the high Priest, and their bodies
were burnt without the camp. For unless the Author took this for granted, he
could not from this (that in those sacrifices it was not lawful to eat the
flesh of the offering) simply conclude, that it is not lawful for us
Christians to eat sacrifices, or that we have an altar whereof we may not
lawfully eat. And this he might well take for granted, because by that
Sacrifice whereby our high Priest entered into his Sanctuary under the new
Covenant, all things were perfomed, whether we respect the plenary expiation of
our sins, or the full reconciliation of Gods favor and grace toward us,
that for that effect there is no further need of any Sacrifices of beasts or
other things corporeal. Neither is there reason, why any man should say, that
in the Christian Religion there are other Sacrifices and oblations, which
Christians must offer; and therefore by that sacrifice other Sacrifices and
oblations are not excluded. For the Author does not oppose that Sacrifice to
those that are wholly incorporeall and spiritual, and whereof no meat can be
made, as are the Sacrifices to be offered by Christians, such as a contrite and
humbled heart, as David speaks, the Sacrifices of praise, the fruits of our
lips, confessing unto the name of God, communicating or doing good (as the
Author has it afterward) and other works of piety. But he opposes it to
those Sacrifices, wherein are offered things corporeal and fit for food; so
that he leaves no further place for all these. Therefore herewith the Sacrifice
of the Mass must needs fall, wherein a thing corporeal that may be eaten, is
said to be daily offered. But some man may demand, how it can be true, that in
the Christian Religion there remains that Sacrifice, whereby the blood of
slain beasts was by the Priests brought into the Sanctuary for sin, and
their bodies burnt without the camp. We answer, because that under
Christianity there remains the Sacrifice of Christ our high Priest, which is
the antitype and solid body, whereof that Sacrifice was but a type and shadow.
Which sacrifice of Christ by the coming of it, has abolished all other
carnal sacrifices, and the eating of them. Whereof this is an open and
manifest argument, that in the type and shadow of it, there was no place
allowed for eating, but the bodies of the beasts slain for it, were wholly
burnt, and that without the camp. Yet it is not necessary, we should say, that
here is a reference, to that yearly Sacrifice only, whereby the high Priest
entered the Oracle, or the holiest of all; seeing the reference may be to all
those Sacrifices, which were made as well for the high Priest himself, as for
the whole people. For the blood of those beasts that were slain for a
sin-offering, was by the high Priest brought into the Sanctuary, although not
into the Oracle or holiest place of all, yet into the first Tabernacle which is
properly called the Sanctuary, chap. 9. verse. 2. (which in other Sacrifices for
private men was not done, wherein the blood of the beasts slain, after the high
Priest had sprinkled the horns of the Altar that stood in the court at the
door of the Tabernacle, was all poured down at the bottom of the Altar,
Levit. 4.25) and the bodies of the beasts so slain for sinne-offerings, were
no less burned without the camp, then was done in that solemn anniversary
Sacrifice, as it appears in the same fourth chapter of Leviticus.

12. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own
blood, suffered without the gate.] Because he had said, that in those
Sacrifices, that carried a type and shadow of the Sacrifice of Christ, the
bodies of the beasts slain were wholly burnt without the camp; therefore he
affirms it came to pass, that Jesus also whom those beasts slain for the
Expiation and Salvation of the whole people, fully represented and shadowed,
suffered without the gate. And this he does for this end, that the conformity
and resemblance between the tipe and antitipe, between the shadow and the
body might appear the better, which at the first sight would sufficiently
argue, that one was referred to the other. The City of Jerusalem, wherein the
people after their conquest of Canaan, seated themselves, is answerable to the
camp wherewith they journeyed in the wilderness, and succeeded in the room
of that camp. And therefore in this respect, it was all one for a man to be
drawn without the gate or walls of Jerusalem, when the people dwelt in that
City, as without the camp, when they had a camp for their City. Jesus also]
the particle also has in this place the force of a comparison; as if he had
said, not only the bodies of those beasts were burnt without the camp: but
Jesus also himself suffered without the gate. Suffered,] namely, the death of
the Cross, the genus being put for the species. And the death of Christ is
answerable, not only to the slaughter of the beasts that were made within the
camp and City, or compass of the Temple, but also to the burning of their
bodies, which was performed without the camp and City; for this death answered
their slaughter, as his blood was shed, and their burning, as his body was
buried. And the things that in the tipe and shadow were as it were severed,
were in the antitipe and body united, so that only death in Christ, answered
both the slaughter and burning of the beasts. That he might sanctify the
people. In these words Christ is tacitly compared with the legal high Priest,
whose proper office it was to sanctify or expiate, not this or that single
person, but the whole people, and the blood of Christ is compared to the blood
of those beasts, which was shed for the whole people. And Jesus did sanctify
and wholly expiate the people with his blood, in that by the intervention of
his cruel death he entered into the heavenly Sanctuary, and appears for us
for ever in the sight of God, to make intercession for us: i. to free us by his
care from all the guilt and penalties of our sins. For the same saying is
expressed by Saint Paul in other words, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. For that which is sanctified
or made holy, is rightly opposed to that which is execrated or made a curse.
We have already observed heretofore, that the Author thought he had occasion
to speak of Christ's blood brought into the heavenly Tabernacle, whereto his
comparison and resemblance of Christ to the legal high Priest might invite
him; yet does purposely avoid it, and uses only words, from which it might
appear, that our sins were expiated by the blood of Christ, yet not as
brought into the Tabernacle of heaven and offered unto God, but only as it was
shed, and prepared entrance for Christ into heaven, and there to help himself
unto God. The same caution is used also by the Author in this place, who in the
former verse having made express mention of the blood of beasts, brought by
the high Priest into the Sanctuary for sin offerings; yet when he comes to
the blood of Christ, says nothing else of it, but that he Sanctified his
people with it, or as it is in the Greek by it, that is, by shedding it. By
his own blood.] Not as the high Priest under the Law, who sanctified the
people by blood, yet not by his own blood, but by the blood of beasts: but
because Christ was to sanctify the people by his own blood, therefore he
must suffer without the gate, and be slaughtered by an infamous death, to fit
him for the subsequent offering of himself afterward to God in the heavenly
Sanctuary.

Let us go forth therefore unto him without the campe] After the Author had
showed that the Hebrews considering they have embraced the Christian Religion,
must not eat or banquet with the meats of sacrifices, as if some part of
divine worship or service were therein contained; now from the infamous death
which Christ suffered without the gate, he inferres, that they must not regard
it at all, if for Christ's sake they be driven from the rest of the Jews, not
only from their temples, sacrifices, and holy banquets, but even from their
City, from their commerce and civil society; yea although they be publicly
reproached as impious and cursed persons, and cut off from the body of the Jews
commonwealth; or at last lose their lives by the same or the like punishment,
under which Christ their head and Captain suffered. And this he therefore
inferres, because the hatred of the Jews against the Christians contained not
it self, with prohibiting them from their Ceremonies, sacrifices and temple:
but proceeded so far as to drive them from their commonwealth and Civil
commerce, with public infamy and reproach, only because they professed the
Religion and name of Christ. Let us go therefore] Seeing our Lord Jesus
Christ, our high Priest and heavenly King, was led out without the gate, and so
separated from the rest of the corporation of men, and there put to an infamous
death, therefore Let us go forth unto him without the camp. Let us willingly
and freely, with an open and ready heart undergo together with him,
banishment, reproaches, infamy, death and all manner of evils. Christ now lives
without the camp, without the City, without the gate; shall we not willingly
go forth, to be rather with him alone, then among the wicked multitude of the
Jews? For we are happier without the camp with Christ, then in the camp without
Christ; seeing where Christ is, there is true happiness. Why the Author names
the camp, we showed the cause before, ver. 12. Bearing his reproach] To bear
the reproach of Christ, is to refuse no suffering for Christ's sake, that Christ
himself did bear. For in the word reproach are included all evils that can be
inflicted upon a man; because evils are always inflicted with infamy and
reproach. And the reproach of Christ, is any reproach like to his reproach, and
for the like cause that he bare his? namely for the testimony of that truth
which he published; that we may subconfirme by our death what he preconfirmed
by his. For it is not the suffering but the cause that makes the martyr.

14. For here have we no continuing City] He annexeth a new reason, why we
should go forth without our camps, that is, bear it patiently to be ejected
and exiled out of our Country or City; because here upon earth we have no
continuing city, i. none that is durable, which cannot be taken from us, nor we
from it. All the cities which we inhabit upon earth, we inhabit only for a
time. Why therefore should we refuse for Christ's sake to lose that city, which
otherwise we must wholly lose in a very short space? Or else the Author
teaches us, that we Christians as we are Christians, enjoy no City upon earth
by any firm and proper possession: but in this respect we are always subject
to expulsions, banishments and such like miseries. The Author therefore might
with good reason use this admonition, to teach Christians what is their state
and condition upon earth, especially the Hebrews who might imagine, because
they proceeded from the stock of Abraham, therefore they had full right to
enjoy the freedom of the city Jerusalem no less then others of their Nation,
and thereupon must needs take it grievously to be excluded from their
inheritance. Therefore he shows that Christians have another inheritance, and
enjoy a right to another city far more excellent. But we seek one to come]
This is that permanent and continuing city, from the possession whereof we
shall never be disturbed in any age; for to this city we have a right by
Christ, who is the head and king of it, that there we may live safely under
him and reign under him. But as long as we live here on earth, we are like
pilgrims and strangers; who are traveling toward their country. He calls this
city to come, because to us it is to come; but to God, and Christ, and the
Angels it is already present. The word we seek although it signify the effect
it self, yet it must not here be taken so much for the effect, as for the
efficacy of Christian Religion, and our duty therein. For then we seek when
we follow the power and guidance of Christian Religion: Because it is the
condition and duty of Christians to seek a City to come, that is, to endeavor
with all care and diligence that they may attain it.

15. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise] Here he proceeds to
a new precept or duty, yet such a one as issues from his former words and
depends on them; as the illative particle therefore shows. Yet it follows not
from the words immediately preceding, but both from his principal assertion,
and from what was included in the argument thereof. The principal assertion
is, That the doctrine of Jesus Christ is immutable; as it was in the beginning,
so shall it remain for all ages. In the argument or proof of this doctrine,
Christ in a comparison with the high Priest is said to sanctify the people
with his blood. Now from this, that the doctrine of Christ is always so
uniforme as to be one and the same, subject to no alteration; and that Christ
is our high Priest, who has sanctified his whole people with his blood, it is
rationally inferred, that we must by him offer sacrifices to God. For anciently
the whole people jointly, and single persons from among the people offered
sacrifices to God by the Priest; the whole people by the high Priest only, but
private persons by Priests of an inferior order; all which, together with the
high Priest, as others were to offer sacrifices by them, are correspondent to
Christ alone; for in this respect Christ alone is as much as all they together.
For, although in the Christian Religion besides Christ our high Priest there
are other Priests, namely all Christians, yet compared to Christ they must be
accounted for the common people. And to offer sacrifices by Christ, is to offer
such sacrifices as are consecrated and prepared as it were by Christ himself,
and by him are made acceptable unto God; and this is done when we offer them as
the worshippers and servitors of Christ, by faith in God, in and through
Christ, by the prescript and command of Christ; for what is offered in this
manner, is offered as it were by the hand of CHRIST himself. The Sacrifice of
Praise. Here he specifies what kind of Sacrifices Christians are to offer
unto God, namely, the Sacrifices of Praise; because all carnal Sacrifices used
under the law are abrogated, and the spiritual Sacrifice of Praise, is
succeeded in the room of all those Sacrifices which were peculiarly offered of
every one under the Law. The sacrifice of praise by a genetive of the species,
is the praise it self and celebration of Gods name, or the act of thanksgiving
unto him. And although our prayers which we power forth unto God, be scarce at
any time, at least especially and principally called sacrifices, but are rather
compared with incense, because they are to be uttered and ascend unto God from
an ardent spirit; yet there is nothing to the contrary, but that we may include
our prayers also in these sacrifices of praise; seeing they are usually joined
with our praises and thanksgivings unto God: And this very act of imploring
Gods help in all things, contains no small part of celebrating and praising
Gods name. Continually] This sacrifice of praise must be offered, continually
and daily without ceasing any day; so that no part or day of our life must be
vacant or void of this sacrifice. For these spiritual sacrifices are of that
nature, that they may be offered continually day after day, without ceasing any
day; for seeing God multiplies his blessings continually upon us, and gives us
every day our daily bread, therefore we must continually offer sacrifice unto
him, giving him daily praise and thanksgiving. To God] God is the same, to whom
these spiritual sacrifices must be offered by Christ; for he is the same
person that was worshipped and served under the old Covenant, and must be so
again under the new, only the manner and way of his worship and service is
changed under the new. That is, the fruit of our lips] He yet further
specifies and explicates the sacrifice of praise, that it is the fruit not of
our corn or our cattle, as it was anciently under the Law, but of our lips;
the fruit that grows on our lips as on the branches, whose roots are the inmost
recesses of the heart, as we see it in the fruits of trees, which grow indeed
and hang upon the branches, but draw their original and their sap from the
lowest roots of the trees. Giving thanks to his name.] He yet declares more
specially what this fruit of our lips is, and says it is our thanksgiving to
the name of God. The word in the Greek, is confessing to his name. But it is
well known, that the Hebrew phrase of confessing to God, does signify to
celebrate, praise, and give thanks unto God. For confessing to God is a
general word, comprehending all manner of our speech unto God, whether we
speak of his attributes, perfections or works in general, which is Praise; or
of his particular blessings and benefits to us, which is Thanksgiving; or of
our sinfulness and offenses against him, which we simply call Confession.

16. But to do good and to communicate forget not] Here he proceeds to another
precept or duty of Christians; namely, to beneficence or communicating toward
the poor and needy, which he reckons among spiritual sacrifices, that he
might allude to the custom observed under the Law. For in the sacrifices of
the peace offerings, whereto our spiritual sacrifices are most resembling,
they were wont to make feasts, to which they commonly invited the poor, and
especially the Levites that ministered in the Temple, that by this means they
might exercise their beneficence toward the meaner sort. This virtue the Author
would not have to cease under the Gospel, although under it the sacrifices of
beasts, and such other carnal things are ceased. We communicate] When as often
as need requires, we impart unto others, that part of our means which was
properly our own; and make that as it were common to many, which was before
proper to our selves. Forget not] Although the offerings of carnal sacrifices
be ceased, and thereby the occasion of doing good and communicating may seem
to be cut off: yet ye must so offer your spiritual sacrifices, that ye may be
always mindful and careful of doing good, whereof fit and opportune
occasions will never be wanting. For with such sacrifices God is well pleased]
Here is the reason given, why we must do good and communicate, because this
beneficence to the poor is a sacrifice, and such a sacrifice as wherewith God
is well pleased. For the words, such sacrifices, must be referred both to the
sacrifice of praise, and to the sacrifice of beneficence. For even under the
Law both these sacrifices were more pleasing unto God then the sacrifices of
sheep and oxen. For says God, Will I eat the flesh of bulls or drink the
blood of goats? Offer unto God thanksgiving and pay thy vows unto the most
High, Psalm. 50.13,14. And again, For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and
the knowledge of God more then burnt offerings, Hos. 6.6. God would rather have
the things which were anciently offered unto him, to be spent upon man who
needs them, then upon himself who needs them not; and therefore he has
released his whole right thereto, that they might wholly be transferred upon
needy men. Hence it manifestly appears, that the community of goods is not
commanded under the Gospel; for if all goods were common, how could we do
good and communicate, seeing that which is already common cannot be
communicated? And how should we perform that service of God, which consists
in the sacrifice of doing good and communicating, wherewith God is well pleased?

17. Obey them that have the rule over you.] Here is the last general precept
or duty that he gives unto Christians. By them that rule, he means the
Rectors, Elders, and Bishops of the Church, who are called Rulers, because they
rule and govern the Church, by doctrine, exhortation, and example of life, by
Counsels, Admonitions, and Ecclesiastical censures. These Rulers we must obey,
though the things they require of us, be many times harsh and troublesome to us.
Yet this precept of obedience must be extended no further, then to such things
as are conformable to the Laws of God, in reference whereto the Rulers of the
Church are to frame all their Rules and Commands. And subject your selves.]
This is but an explication or designation of that obedience, which in the
former words he required of us toward our rulers; because obedience is nothing
else but a subjection of our selves to them that have the rule over us. For
they watch for your souls.] He brings a reason for this precept of our
obedience, drawn from the office of our Rulers; because it is their office and
duty to be very vigilent and careful for their souls, who are committed to
their charge. For they that keep watch have a diligent care of them, for whom
they watch, that no danger may befall them. And common watchmen watch for our
bodies, but the Rulers of the Church watch for our souls, that no man's soul
should perish, or that no man should fail of that true and eternal salvation
of souls. Whence it appears what great reason we have to obey our Rulers,
whose charge and care belongs wholly to our souls, and whose commands and
admonitions we can despise, with no less danger then the loss of our souls.
As they that must give account.] Now on the other side he shows a reason of
the duty of our Rulers whom God has appointed over us, why they must use all
diligent care to watch for our souls; namely, because they must give an
account of their office and actions to God and Christ, who has committed his
poor sheep to their care and charge; so that if any perish through their
default or negligence, they must answer for it under a grievous penalty. For
to this purpose tend those words of God in Ezekiel. So thou, O son of man, I
have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shall hear
the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. When I say unto the wicked, O
wicked man! thou shall surely die; If thou do not speak to warn the wicked
from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I
require at thine hand. Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to
turn from it: if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity:
but thou have delivered thy soul, Ezekiel. 33.7,8,9. Therefore this so weighty
and so dangerous an Office, which our Rulers bear, does altogether require on
their part, that they be careful to watch for our souls; and it well
deserves on our part, that we should obey and subject our selves unto them, and
not take it in ill part, if, to provide not only for our salvation, but their
own, they refuse to humor and flatter our fancies. That they may do it with
joy, and not with griefe] He yet presses our obedience with a further reason;
namely, that our Rulers may reap some spiritual fruit of their Office, and
perform it with joy, and not with grief. For certainly this their Office so
dangerous to themselves, and so commodious to us, does deserve this respect at
our hands, that in the function of their Office, we should so carry our
selves, as to be a comfort and joy unto them, and not a grief. And we are a
joy unto them, when we show our selves obsequious and pliant to their
doctrines, precepts, and warnings: but we are a grief to them when we are
refractory and obstinate. And not with griefe] In the Greek it is (...); which
properly and adequatly signifies sighing; which is the outward effect and sign
of inward grief, and sorrow. For to this effect are the words of Saint Paul 2.
Cor. 2.3. And I wrote this same unto you, lest when I came, I should have
sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice. And again in the same Epistle,
chap. 12.21. I fear lest when I come again, my God will humble me among you
and that I shall bewail many, which have sinned already, and have not repented.
For that is unprofitable for you] This is spoken by way of mollifying or
diminishing the matter. For to grieve our rulers by our disobedience, is not
only unprofitable to us, but very hurtful. Seeing God will take sore vengeance
upon us for this double offense, that we should deserve so ill at Rulers hands,
who watch so piously and carefully for the salvation of our souls, as to repay
their diligence and care with grief and sorrow.

18. Pray for us.] A particular precept or request unto the Hebrews: But he
speaks only of himself in the plural number, as it appears in the verse
following, wherein expressing what they should pray for, he mentions a thing
concerning himself only. For we trust we have a good conscience] He
subjoynes the ground or cause of his request; namely, because he was not a
person altogether unworthy to obtain this good Office from them. But he
speaks very modestly and prudently of himself, that he might decline all
envy. For first, he says not simply, we have a good conscience; but we trust
we have a good conscience; so we believe, and so we persuade our selves;
which could not but be improperly spoken, seeing to speak properly, a good
conscience consists in the persuasion of it self. Therefore a good
conscience is in this place taken for the cause of a good conscience, that is,
for a life unblameable or void of all offense; as if he had said, I trust and
am persuaded, that I so live and so carry my self, that my conscience may well
be at rest with my actions. Secondly, he speaks in the plural number, and by
way of communication does mingle himself in a manner with the multitude,
seeming also to testify no more of himself then of them. In all things
willing to live honestly.] He shows the reason of his confidence, why he
trusts that he has a good conscience; namely, because he is willing to live
honestly in all things. He says not, that actually he does live honestly in
all things, but affectively he is willing to live so; which is much more
modest. But his willingness herein must not be taken for the sole purpose and
intention of his mind: but of his study, endeavor and labor; or of a will
continually actual and effectual. For so Saint Paul testifies of himself.
Acts 24.16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a good
conscience, void of offense toward God and toward men. And this is to live well
and honestly in all things, namely, in all our actions and dealings; when thou
carriest thy self so uprightly, that thou deservest no just reproof or blame,
neither in the sight of God nor of men: Before God, in being clear from all
spot, from which a Christian life ought to be free: and before men, in
appearing such a one, that thou give no just occasion to any, either to
think or suspect evil of thee; and do shun all such things, as though they
be not determined by any Law of God, yet are dishonest in men's opinion.

19. But I beseech you the rather to do this] Namely, to pray for me. And the
adverbe the rather, may be referred to the next verb before it, I beseech you;
as if he had said, I beseech you so much the rather to pray for me, that I may
be restored unto you the sooner; or it may be referred to the verb after it
to do this; as if he had said, I beseech you, that you would the rather pray
for me. But for what? That I may be restored unto you the sooner.] He shows
the end and fruit of their prayers to what effect they should the rather, and
the more earnestly pray for him; namely, thereby to obtain from God, that he
might be restored unto them the sooner; that is, that his return unto them
might be speedier, then it was like to be as things now stood. For it seems he
was already free from prison, and set at liberly, as may be gathered from the
23. verse following.

20. Now the God of peace] Here begins the close of this Epistle, which first
contains a devotion concluded with a doxologie; then certain monitions, or
rather requests, which again he ends with another devotion, and withal ends
the whole Epistle. In his devotion, he first names and describes the person, of
whom all those things are to be performed, which he prays and wishes to
them: Then are expressed the wishes themselves. He says therefore, But the God
of peace] The particle but contains a tacit opposition; as if he had said, I
have hitherto proposed unto you diverse monitions and precepts; but the God of
peace enable you to keep them. But he describes the Author and donor of the
blessings he wishes unto them, first in calling him the God of peace. And the
descriptions of God, that a^ ^sed in wishes, are commonly fitted to the wishes
themselves. In this place, because the Author wishes to the Hebrews that
which might render them truly happy, namely that in all respects they might
please God; therefore by the word peace seems to be meant rather happiness
according to the ordinary phrase among the Hebrews, then concord, or what else
the word peace does elsewhere signify; and in this sense this title is more
frequently attributed unto God, but in the other seldom. And God is called the
God of peace, that is, of happiness, not only because God alone can make men
happy, but because he will and also does make them so, by supplying them
abundantly with all those means and helps whereby true happiness may be
attained by men. And therefore in this place he describes God in this manner,
thereby to teach us, that from him proceeds all happiness, and from him must
be sought, and may be easily obtained all things belonging to the attaining of
it, because he is ready and free to grant happiness to all that seek it by
due means. That brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great
shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting Covenant] He
adjoynes another description of God; from whence it appears, how certainly God
will make those men happy and blessed, that believe and obey him. And he
mentions that mighty and admirable work of God, which to all the godly brings
a most assured hope of eternal happiness and blessedness; and so he
manifestly proves him to be the God of peace or happiness. And this work was,
That he brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shepherd of the
sheep, and that through the blood of the everlasting Covenant: wherein he
describes withal our Lord Jesus himself; that hence it may appear, what an
infinite blessing God bestowed upon men, by this bringing again of our Lord
Jesus from the dead. If God had delivered but some ordinary man from the dead
and estated him in eternal life, yet even for that he must needs be accounted
the author of happiness. But now, that he has raised from the dead not an
ordinary person, but the Shepherd of the sheep, not an ordinary shepherd, but
that great Shepherd; nor constituted by an ordinary way, but through the blood
of the everlasting Covenant; he is much more to be accounted the author and
donor of happiness: Which that this Author might declare the more amply and
fully, therefore it is, that he proceeds by words that are very passionate and
stately. That brought again from the dead] That raised from death to life. The
word reducing or bringing again is very accommodate to signify that God was
the Shepherd of Christ our Shepherd, whose office it is to lead forth his
sheep and bring them again; and that God brought Christ again from the
hideous den of death, and so together with him all his sheep. For the reduction
of our Shepherd from the grave, is also our reduction and resurrection from
it. It was in our Shepherd first that God showed an essay of his great power
and goodness; and that experiment on Christ was an engagement unto us, to
assure us also of our resurrection. But who this God of peace is that brought
again our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead, both the thing it self and the holy
Scriptures clearly show, namely that it is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
In the description of our Lord Jesus almost every word of the Author is
emphaticall. For first he calls him the Shepherd of the sheep, which must not
be understood as restrained to that time only wherein Christ lived upon earth,
but enlarged (and much rather) to the time following, since he sat on the
Throne of God; for since that time, he became most perfectly and properly the
Shepherd of the sheep. Now Christ is the Shepherd of the sheep, not only
because he ministers to them the wholesome food of Gods word and Spirit, but
because he every way looks unto them; for he assembles and collects them, he
governes and defends them, and finally procures their eternal salvation. For
it is the part of a Shepherd, not only to feed the sheep, but to defend and
govern them, and look to them in all things as need shall require. Whence
Peter when he called our Savior the Shepherd, adds to it the word Bishop,
which signifies a Guardian, especially as the Hebrews use to understand it, 1
Pet. 2.25. For when we have a great care of any thing, we often visit,
inspect, and see it; from whence arises the word Bishop, which properly
signifies a visitor or overseer. He that desires to know the properties of a
good shepherd, let him read in the tenth Chapter of John the parable of the
good Shepherd, which there Christ applies unto himself. The article that
prefixed here before the Shepherd teaches us, that he is no ordinary or
vulgar shepherd, but an eminent and excellent person, whose description and
promise also is extant, Ezekiel. 24. But the addition of the word great unto this
Shepherd declares his excellency more manifestly, when the Author says, that
great Shepheard] For by this appellation he specifies, what manner of shepherd
he understands, namely a Shepherd so exceeding great that in comparison of him
all other shepherds are very little. In which sense also St. Peter calls him
the chief Shepherd, or Prince of shepherds, 1 Pet. 5.4. And certainly Christ
must needs be a great Shepherd indeed, seeing he is equal to God in wisdom,
power and dominion, seated in heaven at the right hand of God, upon the throne
of God, and feeds his sheep wholly in the same manner that God does; seeing he
appoints all other shepherds of his sheep, and has them subject unto him,
seeing he gathers his sheep out of all Nations into one sheepfold of his
Church; seeing though he has an innumerable multitude of sheep yet he knows
them all, and so provides for all that no one can stray from him, no one can
perish, no one can want his care for feeding, ruling and defending; and lastly,
seeing he so feeds his sheep that he recovers them from the jaws of death and
hell, and settles them in possession of the Kingdom of Heaven. Through the
blood of the everlasting Covenant] These words must not be referred to the
words brought again, but must be construed with the word shepherd. And a
shepherd by or through blood, is such a shepherd as had shed his blood; for
so we read 1 John 5.6. That Christ came by water and blood, not by water only,
but by water and blood; that is, he was not only pure and clear from all spot
or stain of sin, which purity is signified by the word water; but also that
he suffered a bloody death by shedding of his blood. The Author had intimated
before, that this great Shepherd was dead, in saying, that God brought him
again from the dead: but now he further shows not only the manner of his
death, that it was violent, cruel and bloody; but also the cause of his death,
to what end he dyed, which end tends to our infinite benefit, namely to
confirm and seal the everlasting covenant. For the blood of the Covenant is
that blood which is shed to dedicate, establish and confirm the Covenant, that
it may never be revokeable. But the Author understands the new Covenant, which
was confirmed by the blood of Christ. Whence we may easily collect, how
certain and sure we may be of the promises contained in that Covenant, if we
perform the conditions of it, which are most just and equal. When he calls
this Covenant everlasting, he tacitly opposes it to the old covenant by Moses,
which was not to continue to the end of the world, and therefore was not
properly everlasting. And by the eternity of this Covenant, that it is
everlasting, is withal intimated the perfection of it; for if it were not
perfect, it could not be everlasting; as the former old covenant was not
everlasting, because it was not perfect, but weak and unprofitable; and
therefore it was disanulled and abolished; as the Author said before, chap.
7.18. For there is verily a disanulling of the commandment going before, for
the weakness and unprofitablenesse thereof. And what is said of one
commandment or precept, may well be referred to the whole covenant. Besides,
the eternity of this covenant is mentioned of purpose to advance our comfort
and strengthen our hope; for whereas it is called everlasting, that shows that
it shall not only produce his full effect, but also shall last to the end of
the world. Our Lord Iesus] In these words the Author points out the person,
whom we must understand to be that great Shepherd; namely, no other then our
Lord Jesus, that is, our Lord who is Jesus; so that our Lord, holds the place
of the subject, and the name Jesus is added, to declare who is meant by our
Lord. By which appellation the Author teaches us, what a great Shepherd Jesus
is, seeing he is our Lord, constituted so by God his Father, who brought him
again from the dead. That only Lord, by whom are all things, and we by him;
whom we must worship with God the Father. Yet in all this pathetick and
stately description of our Lord Jesus the Author signifies nothing more unto
us, then what was formerly contained in his appellation of high Priest, so
frequently attributed unto him in this Epistle. From all which, what great hope
and comfort we may gather to our souls, need not here be repeated.

21. Make you perfect in every good worke] Now he expresses the wish it self,
which is wholly concerning their own duty. For to attain eternal happiness
nothing else is required on our part but to perform our duty, according as it
is enjoined us. To make them perfect in every good work, is so to enable them,
that no good work, office, or Christian virtue be wanting in them; and that
they be wanting in no good work, to perform it perfunctorily, unwillingly or
disaffectedly; especially in point of temptation, and matter of persecution,
wherein because it is for the trial of their faith, Patience must have her
perfect work, as S. James requires it, Jam. 1.4. To do his will] The particle
to here does not signify the final cause, because to be perfect in every good
work, and to do the will of God, are really the same thing; and therefore
these can neither be the end nor the means one of another. But this particle
is here explicative to the former words, and is all one with so as; for he that
is perfect in every good work or Christian virtue, he truly and properly does
the will of God. Working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight] He
expresses the way or means whereby God is to make them perfect in every good
work; namely by working in them that which is well-pleasing in his sight. That
which pleases God is every good work. And God works a good work in us,
when he exciteth and moves us to it, and preventeth us with his grace while we
think not of it; when he ministers unto us sufficient strength and help
thereto, suggesteth occasions unto us; and lastly, when he cherishes and
perfecteth it in us: And not that he works in us without our work, that is,
while we are unwitting, unwilling or idle: but while we are willing,
endeavoring and acting. For, otherwise there were neither need nor reason that
the Author should exhort us with so many monitions, incitements and precepts
unto godliness; whereto he with good reason also added his wish, to teach us,
that we must join Gods help with our endeavors, and our endeavors with his
help. Through Jesus Christ] It is doubtful whether these words must he
joined with the word working, or with the words well-pleasing, to show us what
is well-pleasing in the sight of God; namely that which is done through Jesus
Christ, and by him commanded to be done. So Peter 1 Epist. 2.5. when he had
said, that we must offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable unto God, added
also, by Jesus Christ; showing us thereby, what those sacrifices are, namely no
other then what are commanded in the Religion of Jesus Christ. For those words
in Peter seem rather to be referred to acceptable, then to offered; although
the latter may be admitted. To whom be glory for ever and ever] The pronoune to
whom is placed so indifferently by the Author, that it may be referred both
unto God in the former verse, and to Jesus Christ, mentioned immediately
before. And the Author seems to have ordered it so of purpose, and to reserve
the mention of Christ for the last place, that with this one doxology he might
celebrate and magnify both persons, both God and Christ. For he that is a true
Christian cannot be ignorant, that glory for ever and ever must be ascribed no
less unto Christ, then unto God himself. Whereof read what is written,
Revel. 5.12,13. Whence also Peter concludes his 2. Epistle with the like
doxologie openly directed unto Christ. And John Revel. 1.5,6. speaking of Jesus
Christ and magnifying him, does so place the mention of God the Father, that
the pronoune to him, with which he begins his doxology, may be in like manner
referred to God the Father, and to our Lord Jesus Christ, whom he intended to
bless. Hence it manifestly appears that divine worship and service is due to
our Lord Jesus Christ, together with God the Father. Amen.] An Hebrew word as
is well known, which signifies truly or certainly, and always carries the
force of approbation; and that either in assertions, or in devotions, of
wishes, prayers, and praises to the honor of God; or lastly in promises
uttered of things very acceptable and desirable. In assertions it commonly
precedeth and is set before: but in the other two it follows and closes the
sentence. For the former, we meet with many examples in the sayings of our
Savior recited by Matthew, Mark, and John: but Luke relating the same or the
like sayings of our Savior; for the word Amen, either single or double, uses
the Greek word, (...) which exactly answers the Hebrew, or Syriacke. For the
second, there are almost so many examples in the holy Scriptures, as there are
devotions and praises of Gods name in the end of Epistles. For the last, there
is an example in the end of the Revelation, verse. 20. where withal the word
Amen is interpreted or explicated, by addition of the affirmative particle,
(...) although some Copies for (...) read (...); which is a thing that might be
easily altered.

22. And I beseech you brethren] He yet further adds some special points as
it were out of the body of the Epistle. (...) though in the Greek it properly
signify, I exhort; yet in this place it is better translated, I beseech; as
most translations render it in several languages; because the thing which he
entreats of them, is as it immediately follows, to Suffer the word of
Exhortation.] The word of Exhortation is a speech whereby a man exhorts, or is
exhorted, by a genetive case arguing the difference. And in Exhortation
especially this which the Author here understands, is also included
reprehension or reproof. For he seems here to design such speech, as is
somewhat unwelcome and unpleasing to them to whom it is directed, as commonly
reproves use to be; although exhortations also are many times unpleasing,
though they seem free from any reproof. For Exhortations to those who do not
yet their duty, are secret reprehensions and reproves. Therefore the Author
beseeches and entreats them, to suffer this word or speech; that is, to take
it in good part, not to disdain or be grieved at it; that they are exhorted or
admonished by him. For I have written a letter unto you in few words.] Here he
adds the reason why he desires them to suffer the word of Exhortation from
him. The particle for does not in this place signify simply for, but rather
for also, implying a copulative causality, so that here is not brought the sole
cause, but the sociall, and this; omitting other causes whereof they of
themselves might easily take notice; As for example, that this word of
Exhortation was wholesome for them, that it proceeded from a true and hearty
affection toward them; that it was spoken modestly on his part, without any
bitterness or reproach unto them, and such like; as if he had said: Ye ought
therefore the rather to suffer my Exhortation; because I was not only diligent
to apply all things that might serve to lenifie my Exhortation and reproof, as
becomes him that admonishes: but also that I might not give you the least
offense. I have written unto you as briefly as I could, and would not dwell
long upon an argument so unpleasing to you. But if we suppose, that by this
word of Exhortation is not meant that part only of this Epistle, which
consists in Exhortation and reproose, but even the whole Epistle; wherein are
not only Exhortations and reprehensions, but also excellent consolations or
comforts, which in like manner are signified by the word Exhortation, and by
the vulgar Latin is here translated the word of Comfort; Then to suffer this
word, will be nothing else, but to accept it with a ready mind, so that in
reading and hearing of it, they would not think it so prolix and tedious, as
to be weary of it. To which purpose the reason here is very fit, that the
Author says, he has written in few words. For to comprise things of special
moment and worth in few words, as it is a point of great Art, so is it a great
grace to the writing. But the Author calls this Epistle brief, and written in
few words, because considering the Majesty of the argument, and the variety
of the matter, it is very brief, and delivered but in few words. For we may
easily perceive that the Author therein is not indulgent to any repetitions or
prolixe amplification after a Rhetorical strain: but with a singular brevitie
runs over only the chief points, leaving many more things to be collected
by them then he expresses; and in many things writes very concisely.

23. Know ye that our brother Timotheus is set at libertie] Another special
point added by the Author, is an advertisement concerning Timothy, because he
was in good repute among the Hebrews, and went for an Hebrew; for though his
father were a Greek, yet his mother was an Hebrew, and Paul circumcised him in
favor of the Hebrews to ingratiate his person among them; as we read, Acts
16.1,2,3. And therefore the Author supposes, that any good news concerning
Timothy would be acceptable to them, to whom his person was so acceptable. And
the Author gives Timothy the attribute of brother, thereby to signify not
only their common religion that they both professed Christ; but also their
common affection, that each of them was dearly beloved of other. Is set at
libertie] The particular thing that he advertiseth concerning Timothy, and
whereof he desires them to take notice or knowledge is, That Timothy is set at
liberty, which advertisement he conceived would be very welcome to them. Whence
we may easily collect, that Timothy was once in bonds and in prison for the
profession of the Gospel. And it is very probable that he was so; for Paul was
then in bonds when he wrote his Epistle to the Colossians; as appears, Colos.
4.3. where requesting the prayers of the Colossians for himself and his
fellow prisoners, he says; withal praying also for us, that God would open
unto us a door of utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am
also in bonds. And Paul in his Preface of subscription to that Epistle,
adjoynes Timothy with him, as an approver of his Epistle, Coloss. 1.1. So that
it is probable Timothy was his fellow-prisoner. And if any man say, that Paul
names not Timothy among his fellow prisoners, when he mentions their several
salutations to the Colossians, chap. 4 The answer is; It was not reason he
should write any salutations from Timothy, no more then from himself; because
he had joined Timothy with him as a Co-Authour of the whole Epistle, which
was more then a salutation. This imprisonment then of Timothy is very
probable, though from this place it be not fully certain. For the Greek word
(...) which is here translated, set at liberty, does properly signify more
generally, for dismissed, or dispatched, or sent away, and in this sense is
frequently used in the new Testament. And then it may signify here, that
Timothy was now dismissed, or dispatched there where formerly he was detained
about some business of the Ministry; for certain it is, that Timothy by his
especial function was an Evangelist, and therefore frequently employed by the
Apostles, who sent them upon messages about the Ministry unto remote Churches.
See this for Timothy, Acts 17.14,15. and Acts 18.5. and Acts 19.22. and 1.
Cor. 4.17. and Phil. 2.19. and 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. With whom if he come shortly, I
will see you] He intimates unto them, that he expects the coming of Timothy
to him very shortly; yet withal, that if he come not in a short time, then
he himself will come to them without him. So that hereby he signifies his
affection and love toward them, with an earnest desire speedily to see them, as
impatient of his delay in expecting Timothy, though he were very shortly to
come.

24. Salute all them that have the rule over you, and all the Saints] The name
of Saints is here attributed to all Christians in general. As if he had said,
I desire you to salute from me not only your Rulers as your Elders and
Bishops, but all the rest of the brethren, even the whole Church. All
Christians must remember that they are Saints, that is, persons consecrated and
hallowed unto God; and therefore as the Apostle admonishes, must carry
themselves as obedient children, not fashioning themselves according to their
former lusts in their ignorance: but as he which has called them is holy, so
must they be holy in all manner of conversation; because it is written, Be ye
holy, for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.14,15,16. They of Italy salute you] A Grecisme
for the Italians, or Christians of Italy; for so the Greeks use to speak.
Whence it appears, that part of the clause which tradition has added at the
end of this Epistle, is true, That this Epistle was written to the Hebrews
from Italy. For if the Author had written from any other place, why should he
insert a salutation from the Italians only? But the rest of that clause at the
end of this Epistle is false, That is was sent by Timothy. For what could be
more vain, then to write of him, by whom he sent his Epistle? Know ye that he
is set at liberty] And that in the very end of his Epistle, as here he writes
of Timothy, in the verse immediately preceding. And besides in the very same
verse, he advertiseth them of Timothies coming to him, and of his own to them
upon Timothies coming to him, namely from that place where he was detained in
prison; and of his coming or returning from them, as some say who would seem
to defend this postscript. But there must needs be extant an argument to prove
how different from the written word of God, yea many times repugnant unto it,
are the written traditions of men; and therefore much more men's traditions not
written. And the falsity of this subscription, may justly make a man doubt of
the verity of the inscription, which carries the name of Paul, traditionally
also prefixed before it.

25. Grace be with you all. Amen.] Here the Author finisheth and closes this
Epistle with a devotion or holy wish. Grace is the only ground and means to
that peace whereof he styled God the Author, before ver. 20. And therefore also
the only ground of all happiness, for all happiness comes merely by grace.
Yet he expresses not whose grace and favor, he wishes unto them, as a thing
sufficiently known among all Christians; namely the grace of God our Father,
and of Jesus Christ our Lord. Now the same grace of God our Father, and of
Jesus Christ our Lord, be with all them that love verity and piety. Amen.

The Contents of this 13. Chapter, are,
1. Duty. We must be hospitable to entertains strangers. ver. 2. Motive.
Because some thereby have entertained Angels unawares. eod.
2. Duty. We must be merciful toward persons in adversity, ver. 3. Motive.
Because we our selves are also in the body, and thereby also subject:
adversity, eod.
3. Duty. Marriage must be maintained in the due honor of it. ver. 4. Motive.
Because God will judge whoremongers and adulterers, and all that are defilers
and disgracers of the marriage bed, eod.
4. Duty. We must not be covetous, v. 5. Motive. 1. Because God has promised,
he will never leave nor forsake us. 2. Because we may boldly say, The Lord is
our helper, and we will not fear what man shall do unto us.
5. Duty. We must not be inconstant, to be carried about with diverse and
strange doctrines, v. 6. Motive. 1. Because we must keep our selves to our
leaders who have taught us Gods word; and must follow their faith and life, v.
7. 2. Because the doctrine is always the same, as yesterday, so to day and so
for ever, v. 8. 3. Because it is a good thing that the heart be established
with grace, ver. 9.
6. Duty. We must not eat of the sacrifices which our selves offer to God.
Motive 1. Because meats profit nothing to holiness, v. 9. 2. Because the
sacrifices of the Christian altar are not edible, v. 10. 3. Because the
sin offerings under the Law were not eaten but burnt without the camp, v. 11.
4. Because Christ is our sin-offering, who suffered without the gate, to
sanctify us with his own blood. 5. Because Christian sacrifices are only
spiritual; for either they are the fruit of our lips, as praise and
thanksgiving, ver. 15. or the fruit of our hands, to do good and communicate,
v. 16.
7. Duty. We must be patient to suffer any misery in this life, v. 13. Motive.
1. Because Christ our high Priest who sanctified us with his own blood,
suffered reproach, banishment and death, for he suffered without the gate, v.
12. 2. Because here we have no continuing city, v. 14.
8. Duty. We must offer all our Christian sacrifices by Christ, v. 15. Motive.
Because Christ is our high Priest, who sanctified us, ver. 12.
9. Duty. We must be beneficial to do good and to communicate, ver. 16.
Motive. Because beneficence is a sacrifice wherewith God is well pleased.
10. Duty. We must obey our spiritual rulers and submit to them, v. 17.
Motive. Because they watch for our souls, and must give account of their
watching, eod. 2. Because our unrulinesse will be grievous to them and
pernicious to us, eod.

FINIS.

