THE SPEECHES OF Sr. Edward Deering In the COMMONS House of Parliament. 1641.

Printed in the year, 1641.

SIR EDWARD DEERINGS First SPEECH In the Commons House of Parliament. Novem. 9.
1640.
Mr. Speaker,
YEsterday the affairs of this House did borrow all the time allotted to the
great Committee of Religion. I am sorry, that having but half a day in a whole
week, we have lost that.

Mr. Speaker, The sufferances that we have undergone, are reduceable to two
heads: the First concerns the Church. The second belongs to the Commonwealth.
The first of these must have the first fruits of this Parliament, as being the
first in weight and worth, and more immediate to the honor of God, and his
glory, every dram whereof is worth the whole weight of a Kingdom.

The Commonwealth ('it is true) is full of apparent dangers; the Sword is come
home unto us, and the two twind Nations united to each other under one Royal
head, breathing together in the bowels and bosom of the same Island; and
which is above all, imbounded together with the same Religion (I say the same
Religion) by a devilish Machination, like to be fatally imbrued in each others
blood; ready to dig each others grave, Quantillum abfuit!

For other grievances also, the poor disheartened Subject sadly groans, not
able to distinguish between Power and Law, and with a weeping heart (no
question) has prayed for this hour, in hope to be Relieved, and to know
herafter whether any thing he has, besides his poor part and portion of the
common air he breathes in, may be truly called his own.

This (Mr. Speaker) and many other, do deserve, and must shortly have our deep
regard, but suo gradu, not in the first place. There is a unum necessarium,
above all our worldly sufferings and dangers; Religion, the most immediate
service due unto the honor of Almighty God: and herein let us all be
confident, that all our Consultations will prove unprosperous, if we put any
determination before that of Religion. For my part, let the Sword reach from
the North to the South, and a general perdition of all our remaining Rights
and safety threatening us in open view, it shall be so far from making me to
decline the first settling of Religion, that I shall ever argue, and rather
conclude it thus, That the more great, the more eminent our perils of this
world are, the stronger, the quicker ought our care to be for the glory of God,
and the pure Law of our souls.

If then Mr. Speaker, it may pass with full allowance, that all our cares may
give way to the Treaty of Religion, I will reduce that also to be considered
under two heads:

First of Ecclesiastical Persons.

Secondly, of Ecclesiastical Causes.

Let no man start, or be affrighted at the imagined length of this
Consultation: it will not, it cannot take up so much time as it is worth.

This is God and the King; this is God and the Kingdoms; nay, this is God and
the two Kingdoms Cause: And therefore Mr. Speaker, my humble Motion is, that we
may all of us seriously, speedily, and heartily enter upon this the best, the
greatest, the most important Cause we can treat of. Now Mr. Speaker, in pursuit
of my own Motion, and to make a little entrance into this great affayre, I will
present to you the Petition of a poor opressed Minister, in the County of
Kent, a man conformable in his practice, Orthodoxe in his Doctrine, laborious
in the Ministry, as any we have, or I do know. He is now a sufferer (as all
good men are) under the general obloquie of a Puritan, as with other things,
was admirably delivered by that silver Trumpet Sir Benjamin Rudyerd.
near the Bar. The Pursevant watches his door, and divides him and his Cure
asunder, to both their griefs: For it is not with him, as perhaps with some
that set the Pursevant at work, glad of an excuse to be out of the Pulpit: it
is his delight to preach. About a week since I went over to Lambeth to move
that great Bishop (too great indeed) to take this danger off this Minister, and
to recall the Pursevant; and withal I did undertake for Mr. Wilson, (so your
Petitioner is called) that he should answer his Accusers in any of the Kings
Courts at Westminster. The Bishop gave me this Answer (as near as I can
remember) in haec verba, I am sure that he will not be absent himself from his
Cure a twelvemoneth together, and then I doubt not but once in a year we shall
have him. This was all I could obtain: but I hope by the help of this House,
before the year of threats be run out, his Grace will either have more grace,
or no grace at all.

For our manifold griefs does fill a mighty, a vast circumference, yet so that
from every part, our lines of sorrow do lead to him, and point at him, the
Center from whence our Miseries grow.

Let the Petition be read, and let us enter upon the work.

Sr. EDWARD DEERINGS SECOND SPEECH Novem. 23. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
YOU have many private particular Petitions, give me leave by word of mouth to
interpose one more general, which thus you may record: Gods true Religion is
violently invaded by two seeming Enemies, but indeed they are like Herod and
Pilate, fast Friends, for the destruction of Truth, I mean the Papists for one
part, and our Prelaticall Faction on the other: between those two in their
several progress, I observe the occurrence of some few parallells, fit as I
conceive to be presented to this Honorable House.

First with the Papists, here is a severe Inquisition, and with us (as it is
used) there is a bitter high Commission, both these ( contra fas and jus) are
Judges in their own Cause: yet herein their Inquisitors are better then our
High Commissioners. They for ought I ever heard, do not saevire in suos, punish
for delinquents and offenders, such as profess and practice Religion,
according as it is established by the Laws of the Land, where they live: but
with us how many poor distressed Ministers we have; how many scores of them in
a few years past have been suspended, deprived, degraded, excommunicated, not
guilty of the breach of any of our established Laws. The Petitions of many are
here with us, more are coming; all their prayers are in Heaven for redress.
Down with the Tables of these Money Changers: they do profess Commutation of
penance, and I may therefore justly call them so.

Secondly, with the Papists there is a mysterious Artifice, I mean their Index
expurgatorius, whereby they clip the tongues of such Witnesses, whose evidence
they do not like: To this I parallel our late Imprimators Licenses for the
Press, so handled, that Truth is suppressed, and Popish Pamphlets fly abroad Cum
Privilegio, witness the andacious Libells. against true Religion, written by
Cosi^s, Daw, Heylin, Pecklington, Mede, Shelford, Swan, Roberts, and many
others; I name no Bishops: but I add, etc. Nay they are already grown so bold
in this new trade, that the most learned labors of our ancient and best
Divines, must he new corrected and defaced with a Deleatur, by the
supercillious pen of my Lords young Chaplein (fit perhaps) for the technicall
art, but unfit to hold the Chair for Divinity. But herein the Roman Index is
better then our English Licenses; they thereby do preserve the current of
their own established doctrines, a point of Wisdom. But with us, our
Innovators by this Artifice do alter our settled Doctrines: nay, they do
introduce points repugnant, and contrariant; and this I dare assume upon my
self to prove.

3. One parallel more I have, and that is thus, amongst the Papists there is
one acknowledged Supreme in Honor, in Order, and in Power, from whose
judgment there is no appeal.

I confess Mr. Speaker, I cannot altogether match a Pope with a Pope; yet one
of the ancient titles of our English Primate was alterius orbis Papa: But thus
far I can go ex ore suo, it is in Print. He pleads fair for a Patriarch,
and for such an one whose judgment he beforehand professes ought to be
final; and then I am sure it ought to be unerring; put thief two together, and
ye shall find that the final determination of a Patriarch, will want very
little of a Pope, and then we may say mutato nominede te fabula narratur: he
pleaded Pope ship under the name of a Patriarch, and I much fear least the end
and top of his Patriarchall plea may be as that of Cardinal Poole (his
Predecessors) who would have two heads, one caput regale, another caput
Sacerdotale, a proud parallel, to set up the Mitre as high as the Crown. But
herein I shall be free and clear, if one there must be; be it a Pope, be it a
Patriarchall, this I resolve upon for mine own choice, procul a Jove, procul a
fulmine, I had rather serve one as far off as Tiben, then to have one come so
near me as the Thames. A Pope at Rome will do less hurt then a Patriarch at
Lambeth: I have done. And for this third parallel, I submit it to the wisdom
and consideration of this grave Committee for Religion: In the mean time I do
ground my motion on the former two; and it is this in brief, that you will
please to select a Subcommittee of 4, 6, 8, or 10. at the most, and to empower
them for the discovery of the great number of oppressed Ministers, under the
Bishops tyranny: For these 10. years last past, We have the complaints of
some, but more are silent, some are patient and will not complain; others are
fearful and dare not; many are dead; many are beyond Seas, and cannot
complain.

And in the second place that the Subcommittee may examine the Printers, what
Books by bad Licenses have bin corruptly issued forth: the work I conceive
will not be difficult, but will quickly return into your hands full of weight;
and this is my motion.

SIR EDWARD DEERINGS Third SPEECH In PARLIAMENT, 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
THIS Morning is designed for the consideration of the late Cannons, and the
former; and of that which the Clergy have miscalled a benevolence, I shall for
the present, only touch the first of them, and that is the Roman Velites, who
did use to begin the Battle: so shall I but velita^de, and skirmish, whilst
the main Battle is setting forwards.

The POPE, as they say, has a triple Crown, answerable thereunto; and to
support it, he pretends to have a threefold Law.

1. The first that is Ius divinum, Episcopacy by Divine Right: and this he
would have you think to be the Crown next his head, which does circle and
secure his power, our Bishops have in an unlucky time entered their Plea, and
presented their title to this Crown, Episcopacy, by Divine Right.

2. The second is Ius humanum Constantij donativum, the gift of Indulgent
Princes temporal power; this Law belongs to his middle or second Crown, this
is already pleaded for, by our Prelates in Print.

These two Crowns being already obtained (He the POPE) Creates and makes the
third himself, and sets it highest upon the top: This Crown also has its
Law, and that is Ius canonicum, the Canon Law of more use un to his Popeship,
if once admitted then both the other. Just so our Prelates from the pretended
Divinity of their Episcopacy, and from the temporal power, granted by our
Princes, would now oberude a new Common Law upon us: They have charged the
Commons to the full, and never feareing they would requoyle into a Parliament,
they have rammed a prodigious ungodly Oath into them. The Illegality, and
Invalidity of these Cannons, is manifested by one short question, ( vizt.) what
do you call the meeting wherein they were made?

Mr Speaker, who can frame an Argument aright, unless he can tell against what
he is to argue?

Will you confute the Convocation-house? they were a holy Synod: will you argue
against their Synod? they were Commissioners, will you dispute their
Commission? they will mingle all power together, and perhaps answer, they were
something else that we neither knew, nor imagined, unless they would unriddle
themselves, and own what they were, we may prosecute non concludent Arguments.

Mr. Speaker, I have conferred with some of the founders of those Cannons, but
I profess here, that I could never yet meet with any one of that Assembly, who
could well answer to that first question of the Catechism, What is your name?
Alas, they were parted before they knew what they were, when they were together.

The sum of all the several answers that I have received, do altogether
amount unto this: They were a Convocationall, Synodicall Assembly of
Commissioners: Indeed a threefold Chaemera, a Monster to our Laws, a Cerberus
to our Religion. A strange Commission, where no Commissioners name is to be
found! A strange Convocation, that lived when the Parliament was dead. A
strange holy Synod, when the one part never saw nor conferred with the other.

But indeed, there needed no conference, if it be true of these Cannons which I
read of the former, quis nescit, Canones Lamb thae formari priusquam in Synodo
ventilentur?

Well Mr. Speaker, they have Innovated upon us; we may say, It is Lextalionis
to innovate upon them, and so I hope we shortly shall do.

In the mean time my humble motion is, that every member of that Assembly, who
voted their Canons, may come severally to the Bar of this House, with a Book
of Cannons in his hand, and there unless he can answer that Catechism
question, as I called it, better then I expect he can, concept is verbis, in
such express terms as this Honorable House shall then think fit, he shall
abjure his own Issue, and be commanded to give fire to his own Cannons.

And this motion I take to be Just.

FINIS.

