Digiti-Lingua: OR, The most compendious, copious, facile, and secret way of
silent Converse ever yet discovered.

Showing, how any two persons may be capable, in half an hours time, to
discourse together by their Fingers only, and as well in the dark as the light.

The Directions herein given are so clear, and the Method so extensive, (yet
both superlatatively easy) that if six persons are in company, (and each of
them well versed in the design) yet two of them may discourse together, and the
other four wholly ignorant of what they mean.

By a person who has conversed no otherwise in above nine Years.

The Figures curiously Engraved on Copper Plates.

Pulchrum est Digito Monstrari and Dicier hic est. Persius

LONDON, Printed for P. Buck, at the sign of the Temple near the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, School.

Digiti-Lingua: OR The most compendious copious, facile, and secret way of
silent Converse ever yet discovered.
HAving been obliged (through an unfortunate impediment) to these, or some such
like methods of Converse, for now near ten years last past, I have diverse
times endeavored to render the way of expression more facile, and less
burdensome to the memory, as well as more brief and copious both in respect of
time in which a word may be expressed, and also of the figurative letters which
represent a word; and having now (in my own judgment) brought it to as
convenient a period as I well can, I here present the World with it: To whose
censure or approbation I leave it.

I am sensible there has of late been published a pretty piece of Ingenuity,
entitled Sermo Mirabilis, wherein the Author undertakes (by his Book I mean)
to learn a person, so as to be capable to discover his mind to his Mistress, or
his Friend, and requires but six hours time for apprehension. In which time I
truly believe it may be done, and must own it as my own private opinion, that
few people would have patience to sit six hours together, upon no other
business, than purely to learn an Alphabet.

The reason why I judge my method more facile in attaining, and less
burdensome to the memory, is, because in matters of small moment, to me
nothing seems to affect the memory more than sight: Now the Gentleman having
contrived most of the Consonants about the Head, which the person expressing
can never see, there must certainly be some small time allowed for
recollection, that Nose begins with (n) Mouth with (m) and so of the rest;
whereas these Alphabets of mine, depending only on the two hands, the person
learning sees every significative figure he makes; the often seeing of which,
as well as the often doing so, greatly helps toward impressing it on the
memory.

Neither do I perceive how this Gentleman makes his Alphabet more difficult to
an indifferent person, by pointing to two several places for one letter, since
his general rule is, that, that part of the Head or Body represents such a
letter as the name of such part begins withal, he says, point to Arm for (a) or
to Elbow for (e) and omit pointing to the Thumb and Forefinger for those two
vowels, render it more unintelligible to a third person, who is acquainted with
his Alphabets, which I cannot apprehend, unless he had designed two other
letters to be represented by the top of the Thumb and Forefinger; because, I
say, pointing often to the Arm (as in discourse is unavoidable) and not at all
to the Thumb, any Person (observing his general rule) might perceive the
mutation, and thereby render it every whit as plain, as without alteration,
according to his instructions. I cannot but believe (for the reason before
given) it is easier by far to understand what is said than to express it, if
the several parts are pointed to but slowly; and indeed I think his way will
not allow of so swift an occular apprehension, (unless a Man knows where his
Eye may meet a Letter) by reason of the distance of the parts pointed to, as
these Alphabets of mine where the Eyes are continually confined to so small a
compass as about one hand.

All that possibly can be done by the directions given in Sermo Mirabilis, may
more quick, free, and easily be done, by the Alphabets here delivered, and much
more: For two persons can never discourse by those letters, unless they see
each others Arms, Hands, Head and Body; and that perfectly too, whereas by my
Alphabets nothing is required but the Hands, which in case of urgent necessity
may be held over another Head, or the person thus expressing, may put his
hands behind him, his Friend standing at his back; nay, a hundred other
conveniences there are, that Arms, Head and Body will never admit of, which
any person using these Alphabets will soon discover.

However, for more perspicuous demonstration sake, I think it may not be amiss
in this place to subjoyn a supposition or two, which when rightly apprehended,
will as well make way for many more of the like nature, as superlatively
convince the unprejudiced World, that nothing of this sort yet published can
justly claim a parity, with the Methods here laid down, in respect of their
secrecy, pleasure, and convenience.

In the first place, therefore, I will suppose an honorable and and agreeable
contraction, of an inviolable friendship between two persons, (whether of the
same or different Sex, I judge it not material to my matter in hand to
distinguish) who are both very well versed in one or both of these Alphabets,
which many or most of their Friends and Acquaintance may discern; and so
perhaps these two Friends, (though they know they can discourse together, without
any Friends understanding, who I now suppose to be in company) yet because they
cannot do it without their knowledge that they are communicating, they, out of
a piece of breeding and gentility totally decline it, because, for a very true
reason (though a very ill one, if the same thing at the same time may bear both
those contrary Titles), viz. The company being ignorant what the two Friends
say, that troublesome Fiend jealousy, may suggest nocent or dishonorable
inclinations, (especially if of two different Sexes) when in reality it may
only be a mere thought, a slight piece of raillery, or a thing of no manner of
concern or moment. But some people are so cursedly bewitched, and by this Foe
to all Quietude, that they no sooner perceive a whisper but they proclaim a
Plot. It Is what the fair Sex are too often undeservedly charged withal. Now if
such jealous persons were in company (as sometimes may happen) and either of
the two friends any dependence upon them, I think it great folly this way to
disoblige them which may be avoided, and one friend disclose his mind to the
other, without the least perceivance of any in company, by the use of either of
these Alphabets; in this manner, let the person to whom the other is
disclosing, but dispose one of his hands out of the company, as to be hid with
his Hat, put behind him, under a Table, or otherwise, as convenience best
offers, so that the person about to disclose stand or sit next him, or can well
reach his hand without notice taken by the Company: Complying with this
caution, one Friend may discover his mind to the other with all the secrecy
imaginable, by making the same Figures on and about his Friends hand, as he
could on his own hand if his Friend saw him, because this way the Person to
whom spoke, apprehends as well in the dark by feeling, as if he saw the same
Figures in the light. Thus in the most private manner, and by stealth, can a
man make assignation to meet his friend, promise to renew a Visit, ask Counsel,
give Advice, etc. without the least suspicion of the sharpest overlooker; nay,
one of the two friends may look a third person earnestly in the face, as
seeming intent on what discourse entertains the Company, and indeed minds only
what his silent friend and himself are mutually conversing about on each others
Fingers. I believe I have by this time furnished a witty head, with ways enough
to disclose a secret as private as secrecy itself.

Furthermore, any two persons may discourse Riding or Walking, and so that not
to be observed by any Persons meeting or passing by.

But as a Crown to the convenience and pleasure in this way of Converse, let me
mention the facility in learning the method here delivered, which is easily
done in the space of half an hour, ordinarily while a Pipe is smoking, or the
Cloth taking away. And I can most truly affirm I know some great persons, who,
after this my manner, can express any thing sooner by their Fingers, than the
most skilful Artist can by his Pen and Ink, provided he write in words at
length.

I forbear to relate any pleasant accidents happening by the use of these
Alphabets, because I make use of them Tam Necessitate Quam Diversione.

Since there is no word but is made up of one or more Vowels, the Vowels
consequently come about oftener than any five Consonants, wherefore let the
Thumb and Four fingers of the left hand, touched by the top of the Forefinger
of the right hand, represent the five Vowels, aciou. viz. the top of the Thumb
a. the Forefinger e. the Middle-finger i. the Ring-finger o. and the little
Finger u. as by the Figure.

depiction of hand

The Consonants are thus deciphered.
The forefinger and thumb of the left hand put together, B The four fingers
bent in toward the palm of the hand, C The thumb and forefinger of the
left hand joined by the forefinger of the right hand, D The forefinger of the
right hand laid on the back of the 4 fingers of the left hand, F The two Fists
joined, G Draw the forefinger of the right hand quite along the middle of the
left hand, H Touch the Nail of the middle finger of the left hand, I conson.
Draw the forefinger of the right hand quite along the back of the left hand, K
Lay the forefinger of the right hand on the knuckles of the left, L Put 3
fingers in the palm of the hand, M Put 2 fingers in the same manner, N Put the
forefinger of the right hand between the fore and middle finger of the left, P
Turn the top of the fore finger of the left hand to the bottom of the thumb of
the same hand, Q Lay the fore finger of the right hand semicircularly in the
palm of the left, R Encircle the thumb of the left hand with the forefinger of
the right, S Touch the side of the left hand with the fore finger of the right,
T Touch the nail of the little finger of the left hand, U conson. Put two
fingers on the little finger of the left hand, W Lay the 2 foer-fingers across,
X Touch the bottom of the hand long ways with the fore finger of the right
hand, Y Make the figure of the letter in the palm of the hand, Z
Note for (H) and (K) let the Finger be brought from the Part where it is set
to the end of the direct Line within and without the hand. Place this in Page.
19.

diagram of sign language

Notwithstanding I have so largely and plainly described the form of every
significative Figure, I have, that the whole Alphabet might be viewed at once,
caused these Figures to be here set in their Alphabetical Order, as may be
perceived.

Now nothing can be easier, (when any person views the whole twenty six
Figures) than to make such and such signs by his fingers at first sight, as
(according to these rules) represent such and such letters as make up the word
he would express, This, I say, must be as facile, as for a skilful Musician to
play off a Tune at sight, or as if, out of the twenty six letters, there
literally set over their respective representative Figures, I were with a Pen
and Ink to take AND for and, so likewise of any other word.

But this I think good to advise, that whosoever desires to be a proficient in
this silent Language, ought to be able to express the whole Alphabet in their
Alphabetical Order, (laying aside these instructions) as absolutely perfect
before they pretend to discourse, as a Boy ought well to make his letters,
before he essays to write words.

But now it may be objected, if three men buy three of these Books, and make
use of the same Alphabet, they must undoubtedly alike apprehend, which I grant
to be true; but to make my words good, I here present the world with another
Alphabet, and shall anon show the pleasure and commodity of them both together.

Let the top of the four fingers and the Thumb signify the five Vowels, a e i
o u beginning at the little finger for a. and so backwards, as by the following
figure.

depiction of hand

The Consonants I thus dispose.
The same that (d) is in the other Alphabet, B The same that (r) is in the
other Alphabet, C Join the 2 thumbs and 2 fore-fingers, D Cross the Wrist with
the forefinger, F Put the two Fists one upon another G Draw the forefinger
round the hill of the thumb, H The same that (f) is in the other Alphabet, K
The forefinger of the right hand laid within the fingers of the left, I. The
same as in the other Alphabet, MN The forefinger of the right hand put between
the forefinger and thumb of the left, P Encompass the forefinger of the right
hand with the forefinger and thumb of the left, Q The same that (h) is in the
other Alphabet, R Join the 2 little fingers cross ways, S Lay the forefinger
of the right hand directly across the palm of the left hand, T Touch the thumb
najl, U conson. Put all the fingers overone another almost cross, W Connex the
knuckles X Put the fore-singer and thumb of the right hand to the side of the
left hand, Y As in the other Alphabet, Z
But for greater ease to the memory I have caused these Significative Figures
to be set here in their Alphabetical order that they may be at once veiwed. If
Noce for (h) and (r) let the finger be brought from one end of the Line where
it is set to the other end thereofi Place this in Page: 25.

diagram of sign language

If the instructions given to the former Alphabet are rightly understood, there
needs none to this, because reason dictates the same use. Now I would say by
this Alphabet, Good Morrow Sir, which is thus done.

The two Fists upon each other. G

Two fingers put upon the fore finger of the left hand, oo

Two thumbs and 2 fore-fingers joined, Which being put together make Good. d

When the word is ended point directly into the middle of the hand, which
notation must be given at the end of every word again.

Three fingers in the middle of the hand, m

Top of the forefinger o

2 fingers drawn along the middle of thehand rr

Top of the forefinger as before, o

Fingers cross ways over one another. w

Then again the Notation

Two little fingers cross ways, S

Top of the middle finger, i

Along the inside of the left hand, r

Then the Notation.

Which being bore in memory make Good morrow Sir.

But if it should so happen that two persons are conversing totogether by the
use of either of these Alphabets, and suspect a third person to apprehend, it is
but exchanging five or more Letters in an Alphabet, and they can never make
Head or Tail of it, of which intentions any Man may acquaint his Friend by a
whisper or otherwise. As for Example, you would say by this Alphabet Sir your
Servant, which in words at length will be thus.

2 little fingers cross ways, S

Top of the middle finger i

Along the inside of the hand, r

The point in the middle of the hand the notation.

Then again, Forefinger and thumb to the side of the hand y

Top of the fore finger o

Top of the thumb, u

Along the middle of the hand, r

Then the Notation.

Again, 2 fingers cross ways, S

Top of the ring finger, c

Along the middle of the hand, r

Thumb Nail, v

Top of the little finger, a

2 fingers in the palm, n

Draw the fore-singer directly down the middle of the hand, t

Then the Notation:

But now I will suppose that you have agreed to take the Vowels as in the other
Alphabet, and exchange r in this Alphabet, for r in the other Alphabet, which
is c in this, and for c in this Alphabet you will take k in the other alphabet.
You must thus begin then.

Two little fingers cross ways S

Top of the middle finger i

Fore finger semicircularly in the palm of the hand, r

Now any indifferent person that understood both Alphabets would think that you
were about to say sick, or some other word with more letters after the(r) which
is (c) in this Alphabet, or else when he sees the period at the end of (c) in
this Alphabet, tho to your self and friend it signifies(r) He concludes you
speak Latin, or make some mistake in the letters when the truth is, he himself
is in error.

But thus exchanging 5 or 6 letters in an Alphabet, in many words they will be
found so often to reiterate, that a stander-by (tho acquainted with the method)
shall apprehend, but in a mere mist, let him be never so expert at it.

However, having here described 2 Alphabets, every person is left to his
liberty to make up one for himself and friend out of the 2, that will be as
private from all the world, as if they never heard of such an invention, but I
think the design here laid down is now made so plain, it needs not further
Demonstration.

For an affirmative, point to one Eye.

For a negative, point to the Nose.

But if you neither affirm nor deny, put one finger upon the Eye, and another
upon the Nose, which may very well signify I don't know, or indifferent.

And, whereas most of the letters are deliniated by the Forefinger of the
right hand, if it happens that you are to express two Letters of the same sort
just together, it may be done either by two fingers at once as double (o)
double (e) double(f) or any other letter except those that are deciphered by
more than the forefinger of the right hand, or else at twice, as best suits
particular Fancies.

Abbreviating the words by these Signs is the same as with a Pen and Ink,
because to intimate (which) needs no more than the representative Figures of W.
C. H. That. Y. T. and so of any other word, as the person himself pleases. The
throwing out the hand from the body in way of discourse, signifies and.

I heartily wish all Persons may as soon discern the commodity as the use of
these Fruits of a few vacant hours.

FINIS.

