CONCERNING THE NEW CHVRCH DISCIPLINE, AN EXCELLENT LETTER Written by Mr
GEORGE CRANMER to Mr R. H.

Printed in the year 1642.

THE WORDS OF THE learned Mr CAMBDEN in his Annals of Queen ELIZABETH Anno 42.
concerning this Author Mr G. Cranmer.
THis Cranmer (whose christen name was George) was a Gentleman of singular
hopes, the eldest son of Thomas Cranmer, son of Edmund Cranmer the
Archbishops brother. He spent a good part of his youth, in Corpus Christi
College in Oxford, where he proceeded and continued Master of Arts of six
years standing before he removed: and then betook himself to Secretary
Davison. After whose fall, he went in place of Secretary with Sir Henry
Killegrew in his Embassage into France. And after his death, he accompanied
that worthy and learned Gentleman Sir Edwin Sands, in his travels into France,
Germany, Italy and other parts, by the space of three years. And after his
return, was sought after by the most Noble Lord Mountjoy, with whom he went
into Ireland, where he remained, until his unfortunate death (in a Battle
against the Rebels near Carlingford) cut off the great hopes conceived of him.

CONCERNING the new Church Government.
WHat posterity is likely to judge of these matters concerning
Church Discipline, we may the better conjecture, if we call to mind what our
own age, within few years, upon better experience has already judged
concerning the same. It may be remembered that at first, the greatest part of
the learned in the land were either eagerly affected, or favorably inclined
that way. The Books then written for the most part favored of the
disciplinary style: it sounded every where in pulpits, and in the common phrase
of men's speech: the contrary part began to fear they had taken a wrong course,
many which impugned the discipline, yet so impugned it, not as not being the
better form of government, but as not so convenient for our State, in regard
of dangerous innovations thereby likely to grow. One man alone there was, to
speak of, (whom let no suspicion of flattery deprive of his deserved
commendation;) Who, in the diffidence of the one part, and courage of the
other, stood in the gap, and gave others respite to prepare themselves to their
defense; which by the sudden eagerness and violence of their adversaries had
otherwise been prevented. Wherein God has made good unto him his own emprese,
Vincit qui patitur, for what contumelious indignities he has at their hands
sustained, the world is witness; and what reward of honor above his
adversaries God has bestowed upon him, themselves (though nothing glad
thereof) must needs confess. Now of late years the heat of men toward the
Discipline is greatly decayed: their judgments begin to sway on the other side:
the learned have weighed it and found it light: wise men conceive some fear,
lest it prove not only not the best kind of government, but the very bane and
destruction of all government. The cause of this change in men's opinions may be
drawn from the general nature of error, disguised and clothed with the name
of truth; which is mightily and violently to possess men at first; but
afterward, the weakness thereof being by time discovered, to loose that
reputation, which before it had gained. As by the outside of an house the
Passers by are oftentimes deceived, till they see the convenience of the rooms
within: so by the very name of Discipline and Reformation men were drawn at
first to cast a fancy toward it, but now they have not contented themselves
only to pass by and behold a far off the forefront of this reformed house;
they have entered in, even at the special request of the Master workmen and
chief Builders thereof: they have perused the rooms, the lights, the
conveniences, they find them not answerable to that report which was made of
them, nor to that opinion which upon report they had conceived. So as now the
Discipline which at first triumphed over all, being unmasked, begins to
droope and hang down her head.

This cause of change in opinion concerning the Discipline, is proper to the
learned, or to such as by them have been instructed: another cause there is
more open and more apparent to the view of all: namely, the course of practice
which the Reformers have had with us from the beginning. The first degree was
only some small difference about Cap and Surplesse, but not such as either bred
division in the Church, or tended to the ruin of the government then
established. This was peaceable; the next degree more stirring. Admonitions
were directed to the Parliament in peremptory sort against our whole form of
Regiment: In defense of them volumes were published in English, in Latin: Yet
this was no more than writing. Devices were set on foot to erect the practice
of the discipline without authority; yet herein some regard of modesty, some
moderation was used. Behold, at length it brake forth into open outrage, first
in writing by Martin: in whose kind of dealing these things may be observed. 1.
That whereas T. C. and others his great Masters had always before set out the
discipline as a Queen, and as the daughter of God, he contrariwise to make her
more acceptable to the people, brought her forth as a vice upon the stage. 2.
Which conceit of his was grounded (as may be supposed) upon this rare policy,
that seeing the Discipline was by writing refuted, in Parliament rejected, in
secret corners hunted out and descried, it was imagined that by open railing
(which to the vulgar is commonly most plausible) the state Ecclesiastical
might have been drawn into such contempt and hatred, as the overthrow thereof
should have been most grateful to all men, and in a manner desired of the
common people. 3. It may be noted (and this I know my self to be true) how
some of them, although they could not for shame approve so lewd an action, yet
were content to lay hold on it to the advancement of their cause, acknowledging
therein the secret judgments of God against the Bps, and hoping that some good
might be wrought thereby for his Church, as indeed there was, though not
according to their construction. For, 4. contrary to their expectation, that
railing spirit did not only not further, but extremely disgrace and prejudice
their cause, when it was once perceived from how low degrees of contradiction
at first, to what outrage of contumely and slander they were at length
proceeded, and were also likely further to proceed.

A further degree of outrage was in fact. Certain Prophets did arise, who
deeming it not possible that God should suffer that undone which they did so
fiercely desire to have done, namely, that his holy Saints, the favorers and
fathers of the Discipline should be enlarged, and delivered from persecution;
and seeing no means of deliverance ordinary, were feign to persuade themselves
that God must needs raise some extraordinary means: and being persuaded of
none so well as of themselves, they forthwith must needs be the instruments of
this great work. Hereupon they framed unto themselves an assured hope, that
upon their preaching out of a pease-cart, all the multitude would have
presently joined unto them, and in amazement of mind have asked them, Viri
fratres, quid agimus? whereunto it is likely they would have returned an answer
far unlike to that of S. Peter, such and such are men unworthy to govern,
pluck them down; such and such are the dear children of God, let them be
advanced. Of two of these men it is meet to speak with all commiseration, yet
so that others by their example may receive instruction, and withal some light
may appear what stirring affections the Discipline is like to inspire, if it
light upon apt and prepared minds. Now if any man doubt of what society they
were, or if the reformers disclaim them, pretending that by them they were
condemned, let these points be considered. 1. Whose associats were they before
their entering into this frantic passion? Whose Sermons did they frequent? Whom
did they admire? 2. Even when they were entering into it, Whose advise did they
require? and when they were in, whose approbation? Whom advertised they of
their purpose? Whose assistance by prayers did they request? But we deal
injuriously with them to lay this to their charge: for they reproved and
condemned it. How? did they disclose it to the Magistrate, that it might be
suppressed? or were they rather content to stand aloof and see the end of it,
and loath to quench the spirit? No doubt these mad practitioners were of their
society, with whom before, and in the practice of their madness they had most
affinity. Hereof read Doct. Bancrofts book.

A third inducement may be to dislike of the Discipline, if we consider not
only how far the reformers themselves have proceeded, but what others upon
their foundations have built. Here come the Brownists in the first rank, their
lineall descendants, who have seized upon a number of strange opinions, whereof
although their Ancestors the reformers were never actually possessed, yet by
right and interest from them derived, the Brownists and Barrowists has taken
possession of them. For if the positions of the Reformers be true, I cannot see
how the maine and general conclusions of Brownisme should be false. For upon
these two points, as J conceive they stand, 1. That because we have no Church,
they are to sever themselves from us: 2. That without Civil authority they are
to erect a Church of their own. And if the former of these be true, the
latter, I suppose will follow. For if above all things men be to regard their
salvation, and if out of the Church there be no salvation; it follows, that
if we have no Church, we have no means of salvation, and therefore separation
from us, in that respect, both lawful and necessary: as also that men so
separated from the false and counterfeit Church, are to associate themselves
unto some Church; not to ours; to the Popish much less: therefore to one of
their own making. Now the ground of all these inferences being this, that in
our Church there is no means of salvation, is out of the Reformers Principles
most clearly to be proved. For wheresoever any matter of faith unto salvation
necessary is denied, there can be no means of salvation: but in the Church of
England, the Discipline, by them accounted a matter of Faith, and necessary to
salvation, is not only denied, but impugned, and the professors thereof
oppressed: Ergo. Again, (but this reason perhaps is weak.) Every true Church of
Christ acknowledges the whole Gospel of Christ: the discipline, in their
opinion, is a part of the Gospel, and yet by our Church resisted, Ergo.
Again, The Discipline is essentially united to the Church: by which term,
essentially, they must mean either an essential part, or an essential
property. Both which ways it must needs be, that where that essential
Discipline is not, neither is there any Church. If therefore between them and
the Brownists there should be appointed a solemn Disputation, whereof with us
they have been oftentimes so earnest Challengers: it does not yet appear what
other answer they could possibly frame to these and the like Arguments,
wherewith they might be pressed, but fairly to deny the conclusion, (for all
the premises are their own) or rather ingeniously to reverse their own
principles before laid, whereon so foul absurdities have been so firmly
built. What further proofs you can bring out of their high words, magnifying
the Discipline, I leave to your better remembrance: but above all points, I am
desirous this one should be strongly enforced against them, because it wringeth
them most of all, and is of all others (for ought I see) the most unanswerable.
You may notwithstanding say that you would be heartily glad these their
positions might so be salved as the Brownists might not appear to have issued
out of their loins: but until that be done, they must give us leave to think
that they have cast the seed whereout these tares are grown.

Another sort of men there is, which have been content to run on with the
reformers for a time, and to make them poor Instruments of their own
designs. These are a sort of godless politics, who perceiving the plot of
Discipline to consist of these two parts, the overthrow of Episcopal, and
erection of Presbitriall Authority, and that this later can take no place till
the former be removed, are content to join with them in the distructive part of
Discipline, bearing them in hand, that in the other also they shall find them
as ready. But when time shall come, it may be they would be as loath to be
yoaked with that kind of regiment, as now they are willing to be released from
this. These men's ends in all their actions, is (...), their pretense and
color, Reformation. Those things which under this color they have effected to
their own good, are 1, by maintaining a contrary faction, they have kept the
Clergy always in awe, and thereby made them more pliable and willing to buy
their peace. 2. By maintaining an opinion of equality among Ministers, they
have made way to their own purposes for devouring Cathedral Churches and Bps
Livings. 3. By exclaiming against abuses in the Church they have carried their
own corrupt dealings in the civil state more covertly. For, such is the nature
of the multitude, they are not able to apprehend many things at once, so as
being possessed with dislike or liking of any one thing, many other in the
mean time may escape them without being perceived. 4. They have sought to
disgrace the Clergy in entertaining a conceit in men's minds, and confirming it
by continual practice, that men of learning, and specially of the Clergy,
which are employed in the chiefest kind of learning, are not to be admitted, or
spareingly admitted to matters of State; contrary to the practice of all well
governed Commonwealths, and of our own till these late years.

A third sort of men there is, though not descended from the reformers, yet in
part raised and greatly strengthened by them, namely the cursed crew of
Atheists. This also is one of those points, which J am desirous you should
handle most effectually, and strain your self therein to all points of motion
and affection, as in that of the Brownists, to all strength and sinews of
reason. This is a sort most damnable, and yet by the general suspicion of the
world at this day most common. The causes of it, which are in the parties
themselves, although you handle in the beginning of the fifth book, yet here
again they may be touched; but the occasions of help and furtherance which by
the reformers have been yielded unto them, are, as I conceive, two, senseless
preaching, and disgracing of the Ministry; for how, should not men dare to
impugn that which neither by force of reason, nor by authority of persons is
maintained: But in the parties themselves these two causes I conceive of
Atheism. 1. More abundance of Wit than judgment, and of Witty than Judicious
learning; whereby they are more inclined to contradict any thing, than willing
to be informed of the truth. They are not therefore men of sound learning for
the most part, but smatterers, neither is their kind of Dispute so much by
force of argument, as by scoffing. Which humor of scoffing and turning matters
most serious into merriment, is now become so common, as we are not to marvel
what the Prophet means by the seat of scorners, nor what the Apostels by
foretelling of scorners to come: our own age has verified their speech unto
us. Which also may be an Argument against these scoffers and Atheists
themselves, seeing it has been so many ages ago foretold, that such men the
later days of the world should afford; which could not be done by any other
spirit save that whereunto things future and present are alike. And even for
the maine question of the Resurrection, whereat they stick so mightily, was it
not plainly foretold that men should in the later times say, Where is the
promise of his coming? Against the Creation, the Arc, and diverse other points,
exceptions are said to be taken; the ground whereof is superfluity of wit
without ground of learning and judgment. A second cause of Atheism is
sensuality, which makes men desirous to remove all stops and impediments of
their wicked life: among which because Religion is the chiefest, so as neither
in this life without shame they can persist therein, (nor if that be true)
without torment in the life to come, they whet their wits to annihilate the
joys of Heaven, wherein they see (if any such be) they can have no part, and
likewise the pains of hell, wherein their portion must needs be very great.
They labor therefore not that they may not deserve those pains, but that,
deserving them, there may be no such pains to seize upon them. But what conceit
can be imagined more base then that man should strive to persuade himself even
against the secret instinct (no doubt) of his own mind, that his soul is as
the soul of a beast, mortal and corruptible with the body. Against which
barbarous opinion their own Atheism is a very strong argument. For were not
the soul a nature separable from the body, how could it enter into discourse
of things merely spiritual, and nothing at all pertaining to the body? Surely
the soul were not able to conceive any thing of heaven, no not so much as to
dispute against heaven, and against God, if there were not in it somewhat
heavenly, and derived from God.

The last which have received strength and encouragement from the reformers are
Papists; against whom although they are most bitter enemies, yet unwittingly
they have given them great advantage. For what can any enemy rather desire then
the breach and dissension of those which are Confederates against him? wherein
they are to remember, that if our Communion with Papists in some few Ceremonies
do so much strengthen them, as is pretended, how much more does this division
and rent among our selves, especially seeing it is maintained to be, not in
light matters only, but even in matter of faith and salvation. Which
overreaching speech of theirs, because it is so open to advantage both for the
Barrowist, and the Papist, we are to wish and hope for, that they will
acknowledge it to have been spoken rather in heat of Affection, then with
soundness of judgment, and that through their exceeding love to that creature
of Discipline which themselves have bred, nourished, and maintained, their
mouth in commendation of her did somewhat overflow.

From hence you may proceed (but the means of connextion I leave to your self)
to another discourse, which I think very meet to be handled either here or
elsewhere at large: the parts whereof may be these: 1. That in this cause
between them and us, men are to sever the proper and essential points and
controversy, from those which are accidental. The most essential and proper
are these two, overthrow of Episcopal erection of Presbyteriall authority. But
in these two points whosoever joyneth with them is accounted of their number;
whosoever in all other points agrees with them, yet thinks the authority of
Bishops not unlawful, and of Elders not necessary, may justly be severed from
their retinew. Those things therefore which either in the persons, or in the
Laws and orders themselves are faulty may be complained on, acknowledged and
amended; yet they no whit the near their maine purpose. For what if all errors
by them supposed in our Liturgy were amended, even according to their own
hearts desire? if Non-residence, Pluralities, and the like, were utterly iaken
away; are their Lay Elders therefore presently authorized, their Sovereign
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction established?

But even in their complaining against the outward and accidental matters in
Church Government, they are many ways faulty. 1. In their end which they
propose to themselves. For in declaiming against abuses, their meaning is not
to have them redressed, but, by disgracing the present state, to make way for
their own Discipline. As therefore in Venice, if any Senator should discourse
against the power of their Senate, as being either too Sovereign, or too weak
in government, with purpose to draw their authority to a moderation, it might
well be suffered; but not so, if it should appear he spoke with purpose to
induce another State by depraving the present, so in all causes belonging
either to Church or Commonwealth, we are to have regard what mind the
complaining part does bear, whether of amendment, or of innovation, and
accordingly either to suffer or suppress it. Their objection therefore is
frivolous, Why, may not men speak against abuses? Yes, but with desire to cure
the part affected, not to destroy the whole. 2. A second fault is in their
manner of complaining, not only because it is for the most part in bitter and
reproachful terms, but also because it is unto the common people, Judges
incompetent and insufficient, both to determine any thing amiss, for want of
skill and authority to amend it. Which also discovers their intent and purpose
to be rather destructive than corrective. Thirdly, those very exceptions which
they take, are frivolous and impertinent: Some things indeed they accuse as
impious: which if they may appear to be such, God forbid they shoud be
maintained.

Against the rest it is only alleged, that they are idle Ceremonies without
use, and that better and more profitable might be devised. Wherein they are
doubly deceived: for neither is it a sufficient plea to say, This must give
place, because a better may be devised: and in our judgments of better and
worse, we oftentimes conceive amiss, when we compare those things which are in
devise with those which are in practice, for the imperfections of the one are
hid, till by time and trial they be discovered: the others are already
manifest and open to all. But last of all, (which is a point in my opinion of
great regard, and which I am desirous to have enlarged) they do not see, that
for the most part when they strike at the state Ecclesiastical, they secretly
wound the Civil State; For personal faults, what can be said against the
Church, which may not also agree to the Commonwealth? In both States men have
always been, and will be always men, sometimes blinded with error, most
commonly perverted by passions: many unworthy have been and are advanced in
both, many worthy not regarded. As for abuses which they pretend to be in the
Laws themselves, when they inveigh against Non-residence, do they take it a
matter lawful or expedient in the Civill-state, for a man to have a great and
gainful office in the North, himself continually remaining in the South? He
that has an office, let him attend his office. When they condemn plurality of
livings spiritual to the pit of hell, what think they of infinite of temporal
promotions? By the great Philosopher, Pol. lib. 2. cap. 9. it is forbidden as a
thing most dangerous to Commonwealths, that by the same man many great offices
should be exercised. When they deride our Ceremonies as vain and frivolous,
were it hard to apply their exceptions even to those civil ceremonies, which
at the Coronation, in Parliament, and all Courts of Justice are used? Were it
hard to argue even against Circumcision, the ordinance of God, as being a
cruel ceremony; against the Passover, as being ridiculous; shod, girt, a
staff in their hand, to eat a lamb?

To conclude, you may exhort the Clergy, (or what if you direct your
Conclusion, not to the Clergy in general, but only to the learned in, or of
both Universities) you may exhort them to a due consideration of all things,
and to a right esteem and valuing of each thing in that degree wherein it
ought to stand: for it oftentimes falls out, what men have either devised
themselves, or greatly delighted in, the price and excellency thereof they do
admire above desert. The chiefest labor of a Christian, should be to know; of
a Minister, to preach Christ crucified: in regard whereof not only worldly
things, but even things otherwise precious, even the Discipline it self is
vile and base: where as now, by the heat of contention, and violence of
affection, the zeal of men toward the one has greatly decayed their love to
the other. Hereunto therefore they are to be exhorted, to Preach Christ
crucified, the mortification of the flesh, the renewing of the spirit, not
those things, which in time of strife seem precious, but passions being
allayed, are vain and childish.

FINIS.

