The Country Miss new come in Fashion; Or, A farewell to the Pockifi'd Town Miss.
A Country Girl in a Paragon Gown,
That never yet knew the tricks of the town;
Did lately delude a taring Gallant,
Who just such an Innocent Virgin did want,
And since he is enjoyed her I heard him protest
That of all other Misses she pleased him best.
To an excellent new Playhouse Tune, Called, The Mock-Tune to the French
Ranth. With Allowance.
lady with a flower gentleman

GIve me the Lass that is true Country bred,
With paragon gown, straw Hat on her head;
Feeding upon good Bacon and Beans,
But never knew what jilting means.
What though her skin be twany and course,
Flocks she lies on, she will kiss never the worse;
Clap she never had like Miss of the Town,
Tha^'s painted and patcht, and lies up and down
What though her speech be simple and plain,
She knows not what flattering complements mean;
If bawdy you speak, she blushes and smiles,
Such innocent charms stead of beauty beguiles.
Free from distempers in every part.
Where ever she likes she loves from her heart,
She Is not for a minute like those of the Trade,
For pleasing enjoyment for ever she is made,
She has not the trick of forcing delight,
But acts with like pleasures each day and each night
Each moment she is dying, so hot is her fire,
And never does kiss but with perfect desire.
So sound is her Nature, she is always in health.
Her kisses are sweet which she gives me by stealth
When e're I am dull, and sit sighing alone.
She I sing me a song of young Tommy and Jone,
gentleman R I

lady

The hair of her head is as black as a Crow,
She Is very well shaped, not too high nor too low;
All parts are inviting in every degree.
Especially those we are forbidden to see.
My Nanny and I (for that is her name)
So equally manage now each others flame.
That neither's deceiv d nor can ever be cloyd,
But both a like brisk after pleasure's enjoyed.
Our Misses o'th Town act contrary-wise,
They never take delight but in hopes of a prize;
Their desire is palled before they begin.
Because they each day make a Trade of their Sin.
Their blood is corrupted, their bodies are fowl,
They swear loud enough to damn body and soul;
They clap all their Cullies, and their pockets pick.
And send the young fop home for a while to be sick
With a doze of rare Pills and some other fine slaps
They keep 'em selves under the notion of Claps,
Which else would arrive to the bridge of the nose,
But that they prevent by a surpentine doze.
My Nanny and I are free from disease,
We never are in danger let us do what we please:
We hugg and we kiss, we sport and we play,
And for pleasures we study to find a new way.
What though her country Tones does seem rude
And cannot with eloquence others delude
It Is no matter for that, she has won my heart so,
I shall love her for ever for a trick that I know.
Beyond all expressing she sweetens our joys.
And doubtless the's full of fine Girls and fine boys
She Is kind and she is true, and so constant does prove
She never will admit any Rival in Love.
The Butter fly M^ss may scoff if she will.
And swear that my Country Nanny wants skill:
To sport and to kiss, but i will vow she is deceived.
She has judgment enough if I may be believed,
Such harmless embraces would ravish ones soul,
Though old age and envy stand by to control.
Her kisses a man almost dead will revive,
No better are had from no woman alive.
All that I have said of my Nanny is true
And more she deserves if I gave her her due,
But this shall suffice, and my labor i^e save
Lest you all fall a longing for what you cannot have
FINIS.
London Printed for W. Thackeray, T. Passenger, and W. Whitwood.


