A DESCRIPTION Of all the Shires, Cities, and Towns, etc. IN ENGLAND.

Anglia Rediviva; Being a full DESCRIPTION Of all the Shires, Cities, Principal
Towns and Rivers, in ENGLAND.

With some useful Observations concerning what is most Remarkable, whether in
relation to their Antiquity, Situation, Buildings, Traffic, or Inhabitants.

To which is Prefixed, A short Account of the first Origin of our Nation, of
its being Conquered by the Romans As also the occasion of the Saxons and Danes
first entering England.

Collected from the best Historians By Mr. DUNSTAR.

Vincit amor Patriae. --

Virg. London: Printed for T. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard; C. Coningsby at the Turk's Head in Fleetstreet; and D. Midwinter
and T. Leigh at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1699.

To the HONORED Sir Thomas Twisden, In the County of Kent, BARONET.
SIR,
THE desire I always had to serve You, encouraged me to prefix Your Name to
this following Treatise.

Which being Collected from the best of our English Historians, whose Writings
You have frequently conversed with, I presumed that what was here so
compendiously Digested, would revive in Your Mind some remarkable Observations,
not unworthy Your remembrance.

You have here, SIR, a short view both of the ancient and present state of
England; as also an account of the most memorable Battles, annexed to the
places near which they were Fought. I have spared for no Pains and Industry to
make it Perfect, I being earnestly desirous that it might in some manner Merit
Your Favor and Esteem; which being once gained, would be a great means in
engaging others (who are ambitious of emulating Your Example) to receive it
kindly.

How happy I have been in this Performance, the Reader can best determine; this
I am sure of, That if Learning and Sense, Wit and Humor, joined with an
Address that is every way becoming and agreeable, are accomplishments fit to
recommend a Gentleman, All those who know You, and those who are to know You,
will applaud my Judgment in choosing You for my Patron.

Be pleased then, SIR, to afford a kind Reception to these my first Offerings;
let the fullness of my Joy for Your safe return amongst us, plead in my behalf,
and make an atonement for the Faults You will here meet with. Give me leave to
hope that this short Description of Your own Country, which cannot but be very
dear unto You, may find some place among those excellent Remarks which You have
so lately made Abroad.

SIR, since the greatness of Your Quality forbids me to come near You as a
Friend, Permit me to Subscribe my self with all imaginable sincerity,

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, S. DUNSTAR.

Anglia Rediviva.
UNDER the Title of ENGLAND we comprehend the better part of one of the best
and greatest Islands of the whole Earth; which together with that of Scotland,
is generally termed both by Ancient and Modern Writers, Great Britain, or
Albion. It is bounded on the North with the Hyperborean Ocean; on the West with
the Vergivian, or Western Ocean, which parts it from Ireland; on the South it
is divided from France with the English Channel; and on the East it is
separated from Germany, Belgium, and Danemark, with the British, or as some
call it, the German Ocean.

It is in length from Berwick in the North, to the Isle of Wight in the South,
375 Miles, whereof 73 make a Degree; and from Dover in the East to the
Lands-end in the West, about 328; in compass 1300. In shape it is Triangular,
it having Three Promontories shooting out into diverse parts, viz. the Cape of
St. Burien in Cornwall, the Foreland of Kent, and the Point of Catness in
Scotland; it contains according to Mr. Morden's computation, near 30 Millions
of Acres, being about the 1/1000 part of the Globe, and the 1/^33 part of the
Habitable World.

Its Air is Temperate, the Cold in Winter being neither so extreme, nor the
Heat in Summer so vexatiously scorching, as in some parts of the World, which
have either a more Southern, or Northern Situation.

The whole Country is exceeding Fruitful, it is Blessed with all the Commodities
of Heaven and Earth; it has Corn in abundance; it is rich in Pasture; it has
innumerable quantities of Cattle; plenty of Wild and Tame Fowl, and variety of
all sorts of Fish.

The People are Bold and Warlike, very Tenacious of their Liberty, of a
Generous and Noble Disposition; see what the Ingenious Mr. (...) says of them
in his late Poem.

See, in the Ocean yon fair Western Isle,
Whose Three sharp Points the insulting Waves divide!
See with what beauteous Rivers it is supplied!
How rich the happy Fields through where they glide!
Well knew the Old Phoenicians that blessed place:
Enured to Pain, there lives an hardy Race;
Daring as Virtues self for Conquest made:
Peace but their Recreation, War their Trade.
Jealous of Liberty they Chains refuse;
Fair Death before Inglorious Life they choose:
Force cannot bend, but Kindness may improve,
And mildly melt their generous warmth to Love.
Book the 3d. C. 1147. As concerning its Name and its First Inhabitants,
Historians have left us in so great an uncertainty, that we scarce know what to
resolve on; but we need not wonder at so great an Obscurity, if we consider
that the First Inhabitants of Countries had other Cares to employ their
Thoughts, than to deliver their Beginnings to Posterity; and possibly had they
been never so willing so to do, they could not have effected it, seeing their
Life was so uncultivated and void of all Literature, that it was almost
impossible for them to preserve the Memory of things, and to make over the same
to succeeding Ages.

Besides their Druides and Bardi, who Rehearsed and Sung the Actions of their
Heroes, not only like other Heathen Priests Monopolized that little Learning
they had wholly to themselves, and were by this means the only Persons supposed
to be able to give an account of what was past, thought it not lawful to Write
any thing.

Nor indeed have we any better account of ancient times, even in those
Civilized parts of the World, wherein Learning chiefly flourished, when a
profound Ignorance overspread the face of Greece its self, as well as other
Nations; for if we would take the pains to enquire strictly into the matter, we
shall there find as much darkness and obscurity as to their Original, as in
these our European Parts.

What Fabulous Stories would the subtle Greeks impose upon us if we had the
Faith to believe them? Who (as a Learned Father of our Church affirms) had not
learned to speak plain truth till the World was about 3173 Years old; for so it
was when the Olympiads began.

If we would enquire further into the Succession of the Latins, and would take
the trouble to examine the two first Dynasties the first before Aeneas's coming
into Italy and the second of the Aeneadae after; fo certainly it will be
sufficient ground to question the account of times before, if in the third
Dynasty, when the Succession seems so clear, and so certain an Epoch as the
Building of Rome to deduce their accounts from, their Chronology be yet
uncertain; for several of their best Historians make no scruple to confess,
That no certain account can be given of Rome, which was 25 Years after the
Olympiads, and but 752 Ante Christum, till the Regisugium, which was 268 Years
Ante Christum 384.

A fair account then we are like to expect concerning the first rise of our own
Nation, after so many revolutions of Ages, wherein Truth seems, as it were,
more and more to have withdrawn her self from us; which to trace out, we must
again return to the Romans, who are the best able to satisfy us in this case,

This is most certain, that the account of Times before the Romans, either in
Italy, Germany, Old Gallia, or Britain, is scarce sit to be discoursed of
under any other Head, than that of Impostures; not that I think that these
Nations had lain in a perpetual sleep till the Romans roused them with their
Swords, and wakened them, as I may say, into some kind of Civility; but that
they had no certain uniform way of conveying the Transactions of their own, and
former times, to the view of Posterity.

On which account we may very justly reject all those pretended Successions of
Gomer and Brute, as Fabulous; as also that this Island was Inhabited by Giants;
with a great many other, I know not what, pretty Stories, adapted to the
Ignorance of those times.

However, all Historians agree in this, That it is highly probable that the
first Inhabitants of this Island were Originally descended from the ancient
Gauls, (that part of the World being long Inhabited before this) which is
sufficiently apparent from the resemblance of their Government, Manners,
Conditions, Buildings, Habits, and the Community of their Language, which is
the surest proof a Nations Original.

As for its Name, the most probable Conjecture is, That it was termed Britain
from Brit, which in the ancient British Language signifies Painted, and the
word Tain, which denotes a Nation; agreeable to the Custom of the ancient
Britains, who used to discolor and paint their Bodies, that in their Wars
they might seem more Terrible to their Enemies.

We are informed by Julius Caesar in his Commentaries, That it was Governed at
first by several petty Rulers and Princes, of different Interests and Counsels:
He Landed in Britain, A. M. 3095. or thereabouts, but was repulsed by
C^ssibelan, a Bold and Warlike Prince, who was Chosen King, or rather
Generalissimo, by the Unanimous Consent of the other Roytelets, to repel the
common Enemy.

He afterward made several Inroads into it, but without any great Success; he
in the end being forced to leave it to the Government of its own Kings.
Augustus, Tiberius, and Caligula, seemed with good Advice to have neglected it;
but in the Reign of the Emperor Claudius, Plautius the Praetor, A. C. 43.
and after him Ostorius, subdued a great part of it.

Nero being Emperor, Suetonius his Lieutenant gained a memorable Victory over
Bonduce, A. C. 57.
the Wife of Prasutagus, King of the Iceni: After which time the Romans still
gaining ground, the Island was at last totally Conquered in the Reign of the
Emperor Domitian, A. C. 82.
and by his Command first made a Province under Agricola, who much about that
time subdued Scotland and Ireland.

The Romans after they had kept it in Subjection several Hundred Years, were
upon the Northern Nations sacking Rome, 4^.
under the Command of Alaricus, King of the Goths and Vandals, recalled by the
Emperor Honorius; at which time Britain being left in a manner naked and
destitute of help, the Picts and Scots presently invade it: The Britains after
they had repelled them for several Years, being at length much weakened, they
Counsel their King Vortigern to call the Saxons to their Assistance; by whose
Aid under the Commands of their Captains Hengist and Horsa, they overcame their
Enemies in a pitched Battle near Stamford in Lincolnshire. They rewarded the
Saxons for this Victory, first with the Isle of Thanet, and afterward with the
whole County of Kent; who growing daily more Powerful, dispossessed at length
their Benefactors of their Native Habitations; A. C. 689.
so that in the Reign of Cadwallader, the last of the British Kings, they were
complete Masters of the whole Island, parcelling it out into seven Kingdoms,
generally called the Saxons Heptarchy.

The Saxon Kings striving amongst themselves for Sovereignty, were at last,
after they had Ruled separately 129 Years, reduced under subjection by Egbert
King of the West Saxons, A. C. 818. who caused this Land to be called England,
by a Parliament held at Winchester.

From Egbert, England continued under the Government of its own Kings, till the
Year 1017, which was 199 Years; about which time Edmund, surnamed Ironside,
being Murdered, (the Danes having for a long time infessed our Coasts, hoping
to succeed as the Saxons before them had done) Canutus King of Denmark seized
into his hands the Regal Government.

The Danish Kings having Ruled England 29 Years, Edward the Confessor, the
Brother of Edmund Ironside, succeeded in the Kingdom, A. C. 1046. who out of
the Saxon, Mercian, and Danish Laws, Compiled one Universal Body of the Law,
from whence our Common Law is thought to have its Original. He Reigned 20
Years, and died A. C. 1066. to whom succeeded Harold; who having Reigned near a
Year, was slain in a pitched Battle near Hastings in Sussex, A. C. 1067. by
William the Conqueror; from whom begins the most exact Computation of the Kings
of England.

Thus much I thought necessary to give the Reader some insight into the first
Ages of our Nation, which I have endeavored to perform in as concise a manner
as the Subject could possibly admit of. I shall now proceed in the Description
of England, as it stands divided by King Alfred into Shires or Counties; which
I have placed in that order as they are afterward Treated of; beginning with
the Learned Cambden; First, in the furthest Western Parts, and so from thence
pass over the other Countries in order; imitating herein (as he judiciously
Observes) Strabo, Ptolomy, and others the most ancient Geographers; who always
begin their Descriptions in the Western Countries, as being first from the
first Meridian.

The Shires of England are generally computed to be 39, to which if we add 13
more in Wales, reckoning the Isle of Anglesey to be one, the whole makes 52. 6
of which were first Ordained in the Reign of Edward the First, A. C. 1280. the
rest were constituted in the Reign of Henry the VIIIth by a Parliamentary
Authority, An. Dom. 1510.

The Names of the Shires in England.
Cornwall. Devonshire. Dorsetshire. Somersetshire. Wiltshire. Hampshire.
Barkshire. Surrey. Sussex. Kent. Glocestershire. Oxfordshire. Buckinghamshire.
Bedfordshire. Hartfordshire. Middlesex. Essex. Suffolk. Norfolk.
Cambridgeshire. Huntingtonshire. Northamptonshire. Leicestershire.
Rutlandshire. Lincolnshire. Nottinghamshire. Darbyshire. Warwickshire.
Worcestershire. Staffordshire. Shropshire. Cheshire. Herefordshire.
Radnorshire. Brecknockshire. Monmouthshire. Glamorganshire. Caermarthenshire.
Pembrokeshire. Cardiganshire. Montgomeryshire. Merionethshire. Carnarvonshire.
Isle of Anglesey. Denbighshire. Flintshire. Yorkshire. Bishop. of Durham.
Lancashire. Westmorland. Cumberland. Northumberland.
Cornwall, Danmonii.
IN Latin Cornubia; it lies most Westward of all Britain, and shoots into
the Sea with little Promontories in manner of an Horn; it has on the North
side the Severn Sea; on the West, the Vergivian, or Western Ocean; on the
South, the British Channel; and on the East, Devonshire: Both which Counties
were in ancient time Inhabited by the Danmonii, which Name is thought to have
been given them from the Mines of Tin which abound in this Place.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Pensance, a very pretty Market Town, near which is that famous Ambrose
Stone, which being a great Rock, is advanced upon some other of a lesser size
with so equal a Counterpoise, that a Child may stir it with a push of a Finger,
yet a great number of Men are not able to remove it from its place.

2. Falmouth, an Haven as noble as Brundusium its self in Italy; it is able to
receive an Hundred Ships so apart from each other, that neither can see the
others Masts; it is defended from the violence of the Wind by the many rising
Banks with which it is enclosed; it is fortified on the East with the Castle of
St. Maudit, and on the West with the Fort Pendinas.

3. Foy, a Town renowned in former Ages for the many Sea Engagements which have
been fought near it; it is pleasantly seated on the Banks of the River which
bears its Name; near the Haven it has several Bulwarks raised for its defense
by Edward the IVth. A. D. 1460.

4. Padstow, the Situation of this Town is very commodious for Traffic with
Ireland, to which Men may easily Sail from hence in 24 Hours.

5. Launston, a proper little Town, Situate upon the pitch of an Hill;
remarkable upon the account of the Common Goal of the Country, and the Assizes
being kept there.

6. Bodman, a Town of great resort, Situate between two Hills, and lying out in
length East and West; its Inhabitants Populous, Beautiful in its Buildings;
famous in ancient times for the Bishops See being kept there, which in the
Danish Wars was removed to St. Germans.

7. Leskerd, a Town seated on the top of a very high Hill, much frequented for
its Market, and renowned for an ancient Castle which stands there.

Devonshire.
IN Latin Davonia; it has Cornwall on the West, on the South the British
Channel, on the East it is bounded with Dorsetshire and Somersetshire, and on
the North with the Severn Sea; it is a Country enriched with very good Mines,
especially toward the West; it has commodious Harbors on both sides of it;
it is adorned with pleasant Meadows and great store of Woods; and is throughout
replenished with fair Towns and beautiful Buildings.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Plymouth, a Port Town, seated near the Rivers Plime and Tamar, which
meeting near this place fall together into the Ocean; of so great a repute,
that for the number of its Inhabitants it may be compared with a City; such is
the commodiousness of the Haven, that it admits into its bosom the greatest
Ships without striking Sail; before the midst of its mouth lies the Isle of
St. Nicholas, Fortified both by Art and Nature; the Haven has likewise
Fortifications on each side, and is Chained over when there is an occasion;
upon an Hill near adjoining it has a fair Castle for its defense; the Town is
divided into Four Wards, over which a Mayor was ordained by King Henry the
VIth. An. Dom. 1430.

2. Dartmouth, a Port Town seated on an Hill near the River Dartmore; it has
two Castles for its defense; and by reason of its commodious Haven is much
frequented by Merchants, and furnished with very good Shipping. It has
oftentimes bravely defended it self against the French, but especially in the
Reign of Henry the IVth. An. Dom. 1404.

3. Torbay, a safe Road and Harbor for Ships; near it is a little Village
called by its Name.

4. Exeter, Exonia, Isca; a City of great Traffic, much frequented by
Merchants, situated on the East Bank of the River Ex, upon a little Hill,
gently arising by an easy ascent to a pretty height, the Pendant whereof lies
East and West; it is environed about with Ditches and very strong Walls, having
many Turrets orderly interposed; it is in Circuit a Mile and an half, having
Suburbs running out a great way on each side; it contains 15 Parishes, has a
Castle called Rugemont, the Seat of the West Saxon Kings, and afterward of the
Earl of Cornwall, which at this day is commendable for little else but its
Antiquity and Situation; it is beautified with a stately Cathedral, founded in
the Reign of Henry the 1st. An. Dom. 1110. it has been thrice Besieged, but
has always bravely defended its self: First by Hugh Courtney Earl of
Devonshire, in the Civil War between the Houses of York and Lancaster; then by
Perkin Warbeck, that Young imaginary pretended Prince, who feigned himself to
be Richard Duke of York, Second Son to Edward the IVth. Thirdly, by seditious
Rebels of Cornwall, An. Dom. 1549. at which time the Citizens endured so great a
Famine, that for Twelve Days together they were forced to Eat Horses, and to
make Bread of coarse Bran molded in Clothes, till they were at length relieved
by my Lord Russel and Gray, who forced the Rebels to raise the Siege; upon
which King Edward the VIth for a reward of their Loyalty, gave the Manor of
Evyland to this City; the Civil Government of which is in the Power of Twenty
four Persons, out of whom there is from Year to Year a Mayor Elected; who with
Four Bailiffs has the sole Command of the City.

5. Bediford, a Town of good resort, famous for a Stone Bridge with Arched
Work, where it windeth its self into the River Taw.

6. Axminster, a Town renowned in ancient History for the Tombs of the Saxon
Princes, slain in the Battle of Brunabrug.

Dorsetshire, Durotriges.
THE Latin Name Dorcestria; it is bounded on the North with Somersetshire and
Wiltshire, on the West with Devonshire, and some part of Somersetshire; on the
South it lies open for 50 Miles to the British Ocean; On the East it has
Hampshire. The Soil of this Country is very fruitful; the North part is
overspread with Woods and Forests; and from thence adorned with an innumerable
many pleasant Pastures and fruitful Valleys.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Burport, a little Town placed between two small Rivers, remarkable for its
yielding the best Hemp, and for the skill of the Inhabitants in making Ropes
and Cables for Ships, those of the Navy being formerly twisted there.

2. Weymouth, a little Town joined to Kings-Melcomb by a Bridge, famous in
regard of its Haven; it is grown of late much greater than it formerly was by
Sea-Adventures.

3. Dorchester, Durnovaria, the Head Town of the whole Shire, yet it is neither
great nor beautiful, being despoiled by Sueno King of Danemark, about the Year
of our Lord, 1013.

4. Shirburn, it is pleasantly seated on an hanging Hill, and is the most
remarkable and best frequented Town in all this Country; it gains exceedingly
by Clothing; Anno Dom. 704. an Episcopal Seat was Erected in this place by
Aldeme the First Bishop there Consecrated; it was afterward removed to
Sarisburg, Shirburn being kept in reserve for a retiring place.

5. Winburn, a fair Town seated on a piece of an Hill between Two Rivers; it is
large in Compass, replenished with Inhabitants, but few fair Buildings, except
that its Church claims our observation, upon the account of the Sepulcher of
Ethelred King of the West Saxons who lies there Interred; however it retains
even to this day diverse tokens of the Majesty of the Romans.

Somersetshire, Belgae.
COmitatus Somersettensis, is bounded on the North with the Severn Sea; on the
West it confineth on Devonshire; on the South it bordereth, first upon
Devonshire, and then upon Dorsetshire; on the East it has Wiltshire; and
North-East a part of Glocestershire: It is a large and wealthy Region; the Soil
of which is very rich, yielding exceeding plenty of Corn and Pasture; it is very
Populous, and sufficiently furnished with commodious Ports and Havens.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Taunton, a proper Town, pleasantly situated, it is reputed to be one of the
Eyes of the Shire.

2. Bridgewater, a great and populous Market Town, agreeably situated near the
Banks of the Severn Sea, and is by some thought to have been so called from the
Bridge and Water which is near it.

3. Bruiton, a Town memorable for little else than that the Noble Family of the
Mohuns is here Entombed; unless we mention the late extraordinary Processions
which the Women of the Town made on the Conclusion of the late Peace.

Near this place was Founded the Abbey of Glastenbury, fetching its original
even from Joseph of Arimathea, who Enterr'd the Body of our Savior: In the
first Age of the Primitive Church, very Holy Men applied themselves diligently
to the Service of God in this place, who were maintained by an Allowance from
Kings, they Instructing Youth in Religion and in the Liberal Sciences; these
Men embraced a Solitary Life, that they might the more quietly study the
Scriptures; till at length Dunstan, a Man of a subtle Wit, when he had once by
an Opinion of his Holiness and Learning, wound himself into an Acquaintance
with Princes, he brought in the Benedictine Monks, he being made Abbot of the
Convent, after that he had obtained from the hands of many good Princes a Royal
Revenue. When they had flourished 600 Years, they were dispossessed by King
Henry the VIIIth. the Monastry being razed even to the ground, nothing now but
the Ruins appearing of it.

Arthur the British Worthy is thought to have been Buried in this place.

4. St. Philips Norton, a large great Market Town, so named from a Church
Consecrated to St. Philip.

5. Wells, a Town so named from the Springs found in it; like as Susa in
Persia, Croia in Dalmatia, and (...) in Macedonia; for multitude of
Inhabitants, and for stately Buildings, it justly challenges the Pre-eminence
of this Province: It has a noble Marketplace, sustained with Columns, as also
a stately Church and College Endowed with many rich Livings and Revenues; the
Church throughout is very beautiful, but especially the Frontespiece thereof at
the West end is a Masterpiece; the Cloisters adjoining to it are likewise very
fair and spacious.

6. Bath, an ancient City, so called from the Baths in it; beautified
throughout with very fair and noble Buildings for the receipt of Strangers;
it is seated in a low plain, environed about with Hills of an equal height, out
of which certain pleasant Streams of fresh River Water continually descend into
the City, to the advantage and comfort of the Citizens; within the City Three
Springs of Hot Water boil up of a Bluish or Sea Color, sending up from them
thin Vapors, and a kind of strong Scent, by reason that the Water is drilled
and strained through Veins of Brimstone, and a clammy kind of Earth called
Bitumen; which Springs are very Medicinable, and of great Virtue to Cure Bodies
overcharged with Corrupt Humors; for they open the Pores, resolve, attenuate,
digest, consume, and draw forth Superfluities, and at the same time strongly
heal and dry the whole Habit of the Body.

In the Reign of Henry the Is It. A. D. 1110. Johannes de Villula being Elected
Bishop of this place, translated his See to Bath, since which time the Two Sees
growing into one, the Bishop bears the Title of both, and is called the
Bishop of Bath and Wells.

7. Bristol, this City stands partly in Somersetshire, and partly in
Glocestershire; it is sufficiently defended both by Art and Nature, being
situated on the meeting of the From and Avon, not far from the influx of the
Severn into the Ocean; a City exceeding Populous and exceeding Cleanly, there
being Sinks made under ground for the conveyance of all the filth and nastiness
into the Rivers. It has Twenty Churches, reckoning the Cathedral and that of
Ratliff into the Number; the Cathedral was first Built by Robert Fitz-Harding,
Son to one of the Kings of Danemark, An. Dom. 1248. and honored with a Bishops
See by King Henry the VIIIth. Anno Dom. 1542. The principal Building, next the
Church, is an ancient Castle, of such great strength, that Maud the Emperess
having taken King Stephen Prisoner, thought this the safest place to secure him
in; it is furnished with all things necessary for Man's Life, that, next after
London and York, of all the Cities of England it may justly challenge the chief
place; it is so commodiously seated for Trade and Traffic, that the Haven
admits Ships with full Sail into the very bosom of the City; which has
drawn People of many Countries thither; the Citizens are for the most part rich
Merchants, who Traffic all over Europe, and make Voyages even to the remotest
known parts of America.

Wiltshire, Belgae.
IN Latin Wintonia, is enclosed with Somersetshire on the West, Barkshire and
Hampshire on the East, on the North with Glocestershire, and on the South with
Dorsetshire and a part of Hampshire. It Is a Midland Region, plentiful in all
things, and for its variety, pleasant and delightful.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Malmsbury, a fair Town, famous for Clothing; not far from hence dwelt
Aldeme, a very Learned Man; he was the first of the English Nation that wrote
in Latin, and the first that taught Englishmen the measures of a Latin Verse.

Primus ego in patriam mecum (modo vita supersit)
Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas.
Geer. Lib. 3. 2. Chipenham, a large Town of great note for a Market kept
there; it is pleasantly seated on the River Avon.

3. Edindon, a small Town, remarkable for Clothing; here King Alfred in a
memorable Battle most fortunately Vanquished the Danes, reducing them to such
Extremities, that they all Swore, in a set form of Oath made for that purpose,
immediately to depart from England.

4. Trubridge, a fair Market Town, of great repute for the great number of
Clothiers which Inhabit it; it shows the remains of a Castle belonging to the
Duchy of Lancashire.

5. Werminster, a Town very remarkable for a great Corn Market, which is kept
Weekly here, and exceedingly much frequented; it being almost incredible to
relate what great numbers of people resort to it.

6. Wilton, formerly the head Town of the whole Shire; it is a place well
watered, but is now fallen to decay through the Bishop of Salisbury's turning
away the passage that lay through it into the West Country.

7. Salisbury, Sorbiodunum, or Sarum, a City well Inhabited, seated on the
River Avon, which waters every Street of it; it is plentiful in all things,
but especially in Fish; it is adorned with a very stately Marketplace, wherein
stands their Common Hall, made of Timber, a very Beautiful Building: It is
particularly famous for its Minster, which has Three hundred sixty five
Windows, Twelve Gates, and as many great and small Pillars as there are Hours
in a Year; nor is its Cloister for largeness or Workmanship inferior to any in
England.

8. Marlborough, a fair large Town, pleasantly situated, and well frequented;
in this Town King Henry the IIId held a Parliament.

N. B. Toward the North, about 6 Miles from Salisbury, is to be seen an huge
and monstrous piece of work, Insana Substructio; for in the circuit of a Ditch,
there are erected in form of a Crown, in three ranks one within another,
certain large, mighty, unwrought Stones, whereof some are Twenty eight foot
high, and Seven broad, which are so artificially, or rather wonderfully placed
one upon another, that the whole frame seems to hang; it is much wondered at,
both from whence they were brought (the Country affording none such) as also by
what means they were set up: Some have thought them to be no Natural Stones,
but Artificially made of pure Sand, and of some unctious matter incorporated
together. Pliny tells us, that the Sand of Putcoli covered over with Water,
becomes forthwith a very Stone; which if true, our Conjecture is the more
probable; it seeming to confirm what Historians tell us, That they were erected
by the Britans in Memory of Ambrosius Aurelianus, who was Slain here by the
Saxons as he was Fighting manfully for the Defense of his Country.

Hampshire.
IN Latin Hamptonia, is bounded on the West with Dorsetshire and Wiltshire; on
the South with the British Channel; on the East it has Sussex and Surrey; and
on the North Barkshire. It Is a small Province, fruitful in Corn, furnished with
well grown Woods, abounding with Pasture, and for Sea Commodities rich and
happy.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Ringwood, a Town in ancient times of great Fame, but now little better than
other good frequented Market Towns.

2. Christ-Church, a Town so named from a Church therein Dedicated to Christ;
it is seated between two Rivers; it was Fortified in old time with a Castle, and
Beautified with an ancient Church and Twelve Prebendaries, endowed with
considerable* Rents and Revenues; which continued in great repute till the time
of King Henry the VIIIth.

3. Southampton, a Town so named from its situation; it is situated in a very
commodious place between two Rivers; for a great number of fair Built Houses
much renowned; for Inhabitants and concourse of Merchants Wealthy; fenced round
with a double Ditch, strong Walls, and Turrets standing thick between; for the
defense of the Haven, it has a strong Castle of square Stone, cast up upon a
Mount of great height; several of the Roman Emperors Coins are now and then
dug up here, which sufficiently show the Antiiquity of this place.

Memorable it is, for that Canutus the Puissant King of England and of Denmark*
rebuked a Sycophant in this Town, who flattered him, That all things in the
Realm were at his Command. He ordered his Chair to be set upon the Shore when
the Sea began to flow, and then in the presence of many he said unto the Sea as
it flowed, Thou are part of my Dominions, and the ground on which I sit is
mine, neither was there ever any that durst Disobey my Commands, and escape
Unpunished; wherefore I charge thee, that thou come not upon my Land, neither
wet the Clothes and Body of thy Lord; but the Sea flowing on still without any
Reverence of his Person, wet his Feet; then he retiring back said, Let all the
Inhabitants of the World know, That vain and frivolous is the Power of Kings,
and that none is worthy of so sacred a Name, but He to whose Command the
Heaven, Earth, and Sea, by bond of an everlasting Law are Subject and Obedient;
after which he never put his Crown upon his head.

4. Alrefford, a fair Town, standing on the bank of the River Alre, it has a
very spacious Marketplace, built by Lucy Bishop of Winchester, An. Dom. 1220.

5. Winchester, Wintonia, formerly the Seat-Royal of the Kings of the
West Saxons, a City adorned with several Magnificent Churches, as also with a
Bishop's See; it has been oftentimes defaced both by Fire and other
Misfortunes, but it seems now perfectly to have recovered its self; Edward the
IIId appointed in this place a Mart for Wool and Cloth, which was generally
called the Staple; it is well Peopled, has plenty of Water, and contains
about a Mile and an half in Circuit within the Walls; as concerning the round
Table in the Hall of this City, vainly fancied by some to have been King
Arthur's, any man that vieweth it well, may easily perceive that it is not so
ancient. This City slourished in the time of the Romans, in which the Emperors
of Rome seem to have had their Houses of Weaving and Embroidering, peculiar to
their own Persons and Uses.

6. Portsmouth, a Port Town strongly Fortified both with a Wall and
Block-Houses, a Garrison being continually kept in Pay for the defense of it;
it is situated on the very mouth of the Haven, and is always, but especially in
time of War, well frequented, as being more favorable and better affected to
Mars and Neptune than to Mercury.

7. Basingstoak, a Market Town well frequented, situated on the descent of an
Hill, on the North side of which stands a very fair Chapel, Consecrated to
the Holy Ghost, by William the first Lord Sands, who was Buried there.

Isle of Wight.
VEcta Insula; it belongs to, and is opposite to Southampton; from East to
West it stretches out near 20 Miles in length, and spreads in the midst,
where it is broadest, 12 Miles, the place of greatest repute is

1. Newport, the chief Market Town of the whole Isle; it has several Castles
and Block-houses for its defense.

Barkshire, Attrebates.
IN Latin Barcheria; on the North part it is severed from Oxfordshire, and
afterward from Buckinghamshire by the River Isis; on the South it bears
toward Hampshire, where the River Kenet cutteth through it, till it runs into
the Thames; on the West it is bounded by Wiltshire; and on the East by Surrey:
On the West part it has plenty of Command Fruit; but on the East part, where
it consineth with Surrey, the Soil is very barren and unfruitful.

1. Farendon, a Town seated on a rising ground, famous for a Market kept there,
but in times past for a certain Fort which Robert Earl of Gloucester Built, and
defended against King Stephen, who having won it by many bloody Assaults,
levelled it to the ground, so that now it is not to be seen.

2. Abington, a Populous Town, pleasantly seated on the plain of an Hill, since
the Year 1416. in which King Henry the Vth Built a Bridge over the River, and
turned the Kings highway hither to make a shorter passage; it began to be so
frequented, that it is now the chief Town of the whole Shire; it is famous for
its great Trade in Malt.

3. Wallingford, in old time it was compassed about with Walls, it had a very
large Castle situate upon the River, which was thought to be invincible; it was
oftentimes Besieged by King Stephen, but all in vain. This Town was so
dispeopled by reason of a grievous Pestilence, which happened in the Year 1348,
that whereas before it was well Inhabited and had Twelve Churches, it can show
now no more than One or Two.

4. Newbury, a famous Town raised out of the Ruins of Spine, which was formerly
a place of great repute; it is situated in a champion plain, being watered
throughout with the River Kenet; it is well Inhabited, and is very remarkable
for its Trade in Clothing.

5. Reading, a Town famous for fair Streets, well built Houses, as also for the
Riches of the Townsmen, and for their Name in making Cloth; it has lost the
greatest Ornaments it had, viz. a beautiful Church, and a most ancient Castle,
which was razed by King Henry the IId, because it was a Refuge for King
Stephen's followers.

6. Maidenhead, a large spacious Town, filled with good Inns for the reception
of Strangers; it is well frequented.

7. Windsor-Castle, it is situated on an Hill that rises with a gentle Ascent,
and enjoys a most delightful Prospect round about; on the front it
overlooketh a spacious Vale; behind it arise Hills every where, neither rough
nor high, so that it is dedicated, as one would say, to Hunting-Game; it was
Built by King Henry the Is It, An. 1100. and enlarged by King Edward the IIId,
who was Born here; it is in bigness equal to a pretty City, Fortified with
Ditches and Bulwarks made of Stone; in this place King Edward the IIId
Instituted the Noble Order of the Garter, to increase Virtue and Valor in the
Hearts of his Nobility; or, as some report, in honor of the Countess of
Salisbury, of which Lady the King had formerly been Enamored. The Garter was
given to it in Testimony of that Love and affection wherewith the Knights of it
were bound one to another, and all of them jointly to the King as Sovereign;
there are of it Twenty six Knights, of which the King of England is always
Chief; the Ensign is a Blew Garter Buckled on the Left Leg, on which these
words are Embroidered, Honi Soit, qui mal y Pense; about their Necks they wear
a Blew Ribbond, at the end of which hangs the Image of St. George; upon whose
Day the Installations of the new Knights are commonly Celebrated.

THese Regions which I have hitherto Described, viz. of the Danmonii,
Durotriges, Belgae, Attrebatii; when the Saxons Ruled in Britain, fell to the
Kingdom of the West Saxons; who under the Command of their King Egbert, United
the English Heptarchy into a Monarchy; which afterward, through the Cowardice
of their Kings, soon vanished. For after this the Danes brake in upon the
Northumbers, and though often Vanquished, yet being as often Victorious, they
at last seized on the Monarchy of England; which was sometime held by the
Danes, sometimes by the Saxons, till William Duke of Normandy took it from
Harold, and established the Monarchy; which has ever since continued in a
Succession of Twenty eight Princes, down to our Gracious Sovereign King William.

REGNI.
NEXT unto the Attrebatii Eastward, those Regions which we commonly term
Surrey, Sussex, with the Seacoast of Hampshire, were Inhabited by the Regni.

Surrey.
IN Latin Surria; is bounded on the West by Barkshire, and Hampshire; on the
South by Sussex; on the East by Kent; on the North it is Watered by the River
Thames, and by it divided from Middlesex. It is a plain and Champion Country,
yielding Corn and Forage in abundance, especially toward the South.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Farnham, a Market Town, so named from the great quantity of Fern growing
near it; near this place H^nry of (...) erected a noble Castle, which being
afterward demolished by Henry the IIId, was again rebuilt by the Bishops of
Winchester.

2. Guildford, a Market Town well frequented, full of fair Inns; in old time it
was a Royal Mansion of the English Saxon Kings.

3. Kingston, a Market Town well Inhabited, famous in old time by reason of a
Castle therein belonging to the Clares, Earls of Gloucester; it took its name
from a little Town which stood near it; in which when England was almost ruined
by the Danish Wars, Athelstan, Edwin, and Etheldred, were Crowned Kings in the
Marketplace.

4. Richmond, a Town very beautiful and glorious in respect of its Buildings,
famous for the Death of several Kings, but in particular of that most Mighty
Prince King Edward the IIId. Here also Died Ann, Wife to King Richard the IId,
Daughter to the Emperor Charles the IVth, who first taught English Women the
manner of sitting on Horseback, which is now in use, whereas before they rode
very unseemly astride as Men do. Memorable it is likewise for that King Henry
the VIIth, and Queen Elizabeth of glorious Memory, yielded unto Nature in this
place.

5. Croidon, a Market Town well frequented, whose Inhabitants gain to
themselves great advantages by selling of Char-Coal.

6. Lambeth, a Town famous in former times for the Death of Canutus the Hardy,
King of England, who there Revelling with his Lords, amidst his Cups yielded up
his Breath; but at this time it is much frequented by reason of the Archbishop
of Canterbury's Palace which is in this place.

7. Southwark, the most famous Market Town and place of Trade in all this
Shire; it is so large and populous, that it gives place to few Cities in
England; in the Reign of King Edward the VIth it was annexed to the City of
London, and is at this day reckoned as a part of it.

Sussex.
IN Latin Sussexia; is bounded on the West by Hampshire; on the North by Surrey
and part of Kent; on the East by Kent; on the South it lies upon the British
Ocean; on the Seacoast it has many green Hills of an exceeding height,
called the Downs, which standing on a Chalky sort of Mould, yield great plenty
of Corn; the middle part of it is adorned with Meadows, Cornfieldsd, and
Groves, which afford a delightful Prospect.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Chichester, a City well Inhabited, having very fair and regular Buildings,
the Streets crossing one another exactly in the middle, in which is erected a
fair Stone Marketplace, supported with Pillars round about; it has a very
stately Cathedral; the Bishop's See is kept here; it is encompassed almost round
with the Lavant, which falls not far off into the Sea; it was Built by Cissa
King of the South Saxons, A. C. 514.

2. Arundel, a good frequented Market Town, memorable for a magnificent strong
Castle Built near it, belonging to the Earl of Arundel.

3. Lewis, a fair Town, seated upon a rising Ground, which for its greatness
and multitude of Inhabitants, is reputed one of the Chiefest Towns in all this
County; famous it is for the bloody Battle between King Henry the IIId and his
unruly Barons, An. 1263. in which the King lost the day, upon Prince Edward his
Son's pursuing a Troop of the Enemy too far, which he had first routed by his
Valor.

4. Hastings, one of the Cinque Ports, the Landing-place of the Normans, famous
for the overthrow of King Harold in the Fields adjoining; it is Inhabited by a
Warlike People, who are Skilful Sailors; it is well stored with Barks, it
serving both the Country and London in Fish, which they have here in great
Plenty.

5. Winchelsey, it is situated on an high Hill very steep on that side which
looks toward the Sea; it was enclosed with a Rampire, and afterward with
very strong Walls; but it no sooner began to flourish, but it was unfortunately
Sacked by the French and Spaniards; it bears now only the countenance of a
fair Town, it having lost its chiefest Beauty upon the Seas leaving it.

6. Rhye, it lay for a good while unknown in former Ages, but upon the decay of
Winchelsey it began to flourish; it was Walled about by King Edward the IIId,
and had then a very commodious Haven, it being an usual passage from hence to
Normandy; it is now in a manner deserted by the Sea, yet notwithstanding it
has very many Fishing Vessels, so that it serves London with variety of Fish.

Thus far Sussex, which together with Surrey, was the Habitation of the Regni
in the time of the Britains, and was afterward the Kingdom of the
South Saxons; but in the 306th Year after the beginning of it, it came under
the Dominion of the West Saxons.

Kent, Cangi.
IN Latin Cantium; it is bounded on the North by Essex; on the East by the
Channel; it has Sussex on the South; and Surrey on the West to confine upon
it; it is every where full of Meadows, Pastures, and Cornfieldsd, abounding
wonderfully in Apple Trees and Cherry-Trees, which being brought out of
Corasus, a City of Tontus, by Lucullus into Italy, in the 608th Year after the
Building of Rome, and the 120th Year after that translated from thence into
Britain, which was 24 Years ante Christum.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Deptford, a Town where the King's Ships are usually Built, and such as are
decayed Repaired; there is also a Storehouse and College erected here for the
use of the Navy; it is remarkable for the Monument of Sir Francis Drake's Ship,
which by the Command of Queen Elizabeth was drawn on shore in this place, the
Carcass of it is yet to be seen.

2. Greenwich, a very beautiful Town, but especially in respect of the King's
House, which Humphrey Duke of Gloucester Built and named Placence; it is likewise
particularly famous for the Birth of Queen Elizabeth.

3. Eltham, a fair well Built Town, formerly the retiring place of the Kings of
Kent.

4. Sevenoke, in this place Sir William Sevenoke, an Alderman of London, being
a Foundling and brought up here, and therefore so nam^d, built in grateful
remembrance an Hospital and School; he lived in the Reign of King Henry the Vth.

5. Dartford, a large great Market Town, well frequented and well Watered; here
King Edward the IIId Built a Nunnery, which King Henry the VIIIth converted
into a House for himself and his Successors.

6. Gravesend, a Town as well known as any in England for the usual passage by
Water between it and London; King Henry the VIIIth when he Fortified the
Seacoast, raised two Platforms here, and two other on the side of Essex
opposite to it.

7. Tunbridge, a Town well Inhabited, famous in old time for a fair large
Castle, fenced with a River and deep Ditches, which Richard Lord of Briony
Built there; the very Ruins of it at this time manifestly declare the greatness
of it.

8. Maidstone, the largest and most beautiful Town in all this Shire, most
commodiously seated for public Business; one of the two common Prisons of all
this County is appointed here; its Inhabitants are particularly noted for their
Manufacture in Thread.

9. Rochester, a City seated on the River Medway, but of no greatness; in
former times called Durobrivis, but afterward Roffa; it is honored with a
Bishop's See, and is the Second City for Antiquity in all this Island.

10. Chetham, the Station of the Royal Navy, where our Kings have always one
ready for any Service whatever; it was Built with exceeding great Cost by the
Command of Queen Elizabeth, who for the defense thereof raised a Castelet by
the River side. Our Ships in this place, to the dishonor of our Nation, were
burnt by the Dutch, A. C. 1667.

11. Queensborough, a Port-Town well Inhabited; it has Westward in the Front a
very fine strong Castle Built by Edward the IIId.

12. Feversham, a Town very commodiously situated, the most plentiful part of
all this Country lying round about it; it has a little Creek sit for bringing
in and exporting Commodities; so that at this day it flourishes among the
neighboring Towns.

13. Canterbury, an ancient City, famous in the time of the Romans; it is
neither very great nor very small; it has little or nothing in it worth
Observation, besides the Cathedral; famous it is in regard of St. Augustine its
first Archbishop, who is here Interred.

14. Isle of Tanet, a very pleasant fruitful place, its Inhabitants are very
Industrious, getting their Living both by Sea and Land; they being both
Fishermen and Plowmen, Husbandmen and Mariners; they are always ready appointed
for both Elements, they in a manner going round, and keeping a circle in these
their Labors.

15. Sandwich, one of the Cinque Ports; it is on the North and West sides
Fortified with walls, and on the other parts fenced with a Rampire, River, and
Ditch. The Haven, upon the account of the Sands choking it, and a Ship of
Burthen's being accidentally sunk in the Channel, is not deep enough for any
Tall Vessels.

16. Sandon, Deal, Walmer, Three neighboring Castles Built by King Henry VIII;
it is generally reported that Julius Caesar Landed first at this place.

17. Dover, it is seated on the Seashore, where the passage is shortest into
France, for that cause Fortified with a strong and impregnable Castle; esteemed
one of the Keys of England, and the Chief of the Cinque Ports.

Having now described all those Countries that lie between the British Ocean
on the one side, and the Severn Sea, and River Thames on the other; passing now
over the River, let us return to the Head of Thames, and the Salt Waters of
Severn, and there visit the Dobuni, who formerly Inhabited those Parts which we
now term Glocestershire and Oxfordshire.

Glocestershire, Dobuni.
IN Latin Glocestria; on the West it bordereth on Monmouthshire and
Herefordshire; on the North on Worcestershire; on the East upon Warwickshire,
Oxfordshire, and Barkshire; and on the South upon Wiltshire and Somersetshire.
The Country throughout yields plenty of Corn, and abundance of Fruit; the one
through the natural Goodness of the ground, the other through the diligent
Tillage and Labor of its Inhabitants.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Tewksbury, a large fair Town, having three Bridges to pass over; it
stands between the Rivers Severn and Avon, and another Brook which comes
from the East; it is famous for making of fine Woollen Cloth, and the best
Mustard; but more famous in times past by reason of an ancient Monastery
Founded by Dodo a Man of great Power in Mercia, An. Christ. 715.

Memorable it is for the fatal Battle Fought between the House of York and
Lancaster, An. Christ. 1471. wherein Prince Edward, King Henry the VIth's
Eldest Son, being taken Prisoner, he was brought before King Edward the IVth,
who was so provoked by his resolute Answers, that he dashed him on the Mouth
with his Gauntlet, and then Richard the Crouchback with his Dagger stabbed him
to the Heart.

2. Gloucester, a fair beautiful City, both for number of Churches and for
Buildings; it is situated upon the Severn, near the Isle Aldney, where was
Fought the Combat between Edmond Ironside, King of the English-Saxons, and
Canutus the Dane; in the South part there was a lofty Castle of square
Ashler-stone, which is now wholly Ruined; this City gives the Title to the
Third Son of Great Britain: The chiefest Trade of the Citizens is in working
on Iron; the City was Built by the Romans, and set, as it were, on the neck of
the Silures to keep them in Subjection; there was also a Colony planted to
People it, which they called Colonia Glevum. It has a very stately Cathedral
Dedicated to St. Peter, in which lie Interred King Edward the Second, and
Robert Courthose the Eldest Son of King William the Conqueror, Two Unfortunate
Princes. Near this place, An. 1643. was Fought a Battle between the Forces of
King Charles the Is It, and his Rebellious Parliament, in which the famous Lord
Falkland was unfortunately slain.

3. Barkley, a small Market Town, of great repute for a strong Castle, but more
famous for that King Edward the Second, who was Deposed from his Kingdom by the
ill Practices of his Wife, was made away in this Castle by the subtilty of the
Bishop of Hereford, who wrote unto his Keepers these words without Points,
Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est.

4. Camden, a Market Town, well Peopled, and of good resort; in this place the
Saxon Kings Assembled in the Year 689, and Consulted in common about making War
upon the Britains.

5. Winchelcomb, a great Town well Inhabited, famous in old time for an Abbey
Erected there by Kenulph King of Mercia.

Oxfordshire.
IN Latin Oxonium; on the West it has Glocestershire; on the South it is
divided from Barkshire by the River Isis, and Thames; on the East it bordereth
upon Buckinghamshire; and Northward where it points out in manner of a Cone
or Pineapple; it has Northamptonshire on one side, and Warwickshire on the
other.

The Air of this Country is Mild and Temperate, the Land is Fertile and
Delightful, the Hills abound with Woods, and the Valleys are filled with Corn
and Pasture.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Evenlode, a small Town famous for King Henry the Second's Building a
Labyrinth in it for the Beautiful Rosamund, the Lord Clifford's Daughter.

2. Banbury, a fair large Town, not far from which Richard Nevill, Earl of
Warwick, taking part with the House of Lancaster, gave the House of York a very
great overthrow; it is a place of great Antiquity, some Roman Coins being
oftentimes found near it.

3. Oxford, a fair and beautiful City, both in respect of the Private
Buildings, as well as in the stately Magnificence of the Public; the situation
is extremely pleasant, for the Hills being beset with Woods do so environ the
Plain, that as on the one side they exclude the South and West Wind, so on the
other they let in the East, and North-East Wind, which frees the City from all
Corruption; it is particularly famous for its University, which is the most
Celebrated in all Europe, it having 16 Colleges and 8 Halls, all adorned with
most stately Buildings, and enriched with great Endowments, noble Libraries,
and most Learned Graduates of all Professions.

Buckinghamshire, Cattieuchlani.
IN Latin Buckinghamia; on the South it looks on Barkshire; on the West
Oxfordshire; on the North it has Northamptonshire; and from the East, first
Bedfordshire, then Hertfordshire, and afterward Middlesex. The Air of this
County is Temperate and Pleasant, the Soil is Rich, Fat, and Fruitful, the
Valleys maintain an insinite Number of Sheep, whose soft and fine Fleeces are
in great esteem throughout all Asia.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Marlow, a pretty Town of good credit and repute; it took its name from a
certain Chalk, commonly called Marle, which being spread upon Corn-ground eaten
out with long Tillage, does so quicken the same again, that after one Years
rest it never lies fallow, but bears Corn in great plenty.

2. Wickam, a large Town, equal both in Beauty and Buildings to the best in the
Shire.

3. Ailesbury, a fair Market Town, seated on a rising Hill, and compassed about
with many pleasant Meadows; it has a great reputation for Grazing and Feeding
of Cattle.

4. Buckingham, the Principal Town of this Shire, situated on a low Ground, and
encompassed by the River Ouse; 'twas never of any great repute, yet before the
Conquest it was Fortified with a Castle and Rampires against the Invasion of
the Danes.

5. Stony-Stratford, a Town of ancient Note, being supposed to be the Romans
Lactorodum; it is built of rough Stone upon the ancient Causey-way, which is
called Watling-street; where remains Marks thereof even unto this day. At this
place Edward the Elder stopped the passage of the Danes, whilst he strenthened
Torcester against them; in this place Edward the First reared a beautiful Cross
in Memory of Eleanor his Deceased Queen, as he did in every place where her
Corpse rested, from Herdby in Lincolnshire, till it was received and Buried at
Westminster.

Bedfordshire.
IN Latin Bedfordia; on the East and South side it joineth to Cambridge and
Hertfordshire; on the West to Buckinghamshire; on the North to Northampton and
Huntingtonshire; it is divided into two parts by the River Ouse; the Soil is
very bountiful, especially toward the North, that being Watered by the River.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Bedford, a Town more famous for its Antiquity than for its. Beauty, it
having sustained great damages, both in the Wars between King Stephen and Maud
the Emperess, as well as in the unhappy Dissentions between King John and his
unruly Barons; the River Ouse divides it into two parts, but it is joined
together by a Stone Bridge.

2. Dunstable, a Town seated in a Chalky Ground, well Inhabited and full of
Inns, it has Tour Streets answering to the Four parts of the World, in every
one of which is a Pond of standing Water for the use of the Inhabitants.

Hertfordshire.
HErtfordia, has on the West Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire; on the South
Middlesex; on the East Essex; and on the North Cambridgeshire. The Air is sweet
and healthful, being seated in a Climate neither too Hot, nor too Cold; the
Soil is pleasant and delightful, yielding abundance of Corn, Cattle, Wood, and
Grass, being destitute of nothing which either affords Profit or Pleasure to
Mankind, which are more augmented by the many Rivers which arise in it, and run
through it.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Royston, a Town of late days very famous and much frequented for Malt, as
also for a Corn-Market which is Weekly held there.

2. Hatfield, a fair large Town, in the upper part of which stands a pleasant
Seat, belonging to the Earl of Salisbury.

3. Hertford, it was formerly the Principal Town of the whole Shire, but is now
fallen to decay.

4. Ware, a pleasant Town, well Watered and much frequented, famous in old time
for a Tournament instituted there by the Earl of Pembroke, who was
unfortunately killed by a fall from his Horse* They were first instituted, A.
C. 934. and grew not out of use till the happy days of King James the First.

5. Bishop-Stortford, a large well frequented Town, fenced in old times by a
Castle.

6. St. Albans, the Verulamium of the Romans, a very ancient Town and well
Peopled; some old Coins are here oftentimes dug up, which are thought by
some to be Stamped before the coming in of the Romans. Near this place
Ostorius, the Emperor Claudius's Lieutenant, is thought to have subdued the
Valiant Briton Caractacus. Famous it is likewise for Two Memorable Battles
Fought between the House of York and Lancaster; first Richard Duke of York,
Anno 1455. gave the Lancastrians a great overthrow, took King Henry the VIth
Prisoner, and slew a great many Honorable Persons. Four Years after the
Lancastrians, under the Conduct of Queen Margaret, won the Field, put the House
of York to Flight, and restored the King to his former Liberty.

7. Barnet, a fair Market Town, famous for a great Beast-Market kept there, but
more renowned it is for a memorable Battle Fought April the 14th An. 1471.
between the Houses of York and Lancaster, wherein the Victory happily fell to
King Edward the IVth, Richard Nevill the great Earl of Warwick, being there
slain.

Middlesex, Trinobantes.
MIddlesexia, it is severed from Buckinghamshire on the West by the River (...);
on the North from Hertfordshire by a known crooked Limit; from Essex on the
East by the River Lea; and from Surrey and Kent on the South by the Thames.
It Is seated in a pleasant Vale, having some Hills around it of a good ascent,
from whose tops the prospect of the whole is seen, like to Zoar in Egypt, or
rather like a Paradise and Garden of God.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Uxbridge, a Town of late Years very full of Inns, and pleasantly situated.

2. Stanes, a fair beautiful Town, near which the Baronage of England assembled
together in great Numbers to exact their Liberties of King John, A. C. 1215.

3. Hampton Court, a Royal Palace of the Kings, of admirable Magnificence,
Built by Cardinal Wolsey; it was enlarged and finished by King Henry the
VIIIth; it contains within it Five Inner Courts.

4. Fulham, a Town particularly famous for the Palace of the Bishop of London.

5. Chelsey, a Town of very fair Buildings, but chiefly remarkable on the
account of the College Erected for the Maintenance of ancient Soldiers; it was
finished in the Reign of the late King James.

6. LONDON, the Seat of our British Empire, and the Chiefest for Traffic in
the World; Seated in an excellent Air upon the River Thames; its Buildings are
Fair and Stately, the Streets Spacious; it has scarcely any Rival in Europe;
famous it is for its Magnificent Cathedral, thought to be in former times the
Temple of Diana, but it is now Consecrated to St. Paul.

London-Stone is thought to have been fixed for a Mile-Mark, such as was in the
Marketplace of Rome, from which was taken the dimension of all Journeys every
way; it is thought to be placed in the midst of the City.

LONDON was formerly Walled about by Constantine the Great, at the request of
his Mother Helena; but at this time its chief Strength consists, not so much in
its Wall, as in the great Number of its Inhabitant.

7. Westminster is a City of its self, and has its peculiar Magistrates and
Privileges; it was formerly more than a Mile distant from London, but it is now
joined close to it; famous it is for the Abbey, the Hall of Justice, and the
King's Royal Palace.

In the place where the Abbey now stand: there was formerly a Temple
Consecrated to Apollo, out of the Ruins of which this present Abbey was Built
by King Edward the Third; a Work that cost Fifty Years Labor in Building:
Which Church the Abbots afterward very much enlarged toward the West end, and
King Henry the Seventh adjoin'd thereto at the East end a Chapel of admirable
Elegancy, wherein is to be seen his own most stately Monument of solid and
massy Copper.

Essex.
ESSEXIA, on the North the River Stour divides it from Suffolk; on the East it
has the Ocean; on the South the Thames separateth it from Kent; on the West the
Lea divides it from Middlesex; and the Stour from Hertfordshire. The Air is
temperate and pleasant, but toward the Waters somewhat Aguish; the Soil is
rich and fruitful, being in some parts so very fertile, that after Three Years
Glebe of Saffron, the Land for Eighteen more will yield plenty of Barley,
without either Dunging or Manuring the Earth.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Leyton, a fair beautiful Market Town.

2. Chelmsford, a fair large Town, thought to be the old Canonium of the
Romans; it is situated in the midst of the Shire between two Rivers, which join
themselves together near this place; the Assizes of the County are kept here.

3. Maldon, an ancient Town, called formerly Camolodunum, famous for Bonduca,
or Boadicias Victory over the Romons, 70000 being slain in this place; its
Antiquity is apparent from the Coins, Helmets, and Bones, which were dug up in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, to which we may apapply these Verses of Virgil,
Geor. Lib. 1. 493.

Scilicet and tempus veniet, cum sinibus illis
Agricola incurvo terram molitus aratro,
Exesa inveniet Scabra rubigine pila;
Aut gravibus rassris galeas pulsabit manes,
Grandiaque essossis mirabitus ossa Sepulchris.
4. Colchester, a proper fair Town, pleasantly seated; it is Walled about, and
Beautified with 15 Churches; the ancient Coins daily dug out here, do show that
it flourished in the time of the Romans. The Trade of the Inhabitants consists
chiefly in making of Cloth and Bays, with other sort of Stuff.

5. Harwich, a Port-Town, not very great, but well Peopled, Fortified both by
Art and Nature; it is Memorable for a Battle at Sea fought between the English
and Danes, An. Christ. 884.

6. Saffron-Walden, a fair Market Town, famous for the great Quantity of
Saffron which grows there; which Commodity was at first brought into England in
the Reign of Edward the IIId.

Suffolk, Iceni.
SUffolcia, has on the West Cambridge; on the South the Stour divides it from
Essex; on the East it has the German Sea; and on the North Norfolk. The Air of
this place is thought by some Physicians to be the very best in the whole
Island; the Soil is fruitful, and replenished with all things.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Bury, a very fair beautiful Town, remarkable for an Abbey Built by Canutus,
to Expiate the Sacrilegious Impiety of his Father Suenus against this Church;
it appears still beautiful even in its very Ruins. Near this place was fought a
great Battle between Robert Bossu, Earl of Leicester, and King Henry the IId,
the Victory falling to the King's Party, A. C. 1173.

2. Sudbury, formerly the chief Town of this Shire; it is Populous and Wealthy,
the Inhabitants making great advantages by Clothing.

3. Ipswich, the principal Town of this Shire, well Peopled, beautiful in its
Buildings, has 14 Churches, and a very commodious Haven; it is fenced with a
Rampire; it was Sacked by the Danes, An. 991. and again in the Year 1000; yet
it perfectly recovered its former Beauty; and was the finest Town in England,
had a very noble Harbor, which was most convenient for the Northern and
Eastern parts of the World; in this state it continued, till through the severe
Injunctions of Bishop Laud, in the Reign of King Charles the First, concerning
matters in Religion, several Thousands of Families were frighted out of Norfolk
and Suffolk into New England.

Norfolk.
NOrfolcia, it is bounded on the East and North by the German Ocean; on the
West the Ouse divides it from Cambridge; on the South it confineth upon
Suffolk. The Air is sharp and piercing, especially in the Champion and near the
Sea; upon which account the Spring and Harvest is not so soon here as in other
Countries; it is a Champion Country large and spacious, abounding with Rivers,
pleasant Springs, good Corn and Pasture.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Thetford, a large Market Town, but thinly Inhabited; in times past it was
very Populous, and besides other tokens of Antiquity, it has still to be seen
a great Mount, fenced with a double Rampire, and Fortified in ancient times
with Walls; it was formerly the Seat of the Kings of the East Angles, and known
to the Romans by the Name of Sitomagus.

2. Norwich, a famous City, pleasantly situated on the River Yare, which runs
thence to Yarmouth, lying out in length from South to North a Mile and an half,
and in breadth about half so much, it drawing in it self by little and little
at the South end in manner of a Cone; in that Circuit it comprehends about
Thirty Parishes, well Walled about with many Turrets, and Twelve Gates; but it
has in it much waste ground, the City suffering great loss both in Wealth and
Buildings by Ket's Rebellion in the time of King Edward the Sixth; it has
recovered its first blow by the Dutch Manufactures, but of the last it still
languisheth; though at this present it glories in the Beauties of a fair
Cathedral, the Three Palaces, of the Bishops, the Dukes of Norfolk, and the
Earls of Surrey, and the ruins of an ancient Castle of the Saxons Building.

3. Yarmouth, a Port-Town, having a very convenient Haven; it is beautifully
Built, and strongly fenced both by Art and Nature; it is almost encompassed with
Water; on the West side with a River that has a Drawbridge over it; on the
other parts with the Ocean, unless Northward, where it is firm Land; it is
defended by a strong Wall, which together with the River, make a square Form of
Four sides somewhat long; upon the Wall toward the East, a great Mount is cast
up, on which are planted several pieces of Ordinance.

4. Lynn, a large Town, encompassed with a deep Trench and Walls; for the most
part it is divided by Two small Rivers, which have Fifteen Bridges over them;
it is of no great Antiquity, yet by reason of its Havens, Buildings, and
Merchants, it is the Second Principal Town of this Shire.

Cambridgeshire.
CAntabrigia, on the East it lies on Norfolk and Suffolk; on the South on
Essex and Hertfordshire; on the West on Bedford and Huntingtonshire; it is
divided into two parts by the River Ouse or Came. This Province is not so large
as some others, nor the Air so temperate and pleasant, it being infected by the
Fens; the North part is for the most part Fenny, and surcharged with Waters;
but the South is Champion, yielding Corn in abundance.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Cambridge, a Town particularly famous for its University; which, as it is
reported, was first begun and Founded by Cantaber a Spaniard, 375 Years ante
Christum; as also that Sigebert, or Sebert, King of the East Angles, restored
it again, An. Dom. 630. Being drstroyed afterward by the Danes, it was for a
long time of no account, until it revived under the Normans Government; at this
day it has Sixteen stately Colleges and Halls, which for Buildings, Beauty,
Endowments, and Number of Students, are so replenished, that Oxford excepted,
the like is hardly to be found in Europe.

2. Ely, a City not so great as ancient, situate in the Isle so named,
occasioned by the divided Streams of Ner and Ouse, with the overflowings of
other Rivers, turning a great part of this Tract into Fenns and Marshes;
remarkable for little else but its Cathedral, which was erected An. Dom. 1110.
in the 10th Year of King Henry the First.

Huntingtonshire.
IN Latin Huntingtonia; is bounded on the South by Bedfordshire; on the West
and North by Northamptonshire; and on the East by Cambridgeshire. The Soil is
fruitful, yielding Corn in great abundance; toward the East, where it is
Fenny, it is very rich and plentiful for the Feeding of Cattle; in all the
other parts it is extremely pleasant, on the account of the Woods and Groves
with which it abounds.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. St. Neets, a Market Town, so named of one Neutus a Learned and Holy Man,
who Traveled all his Lifetime in Propagating Christianity; his Body was
translated from Neotstock in Cornwall to this place.

2. Huntington, the principal Town of all this Country; it is seated on the
River Ouse, somewhat high, stretching its self out in length Northward; it is
adorned with Four Churches; and by the River near unto the Bridge the Mount and
Plot of an ancient Castle is yet to be seen.

3. Godmanchester, a very great ancient Country Town, situate in an open
ground, of a light Mould, and bending to the Sun; it is reported in former
times, that the Inhabitants received King James the First in his Progress this
way, with a Hundred and eighty Plows, brought forth in a Rustical kind of
Triumph.

4. St. Ives, a fair Town, so named from Ivo a Persian Bishop, who about the
Year 600 Traveled through England, Preached diligently the Word of God,
especially to this Town, wherein he Died.

5. Kimbolton, a fair beautiful Castle, formerly the seat of the Mandevils, but
now in Possession of the Staffords.

Northamptonshire, Coritani.
IN Latin, Northamptonia; it is situated in the very midst of England; on the
East it is bounded by Bedford and Huntingtonshire; on the South by Buckingham
and Oxfordshire; on the West it has Warwickshire; and on the North Rutland and
Lincolnshire. The Air is temperate and healthful, the Soil rich and fruitful,
and so plenteously Peopled, that from some ascents you may see 30 Churches at
the same time.

The Prinicipal Towns are these.
1. Northampton, a fair beautiful Town Built for the most part of Stone; it is
Walled about, except on the West, where it is defended with a River; from the
Walls you have a goodly prospect every way to a wide and spacious plain
Country; it was Fortified heretofore with a very strong Castle, and seated in
so excellent an Air, that once the Students of Cambridge purposed to remove the
University to this place; famous it is for a Battle fought between the House of
York and Lancaster, in which the House of York prevailing, King Henry the VIth
was taken Prisoner and conveyed to London.

2. Peterborough, a City seated in the very Angle of this Shire; famous in old
time for a Monastery, which is since converted into a Cathedral, the Building
of which is truly Magnificent, the Forefront carries a majesty with it, and
the Cloisters are exceeding large; in the Glass Windows is represented the
History of Wolpher the Founder, who being most averse from Christianity,
Murdered Wolphald and Rufin his own Sons, because they had Devoted themselves
to Christ. In the Cathedral lies Buried Catherine the Repudiated Queen of King
Henry the VIIIth. Mary Queen of Scots was also at first Buried here, but was
afterward removed to Westminster by the Command of King James the Is It.

3. Rockingham Castle, it was Built by William the Conqueror, Fortified with a
Rampire and Bulwarks, and a double range of Battlements; it is situate on the
side of an Hill within a Forest.

Leicestershire.
IN Latin Leicestria, is bounded on the East by Lincolnshire and Rutlandshire;
on the North by Nottinghamshire and Darbyshire; it has Warwickshire on the
West; and on the South Northamptonshire. The Air is gentle, mild, and
temperate, giving Appetite both to Rest and Labor; the Commodities of the Soil
are Corn, Cattle, and Coals, of which the Inhabitants have great plenty.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Bosworth, an ancient Market Town, memorable for the Victory which Henry
Earl of Richmond, who was afterward Henry the VIIth, obtained over the Usurper
Richard the IIId the Tyrant, and most of his Commanders being there slain.

2. Leicester, a fair Town, beautiful in its Buildings, and of great Antiquity;
'twas fenced with a very strong Wall, which was razed in the Reign of Henry the
IId, it has in it a stately Church and Hospital, Built by Henry the First, Duke
of Lancaster.

3. Loughborough, a fair beautiful Town, which for its Buildings and pleasant
Woods, challenges the second place in all this Shire.

4. Dunnington, a fair ancient Castle Built by the Earls of Leicester, it
belongs now to the King.

Rutlandshire.
IN Latin Rutlandia, it is environed with Leicestershire, unless it be on the
South, where it lies on the River Welland, and on the East where it touches
on Lincolnshire; the Air is both healthful and delightful, subject neither to
extremity of Heat or Cold; the Soil is so rich, that for Corn and Tillage this
small County gives place to none.

The Principal Town is*
Okcham, a Town remarkable only for the Ruins of an old decayed Castle Built in
the Normans time, formerly the Seat of the Ferrers, but afterward it was given
by Henry the VIIIth to Thomas Cromwell, whom he advanced to the highest
Dignities.

Lincolnshire.
IN Latin Lincolnia, is bounded on the West by Rutlandshire and
Nottinghamshire; on the North it reaches to Humber an arm of the Sea; on the
East it has the German Ocean; and on the South it is divided from
Northamptonshire by the River Well^nd. The Air upon the East and South part is
thick and foggy, by reason of the Fenns, but in other places very moderate and
pleasing; the Soil upon the West and North is very Fertile, but toward the
East and South, Fenny, Brakish, and Barren; yet for Fowl and Fish it exceeds
any other in the Realm.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Crowland, a Town of good Note; it stands amidst most deep Fenns and muddy
Waters; it is so shut up, and divided round about from all entrance, that there
is no access unto it, unless it be on the North-East side, and that by narrow
Cawseys; it is seated altogether like Venice; it has three Streets divided from
each other by Watercourses between, planted thick with Willows, and raised upon
Posts pitched and driven down into the standing Waters, having over them a
Triangular Bridge of admirable Workmanship; about the Town the ground is so
rotten and moorish, that a Man may thrust a Pole directly down Thirty Foot
deep; however the Town is well Inhabited, the Inhabitants making great
advantages by taking Fish, and catching of Waterfowl, which is so great in the
Month of August, that they will spread a Net, and at once draw Three thousand
Wild Ducks together.

2. Spalding, a Town situate upon the same River, being enclosed round with
Riverets and Drains; yet is infinitely a fairer Town than a Man could possibly
expect to find among such Slabs and Water-plashes.

3. Boston, a famous Town, standing on both sides the River Witham; it is well
frequented upon the account of its commodious Haven; the Marketplace is fair
and large, the Church great and beautiful, the Steeple of it rising up to a
mighty height, does, as it were, salute all Travelers, and give direction to
the Sailors; a Staple of Wool is settled here, which enriches it very much.

4. Stanford, a Town well Peopled, of good resort, Endowed with several
immunities; it was formerly Walled about, but is at this day beautified with
Seven Churches, and a very fair Hospital.

5. Grantham, a Town well frequented, adorned with a very fair Church, and a
Free School Built by Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester.

6. Lincoln, a place in former days of great Strength and Note, being one of
the best Peopled Cities in all the Saxon Heptarchy, and of great Merchandise
and Trassick both by Sea and Land; it had formerly Fifty Churches, but is now
much decayed, it having suffered much damage in the Wars of King Stephen, and
of Henry the IIId with his Barons, as also both by Fire and Earthquakes; the
chief Fame it now has is for its Minster, one of the stateliest Piles in
England, and perhaps in Christendom, high seated on an Hill, and from thence
discerned over all the Country. The City is seated on the side of an Hill,
where the River Witham bends his course Eastward; famous it is in respect
that Vortimer the Warlike Briton, who often discomfited the Saxon Armies, ended
his days, and was here, contrary to his Commandment, Buried.

7. Wainfleet, a Town deservedly remarkable, in that it Bred William Wainfleet
Bishop of Winchester, the Founder of Maudlin College in Oxford.

Nottinghamshire.
IN Latin Nottingamia, has on the East Lincolnshire; on the North Yorkshire;
on the West Derbyshire; and on the South side Leicestershire. The Air is
pleasant and healthful, the Soil rich and clayey, and for Corn and Grass so
fruitful, that it claims the second place before any other in the Realm.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Stoke, a little Village, famous for the Victory obtained by King Henry the
VIIth against Sir John de la Pool Earl of Lincoln, who being by King Richard
the IIId declared Heir apparent to the Crown, Rebelliously opposed himself
against his Sovereign, and in this place sighting Manfully, both he and most of
his Followers lost their lives.

2. Nottingham, a fair Town seated on the Trent, but very high upon an Hill
which overlooks it; for Buildings, fair Streets, and a spacious Marketplace,
not giving way to many Cities; but of most fame for a Royal and magnificent
Castle, which for Strength, Stateliness, and Prospect, may justly challenge the
Precedence of most in England; it is mounted upon an huge steep work on the
West side of the City; it was Built by William the Conqueror to bridle the
English* David the IId. King of Scots, and Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, were
detained a long time Prisoners in this Castle. Memorable it is, for that King
Charles the Is It, first set up his Standard in this place, occasioned on the
unhappy Differences between him and his Parliament, August 22. 1642.

3. Southwell, it is adorned with a very beautiful Church Consecrated to the
Virgin Mary; it is a Town not very fair to outward view, but strong, ancient,
and of great fame; the Archbishop of York has a stately Palace in this place.

Derbyshire.
IN Latin Darbia, has on the East Nottinghamshire; on the South
Leicestershire; on the West Steffordshire; and on the North-side Yorkshire; it
resembles the Form of a Triangle, but not with equal sides. The Air is good and
healthful, and the Soil rich and fertile, especially in the South and East
Parts.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Derby, a fair Town, well traded and resorted, situated on the River
Darwent; which on the East side of it affords to the Eye a pleasant and
delightful Prospect, running down and carrying a full and cheerful Stream under
a beautiful Stone Bridge; upon which formerly a fair Chapel was Erected, which
is now gone to decay; it is adorned with Five Churches, the greatest of which
named Alhallows, and Dedicated to the Memory of All Saints, is peculiarly
remarkable for its lofty Spire, and the Tomb of the Countess of Shrewsbury.

2. Peak, so called from its Hills and Mountains; from this place we have our
Lead and Milstones, and the Apothecaries their Antimony.

3. Buxton, a Town memorable for Nine Water-springs which arise out of a Rock
within the compass of Eight Yards, Eight of them are Warm, but the Ninth is
very Cold; these run under a very fair square Building of Freestone, and about
Sixty Paces off receive another Hot Spring from a Well, enclosed with Four flat
Stones, called St. Anns; near unto which another very Cold Spring bubbles up:
The Inhabitants report that great Cures have been effected by these Waters, and
daily experience shows that they are good for the Stomach and Sinews, and
very pleasant to Bathe the Body in. The Town is lately adorned with very
beautiful Buildings.

Having now Described the Regions of the Coritani, we will next survey the
Provinces of the Cornavii; who, if we may believe Ptolomy, seem to have
Possessed Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Cheshire.

Warwickshire, Cornavii.
IN Latin Warwicus, has on the East Northamptonshire and Leicestershire; on
the South Oxfordshire and Glocestershire; on the West Worcestershire; and on
the North Staffordshire. Its Air and Soil are equally desirable; the Air is
extremely healthful, and the Soil in the South part yields such a plentiful
Harvest, that the Husbandman smiles to behold his pains so well rewarded.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Warwick; this Town was the ancient Praeciduum of the Romans; it stands on
the River Avon upon a steep and high Rock, and all the Passages to it are
wrought out of the very stone; it is yet apparent that it was formerly
Fortified with a Wall and Ditches; toward the South-West it shows a Castle
strongly Fortified both by Art and Nature; 'twas in a good state upon the
entrance of the Normans, but has lately suffered much by Fire.

2. Henly, a pretty Market Town, which had formerly a Castle adjoining to it,
belonging to the Family of the Montforts.

3. Killingworth, a beautiful strong Castle, encompassed with Parks, given by
Queen Elizabeth to Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester.

4. Bremicham, a Town full of Inhabitants, resounding always with Hammers and
Anvils, they being most of them Smiths.

5. Coventry, a City so called from an old Convent and Religious House which
gave Name to it; beautified it is with a Well Built Wall, large Streets,
handsome Houses, and two fair Churches, Dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and St.
Michael; it was formerly the only Mart and City of Trade in all these Parts,
notwithstanding that it is destitute of all the advantages which a Navigable
River might afford it.

6. Edgehill, a small Village famous for the Battle fought between the Forces
of King Charles the Is It, and those of the Parliament, in which both sides
claimed the Victory.

Worcestershire.
IN Latin Wigornia, has on the East Warwickshire; on the South Glocestershire;
on the West Herefordshire and Shropshire; and on the North Staffordshire. The
Air of this Shire is temperate, and the Soil fertile, abounding with Corn,
Woods, Pasture, and every thing that is necessary for the Life of Man.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Kidderminster, a fair Town, has a great Market, it is well frequented,
divided into two parts by the River Stour; it is adorned with a very beautiful
Church.

2. Worcester, the principal City of this Shire, it being truly admirable both
in respect of its Antiquity and Beauty; it is situated on the East Bank of the
Severn, and from the same is Walled triangularly about, extending in Circuit
One thousand six hundred and fifty Paces, in which are made Seven Gates for
entrance, and Five Watch-Towers for its defense; it has suffered much damage
both by War and Fire, but seems now to have recovered its former Beauty; it
has a stately Cathedral, in the midst of which lies Interred the Body of King
John, under a Monument of White Marble. The Reputation it now has arises from
its Inhabitants, who are both Numerous and Wealthy by their Trade in Clothing.
Near this place Cromwell the Usurper, gave King Charles the Second's Forces a
terrible overthrow, wherein he slew Three thousand five hundred and fifty,
among which were Duke Hamilton and General Forbes, and took Five thousand
Prisoners; this happened June 13, An. 1651.

Staffordshire.
IN Latin Staffordia, has on the East Warwickshire and Derbyshire; on the
South Worcestershire; on the West Shropshire; and on the North Cheshire. The
Air is Healthful, but very sharp toward the North; in which place the Soil is
not so fruitful as in the Southern parts.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Stafford, the principal Town of this County; it was Built by Edward the
Confessor, and Incorporated by King John; and upon the East and South part was
Walled and Trench'd by the Barons of the place; the rest from the East to North
was secured by a large Pool of Water, which now is become fair Meadow Grounds;
it has Four Gates opening to the Four Winds; it is adorned with a very
beautiful Castle of its Name, which adds not a little to the Beauty of the
place.

2. Stone, a fair Market Town, famous for a Church Consecrated to the Memorial
of the Death of Wolfald and Rusin, Sons to Wolfer King of the Mercians, who
were slain by their Father because they had embraced Christianity.

3. Lichfield, a fair large City, situated in a Plain, divided into two parts
by a Pool of Water, which notwithstanding are joined into one by means of two
Bridges made over it, which have sluices to let out the Water; the South part
consists of diverse Streets, has in it a School and Hospital Founded for the
Relief of the Poor; the other part is beautified with a stately Cathedral,
encompassed with a strong Wall, adorned with the Bishop's Palace, and fair
Houses for the Prebendaries, which make together an excellent show, mounting up
on high with Three Spires of Stone; and indeed for elegant and noble Buildings,
it gives place to few Cathedrals.

4. Burton, a Town famous, in regard it yields great store of Alablaster.

Shropshire.
IN Latin Salopia, has on the East Staffordshire; on the South Worcestershire,
Herefordshire, and Radnorshire; on the West Montgomery and Denbighshire; and on
the North Cheshire. The Air is wholesome, affording health to the Inhabitants in
all Seasons of the Year; the Soil is rich, and stands most upon a reddish
Clay, abounding in Wheat, Barley, Coals, Iron, and Woods; it is divided into
two parts by the River Severn.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Ludlow, a Town more fair than ancient, encompassed with a Wall reaching
about a Mile in circuit; it is defended by a stately strong Castle, Built by
Roger Montgomery. King Henry the VIIIth Ordained in this place the Council of
the Marches.

2. Bridgnorth, a Town seated upon a Rock, out of which the ways leading to the
upper part of the Town are wrought; it is Fortified with Walls, a Ditch, a
stately Castle, and the Severn, which between the Rocks runs down with a
very great fall.

3. Shrewsbury, a Town strongly Fortified both by Art and Nature, adorned with
two fair Churches and other Buildings, both Public and Private; almost all the
Commodities of Wales do flow to this Town, as to a common Mart of both Nations;
famous it is for the Battle between diverse of the Nobility and King Henry the
IVth, they purposing to advance Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, to the Crown,
as the undoubted apparent Heir of King Richard the IId: It was taken by the
Parliament Forces raised against King Charles the First, An. 1645.

4. Oswestre, a little Town enclosed with a Ditch and a Wall, and Fortified
with a pretty Castle; the Inhabitants Traffic much in Welsh Cottons, whereof
great store is bought and sold here every Week.

Cheshire.
IN Latin Cestria, has on the South Shropshire; on the East Staffordshire and
Darbyshire; on the North Lancashire, and on the West Denbighshire and
Flintshire. For Air and Soil it far exceeds its Neighboring Counties, being in
my opinion equal to the best; the best Cheese in all Europe is made in this
place. The Inhabitants of this Shire have never been stained with the blot of
Rebellion; whose Loyalty King Richard the IId so much esteemed, that by
Authority of Parliament he made the County to be a Principality, Stiling
himself the Prince of Chester.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Chester, a City Built in form of a Quadrant; it is enclosed with a Wall
extending two Miles in compass; it has a Eleven Parish-Churches, of which that
of St. John's by the North Gate is a most stately Building; the Houses are very
fair Built, and along the chief Streets are Galleries, or walking-places,
having Shops on both sides. Memorable it is, for that King Edgar sitting in a
Barge, Kennady King of Scotland, Malcolm King of Cumberland, Macon King of Man
and of the Islands, with all the Princes of Wales, who were come to do him
Homage, Working like Watermen at the Oar, Rowed him along the River Dee in a
triumphant manner, to his great glory and the joy of the Beholders; this was
about the Year 960.

2. Nantwich, a Town reputed to be the greatest and fairest Built of all this
Shire, next to Chester; it is also very famous for the making of Salt.

3. Macclesfield, a very fair Town, giving Name to a Forest near adjoining,
where Thomas Savage, the Archbishop of York, Built a Coll, in which some of the
Family of the Savages lie Entom'd.

We have now Surveyed the Regions of the Cornavii, who with the Coritani,
Dobuni, and Cateuchlani, made the Kingdom of the Mercians; all the other
Kingdoms of the Saxons Heptarchy confined upon it; it was much larger than any
of the rest, but fell at last into the Dominion of the West Saxons, An. 826.
after that the Danes had wasted it many Years.

Herefordshire, Silures.
BEfore I treat of the other parts of England, give me leave to turn aside and
to visit Wales, called in Latin Cambria, or Wallia, where the ancient Britains
had their abode; nor will it be improper, it lying adjacent to the Cornavii,
that it should be spoken of in its due place, especially since the Inhabitants
are now Incorporated with us into our Commonwealth.

Wales comprised in times past before the Conquest the whole Country beyond the
Severr, which in the time of the Romans was Inhabited by the Silures, Dimaetae,
and Ordovices; for these held not only the Twelve Shires of Wales, but those
Two also beyond the Severn, viz. Herefordshire and Monmouthshire, which are now
reckoned among the Counties of England; according to Ptolomy the Silures
inhabited the South part, called by one Name Dehubarth, but now, Herefordshire,
Radnorshire, Brecknockshire, Monmouthshire, and Glamorganshire. The Inhabitants
are generally impatient of Servitude, very Valiant, and given to War.

Herefordia, is bounded on the East with Worcestershire and Glocestershire; on
the South with Monmouthshire; on the West with Radnor and Brecknockshires; and
on the North with Shropshire. This Counties Climate is healthful and temperate,
and the Soil so fertile for Corn and Cattle, that no place in England yields
more.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Hereford, the principal City of this Shire, seated on the Banks of the
River Wye, in the middle of most flourishing Meadows, and no less plentiful
Cornfieldsd; it was raised out of the ruins of the ancient Ariconium; it is
encompassed almost round with Rivers; it was Walled about in the Reign of Henry
the First, who Founded in this place a most beautiful Cathedral Church.

2. Lemster, a Town famous for exceeding fine Wool.

Radnorshire.
IN Latin Radnora, has on the North Montgomeryshire; on the East
Herefordshire; on the South Brecknockshire; on the West, where (...) grows
very narrow, Cardiganshire. The Air of this Province is very sharp and Cold,
and the Soil lean and barren; its riches consists chiefly in the brood of
Cattle.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Radnor, the principal Town of this Shire, fair Built, after the manner of
the Country, with thatched Houses; in times past it was fenced with a Wall and
Castle, which are now grown to decay.

2. Prestan, a Market Town, so fair and beautiful, that it in a manner puts
down Radnor; it is of late Years wonderfully frequented.

3. Knighton, a Town scarce inferior to Prestian; near this place is King
Offa's admirable Ditch, reaching from Dee Mouth, up to Wy Mouth, by this Town,
for the space of Fourscore and ten Miles, made by him to separate the Brittons
from his Englishmen.

Brecknockshire.
IN Latin Brechinia, is bounded on the East with Herefordshire; on the South
with Monmouth and Glamorganshires; on the West with Caermardhenshire; and on
the North with Radnorshire. The Air is very Temperate, the whole County is full
of Hills, and uneven for Traveling; but the Soil is very fertile, yielding in
the Valleys both plenty of Corn and Pasture.

The Principal Town is
1. Brecknock, the Shire-Town, seated in the very heart of the Country; its
Walls are strong and of good repair, it has Three Gates for entrance, with Ten
Towers for its defense; on the West side it has a stately Castle; that it was
Inhabited in the Romans time, is evident from the Coins of the Roman Emperors
oftentimes dug up here.

Monmouthshire.
IN Latin Monumethia, is bounded on the North by the River Munow, that
separateth it from Herefordshire; on the East the River Wye divides it from
Glocestershire; on the West the River Remney severeth it from Glamorganshire;
on the South it is bounded by the Severn Sea. The Air is healthful and clear;
the Soil is Hilly, Woody, Rich, and in all places very Fruitful.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Monmouth, the chief Town of this Province; it is encompassed almost round
with the Rivers Munow and Wye; on the North side, where it is not defended with
Rivers, it was formerly Fortified with a Wall and Ditch.

2. Chepstow, a Town situate on the side of an Hill, rising from the very
River, Fortified round about with a Wall of a large Circuit; it has a very
fair Castle situate over the River Wye; the Town generally speaking is of good
resort.

3. Abergevenny, a Town well frequented, Fortified with Walls and a Castle;
which of all the Castles in Wales (as Giraldus says) has been most defamed on
the account of Treason.

4. Newport, a Town lately Built, not unknown upon the account of its Castle,
and the Commodiousness of its Harbor.

Glamorganshire.
IN Latin Glamorgania; on the South it has the Severn Sea; on the East
Monmouthshire; on the North Brecknockshire; and on the West Caermardhenshire:
The Air is temperate, and gives more content to the Mind, than the Soil does
fruit or ease to Travelers.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Cardiffe, a proper fair Town, having a commodious Haven, Fortified by a
strong Wall and Castle by Fitz-Haimon; memorable it is for that Robert
Curthouse, William the Conqueror's Eldest Son, being quite put by his hopes of
the Crown of England, and deprived of both his Eyes by his Brother King Henry
the First, lived until he was an Old Man in this Castle.

2. Cowbridge, a fair Market Town well frequented.

3. Landaffe, a small City, and of as small reputation, situate somewhat low,
but adorned with a Bishops's See, and a Cathedral Consecrated to St. Gelean
Bishop of the place.

West-Wales.
Caermardhenshire, Dimetae.
IN Latin Maredunum, is limited on the East with Glamorganshire and
Brecknockshire; on the West with Pembrokeshire; on the North it is severed from
Cardiganshire by the River Tovy; and on the South it has the Ocean. The Air is
pleasant and delightful, the Soil being not so full of Hills as its
neighboring Counties, is therefore much better for Corn and Pasturage.

The Principal Town is
Caermardhen, the chief Town of this County, compassed about with Brick Walls,
part of which is yet standing upon the River Tovy; which is able to bear small
Ships, although there be now a Bar of Sand cast up against the mouth of it;
it is pleasant for its Woods and Meadows, and venerable for its Antiquity;
memorable it is for the Birth of the Sage Merlin.

Pembrokeshire.
IN Latin Pembrocia; the Sea presses upon every side of this County, unless it
be on the East, where Caermardhenshire, and on the North where a part of
Cardiganshire boundeth upon it. The Air is passing temperate, and the Soil very
fruitful.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Tenby, a fair Town, strongly Walled toward the Land, it looks into the
Sea from a dry Cliff; famous it is for its commodious Roads for Ships, and for
an abundance of Fish taken there.

2. Milford-Haven, than which there is not another in all Europe either nobler
or safer; there are reckoned within it Sixteen Creeks, Five Bays, and Thirteen
Roads, known every one by its several name; it is particularly famous for the
arrival of King Henry the Seventh, who released England from the Domestic
Calamities and Civil Miseries it then groaned under.

3. Pembroke, the principal Town of this Shire; it stands on the East Creek
of Milford-Haven; it was formerly Fortified with Walls and a Castle, which are
now decayed.

4. Haverford, situate in the Demi Island of this County, by the Welsh called
Ross, by the English, Little England beyond Wales, by reason of the English
Tongue there spoken; it is a Town the best Traded and frequented of all
South Wales; it was Fortified with a Rampire and Wall on the North side by the
Earls of Clare.

5. St. David's, a small City, memorable for little else than that it is adorned
with a Bishop's See, and a fair Church Dedicated to St. Andrew and St. David;
from this place in a clear day you may see Ireland.

6. Newport, a Town situate on a steep Cliff, where there is a very commodious
Harbor and Road for Ships; it is endowed with several Immunities and
Privileges, and defended with a Castle.

Cardiganshire.
IN Latin Ceretia, is bounded on the West by the Sea; and on the South by the
River Tovy, which Separateth it from Caermardhenshire; the East and North sides
are limited by Brecknockshire and Montgomeryshire. The Air is open and somewhat
piercing, the Soil is Hilly and uneven, but more plain toward the Sea, than in
the East and North parts; it has very little Corn, few Woods, but Cattle,
Fish, and Fowl, in abundance.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Cardigan, the Shire Town, situated on a steep Bank, strongly Fortified with
a Wall and Castle by the Earls of Clare.

2. Aberistwith, a most populous and plenteous Town, near which are found
several Veins of Lead.

We have now described the Counties of the Silures and Dimetae; pass we now to
the Ordovices, the ancient Inhabitants of North Wales, which is now divided
into the Counties of Montgomeryshire, Merionethshire, Caernarvonshire,
Denbighshire, and Flintshire.

North Wales.
Montgomeryshire, Ordovices.
IN Latin Mons Gomericus, is bounded on the South with Cardiganshire and
Radnorshire; on the East with Shropshire; on the North with Denbighshire; and
on the West with Merionethshire. The Air is cold and piercing, the Soil
fruitful, especially in the East parts, they being watered by the Severn.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Montgomery, a Town seated on the rising of a Rock, having a pleasant Plain
under it; it is defended by a very strong Castle, both which were Built by
Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Shrewsbury.

2. Plinlimmon-Hill, is particularly famous for its wonderful Height, and that
on the part where it boundeth one side of this Shire, it pours forth the
Severn, which next to the Thames, is the greatest River in all Brrittain.

Merionethshire.
IN Latin Mervinia; on the West the Sea beats upon it; on the South it is
divided by the River Dovy from Cardiganshire; on the North it is bounded by
Caernarvon and Denbighshires; and on the East by part of Denbighshire. The Air
of this place is neither pleasant, nor the Soil profitable.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Bala, a little Town endowed with several Immunities, Peopled with few
Inhabitants, and very rudely Built; nevertheless it is the chief Market Town of
these Mountainers.

2. Harlech, a Market Town, situated in a bleak and barren place, it has few
Houses, and those not curiously Built; nor is it famous for any thing, unless
we make mention of a strong Castle that stands near it, commanding the Sea, and
passage of such as might seek to invade the Coast.

Caernarvonshire.
IN Latin Arvonia, the North and West sides lie upon the Irish Sea; the South
is enclosed with Merionethshire; and the East with Denbighshire, from which it
is severed by the River Conony. The Air is sharp and piercing, nor is the Soil
to be commended much for its fertility.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Caernarvon, a Town so called from its standing over against the Island
Mona; it is encompassed with a small Circuit of Walls about it; but the same is
exceeding strong; it is also defended by a stately Castle, which takes up the
whole West side of it; the Buildings are beautiful, and the Inhabitants much
commended for their courtesy; who think it a point of their glory, that King
Edward the First Founded their Town, and that King Edward the Second, the first
Prince of Wales, was Born there; it was formerly much resorted to, for the
Chancery and Exchequer of the Princes of North Wales.

2. Bangor, a City seated on the Menai, a branch of the Irish Sea; remarkable
for little else than that it is adorned with a Bishop's See, and a fair
Cathedral Consecrated to Daniel, who was sometime Bishop of the place; it was
defaced by Owen Glendower, and afterward re-edified by Henry Dean, An. Dom.
1496.

Isle of Anglesey, or Mona.
IT IS severed from Britain with the small narrow strait of Menai, and on all
parts besides it is beaten upon by the Irish Sea; it is in length 20 Miles, and
in breadth 17.

Its Principal Town is,
Beaumarish, Built by Edward the First on the East side of the Isle, on a
Marish ground, it was so named from the pleasantness of its situation; other
Towns there are, such as Newburg, Aberfraw, which have nothing in them
remarkable. The Druids formerly Inhabited this place; 'twas attempted by
Suetonius, and brought under the Power of the Romans by Agricola.

Denbighshire.
IN Latin Denbiga; on the North-North-West it has, first the Sea for a small
space, and then Flintshire; on the West the Sea; on the South Merionethshire
and Montgomeryshire; and on the East Cheshire and Shropshire. The Air is
pleasant and wholesome, the Soil is barren toward the West part; yet in the
middle, where it lies flat with a Valley, it is very fruitful.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Denbigh, the Shire Town, Fortified with a strong Wall and Castle, and
strengthened with high Towers by Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln; it is well
frequented, and is deservedly reputed the most beautiful place in all
North Wales, especially since it was made by King Henry the Eighth the Head
Town of a County; before which time it was also of great resort, as being the
Head Town of the Barony of Denbigh, conceived to be one of the goodliest
Territories in England, having more Gentlemen holding of it than any other.

2. Ruthin, a very great Market Town, full of Inhabitants, and well replenished
with Buildings, particularly famous not long since for a stately Castle, Built
by Roger Gray in the Reign of King Edward the First.

Flintshire.
IN Latin Flintum, is bounded on the North with an Arm of the Irish Sea; on the
East with Cheshire, and on the other parts with Denbighshire. The Air is
healthful and temperate, without any Foggy Clouds and Fenny Vapors; the Soil
brings forth plenty of Co^^ and Pasture.

The Principal Town is
St. Asaph, a very ancient City, but at present it is neither remarkable for
its Buildings, nor the Church for its Beauty; it is honored with a Bishop's
See; it took its name from Asaph, a very devout pious Man, and was Founded in
the Year of our Redemption 560, by Kentigern Bishop of Glascow, who fled hither
out of Scotland.

Yorkshire, Brigantes.
IN Latin Eboracum; on the North side it has the Bishopric of Durham, which
the River Tees with a continued course separateth from it; on the East it is
bounded by the German Ocean; on the South it is enclosed, first with Cheshire
and Darbyshire, afterward with Nottinghamshire, and then with Lincolnshire; on
the West it has Lancashire and Westmorland; the whole Shire is divided into
Three parts, which are termed, The West Riding The East Riding The North Riding


West Riding.
IS compassed by the River Ouse, with the bound of Lancashire, and South limits
of the Shire, and bears toward the West and South.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Sheffield, a Town of great repute, both for its Inhabitants, who are
generally Smiths, as well as for the many Iron Mines which are found
thereabouts; it is Fortified with a strong and ancient Castle.

2. Halyfax, a famous Town lying from West to East upon the steep descent of an
Hill; it is not many Years since it took this Name, it being formerly called
Horton; is is so very populous, that it is thought to have 12000 Inhabitants.

3. Wakefield, a great Market Town well frequented, its Buildings are very
beautiful, famous it is for its Inhabitants getting great store of Wealth by
making Cloth; nor is it less remarkable for its Bridge, upon which King Edward
the Fourth erected a beautiful Chapel in memory of those who lost their Lives
in Battle, his own Father being slain in the Field by those that sided with the
House of Lancaster.

4. Leeds, formerly a House of the Kings, but now grown to be a populous rich
Town by reason of Clothing.

5. Towton, a little Country Village, which may not be unfitly termed England's
Pharsalia; famous it is for the Battle between the Houses of York and
Lancaster, where the Lancastrians received so terrible an overthrow, that they
left more than 30000 dead upon the place.

6. York the second City of England, the fairest in all this County, it being a
singular safeguard and Ornament to all the Northern parts; a pleasant place,
large and stately, well fortified and beautifully adorned as well with private
as public Buildings; rich, populous, and to its greater dignity, it has a
stately Cathedral consecrated to St. Peter, and an Archiepiscopal See, which
beside Twelve Bishoprics in England, exercised formerly the Power of a Primate
over all the Bishops of Scotland; but it has now but Four within its Diocese,
viz. the Bishopric of Durham, of Carlisle, of Chester, and of the Isle of Man.
Memorable it is for the Death of Severus the Emperor, and of Constantine the
Father of Constantine the Great.

East Riding.
ON the North and West side it is bounded with the River Darwent; on the South
with the Salt Water of Humber, and on the East with the German Ocean.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Beverly, a great Town, very populous and full of Trade; so named from John
de Beverly Archbishop of York, a Godly and Learned Man, who after he had given
over his Bishopric as weary of this World, came hither and ended his Life in
Contemplation, An. Dom. 721.

2. Hull, a Town Founded by King Edward the First, which by little and little
has rose to that Dignity, that for stately and sumptuous Buildings, for strong
Blockhouses, for well-furnished Ships, for store of Merchants, and abundance of
all things, it is become now the most famous Town in all these parts; the
Inhabitants make a great Trade of Island Fish dried and hardened, which they
term Stock Fish, whereby they gather a mass of Riches.

3. Patrington, a Town pleasantly seated, having a most delightful Prospect; on
one side lies the main Sea, on the other the Humber, and over against it the
fresh and green Borders of Lincolnshire. The Inhabitants glory much on the
account of their Antiquity and the commodiousness of their Haven.

North Riding.
OR the North part of this County, stretches it self Westward 60 Miles
together, even as far as to Westmorland; it is limited on the one side with
Darwent, and for a while with the River Ure; on the other side with the River
Tees running all along by it, which on the North Coast separateth it from the
Bishopric of Durham.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Pickering, a large Town belonging to the Duchy of Lancaster, situate upon
an Hill, and defended by an old Castle, to which a great number of small
Villages lying round about do appertain.

2. Scarborough-Castle, is se^^ed on a Rock of a wonderful height and bigness,
which by reason of steep Cliffs is almost inaccessible on every side; it was at
first Built by William le Gross Earl of Albermarle, which being in process of
time fallen down, it was afterward Rebuilt by King Henry the Second; here the
Hollanders Fish for Herrings, demanding first License of the Lord of the Castle.

3. Rhidal, a pleasant beautiful Market Town, adorned with Twenty three
Parish-Churches, through the midst whereof runs the River Rhy.

4. Malton, a large Market Town, well frequented for Corn, Horses, Fish, and
Implements of Husbandry; here are to be seen the Foundations of an old Castle
belonging to the Family of the Vescys.

5. Richmond, a fair beautiful Town, seated on the River Swall; it seems to
have been formerly Fortified with a Wall, whose Gates yet stand in the midst of
the Town, so that the Suburbs are extended far without the same; it is
indifferently populous and well frequented; the People are most employed in
Knitting of Stockings, wherewith even the Decrepit and Children get their own
Livings.

Durham.
IN Latin Dunelmus, is bounded on the North by Northumberland; on the West,
where it is more narrow, by Westmorland and Cumberland; on the South it has
Yorkshire; and on the East the German Ocean. The Air is sharp and piercing, and
would be more violent were it not for the Vapors of the German Sea, which
dissolving the Ice and Snow, make the Air more mild and temperate. As for the
Soil the East part is by far the richest.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Hartlepool, a very large Town of good resort, it has a very safe and
convenient Harbor for Shipping.

2. Durham, a noble City seated on high, and shaped in form of an Egg,
environed on all sides, but on the North, with the River Were; it is Fortified
with a Wall; its Buildings are beautiful, but especially its Cathedral, which
standing on the South side where the River windeth its self about, makes a
solemn and gallant show, having an high Tower in the midst, an^ two Spires at
the West end. Famous it is likewise for its Castle, which stands between two
stone Bridges over the River; as also for its spacious Marketplace, and for
St. Nicholas's Church, which is a beautiful Fabric. Near unto this City, at
Nevils Cross, a sore Battle was Fought between the English and Scots, wherein
David Bruce, King of Scotland, with many of his Nobility, were taken Prisoners
by Queen Philippa, Wife to that glorious Prince King Edward the Third, who in
Person was present in the Field.

Lancashire.
IN Latin Lancastria, is enclosed between Yorkshire on the East side, and the
Irish Sea on the West; on the South side, where it boundeth on Cheshire, it is
broader, and by degrees the more Northward it goes, where it confineth on
Westmorland, it is narrower. The Air is subtle and piercing, not troubled with
gross Vapors; but the Soil for the most part is lean and barren, yet it
produces such numbers of Cattle of such large proportion, that even Spain can
scarce afford the like.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Manchester, a very beautiful Town, far excelling all others round about it;
it is of good resort, and is famous for Clothing; the Marketplace is large and
spacious; it is also adorned with a very fair Church and College, Founded by
Thomas Lord Delaware; it was in former times called Mancunium, and was made a
Fort and Station of the Romans.

2. Riblechester, though it be at present but a small Town, yet by Tradition it
has had the repute of the richest Town in Christendom, and is reported to have
been the Seat of the Romans, which the many Monuments of their Antiquities,
Statues, Pieces of Coin, and other several Inscriptions dug up from time to
time by the Inhabitants, may give us sufficient persuasion to believe.

3. Warrington, a fair Market Town, known by reason of the Lords thereof
sirnam'd the Butlers, who obtained of Edward the First the liberty of a Market
for it.

4. (...), a good well frequented Town, famous for it, Antiquity, but more
famous for a convenient passage from this place to Ireland.

5. Ormeskirk, a Market Town, remarkable for the Sepulchers of the Stanleys,
the Earls of Darby.

6. Preston, a Town of good resort, so named from the Religious Men dwelling in
it.

7. Lancaster, it was formerly the chief Town of this Shire, but at this day it
is neither well peopled nor much frequented; most of its Inhabitants are given
to Husbandry, the Territory round about being well Manured, lying open, fresh,
and fair, and not void of Woods; Roman Coins are often dug up here, and here
they say was the plot of ground in which the ancient Town was planted, which
was destroyed by the Scots, An. Dom. 1^^2. it is sufficiently famous in our
English Annals for those Noble Persons who have successively born the Title of
Earls and Dukes of it, the greatest Princes for Revenues of any Subjects in
Christendom.

Westmorland.
IN Latin Westmoria, is bounded on the West and North with Cumberland; on the
East with Yorkshire and the Bishopric of Durham; and on the South with
Lancashire. The Air is sharp and piercing, purging its self from Mists and
Vapors; but the Soil for the generality is so unfertile, that it can hardly be
brought to any fruitfulness by the industry and painful labor of the
Husbandman.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Appleby, a Town pleasantly seated, encompassed for the most part with the
River Eden; but it is at present so slenderly Inhabited, and the Buildings so
rude and simple, that were it not for its Antiquity, it deserves not to be
accounted the Shire-Town, and to have the Assizes kept in the Castle, which is
the common Goal for Malefactors; in short, all the beauty lies in one broad
Street, which from North to South rises with an easy ascent of an Hill, in the
upper part stands the Castle, in the lower the Church, and by that a very
good School Founded by Robert Langton and Miles Spenser, Doctors of Law.

2. Kirkby Lonsdale, a Town situate on the East side of this Shire, the tract
of Land lying about it being called Lonsdale; it has a very good frequented
Market; all the People round about repair hither on Sundays to Church.

3. Kirkby Stephen, a fair Market Town of good resort.

4. Kendall, situate in a Dale on the River Can, from whence it had its Name;
it is the chief Town in Westmorland, having two long fair broad Streets
crossing one another; it is of great Trade and Resort, and for the diligent and
industrious practice of the Inhabitants so excels the rest, that in regard
thereof it carries a super-eminent Name above them, and has great Vent and
Traffic for her Woollen Clothes through all the parts of England. Famous it is
for giving the Title of Earl to John Duke of Bedford, Regent of France in the
time of King Henry the Sixth.

Cumberland.
IN Latin Cumbria; on the North boundeth on Scotland; on the South and West the
Irish Sea beats upon it; and Eastward, above Westmorlan^, it confineth on
Northumberland. Its ancient Inhabitants, though known to the Romans by the name
of Brigantes, were the natural Britons, who called themselves (...) The Air is
piercing, and of a sharp temperature, and would be more biting, were it not
that the high Hills oppose and break off the Northern Storms, and dissolve the
falling Snows. The Province is very rich, the Vales smile with Corn, and the
Hills with Pasture; the Sea affords plenty of Fish, and the Land is overspread
with variety of Fowls.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Keswick, a little Town, seated in a very pleasant Soil, being compassed
about with Hills; King Edward the Third ordained a Market in this place by the
procurement of Sir Thomas Darwentwater the Lord of it. Famous it was in times
past for its Copper-Mines, it being at this day much Inhabited by Mineral Men,
who have here their Smelting house by Darwent-side, which with its fo^ible
Stream, and their ingenious Inventions, serves them in stead for easy
Bellows-works, Hammer-works, Forge-works, and Sawing of Boards, not without
admiration of such as behold it.

2. Cokermouth, a rich frequented Market Town, seated in a Valley between two
Hills; its Buildings are fair and beautiful; upon one of the Hills stands the
Church, on the other a very strong Castle, the Gate whereof carries in the
Front the Arms of the Percus.

3. Papcastle, an ancient Castle, but at this present almost ruinated; however
memorable it is, in that for a great number of Monuments it lays claim to a
Roman Antiquity; among which was found a large Vessel of Greenish Stone,
engraven with little Images, which serves now for a Sacrarium Regenerationis
in St. Brigids Church hard by. Several Authors tell us, that Fonts were adorned
with Pictures of Holy Men, to the end that such as were Baptized, might have
before their Eyes the Pictures of those Men whose deeds they were to imitate;
so says Pontius Paulinus: for in the first Plantation of Christianity among
the Gentiles, such only as were of full Age, after they had been Instructed in
the Principles of the Christian Religion, were admitted to Baptism; and that
but twice in the year, viz. at Easter and Whitsontide, except on urgent
occasions; at which times they which were to be Baptized were attired in White
Garments, Exorcised and Exsuffled with sundry Ceremonies, which I leave to the
Learned in Christian Antiquities.

4. Solway-Frith; within this very Frith, where the Salt-waters ebb and flow,
the English and Scots by report of the Inhabitants, fought with their Fleets at
full Sea, and with their Horse and Footmen at the ebb; which seems no less
mavelous, than that which Pliny reported, not without wonder, of the like
place in Caramania; this Arm of the Sea is called Solway-Frith, from Solway a
Town of Scotland bordering upon it.

5. Penrith, a little Town of an indifferent Trade, Fortified on the West side
with a Castle of the Kings, which in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, was
repaired out of the Ruins of a Roman Fort; it is adorned with a fair Church, and
a beautiful Marketplace.

6. Carlisle, a City commodiously and pleasantly seated; it is guarded on the
North with the Channel of Eden; on the East with Deterill; on the West with
Caud; besides these natural Fences, it is Fortified with strong Walls of Stone,
with a Castle and Citadel; in fashion it lies out somewhat long, running out
from West to East; on the West side stands the Castle, repaired by King
Richard the Third; in the midst of the City stands the Cathedral Church, the
upper part of which being the newer, is very artificially and curiously
wrought, but the nether part is much more ancient. That this City flourished in
the times of the Romans, diverse tokens of Antiquity now and then dug up
there, and the famous mention of it in those days do sufficiently prove.

The Picts Wall.
THrough the higher part of Cumberland shoots that famous Wall which was the
limit of the Roman Province; for when the Romans had enlarged their Empire,
even so far beyond their Wishes, that the unwieldiness thereof began to be of
its self fearfully suspected, the Emperors thought it the safest way to limit
the same with certain bounds; In this Isla^d therefore the Romans when they
perceived that the further parts of Britain lying Northward were Cold, of a
rough and barren Soil, and Inhabited by the Caledonians, Britons, and barbarous
Nations, in subduing which they were sure to take much pains, and reap very
small Profit; built at several times diverse Fences, as well to bound as to
defend the Province; the first Wall or Fence is thought to have been raised by
Julius Agricola, it being made of Turfs, between Edenborough and Dunbritton
Frith; the second Fence was by the River Tine, where a Stone Wall Fight Foot
broad, and Twelve Foot high, was Built, being an Hundred Miles long, reaching
from the German Sea to the Irish Ocean. It was begun by the command of Adrian
the Emperor, and was finished by Severus, who hereupon was styled Britannicus.
Some report that this Wall was only of Turfs, and that the Stone Wall was
erected afterward by the Romans when they left Britain.

Lollius Urbicus Lieutenant of Britain, under the Emperor Antoninus Pius,
enlarged the bounds again as far as to the first Frontier Fence that was raised
by Agricola.

The first that was ever blamed for neglecting these limits, was Constantine
the Great, for he it was that was the first and principal cause that the state
of the Empire ran to ruin; however, this admirable work could not divert the
tempestuous storms of Foregin Enemies; for when the Romans retired out of
Britain, the Picts and Scots a^^^ulting the Wall, broke down the Fences with
their Engines, and overran Britain, being then disarmed and shaken with Civil
Broils, and most miserably afflicted with extreme Famine.

Northumberland, Ottadini.
IN Latin Northumbria; it lies enclosed in fashion of a Triangle, but not with
equal sides; the South side is shut in with Darwent running into Tine, and with
the River Tine its self, where it confineth on the Bishopric of Durham; the
German Sea beats on the East side; on the West it has Cumberland; on the
North it fronteth Scotland with the River Tweed, which was the ancient limit of
both Kingdoms. The Air must needs be subtle and piercing, these Northern parts
being very much exposed to extremity of Weather. The Soil is neither rich nor
fruitful, it having neither fertility of ground for Corn or Cattle, the most
part of it being rough, and in every place hard to be Manured.

The Principal Towns are these.
1. Newcastle, the Principal Town in all these parts, ennobled by a notable
Haven which the River Tine makes, it being of that depth, that it bears very
Tall Ships; and so defends them, that they can neither be easily tossed with
Tempest^, nor driven upon the Shelves and Rocks; it is situate on the rising of
an (...), very uneven; on the North bank of the River which has a fair Bridge
over it, on the left hand stands the Castle, and on the right the
Marketplace, and the better part of the Town; it was Built by Robert the Son
of William the Conqueror, and named by him Newcastle; the Buildings are
beautiful, it is adorned with Five Churches; the Inhabitants are extreme
Wealthy, partly by intercourse of Traffic with the Germans, and partly by
carrying out Seacoals, both into Foreign Countries, and also into other parts
of England; it was Fortified with very strong (...) having Eight Gates, in the
Reign of King Edward the First. Before the Conquest it was called Monkchester,
it having been in possession of the Monks, and Chester being added, which
signifying a Bulwark or place of defense. Shows that in ancient time it had
been a place of Fortification. It was taken by the Scots, An. 1642. who entered
England in an Hostile manner, under pretense of delivering a Petition to King
Charles the First.

2. Tinmouth, a very ancient and strong Castle; on the East and Northside it is
impossible to be entered, by reason of a mighty high Rock hanging over the Sea;
and in other places such is the height of it, that it needs but small defense.

3. Morpeth, a famous little Town, situate on the North bank of the River
Wentsbeck, on the South bank stands the Church, and the Castle by it, all
beset with Trees; this Town, An. Dom. 1215. was set on Fire by its own
Inhabitants out of spite and malice to King John. Near this place was Born John
Duns, called Scotus, because he was descended of Scottish Blood; who being
brought up in Merton College in Oxford, became wonderfully Learned in Logic;
and in the intricate Divinity of those times; yet as one still doubtful and
unresolved, he overcast the truth of Religion with mists of obscurity; and with
so profound and admirable Subtilty he wrote many Books in a dark and rude
Style, that he deserved the title of the Subtle Doctor, and after his own Name
he erected a new Sect of Scolists; but he Died pitifully, for being taken with
an Apoplexy, and over-hastily Buried for Dead, whilst upon the return of Life
Nature was about to discuss the violence of the Disease, he endeavoring in
vain by a lamentable noise to call for help, after he had a long time knocked
his Head against the Gravestone, he dashed out his own Brains, and at last
yielded up his vital Breath.

4. Barwick, the utmost Town in England, and the strongest Hold in all
Britain; it is situated between two most mighty Kingdoms, as Pliny has reported
of Palmyra in Syria; it was the first thing always that both Nations took care
of whenever they were at discord, it having had different fortunes, being one
time under the power of the Scots, and another time of the English. Our Kings
have oftentimes Fortified and Fenced it with new Works, but especially Queen
Elizabeth, who enclosed it about in a narrower compass within the old Wall,
with an high Wall of Stone most strangely compacted together, which, she has
so forewarded again, with a Counterscarp, a Bank round about, with Mounts of
Earth, and other Terraces above, that the strength thereof may justly cut off
all hopes of winning it, if these two so glorious Nations had not been most
happily united.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. Line 17. after proof add of. P. 39. l. 22. for Corasus read Cerasus.
P. 57. l. 12. for raffris read rastris. L. 13. for mirabitus read mirabitur. P.
63. l 20. for Neets read Neots. L. 21. for Neutus read Neotus. P. 76. l 11. for
Praeciduum read Praesidium.

A Table of the Ancient Inhabitants of ENGLAND.
ATtrebates Page 30 Belgae Page 19 Brigantes Page 105 Cantii vel Cangi Page 39
Cateuchlani Page 48 Coritani Page 65 Cornavii Page 76 Danmonii Page 12
Durotriges Page 17 Dobuni Page 44 Dimaetae Page 93 Iceni Page 58 Ottadini Page
127 Regni Page 34 Silures Page 86 Trinobantes Page 53
A Table of the Counties in England and Wales.
BArkshire Page 30 Bedfordshire Page 50 Buckinghamshire Page 48 Cambridgeshire
Page 62 Cheshire Page 84 Cornwall Page 12 Cumberland Page 120 Darbyshire Page
74 Devonshire Page 14 Dorsetshire Page 17 Durham Page 113 Essex Page 56
Glocestershire Page 44 Hampshire Page 26 Hartfordshire Page 51 Herefordshire
Page 86 Huntingtonshire Page 63 Kent Page 39 Lancashire Page 115 Leicestershire
Page 67 Lincolnshire Page 69 Middlesex Page 53 Northamptonshire Page 65
Nottinghamshire Page 72 Norfolk Page 59 Northumberland Page 127 Oxford Page 47
Rutland Page 68 Shropshire Page 82 Somersetshire Page 19 Staffordshire Page 80
Suffolk Page 58 Sussex Page 37 Surrey Page 34 Warwickshire Page 76 Westmorland
Page 118 Wiltshire Page 23 Worcestershire Page 78 Yorkshire Page 105
Brecknockshire Page 89 Cardiganshire Page 96 Caermarthenshire Page 93
Caernarvon Page 99 Denbighshire Page 102 Flintshire Page 104 Glamorganshire
Page 92 Montgomeryshire Page 97 Monmouthshire Page 90 Merionethshire Page 98
Pembrokeshire Page 94 Radnorshire Page 88
A Table of the Cities and Principal Towns in England and Wales.
A
ABergevenny Page 91 Aberistwith Page 96 Abington Page 31 St. Albans Page 52
Alresford Page 28 Arundel Page 37 Axminster Page 17 Aylesbury Page 49 Isle of
Anglesey Page 101 St. Asaph Page 104 Appleby Page 118
B
BArnet Page 53 Barwick Page 130 Basingstoak Page 29 Bath Page 21 Beaumarish
Page 101 Bedford Page 50 Bremicham Page 77 Beverly Page 109 Bishop-Stortford
Page 52 Boston Page 70 Brecknock Page 89 Bridgnorth Page 82 Bridgewater Page 19
Bristol Page 22 Bruton Page 19 Buckingham Page 49 Burton Page 81 Bury St. Ed.
Page 58 Bodnan Page 13 Bediford Page 16 Burport Page 17 Barkly Page 46 Banbury
Page 47 Bosworth Page 67 Buxton Page 75 Bala Page 98 Banchor Page 100
C
CAmbridge Page 62 Canterbury Page 42 Cardisse Page 92 Carlisle Page 123 Camden
Page 46 Carmarthen Page 93 Chatham Page 42 Chelmsford Page 56 Chelsey Page 54
Chester Page 84 Chichester Page 37 Chipenhans Page 24 Colchester Page 57
Coventry Page 77 Cowbridge Page 92 Crowland Page 69 Croidon Page 36 Christ
church Page 27 Chepstow Page 90 Cardigan Page 96 Carnarvon Page 99 Cokarmouth
Page 121
D
DArtford Page 41 St. David's Page 95 Deal Page 43 Denbigh Page 102 Darby Page
74 Dorchester Page 18 Dover Page 43 Dunstable Page 51 Durham Page 114 Dartmouth
Page 15 Deptford Page 40 Dunnington Castle Page 68
E
EDghill Page 77 Ely Page 63 Exeter Page 15 Edindon Page 24 Eltham Page 40
Evenlode Page 47
F
FArnham Page 35 Farindon Page 31 Foy Page 13 Falmouth Page 12 Feversham Page
42 Fulham Page 54
G
Gloucester Page 45 Grantham Page 71 Guildford Page 35 Glascon Page 21 Greenwich
Page 40 Gravesend Page 41 Godmanchester Page 64
H
HArwich Page 57 Hatfield Page 52 Haverford Page 95 Henley Page 76 Hereford
Page 87 Hampton Court Page 54 Hartford Page 52 Hastings Page 38 Huntington Page
64 Harlech Page 98 Halyfax Page 106 Hull Page 109 Hartlepool Page 113
I
IPswich Page 59 St. Ives Page 64
K
KIngston Page 35 Kimbolton Castle Page 64 Killingworth Castle Page 77
Kidderminster Page 78 Knighton Page 88 Kirby-Lonsdale Page 119 Kirby-Stephen
Page 119 Kendall Page 119 Keswick Page 120
L
LEskerd Page 13 Launston Page 13 Lambeth Page 36 Lewis Page 38 London Page 54
Leyton Page 56 Lynn Page 61 Leicester Page 67 Loughborough Page 68 Lincoln Page
71 Lichfield Page 81 Ludlow Page 82 Lemster Page 87 Landaffe Page 92 Leeds Page
107 Leverpool Page 116 Lancaster Page 117
M
MAlmsbury Page 23 Marlborough Page 25 Maidenhead Page 32 Maidstone Page 41
Marlow Page 49 Maldon Page 57 Macclesfield Page 85 Monmouth Page 90 Milford
Page 94 Montgomery Page 97 Malton Page 112 Manchester Page 115 Morpeth Page 130
N
NOrton St. Phil. Page 20 Newport W. Page 30 Newbury Page 32 Norwich Page 60
St. Neots Page 63 Northampton Page 65 Nottingham Page 73 Nantwich Page 85
Newport Page 95 Newcastle Page 128
O
OKeham Page 68 Oxford Page 48 Oswestre Page 83 Ormeskirk Page 116
P
PEnsance Page 12 Padstow Page 13 Plymouth Page 14 Portsmouth Page 29
Peterborough Page 66 Peak Page 74 Prestain Page 88 Pembroke Page 95 Plinlimmon
Hills Page 97 Patrington Page 110 Pickering Page 111 Preston Page 116 Papcastle
Page 121 Penrith Page 122
Q
QUeensborough Page 42
R
RIngwood Page 27 Reading Page 32 Richmond Page 112 Richmond Y Page 35 Rhy Page
38 Rochester Page 41 Roiston Page 52 Rockingham-Castle Page 66 Radnor Page 88
Ruthin Page 103 Rhidal Page 112 Riblechester Page 116
S
SHirburn Page 18 Salisbury Page 25 Southampton Page 27 Southwark Page 36
Sevenoke Page 40 Sandwich Page 43 Sandon Page 43 Stony-Stratford Page 49 Stanes
Page 54 Saffron-Walden Page 57 Sudbury Page 58 Spalding Page 70 Stamford Page
71 Stoke Page 72 Southwell Page 73 Stafford Page 80 Stone Page 80 Shrewsbury
Page 83 Sheffield Page 106 Scarborough-Castle Page 111 Solway-Frith Page 122
T
TOrbay Page 15 Taunton Page 19 Trubridge Page 24 Tunbridge Page 41 Isle of
Tanet Page 42 Tewksbury Page 44 Thetford Page 60 Tenby Page 94 Towton Page 107
Tinmouth-Castle Page 130
U
UXbridge Page 54
W
WEymouth Page 17 Winburn Page 18 Wells Page 20 Werminster Page 24 Wilton Page
24 Winchester Page 28 Isle of Wight Page 33 Wallingford Page 30 Windsor Page 32
Winchelsey Page 38 Walmer Page 48 Winchelcomb Page 46 Wickam Page 49 Ware Page
52 Westminster Page 55 Wainfleet Page 72 Warwick Page 76 Worcester Page 78
Wakefield Page 106 Warrington Page 116
Y
YArmouth Page 61 York Page 107
FINIS.
Books Printed for Chr. Coningsby.
(...) sive quarundam Fabularum Explicatio, Linguae Graecae Tyronibus
accomodata; Una cum Locis Poetarum Fabularumque citatis. In usum Scholae
Mercatorum Scissorum Londinensis; Octavo. Pret. 1. s. 6 d.

Scarronides; or, Virgile Traverstie: A Mock-Poem on the First and Fourth Books
of Virgil's Enaeis, in English Burlesque. Octavo. Price bound 1 s.

A new Book of Ciphers: Containing in general all Names interwoven and reversed
by Alphabet; being very pleasant for Gentlemen and Ladies, and useful for all
sorts of Artists, as Painters, Carvers, Engravers, Chasers, Watchmakers,
Imbroiderers, etc. With several other useful and necessary Examples. Composed
and Engraven after the newest and true Mode, By Ben. Rhodes. Octavo. Price
bound 5 s.

The Modish Penman; or, a new Copy-Book, containing variety of all the usual
Hands now practiced in England, with a curious Copy of the Greek Alphabets, and
Joining-hand: With Directions whereby any Person may attain to write any of
those Hands with little practice. Likewise excellent Receipts for making
several sorts of Ink, and other Curiosities. By William Elder. In Quarto. Price
1 s.

A new Set of Round-hand Copies Alphabetically composed, which, together with
the Alphabets, are curiously Engraven, and Printed on the Tops of 36 Quarto
Pages, and Stitched up in blew Paper; and will supply the want of a Master. By
William Elder. Price 1 s.

Likewise the Set Secretary Hand curiously Engraven in the same manner,
whereby any Person may attain to the Clerk-like Engrossing of any Writings,
Deeds, etc. with Expedition. Price 1 s.

Also Red Copy-Books, and most other Copy-Books to be sold.

An Exact Table of Interest, Simple and Compound, showing the Interest of any
Sum for any Number of Days or Years at the Rate of, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10
per Cent. and the amount and present worth of any Sum; and the amount and
present Worth and Purchase of Annuities. Curiously Engraven, and Printed on a
large Imperial Sheet of Paper. Price 1 s.

England's Record-Ink, which for its Brightness and durable Blackness is
fittest for Records or any other Writings, and far transcends any yet extant.
It is Sealed up (with the Maker's Name on it) in Sixpenny strong Bottles fit for
Carriage; being made and sold by the Publisher hereof.

Books Printed and Sold by D. Midwinter and T. Leigh, at the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Church yard.
THE Education of Young Gentlewomen, written originally in French and from
thence made English and improved for a Lady of Quality. Twelves. 1699.

Advice to Young Gentlemen in their several conditions of Life; by way of
Address from a Father to his Children, by the Abbot Goussault; with his
Sentiments and Maxims upon what passes in Civil Society. Printed at Paris 1697.
and Translated into English. Octavo.

A complete Doctrine of the Bones, according to the newest and most refined
Notions of Anatomy, showing their Nature and Substance, etc. By Robert Baker,
Surgeon. Octavo. 1699.

Plain and full Instructions to raise all sorts of Fruit Trees that prosper in
England, etc. the Second Edition, with the Addition of Two entire Chapters of
Greens and Greenhouses, by the Author T. Langford, Gent. Octavo. 1699.

The Lives and Characters of the English Drammatick Poets; also an Account of
all the Plays that were ever yet Printed in the English Tongue, etc. first
begun by Mr. Langbain; improved and continued down to this time by a Careful
Hand. Octavo.

A Voyage to the East Indies, giving an Account of the Isles of Madagascar, and
Mascarene, of Surat, the Coast of Malabar, etc. Written originally in French by
Mr. Dellon, M. D. Octavo.

The Mystery of Phanaticism, or the Artifices of Dissenters to support their
Schism; together with the Evil and Danger of them, set forth in several
Letters, etc. By a Divine of the Church of England. The Second Edition. Octavo.

The Life of our Blessed Savior, an Heroic Poem, etc. with above Sixty Cuts.
The Second Edition. Fol.

Resolves, Moral, Divine, and Political. By Owen Feltham, Esquire. Fol.

Bishop Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England. In Two
Vol. Fol.

Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers. In Two Vol. Fol.

Bishop Tillotson's Posthumous Sermons, In Five Vol. Octavo:


