THE VINDICATION OF THE SEPARATE BRETHREN OF THE SPIRIT, Against a Libell,
Called The Resolution of the ROVND-HEADS.

And against all Slanderous Pamphlets, since the time that Simon Magus tempted
Simon the Cobbler.

Published by H. Drowrey.

LONDON, Printed 1641

The Vindication of the Roundheads.
FIrst whereas that Libell begins with our head, we therefore pronounce it a
Capital Libell.

It then butts at our horns which in despite of that Libell shall shoot out to
a greater length, and be more visible then they were, there being no
contradicting since Doctors Commons suffered an Eclipse.

As for the Cavalliers, our black and blew Arms and Sides do confess that
dear truth, and we only say they are a Company of Absoloms, and we hope to
see them hanged in their long Locks for that affront.

To the shutting upon Shopps, we answer, that even as when the Sky falls you
may catch Larkes, just so when Bishops go down we may set up again.

As for the Whitebrothes, etc. they are dishes the Libeller would lick his lips
at, and we say, that at one of those Feasts we edify so much, and grow so
strong, that the Devil himself cannot tame us.

To that point where he says that we hold to maintain Bishop, Order,
learning and Unity, in the Church, Universityes and Commonwealth, is
Profaneness, superstition, and plain Popery, Though it be put upon us as a
jeere, yet thus we confirm it; First, to maintain Order is proph^nesse; for
if there were no Order (as it is amongst as) there could be no transgression of
the Order, and consequently no profaneness. Secondly, Learning is superstition,
for thereby Scholars are so furnished with suffient arguments against us, that
they dare stand stiff upon their own knowledge and as it were overtopps us.
Lastly peace and Union is Popery, for what do the Papists more boast of then
their Uniformity, That we may not therefore be like them, we entend as long as
we may have any Countenance, to set all the Kingdom together by the ears,
whereby we in time shall become as famous for our seperations as they, for
their Uniformity.

As for the Terms of Roundheads and prickears, we say it is a seemly sight,
and if our example could but beget that fashion, amongst the Courtiers, they
would look just like so many Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednegoes, in the Kings
House, to the amazement nay afrightment of all foreign nations that should
behold them, which some of them may easily do, without the help of a Barber,
it is but even pulling off a Cap of hair, and the thing is done if not over
done.

Then for our Lecturers of both Sexes, I pray you who is it but they that beget
Children Daily and Hourly in our Churches? The men haild out of the world, and
the women pull them in by the shirts of the flesh, and in short, time draw them
empty of Carnal things, abating much of their fleshly lust, leaving them
only to the comfort of a crestfalne Spirit which we call Repentance, and
after that brunts over they quickly learn the Mystery of conventicle,
break-fasts which surely proves Cordial and Restorative, enabling them to go
through with the work they take in hand Cheerfully and powerfully.

Concerning the Community betwixt the Brethren and the Sisters, surely surely
no flesh is able to resist the sweet alurement of a zealous fleire when she
hears a not able piece of stuff from the impudent Lecturer, or of a goodly
Sky-colored gleg upwards, upon the pricking of her conscience, and the
Deepe-sigh of two minuits long presently after it, for these causes we wonder
that the young Gentlemen of the Inns of Court do not convert, verily the
provocatives thereunto are plump, and smoath, and yet rough enough in some
places, (but those are Common places, and therefore not worth mentioning) They
are no Iesebels painted or brayded, but rather faithful Rahabs, penitent
Harlots. Another inducement to the Gentlemen might be good Husbandry: for
questionless, the Commons are larger, and the payment lesser. Besides, they
teach the Tone of the Nose an Artificial way, as well as the Sisters of Saint
Giles in ruefull earnest* and we hope this will be considered.

Touching the Woods and Sawpits, they were places frequented only in those
times, when Learning played the Tyrant, by Commission, since which extirpation;
every of our own houses are Synagogues for that purpose. And for the putting
out lights, some reasons may be showed, and some not; one cause thereof may be,
for that in our Prayers we should see each others yawning, gaping and staring
upward, the divine rapture would be converted to a loud laughter at one
another ill-favored faces, and we so prevented of that fruit, which from the
exercise will otherwise arise* as for other reasons they are not to be
discovered to any reprobate, whose hair is longer then his ears.

Then the Lybel wrings us by the Nose, the Nose is to be considered as part of
the Face, and is the instrument of one Sense (then it is well you will say we have
some sense) but you shall find we make other use of it then you expect, for
even as the Apostles did speak with Tongues, so verily do we speak with Noses,
yea, with fiery Noses, which do guide a Musical and Tintinable relish to our
Language; like the hum of a Bell, or the drove of a Bagpipe; but (as the Song
has it) let Symons Beard alone, so let Beters Nose alone.

For the Ruff, the Dublet, and the Breeches, they have their significations*
the Ruff shows how terrible we are in our Choler, the Doublet is the Emblem
of the Stomach which is spacious, and the shortness of the Breeches,
conduces to the length of the Leg, and therefore demonstrates our adversnesse
to the Charactor of the Duck, O Ducks, plaguie Creatures.

As for our Faith, Charity and good Works, we link them thus together* our
Religion is built on Faith only, and great need there is it should be strong,
in respect the other Graces and Symptoms of heavenly mindedness are seldom
apparent in us, not need they be so, For Faith applies it self to things not
seen, our Charity and good Works were never seen nor ever shall be, for that is
the common way of Salvation, and dissonant from the rules of singularity; but
ours prescribes a new way to be saved by stratagem.

The length of the Prayer is a qualification in the Lungs, the toutologie
thereof a Vertigo in the Brain, and the earnestness of the same, a habit got
by practice, which seems to strain the interiours of the whole man, with a
kind of Divine Witchcraft, even ravisheth the Souls of the tender Sisters, and
fills them with a servent desire to experience the strength of those able
bodies that retain such powerful graces.

As for the Robes, Gestures, and Utensils Ecclesiastic, what is a Canonical
cote, but a woollen Smock; or a Surplesse, but an over-wide Linen Smock, and
is a habit quite contrary to a plain Text, that men should not put on Women's
Apparel, what are the ornaments of the Altar, but Images of Gold and Silver in
the form of Candlesticks and Embossed Books, and the Cringes and Bowings, but
Sacrifices of dexterous hamstrings thereunto.

As for the Synod of Morefields and Pimlico, we doubt not but the Canons there
devised, will hold good with as much success as those last enacted a Paul's,
especially for that the Agent of them are now, etc.

Now truly and verily for the Resolution and the Reformation, it could not
have been (...)ed, though the Ironmonger, Law^^^t of our Family had draw^ it;
but only the rascally Libeller put it in jearing Terms; but that may be
requited when we meet him in Cheapside.

Now for an Addition of better Arguments for the maintenance of this Religion,
take these few; It is confirmed by the lamentable death of a godly Knight, the
Proto-Martyr of the Spiritual cause, who because he is dead, our Secretary
(being principal Council in this Vindication) thinks it good manners or, let
him rest in peace; but in his life time Ram-Ally knew him well.

Rome is the Beast with ten Horns, we having but two Horns, are therefore no
Roman Beasts; those Horns were empailed with Crowns, which our horns rather
push against. A glorious Whore did ride on that Beast* but we are Beasts our
selves, and ride the Whore.

The Jesuits are the only Roman Puritans, that our singularities ought to take
the right hand of theirs* they are the Brothers of Jesus the Surname* but we
are the Brothers of Christ the proper name, which always preserves the
eminence of the Pedigree in every great Family.

That this Religion is merely of the Spirit, what do you say to many of us,
that can read as perfectly at the wrong end of the Book, as at the right end;
or to a Brown-Baker that will take a Sermon Verbatim in Charactors (which you
would take for Conjuring forms, they look so ghastly) and yet could never
read a Letter of the Book, or to another, that never read his Accidence, and
hates Latin, yet derives Hebrew roots with facility; if these be not peculiar
and si^ple gifts of the Spirit, then we have no good Spirit in us, and the
Resolution is an honest Libel.

FINIS.

