The House of Weeping: OR, MAN'S last PROGRESS TO HIS LONG HOME: Fully
Represented in several FUNERAL DISCOURSES, With many Pertinent EJACULATIONS
under each Head, to remind us of our Mortality and Fading State.

By JOHN DVNTON, M. A. late Minister of Aston Clinton near Aylsbury in the
County of Bucks.

Illustrated with a Lively Emblem of a FUNERAL SOLEMNITY.

He comes forth like a Flower, and is cut down.

Job 14. 2. Recommended as the most Proper Book yet extant ^ be given on
Funeral Occasions.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey, 1682.

The mourning Ring


London printed for John Dunton

A Mourning-Ring, In Memory of your Departed Friend, Containing. The House of
Weeping. The Sick Man's Passing Bell. Death-Bed-Thoughts. The Fatal Moment. The
Treatment of the Dead, in order to their Burial. The Funeral Solemnity. A
Conference between the Mourners. The History of those that have died suddenly,
etc. Observations on the Bills of Mortality. A walk among the Tombs. The
Pilgrim's Guide from his Cradle to his Grave. The Author's Tears, or
Meditations on his own Sickness, Death and Funerals etc.

The Second Edition.

Recommended as proper to be given at Funerals

London, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven, in the Poultrey, 1692.

The House of Weeping


(...) goes to his long home and the Mourn. go about the streets Eccl: 12. ^

(...)nted for John Dunton at ye Black Raven (...)he Poultry London.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Truly Pious and Religious Lady, THE Lady BRIDGET
ROBERTS, the Virtuous Relict of Sir Howland Roberts Baronett, late of
Glastenbury in Kent.
May it please your Ladyship,
SO usual is the Custom of Dedicating Books of this nature to Persons of pi and
virtuous Inclinations, that we very rarely find any venture in to the World
without it.

The Just and deserved Fam^ of your Ladyships unparalled and Exemplary Piety,
and your having embraced the Power as well as the Form of Godliness, (whilst
most in this wicked and profligate Age not only content themselves with the
Form, but take a Liberty to be licentious and profane) together with your
Ladyships having upon all occasions manifested an Extraordinary Zeal and
forwardness for the encouraging any thing that tends toward the promoting of
Piety and Religion; is all the Apology I shall make for presuming to ^ay this
small Treatise at your Ladyships feet.

The Substance of these Discourses, were Sermons preached by my Father (now in
his Grave) upon several Funeral Occasions, and never intended by him for the
Press, but having perused them since his Death, and finding them more suitable
and pertinent for a Funeral Gift (for which they are chiefly intended) than any
Book yet extant in so small a Tract: I do therefore humbly implore your
Ladyships favor and Protection to them; ^ssuring my self, that if they shall
find Acceptance with your Ladyship, and have the Honor of your approbation, it
will very much influence and facilitat their passage into the World, t^ which I
hope* they will be very useful: For certainly there can be nothing more proper
than the frequent and serious reading such Discourses as these when most are so
apt to banish from them the thoughts of their Dying Hour, notwithstanding the
many Objects of Mortality that are daily represented to their view, and their
frequent Invitation to the House of Weeping.

MADAM,
Here in this small Book (properly styled the House of Weeping for its
suitableness for a Funeral Present) is fully and impartially related,

1. The Certainty of a Dying Hour; and how suddenly it may come, we know not:
for this Evening Sun may see us dead, and its Morning Rays may light us to be
buried in that cold Earth which now most so negligently tread upon: And that
indefatigable Harbinger the Sun (whose constituted place is to Irradiate the
lower World) is gone out early this Morning on its winged speed, to score us
out the Lodging of a Tomb: for so many Minutes that are since its setting out
this Day, so many Minutes are as so many points deducted from our Life; and so
short a Date has every Mortal Frame, that before Heavens nimble Traveller has
run Ten or Twelve Millions of Leagues, (his daily task) our forward Sands may
have posted us to the Hour of Death.

2. The Frailty of the Life of Man: under which Discourse is shown the
shortness of Humane Life; and here under this Head, the Life of Man is compared
to a Running Hour, to a fine Summers Day, Posting to the Night of Death, and
Vanishing away; to a Flying Cloud; to a perishing Breath, to a Sweet (but
Fading) Flower, to a Blooming Spring (which often Deaths frost Nips in its
Sweetest Prime) hasting to a withering Autumn.

3. That the Grave is Man's last Home: under which Sermon those are Reproved,
who Live as though they had Imbibed (as an Article of their Faith) one of those
absurd and destructive Principles, that all Men come into the World by Accident
and Chance, and are to Live in it for ever, and that to no other end, than to
Pamper the Flesh, and Indulge their sensual Appetites with all manner of carnal
delights and pleasures. Here is likewise shown, that when the black Attire of
our Funeral is over, and our surviving Friends returned again to their own
houses and homes, (after passionately following our Hearse to the Grave) we
shall be lodged in a State incapable of Alteration for ever; and likewise what
care we ought to take upon that Consideration, to secure our Everlasting
welfare in the other World. Here is likewise shown how poorly and meanly Clad
we must enter into our Coffins, and how that a Winding Sheet and one poor
Shroud, is all our Weeping Friends can bestow upon us, when they take of us*
their last Adieu. And here those are seasonably Reproved, who spend their
precious Time (one Sand of which is worth ten Thousand Worlds) in haughty
Deckings, in over Curious Trimmings, when suddenly their Pampered Bodies may
be Sacrificed to the gaping Grave, and be made a Feast for Worms; nay, and if
not Strewed with fragrant Flowers (before their very Interment) may become a
sight enough to nauseate the Spectators.

4. That there is no Returning from the Grave: under which Discourse is shown,
that when once we are carried (upon the Shoulders of Weeping Friends) to our
long Homes, that then there is no Returning again for us, to Live with them
upon Earth, but must there rot under ground, till the bright Morning Day of the
Resurrection*

5. That it is the Duty of all to prepare for their last Change: under which
Sermon are reproved those who Repent not of sin, till they are deprived of a
Power to commit it; who Live as if their Souls were not Immortal, but did dye
with their Bodies, and were not obliged to appear at any Tribunal, to render an
account of any thing done in this Life; who live as if there were no such thing
as Hell or Heaven, Rewards for Virtues, or Punishments for Vices in the other
Life; who Live as if the Brutal and momentary Pleasures of this present world
were more sweet and pleasant, and to be chosen before those Eternal Rivers of
Pleasures that run at Gods right hand for evermore; who Live as if Repentance
were not necessary for Pardon, or as those who care not whether they are Saved
or Damned when they Depart this Life.

6. That all, both Good and Bad, must arise to Judgment: under which Sermon is
shown, that all men (when the last Trump shall sound at the end of the World)
must make their Appearance (to receive their Last Doom,) before that Judge,
whose Sentence they cannot Reverse, whose Wisdom they cannot deceive, whose
Equity they cannot bow, whose Severity they cannot withstand, whose Indignation
they cannot Appease, whose Determination they cannot alter, and from whose
Presence they cannot fly.

7. That there will be a glorious Resurrection for them that sleep in Jesus:
under which Discourse is shown, that at the last day, those who were Heirs of
Glory, shall arise out of their Graves, to shine as so many Resplendent Suns in
the Empirean Heavens, to Chaunt forth Eternal Hallelujahs in that upper World;
where they shall be ever Guarded with the Noble and Innumerable Train of
Angels, where they shall ever have the Honorable Society of Patriarchs and
Apostles, where they shall ever have the whole Army of Triumphant Martyrs, and
a thousand times ten Thousand times ten Thousand blessed Saints for their
Glorious Attendants, with whom they shall be to Eternity Happy in a
Transcendent manner, above Expression, above Conception.

8. Eighthly and Lastly, In this small Treatise is faithfully related, what is
the Swan-like Note of a Dying Christian; (being my Fathers last Sermon, etc.)
under which Discourse is shown, that one Glance of Heaven, one Grape of Canaan,
one Glympse of the Crown of Glory, is that which is able to set a Gloss upon
the Face of Death, and to make it really Lovely in the Eyes of an Expiring
Saint, filling him with so much Joy, that he can cheerfully Smile at the
Thoughts of the near Approaches of Death, and Triumph at the sight of a Tomb,
Death being more Welcome to him, than a joyful Trumpet sounding out to a
glorious Jubilee.


MADAM,
Now if this Weeping House may be any ways useful to your Ladyship or any
Other, I shall have attained my chief and principal end of its Publication; and
with comfortable Hopes that it may, I Humbly beg the Honor to Subscribe
(assuring my self and all the World, that when the Dismal Ewe-tree and
flattering Ivy shall grow about your Mournful Grave, that the longest Date of
Time shall not be able to Puff away the sweet Remembrance of your Virtuous
Deeds, but that afterward to the end of the World your Honorable Name shall
be a Rival with Time, for the Victory of Perpetuity;)

MADAM, Your Ladyships most Humble, John Dunton.


In praise of the Author of the House of Weeping, with the Explanation of the
Frontispiece annexed to his Book.
WIth sighs and groans, and plunged Eyes attend
The doleful Map of every Mortals End.
Enter the Sable House of Weeping, see
The lively Scene of Humane misery.
Our reverend Author could not stop a stream
Of tears, when treating on so sad a Theme:
Survey these pious Lines, and there you will find
The lively Pourtraict of the Authors Mind.
In tears he preached, with tears he seemed to write,
And may be termed the Christian Heraclite:
He wrote, he spoke 'em; thus whoever says,
Needs not another word to speak their praise.
Since all must follow him, or soon, or late,
His pattern let us strive to imitate.
Our Entrance and our Exit seem to meet,
Our swaddling Bands almost our Winding Sheet.
Poor man from Mother Earth does just arise,
Then looks abroad, returns again, and dies.
Some forty years perhaps with much ado
He has prolonged his tedious life unto,
Then under Griefs and Cares he sinks away,
His Carcass mouldring into native Clay.
See where his Friends surround the sacred Vrn,
Where all his fond Relations fondly mourn;
And when the solemn Bell does sadly call,
The drooping Pomp attends his Funeral,
How he from Fortunes store can only have
A Narrow Coffin, and a scanty Grave.
Happy, thrice happy they who had the grace
To fix their Treasures in a better place:
Who, e're from hence they did their Lodgings move,
Were careful to lay in a Stock above:
Those Death may wound, but never can destroy,
Their House of Weeping proves an House of Joy.
W. S.
Another on the Frontispiece.
See thou, frail man, the Emblem of thy State?
The exact Idea of thy hasting Fate?
The Figure's drawn to the life, yea every part*
Is graced and decked with more than Zeuxian Art:
The first Scene shows when Man's laid out for dead,
When the sprightly Soul from the Body's gone and fled;
His mournful Friends no longer can endure
The lifeless Corpse, therefore they do immure
And shut it close up in a Sable Hearse,
As totally unfit for all Commerce;
Over which they shower such store of tears that they
Mourning, exhaust their Moisture and decay.
With sorrow-wounded hearts they sob and cry
Themselves to death, they take their turns to dye.
Because one's death from the other draws such grief,
As kills the Soul in spite of all relief:
Next is he brought on shoulders of his Friends
Along the Streets, where dismally attends
A Crowd of Mourners to the Church, where they
Are twice foretold, and warned they are but Clay;
First by the words of the Preacher, and then next
The Corpse (though tacitly) repeats the Text:
But lo the End's more dismal than the rest,
Which brings the final Consummatum est:
Earth now is laid to Earth, and dust to dust,
Earth ope's its mouth, the Coffin stop it must.
This is the Lot of all, none can it flee:
Earth's not quite full, there is room yet left for thee.
Sic raptim scripsit H. C.
An Acrostick on the Name of the Reverend Author of the House of Weeping.
In the cold house of Mother Earth must lie
Our mortal Bodies, Holy Souls will fly
Home to their God, their King, their Native Lands,
Not the weeping House, but the House not made with hands.
Death then, thou King of Terrors, do thy worst,
Unto Christ's chosen Ones His only Trust,
Now, now, thou raging Hector, it is too late,
To turn them out This House, this blessed state
Of Bliss; Therefore, thou Tyrant, I reply,
Now dolor's exiled, and a Weeping Eye.
S. S.
Upon the House of Weeping, made by the Reverend Mr. John Dunton, late Minister
of Aston Clinton in the County of Bucks.
ITs Frontispiece appalls the Ruddy Cheek:
Its sable Inside flinty hearts does break.
Unerring Marks of deepest Grief abound
Through each Story from the Battlements to the Ground.
Its mourning Garb forbids Sol's fulgent Rays,
Into dark Nights converts the Crystal Days.
Thence Joy's exiled, and there the Grateful'st Guest
Is that Swollen Weeping Eye exceeds the rest.
The House of Weeping it is justly named,
Cause for sad Funerals it is greatly famed.
What! naught but Monuments of Death's dire Rage,
Which Mortals fiercely hurls off this wide Stage!
Who can withhold from mingling Tears with Grief,
To see this Tyrant reign as Monarch chief?
Sad Havoc makes Deaths Sithe! for oh! alas!
It cuts down Myriads like to Piles of Grass,
And Earths cold Bowels does their Mansion make,
Till they to endless Bliss or Woe awake:
And e're these Crumbled into Atoms are,
Makes Thousands more of this dread Lot to share.
No sooner is one Corpse entombed in Dust,
But King of Terrors to his boundless Lust
Offers a second; and e're from Bright Eyes
Mourners cast off their doleful Red Disguise,
With dying Breath the last Boon crave of their Friends,
Which Rites discharged, their lives Death quickly ends.
Thus the Supporters of the Dead Man's Pall
Return them home, then in the Grave do fall.
What Marble Eyes distill not showr's of Tears?
What Stoic Heart is not harrast with Fears
To ken this Emblem, to revolve this Book,
Where Death's Memento's stand where e're you look?
Your Eyes being fed with the Limners skilful Art,
Impress this Preachers Echo on your Heart,
Which will unsting this ghastly Scorpions Tail,
Transport you with sound Joy, when others wail:
Adapt you to ascend on Cherubs Wings,
To the Highest Orb, where the Chore of Angels sings,
Where you to Jah shall with sweet Symphony
Carol Hosannahs to Eternity.
J. S.
Books Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey.
1. MR. Doolitel on the Sufferings of Christ, from the Garden to the Grave;
being a Second Part to a former Treatise on the Sacrament.

2. Mr. Jayes Sermon on the Lord Presidents Imprisonment and Miraculous
deliverance, entitled Daniel in the Den.

3. Mr. Showers Sermon at Madam Barnardistons Funeral, with an Account of her
Life and Death.

4. The House of Weeping, or Man's last Progress to his Long home, in several
Funeral Discourses: By Mr. John Dunton, M. A. Illustrated with a lively Emblem
of a Funeral Solemnity, and recommended as the best Book yet extant for a
Funeral Gift.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Remember a while ago, there was a Question proposed to the Athenian Society;
Whether Books are not more proper to be given at Funerals, than Bisquets,
Gloves, Rings, etc. The Answer they returned was: That undoubtedly a Book would
be a far more convenient, more durable, and more valuable a Present, than what
are generally given, as much exceeding them, as the Soul does the Body; and
besides, will much better, and more profitably preserve the Memory of a
Deceased Friend; if good, teaching him how to follow him; if bad, to avoid his
Example, that they may escape his End; and the Truths contained therein, we
should think, would make a more lasting Impression, even than a Sermon it self,
much more than a Dull Deaths-head; for having always before our Eyes, the Idea
of those for whom 'twas given; they will still (as it were) Preach from the Dead
unto us. Thus far you have the Opinion of the Athenian Society, in this Matter.
And certainly nothing can more conduce to our eternal Welfare, and to put us
in mind of Mortality* than Books of this kind; and to the end they may be more
Profitable and Useful to Christians, it were to be wished that this.
Mourning-Ring, which is so Entitled, that it might be given at Funerals,
instead of Gloves, Bisquets, Wine. And those that think it proper, may Print in
a Sheet of Paper, the most Material Passages, in the Life of their Dead Friend,
and bind it up with those Mourning-Ring* they give away at his Funeral; and for
the more effectually perpetuating the Memory of the Party Deceased. There is
room left in the Title of this Book, for inserting his Name and Place of
Burial. And indeed, all serious practical Books are proper for this Design, and
if Bound in Black, with a Cipher of Mortality, (as this Mourning-Ring, should
be when given at Funerals) will be very decent and proper for such a Solemn
Occasion; to make the serious Impressions of our Frailty more strong, was I
suppose the first Original of Funeral Sermons, and for this purpose they are
still Printed, that the consideration of the Dead may further the Holiness and
Salvation of the Living. And doubtless, Reading and Meditation would be much
more decent at such Solemnities, than Eating and Drinking, and putting on Gay
Attire. Books of this Subject would make the People mind the present instance
of Mortality, and affect them with devout Meditations thereon. How sad is it to
consider the unsuitable Carriage, of a great many Persons at Funerals; those
opportunities are usually spent in idle Chat, in Eating and Drinking, and that
sometimes to Excess, so that the House of Weeping is turned into a House of
Mirth and Feasting. Many have put in Practice this useful Design of giving
Books at the Interment of Friends, which if it were more general, the good
Effect thereof would be soon discerned. in the Lives of Christians; for it may
be fitly be said of a Book, given at Funerals, as Divine Herbert says of a
Verse, viz.

A Book may find him who a Sermon flies,
And turn a Gift into a Sacrifice.
When Christians attend at Funerals, and sit over Graves, and are amused with
the doleful Passing Bell, and look upon Skulls, and dead Bones, and Ghastly
Spectacles, upon the dropping Eyes and despondent Looks of Mourners, they have,
if ever, some suitable self-humbling Apprehensions of their own Mortality,
which would abide with 'em by a frequent perusal of such a Treatise as this
which, puts them in mind of their departed Friends, and serves as King*
Philip's Boy, who saluted him every Morning with a Remember Sir you are a Man.

There are no Ingredients in the Shop of Nature that are a sufficient Cordial
to fortify the Heart against this King of Terrors or his Harbingers: The
Velvet slipper cannot fence the Foot from the Gout, nor the Gold Ring the
Finger from a Fellon; the richest Diadem cannot quit the Headache, nor the
purple Robe prevent a Fever; Beauty, Strength, Riches, Honor, Friends, nor
any, nor all can repeal that sentence, Dust thou art* and to Dust thou shall
return. Every Fit of an Ague, and every Distemper of this frail Constitution
being as a light Skirmish before the main Battle of Death, wherein weak Man
being vanquished, is led Captive to his long home: And when once the Lines of
Mortality are drawn upon the Face of the fairest Mortal, he becomes a ghastly
Spectacle (how lovely soever before) and the conclusion is, Bury my Dead out of
my sight. This inevitable necessity, however it be confes^ed and acknowledged
of all; yet lamentable experience teaches that in the Christian World most Men
so live as though they should never die.

Now, That we may be fitted to encounter with this last Enemy ( besides the
manifold helps which God has reached to us in his Word, in the Passages of his
Providence, in the frequent Examples of Mortality before us continually, and in
our own sensible Approaches to the Gates of Death: I say, besides these and
infinite more,) this Mourning-Ring, by Gods blessing, and our endeavors, may
prove no small furtherance in our Pilgrimage. The whole Work being the most
Comprehensive history of Death, and Funeral Monuments, yet extant; each Sermon
and Meditation therein is as a several Legacy, bequeathed by those upon the
Occasion of whose Deaths they were written, as by so many Testators, who
themselves have made a real Experiment of Mortality, and left these for our
Instruction that surviveve them. It is true, the daily Examples of Mortality
are so many real Lectures that by a kind of Dumb Oratory, persuade us to expect
our End, but as they are Transcient, so our Thoughts of them Vanish. Therefore,
it can be no small Advantage to have always before us, this Mourning Ring,
which will abundantly furnish us with Meditations in this kind, and be still
constantly putting of us in Mind of our Departed Friend.

It was a Custom in former times for Great Men to make them Sepulchers in their
Gardens, to mind them of Death, in the midst of the Pleasures of this Life.
This present Work may not unfitly be termed a Garden, wherein whosoever takes a
daily walk, will find that Titles of Honor are written in Dust, and that
Princes and Great Men must Die; that their very Monuments are Mortal, and will
in time be found as Archemedes his Tomb (by Cicero) in vepretis, overgrown with
Thorns and Briars: And that even Poor Men too, (who have no Comet, Prodigy, or
Earthquake to Toll the Knell of their Departure.) But who do as it were steal
into their silent Graves with no greater noise than can be made by a Branch of
Rosemary, Sprig of Laurel, or a Black Ribband, have Precious and Immortal Souls
to save as well as they with the Methods and Courses both should take to get
Saving Grace, and the Knowledge of Christ, which will prove a Possession for
them to Eternity:

In a word, be thy Estate and Condition what it will be, here thou may have
both Directions to guide thee, and Comforts to support thee in thy Journey on
Earth, till thou arrive at thy Heavenly Country.

The Author of this Mourning-Ring, spent a great part of his Time in Holy and
Devout Contemplations upon the things of another Life as this Excellent Piece
of his sufficiently shows.

Missenden gave him Breath,
And Cambridge Education;
His Studies are of Death,
Of Heaven his Meditation.
His great Care was so to fit and prepare himself for a Happy Death whilst in
the World, that after this Life ended he might enjoy Eternal Happiness in that
which is to come. Let us then imitate so great a pattern of Piety; that so when
we come to Die, we may have nothing to do but to Die, and willingly to resign
up our Souls into the Hands of Almighty God.

And now being refreshed with these Fragrant Leaves, what shall I say? Blessed
Author, art thou yet Alive? Breathe longer in this Fruitful Air, and extract
more out of this so Rich a Stock. A Scribe so well Instructed cannot have spent
all, but must have new or old to bring out of his Treasury. Do not hide, but
improve thy Talent; be not only a good and wise, but a faithful Steward, and
yield us more of thy pleasant Fruits. Thou have begun well, who, what shall
hinder thee? Thy present (were there no succeeding) Reward is Spur enough to
future Work. Religion is Recreation, and Heaven is the way to Heaven: Good Men
are there on this side the Grave. Thy longing Soul was still peeping into it,
and sending thy Thoughts as Spies, to view this Promised Land. But art thou at
Rest from thy Labors? This (among others) thy Work follows thee, and has here
erected thy lasting Monument. Where ever thou were Buried, Obscurity shall not
swallow thee. Every good Heart that knew thee is thy Tomb, and every Tongue
writes thee an Epitaph. Good Men speak well of thee, but above all, God
delights in thee. Thy Thoughts were still fluttering upwards, richly fraught
with Divine Meditations, and ever aspiring, till unlading themselves in the
Bosom of thy Beloved. We are hugely thankful that a few dropped from thee for the
Comfort and Example of fainting weeping Mortals below. Thou lived'st in deed,
whilst others live only in show; and have changed thy Place, but not thy
Company.

But my Paper is short, and my time shorter, I must therefore conclude, for the
Book is wholly Printed, and stops only until I have told thee that I am

Thy Friend

In Praise of the Author of the Mourning-Ring, with the Explanation of the
Frontispiece Annexed to his Book.
WIth sighs and groans, and plunged Eyes attend
The doleful Map of every Mortals End.
Enter the Sable House of Weeping, see
The lively Scene of Humane Misery.
Our Reverend Author could not stop a stream
Of tears, when treating on so s^d a Theme:
Survey these pious Lines, and there you will find
The lively Pourtraict of the Authors Mind.
In tears he preached, with tears he seemed to write,
And may be termed the Christian Heraclite:
He wrote, he spoke 'em: thus whoever says,
Needs not another word to speak their praise.
Since all must follow him, or soon, or late,
His pattern let us strive to imitate.
Our Entrance and our Exit seem to meet,
Our Swaddling Bands almost our Windingsheet.
Poor Man from Mother Earth does just arise,
Then looks abroad, returns again, and dies.
Some forty years perhaps with much ado
He has prolonged his tedious Life unto,
Then under Griefs and Cares he sinks away,
His Carcass mouldring into native Clay.
See where his Friends surround the Sacred Urn,
Where all his fond Relations fondly Mourn:
And when the Solemn Bell does sadly call,
The drooping Pomp attends his Funeral,
How he from Fortunes store can only have
A narrow Coffin, and a scanty Grave.
Happy, thrice happy they who had the Grace
To fix their Treasures in a better place:
Who, e're from hence they did their Lodgings move,
Were careful to lay in a Stock above:
Those Death may wound, but never can destroy,
Their House of Weeping proves an House of Joy.
W. S.
Another on the Frontispiece.
See thou, frail Man, the Emblem of thy State?
The exact Idea of thy hasting Fate?
The Figure's drawn to the Life, yea every part
Is graced and decked with more than Zeuxian Art:
The first Scene shows when Man's laid out for dead,
When the sprightly Soul from the Body's gone and fled:
His mournful Friends no longer can endure
The lifeless Corpse, therefore they do immure
And shut it close up in a Sable Hearse,
As totally unfit for all Commerce:
Over which they shower such store of tears that they
Mourning, exhaust their Moisture and decay.
With sorrow wounded Hearts they sob and cry
Themselves to death, they take their turns to die
Because one's death from the other draws such grief,
As kills the Soul in spite of all relief:
Next is he brought on Shoulders of his friends
Along the Streets, where dismally attends
A Crowd of Mourners to the Church, where they
Are twice foretold, and warned they are but Clay:
First by the words of the Preacher, and then next
The Corpse though tacitly) repeats the Text:
But lo the End's more dismal than the rest,
Which brings the final Consummatum est:
Earth now is laid to Earth, and Dust to Dust,
Earth ope's its Mouth, the Coffin stop it must.
This is the Let of all, none can it flee:
Earth's not quite full, there is room yet left for thee.
Sic raptim Scripsit
AN ACROSTICK.
In the cold House of Mother Earth must lie
Our Mortal Bodies, Holy Souls will fly
Home to their God, their King, their Native Lands,
Not the weeping House, but the House not made with hands.
Death then, thou King of Terrors, do thy worst,
Unto Christ's chosen Ones his only Trust,
Now, now, thou raging Hector, it is too late,
To turn them out this House, this blessed state
Of Bliss: Therefore, thou Tyrant, I reply,
Now dolor's exiled, and a Weeping Eye.
S. S.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST Part OF THE Mourning-Ring.
THE Introduction to the House of Weeping, from p. 1. to p. 15. The house of
weeping, p. 15.
The Subjects Treated on under this General Head, are, viz.

Jesus wept, John 11. 35. Sermon 1. p. 15. Death* parts the dearest Friends, p.
30. The last sigh, p. 36. Man gives up the Ghost, and where is he? p. 44. He Is
carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom, p. 49. The Winding Sheet, p. 77. Tears
for a Dead-Husband, p. 99. The Dying Knell, p. 111. Put on Mourning Apparel, p.
117. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? p. 126. Bury my Dead out of
my sight, p. 146. The Funeral Procession, p. 150. The Worms shall feed sweetly
on him, p. 172. Prepare to follow, p. 174. Look upon every day as your last, p.
205. The Swan-like Note of a Dying Christian, 216. The Eye that has seen him
shall see him no more, p. 231. The Good Man's Epitaph, p. 235. Hopes of a Joyful
Resurrection, p. 244. The Yearly Mourner, p. 253. Weep not, she is not dead but
sleeps, p. 255. Goodnight, p. 262. Deathbed Thoughts, p. 81. The Fatal
Moment, p. 281. The Treatment of the Dead in order to their Burial, p. 284. The
Funeral Solemnity, p. 291. An Account of the Death and last Sayings of the most
Eminent Persons from the Crucifixion of our Blessed Savior down to this
present time: To which will be added (in the second part of the Mourning* Ring)
all the Remarkable Deaths omitted in the First Part.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Second Part OF THE Mounrnig-Ring.
Which said Book, is now going to the Press, to supply what was wanting in the
First Part, and to complete this Funeral Gift.

ADvice to those that are Diseased either in Body or Mind. The solemn Wishes*
of' a Person giving up the Ghost. The Death watch. The Sick-man's Passing Bell.
A Conference between the Mourners. The History of those that have died
suddenly, etc. Observations on the weekly Bills of Mortality. The Author's
Tears or Meditations on his own Sickness, Death and Funeral. The Danger of a
Deathbed Repentance. A walk among the Tombs; or, a Discourse of Funeral
Monuments, of the several Customs of Burials from Adam to this time of
Epitaphs, and other Funeral Honors. The Pilgrim's Guide from his Cradle to his
Grave. A Discourse of the Four last Things, composed chiefly of the Authors own
Experiences during his late Illness.
This Second Part will be Published in a few Weeks.
ERRATA:
IN Page 216. Of the House of Weeping, or Dying Christian, read The Swan-like
Note of a Dying Christian.

THE Introduction TO THE HOUSE OF Weeping.
Upon first hearing of the Death of a Neighbor, or of a House-weeping for the
loss of a Friend, think with thy self, and say,
HOW, is my Neighbor Dead? Then surely the Bell rings out, and tells me in
him, that I am Dead also. The Soul ^f my Neighbor is gone out; and as a Man
who ^ad a Lease of 1000 years after the expiration ^f a short one, or an
Inheritance after the Life ^f a Man, in a Consumption, he is now entered unto
the possession of his better Estate.

Time was his Race, but newly was begun,
Whose Glass is run.
He in the troubled Sea was heretofore,
Though now on Shore:
And it is not long before it will be said
Of me, as it is of him, alas! he is Dead.
His Soul is gone; whither? Who saw it come ^n, or who saw it go out? No body;
yet every body is sure, he had one, and has none.

If I will ask, not a few Men, but almost whole Bodies, whole Churches, What
becomes of the Souls of the Righteous, at the departing thereof from the Body?
I shall be told by some, That they attend an expiation, a purification in a
place of torment; by some, that they attend the fruition of the sight of God,
in a place of rest; but yet, but of expectation; by some, That they pass to a^
immediate possession of the presence of God. Saint* Augustine studied the
nature of the Soul, as much as any thing, but the salvation of the Soul; and he
sent an express Messenger to Saint Hierome, to consult of some things
concerning the Soul: But he satisfies himself with this: Let the departure of
my Soul to Salvation, be evident to my Faith, and I care the less, how dark the
entrance of my Soul into my Body be to my Reason. It is the going out, more
than the coming in, that concerns us. The Soul of my Neighbor, this Bell tell
me, is gone out; Whither? Who shall tell me that: I know not who it is; much
less what he was: The condition of the Man, and the course of his Life, which
should tell me whither he is gone, I know not. I was not there in his sickness,
nor at his death; I saw not his way, no^ his end, nor can ask them who did,
thereby t^ conclude or argue, whither he is gone. But yet I have one nearer me
than all these, mine own Charity I ask that, and that tells me, he is gone to
everlasting rest: I owe him a good opinion, it is but thankful Charity in me,
because I re^eived benefit and instruction from him when his ^^ll tolled: But
for his Body, How poor a wretched thing is that? We cannot express it ^ fast,
as it grows worse and worse. That Bo^y, which scarce three minutes since was
such a House, as that that Soul, which made but one ^tep from thence to Heaven,
was scarce through^y content, to leave that for Heaven. That Bo^y which had all
the parts built up, and knit ^y a lovely Soul, now is but a Statue of Clay; and
now these Limbs melted off, as if that Clay ^ere but Snow; and now, the whole
House is ^ut a handful of Sand, so much Dust, and but ^peck of Rubbidge, so
much Bone. If he, who ^ this Bell tells me, is gone now, were some ^xcellent
Artificer, who comes to him for a ^^ak, or for a Garment now? or for Counsel, ^
he were a Lawyer? if a Magistrate, ^or Ju^ce.

O my God, thou do certainly allow, that ^ should do Offices of Piety to the
dead, and that ^ should draw instructions to Piety, from the dead. ^ not this,
O my God, a holy kind of rai^g up seed to my dead brother, If I, by the
me^ation of his death, produce a better life in ^ self? It is the blessing upon
Reuben; Let Reu^ live, and not dye, and let not his men be few: ^ut. 33. 6. Let
him propagate many. And it is ^ malediction, That that dies,, let it dye,
Zechar. ^9. Let it do no good in dying, for Trees ^out fruit, thou by thy
Apostle call, Twice ^ Jud. 12. It is a second death, if none live the
better, by me, after my death, by the manner of my death. Therefore may I
justly think that thou made that a way to convey to the Egyptians, a fear of
thee, and a fear of death, that there was not a house, where there was not one
dead, Ex. 12. 30. For thereupon the Egyptians said, We are all dead men: The
death of others, should catechize us to death, Thy Son Christ Jesus is the
first. begotten of the dead, Apoc. 1. 5. He rises first, the eldest Brother,
and he is my Master in this science of death: But yet for me, I am a younger
brother too, to this man, who dyed now, and to every man whom I see, or hear to
die before me, and all they are ushers to me in this School of death* I take
therefore that which thy servant David's Wife said to him, to be said to me; If
thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shall be slain, ^ Sam. 16. 11.
If the death of this man work not upon me now, I shall die worse, than if thou
had not afforded me this help: For thou have sent him in this Bell to me, as
thou did send to the Angel of Sardis, with Commission to strengthen the
things that remain, and that are ready to die, Apoc. 3. 2. That in this
weakness of body, I might receive spiritual strength by these occasions. If I
mistake thy Voice herein, if I overrun thy pace and prevent thy Hand, and
imagine Death more instant upon me than thou have bid him be, ye the Voice
belongs to me? I am dead, I was b^^ dead, and from the first laying of these
mud-w^^^ in my conception, they have moldred away, and the whole Course of Life
is but an active death. Whether this voice instruct me, that I am a de^ Man
now, or remember me, that I have been dead Man all this while, I humbly thank
the O Lord, for speaking in this Voice to my So^

When Invited to the House of Weeping, Reflect and say,
DUty obliging me to perform the last Office of Love to my Friend; I will
surely ^^llow his Corpse to the Grave, that in such a Spectacle as in a Glass) I
may behold my own Mortality; or tho I always carry about me the Symptoms ^f
Mortality, and the marks of Death; yet have hitherto lived as if I should never
die. In ^mall Villages where Instances of Mortality are ^ery rare, there the
inward thoughts of their ^earts seem to be, that they and their Houses ^^all
continue for ever, and their dwelling pla^s to all Generations. In Populous
Towns and ^^ies, there the commonness takes away the ^^se of Mortality: And oh
how sad is it to be^old the unsuitable Carriage of the generality of ^hristians
at Funerals, those opportunities are sually spent in unprofitable Chat, in
Mirth, in ^ating and Drinking, and that sometimes to ^xcess, and thus the House
of Mourning is turned to the House of Mirth and Feasting. But Lord* ^ant that
this may not be my practice, when I ^me to the House of Mourning, where my
Friend ^w lies dead: Let my Eyes affect my Heart, ^at I may seriously mind the
present instance of Mortality, and be affected with such Meditati^s as these.

Lord, this Tragedy that is now acting on my de^sed friend, must ere long (God
knows how soon) ^ acted on me, my Breath is ready to perish, ^e Earth is gaping
for me; yet a little while ^d I shall be carried down into the Chambers Death.
Lord, teach me so to number my days, that I (...) Heart unto true Wisdom*

As thou art walking along to the House of Weeping, seriously meditate on Ruth
1. Ver. 17.
WHere thou dyest, will I dye, and there I will be buried; the Lord do so to
me, and more also, if ought but Death part thee and me.

Where thou dyest will I dye.

Here Ruth supposes two things, 1. That she and her Mother in Law should both
dye; It is appointed once to dye. 2dly. That Naomi as the eldest should die
first: For according to the Ordinary custom of Nature, it is the most probable
and likely, that those that are most stricken in years, should first depart
this life. Yet I know not whether the Rule or Exceptions be more general; and
therefore let both Young and Old prepare for Death, the first may die soon, but
the second cannot live long.

And there will I be buried.

Where she supposed two things more; first, That those that survived her, would
do her that favor to bury her, which is a common courtesy not to be denied to
any: It was an Epitaph written upon the Grave of a Beggar, N^d^s eram vivus,
mortuus ecce tegor. 2dly. She supposes they would bury her, according to her
instructions, near to her Mother Naomi.

Observation.

As it is good to enjoy the company of the Godly while they are living, so it
is not amiss, if it will stand with convenience to be buried with them after
death: The old prophets bones escaped a burning by being buried with the other
Prophets, and the Man who was tumbled into the grave of Elish^* was revived by
the virtue of his Bones. And we ^ead in the Acts and Monuments, That the body
of Peter Martyr's wife was was buried in a dunghill, but afterward being taken
up in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, it was honorably buried in Oxford, in the
grave of one Frideswick, a Popish-she-Saint; to this end, that if Popery, which
God forbid, should overspread our Kingdom again, and if the Papists should go
about to untomb Peter Martyrs Wifes Bones, they should be puzzled to
distinguish betwixt the Woman's body and the Relics of that their Saint, so
good it is sometimes to be buried with those whom some do account pious; though
perchance in very deed they be not so.

The Lord do so to me and more also.

To ascertain Naomi of the seriousness of her intentions herein, Ruth backs
what formerly she had said, with an Oath, lined with an execration.

If ought but Death.

See here the large extent of a Saints love, it lasts till Death, and no
wonder, for it is not founded upon Honor, Beauty, wealth, or any other
sinister respect in the party beloved, which is subject to Age or Mutability,
but only on the Grace and Piety in him; which Foundation, because it always
lasts, the love which is built upon it, is also perpetual.

Part thee and me.

Death is that which parts one Friend from another; Then the dear Father must
part with his dutiful Child, then the dutiful Child must forget his Dear
Father, then the kind Husband must leave his constant Wife, then the constant
Wife most lose her kind Husband, then the careful Master must be sundred from
his industrious Servant, then the industrious Servant must be sundred from his
careful Master. Yet this may be some comfort to those, whose Friends death has
taken away; that as our Disciples, Yet a little while, and you shall not see
me; and yet a little while, and you shall see me again: So yet a little while,
and we shall not see our Friends; and yet a little while, and we shall see them
again in the Kingdom of Heaven, for not mittuntur, sed praemittuntur, we do not
forego them, but they go before us.

When thou art entered into the House of Weeping, fall down on thy knees, and
say,
OH Lord our God, in thee, and by thee we live, move, and have our Being: As
thou did at the first breath into Man the Breath of Life, and he became a
living Soul; so when thou shall be pleased to command that Breath again out of
Man's Body, then will he presently become a dead Carcass; and so short is the
Life of Man, that many times he does but cry and Die; yea, sometimes his
Mothers Womb does prove his Tomb, so that he does not once cry to tell the
World that he did once Live.

Neither is the Thread of Man's Life at any time spun so strong, but at one word
of thy Mouth it is soon snapt in two: Seeing therefore we do but Live to Die,
we beseech thee (Oh blessed God) let us Die to Live; let us live well, that so
we may die well; let Death never surprise us unlooked for, or unprepared; nor
let it ever seize upon us in an unconverted unregenerate State.

Good Lord, let us not so live as to be ashamed to live any longer, or to be
afraid to look grim Death in the Face, when it comes to separate our Souls from
our Bodies, and to summon them to make their appearance before the great Judge
of the Quick and Dead. Let us with thy Servant Job wait all our appointed time,
until our Change does come: Seeing it will be our greatest Wisdom to wait for
Death, which always waits for us, and to expect that at all times, which will
come at some time. and may come at any time.

Let us Pray, and Preach, and Hear, and so spend our time, as those who know
and consider that all they do, they do it for Eterninity, and we shall never
have but one Cast for Eternity: Heaven and Glory is here to be won or lost for
ever.

Blessed God, thou have taught us in thy Word, that it is better to go to the
House of Weeping, than to the House of ^easting; for that is the end of all
men, (and thou have said, That the Living will lay it to heart:) Oh Lord, we
are this day come to the House of Mourning and Weeping, and we have seen the
end of one, yea, of many of our Friends and Acquaintance, within a short space
of time (and in the Death of our Friends, we may read our own Death) and yet
shall not we who are lest behind them in the Land of the Living, lay these
awakening instances of Mortality to heart? shall we hear and see daily our
nearest and dearest Relations giving up the Ghost, and departing out of this
into another World; and yet shall we once think that we shall ever live to
enjoy the Pleasures of this present evil World? But seeing, Lord, this World is
a dying World, and all its glory is a dying Glory; let our Minds and Hearts
therefore be set upon the Glory of Heaven, which is a never fading Glory: Oh!
did we believe and consider how much better ^ Believers future Estate will be,
than his present State is, then should we think that Tim^ is too long before we
do, and that Etern^^ will be too short when we shall enjoy our gracious
Redeemer upon his Throne of Glory Let us ever live as those that have one Foot
in the Grave already. Thousands and Millions, yea innumerable Millions of
Thousands are gone to their Graves before us, and do we think, tha^ we that are
but enlivened Dust, animated Shadows, dying Lumps of Clay, can keep our Bodies
from being a Feast for Worms, or ou^ Souls from seeking new Lodgings in another
World? Oh! let us therefore every day ^^ looking into our Graves, and
familiarize Death unto our Thoughts, before it comes; let us consider how many
signal Admonitions tho^ do daily give us of our approaching end; I^ not every
Distemper and Sickness of Body as it were a little Death, and a fair Warning to
put us in mind of our last Change? The Gray Hairs which are here and there upon
our Heads, the deep wrinkles which are engraven upon our Foreheads, the loss of
Teeth, the Dimness o^ Sight, our Deafness in Hearing, our Palsy* hands our
feeble trembling Limbs, and the frequen^ Sight of seeing Friends laid out in
their Winding Sheets for Dead, and carried to their Houses o^ Clay, the silent
Grave, are Circumstances an^ Symptoms serving to remind us, that the time draws
near wherein we must die, and that our departure is at hand: Let us therefore
live as dying Men, and let us die as Living Christians; let us set our House
and our Heart in order, remembering the Text, It is appointed for all Men once
to Die, but after this the Judgment.

The Mourners being all come, first sing the following Psalms, and after that,
Read part of 1 Cor. Chap. 15. to bring your minds into a serious frame.

Psalm 39.
I Said, I will look to my ways,
for fear I should go wrong:

offend not with my Tongue.

my mouth with fource and might,
Not once to whisper all the while
the wicked are in ^ight.

but kept me close and still:
Yea, from good talk I did refrain,
but sore against my will.

with musing thought and doubt;
Which did increase and stir the fire:
at last these Words burst out;

which yet I have not past;
So that I may be certify'd
how long my Life shall last.

in length much like a Span:
Mine age is nothing unto thee,
so vain is every Man.

in vain himself annoy,
In getting goods, and cannot tell
who shall the same enjoy.

what help do I desire?
Of truth my help does hang on thee,
I nothing else require.
The Second Part.

Lord quit me out of hand:
And make me not a scorn to Fools
that nothing understand.

no trouble might me move.
Because I knew it was thy work,
my patience for to prove.

I can them not withstand:
I faint and pine away for fear
of thy most heavy hand.

he waxes woe and wan,
As does a Cloth that Moths have fret,
so vain a thing is Man.

regard my Tears that fall:
I sojourn like a stranger here,
as did my Fathers all.

my strength for to restore:
Before I go away from hence,
and shall be seen no more.
Psalm 90. Ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11.
THou grindest Man through grief and Pain,
to dust, or clay, and then,
And then thou say again Return,
again, ye sons of Men.

what is it in thy sight?
As yesterday it does appear,
or as a watch by night.

then is their Life and Trade
All as a sleep, and like the grass,
whose beauty soon does fade.

but fades by and by:
And is cut down ere it be night,
all withered, dead, and dry.

that we do live on mold:
If one see fourscore, surely then
we count him wondrous old.

the which we count upon,
Is nothing else but painful grief,
and we as blasts are gone.
1 Cor. 15. Ver. 19, 20, 21, 22, 26, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55.
IF in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all Men most miserable.
But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that
slept. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. The
lost enemy that shall be destroyed, is death. Now this I say, brethren, that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; neither does corruption
inherit incorruption. Bihold, I show you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but
we shall all be changed, In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump (for the trumpet shall sound) and the dead shall be raised incorruptible,
and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible shall have put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in Victory? O
death where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy Victory?

THE HOUSE OF Weeping.
Sermon I. John 11. 35. Jesus Wept.
WE may learn from the Example of Our blessed Savior how we are to behave our
selves; what we are to do in the Sickness and Death of Friends.

In this World we are all Bennonies, the Sons of Sorrow: The way to Heaven is
by Weeping Cross: The Calendar tells us, we come not to Ascension Day, till the
Passion Week be past.

It is the great work of a Preacher to consider the state of the people to whom
he preaches, so to prepare his work before hand, as that he may hit the mark,
The Preacher sought out acceptable words; now generally those words are most
acceptable to, and best received by the hearers that are suited to their
present condition. I considering therefore the secret hand of God upon this
Congregation, in taking away an eminent Servant of Christ, thought it incumbent
upon me to speak something at this time that might be suitable to the present
dispensation of of God toward you, and in meditations this Scripture was cast
in.

Jesus Wept.

The occasion of this text is known unto you; in the beginning of this Chapter
you read that Lazarus was sick, and the news thereof immediately sent to Jesus;
who notwithstanding he dearly loved him, yet (as the sequel of the story
acquaints you) he does not presently go up to Bethany to visit sick Lazarus*
but makes a stay for several days; the reason whereof is at hand, viz. That a
sentence of death might pass upon beloved Lazarus, and he be laid in the grave,
and a stone rouled upon him; and all this in order to the manifestation of the
glory and power of Christ in his resurrection.

After Lazarus had been in the grave four days, Christ he comes up to Bethany,
and the sisters of Lazarus, viz. Martha and Mary, they come out to meet Jesus;
first Martha she comes, ver. 20. and she says, Lord If thou had been here,
my brother had not died, ver. 21. After this comes Mary, ver^. 32 and she falls
down at Christ's feet, saying, Lord If thou had been here, my brother, had not
died. When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews a so weeping which
came with her* he groaned in the Spirit. and was troubled, and said, where have
ye laid him? They say unto him, Lord, come and see.

Jesus wept.

There is very much wrapped up in the bowels of this little Text: Here we may
take notice of the humanity of Christ; it appears by Christ's weeping that he is
perfect man, as well as perfect God: That Christ wept, is to be referred, not
to his Divinity, but to his Humanity; and so we shall find that Christ was
subject as to this, so to all natural infirmities; as hunger, thirst weariness,
etc. which may comfort the Saints that groan under natural, as well as sinful
infirmities; and that from the reason why Christ was made in all things like
unto his brethren; namely, That he might be a merciful High Priest, Hebr. 2.
17, 18. And though Christ be now in glory, yet he is touched with the feeling
of the infirmities of his people here on earth, Hebr. 4. 15. so touched, as
that he cannot but have compassion on them under all their pressures and
grievances whatsoever.

Do thou then groan under natural weaknesses and infirmities? Go boldly to
the Throne of grace, and Christ will enable thee to bear up under these
weaknesses, until mortality shall have put on immortality.

The Subject Matter of this Chapter is Lazarus redivivus; it is a Relation of
the miraculous raising up of Lazarus from the Dead.

From verse. 1, 3. we may observe thus much, that a Believers interest in the
distingnishing love of Christ, does not exempt him from outward Troubles or
bodily Distempers: He whom thou love is sick.

From verse. 4. We may observe thus much, that the darkest Difpensations of
Providence, they oftentimes usher in the brightest manifestations of God to the
Soul, or Gods Glory is most manifested in the Creatures Weakness.

From Verse. 6. We may take notice, it was ever in Christ's intention to
manifest his Love and Goodness to Lazarus, and yet he comes not near him for
the present, but rather goes away and leaves him upon his sick Bed, and suffers
him at last to give up the Ghost.

From Verse. 14. We may observe, that Christ his absence or the suspension of
divine Grace and Love, they are in infinite Wisdom ordered for the further
advancing of Soul Comfort. Had not Lazarus been sick, had he not been dead and
buried, the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of Christ had never been so eminently
discovered as it was toward him.

Martha and Mary cry out, v. 21, 32. Lord, if thou had been here our Brother
had not died; It is true, Christ might have recovered Lazarus upon his
sickbed; but to fetch him out of the Grave after he had lain stinking four
days, was a higher demonstration of his Love, Wisdom, and Power. There is not
the like ground that Christ should show forth his miraculous Power, in raising
up our dead Friends from the Grave, as was then; yet this special and useful
conclusion may by way of Analogy, be deduced from this instance; namely,

That such Comforts and Mercies as are fetched out of the Grave, as have had a
sentence of Death passed upon them, they are ever sweetest, and tend most to
Gods Glory. Isaac had never been so precious to his Father Abraham, had he not
been so miraculously restored from dying, as he was once.

But we shall hasten to see what is the cause of Christ his weeping, and what
the cause was, you may see, ver. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36* when Christ saw Mary come
weeping toward him, having her heart running over with Grief, for the
departure of her Brother, Christ groaned in Spirit, and was troubled; when they
told him where dead Lazarus lay, he wept (as my Text expresses.)

Jesus Wept.

Oh Men and Angels, stand and wonder to all Eternity! When you read these two
words, Jesus wept. What, does Mary's weeping set Jesus Christ a weeping? Does
Mary and Martha shed Tears for the Death of Lazarus, and does Christ his Heart
even bleed within him to see them troubled and mourning upon the same account*
so the word in the Greek seems to import, (...), he troubled himself; his own
heart stirred up his Affections to be troubled. Does Christ weep upon the
consideration of Lazarus Death? Then hence we may learn, that a moderate
sorrowing for Friends departed is lawful, tho excessive Sorrow is very
unsuitable to a Gospel Frame of Spirit. Solomon tells us, There is a time for
Weeping, and Paul tells us, We should weep as though we wept not.

But to come to the thing I chiefly intend, and that is the occasion of Christ's
weeping, which was the death of Lazarus, a good man: whence I shall observe and
prosecute this Doctrine:

That it is a Christ-like temper of mind, to be deeply affected with, and to
weep over the death of such as are truly pious.

Here Is Lazarus a good man in his grave, and Christ he weeps over him: you have
a weeping Christ over a dead Lazarus.

When old Jacob an eminent person was buried, it is said Genesis 50. 10. That they
mourned with a great and sore lamentation, and that for 7 days together. And so
when Moses died, and was buried by a secret hand, it is said the Children of
Israel mourned for him 30 days, Deuteronomy. 34. 8.

My dearly beloved, you have lost a Moses, one that was valiant for God in
former times, when the people of God in England were coming out of Egypt, and
he has been an eminent leader to the saints in their wilderness state, and God
did often take him to the top of Pisgah, and gave him there glorious visions,
and that not only of heavenly Canaan, but also of that glorious land of rest
and righteousness that the Saints shall enjoy in this world. Now that such a
Moses should be taken off in the Wilderness, while the people of God are yet
short of this good Land, is matter of great humiliation.

Likewise you find the same spirit in those Christians, Acts 20. that Paul (the
great Apostle of the Gentiles) did there take his farewell of, saying, ver. 25.
And now behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the
Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. It Is said, 37, 38 verses, And they
all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him: Sorrowing most of all
for the words which he spoke [that they should see his face no more.]

Now by all this it appears, that it is both the duty and property of a
Christian ( such an one as has been baptized into the spirit of Jesus) to be
deeply affected with, and weep over, the death of such as are truly pious,
especially when they are eminent for use and service to Christ, and his people.

We shall now give you the reasons why it is so, and cannot be otherwise, but
that gracious persons must needs weep over the death of good men.

First, Because every stroke in this kind, puts a serious heart in mind of its
own mortality, tells us that we are dying creatures, and that is a very serious
consideration to every awakened soul. The living, the living will lay it to
heart, says Solomon, Eccl. 7. 2. Alas my Brethren it is a serious thing to dye.
And the stroke of death upon others, tells us that die we must, and how soon we
know not: This Evening sun may see us dead, it went out Early this morning to
score us out this lodging of a Tomb. And oh happy, thrice happy is that person
that can die well. Now such strokes as these put a serious soul in mi^d of
dying. There Is none present knows who may go to the grave next. That Is the
First; but then,

2. It Springs from that Sympathy that is both in nature, and grace: first in
nature, when God takes away a husband, a Father, a Child, etc. this cuts deep,
and affects much. Abraham he mourns over beloved Sarah; David over Absolon,
though a rebellions son. To be stupid, and not to mind the hand of God when he
smites our near and dear relations, does declare, that we do not only want
grace, but natural affection; And then in Grace there is also a great sympathy:
if God smites one member of the Church, the rest are affected with it: If a
Paul, a Minister of Christ, ^^p^stor, a spiritual Father, comes to take his
farewell of his people, and tell them that they shall never see his face more;
Oh What weeping, and mourning, and lamenting is there at his departure.

3. The perishing of good men is a just cause of weeping, and that because they
are a great blessing to the nations, cities, families, etc. where they are
cast. It fares either the better, or the worse with such places for their sake.
When God destroyed the old world, the family of Noah was saved for Noah's sake,
Genesis 7.

Prosane wretches are ready to wish the people of God all out of the world; but
alas! what would then these wretches do? they are beholding to the saints for
their very beings, and for the continuance of all their mercies.

When God has but once gathered in his elect, and done his work in Zion, he
will soon pull the world about these men's ears: If the righteous be taken away,
he is taken away from the evil to come, (Isa 57. 1.) Woe to Sodom, if Lot
depart; and so I may say, Woe to England, if the righteous should be taken away;
Woe to Graffham whenever thou ceasest to be a refuge to the saints, whenever thy
gates shall be shut against the ministers and people of the Lord Jesus.

The Children of Israel, though they slighted and despised the Prophets, would
in time of distress come to them for Prayer, 1 Samuel 7. 8, 9. and 12, 19. Yea,
Pharaoh, as proud, and as high as he was, yet when the Plague was upon him,
Moses he must be sent for, and be entreated to pray for him, and his people.

And thus much for the Reasons of the Doctrine, showing why the People of God
must needs be affected with, and Weep over the Death of Religious Persons.

We shall now proceed to Application.

And first it affords matter of information; as First, if it be a Christ-like
Frame to Weep over the Death of such as are t^ informs us, how unlike to Christ
su^ though they plead for Christian Bur^ attend Funeral Solemnities with a
vain, (...) ungodly Spirit, and Carriage, making t^ of Weeping a House of
Laughter, and filling (...) selves with Wine (wherein is e^c^ss) until (...)
become more like beasts than m^n, which is a practice too common at Funerals.

You may soon judge how sit such persons are to attend upon a Funeral Sermon;
but indeed I am apt to think, Funeral Sermons have generally been rather for
Ostentation, and Vain Glory, than for Profit.

Hereby is likewise condemned that heathenish practice of Ringing of Bells, so
soon as ever Funeral Solemnities are performed.

How unsuitable is it, that so soon as ever the Husband, or Wife, or a godly
Friend is laid in the Earth, to set the Bells a Ringing, which imports matter
of joy rather than of sorrow?

2. If it be a Christ-like-Frame of Spirit, to weep over the Deaths of good
men, it informs us how unlike to Christ that Spirit is, whereby men do censure,
and reproach good men when taken away by Death.

And I do the rather mention this, because some have taken the boldness to
judge and censure this Eminent Servant of Christ now in Glory, and to speak
very unworthily concerning him, since his Death.

How unlike to Christ is this Spirit? Thou that should be judging and
condemning thy self for Non-improvement of so great a mercy, art judging this
Eminent servant of Christ now dead. The Liturgy of the Church of England will
teach thee better; for let persons be never so vile ^s, yet when they come to
be laid ^ave, then they are dear Brethren and (...)

^ore away with this Spirit, to Hell with (...) from thence it came. Let it
suffice, (...) this glorified Saint suffered much in this and while he was
living: I am apt to think the Heats and Passions, and rash Censures of
Professors, has made him ^ft go home with a sad Heart, and cost him many a
Tear in private: Suffer him to be quiet in his Crave; let this his suffering
suffice, let not his name suffer now he is dead; suffer him to be quiet in his
Grave; leave his judgment to the Lord, and let it be your Work to improve those
many Sermons that he has in the fear of his God preach`d unto you.

2. Who made thee Lord over thy Brothers Conscience? Must all professors be
condemned by thee, because they cannot see with thy eyes, and tread in thy
steps? By what authority do thou impose thy particular light and persuasion
upon thy brother; and that so, as almost to un-saint him? This imposing spirit
is an Antichristian spirit evermore.

The next use may be of Exhortation. Is it so, that it is a Christ-like Frame
of Spirit to be deeply affected with, and to weep over the death of such as are
truly pious? Then it concerns us seriously to consider the Providence of God
this way, and that more generally and more particularly. First, more generally,
God has lately made sad breaches upon many of the Families of his precious
Servants; many a flourishing Family has mouldred away in a little time: And
God has lately taken away many very famous Instruments, both Ministers and
others; so that we have cause to cry out with the Psalmist, Psalm. 12 1. Help
Lord, for the Godly Man cease; for the faithful fail from among the Children
of Men.

But Secondly, and more particularly, I would beg you of this Congregation to
consider the present stroke of God upon you, in taking away your worthy Pastor;
his Death justly calls for weeping and Tears; if you consider,

First, That he was one that had love for all Saints: he had room in his heart
for every soul that he did judge to be received into the heart of Christ: he
held communion with the Saints, not upon the account of this or that form, or
name, but upon the account of union with the Lord Jesus: he loved no man upon
the account of opinion, but upon the account of union with Christ, and this he
has declared many a time in this Congregation. There was hardly a member that
he did in the name of Christ and the Church give the right hand of fellowship
unto, but he did acquaint them with this his principle; told them that Union
with Christ was the ground of Communion among the Saints; and the reason of
their admission was not their being of this or that opinion, but for that they
were judged persons interested in Christ, and such who (by virtue of Christ's
purchase) were heirs of that glory above that must receive all Saints ( not as
Church of England men, Presbyterians, Independants, or Anabaptists, etc. but as
Saints, into its everlasting habitations.

Secondly, His Death justly calls for your Weeping and Tears, for that you have
lost a Pastor, who had great light in the Covenant of Grace, he preached that
Doctrine with the greatest alacrity, and raisedness of spirit imaginable. In
the handling of other subjects he was more straightened and discomposed; but
when he came to speak of the unsearchable riches of the Grace of Christ, he was
as an Angel of God, lifted up above himself: he had a flood of words, and yet
seemed to want words to express what he did know, and what he did enjoy of
divine grace and favor. This being true must needs be great.

To lose a pure Gospel Preacher is a great loss: Eternity depends upon a right
understanding of the great Doctrine of Justification by Christ. Eternity
depends not upon being baptized once or twice, upon this or the other Form; we
may be guilty of mistakes about the circumstances of worship, and yet be happy;
but if we mistake about the great matter of our Justification by Christ, we are
lost for ever.

Thirdly, His Death justly calls for Weeping, for as much as we have all lost
the Conversation of one who was an Experimental Christian, one that had much
communion with God, and much experience of his goodness, as you have heard him
often express: Many a Preacher dishes out largely to others, of that which he
tastes but little himself. I am apt to think, many a faithful Minister of
Christ lives but low, in comparison to what this blessed Saint enjoyed. By this
his Experience, he was enabled to speak a word in due season to the weary Soul.

He walked close with God in his Family; he was not a Saint abroad, and a Devil
at home; but made it appear that he was really good, by this, that he was
relatively good, good in his Relations; a good Husband, a good Father, etc.

He sat loose from this World; he made not gain his godliness; he did not
design to make Merchandise of Christ and the Gospel.

His discourse was mostly heavenly, and Spiritual: If other discourse was in
hand, he was but dull Company, he had little to say: but if the Conference were
Heavenly, he was as upon the Wing, as a fish in the Water, and a Bird in the
Air, etc. He would often say, with pious Dod, come, enough of the World, now
let us talk of Heaven.

If it be here objected, that he was in his younger years of a vain and slight
conversation; I answer,

First, Divine Love rides in greatest triumph, when it has the greatest
sinners following it as it is Captives.

Secondly, Some in the Church of Corinth that ^id heartily close with Christ,
were before their Conversion very Vile and Wicked, see 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, ^1.
Such were some of you, but ye are washed, etc. But,

Thirdly, This blessed Saint would to his dying ^^y, acknowledge his former
vanity, to his own ^ame, and the lifting up of the Riches of free grace; ^^d
mind what the Apostle says, 1 John 1. 9. If we ^nfess our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us from all un^^ghteousness.

I shall now close up all with a word or two ^ way of Caution; and that

First, Though this stroke of God be just matter ^ weeping and sorrow, yet you
must take heed a murmuring Spirit: You have cause to be ^leased with your
selves, and your sins, but ^^ with God, because God takes away nothing but ^at
he first gave. The Person and gifts of this ^^^t, were given unto you by the
Lord; he ^^^h taken nothing but his own. Learn there^^ to say with Job Chap. 1.
21. The Lord gave, ^ the Lord h^th taken away; blessed be the name ^he Lord.

Secondly, Though you are to weep under this stroke, yet take heed of mourning
as those without hope; without hope, I say, ^^. With respect to him; his
happiness is unquestionable: Your loss is his gain. He is taken up into glory,
and has there communion with God. He is now where God is served, adored and
glorified with one heart, and with one consent.

Secondly, Weep not without Hope with respect to your selves, as if God were
not able to make up this loss. I remember a Relation of a Lady, from whom it
pleased God to take an only Son, that sometime after a Friend coming to visit
her, and bemoaning this her sad loss, she breaks forth into these expressions,
[I profess ( says she) God can never make me amends for the taking away of
that Son] A dreadful speech it was; take heed (my friends) of this Spirit. It Is
true, your loss is great, but God is able to supply it; and that either,

First, By causing the Spirit of Elijah to fall upon Elisha, by anointing and
raising up of some other to head and feed you in the room of this his Servant.
Or 2dly. He can feed you himself without a Minister: God can fill up the room
of Ministry and Ordinances. Indeed let God be absent, and there is nothing can
fill up his Room. It Is not Husband, Wife, Children, Estate, Liberty, Pastors,
Ordinances, etc. can supply the want o^ God: But now let God be present, and
that i^ above, and more than all.

Lastly, Such strokes should teach us all to provide for death. God takes away
our Leaders, and we must follow them: Those that would not follow the Counsel
and advice of this pious Divine, while living, must follow him to the Grave now
dead; to the Grave we must all go, and the Lord knows how soon: Of what import
therefore is it, that we all manage matters so while we live, as that when we
come to die we may die in peace, and in full assurance of Eternal Life? Our
present Time, is but a dressing Room for Eternity; let us therefore perform
every thing with this Proviso, That I may die well. I am so to buy, sell, and
converse with Creatures, that I may die well. I am so to hear, pray, read,
receive the Sacrament, have Communion with the Saints, as that I may die well,
die in peace; all is to be done in order to dying well.

Such, Death may wound, but never can destroy,
Their House of weeping proves an House of joy.
Death parts the dearest Friends.
WHen a man goes to his Long Home, all the pleasure in his Society is dead with
him; nothing remains of it, but the remembrance, which serves only to
aggravate, and heighten the Grief of the Surviver. 'Twas a true saying of one
-- ^ura secunda bonus socius: A good companion is as a prosperous Gale,
carrying a Man pleasantly, and with comfort, through the Tempestuous Sea of
this World. And again -- Bonum sodalitium optimum solatium. Good Company is the
best solace: Indeed, suitable Society is the comfort of Life, the improvement
of Parts, the joy of the Intellect, the only distinguishing Privilege that
gives the Preference to Men above Beasts. Take away this, and what happiness is
it to be a Man, or what is humane Life any thing to be accounted of. But when
Man is dead, there can be no more delight in him, or comfort received by
Society with him. There is no converse in the shades below, no interlocution in
those gloomy Regions. The Grave is a silent House, where the Eyes of all the
Inhabitants are closed in the Dust, and their Mouths filled with cold Clay. And
therefore this should cause Mourning in the Streets, when we see a man going to
his Long Home, especially if he was a Friend or Relation, because we shall
never have the opportunity of enjoying any pleasant hours with him more. We
must then bid farewell to all discoursing upon any Subject, to all advising
about any difficulties, to all profiting by any Polemick Notions started and
improved in an amicable way. In a word, we must bid an eternal Adie^ to any
pleasure or satisfaction we received in communing with him, for we shall enjoy
no more of it for ever. Oh! surely this cannot but cut deep in a generous Soul;
this cannot but greatly wound a spirit, whose thoughts are drained from the
dross of Plebeian Conversation, that has any esteem at all for the advantages
of a rational Life. Upon this account it was, that the old Prophet in Bethel,
lamented over the man of God which came from Judah, who was slain by a Lion, as
he rode upon an Ass in the Highway. He bitterly bewailed, and mourned for his
Death, crying out, -- Alas my Brother! As if he had said, I have been extremely
refreshed by thy company, in hearing the Word of the Lord from thy mouth,
concerning the destruction of the Priests that burn Incense upon the Altar, and
the pulling down the House of Jeroboam. Oh! How have I been strengthened in my
Courage, confirmed in my Faith, and the more resolved in the Ways of God, by
this thy Prophecy. But now thou art gone, I shall never have any more of this
profitable and spiritual Discourse with thee. This made him weep over his torn
Carcass, and bitterly lament his untimely Fall, and to give a solemn Charge to
his Sons, that when he was dead, they should bury him in the Sepulcher wherein
this man of God was buried, and lay his Bones close by the Bones of this
Prophet.

When Death parts us from a Friend, we shall never see him more: he vanishes
(as it were) out of our sight, and we are never more to behold him, or cast our
Eyes upon him. He is both actively and passively in an invisible State. So Job
mournfully speaks of himself, chap. 7. ver. 7, 8. Oh! remember that my life is
wind, my eyes shall no more ^^e good. The Eye of him that has seen me, shall
see me no more; thy Eyes are upon me, and I am not. What more cutting
Expression, what more sadning Inculcation, what more provoking Incitation to
Monrning, can there be, than the Sense of this; that we shall behold the Face
of our beloved Friend (after his departure from us) no more! Were Man to
Return, though after never so many Years absence from his home, or continuance
in the Grave: Were he to visit his habitation again, and become the objective
delight of his poor Mourning Friends and Relations, it might be some
alleviation to their Grief, when he takes his journey to his Long home. But Oh!
What a prick to the heart, what a stab to the Soul, what a deadning to the
Spirits, what an inundation of Sorrow, (like the opening of Pandora's Box) is
this lamentable Thought to an ingenuous Man, that he must never, never, never
more behold the Face of this or that Relation in this Region of Mortality; nor
have any converse with him on this side the Bank of Eternity! What Husband can
think so of his Wife, and not melt? what Wife can have such a thought of her
Husband, and not faint? what Parent can consider this, with respect to his
Child, and not mourn? what Child can reflect upon the impossibility of ever
seeing his Father or Mother more, and not be overwhelmed with grief? In a word,
What Friend or Relation can ponder on such an eternal Farewell, as is then
given, and not be dissolved into Tears. It is the opinion of Divines, That the
chiefest of Saints happiness, consists in Vision, or in the use of the visive
faculty, which will then be enlarged and made glorious to perfection; for they
shall see the Face of God in Righteousness, and be satisfied with his likeness;
they shall be for ever with open Face, beholding (as in a Glass) the Glory of
the Lord, and be changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord. Sure I am, the Saints greatest comfort in this World,
consists in Vision, or beholding God's Image in his People; and that not only
the work of his Power in their comely Features, but the work of his Grace in the
divine Characters of Wisdom, engraven in their Souls and immediately reflected
upon in all their Actions. Therefore it cannot but cause Mourning, when such
delightful Objects are removed out of sight, and never more to be beheld.

And so much the more still, if consider the great change and alteration Death
makes in the place of the Deceased; the great Vacuum there is, when Man is
removed, and carried away to his Long home: Concerning which, Job excellently
speaks, chap. 7. v. 9, 10, 11. As the cloud is consumed, and vanishes away: so
he that goes down to the Grave, shall come up no more. He shall return no more
to his house, neither shall his place know him any more. Therefore I will not
resrain my Mouth, I Will speak in the anguish of my Spirit I will complain in
the bitterness of my Soul. Oh! It is very sad to consider what a great change
one stroke of Death may make. A Wife Husbandless, poor Children Fatherless,
Servants Masterless, and many Friends Comfortless: And so great is the
alteration in the Family, that the whole House resents it; and seems silently
to Mourn for it. There is (as it were) a Face of sadness in every place he was
wont to be conversant in: Look in his Parlour, where he used to sit with his
Wife, and Children about him, and there is nothing but a profound silence; his
voice is not to be heard: Look at his Table, where he used to sit with
cheerfulness, eating his Bread with joy among his Relations, and the dull
demeanor, and sorrowful posture of all the assessors, do plainly, yet dolefully
speak, Behold, he is not here: Look in his Shop, where he used to be about his
occasions; and the disorder and confusion there proclaims aloud his being gone,
and not to be heard of: In a word, Look in every place where he used to be, and
you will find one mourning circumstance or other, a legible Historian of his
departure, and being no more among them. So that, if you seek him, you will not
find him; if you ask for him, you will hear no news. Now surely, methinks, the
very miss of a Man in his Family, the want of him in his place, the great
change immediately following his Departure in his Relations and in all his
affairs and Concerns, should be cause enough to enforce a Mourning from his
Survivors, if there were no other consideration, and cause 'em to prepare for
their own Deaths. For,

How many have we known that were of as healthful and vigorous a Constitution
as we are, that by a Surfeit, or an acute Fever, have in a few days been
snatched away? How many that were traveling on the same Road with us a while
ago, are now at their long Home, lying in the Grave; and should not we by their
early departure, learn to die? It would not be tedious to us in this sense, to
live in Golgotha, or to dwell among the Tombs, when we have in them seen the
End of all Men, Eccles. 7. 2. We should not any more love the World, nor its
Enjoyments and Pleasures, seeing they will vanish in the twinkling of an Eye;
and after all the poor satisfaction they have given us, fall into the dead Sea.
The Passing-Bells of others loudly tell us, that Man in his best Estate is
altogether Vanity, Psalm. 39. 5. And what they have undergone, will in a few
days or hours more, be our own Lot. Though they are gone before, we must tread
in their steps, and go the same way. When that hour is come, all our Friends
and Acquaintance cannot hold us; for we that now hear, and move, and speak,
shall fly away into a vast Expanse, and not behold Man with the Inhabitants of
this World any more, Isa. 38. 11. As we have seen the pale Looks, and have
heard the last Voice of others, so shall we our selves in the like manner be
made Spectacles of Mortality to those that remain after us. We, and all our
Companions, must take a long Farewell of each other, and not meet again till the
day of the general Resurrection. And is it too soon to remember our Creator,
when we have seen many as Young as we are, breathe their last? And we that now
mourn for others, know not how soon our Friends may do the same for us, and
celebrate our Funerals. When God took away many others, that we knew he might
at the same time, or before, have taken away you or me; and why do we survive
their Death, but that we may set our House in Order? The time is coming, when
Riches and Honor, Health and Beauty, Credit and Reputation among men, will be
of no value, nor will Gold and Silver, the Idols of this, be current in the
next World. We should not therefore be like those young people that are only
serious in the House of Mourning, or when they see their Friends carried to the
Grave, but i^ the next vain Company suffer the Impressions of their Mortality
to wear off again. We must be always sober in our Conversation, as not knowing
when we our selves shall be gone; only this we may know that as the Years we
have already lived are soon past, so will those that are to come with the same
swift motion pass away. The longest Life here on Earth is but as a moment, if
compared with the future Eternity: It Is as a flash of Lightning to the whole
Element of Fire, just seen, and then vanished.

The Last Sigh.
MY dearest Children, ye whom I love in the tender and yerning Bowels of
Affection; draw near, and attend to the words of your dying Mother, who am now
sighing out my last breath: A weak Woman ye see I am; but yet sinful I am,
which peradventure ye see not. O weep not, my pretty ones: do not pierce and
break my troubled heart with your sad laments. I must die, my little ones, and
go to a better place, whither ye I hope shall one day follow me. We came not
together into the World; nor shall we go together out of it. In vain do ye shed
those Tears of Sorrow: for although Nature teaches you to bewail my departure,
yet Grace will teach you to moderate your Mourning. My Heart even bleeds to
leave you behind me, fearing lest ye will forget the Commandments of your God.
I should be sorry to have just cause to say unto you as Moses did to the
Levites; yet I will put you in mind of his words. Behold (said he) while I am
yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the Lord; and how
much more after my death? Deuteronomy. 3^. 27. I know that after my death ye will
utterly corrupt your selves, and turn aside from the way which I commanded you;
and evil will befall you in the latter days, because ye will do evil in the
sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger through the work of your hands,
verse. 29. But I am persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
salvation, though I thus speak, Heb. 6. 9. O my dear ones hearken unto the
words which I shall say: They must be my Legacy unto you: Hear me with
patience; and treasure up in your memories the last Speech of your Fainting,
your dying Mother.

How dear ye cost me before ye had life, and what Pangs and Torments I suffered
for you before ye were heard or seen in the World, ye cannot imagine, nor I
express. Yet all was forgotten for joy that ye were born, Joh. 16. 21. and
hoping that ye would add unto the Quire of Saints. To this purpose, I have
labored and taken care for the nourishment both of your Souls and Bodies; and
for your sustentation (so much as in me lay) from the Breast to this instant. O
what sad and perplexed thoughts have I had for you in the day times; and how
many hours have I borrowed from my sleep in the nights, to think what would
become of you, if ye should not be obedient to the Commandments of my God! To
the same God they are best known. O how often upon my knees have I prayed for
your happiness; and wept, and mourned, when ye have done what ye ought not! To
him is it best known to whom I now am going. Sometimes when ye have offended, I
was enforced to correct you: but each stripe which ye received did cut me into
the heart. In many things ye failed, because ye were young: and in many things
I failed too, because I am a weak and a sinful Woman. If at any time ye thought
that I did not my Duty, take heed that hereafter ye remember it not to my
dishonor. Ponder in your minds that curse which wretched Ham the Father of
Canaan received from Noah, when he saw his Nakedness, and told his Brethren.
Cursed (said Noah) be Canaan: a servant of servants shall he be to his
Brethren, Genesis 9. 25. But because Shem and Japhet, took a Garment, and laid it
upon their Shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their
Father, and their faces were backward, and they saw not their Fathers
nakedness, verse. 23. Therefore he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and
Canaan shall be his servant, verse. 26. God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall
dwell in the Tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his Servant, v. 27. Consider
with your selves that I am your mother. Whatsoever imperfections ye have
discovered in me, do in some kind reflect even upon your selves: for as your
Bodies were mine, so my Credit and good Name you must account to be yours. But
I cannot think that ye will need more Advice for this, which even Nature it
self should teach you to practice.

My time is but short; my Speech begins to fail me. I will not trouble you
with much, although something more I must say unto you, which I hope ye will
remember when I shall sleep in the Dust. Your first and chiefest Duty must
always be for the service of your God. If ye will daily observe the benefits
which he sends you, ye cannot choose but thank him daily for his Blessings.
Let it be your care to ground your actions upon his written Law. Undertake
nothing which is not warranted by his Word: and go forward in nothing by
unlawful means, or to a bad intent. Begin all in him, and continue in him, and
end in him; and he himself will be your Reward. If ye always preserve Religion
in your hearts, ye will always have quietness and content in your minds. First
make him your God, and then distrust not his Providence; no nor his love and
compassion while ye remain his Children. In whatsoever vocations ye shall lead
your lives, be sure that ye be conscionably industrious and laborious in them;
and then leave the event and the blessing to his good pleasure. I would sain
have you be his Children much more than ye are mine: for ye have nothing from
me but your sin and corruption; but from him you must expect both grace and
glory. If therefore ye strive to bless and magnify your God, ye may be sure
that your God will both bless and glorify you his Children. Remember that the
blessing of the Lord makes rich; and he adds no Sorrow with it, Prove. 10.
22. Take heed therefore to your selves, and let him be in all your thoughts;
for even for them ye must account at his great Tribunal. Take heed unto your
Words, that they give none offense either to God or Man. There is a sort of
people who bless with their mouths, but they curse in their inward parts, Psalm.
62. 4. I would not have you be of the number of them: for as they love cursing,
so it shall happen unto them: they delight not in blessing, therefore shall it
be far from them, Psalm 109. 17. As they cloth themselves with cursing like as
with a Garment, so it shall come into their Bowels like Water, and like Oil
into their Bones, verse. 18. Take heed also unto your Actions, that there be not
wickedness in the intent, nor sin in the prosecution of them: for howsoever
they shall appear in the Fie of the World, they will be strictly and justly
examined by the righteous judge. First be ye sure that ye bless your God, and
then ye may expect a blessing from him. When ye have eaten and are full, then
ye shall bless the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. 8. 10. Remember the Congregation of
Israel, how they blessed the Lord God of their Fathers, and bowed down their
heads, and worshipped the Lord, 1 Chr. 29. 20. Remember how the Levites
encouraged the People unto it, and said unto them, Stand up, and bless the Lord
your God for ever and ever, and blessed be thy glorious Name, which is exalted
above all blessing, and praise, Neh. 9. 5. Remember how the Psalmist moved them
unto it when he cried, O bless our God ye people, and make the voice of his
praise to be heard, Psalm. 66. 8. Be thankful unto him, and bless his Na^^ Psalm
100. 4. Remember how David resolved, ^^ying, I will bless the Lord, which has
given me counsel, Psalm. 16. 7. Remember how he decreed, saying, I will bless
thee while I live, I will lift up my hands in thy Name, Psalm. 63. 4. Remember
how he encouraged his Soul to this Duty, saying, Bless the Lord O my Soul, and
all that is within me bless his holy Name, Psalm. 103. 1. Bless the Lord O my
Soul, and forget not all his benefits, verse. 2. Who forgiveth all thine
iniquities, who heals all thy disease, verse. 3. Remember how he practiced it
when he blessed the Lord before all the Congregation, and said, Blessed be thou
Lord God of Israel, our Father for ever and ever, 1 Chr. 29. 10. Thine, O Lord,
is the greatness, and the Power, and the Glory, and the Victory, and the
Majesty; for all that is in the Heaven, and in the Earth is thine: Thine is the
Kingdom, O Lord, amd thou art exalted as head above all, verse. 11. Both Riches
and Honor come from thee, and thou reignest over all; and in thine hand is
power and might; and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength
unto all, verse. 12. Now therefore our God we thank thee, and praise thy
glorious Name, verse. ^3 And remember how Ezra blessed the Lord, the great God;
and all the people answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands; and they
bowed their heads, and worshipped the Lord, with their Faces to the ground, Neh.
8. 6. Thus if ye bless him, if ye love him, if ye honor him, if ye obey him,
he will so bless you, that ye shall delight in his Service, and be filled with
his Goodness. Carry in your minds those words of the Psalmist, Blessed is every
one that fears the Lord, that walks in his ways: For thou shall eat the
labor of thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it shall be well with thee,
Psalm. 128. 1, 2. Blessed is the Man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope
the Lord is, Jer. 17. 7. Remember how after the Death of Abraham, God blessed
his Son Isaac, Genesis 25. 11. So he may you, and so he will you, when I, your
poor feeble Mother, am stretched forth, and returned to the Earth; i^ ye will
hear his voice, and observe his statutes. If so you will do, then the Lord your
God will bless you in all the works of your hands, which ye shall do, Deuteronomy. 14.
29. He who created man in his own Image both Male and Female, and blessed them,
Genesis 1. 27, 28. Even the same Lord will bless you, if ye be Righteous, Psalm. 5.
12. And with favor be will compass you as with a Shield, Psalm 115. 13. He
will bless them that fear him, both small and great, 2 Timothy 4. 6.

And now my Children, I have not much more to say to you; for the time of my
departure is at hand. If you do heartily love your God I know that ye will
affectionately love each other: Ye will be observant to your Guardians, and
Instructors: Ye will be courteous unto all. Be not dismayed at any Cross or
Affliction; at any loss or poverty which may fall upon you: Mat. 6. 33. but
seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; and then all other
things shall be added unto you. Deuteronomy. 28. 8. Then the Lord shall command the
blessing upon you, both in your Storehouses, and in all that ye set your hands
unto. Exodus 23. 25. He shall bless your Bread and your Water and take away
sickness from the midst of you. Deuteronomy. 28. 3. Blessed shall ye be in the City,
and blessed shall ye be in the field. verse. 4. Blessed shall be the fruits of
your bodies, and the fruits of your grounds, and the fruits of your Cattle, and
the increase of your kine, and the flocks of your sheep: verse. 5. Blessed shall
be your basket and your store. verse. 6. Blessed shall ye be when ye come in,
and blessed shall ye be when ye go forth. c. 7. 13. The Lord will love you, and
will bless you, and multiply you: He will also bless the fruit of the Womb unto
you, and the fruit of your Land, and your Corn, and your Wine, and your Oil,
and the increase of your kine, and the flocks of your sheep in the places where
ye shall live. c. 28. 12. He will open unto you his good treasure; the Heaven
to give the rain unto your land in his season, and to bless all the work of
your hands: and ye shall lend unto many, and ye shall not borrow. Genesis 49. 25.
He shall help you, and bless you with the blessings of heaven above; blessings
of the deep that lies under, and blessings of the breasts, and of the Womb.
And that he may thus bless you, the same Lord direct your hearts, and preserve
you in his Blessing.

All that I can do now, is to pray for you; and my weakness will hardly permit
me to do that: Yet so long as I can speak I trust I shall pray, and in my
petitions remember both my self and you. While I am yet alive, it is my duty to
pray for you, and it is your duty also to pray for me. The Lord grant that we
may all do what he requires at our hands* Do not ye grieve too much, that I am
so near my rest: For it is the Decree of my God, and the longing expectation of
my wearied self. The Lord give you patience to endure this Affliction: and the
Lord give me patience and perseverance unto the end. 1 King. 2. 2, 3. Now I go
the way of all the Earth: Keep ye the charge of the Lord your God, to walk in
his ways; to keep his statutes, and his Commandments and his judgments, and his
testimonies, as it is written in the Scriptures, that ye may prosper in all
that ye do, and whithersoever ye turn your hands. Deuteronomy. 33. 7. The Lord give
you the blessing of Judah, and hear your voices; and let your hands be
sufficient for you; and let him be an helper to you from your Enemies. And the
Lord give you the blessing of Benjamin: verse. 12. The Lord cover you all the
day long, and dwell between your shoulders. And the Lord give you the blessing
of Joseph: v. 13. Blessed of the Lord be your Land for the precious things of
Heaven; for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath; v. 14. and for the
precious Fruits brought forth by the Sun; v. 16. and for the precious things
put forth by the Moon; and for the precious things of the Earth, and fullness
thereof; and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush. v. 27. The
eternal God be your Refuge, and underneath you the everlasting Arms. 2 Samuel 7.
26, 29. And now, O Lord God, let it please thee to bless the House of thy
Servant, and with thy blessing let the Family of thy Servant be blessed for
ever. Deuteronomy. 26. 15. Look down from thine holy Habitation from Heaven, and bless
them. Psalm. 67. 1. O my God, be merciful unto them, and bless them, and cause
thy face to shine upon them.

And now (with Jacob) I have made an end of commanding you; and ready I am to
gather up my Feet into the Bed, and to yield up the Ghost, and to be gathered
unto my Fathers, Genesis 49. 33. Only come ye near, my dear ones, that I may kiss
you, and that my cold and clammy hands may be laid upon your heads, that I may
once more bless you and die.

Fare well my pretty ones; farewell the children of my dear affection I must
leave you, and I hope I shall leave my God with you, who will be unto you a
Father of mercies, and a God of all consolation, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Once more
farewell. Love as brethren; and the God o^ and peace be with you, 1 Pet. 3. 8.
The Lord Jesus Christ be with your Spirits. Grace be with you all, Amen, 2 Timothy
4. 23.

Man gives up the Ghost; and where is he?
AMong the many serious and weighty Questions, which a sober considering Person
may propound unto himself; that is of none of the least concernment, which is
mentioned by the Holy Man Job, Chap. 14. verse 10. Yea, Man gives up the Ghost
and where is he? We may take the words asunder, and consider them apart. Yea,
and as much as to say, it is a Truth past all doubt, there is no nay to be said
to it; it is sealed with Yea, and Amen; for it shall certainly come to pass, at
some time or other, that Man must give up the Ghost; and as much as to say, his
Soul shall be separated from his Body; Those two loving twins being at the
point of Death to go several ways, they must part at last. And for as much as
it is evident to sense, that the body returns to the dust, what way the Soul
takes, is the great Question; as follows, Man gives up the Ghost; and where
is he? Or what becomes of his Soul, when it has once taken its leave of the
body? This Question may more easily, than comfortably be answered by most,
thus, every separated Soul goes either to Heaven or Hell. But, alas! those two
places are not more distant, than different in their Natures. Heaven is a place
of eternal happiness, Hell is a place of everlasting Misery. And therefore, O
my Soul, it is both good and necessary, that thou should think before hand,
what will be the place of thy future abode. The Body which is the Souls present
habitation; it is not (as Job speaks,) a body of Brass, but a body of Clay;
and therefore when the stroke of death shall knock that earthen Vessel in
pieces, where then Oh my Soul* will be thy next lodging? Either thou must lie
down in everlasting burnings, or else rest upon the Mountain of My^rh, and the
Hill of Frankincense, with sweet Jesus. Man when he has, (as an ^hireling)
accomplished his day, ought seriously to consider of the approaching Night. And
seeing it may be said, (as of Ephraim thou have here and there a gray hair upon
thy head, and the shadows of the Evening are lengthened out; it is neither safe
nor prudent, Oh my Soul, to be serious about trifles, or to trifle about
serious things. Before the great and terrible day of account, therefore, Oh my
Soul, do thou call thy self to account, and ask these questions of thy self,
Can thou think of going to Hell with comfort? Or can the thoughts of Heaven
be any otherwise comfortable, than as thou believe it to be thy Heaven? Can
thou rejoice, when thou think how many shall put on Crowns of Glory, and yet
thy self have no part, or lot in that matter? Art thou deeply convinced, Oh
Man, what ^ glittering and a glorious Divine Ray, does quicken, actuate, and
ennoble that Lump of Atoms, which thy Body is composed of? And when that Body
of thine shall be crumbled into Ashes, by one touch of the Almighty, have thou
forethought what shall become of that immortal In-mate, which for a little
season has been cloystered up in thy clay Breast? And do thou soundly
believe, that there is a future state of Infinite joy, and eternal Sorrow? And
have thou thoroughly pondered the certain uncertainty of all temporal
Enjoyments? And art thou heartily persuaded, that Heaven is only worth the
looking after? What say thou to these things, Oh my Soul? Let the matter be
urged home, is everlasting damnation by all means possible, to be prevented? Or
may Hell be supposed to be a tolerable Habitation? Or can a poor guilty Worm
endure with ease, the burden of infinite Wrath? Or is endless glory no whit
desirable? Or will it not repent thee, Oh my Soul, hereafter, when it is too
late, if thou now neglect so great Salvation, as is freely offered to thee in
Christ Jesus? Do thou know, Oh Man, that thou must shortly give up the Ghost?
And yet have thou not had one serious deep thought, what place of entertainment
thy naked Soul shall find in another world, when it is stripped of its present
fleshly case and clothing? Oh press thy Soul hard with these thoughts, how it
is like to go with thee, when thou first steppest into Eternity? What say
thou, Oh my Soul, are the things of time only or chiefly to be minded? And are
the precious things of Eternity utterly to be forgotten, or disregarded? Has
the infinitely wise and gracious God, only given thee opportunities and
abilities to desire, and hasten thy eternal ruin? And have thou no time,
capacity, understanding, or will, to work out thy Salvation, with fear and
trembling? Can thou once suppose, thou shall ever be an Inhabitant upon the
Earth? Or is the Earth, with the sensual delights thereof, which thou must
certainly forego, more valuable than Heaven, with its fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore? Or if thy judgment be clear in this case, why do
thou no more think upon, love, and long to be dissolved, and to be clothed
upon with that house, which comes down from Heaven? Will the enjoying of sinful
pleasures, or empty lying vanities, for ^ few minutes, recompense the loss of
Heaven ^t self? Can any thing be counted an advantage, when the Soul loses
God, and it self, ^n the getting of it? Or can any thing be had upon Earth,
that will hold ever? Awake, Oh my drowsy Soul, and let thy Conscience and
Conversation, no longer contradict one the other. ^f thou judge Heaven to be
Heaven indeed, and one moments Communion with God, more ^orth than ten thousand
Worlds; then let thy Conversation be now in Heaven, that thy Con^cience may not
hereafter witness against ^hee. Or tell me plainly, Oh my Soul, ^ost thou
pretend that thou art really willing to ^o to Heaven, and yet art unwilling for
the pre^ent, through thy weakness of Faith, to leave this Earth, with all the
sensible comforts of it? Or ^oth thy natural timorousness, or unpreparedness,
^ut a check to the vehemence of thy Desires? Or, that is it, that thou so much
stickest at? Is there ^ Lion in the way? Would thou not be detained, one day,
one minute, or moment longer from drinking thy fill at the Fountain of Living
Waters, and yet art afraid to pass over that narrow darksome Bridge of Death
which leads thereunto? Indeed* Death is the King of Fears; but yet a Serpent
without a Sting, may safely be put into thy Bosom. Thou art then willing to be
with thy glorious Redeemer upon the Throne, only the sad Thoughts of giving
(...) thy tender Flesh to be meat for the Worms, th^thing startles thee. But
weigh the matter well (...) thou be for ever happy, and not be with Christ ^st
thou be where Christ is, and not die? Well the w^^^om death, though not for thine
own sake, yet for his sake whose Messenger thou art, and who has sent thee to
fetch me home to himself; with whom I shall be, as soon as ever I am but parted
from thee. Then I shall with joy look back upon thee, O sad Messenger, and
triumph over thee, saying, Oh Death, where is thy Sting? Oh Grave, where is thy
Victory? But thanks be unto God, who has given me the Victory, through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Oh Death, though thy looks be terrible, and thy last gripe
pa^nful, yet is thy Message comfortable; and I was more afraid than hurt: For I
see, though thou leadest me through a dark Entry, yet it is my Fathers House.
And as soon as I had passed from thee, or ever I was aware, my Soul made me
like to the Chariots of Aminadib. So come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

He Is carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom. Sermon II.
Luke XVI. 32. And it came to pass that the Beggar died, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's Bosom.
The whole Parable runs thus:

THere was a certain Rich Man, which was clothed in purple and fine Linen,
and fared sumptu^^sly every day. And there was a certain Beggar nam^^ Lazarus,
which was laid at his Gate full of sores, ^ed desiring to be fed with the
crumbs which fell from ^e Rich Man's Table; moreover, the Dogs came and ^^ked
his Sores. And it came to pass that the Beggar ^ed, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham' s ^^som: The Rich Man also died, and was buried. and in
Hell he lift up his Eyes being in torments, and ^th Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his Bosom, etc.

Dearly Beloved, In my Discourse upon these words, I will not be over tedious,
but with as much brevity as I can I will unfold some of the weighty Truths
contained therein. And the Lord grant that they may be of general use to all
persons that shall either read or hear them.

These words have Relation unto the precedent Verses in this Chapter, wherein
our Savior Christ, from the thirteenth to the seventeenth verse, reproves the
Covetousness of the Pharisees, by showing unto them, that no man can serve two
Masters, that is, God and Riches. All these things heard the Pharisees, which
were covetous, and they mocked him: Whereupon he aptly and fitly takes
occasion to relate this Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus.

Hearken therefore now, and I will speak of a great Rich Man, that flourished
here on Earth (as a learned Divine observes,) In all pomp and abundance, that
shined in courtly purple Robes, that was clothed in Byssus and fine Silk, and
fared deliciously, that was lodged softly, that lived pleasantly. But
understand what became of this Rich Man; his years being expired, and his days
numbered, and his time determined, he was invited to the fatal Banquet of black
ugly Death, that makes all men s^bject to the rigor of his Law; his Body was
honorably buried, in respect of his much Wealth: but what became of his Soul?
That was carried from his Body to dwell with the Devils; from his purple Robes
to burning Flames, from his soft Silk and white Byssus to cruel pains in black
Abyssus, from his Palace here on Earth, to the Palace of Devils in Hell; from
Paradise to a ^ungeon, from Pleasures to Pains, from Joy to Torment, and that
by hellish means, damned Spirits, into the infernal Lake of bottomless
Barathrum, where is woe, woe, woe! And where is weeping and wailing, and gnashing
of Teeth, Mat. 25. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the people
that forget God, Psalm 6.

Hearken also of a certain poor Beggar clothed in rags, with miseries pained,
pained with griefs, grieved with sores, sorely tormented, unmercifully
condemned, lying at this Rich Man's Gate, desiring to be refreshed but with the
Crumbs that fell from the rich Man's table, the dogs had more pity than this
rich man, on this distressed creature, for they came to visit him, they came to
comfort him, they came and licked his sores.

Well, his time being also determined, he went the way of all flesh, and death
was the finisher of all his miseries and griefs; Vita assumpsit mortem, ut mors
vitam acciperet; He died once, to live for ever. And what became of his soul?
it was carried from his body to his Master, from a House of Clay, to a house
not made with hands, from a wilderness to a Paradise, from an ^arthly prison,
to a heavenly Palace, from the richmans gate, ^o the City of the great God,
from pains to pleasures, from ^iseries to joys, from Adams corruption, to
Abraham's ^osom. It was carried by Angels into the Quires of Angels, to have his
being and moving in the very moving Heavens with God himself. Where is life,
food and abundance, and glory, and Health and peace, and eternity, and all good
things: all above all that either can be ^ished or desired: And this is the
subject that I shall ^^w speak of. And here let it please you to con^^der the
argument of this Scripture, which is ^wofold:

First, Our Savior Christ hereby advises all ^ch men to be merciful to their
poor Brethren in ^is Life, lest they find no mercy in the life to ^ome.

Secondly, He does comfort all poor men, that although they are afflicted in
this life with great miseries and calamities, yet they shall be comforted in
the life to come, and rest in Abraham's bosom.

And here observe what one formerly Notes, viz. That if Jesus Christ had said
only thus much, There was a certain Rich man that fared sumptuously daily, and
a certain Beggar laid at his Gate full of sores: The wicked would have
straightway inferred that the rich man was the happy man, for at the first view
it seems to be so; But take all together and you will quickly see that there is no
man in a worse condition than this miserable wretch.

(2.) That if a man would judge of persons according to outward appearance, he
shall very often take his mark amiss. Here is a man to outward appearance,
appears the only blessed man; better by half than the Beggar, in as much as he
is rich, the Beggar poor: he is well clothed, but peradventure the Beggar is
naked; he has good food, but the Beggar would be glad of Dogs meat ( and he
desired to be fed with the Crumbs of the Rich Man's Table,) the Rich man fares
well every day, but the Beggar must be glad of a bit when and where he can get
it. O! who would not be in the Rich man's state? A wealthy man sorts of new
Suits, dainty Dishes every day: enough to make one, who minds nothing but his
belly and his back, and his lusts, to say, O that I were in that man's
condition! Oh that I had about me, as that man has! then I should live a life
indeed; then should I have hearts ease good store; then should I live
pleasantly, and might say to my Soul, Soul, be of good cheer, eat, drink, and
be merry, Luke 12. 19. thou ^ast every thing plenty, and art in a most blessed
condition. But if the whole Parable be well considered, you will see Luke 26.
15. that that which is had in high estimation with men, is an abomination to
God. And again, John 16. 20, 21, 22. that condition that is the saddest
condition, according to outward appearance is oft-times the most excellent; for
the Beggar had ten thousand times the best of it, though to outward appearance
his state was the saddest.

Methinks, to see how the tearing Gallants of the World will go strutting up
and down the Streets: Sometimes it strikes me with amazement; surely they look
upon themselves to be the only happy men, but it is because they judge
according to outward appearance; they look upon themselves to be the only
blessed men, when the Lord knows the generality are left out of that blessed
condition; Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble
are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Ah! did they that do now so brag that no body dare
scarce look on them; but believe this, it would make them hang down their heads
and cry, Oh! give me a Lazarus's portion.

But I Will proceed to the division of my Text and in this Scripture observe
these following parts, (formerly taken notice of) viz.

The parts of the Text are four.
1. The life of the rich man, in these words, There was a certain rich man,
clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day.

2. The life of the Beggar, in these words: Also there was a certain Beggar,
named Lazarus, which was laid at his Gate full of sores, etc.

3. The death of the Beggar, in these words; And it was so that the Beggar died
and was carried, etc.

4. The death of the rich man; The rich man also died and was buried.

In the first part, I note these three circumstances.

1. What this Rich Man was, and whether there were any such man or no.

2. What his Apparel was; not mean or ordinary, but Purple and fine Linen.

3. That his Diet was not base, nor homely, but delicious, and not once, nor
twice, but every day.

In the Life of the Beggar, I find four Circumstances.

1. Where he lived: in no Palace or House, but at the Rich man's Gate.

2. How he lived: neither in Health nor Wealth, but miserable, full of Sores.

3. That he desired in this life, not Lordships, or Houses, or Land, or Gold,
or Silver, but Crumbs to save his Life.

4. Who showed the Beggar kindness in his Life? Not the Rich man, but the Rich
man's Dogs, The Dogs came also and licked his Sores.

In the death of the Beggar, I note these three Circumstances.

1. What became of his Body being dead? No mention hereof is made in Holy
Scriptures; it may be it was Buried with little or no respect, because he was a
poor man, or else cast into some Ditch, by reason of his Sores.

2. What became of his Soul? It went not out to Purgatory (^or there is no such
place) but it was carried into Abraham's Bosom.

3. By whom? By Angels. It was carried by Angels into Abraham' s Bosom.

In the Death of the Rich man, I note these two Circumstances.

1. What became of his Body being dead? It was Honorably Buried because of his
great Substance.

2. What became of his Soul? It went to Hell. He being in torments, lift up his
Eyes, and saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his Bosom.

Of these successively.
And first, in the life of the Rich man, we noted what this Rich Man was,
whether there was indeed any such man or no: Wherefore here may a Question
arise, whether this be a Parable or History: The Writers hereof do not agree.

Marlorat says, Quanquam quibusquam haec simplex Parabola esse videtur, tamen
quia his Lazari nomen exprimitur, rem gestam narrari probabile; Some are of
that mind, that this is a Parable, yet because (says he) Christ twice
expresses the name of Lazarus, it argues, that he spoke of a thing that was
so done indeed.

Likewise says Franciscus Lambertus, Credendum magis esse historiam and
exemplum verum quam Parabolam; It must be believed that this is rather a
History, and a true Example than a Parable.

But Theophilactus is of a contrary opinion, who says, Parabola haec est and
non vera historia; This is a Parable and no History.

Erasmus also says, that it is but a Parable, whereby Rich Men may learn to be
merciful to their poor Brethren, that they may speak for them in the day of
Vengeance and Wrath.

Many Writers there are also, that rather aiming at the Arguments and
Observations herein, have not set down their Judgments, whether it be a Parable
or History: Therefore it might seem Wisdom in me to suspend my judgment also
herein, especially, since Marlorat says, Paru^ re^ert, ut tam sit Parabola, an
Historia, modo summam doctrinam teneant lectores. It greatly skilleth not
whether it be a Parable or History, so that we duly consider the Doctrine
herein.

But because it is requisite that I also show my Opinion, I will return my
Verdict, according to my Evidence: And therefore in naked truth I find and hold
that it is a Parable: And my Reasons are these two: First, because our Savior
in the beginning of this Chapter, does relate a Parable of the Rich Man that
had a Steward, etc. therefore he continues in this Chapter to open his mouth
in Parables, according to the Prophet, I will open my mouth in Parables, and
show dark sentences of old time. Secondly, because the Rich Man cried out of
Hell unto Abraham, and Abraham answered the Rich man; which needs must be
understood Parabolically: For the Damned in Hell cannot see nor hear the Saints
that are in Heaven, neither by reason of the distance of place, and also
because of many Spears and Orbs that are betwixt Heaven and Hell, neither
shall they see nor know what is done there. And again, Abraham's throat is dry,
and cleaves to the Roof of his Mouth: Therefore he cannot speak so loud as to
be heard out of Heaven into Hell. Therefore it is but a Parable.

Secondly, let us consider what his Apparel was, Purple and fine white, as some
will have: But we read, (...), which word (...), although some take it for fine
Flax, yet let it here be understood of Silk. There was a very great difference
betwixt the Apparel of John the Baptist, and this Man; John's Raiment was
Camels Hair, with a Leathern Girdle about his Loins, which did Argue Repentance
and Mortification in him; but this Rich Man's Apparel was Purple and fine Silk;
whose outward Apparel did argue the Pride at his Heart: The outward Habit for
the most part resembles the inward Habit and condition of the Mind. Pride, as
says one, is grounded in the Heart of Man, a Vice most loathsome to God,
hateful to Men, and hurtful to the Soul.

But let us consider the third Circumstance in the Life of the Rich Man, to
wit, what his Diet was, Deliciously every day: And here we see what the
Children of this World delight in, namely, in fullness of Meat, who neglecting
the serving of God, have given themselves to serve Bacchus and Venus. Hence one
notes, A gluttonous Person eats more for Pleasure than Necessity: So did the
Rich Man, so did our first Parents, it was not through need or necessity, that
they did eat of the forbidden Tree, but through Wantonness, Pleasure, and
Idleness. Gluttony is a flattering Devil, and a pleasant sin, and a sweet
Poison, which whosoever uses, has not the use of himself, which who so has not,
has no sin, for he is all sin it self. Besides, it has an especial effect,
for it does, as Gregory says, generate Lust.

To be short, it was Gluttony that caused our Parents to transgress. It was
Gluttony that caused Let to commit Incest. It was Gluttony that made Esau to
sell his Birthright. It was Gluttony and Drunkenness that caused Nabal's
Death. It was Gluttony that lost Belshasars Kingdom.

Be not thou desirous of dainty meats, says Solomon, For he that loves
Banqueting, shall be Poor, and he that delights in Wine, shall not be Rich.

But let us a while leave this Rich Man, and consider the second, that which is
the Life of the Beggar.

There was also a certain Beggar, named Lazarus, etc.

And here observe these things: 1. That the Saints of God are a poor
contemptible People. There was a certain Beggar: If you understand the word
Beggar, to hold forth outward Poverty, or scarcity in outward things, such are
Saints of the Lord, for they are for the most part a poor, despised,
contemptible People; but if you Allegorize and Interpret it thus, they are such
as beg earnestly for Heavenly food; this is also the spirit of the Children of
God, and it may be, and is a truth in this sense, though not so Naturally
gathered from this Scripture. 2. That he was laid at his Gate full of Sores:
These words hold forth the Distempers of Believers, saying, he was full of
Sores; which may signify the many Troubles, Temptations, Persecutions and
afflictions in Body and Spirit, which they meet withal while they are in the
World; And also the Entertainments they find at the hands of those ungodly
ones, who Live upon the Earth. Whereas it is said, he was laid at his Gate full
of Sores. Mark, he was laid at his Gate; not in his House, that was thought too
good for him, but he was laid at his Gate full of Sores: From whence Observe,
that the Ungodly World do not desire to entertain and receive the poor Saints
of God into their Houses; If they must needs be somewhere near unto them, yet
they shall not come into their Houses: Shut them out of Doors! if they will
needs be near us, let them be at the Gate. And he was laid at the Gate full of
Sores. 2. Observe, that the World are not at all touched with the afflictions
of God's Children* for all they are full of Sores, a despised, afflicted,
tempted, persecuted people, the World does not pity; no, but rather labor to
aggravate their Trouble by shutting them out of Doors, sink or swim, what cares
the World? they are resolved to disown them, they will give them no
Entertaiment; if the lying in the streets will do them any good, if hard Usage
will do them any good, if to be disowned, shut out of Doors, rejected of the
World will do them any good, they shall have enough of that, but otherwise, no
Refreshment, no Comfort from the World: And he was laid at his Gate full of
Sores.

Poor Lazarus! What, lying at a Gate* and full of Sores too? Would not this
Rich Man afford thee some out-house to lie in, to shroud thee from Storms and
Tempests? no: would not his servants pity thee? no: would not his Children
speak for thee? no: Would not his Wife entreat her Husband for thee? no: Had
thou ever done them any wrong; no: But, Lazarus, it may be thou art stout, and
oftentimes Beggars will be chusers; thou perhaps would have some great
Alms, or Copyhold, some Farm of this Rich Man? no: Or thou would have some
delicate Meat? no* Many Dishes? no: Or thou would sit at the Table with his
Sons and Servants? no, no: What is it then that thou do desire? Nothing but
Crumbs to refresh my Soul; nothing but Crumbs to save my Life: Nothing but
Crumbs, Crumbs, that fall from the Rich Man's Table: I know that he fared
Plentifully, and that he may well spare them.

What shall I say of the hardness of this screwing Rich Man's Heart? Let me
speak for Lazarus unto the Rich Man; yet I shall but asi^am comere, (as one
well observes) get nothing of this hard Fellow. I have a Message unto thee, O
thou Rich Man, from the great God of Heaven, and he does desire thee that thou
respect the Beggar that lies at thy Gate pained with sores, pained with grief,
and even starved through Hunger: And I beseech thee in Gods stead, that thou
have pity on this Beggar, as God shall have pity, mercy, and Compassion on
thee, and look what thou layest out, it shall be paid thee again. But he
answered I warant you he is some Runnagate Rogue, and so long as he can be
mantained by such easy means, he will never take any other Trade upon him:
Nay, but good Sir, let please you only to behold this Poor Creature; which
suppose it were granted: and he coming to the Gate where this wre^ched Object
lay, seeing him bewrayed with sores, betattered with Rags, and the Dogs licking
him, stopping his Nose, with a squeamish Face, and disdainful look, began to
say unto him: I see thou art some lewd Fellow, that such Miseries happen unto
thee, and such Plagues come upon thee; it is not for thy goodness, or
Righteousness, that these Afflictions light on thee. But he replied, O good
Master, some Comfort, good Master, some Relief; good Master, some Crumbs to
save my Life, I shall die else, and starve at your Gate; good Master, I beseech
you for Gods sake, I beseech you for Christ's sake, take some Pity, some
Compassion, some Mercy on me. But he with an Angry look, disdaining Lazarus,
said: Away hence thou Idle Rogue, not a penny, not a Morsel, not a crumb of
Bread; and so stopping his Nose from the scent, and his Ears from the Cry of
Lazarus, returned unto his stately Palace: And this Poor man's Throat being dry
with Crying, his Heart fainting for want of Comfort, his tongue cleaving to the
roof of his mouth, being worn out with Fastings and miseries, starved at the
Rich Man's Gate. Now, must I speak for dead Lazarus against this Rich Man. Nam
si hi tacuissent, nonne lapides clamabunt; if I should hold my peace, the very
stones would cry. O thou Rich Miser, and more than cruel wretch, Lazarus is
dead, he is dead at thy Gate, and his Blood shall be upon thee, thou shewedst
no Mercy unto him, no Mercy shall be showed to thee, thou stoppedst thy Ears
unto his cry, thou shall cry and not be heard. It is inhumane Wickedness to
have no Compassion on distressed Lazarus, but most of all, to let him starve at
thy Gate for want of Food. What did be desire of thee but only Crumbs to save
his Life? Is it not a small thing, I pray thee, that thou having abundance of
Meat, should see him starve for Bread? That thou flourishing in Purple and
Silk, would see Lazarus lie in Rags? That thou seeing even thy Dogs have pity
on him, thou would have no pity upon him thy self? What Eyes had thou that
would not see his Sores? What Ears had thou, that would not hear his
cry? What Hands had thou that would not be stretched out to give, What Heart
had thou that would not melt in thy Body? What Soul had thou, that would
not pity his silly Soul, this wretched Body, poor Lazarus? If the stones could
speak, they would cry, fie upon thee: If thy Dogs could speak, they would
condemn thee of unmercifulness: If dead Lazarus were here, his Sores would
bleed* afresh before thy face, and ^ry in thine Ears, that thou art guilty,
guilty of his Blood, and that thy sin is more than can be pardoned.

Why should not I tell thee the Portion that is prepared for thee? This shall
be thy Portion to drink: Let thy days be few, and let another take thine
Office: Let thy Children be Fatherless, and thy Wife a Widow: Let thy Children
be Vagabonds and beg their bread, let them seek it also out of desolate places;
let the Extortioner consume all that thou have and let the stranger spoil thy
Labor: Let there be no Man to pity thee, nor to have compassion on thy
Fatherless Children: Let thy Memorial be clean forgotten, and in the next
Generation let thy Name be clean put out: Let him be an accursed Example to all
the World: Let him be cursed in the City, and cursed in the Field; let him be
cursed when he goes out, and when he comes in; let him be cursed when he
lies down, and when he rises up: Let all Creatures, and the Creator himself
forsake him, Angels reject him, Heavens frown at him, Earth open thy Mouth,
Hell receive him, Spirits tear him, Devils torment him, let no mercy be showed
unto him that showed no mercy; Thus shall the miseries of Lazarus be revenged
by the just plagues that shall justly fall upon the Rich man's head.

Secondly, In the Life of Lazarus I noted how he lived, to wit, miserably and
full of Sores, and yet this rich Man would not pity him. Christ could not of
his mercy but cure the Leper, when he saw him full of Sores and Leprosy; and
Elisha could not but out of Humanity teach Naaman the Assyrian to wash himself
in Jordan, that he might be whole, but this rich Man would not help the poor
Beggar, neither by his counsel, Purse, Table, or Crumbs, but let him alone to
pining Misery at his Gate.

Here we note in the person of Lazarus, the great miseries and Afflictions that
the Church of God does endure in this World.

Great are the troubles of the Righteous, says David; not small or few, but
great and many, Psalm 34. Again, He will thoroughly purge his floor, not
slightly, nor by halves; thoroughly, Mat. 3. And he will search Jerusalem with
Candlelight, lest he should over-slip any wickedness therein.

And further to prove this, we have many examples in the Scripture, but that
well known out of Job, may not be omitted, whose miseries were more than many,
and intolerable: As first, he being a just man, and one that feared God, to be
thus plagued: For when one Messenger was relating tragical News to him, there
came another on the neck of him, like the waves on the Sea. While he was yet
speaking, there came another; While the other was yet speaking, there came
another; yet this good Man had not so much as an hours respite to breath, or to
receive comfort and consolation by any means: His goods were lost, his Body
plagued, his Servants slain, his Sons were dead, and no Creature left alive to
comfort him, but only a froward Wi^e to grieve and vex his heart. Miseria est
copia tribulationis, and inopia consolationis, quando multifarie quis patitur:
and a nomine relevatur; Misery is then a Sea of tribulation, and scarce a drop
of consolation, when a Man is oppressed many ways, and relieved by no means.

Thirdly, In the Life of the Beggar we noted what he desired in this life,
Crumbs, desired to be refreshed with the Crumbs that fell from the rich man's
Table.

By these words our Lord Jesus does show us the frame of a Christians heart,
and also the heart and carriage of worldly men toward the Saints of the Lord.
The Christian's heart is held forth by this, that any thing will content him
while he is on this side Glory; And he desired to be fed with the Crumbs, the
Dogs meat, any thing; I say a Christian will be content with any thing, if he
have but to keep life and soul together (as we use to say) he is content, he is
satisfied; he has learned, if he has learned to be a Christian, to be content
with any thing? as Paul says, I have learned in whatsoevir state I am,
therewith to be content. He learns in all conditions to study to love God, to
walk with God, to give up himself to God; and if the Crumbs that fall from the
Rich man's Table will but satisfy nature, and give him bodily strength, that
thereby he may be the more able to walk in the way of God, he is contented, and
be desired to be fed with the Crumbs that fell from the Rich man's Table. But
mark he had them not; you do not find that he had so much as a Crumb or scrap
allowed unto him. No, then the Dogs will be beguiled, that must be preserved
for the Dogs. From whence observe, that the ungodly world do love their Dogs
better than the Children of God; you will say that is strange: It is so indeed,
yet it is true, as will be clearly manifested; as for instance, how many pounds
do some men spend a year on their Dogs, when in the mean while, the poor Saints
of God may starve for hunger? they will build Houses for their Dogs, when the
Saints must be glad to wander, and lodge in Dens and Caves of the Earth, Heb.
11. 38. and if they be in any of their Houses, for the hire thereof, they will
warn them out, or Eject them, or pull down the House over their heads, rather
than not rid themselves of such Tenants. Again, some men cannot go half a mile
from home, but they must have Dogs at their he^ls, but they can very willingly
go half a score miles without the society of a Christian. Nay, if when they are
busy with their Dogs, they should chance to meet a Christian, they would
willingly shift him if they could: they will go on the other side the Hedge or
the way, rather than they will have any society with him; and if at any time a
Child of God should come into a House where there are but two or three ungodly
wretches, they do commonly wi^h either themselves or the Saints out of doors;
and why so? because they cannot down with the society of a Christian: though if
there come in at the same time a Dog, or a Drunken swearing wretch, which is
worse than a Dog, they will make him welcome, he shall sit down with them, and
partake of their Dainties. And now tell me, you that love your sins and your
pleasures, had you not rather keep company with a Drunkard, a Swearer, a
Strumpet, a Thief, nay a Dog, than with an honest-hearted Christian? If you say
no, what means your sour carriage to the People of God? Why do you look on them
as if you would eat them up? yet at the very same time, if you can but meet
with your Dog, or a drunken companion, you can ^awn upon them, take
acquaintance with them, if it be two or three times in a Week: But if the
Saints of God meet together, pray together, and labor to Edify one another,
you will stay till Doomsday before you will look into the House where they are.
Ah Friends, when all comes to all, you will be found to love Drunkards,
Strumpets, Dogs, any thing; nay to serve the Devil, rather than to have loving
and friendly Society with the Saints of God.

The Dogs came and licked his sores. The Rich Man's Dogs by licking Lazarus,
taught their Master to have mercy on him, but he would not, therefore he had
worse than a doggish Nature, and cruel Heart. But here first we note God's
Providence toward his Children, he will have them comforted and fed, though by
dumb and only sensible Creatures; so the Dogs here came and licked Lazarus's
sores. So Elias was fed by Ravens to save his life, 1 Kings 19. 4. And thou
shall drink of the River: and I have commanded the Ravens to ^eed thee there.

But again, Secondly, In that, Dogs came and licked Lazarus' s Sores, when the
Rich Man himself forsook him, we observe that sensible dumb Creatures of the
Earth (are in their kinds) better* than many men. Therefore it is that God
complains by the mouth of the Prophet; The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass
his Masters Crib, but my People will not know me, says the Lord. So the Dogs
here knew Lazarus to be pained* but the Rich man would not vouchsafe to know
him: Therefore his own Dogs condemned him of merciless Cruelty.

Here Beloved, you may see not only the afflicted state of the Saints of God in
this World, but also, that even Dogs themselves, according to their kind, are
more favorable to the Saints than the sinful World; though the ungodly will
have no mercy on the Saints, yet it is ordered so that these Creatures, Dogs,
Lions, etc. will. Though the Rich Man would not entertain hi^ into his House,
yet his Dogs will come and do him the best good they can, even to lick his
running Sores. It was thus with Daniel, when the World was against him, and
would have thrown him to the Lions to be devoured: the Lions shut their mouths
at him; so that there was not that hurt befell to him as was desired by the
Adversaries, Dan. 6.

But now let us consider the Third Part, which is the Death of the Beggar.

It was so that the Beggar died. Here is the adage fulfilled, Mors optima
rapit, deterrima relinquit. Now must I speak of Tragical matters, of Funerals
and Obsequies, of Dissolution and Death.

This Beggar died, that represents the Godly; and the Rich Man died, that
represents the Ungodly: From whence Observe, neither Godly nor Ungodly must
live always without a change either by Death or Judgment: The good man died,
and the bad man died; that Scripture does also back this Truth, that good and
bad must die, mavelous well, where it is said, And it is appointed to men
once to die, and after that the Judgment, Heb. 9. 27.

Now, when it is said, the Beggar died, and the Rich man died, part of the
meaning is, they ceased to be any more in this World I say, partly the meaning
is so, but not altogether, though it be altogether the meaning, when some of
the Creatures die, yet it is but in part the meaning, when it* is said, that
Men, Women, or Children die; for there is to them something else to be said
more than a barely going out of the World; for if when unregenerate Men and
Women die, there were an end of them, not only in this World, but also in the
World to come, they would be more happy than now; for when ungodly men and
women die, there is that to come after Death, that will be very terrible to
them, namely, to be carried by the Angels of Darkness from their Deathbeds to
Hell, there to be reserved to the Judgment of the great day, when both Body and
Soul shall meet and be united together again, and made capable to undergo the
uttermost vengeance of the Almighty to all Eternity. Ah, Beloved, if this great
Truth, that men must die, and depart this World, and either enter into Joy, or
else into Prison, to be reserved to the Day of Judgment, were believed, we
should not have so many Wantons walk up and down the streets as there do; at
least, it would put a mighty check to their filthy Carriages, so that they
would not, could not walk so basely and sinfully as they do. Belshazzar,
notwithstanding he was so far from the fear of God as he was, yet when he did
but see that God was but offended, and threatened him for his Wickedness, it
made him hang down his head, and knock his knees together, Dan. 5. 5, 6. If you
read the Verses before, you will find, he was careless, and satisfying his
Lusts in Drinking, and playing the Wanton with his Concubines: But so soon as
he did perceive the Finger of an hand writing, Then (says the Scripture) the
King's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the
joints of his Loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. And
when Paul told Felix of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, it
made him tremble. Further, this is a certain truth, that not only the Wicked,
but the Godly also must have a time to depart this Life. And the Beggar died;
the Saints of the Lord they must be deprived of this Life also, they must yield
up the Ghost into the hands of the Lord their God; they must also be separated
from their Wives, Children, Husbands, Friends, Goods, and all that they have in
the World, for God has decreed it: It is appointed, namely, by the Lord, for
Men once to die, and we must appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, as it
is, 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11.

But again, in the Death of the Beggar: First we noted what became of his Soul,
It was carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom. Whereby we learn the Immortality
of the Soul. Pythagoras was the first among the Grecians, that taught the Soul
was Immortal. The Philosophers also, and Heathen Poets do prove the Immortality
of the Soul.

Cedit enim retro de terra quod fuit ante
In terram, sed quod missum est ex aetheris oris
Id rursum coeli fulgentia templa receptant.
The part of Man that was made of Earth, went to Earth, and that part as came
from Heaven, went to Heaven again.

But leaving these, we prove by Scripture the Immortality of the Soul, Man was
made a living Soul. Therefore the Soul is Immortal. And here in the Text,
Lazarus being dead, his Soul was carried into Abraham' s Bosom.

Here therefore is the damnable Opinion of the Atheists overthrown: For if they
deny God, they must also deny that they have Souls, and so consequently that
they are not men. But St. John teaches them, that all things were made by the
Word of God, and without it nothing was made; therefore if they are made they
are made by the Word of God, and of a reasonable Soul, which do acknowledge and
believe in the Creator. Anima est primum principium vitae per se subsistens,
incorporea a^ incorruptibilis: The Soul is the first beginning of Life,
subsisting of it self, incorporeal and incorruptible. St. Austin, Anima est
spiritus, est substantia incorporea, corporis sui vita sensibilis, invisibilis,
rationalis, immortalis. The Soul of man is a spiritual, or incorporeal
substance, sensible, invisible, reasonable, immortal: For as he also says,
Solu^ homo habet animam rationalem: Only Man with an Immortal Soul. Lazarus
Soul was carried into Abraham's Bosom, which is a quiet Haven, which the
faithful have gotten by the troublesome Navigation of this Life, that is, the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Here therefore we note that the Souls of the Elect being separated from their
Bodies, are presently in Joys, and are carried into Abraham's Bosom; so called,
because it belongs only to the Faithful. Well then, Lazarus Soul went to
Heaven; and Christ said to the Thief on the Cross, This day shall thou be with
me in Paradise. Not to morrow or next Year, but this day. Therefore the Souls
of the Elect being separated from their Bodies, are in Joy and Rest. As also on
the other side, the soul of the Rich man and the Damned, after they be
separated from their Bodies, are in Hell Torments.

And thus much concerning the place whither Lazarus soul was carried, being
dead; namely, into Abraham's Bosom.

Lastly, We noted by whom, by Angels: It was carried by Angels into Abraham' s
Bosom.

And here an Objection arises, viz. If this be so, that the Godly die as well
as the Wicked, and if the Saints must appear before the Judgment Seat, as well
as the sinners, then what Advantage have the Godly more than the Ungodly, and
how can the Saints be in a better condition than the Wicked.

Answ. Read the 22d. Verse over again, and you shall find a mavelous
difference between them, as much as is between Heaven and Hell, everlasting
Joy, and everlasting Torment; for you find, when the Beggar died, which
represents the Godly, he was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom, or
into everlasting Joy, Psalm. 1. But the Ungodly are not so, but are hurried by
the Devils into the Bottomless Pit, drawn away in their Wickedness, Prove. 14.
32. for he says, And in Hell he lift up his Eyes; when the Ungodly do die,
their misery begins, for then appear the Devils like so many Lions, waiting
every moment till the soul depart from the Body; sometimes they are very
visible to the dying Party, but sometimes more invisible: But always this is
certain, they never miss of the soul, if it do die out of the Lord Jesus
Christ, but do hale it away to their Prison, as I said before, there to be
tormented and reserved until the great and dreadful day of Judgment, at which
day they must, Body and Soul, receive a final Sentence from the Righteous
Judge, and from that time be shut out from the Presence of God into everlasting
woe and distress. But the Godly, when the time of their departure is at hand,
then are also the Angels of the Lord at hand; yea, they are ready waiting on
the ^oul, to conduct it safely into Abraham's Bosom. ^ do not say, but the
Devils oft-times are very bu^ie doubtless, and attending the Saints in their
^ickness; yes, and no question, but they would willingly deprive the soul of
Glory. But here ^s the comfort, as the Devils come from Hell ^o devour the soul
(if it be possible, at it is de^arture) so the Angels of the Lord come from
Heaven, to watch over and conduct the soul (in spite of the Devil) safe into
Abraham's bo^om.

David had the comfort of this, and speaks it ^orth for the comfort of his
Brethren, Psalm. 34. ^. saying, The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them
that fear him, and delivers them. Mark, the Angel of the Lord encampeth round
about his Children, to deliver them: From what? From their Enemies, of which
the Devil is not the least: This is an excellent comfort at any time, to have
the holy Angels of God to attend a Poor Man or Woman, but especially ^it is
comfortable in the time of distress, at the time of Death, when the Devils
beset the Soul with all the Power that Hell can afford them, ^ut now it may be,
that the glorious Angels of God do not appear at the first, to the view of the
Soul; nay, rather Hell stands before it, and the Devils ready, as if they would
carry ^t thither, but this is the comfort, the Angels do always appear at the
last, and will not fail ^he soul, but will carry it safe into Abraham's ^osom.
Ah! Friends, consider, here is an ungod^y man upon his Deathbed, and he has
none ^o speak for him, none to speak comfort unto ^im, but it is not so with
the Children of God, ^or they have the spirit to comfort them. Here ^s the
ungodly, and they have no Christ to pray for their safe Conduct to Glory, but
the Saints have an Intercessor, John 17. 9* Here is the World, when they die,
they have none of the Angels of God to attend upon them, but the Saints have
their Company. In a word, the unconverted person when he dies* he sinks into
the bettomless Pit; but the Saints when they die, do ascend with and by the
Angels into Abraham's Bosom, or into unspeakable Glory, Luke 23. 34.

And so let us consider the fourth and last part, which is the Death of the
Rich Man.

The Rich Man died also, etc. Here ^e may again see, that Death is the way of
all flesh. Death shakes Cedar and Shrub, Death calls away the Rich man from
his pleasure, and Lazarus from his Pain, and all must obey when Death calls.
It is not the Majesty of a Prince nor Holiness of a Priest, strength of Body,
feature of Face, Wisdom, Beauty, Riches, Honor, nor any such secular regard
can plead against Death, or privilege a man from the Grave, Statutum est
omnibus semel mori: The Decree is out, all must die once; all must taste of
this distasteful cup of death. Let us know then that the Pale Horse, and he
that sits thereon, whose name is Death, comes running on toward us, fall
that is within us, and without us, are Remembrancers of Death. The Sun rising
in the East, and setting* in the West, shows our rising and alling, our
coming in and going out of this World. All cry unto us we must away, we must
away, we must hence, as Christ said, My Kingdom is not of this World. Death is
a separation of the Soul from the Body; the Husband separated from the Wife of
his youth; the Father separated from his Children whom he dearly loved; the
Children from their Parents, the Master from his Servant, and the Servant from
his Master, thus Parents and Friends' and all must part.

The first circumstance of the Rich man is, to know what became of his Body? It
was honorably buried. But here we see that honorable Burial does not profit
the damned soul. Tares are sown as well as Wheat in all times; if the one grow
up for the fire, the other for the barn; Gather the Tares in bundles, and burn
them, but gather* ^^e Wheat into my barn, Matthew. 1. 30.

But let us lastly consider what became of his Soul.

And being in Hell Torments, etc. But because ^one can so well relate miseries,
and none can de^cribe the torments of Hell so well as he that has ^elt the
same, let the Rich man himself speak, and ^et us hear him what he says, he
being in Hell tor^ents, he thus begins: O wretch that I am, why did I s^ffer
Lazarus to starve at my Gate? ^or which I am shut in the Gates of Hell. Why did
not give Lazarus a crumb of Bread? for which ^ cannot have here now one drop of
Water to coo^ ^y tongue. Why did I show Lazarus no mercy o^ ^arth? for which no
mercy is showed to me in Hell* that shall I do? for I am tormented in this
flame, ^ will cry unto Abraham, Abraham have mercy ^ me, and send Lazarus, that
he may dip the ^ of his finger in water, to cool my tongue. I ^ tormented here;
Abraham, I am torn in pieces ^e; Abraham, I am plagued and continually pained
^e; Abraham, here my purple Raiment is flames ^^re, my light is darkness, my
day night, my com^ions are Devils! O how they hale me! O how ^ pull me! O how
they vex and torment me! ^e my feet are scorched, my hands are seared, my ^t is
wounded, my eyes are blinded, my ears are ^d, my senses confounded, my tongue
is hot, it is very hot: send Lazarus therefore, Abraham, with a drop of Water
to comfort me; one drop, good Abraham, one drop of Water.

But Abraham answered him: Thou damned wretch, once thou did disdain Lazarus,
once thou did refuse Lazarus, once thou did scorn Lazarus, now Lazarus
shall disdain, refuse, and scorn thee: once thou stoppedst thine ears from the
cry of Lazarus, now he ^lops his ears from thy cry: once thou turnedst away thy
face from Lazarus; now he turns away his face from thee: once thou deniedst
crumbs to Lazarus, now he denies water to thee, not a spoonful, not a drop of
water.

Oh Abraham, but now if I had my goods, I would give Lazarus all for a drop of
Water: Now if I had a million of Gold, I would give it all for a drop of water:
now if I had a world of wealth, I would give i^ all to Lazarus; therefore, good
Abraham, one dro^ But he answered, No not a drop*

Not a drop? Then cursed be the day wherein I w^ born, and cursed be the night
wherein I was conceived cursed be my Father that begot me, and cursed be ^
Mother that bare me; cursed be the place that k^ me; cursed be the delicate
Robes that clothed me, cur^ be the delicate Meat that fed me; let me be most
acc^sed of all creatures both in Heaven and Earth. And ^ leave we him cursing,
who indeed was most accused; and learn that the souls of the damned b^ing
separated from their bodies, are in H^ Torments.

But to conclude all in one word, and to app^ all that has been spoken to this
present t^ and place, let us all in our vocations and plac^ follow the advice
of a late Eminent ^^ viz. to learn to have mercy on Lazarus, that i^ on our
poor Brethren, that we may find mer^ and that mercy may rejoice in Judgment: a^
you that are Magistrates of this City, think ap^ Lazarus that lies in your
Streets, that pineth at your gates, that starveth in* your Prisons for want of
Crumbs: Hark, how they cry Bread, bread, a loaf of bread for Jesus sake. Who
would not hear them? who would not pity them? who would not comfort them? Also
see that you choose good and merciful Officers in your Spittles and Hospitals,
that may feed Lazarus, and not fill their own Purses and Bellies, as the rich
man did. And you that sit in the seat of Judgment, and are Gods ^here on earth,
let the matter be rightly judged between the rich man and poor Lazarus; let
equi^ty be in your right hand, and justice in your left; consider that Lazarus
is poor, and that he is not a^le to wage Law against the rich man, yet defend
^im and let him have right. Defend the Father^ess and Widow. See that such as
be in need and necessity have their right: then shall the ^ighteous God of
Heaven bless you, and bless the ^and for your sake; then shall we be with
Lazarus ^ the blessed place of rest, whilst wretched Dives ^ tormented in Hell
flames, (even in that burn^g prison where angry and enraged Devils shall ^e his
Tormentors to Eternity) where he will be ^r ever crying and groaning out in
this kind of ^oleful manner following, viz.

^h! cursed, cursed, most accursed Soul,
^ Where am I now? what Friends are those that howl?
^ey seize upon me, they torment me sore,
^ I Shreik with anguish, they in fury roar.
Earths deep center; dark and dreadful Cell,
Where only angry damned Spirits dwell
grossest darkness, yet my sight so clear,
Most hideous Visions to the same appear.
In Hell, indeed, where I endure that curse
Which shall not cease, but be hereafter worse
In fire infernal; out of measure hot,
Which ever burns, and yet consumes not.
I rave, I curse, and I accuse my fate,
As if such torments were unjust, too great;
But Conscience nips me with, not so: I try
To kill that worm, but oh! it will not die.
Most wretched I, besides the Woes I have,
Methinks I hear my bones within my Grave,
(As troubled with some fatal Trumpets sound)
Begin to shake and shiver in the ground.
Alas, alas, what shall of me become
When wretched, go, ye cursed, is my doom.
How shall my Soul and Body both affrighted,
Then curse the hour they were again united.
How shall the Devils then with fury driven
Sieze me for Hell, when sentenced out of Heaven;
And on me with much insultation rage,
As if my torments might their own assuage.
Then with the hideous howling heard of Hell,
I shall be thrown down to that dreadful Cell,
Where we in flames, which never fail, shall burn;
From whence we never, never shall return.
The Winding Sheet.
NOw where am I? If I look behind me, I see Death hastening after me, nay, that
Death ^s at my Back: If I look forward, I see Heaven and Hell before me, my
self standing on the very brink of Time, and my next step (for ought I know)
may be into Eternity of joy or sorrow, where I did but now by Faith see others
were, there I my self must quickly really be, there I shall rejoice with them.
If I look a little before me, I may see my self cast down upon a Bed of
sickness; my Friends weeping, and fearing I shall die; the Physicians are
puzzled, and at a loss, giving me over for the Grave, and my self gasping for
Life, and breathing out my last. If I look but a little before me, I can as ^t
were hear my Friends saying, He is dead, he is dead, he is gone, he is
departed, and then (as it were) I might see them haling me out of my bed, and
wrapping me in My Winding Sheet, and nailing me up in my Coffin. I might see my
Grave a digging, and men hired to carry me on their shoulders from my house to
my Long Home, Relations and Neighbors following after to see me lodged in the
Dust, to lie and rot among the Dead.

But before all this can be done to my Body, my Soul has taken it is flight
into Eternity, where it is without change or alteration, for ever to be with
God or Devils. Oh that I ^ould then work it on my heart, that I must quickly be
either in Heaven or Hell, that I have a long Race to run by a short breath, (if
I enter Heaven,) a great way to go in a few hours.

The Sun who goes so many miles in a minute, the stars of the firmament, which
go so very many more, go not so fast, as my body to the Earth. In the same
instant that I feel the first attempt of the disease, I feel the victory; In
the twinkling of an eye, I can scarce see; instantly the taste is insipid and
fa^uous; instantly the appetite is dull and desireless: instantly the knees are
sinking and strengthless; and in an instant, sleep, which is the Picture, the
copy of Death, is taken away, that the original, Death it self may succeed, and
that so I might have death to the life

To return from the dead, is impossible; all my life then I will prepare for
death.

They call death Charons boat, I am sure it wafts* the Soul from a material to
an immaterial World.

I have but one step to Eternity: it is from life to death, I will be preparing
this body of mine, to win the garland of a blessed Immortality.

O the serious thoughts while I live! How I must die, these do so make me run,
that I may obtain a Crown of glory.

The sound of the Passing Bell assures me there is some to day likely to die;
it is so ^igh Night, it is high time then to work out my Salvation; lest the
Night of death put in, and none can work.

I have a task set will take up all my time, viz. to die well; while I live
then, I will learn to die; lest being found unprepared, it be said, Thou fool,
this night thy Soul shall be required of ^hee.

Maximilian the Emperor made his Coffin always to be carried along with him, to
this and, that his high Dignity might not make ^im forget his Mortality.

What was long since decreed in Heaven, God has sent Warrants to execute on
Earth, ^^mel mori, for us once to die.

Kings Xerxes standing on a Mountain, and ^aving many hundred thousand of his
Soldiers standing in the plain, fell a weeping, to think upon it, how in a few
years, and all those gal^ant valiant men must die.

Adam, he lived 930 years, and he died.

Enoch, he lived 96^ years, and he died.

Methusalem lived 967 years, and he died.

O the longest (...) has its night and in the and ^man must die!

The Princes of the Nations* pass sentence of death upon others: Well, it is
not long, but their turn will come, Semel mori once to die.

Many of us live where our parents lived, and live of the same lands which they
lived of: It is not long, and our Children shall do as much for us; For we must
go hence, and be seen no more.

Some ride Post, some Hackney pace, at serius, citius, sooner, later, all
arrive at the Common Inn, the grave, and die.

Some have the Palsy, some the Apoplexy, some a Fever, some an Ague, some a
Consumption, some none of them: yet the sick, the sound, they all meet in the
end, at the same Rendezvous, at the House of Death.

The Scholar thinks to delude Death with hi^s Fallacies. The Lawyer puts in his
Demur, the Prince his plea is State affairs: at aquo pulsat pede, Death knocks
at all doors alike; and when he comes, they all go hence, from their houses to
their graves.

Joseph the Jew, in his best health made his Stone-Coffin be cut out in his
Garden, to put him in mind of his Ego abeo, I go hence.

The Persians they buried their dead in their houses, to put the whole household
in mind of the same lot, Semel mori, once to die.

Simonides, when commanded to give the most wholesome rule to live well, willed
the La^edemonian Prince ever to bear in mind, Se tempore brevi moriturum: ere
long and he must die.

I have read of a sort of people that used dead men's bones for money, and the
more they have, they are counted the more rich: Herein consists my richest
treasure to bear that about me will make me all my lif^ ^ember my end.

Great Sultan Saladan, Lo^^ of many Nations and Languages, commanded upon his
deathbed, that one shall carry upon a Spears point through all his Camp, the
Flag of Death, and to proclaim, for all his wealth, Saladan has naught left,
but this winding sheet, An ensured Ensign of Death triumphing over all the Sons
of Adam.

I uncloath my self every night, I put off all, but what may put me in mind of
my windingsheet.

Anaxagoras having word brought him, his only son was dead; his answer was,
Scio me genuisse mortalem, I know he was born to die.

Philip of Macedon gave a Boy a pension every morning to say to him Philippe,
memento ^e hominem esse, Philip remember thou art a man, and therefore must die.

We read of Philostrates, how he lived seven years in his Tomb, that he might
be acquainted* with it, against the time he came to be put into it: Oh, an
Apprentiship of years, is time little enough to make us perfect in the Mystery
of Mortality.

Divine Meditations arising from the Contemplation* of these sad and serious
Sentences.
1. Med.

IS it not high time to make fit to die, considering thy Winding Sheet lies
ready for thee, and the Bell tolls thee away. Say with thy self, My want is
great, my time is almost run: If I make not market to day, I am not sure to do
it to morrow. O the uncertainty of Life shall be the Alarum-Bell to give me now
notice, to work out my Salvation with fear and trembling.

O, I am never so nigh my God, as when I think of my end. FRIEND, let Death be
in thy thoughts, and God will be in thy heart.

2. Med. Meditate, since man must die, Lord, what danger in dying unprepared!
this is Maxima miseria, A misery of miseries; and St. Augustine gives the
reason. For that look how a man goes to that prison the Grave, so he goes to
the Judgment-hall to be tried.

But oh Death, thou Common Butcherer of human Nature! after thy great stroke be
struck, I am not dead, but asleep. Blessed be thou my God, who have made my
grave my bed, in which, after I have taken some silent rest, the noise of the
Archangel with his Trumpet, shall awake and raise me, from a Death for sin, to
a life of glory. Death is the way we must all walk to Life:

Some ancient Fathers, and some late Writers (says the Lord Manchester) have
fixed upon the Love of God; Some, upon the Passion of Christ; Some, upon the
Joys of Heaven; Some, upon Contempt of the World; several others, upon diverse
other subjects: All opening, that some one is to be chosen. For whosoever will live
to himself, must be at leisure for God. And a wise Vivere sibi. Vacare Deo.
man says, Wisdom is to be written in time of leisure: Whoever is lessened by
work, he cannot tend it.

I being in my accustomed retiredness, disengaged from public affairs (which
was but seldom) found it useful, fruitful and delightful, To bestow my thoughts
upon my latter end.

There be four last things, say the Fathers, Heaven, Hell, Death, and Judgment.

All Subjects large enough.
But considering I had passed so much Employment, so many Offices, so long
Practice in several professions, I now thought it time to seize on Death,
before it seiz`d on me. Lord, teach me to number my days, that I may apply my
Heart to Wisdom.

After long meditation, this I found, that when Meditation had begotten
Devotion, then it applied it self to Contemplation; which required a settlement
upon some Divine Object.

And what more heavenly than the thought of Immortality? What so necessary as
the thought of Death? Herein therefore I complied with my own desires, and did
so as it were weave my own windingsheet by making choice of Death for the
Subject of my Contemplation.

We should not diffuse our thoughts into variety of Considerations, but
recollect them into one by Contemplation. Herewith a man's soul being once
affected, hardly shall he obtain leave of his thoughts to return again to
employments.

And lest I, busied about many things, should remain unknown unto my self; for
the old word is a true one, Nil prosunt lecta nec intellecta; nisi teipsum
legas, and intelligas.
Neither things read, or understood, profit him at all, who does not both read
and know himself. I there applied my self [ Ad meum novissimum, to my last
thing,] what man lives, and shall not see death? And if, after death, The
Righteous shall scarcely be saved, we may well be fearful, and had need be
careful that we be not taken unprepared.

When I was a young Man, (says Seneca) my care was to live well, I then
practiced the art of well living. When age came upon me, I then studied the
Artem been vivendi. art of dying well; how to Artem been moriendi. die well.

It is true, The journey of Life appears not to busy men until the end. Yet
when I was most busy of all, I delighted my self with this comfort, that a
time would come, wherein I might live to my self, hoping to have sweet leisure
to enjoy my self at last.

And this I am now come to, by disposing, not by changing my self.

Lord let me be found in this posture, when I come to die.

In the courses of my* Life I have had interchanges: The World it self stands
upon vicissitudes: God has interwoven my life with adversity and prosperity.
When I first took me to a Gown, I put on this thought; I desire a Fortune like
my Gown, not long, but fit; fit for my condition; Fortunam ut tegam appeto, non
longam, sed Concinnam.
finding by others, that a contented kind of obscurity keeps a Man free from
Envy. Although any kind of Superiority be a mark of envy; yet, Not to be so
high, as to provoke an ill eye, nor so low as to be trodden on, was the height
of my Ambition. But I must confess, I have since had a greater portion of the
World's favor, than I looked for: Nevertheless, I never gave trust to fortune,
although she seemed to be at peace with me.

To check repining at those above me, I always looked at those below me; nor
did any preferments so delight me, or abuse me, as to make me neglect preparing
for my dying day.

And now, I thank God, I can say, O Lord, my heart is ready. This I have
considered, that Life flows away by Hours and days, as it were by drops.

Careful Martha was full, busy about many things: but was well advised by
Christ, There was only one thing necessary.

One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I may dwell in his House for ever;
This was David's unum, his one thing, and, God willing, shall be mine.

Amidst these thoughts, I had these things in contemplation.

1. What Death was, and the kinds of Death. 2. Secondly, What fears or joys
death brings. 3. Thirdly, When Death is to be prepared for, and How. 4.
Fourthly, Death approaching, what our last thoughts should be.
Of these things I thus believed.
That Death was but a fall, which came by a* Fall. Our first-framed Father Adam
falling, in him we all fell. It was not the Man, but mankind.

Body and Soul parting.
But, Oh how bitter, at that time will be the parting of Soul and Body! We see
old acquaintance cannot part without tears. What shall such intimate familiar
friends do, as the Soul and Body are, which have lived together from the Womb
with so much delight?

In that hour, every man will make Balaam's suit, O that I might die the death
of the Righteous! We all desire to shut up our last scene of Life* with, In
manus tuas, Domine; Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my Spirit.

At this Hour, What would a man give to secure his Soul? Quid dabis pro anima
tua tunc, qui nunc pro nihilo das illam? What will thou give then for thy Soul
to save it, who do so prodigally throw it away now for nothing? This thou
can not leave behind thee, that will tell thee whether thou go, and what
thou shall look for: Tunc, quasi loquentia, tua Opera dicent; Tu nos egisti:
Tua opera sumus; Te non deseremus, sed tecum ibimus ad Judicium: Then shall thy
doings, even speaking aloud, say unto thee, Thou have done us, we are thy
works, we will not leave thee, but will go with thee to judgment.

In that day shall come into men's minds (by the Divine Power) in the twinkling
of an Eye, all their past good or evil Works.

Memory, the Magazine of the Soul, will then recount all that thou have done,
said, or thought, all thy life long: For there needs no other Art of memory for
sin, but misery.

Man is a great flatterer of himself, but Conscience is always just, and will
never chide thee wrongfully; it always takes part with God against a man's
self: It is a domestic Magistrate, that will tell what you do at home: It is
well termed the pulse of the Soul; therefore if you would know the true state
of your Body or Soul, feel how this beats, that will tell you: Yet take heed
you make not an Idol of your Conscience; neither think, as some do, that it is
a crime to make a Conscience of our Actions

At point of death, if a man will take his aim by the best men that ever lived
or died; that of David, Ezekias, yea, and of Christ himself, (as he was man) is
able to amaze any man; when as our Savior Christ, not many hours before he
suffered, said, My soul is troubled, and what shall I say; and at the very
point of Death, said, Father, if it be thy will, let this Cup pass from me.
When David said, Save, Lord, for thy mercies sake: For in Death there is no
remembrance of thee. And Ezekias wept sore, when he was bid, Put thy house in
order, for thou must die: If the Patriar^^s, if the Prophets, if the Apostles,
if the Martyrs, if Christ himself was thus troubled at the hour of Death,
Wretched man that I am, what shall I do? We were all to seek, but that Christ
bids us, Be of good cheer, for I have overcome Death.

Caesar Borgi^s being sick to death, said, When I lived, I provided for every
thing but death; now I must die, and am unprovided to die.

Previous preparation becomes a wise man. But we are all deceived with this
Error, that we think none but old men approach to death: neither experience nor
age can work upon us; so death, that it may more easily surprise us, shrowds it
self under the very name of life.

He that sees the Basilisk before he be seen of it, avoids the poison: See
Death before it comes, you shall not feel it when it comes.

We pray daily; Lord, Give us this day our daily Bread; whilst it is called to
day: We should remember, Life is but a day, it is but a day, not an age.
Wherefore, says Solomon, Talk not of to morrow, for thou know not what to
morrow will bring forth.

A man, says Luther, lives forty years before he knows himself to be a fool;
and by that time he sees his folly, his Life is finished. So men die before
they begin to live.

To die well, is too busy a work to be done well on a sudden. Deferring, as
well as presuming, makes many men implicit Atheists.

It was a sweet Speech, and might well have become an Elder Body, which a young
innocent Child of my own, used in extremity of sickness, Mother, what shall I
do? I shall die before I know what death is. I beseech you tell me what is
Death, and how I should die.

Now of the way to die well.
HE that would end his days well, must spend them well: It Is no great matter to
live, all do as much; but few die well.

But Death falls sad and heavy upon such,
Are little known at home, abroad too much.
Man is ready to die before he lives; but therefore he lives a time in the
world, that he may die betime to the world. His Years come to an end as a Tale
that is told. His days deceive him, for they pass as a shadow, by moonshine;
then appearing longest, when they draw nearest to an end. Job says, My days
are swifter than a Post, they flee away and see no good.

The art of dying well is better learnt by Practice, than by Precept.

Unto dying well, three Things are most requisite:

First, To be often meditating upon Death*

Secondly, To be dying daily.

Thirdly, To die by little and little.

The first step of dying well.
OFten meditation of Death brings a man to die in ease; for it alleviates
pains, expels fear, eases cares, cures sins, corrects death it self. The very
Thought of Eternity will make easy and pleasant all things we suffer in a
miserable Life.

How can we be said not to die, when we live among the dead? We live with so
many deaths about us, as we cannot but often think of dying.

Every Humor in us engenders Diseases enough to kill us, so that our Bodies
are but living Graves; and we die not because we are, sick, but because we
live. And when we recover from sickness, we escape not sickness, but the
disease: All this life is but a death of an hour.

Familiarity with Death, a sovereign Cordial against Death.
THerefore be acquainted with Death betimes; for through acquaintance, death
will lose his horror; like unto an ill Face, though it be as formidable as a
monster, yet often viewing will make it familiar, and free it from distaste:
walk every day, with Joseph, a turn or two in thy Garden with death, and thou
shall be well acquainted with the face of death; but shall never feel the sting
of death: Death is black, but comely. Philostrates lived seven years in his
Tomb, that he might be acquainted with it, against his bones came to lie in it.
Some Philosophers have been so wrapped in this contemplation of Death, and
Immortality, that they discourse so familiarly and pleasingly of it, as if a
fair death were to be preferred before a pleasant life.

This is well for Nature's part; and Moralists think this enough for their part
to conceive so: But Christians must go farther; and search deeper: They must
try where the power of death lies. They shall find that the power of every
man's death lies in his own sin; That death never hurts a man but with his own
weapons: It always turns upon us, some sin it finds in us. The sting of Death
is sin: Pluck out the sting, death cannot hurt us. The way to die well, is to
die often. Let a man often and seriously think of dying, then let him sin if he
can, said Picus Mirandula. In Sardis there grew an Herb called Appium Sardis,
that would make a Man lie laughing when he was deadly sick: Such is the
operation of sin. Beware therefore of this [ Risus Sardonicus] laughter of
Sardis.

We count it a fearful thing for a man to be author of his own death; but a
sinful life slays the soul. and so while we live, we kill or lose our better
life. The Commandment that says, Thou shall not kill, especially forbids the
murdering of our own Souls. And herein is our happiness; though we live in
sin, yet we die without sin. Therefore to me Death is welcome; not as an end of
troubles, but of sin. Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, for thou have
redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth.

The Second Step, To be dying daily.
THE second step to dying-well, is, to die daily. Methinks, O my Soul, it is
but yesterday since we met, and now we are upon parting; neither shall we, I
hope, be unwilling to take our leaves: for, what advantage can it be to us to
hold out longer together. Are we not assured that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens? Why therefore, O my Soul, should thou be loath
to part upon fair terms? Thou, O my Soul, to the possession of that happy
Mansion, which thy dear Savior has, from all Eternity, prepared for thee in
his Father's house: and thou, O my body, to that quiet repository of the grave;
till ye both shall happily meet in the blessed Resurrection of the Just.

I die, that I may not die. I die daily, says Saint Paul. So many days as thou
live, reckon so many lives; for he that disposes all his days as one life,
can neither wish nor fear to morrow.

The old saying is a good saying; Do that every day, which thou would do the
same day that thou die. It Is an excellent thing to make all we can of life,
before Death.

To die by little and little, the third step.
THE third step to dying well is, to die by little and little.

Naturally we are every day dying by degrees: the faculties of our minds, the
strength of our bodies, our common senses are every day decaying, by little and
little: every sin is more than a disease, and a wicked life makes a continual
death. Impie vivere est diu mori; To live wickedly, is to be long a dying:
Therefore says the good Man, We are killed all the day long.

He that uses this course every day. To die by little and little, to him (let
Death come when it will) it can neither be terrible nor sudden.

If we keep a Courser to run a Race, we lead him daily over the place, to
acquaint him by degrees with all things in the way, that when he comes upon his
speed, he do not start or turn aside for any thing he sees. So let us inure our
souls; and then we shall run with boldness the race that is set before us,
looking to Jesus, the Author and finisher of our salvation.

To die by little and little, is first to mortify our lesser sins, and not to
say with Lot, Is it not a little one?

There be also a sort of little deaths, sickness of body, loss of Friends, and
the like: Use these in their kind, and you may make them kindly helps to dying
well.

Every change is a certain imitation of Death. Let a man go out as he came into
the World; which was, first by a life of Vegetation, then of Sense, afterward
of Reason.

To die daily, is this: daily to attend upon, and exercise that great duty of
Mortification, according to our solemn Vow and Covenant made to God at our
Baptism: which Vow and Covenant, we renew, at our first coming to the holy and
blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Alas, how few do consider, or
understand this great duty of Mortification, and fewer practice it. And yet
this, above all others, is the Grace which fitteth and prepares us for Death;
this Grace puts us into the possession of Life Spiritual; and by
perseverance in it, into life Eternal, Romans 8. 13. But if ye live after the
flesh; that is, after the appetites, lusts, affections of the flesh; ye shall
die. But I bless God, I have nothing to do with the World, nor the World with
me. Riches, Pleasures, honors transport me not, affect me not; nor am I
dejected and afflicted with poverty, common pains, sicknesses, disgrace or
scorn. Christ lives in me, and I in him; therefore, I humbly thank the power
of his grace, I can die as willingly as I can go out of one Room into another.

For the manner of dying.
AMongst Men it is a matter of chief mark, the manner of a man's death. The
chief good of Man, is his good departure out of this life.

Before you die, set your house in order: He that has not a house, yet has a
soul; no soul can want affairs to set in order, for this final dissolution.

The chief grace of the Theater, is the last Scene. It is the Evening that
Crowns the day; and we think it no good sign of a fair Morrow, when the Sun
sets in a Cloud: The end Crowns every Work.

Most men wish a short Death, because death is always accompanied with pain. We
die groaning. To lie but an hour under Death is tedious, but to be dying a
whole day, we think beyond the strength of humane patience: He that desires to
be dissolved, and be with Christ, dies not only patiently, but delightfully.
Happy is he, that after due preparation, dies ere he be aware; so likewise is
he happy that, by long sickness, sees death afar off; for the one dies like
Elias, the other like Elisha: both blessedly.

The best posture to be found in when Death comes, is in the exercise of our
calling: Press, says St. Paul, toward the mark, for the prize of the high
calling, Phil. 3.

A good Man, by his good will, would die praying, and do as the Pilgrim does,
go on his way singing, and so adds the pains of singing to that of going; Who
yet by this surplus of pain, unwearies himself of pain.

But some wretches think God rather curious, than they faulty, if a few sighs,
with a [ Lord have mercy upon us,] be not enough at the last gasp.

But commonly good Men are best at last, even when they are dying. It was a
Speech worthy the commendation, and frequent remembrance of so divine a Bishop
as Augustine, which is reported of an aged Father, in his time; who, when his
Friends comforted him on his sick bed, and told him, they hoped he should
recover; answered, If I shall not die at all, well; but if ever, why not now?
Surely it is folly, what we must do, to do unwillingly. I will never think my
Soul in a good case, so long as I am loath to think of dying.

There is no Spectacle in the World so profitable, or more terrible, than to
behold a dying man; to stand by, and see a man dismanned. Curiously did thou
make me in the lowest part of the Earth, says David: but to see those Elements
which compounded, made the Body: To see them divided, and the man dissolved, is
a rusul sight.

Every dying man carries Heaven and Earth wrapped up in his bosom, and at this
time each part returns homeward.

Certainly, death has great dependency on the course of man's life, and life
it self is as frail as the Body which it animates. Augustus Caesar accounted
that to be the best death which is quick and unexpected, and which beats not at
our doors by any painful sickness. So often as he heard of a man that had a
quick passage, with little sense of pain, he wished for himself that
Euthanafie: While he lived he used to set himself between his two friends,
Groans and Tears. When he died he called for his Looking-glass, commanded to
have his Hair and Beard kembed, his reviled Cheeks smoothed up. Then asking his
Friends, if he acted his part well, when they answered, Yes; why then, says he,
do you not all clap your hands for me?

Despair in dying, may as well arise from weakness of Nature, as from trouble
of Mind: But by neither of these can he be prejudiced, that has lived well.

Raving, and other strange Passions, are many times rather the effect of the
Disease, than coming from the mind. For upon Death's approaches, choler fuming
to the Brain, will cause distempers in the most patient Soul. In these cases,
the fairest and truest judgment to be made is, that sins of sickness occasioned
by violence of Disease in a patient man, are but sins of infirmity, and not to
be taken as ill signs or presages; A Son of so many Tears cannot but be saved.
I will not despair in respect of that man's impatient dying, whom the Worm of
Conscience had not devoured living.

Seldom any enter into Glory with ease; yet the Jews say of Moses, His soul was
sucked out of his mouth with a kiss.

David in this case, the better to make his way, prayed and cried, Lord, spare
me a little. O spare me, that I may recover my strength, before I go hence and
be no more.

Indeed to Ezekias some Years of Days were lent: But we are not worthy of that
favor; we must not expect that God will bring back the shadow of degrees, when
once it is gone down in the Dial of Ahaz; we must time it as we may, and be
content to live and die at uncertainties.

Therefore, as a sick man hearkens to the Clock, so let us watch Death. For
sudden coming of Death, finding a weak soul unprepared, makes it desperate, and
leaves it miserable.

Death approaching, what our last Thoughts should be.
SEneca says, the last day judges all the precedent. The last is the best;
dying words are weightiest, and make deepest impressions. Our last thoughts are
readiest to spend themselves upon somewhat that we loved best while we lived.

The soul it self, when it is entering into glory, breaths Divine things.

At this time a good man's tongue is in his breast, not in his mouth; his words
are then so pithy and so pectoral, that he cries, O Lord Jesus, take thine own
into thy own custody!

Anatomists say, there are strings in a man's tongue, which go to his heart;
when these break, Man speaks his heart. Oh that they were wise! (said Moses)
and would understand, and foresee their latter end. When he was dying Christ's
last words in the Bible are, Surely I come quickly; Our answer is, Amen: Even
so come Lord Jesus, etc.

I have but small acquaintance with the future State, but this I Am sure there
will be no change that will be so surprising to me as that By Death. It is a
thing of which I know but little, and none of the millions of Souls that have
past into the invisible World, have come again to tell me how it is.

I.
It must be done (my Soul) but it is a strange,
A dismal and Mysterious change, Norris.

When thou shall leave this Tenement of Clay;
And to an unknown somewhere wing away;
When Time shall be Eternity, and thou
Shall be thou know not what, and live thou know not how.
II.
Amazing State! no wonder that we dread
To think of Death, or view the Dead,
You Are all wrapped up in the Clouds, as if to thee
Our very knowledge had Antipathy.
Death could not a more sad retinue find,
Sickness and pain before, and darkness all behind.
III.
Some courteous Ghost tell this great Secrecy,
What it is you are, and we must be.
You warn us of approaching Death, and why
May we not know from you what it is to dye?
But you having shot the Gulf, delight to see
Succeeding Souls plunge in with like uncertainty.
IV.
When Life's close knot by writ from Destiny,
Disease shall cut, or age unty;
When after some delays, some dying strife,
The Soul stands shivering on the ridge of Life;
With what a dreadful Curiosity
Does she launch out into the Sea of vast Eternity.
V.
So when the spacious Globe was deluged over,
And lower holds could save no more,
On the utmost Bough the astonished Sinners stood,
And viewed the Advances of the encroaching Flood.
Over topp'd at length by the Elements increase,
With horror they resigned to the untry`d Abyss.
It is very desirable to know in what condition our Souls will be when they
leave the Body, and what is the Nature of that abode into which we must go, but
which we never saw into; and through what Regions we must then take our flight,
and after what manner this will be done. It Is certain my Soul will then
preserve the faculties that are natural to it, viz. to understand, to will, to
remember, as it is represented to us under the Parable of Dives and Lazarus: But
alas! we little know how the People of the disembodied Societies act, and will,
and understand, and communicate their thoughts to one another, and therefore I
long to know it. What conception can I have of a separated Soul (says a late
Writer) but that it is all Thought?

I firmly think when a man's body is taken from him hy Death, he is turned into
all Thought and Spirit. How great will be his Thought when it is without any
hinderance from these material Organs that now obstruct its Operations? In that
Eternity (as one expresses it) the whole power of the Soul runs together one
and the same way. In Eternity the Soul is united in its Motions, which way one
faculty goes all go, and the Thoughts are all concentred as in one whole
Thought Beverley's great Soul of Man. p. 292.
of Joy or Torment.

These things have occasioned great variety of Thoughts in me, and my Soul when
it looks toward the other World and thinks it self near, it can no more cease
to be inquisitive about it, than it can cease to be a Soul.

Tears FOR A Dead Husband.
WHen Mary came where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his feet, saying
unto him, Lord if thou had been here, my Brother had not died, Jo. 11. 32.
She wept indeed, yet it was but for a Brother; and the Jews also wept, verse.
33. yet it was but for a common Friend: But what was all that to the death of a
Husband? O my Husband, my Husband! That very name of Husband methinks would
flatter me with comfort, as if I might imagine that he could hear me. But oh, he
is dead, he is dead: He cannot hear me he cannot behold me; he cannot answer
me: His Ears are locked up, his Eyes are closed, his mouth is sealed, his Soul
is gone. O what shall I do for my head, my guide, my heart, my Husband? Were my
Savior upon Earth again, I could send one to him as Mary did, who should say,
Lord, behold, he whom thou love is dead. Dead, say I^ O dead, dead; he is
gone; he is departed, and can never be recalled. But why? Why can he not be
called back again? Did not my Jesus cause Lazarus to arise when he had been
four days dead? ver. 39. Yes, he did: But what then? I neither love my Savior
so well as Mary did, nor (I fear) does he love me so well as he did Mary: or if
both were so, yet since Miracles are ceased, I cannot so much as hope that he
will call back the Spirit of my Lord, my Husband. Oh could he be wooed by the
Tears of a sinful Woman, never did any mourn so much as I would. But nothing
will persuade: I seek but the disturbance of him whom I mourn for, if I desire
to call him from his eternal rest.

When Sarah died in Kirjath-Arba, Abraham stood up from before his deceased
Wife, and spoke unto the Sons of Heth, saying, I am a stranger, and a Sojourner
with you: Give me a Possession, and a burying place with you, that I may bury
my dead out of my sight, Genesis 23. 3, 4. Though he so tenderly affected her
whilst she was living, yet he would not look too long on her when she was dead.
It is a duty as full of humanity to interr with decency the Bodies of the dead,
as it is of Religion to love the Persons when they are alive. Yet vain is man
in this affection, if he fixes his love only on the beauty of the body. This
flesh which is so tender, this skin which I strive to preserve both smooth and
white, must one day be a banquet for the loathed Worms. No greater privilege
belongs to me than did to my Husband; for the time will come when I shall
follow him to the Earth. Had I loved only his outward form, my love should now
either be quite forgotten, or else I should fondly desire to deny it interment:
But it was his body enlivened with a rich and excellent Soul, which drew mine
affection, and commanded my desires. Had that Soul and body continued their
Society, I had been freed from my laments: but they have bid farewell till the
general Resurrection, and hence am I enforced to utter my complaints. I weep
for my loss because we are divorced: But oh what conflicts then can I imagine
that he had, when he was not only to part from his indeared Wife; but likewise
his Soul was to leave this chillowed Earth! Oh for him, for him, for my loss of
him do I pay the tribute of these watering Eyes. Yet these tears must not flow
in too great abundance, lest by them I should seem to envy his happiness. Even
when his body shall be laid to sleep in the grave, if I mourn too much, it
will be justly suspected that too much I loved the worst of my Husband. His
Soul, which was his best, is now in perfection, and may not be lamented: his
Body which is the worst and grosser part of him, is now to be committed to the
Earth whence it came. Thither it must go, to that place I must commend it;
otherwise my former love may be turned into loathing: and that which I esteemed
when it was alive, I shall be forced to abhor, if I keep it from the Grave. O
it grieveth me each minute that I think of my dearest; it troubles and
perplexeth me with disturbed thoughts, when I consider how frequently I loved
him, yet cannot enliven him. But these are only the fond conceptions of an
erring fantasy; and tell me that I loved him more than I should, or else now
I would not grieve so much as I do. If my love to God be so great as I pretend,
I shall thankfully acknowledge his Love to the departed. O let it never be said
that my Love was Idolatry, in affecting him, too much, who is but dust and
ashes.

But why sit I musing in these pensive thoughts when I should rather prepare
for the burial of the dead? Have I taken a course for the place of his Rest,
where his cold body may be laid to sleep? This is a duty which every age has
been careful to perform. It was a greater argument of Jehojakim's fury against
Vriah the Prophet, that he cast his dead body into the graves of the common
People, than that he slew him with the Sword, Jer. 26. 23. It has also been a
testimony of God's revenge, when he suffered not the dead to have a decent
interment. If a Man beget an hundred Children (says the Preacher) and live
many years, so that the days of his years be many; and his Soul be not filled
with good, and also that he have no burial, I say that an untimely birth is
better than he, Eccles. 6. 3. When the Man of God had disobeyed his command,
the old Prophet told him, saying, Thy Carcass shall not come into the Sepulcher
of thy Fathers, 1 King. 13. 22. This Curse was accounted as full of dread, as
any that was sent upon the Sons of Men.

But on the contrary Abijah the Prophet tells the Wife of Jeroboam concerning
her sick son Abijah, saying, Arise, get thee to thine house; and when thy feet
enter into the city, the Child shall die: But all Israel shall mourn for him,
and bury him; for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the Grave, because in him
there is found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of
Jeroboam 1 Kings 14. 12, 13. Again, when Huldah the Prophetess did foretell the
destruction of Jerusalem, but a respite thereof in the time of J^siah, she told
him, saying, Behold, says the Lord, I ^i^^ gather thee to thy Fathers; and
thou sha^^ ^ gathered into thy Grave in peace, 2 Kings 22. 20. Thus has it
often discovered the wrath of the Almighty, when the carcasses of the dead have
been denied their funerals: and on the contrary, it has sometimes manifested
his love, when they have peaceably been brought to their longest home. Burial
is the last of duties which we owe unto our friends, to which both religion,
and nature, and civility do prompt us forward. When Isaac, being old and full
of days, did give up the Ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people; his
two sons Esau and Jacob buried him, Genesis 35. 29. When John the Baptist was
beheaded in the prison his disciples came and took up the body, and buried it,
Mat. 14. 12. The disciple that was willing to follow my Redeemer, yet accounted
it his duty to attend on the funeral of his deceased Father, and therefore
desired, saying, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my Father, cap. 8. 21.

Even the glutton in the Gospel had so much favor as to be brought to his
Grave: so says the text; The rich man also died, and was buried, Lu. 16. 22.

It is then the duty of the living to provide even for the dead, that they may
be buried in peace.

But is it a matter of any moment in what place we lay the bodies of our
deceased friends? Is it not all one, whether in the fields, or whether in our
Golgotha's? No doubtless, for even the laws of our land are so justly severe
against Idolaters, that we suffer not the convicted to be buried in our ground
which is dedicated to this use. Neither may they be permitted to mix with our
dead, who have desperately become the murderers of themselves: but they lie in
the roads, where a stake is set up, to give notice to passengers that they
unnaturally hastened their own departure. Is it a matter of some moment to us
who are living, that we lay our deceased friends in a place convenient: for
although it extends not to their knowledge, yet it redoundeth to their honor.

But is it not all one in what part of the ground I bury my Husband, so I lay
his body in a place that is set apart for that purpose? Surely no; although it
is equal to him, yet is it not to me. Although at the resurrection we shall
meet again, at what distance soever our Graves shall be made; yet there is some
reason we should be buried so near as we may, that as our bodies were enjoined
a mutual society in the time of life so they might also sleep together in the
silent dust. It is but just that one grave should receive the bodies of us, for
whom one bed was designed upon earth; that as in our lives we were made one
flesh, so after our deaths we should make one lump. When Barzillai was offered
a favor from King David, and wooed to spend his time at the Court, he besought
the King, saying, Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back again, that I may die
in mine own city, and be buried by the grave of my Father, and of my Mother, 2 Samuel 19. 37. Friends have ever desired to lie by friends, that those especially
who were knit together in blood and affection, might be joined together in
their earth and ashes. In the Cave of Machpelah which Abraham bought of Ephron
for four hundred shekels of silver, was buried both himself, and Sarah his
wife, Genesis 23. 16. There lay Isaac, and Rebekah his wife, cap. 49. 31. and
there lay Leah, and Jacob her husband, chap. 50. 13. Though Saphira died by the
judgment of God for the lie she had told: yet when she fell dead at Peter's
feet, and yielded up the Ghost, the young men came in, and carried her forth,
and buried her by her Husband, Act. 5. 10. It is therefore convenient that I
choose a place for burial of my Husband, where (if so it may be) I my self may
be laid. Convenient it is, but not absolutely necessary; for the souls shall
not enjoy the less felicity for the remoter distance, and separation of the
bodies: neither shall the bodies either be sensible of the disjunction; or
shall it retard their meeting at the general day. Although the bones of Jacob
were carried into the land of Canaan, and buried in the cave of the field of
Machpelah which Abraham bought, according as he had made his son Joseph swear
to him before his death, Genesis 50. 13. 5. yet he had formerly buried his beloved
Rachel in the way to Ephrah, which is Bethlehem, and there Jacob set a pillar
upon her Grave, which was called the pillar of Rachel's grave, cap. 35. 19, 20.

Thus do I sit and muse about the burial of him whom so dearly I loved. Yet
methinks I could most readily preserve him from the dust, if either it were in
my power, or might bring me content. But go he must, and I must follow him.
This narrow room of his coffin must be put in trust with his mouldring earth:
and he who in his life time was entertained with variety of spacious chambers,
must now securely sleep in the chamber of a Grave. O how it grieveth me to see
this effect of sin! Had not Adam fallen, my husband had not died. But oh, he is
dead; and since nor tears, nor sigh's, nor groans, nor cries have power to
recall him, it is therefore my duty, and it shall be my care to express my love
to him in the rites of his funeral. Friends shall carry him; neighbors shall
attend on him; and my tears shall embalm him. The preacher shall be instructed
in the virtue which adorned him, that so he may commend them to others for
their due imitation. The hearers shall greedily attend to the praises of the
dead; and not only acknowledge their truth, but contentedly wish like him to
live, and like him to die.

Now, O now another storm approaches in mine eyes: for the company begins
to approach my doors; and my neighbors and my friends are hastening to my
house. But when they come let them not think to comfort me, lest they add to my
grief while they vainly strive to conquer my Passion. I cannot allow an
intermission or forbearance of Tears, lest I should appear unnatural. If I do
not weep, I I did not love. O methinks I could willingly weep my self into a
Statue, that I might become his monument. It is the height of injustice to
forbid my Tears, since the delight of mine Eyes is now to be carried to the
place of Oblivion. Methinks every thing seems to call for a Tear, which is
the object of a Sense. Those Bells which so mournfully accord in their Tunes,
invite my Neighbors to come to the Funeral; yet not to appear with empty Eyes,
unless they come to learn how to weep. These Herbs, these Strewings, which
lately were fresh and at ease in their Beds, are willing to lie even under the
feet of these that will mourn: And because they have no Eyes themselves to weep
us a Tear, they lie to receive what shall drop from the mourners. These Sprigs
of Rosemary do call to my remembrance with what joy and delight they pleased me
at my Nuptials: But (lest I should forget the greater happiness of the marriage
with the Lamb) even this Herb which served at our Wedding does attend at the
Funeral. O methinks these Spriggs have sad Rhetoric sitting on their leaves;
for those drops of Water which hang upon them, were once the Blood of the
fragrant Flowers, and now are the Tears of the drooping Plants. So ready were
these Spriggs to come when I desired them, that they slipped from their stems
to attend these Obsequies. These exotic Perfumes which delight the sense, are
willing to be burned, rather than the living shall be offended with the dead.
These sable Garments strike Terror into the Eye, and command the spectator to
lend us a Sigh. And what other Lecture is read here, or taught, but God's
decree of Man*s Mortality? The chief Speaker and Orator is he who has now
forgotten to speak; for the locking up of his Senses, the silence of his
Tongue, and the coldness of his pale and frozen Body, have more force to prove
the shortness of our Lives, than the most Eloquent Strains of the best
Rhetorician. These Bells assure me, that my Life is but a sound, a noise, an
air: These Persumes tell me, That it is but a Vapor: These Herbs do teach me,
that Flesh is as Grass, 1 Pet. 1. 24. And these Tears, these early Tears, which
so suddenly arise, when my Heart does call, teach me Mortality in their hasty
falling. And who can choose but weep for the shortness of our Lives? Who can
forbear a Tear at the Funeral of a Friend? It was a curse inflicted upon the
wicked Jews, that they neither should be buried, nor yet lamented. They shall
die of grievous deaths (says the Prophet) they shall not be lamented; neither
shall they be buried: but they shall be as dung upon the face of the earth; and
their carcasses shall be meat for the fowls of heaven, and for the beasts of
the earth, Jer. 16. 4.

Grace must, and most willingly shall have the chief predominance; but let
Nature have likewise its qualifyed Drops, so they grow not immoderate. Though
my loss be the greatest to whom he was a Husband, yet others may weep too, to
whom he was a Friend: When Joseph went to bury his Father, then all the
servants of Pharaoh went with him, and the Elders of his house, and all the
Elders of the Land of Egypt: And all the house of Joseph, and his Brethren, and
his Fathers House: And they came to the Threshing-Floor of Arad, and there they
mourned with a great and very sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his
Father seven days, Genesis 50. 7, 8, 10. When Lazarus was buried, and the Jews saw
Mary rise up hastily, and go out, they little imagined that she went to meet
the Lord of Life: but they followed her, saying, She goes unto the Grave to
weep there, Jo. 11. 31. When her Brother Lazarus was dead, she wept, and her
sister wept, and her friends the Jews wept: And when Christ did see them all
thus weeping, he was so far from blaming them, that he wept himself, ver. 35.
When Josiah was slain, his servants took him out of the Chariot wherein he was
wounded, and put him in the second Chariot which he had, and they brought him
to Jerusalem: And he died, and was buried in one of the Sepulchers of his
Fathers: and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35. 24. When
Samuel was dead, all Israel lamented him, and buried him in Ramah, in his own
City, 1 Samuel 28. 3. When the old Prophet took up the Carcass of the Man of God,
who had been slain by a Lion, he laid it upon the Ass, and brought it back; and
came to the City to mourn, and to bury him: And he laid his Carcass in his own
grave, and they mourned over him, saying, Alas my Brother, 1 Kings 13. 29, 30.
The Children of Israel wept for Moses in the Plain of Moab thirty days, Deuteronomy.
34. 8. Though Samuel took his leave, and departed from Saul, and came no more
to see him until the day of his death; nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 35. Though Jephthah's Daughter had been dead and buried long before,
yet it was a custom in Israel, that the Daughters of Israel went yearly to
lament the Daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite, four days in a year, Jud. 11.
39, 40. When Stephen was stoned, devout Men carried him to his burial, and made
great lamentation over him, Acts 8. 2. When Hezekiah slept with his Fathers, he
was buried in the chiefest of the Sepulchers of the Sons of David; and all
Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at his Death, 2 Chr. 32.
33. When Mary Magdalen stood weeping at the feet of my Savior, and did wash
his Feet with Tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, and brought an
Alabaster Box of Ointment, and anointed him with the Ointment, Luke 7. 37, 38.
He was so far from disliking it in her, that he checked his Disciples who had
indignation at the Act* and therefore said, To what purpose is this waste? Yea,
he reproved them, and said unto them, Why trouble ye the Woman? For she has
wrought a good work upon me: For in that she has poured this Ointment on my
Body, she did it for my Burial, Mat. 26. 8, 10, 12. She has done what she
could; she is come aforehand to anoint my Body to the burying, Mar. 14. 8.
Here, I find, was Ointment to embalm him; and here were also Tears at his
Funeral: And yet so far was Christ from blaming her for her Tears, that he not
only decreed the publishing of this Act through the World where the Gospel
should be preached, and that for a Memorial of her, Mat. 26. 13. but he
likewise upbraided Simon with the tears of the sinner, and said unto him, I
entered into thine house, and thou gave me no water for my feet, but she has
washed my feet with Tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, etc.
Wherefore her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much, Luke 7.
44, 47. Weep then I may upon this sad occasion; yea, and weep may my Friends
too. Tears are as proper at a Funeral, as Smiles at a Wedding. We have two
Marriages; the first whereof is to living Dust; the last to the cold and silent
Earth. At the former we rejoice, for it was an institution of God before Man
had sinned, Genesis 2. 24. At the latter we weep, for it is the effect of sin. We
cloth our selves in delightful Colors, when we celebrate the former: But our
Blacks at the latter are our Wedding Garments. The Rosemary is served about at
each: The Gloves and the Favors attend at each: The Wine, and the other
accustomed Entertainments are given at each: We go to the Church for the
consummation of each: Only here is the difference, that at the one we rejoice,
but at the other we mourn. Every Guest that is willing to comply with the
present occasion, must as well be sad at this, as be merry at the other. Weep
we may, and weep we must; especially my self who have lost my self. But yet let
me take heed that I offend not in my Tears, lest that which is my Duty be
turned into a Crime. I must especially take heed that I err not in the cause of
these Laments: for if I grieve at the happiness of him that is departed, I
discover an Envy rather than Affection. If I grieve for the loss which my self
sustaineth, I must take heed that I wrong not my confidence in God. I may not
offend in the number of my Tears; for if I weep too much, I may forfeit my
hope; or at least I may occasion those that behold me to think that I doubt of
the salvation of the Dead. Weep I may, and weep I must: but for fear lest I
offend in these my Tears, in my earnest Prayers I will beg that they may be
sanctified. To my God will I go for his Direction and Assistance: And in this
storm of my Tears, I will shelter my self under his Protection.

The Dying Knell --, Or, Tears for the Death of a beloved Brother, and may
likewise serve at the Decease of any other faithful Friend.
A Friend (says King Solomon) loves at all times, and a Brother is born for
adversity, Prove. 17. 17. Friendship which is begotten by the outward form, or
any other sinister and byrespect, lives no longer than that ground of
affection: but nature is stronger than our election can be; and Religion
obliges far more than both. O how great then is my loss of my dearest Brother,
in whom both excellency of Feature nearness of blood, and a gracious
conversation conspired together to render him matchless! To me he was a Friend
but now to the Grave: and what loss can be greater than the loss of a Friend?
To me he was a Brother, but now to the Worms: And what loss can be more
deplorable than the loss of a Brother? But to me he was yet more: he was a
Friend in his Love and courtesies, a Brother by his blood, yea and an
instructor, a teacher of Religion and goodness: And yet nor love, nor blood,
nor Religion could preserve him mine. O what Sorrows do accompany all things
transitory! His love could not die, but his body could: And so I am deprived of
the Society of my Brother, because my Brother was subject to Corruption. But is
this the adversity for which he was born, according to King Solomon? Did the
Wise Man intend that a Brother is born to bring Adversity? Or rather to comfort
us in the time of Adversity? Had he been a cause of my least disturbance while
he was living, he would have eased my grief by grieving himself. He would have
comforted me in the time of trouble, had he lived to see my grievous mourning.
But now alas I am left to lament alone; and so much the more for the want of
his comfort. I now must grieve for him who was my joy: and my laments and my
griefs increase the higher, because for his sake they arise who cannot allay
them. Had we lived in hatred, his death peradventure might have been my
Comfort. Had we loved but slightly, a tear or two I might have thought enough
to pay at his Funeral. But our Love was firm, it was strong, yea strong as
death; and who then can blame me if my sorrows in some measure keep pace with
my love? O what tie can be so great as that of affection? What love so great as
of a Brother and Sister? And yet so vain is Man, so frail are Mortals, that
either our affection or our persons must have a divorce. Had my deceased
Brother forgotten the tie and bond of nature, and in his life had he turned his
love into hatred; yet his fault ought not to have lessened my Love, to which
both Nature and Religion did strongly oblige me. Had he loved me but coldly and
faintly, as diverse do; yet I ought to have warmed his affection with the
fervency of mine. But oh, he dearly loved, he cordially affected me: and yet
his love and his affection could not prolong his life.

Had my Brother and I been Idolaters together, I might have believed that that
sin had slain my Brother. But as our Love was constant, so our Religion was
undefiled: yea the strength of our Love was founded on the purity of our
Religion; and yet he has paid his debt to Nature. The Lord did, threaten to
set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and that they should fight every one
against his Brother, Is. 19. 2. Those Egyptians were heathens, and Enemies to
the Church; but my Brother and I were united both in the Profession and the
Love of Christianity: and yet through our sins I fear that even we destroy each
other. My sins are partly punished in his death: and his death has given me so
deep a wound, that peradventure I shall not long survive him. Our love was so
entire, that methink's I could willingly sleep with him in his Grave: for while
I live, my breast is but his walking monument. Such love as ours did not always
possess the hearts of some as nearly allied? which makes me sigh to think that
ever there were any which had layen successively in the self same womb, and yet
did not join in the unity of affection.

Methinks the complaint of the Church may be part of an Elegy upon my deceased
brother; for with her I may cry out, and that justly too; The good man is
perished out of the earth. But neither can I say that he was a Jew in
supplanting; or an enemy to the Church, lying in wait for blood; What secret
Devil did guide both the tongue and the hand of Joab, when under the color of
friendship he asked Amasa, Art thou in health, my brother? And took him by the
beard with the right hand to kiss him, 2. Sam. 20. 9. and yet even at that time
smote him with his sword in the fifth ribb, and shed out his bowels to the
ground that he died* v. 10. What cursed fiend did guide the tongue of that
wicked miscreant whom the Psalmist charge thus, and says, Thou sit and
speaks against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mothers son, Psalm. 50.
20. Had my brother either supplanted me, or hunted me with a net, or sought to
slay me, or slandered me with his tongue, then I might peradventure have saved
this great expense of my Tears. But he was always so good a Brother, that I
could never justly charge him with the least discourtesie. O no, we took sweet
Counsel together, and walked unto the House of God in company, Psalm. 55. 14. I
may say of him as Nehemiah spoke of Hanani the Ruler of the Palace, He was a
faithful man, and feared God above many, Neh. 7. 2. His blood was near to me;
but his Soul was nearer. His person I loved, as I was prompted to it by Nature:
But his inner man I more zealously affected, to which I was allured by his
gracious endowments, yet neither his Counsel, nor his society, nor his
fidelity, nor his Religion could preserve him from the sentence of a temporal
death. O what would I not do to call him back again? What would I not give to
have him restored to life again? But all that I can either do or give, cannot
persuade his Soul to return back to its Prison.

Well then, seeing that I cannot fetch him from the Grave, I will yet send up
my sighs toward the place where he is blessed. This I may do without any check
either of reason, or religion. It was a curse which God did inflict upon
Jehojakim for his sins, That they should not lament for him, saying, A^ my
Brother, Jer. 22. 17, 18. But on the contrary, when Deborah (though she was but
Rebekah's Nurse) was buried beneath Bethel under an Oak, the name of it was
called Allon-Bachuth, the Oak of weeping, Genesis 35. 8. When the enemies of David
were visited by sickness, he behaved himself as though they had been his
Friends, or his Brethren: Yea he bowed down heavily, as one that mourns for
his Mother. Ps. 35. 14. But he who now is dead was not my enemy, but my friend,
yea and no common friend, but a Brother: yea, and not a Brother in the flesh so
much as in affection, even as dear as a Mother. Why then should I not sorrow
for the loss of such a Brother? I will grieve, I will lament when I remember
the Love, and the courtesies which he showed unto me; and I will speak in the
language of the Church to Christ, and say, O thou that were my Brother, that
sucked the breasts of my Mother, when I should find thee without, I would kiss
thee; yet I should not be despised, Cant. 8. 1. I will lament him as David did
Saul and Jonathan, and say, the Beauty of Israel is dead, 2 Samuel 1 19. he was
lovely and pleasant in his life, ver. 23. I am distressed for thee, my Brother;
very pleasant have thou been unto me; thy love to me was wonderful, passing the
love of Women, v. 26.

But what advantage to the dead are the tears of the living? Can my sighs
inspire life into his bosom? Can a draught of my tears fetch him back again to
life? O no: it is this, it is this therefore that does heighten and increase my
sorrows, even that my tears cannot recover him whom I lament. But cease, fond
woman, cease thy sobbs and cries of discontent. By the extremity of thy passion
thou may hasten to his Grave: yet if thou murderest thy self with excessive
sorrow, thy soul may be deprived of the society of his. It Is true indeed; it is
most true. Little can I expect to come to heaven, if I violently force my self
from the earth. Why then do I take on, as if I either suspected his happiness,
or doubted of following him? What comfort can it bring to his body of earth, to
have it cabined in the Grave with his dispersing ashes? The dust of both of us
may mix in the vault, and yet no joy arise to our senseless ashes. If his earth
was that which drew mine affection, I see my fondness in the corruption of that
Earth: but if his gracious soul was the object of my love, I must strive to
come where that surviveth. To heaven he is gone, and to heaven I Will hasten: and
because I will go the surest way, I will walk in those paths which faith and
patience shall direct me in. I will no more disturb the peace of my mind, since
that cannot help me to the company of him. Weep indeed I do; I am enforced unto
it: it is the law of nature; it is an act of necessity; I cannot avoid it. Yet,
though I weep, I will labor for content: and since my God (as I undoubtedly
believe) has been pleased to crown my brother with glory; I will beseech him
to comfort me here with his grace. I will not immoderately weep, lest I injure
my self: I will not weep without hope, lest I offend my Maker: but that I may
weep as I should, and hope as I ought, and live as I am required, I will humble
my self at the feet of him to whom my brother is gone.

Put on Mourning Apparel. Sermon III.
ECCLES. 7. 2. It is better to go to the House of Mourning, then to the House
of feasting: for that is the end of all Men, and the living will lay it to his
heart.
IT is evident, that in this Verse that I have now read to you, the Wise man
speaks of such a mourning, as is occasioned by the Death of friends. And he
says of that Mourning, that it is better than to be in the House of Feasting.

That he speaks of such a mourning, appears by that which follows: First, he
says that this is the end of all men, he speaks therefore of such a mourning,
as is upon the end of men, upon the departure of men out of this World: And
Secondly, he says, the living will lay it to his heart: He speaks of such an
end of Men, as is opposite to the life of Men.

In a word, By the House of mourning, he means a house wherein some one is
dead, which gives occasion to the parties that dwell there, of sorrow and
mourning for their departed friend. It is better to go to such a house.

By the House of feasting, he means not only such a house wherein there is
feasting, but also all manner of abundance: As commonly Men show their wealth
in Feasting.

By the end of all men, he means such an end of a man as that he cease to
be as he was upon earth, and cease to do as he did upon Earth.

By laying to heart, he means such a serious considering, and pondering, and
discussing of every thing, as they may bring it to some use, may draw some
Fruit, and benefit out of it to themselves.

So that the sum and substance of the words is thus much; It is a better thing
for a Man to be conversant about the thoughts of death, and to take hold of all
occasions that may bring the serious consideration thereof into his heart, than
to delight himself in those worldly pleasures, and sensual delights, wherein
for the most part men spend their lives.

The words consist of a Proposition; And a proof or confirmation of that
Proposition.

The Proposition. It is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to go to
the house of Feasting.

The Confirmation or proof of it, is double: First, Because this is the end of
all Men: Secondly, Because the living will lay it to his heart.

In the former, he calls the House wherein any one dies, the House of
Mourning. It is better to go to the House of Mourning.

Where you see; That the Death of Men with (...) live, is a just occasion of
Mourning to (...)

(...) holy Ghost would not have described (...) ^ouse wherein a man dies in
this manner, (...) were not some equity and justice in m^ing upon such an
occasion. For he speaks n^^ here (as I conceive) ^nly with reference, and
^espect to the common Custom of natural and worldly Men; but with respect to
the natural disposition and affection, that is in the heart of man, and the
equity of the thing. There should be visible signs of Mourning, and there is in
it a just occasion, when men are taken away by death.

When Sarah died, the text says, that Abraham came to Mourn for Sarah, and to
weep for her, Genesis 23. 2. And Esau, when he speaks of the death of his Father
Isaac, he calls the time of his death, the time of Mourning, the days of
Mourning for my Father are at hand, Genesis 27. 41. So Joseph when his Father was
dead, it is said that he mourned for his Father seven days, Genesis 50. 10. When
Samuel was dead, all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him, 2 Samuel 25. 1. When Josiah was dead, there was such a great lamentation for him,
that it became a pattern of excessive mourning; In that day there shall be a
great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadri^^on in the Valley of
Megiddon, Zach. 12. 10 Our Savior Christ when he looked upon Lazarus, he wept,
because he was dead. And those Ephesians, this was it that broke their hearts,
they sorrowed most of all for the words which St. P^^l spoke, that they should
see his face no more, Acts 20, 38

We come now to the proof of the point, why going to the House of Mourning,
taking these occasions to affect our hearts, is better than to go to the House
of Feasting, than to take occasions of delighting our selves in outward things.
What Is the reason? It is double.

First, This is the end of all men.

What is the end of all men? The House of Mourning. That which he means by
the House of Mourning here, is that which he calls the end of all men, that
which puts an end to all men, and to their actions upon earth, and that is
Death.

So that the main point, that in this place the wise man intends, is but thus
much, I will deliver it in the very words of the Text, we need not vary from
them at all.

Death is the end of all Men.

But here it will be objected; We find some men that did not die. It is said of
Enoch, that he was translated, that he should not see death, Heb. 11. 5. And of
Elijah, that he went up by a whirlwind into heaven in a chariot of fire, 2
King. 2. 11. These men did not die.

To this, I answer briefly, Particular and extraordinary examples, do not
frustrate general rules: God may sometimes dispense with some particular men,
and yet the rule remain firm. I say it may be so.

But secondly we answer, They had that that was in stead of Death to them, some
change, though they did not die after the manner of other men. So at the end of
the world, it is said, that those that are alive shall be caught up and
changed, in the twinkling of an eye; there shall be a sudden, and almost
undiscernable, unperceivable change, which shall be to them in stead of death.

But it will be objected further; There is a promise made in Joh. 11. That
those that believe shall never die.

To this I answer with that common distinction; There is a twofold death, which
the Scripture calls, the first and the second death: The first death, is the
death of the body, that arises from a disjunction, and separation of the body
from the soul; And there is a second death, that arises from the dis-junction,
and separation of the soul from God. The first death is no death properly, the
second Death is that which is truly Death: And so they shall not die. A man may
have a body separated from the soul, and yet not his soul separated from God,
nor himself from Christ. Who shall separate us from the love of God in Christ?
Neither life, nor death, nor principalities, nor powers, etc. Romans 8 38.

This point also is of use to us, in the death of others.

First, to moderate the mourning of Christians for the Death of others. Why? It
is the end of all men, it is that that is the common condition of all men, it
should not be too grievous, nor too doleful to any man. We would not have our
friends to be in another condition in their birth than others, we would not
have them have more fingers, or more members than a man, and would we have them
have more days? Let this serve as a brief touch upon that.

Secondly, it teaches us to make good use of our fellowship while we are
together. Not only we may die, but those that are useful to us may die also,
let us make good use of one another, while we live therefore.

It did smite the heart of those Ephesians, that they should see the face of
Paul no more; specially above the rest it grieved them, that they should see
him no more; how would it have grieved them think you, if they had always
hardened themselves against his ministry before?

Think with your selves seriously, here is such a Minister, such a Christian
friend, that husband and wife, that parent and child, a time of ^arting will
come; let us make it easy now, ^y making good use of one another while we ^e,
that when friends are took away, we may ^^ve cause to thank God, that we have
had com^nion, and comfort of their fellowship and ^^ciety, the benefit of their
graces, the fruit of ^^eir lives: and not sorrow for the want of them ^ death.

Death separates a Man from his Friends.
For alas! Death does not only part a man's body and soul, a man's self and his
wealth, but it parts a man from his friends, from all his worldly
acquaintance, from all those that he took delight in upon earth: Death makes a
separation between husband and wife: see it in Abraham and Sarah, though
Abraham loved Sarah dearly, yet Death parted them, Let me have a place to bury
my Dead out of my sight, Genesis 23. It parts Father and Child, how unwilling
soever they be: see it in David and Absalom, Oh Absalom, my son, would God I
had died for thee: and Rachel mourned for her Children, and would not be
comforted, because they were not. It parts the Minister and the people: see
it in the case of the people of Isreal's lamenting the death of Samuel; and in
the case of the Ephesians, at the parting of S. Paul, sorrowing especially when
they heard they should see his face no more. It parts those friends who were
so united together in love, as if they had but one soul in two bodies; see it
in the separation that was made by death, between David and Jonathan, that were
so knit together in their love, that he bewaileth him, Woe is me for my brother
Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1. 9.

This is necessary consideration for us that live that we may learn to know how
to carry our selve toward our worldly friends, and how to moderate our selves
in our enjoyment of these worldl^ comforts. Look upon every worldly thing as
mortal, as a dying comfort. Look upon Children and friends, as dying comforts.
Look upon yo^ estates, as that that has wings, and will be gone. Look upon
your bodies, that now you make so much of, as a thing that must be parted from
the soul by death, and that ere long.

See what advice the Apostle gives, 1 Cor. 7. 19. the time is short (says he)
therefore let those that marry, be as if they married not: and they that
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as though they
p^ssessed not: and they that use this world as not abusing it, for the fashion
of this world passes away.

When thou accompaniest another to the grave, do thou conclude thus with thy
self the very next time that any death is spoken of, it may be mine? or, as
Saint Peter speaks to Saphira after the death of Ananias, The feet of those
that have buried thy husband are at the door, and shall carry thee out also.

Again this Doctrine serves to reprove, that sinful laying to heart of the
death of others, that is too frequent and common in the world.

That is, first, when men with too much fondness, and with too great excess and
distemper of affection, look upon their dead friends, as if God could never
repair the loss, nor make amends for that he has done in taking of them away.
Rachel mourns, and will not be comforted. David mourns, and will scarce be
comforted, Oh Absalom, my son, my son, would God I had and for thee. What is
all this but to look on friends, ^ather as Gods than men, as if all sufficiency
^ere included in them only? Men look on their ^riends, as Micah did upon his
Idol, when ^hey had bereaved him of it, they took away ^ll his comfort and
quiet; You have taken away ^y Gods (says he) and what have I more, Judge. 8. ^4.

This now is an ill taking to heart the death ^f friends, to mourn as men
without hope.

Secondly, there is taking to heart, and considering of the death of men, but
it is an unrighteous considering, and unrighteous judging of the death of
others. If men see one die, it may be a violent death, then they conclude,
certainly there is some appearent token of Gods judgment on such a one. If they
see another die, with some extremity of torment, and vehement pains, certainly
there is some apparent evidence of Gods wrath upon this man. If they see
another in some great and violent tentation, struggling against many tentations,
they conclude presently, certainly such are in a worser case than others. I may
say to all these, as Christ said once to those that told him of the eighteen
men upon whom the Tower in Siloe fell, think you that they were sinners above
all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? Luke 13. 4. Or rather, as Solomon says, All
things come alike unto all, there is one event to the righteous, and to the
wicked, Eccles. 9. 2. Learn to judge righteous judgment, to judge wisely of the
death of others, take heed of condemning the generation of the just.

But rather, in the last place, Make this use of the death of every one. Does
such a man die by an ordinary sickness, having his understanding, and memory
continued to the end Does such a man die in inward peace an^ comfort, with
clear and evident apprehension of Gods love, so that he can with Simeon say
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace Luke 2. 29. What use
should thou that live^^ make of this now? Certainly, let the sweetne^ of
their death, make thee in love with the goodness of their lives. That is the
only way to a happy death, to a comfortable end indeed, the leading of a
fruitful and profitable life.

The main business that a man has to do, is to make sure of himself in this
life. It was the question that Saint Austin made to those that told him of a
violent death that seized upon one. But how did he live? (says he.) He made no
matter how he went out, but how he carried himself in the world. And truly this
is the great Question, that every man should put to his soul. I must out of the
world, how have I lived when I was in the world? had GOD any glory by me? had
men any good by me? have I furthered my account against the day reckoning, that
I may give it up with joy.

But now he is Dead, wherefore should I Fast? Sermon IV.
2 SAMUEL xii. 23. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him
back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.
HEre you have a large Description of that incomparable Love which our princely
Prophet David, that good King of Israel, did bear toward his Son, who was no
sooner visited with sickness, but that his most loving, tender and indulgent
Father made earnest supplication and Prayer unto Almighty God, the only
Physician both of Soul and Body, to restore him to his wonted Health again;
which when he saw how that it could not be gained, like one in a trance
presently fell down upon the ground, where he (so long as his innocent Child
could move) (...) lie both night and day; ever fastin^ ^ng, and crying out most
lamentably, as it is evident, ver. 16. saying, O who, who shall deliver this
poor Soul from the cruel jaws of all-devouring Death? Wherefore, so soon as the
Elders did behold him, being moved to pity, they came like good loving
Neighbors unto him, with wet-shot Eyes, and desired him by all means possible
to rise up from the ground, and not to take it so much to heart: But for all
that, they could not prevail, he would not leave his low and lamentable
Lodging, so long as his poor sick Child was alive: Niobe-like, he wept still,
and would not be comforted. He had (as St. Bernard makes mention) a Week of
Sorrows: When he saw his sweet Child, that poor Infant, still panting and
striving for Death, unto which he was so soon sentenced, he could not refrain
from Tears, and leave off sorrowing, as you may see by this his mournful Elegy:
But as soon as the Child was dead, when it had paid that debt which we must
all, and we know not how soon, being only certain in uncertainty; then he could
rise from the ground, change his Clothes, wash his Hands, and break his long
Fast: Whereupon his Servants, as soon as it did arrive unto their knowledge,
ver. 21. began to expostulate, and say unto him, What thing is this that thou
do? Thou did fast and weep for the sick Child, so long as it was alive; but
now it being dead, thou can leave off all doleful Lamentations, and rise and
eat: It Is true, (says he) I could not do so before, seeing it did strive so
for death; but now I can, and this is my reason: For now he is dead.

In these words, as they distribute themselves you have these three following
Circumstances, regardable.

First, A serious Consideration; But now he is dead.

Secondly, An acknowledgment of his own Imbecility and weakness, Can I bring
him back again? And then,

Thirdly, and lastly, His Confidence; I shall go to him, etc.

But now he is dead, etc.

Now of these in their order severally: And First of that serious Consideration
which King David took, when that his sweet Child was dead, which every one
ought to do, and that was, Why shall I fast any longer? Why shall I weep, and
cry thus mournfully both day and night, seeing he is dead and gone? No, I will
not do it; for if I should, it would not bring him again, it would not revive,
but still add more grief unto my sable thoughts, which are too grievo^s and
sorrowful for me a forlorn creature to endure.

But now for the better adavancement of your knowledge, and the better managing
of my discourse, you may with me consider these four following particulars,
which (as it is most requisite and necessary) are to be treated of severally.

First, The person fasting and mourning.

Secondly, The person mourned for.

Thirdly, The manner of his Mourning: And then,

Fourthly and lastly, The Reason which he gives why he does not continue (after
the death of his dear Child) any longer in that doleful condition.

Now the very first in this Tragical Chorus is King David, that sweet Singer of
Israel, who was so loving and tender hearted, that he could not forbear to
sympathize, condole, and ^o have a natural compassion on all, as his own words
give warrant, Psalm. 35. 13. For, says he ^here, As soon as I perceived that my
neighbors grew sick, I could not refrain my self from mourn^ng, but clothed
my self with Sackcloath, and humbled my soul with fasting; which are the
Ensigns of Sorrow, or as some say, the Weapons of Repentance. To mourn for the
Sick, is both natural, commendable, and profitable; and therefore, says the
Poet.

Est quaedam flere Voluptas:
That there is much pleasure in Mourning: ^t still disburdens the heart, by
opening its ^luces, and discharges Con^h^s in canales, Ci^terns into
Conduit-pipes, which run like Rivers of water, Psalm. 119. 136. And therefore,
^ays holy David, Mine eyes gush out with rivers ^f water: It was an usual
custom in this good King, to fast, pray, and mourn continually for ^ll persons
under affliction, whether of Mind, Body, or estate: And therefore, think you,
was ^t possible that his merciful eyes should not be eclipsed with tears, when
he took his Farewell of his sweet Babe, which his eyes could ^ever behold
again, until that he himself did ^ass into the low Chambers of death? Seven
days (like Job in his troubles) he turned and ^ossed himself upon the ground,
still crying but most mournfully, as one utterly undone ^or his Son, expecting
always that God almighty would be favorable and gracious unto him, and grant
his Son a longer life: but when he saw that he would not be treated to prolong
his days upon earth, resolved fully with himself to leave off his sorrowing,
and to say with patient Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job 1. 21. The Lord gave me my Child, and now
has he taken him away from me again, therefore why should I any longer fast
and mourn? why should I weep and sigh thus bitterly; yea and why should I, even
I feeble Creature (whose Life is but a vapor, a very moment) lay it thus to
heart, and take on thus sadly? Can I bring him back again? No, I shall go to
him, but he shall not return to me. Job I say, in all his cruel troubles, could
not be more patient, than this princely Prophet was here. This his serious
consideration does not only bespeak him to be religious, wise and patient; but
also to be most holy. Job, although a very patient man, never could nor would
do thus; but cursed even the day wherein he was born, Job 3. 3. saying. Let the
day perish wherein I was born, and the night wherein it was said, There is a
Man-child conceived. Yet further, if that you do but look upon this princely
Prophet and good King, in his Obsequies for his Son Absalom, you will find him
no otherwise affected, than he was for this poor Infant, as it is made
manifest, 2 Samuel 18. 33. Oh! Absalom, Absalom (faith he there by way of
Epizeuxis when that the sad tidings concerning the death of his well-beloved
Son had arrived unto his kdowledg) I would to God that I ha^ given up the
Ghost, and died for thee; yea even for thee, my Son, Absalom, my Son, Absalom;
Oh Absalom, my Son, my Son! As soon as he perceived Cushi to draw near unto
him, ver. 32 then, yea even then he had an Earthquake i^ his Soul, his
faculties were all set on fire, and when that the sad sorrowful news was told
him of his dearly beloved Sons death, then in a rage he put all out of the Room
where he was, and fell upon his knees with wet-shod Eyes, still wringing his
hands, and wishing heartily that God had been pleased to take him instead of
his son Absalom, that precious Jewel of his. I say that Abraham the Father of
the Faithful, could not have taken it out worse; he could not have been more
sorrowful, if that his dear Son Isaac had been offered; nor our old Grandsire
Adam, the Father of the Living, for his slain Son Abel, than holy David that
good King of Israel did here for these two Sons of his; but especially for
Absalom. It Is true, so long as the sweet Babe was alive, still striving and
struggling in his sight daily and hourly for Death, which (like that Serpent
Regulus) by no Charms can be charmed; he took on most grievously: but when he
had yielded up the Ghost, when Death, Gods special Bailiff, had arrested him
with a Habeas Corpus, then he could leave off sorrowing, and resolve fully with
himself to fast no longer. So long as it was alive (says he in the former
Verse) I had hopes that God would hear my Prayer, be gracious unto me, and
prolong his days here with me in this habitable Orb, but now it has pleased
almighty God to take unto himself my dear Child out of this miserable world,
wherefore should I fast? wherefore should I take on thus sadly, being all is in
vain? No, I will not do it, I will not be guilty of such a great Offense: for
now he is dead, wherefore should, etc. Daniel that holy Prophet was of such a
tender disposition, that he wept and mourned full three weeks together, not
suffering himself to eat any pleasant thing, Dan. 10. 2. Esau wept for the loss
of his Blessing; and Joash for Elisha being ready to die. Job wept and mourned
for such as were in sorrow, trouble or any other adversity, and for his own
afflictions; and so did Isaiah, with the good Prophet Jeremiah for the misery
of the Israelites to come, Jer. 13. Naomi wept and mourned most dolefully
departing from her Country, and so did Nehemiah for Jerusalem*s misery. Elisha
did mourn and weep bitterly seeing the evil which Hazael should do to the
Israelites Children; and so did the Women for their harmless Children slain by
Herod, Luke 23. 28. Insomuch that their cry penetrating the clouds, and
knocking at Heavens gate, did enter into the ears of the Lord of Hosts.

And to preceed: Abraham mourned and wept bitterly for his Wife being deceased:
Abigail for Vriah her loving husband: David for Saul, Abner and Jonathan; the
Egyptians for Jacob seven days; Jacob for Joseph supposing him dead; Joseph for
Jacob being dead; Jeremiah for Josiah with great Lementation, and the
Israelites for Moses and Aaron thirty days. But holy David here (in my Text)
took a better course; who (as soon as his child was departed) left off
sorrowing, saying, Now he is dead, wherefore should I mourn? etc. St. Paul in
his Epistle to the Romans, bids us weep with them that weep, Romans 12. 15. And
for the dead, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. but not as others sorrow, which have no hope. We
must not weep and mourn immoderately, lest with Samuel we be reproved, when he
lamented overmuch for Saul: but moderately, as St. Paul that blessed Apostle
did for Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 27. They mourn moderately, do nothing contrary
to the Word of God: For Almighty God, by whom Death is inflicted, would have
the nature thereof to be such, that it should bring Tears and sorrow, not only
unto them which die; but unto those also of whom they that die are beloved. Who
(but a man of a stony heart, in the mourning Troop accompanying his loving
Neighbors deceased Son unto his Grave, dying in the Spring of his Youth, even
at that Age when he was most able to comfort his dearest Friends, even her that
brought him into the World, or in the Winter of her Widowhood, when she did
most want him) could refrain from mourning and weeping? Children are walking
Images of their tender Parents, even Flesh of their Flesh, and Bone of their
Bone, the Wealth of the poor man, and the Honor of the Rich; it must then be
one step unto Weeping Cross, when any Parents lose their Children.

St. Ambrose in his book concerning Naboth, chapter 5. makes mention of a Tragical
Accident: How that in his time there was a poor man, in extreme necessity,
constrained to sell one of his Sons in perpetual Bondage, that he might hereby
save the rest from a present Famine; who calling all his dear Children unto
him, and beholding them as Olive Branches round about his Table, could not
resolve which he might best spare; his eldest Son was the strength of his
Youth, even he that called him first Father, and therefore not willing to part
with him; his youngest Boy was the Nest-chick, the dearly beloved of his
mother, and therefore not willing to part with him; a third most resembled his
Progenitors, having his Fathers Bill, and his mothers eye, therefore not
willing by any means to part with him; one was more loving than the rest, and
another more Diligent; so that the good Father in conclusion among so many,
could no^ afford to part with any. Nay, it is almost Death to some, to part
with any of their Children, but for a Year or two, although that they go but a
little way, and may return when they will: Therefore could David be thought
blameworthy, to mourn for his Child, whom he could not see till he went to
him; but now he is dead, etc.

And this brings me now unto the second thing considerable in my Text, which is
the Person whom David that good King, wept and mourned for thus dolefully, and
that was for his Son, an innocent Babe, who was no sooner born into this
miserable World, but visited with a mortal Disease, and so cut off for the Life
of Vrias in his Infancy. The Life of his Son Ammon was not satisfaction
sufficient, nor of his dearly beloved Son Absalom, nor yet the Life of his Son
Adonijah, but also this poor harmless Creature, must suffer together with them;
now he is dead: It is enacted by Almighty God, in the high Court of Parliament
in the Kingdom of Heaven, unto all men, that they shall once Die; and therefore
says David, Psalm 89. 48. What man is he that lives, and shall not see death?
Shall he deliver his* Soul from the Hand of the Grave?

There are two sorts of Deaths; Corporal, which is either natural or violent;
or Eternal Death, which is called a Spiritual Death, or the second Death.

The first (being only a Separation of the Soul from the Body, with all the
evils that attend thereon) this sweet Child suffered. Death is like an Archer,
making man his Butt, who when he shoots, pierces in this manner following:
In shooting over us, he wounds our Ancestors; behind us, our Servants; on our
right hand, our Wives and Children; on our left hand our Friends; and in the
midst our selves; so that as St. Paul says, Heb. 9. 27. No one can escape him:
So that you may see as Job says, man's time is appointed, his months
determined, and his days (which are but few upon Earth) numbered; yea, and (as
our Savior Christ says) his very last hour is limited: He was made of the
mould of the Earth, and therefore thither shall he return; and as all have one
entrance into Life, the like going out shall they have to death: Naked came we
into this most miserable World, and naked shall we return again. If Adam had
not eaten of the forbidden Fruit, we had never known what Sin had been, and so
by consequence Death; which is a thing that now cannot by any means be avoided,
before that we knew what sin was, we had strong Houses: But ever since, God
let us us dwell in thatched Cottages, and clay Walls; every Disease like a storm
is ready to totter us down. In old time, men used to live long; but now many
are thrust out of house and harbor, at less than an hours warning; yea, and
even in their infancy, at their first coming into the world; as this poor
innocent Child was; and not only for their own faults, for their own
transgressions, but for their Parents. In the Third of Genesis you may find man's
Exodus, and that is, thou shall die. Ever since Old Adam, our great, great,
great Grandfather, neglected his Duty toward God, Death the lodge of all men's
lives, comes with insensible degrees upon the sons of men; it is impartial hand
is always destroying; no Wisdom can appease, no Policy can prevent, nor any
earthly Riches redeem us from the Grave; semel a^t bis morimur omnes, some
once, some twice, we must all die; we have an old Statute for it, that this
earthly Tabernacle must suffer corruption, and therefore the Poet sings sweetly;

Post hominem vermis, post vermem foetor, and horror;
Sic in non hominem vertitur omnis ho^o.
As man came from the Earth, so thither shall he return, and become a
habitation and food for Worms. If any had been exempted from the fatal and
general sentence of Death, then (without all question) our most blessed
Savior, and Redeemer Jesus Christ had been; who (for our Sins, and for our
insufferable Iniquities) suffered the sharpest death imaginable, even to die
upon the Cross; who was equal to the Father touching his Godhead: Now, seeing
that this ever blessed Virgins Son, Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and harmless
Lamb of God, did suffer an ignominious Death, to redeem us from Eternal Death;
let not us be unwilling for our own good, to lay down our lives, and to part
(without sorrow and grief) with our dearest Friend, or Relation; but rather let
us take up a full resolution, when any of our Friends, although never so near
and dear unto us, be departed, and say with David, now he is dead, now he
cease to breath, and now he has taken a farewell of the Elements, wherefore
should I fast? Can I bring him back again? Good Christians can with patience
embrace this Life, yet in their best meditations they do commonly wish for
Death; they honor all that contemns it, but cannot endure, or heartily love
any that is afraid of it; this makes many naturally love a Soldier, and honor
those tattered, and contemptible Regiments, that will die at the command of a
Sergeant. For a Pagan there may be some motives to be in love with Life, for a
Christian to be amazed at Death; I see not how he can escape this dilemma that
is too sensible of this Life or careless of the Life to come. If a Wife put
forth her Child to Nurse, and the Nurse having kept it long enough, she takes
it home again; can the Nurse or any other have any cause to complain? so the
cause stands between God, and our Souls, If God (having inspired into these
mortal Bodies of ours, that which is immortal) come, and take it to himself,
lest it should come to harm; can any one have any reason to Complain? As seed*
unless sown in the Ground, cannot bring forth, so we until that Death come, and
we be laid in the Ground cannot expect our consummation and bliss with Gods
Saints in his Kingdom of Glory. Death freeth the godly from the Tyranny of
Satan, from Sin, from the World, from the Flesh, and from eternal Damnation,
placing them with Christ for evermore in Heaven, the Center of all good wishes,
where instead of Earthly Bodies, they shall be clothed with unspeakable Glory;
and all this holy David was not Ignorant of, which made him (as soon as his
dearly beloved Son had taken his Farewell of this inferior Orb) say, Wherefore
should I fast? seeing my Child, yea, my precious Jewel, has changed his Life
out of a miserable world, into a Kingdom where pleasures ineffable are to be
had for evermore; but now, etc. And this brings me now unto the Third thing
considered in my Text, which is the manner of his mourning, and that was how he
spun away his time in weeping, fasting, and praying for his dear child so long
as he was alive; he did not as Priamus did for his Son Hector, Fast, Weep, and
Pray after his Death, or as many do now adays, only in outward show, altering
their Garments. No, his was far otherwise. it was real, true, and hearty
sorrow, not countenanced in the least with a heavy look or with a solemn sigh
blown from deceitful lungs. No, his was a Weeping, Watching, Mourning, and
Fasting Grief; he was sequestered from all Worldly contentment, imprisoning his
Body from all the pleasures of this mortal Life, ever making his bed to swim,
and watering his touch with tears. He mourned as one for his only Son, eating
ashes like Bread, and mingling his Drink with weeping; still weeping, wailing,
and crying as one that had parted with his dear Mother, Psalm 35. 14. or as a
virgin girded with sa^k-cloath for the husband of her youth, Joel 11. 8. Nature
(being we are Members of one Body, thinking the mishap of other men to be our
own, through the mutual compassion of Christ's Body) makes us desirous to live
together so long as is possible; therefore was it possible for David to refrain
from tears, when he took his farewell of one Child, part of his own Body? No, he
could not forbear crying, until he began to consider with himself that he was
dead, and that the Death of the Saints is precious in the sight of the Lord,
and the day thereof better to them, than the day of their birth* being then
(and not before, as Saint John Says, Revel. 14. 13.) they rest from their
labor; then, yea then, and not before; he could rise, change his clothes, wash
his hands, and break his fast. Now such (I say) if they will mourn, ought to be
your manner, that is, so long as your friends are visited with Sickness, they
ought to sympathize, condole, and have a fellow-feeling of their Maladies, ever
providing to your power, all good means for their Health, and Recovery, and for
good looking to them, in the time of their weakness; yea, you must pray for
them, and use all lawful and good means possible for their ease, and succor;
so long as it shall please God, to continue them with you in that sorrowful
condition; but then, as soon as it shall please Almighty God to call any of
your Relations from you (although never so near, and dear unto you; yea,
although he be the staff of your Life, and your only Joy, and Comfort) you
ought to refrain from tears, and immoderate mourning; cheering up your selves,
and resolving fully in your mind as holy David did here, lest that you
displease the Creator, and Preserver both of our Souls and Bodies, saying, Now
he is dead, etc. for there is a time to Mourn, and a time to Rejoice, I took on
(says he) most sadly in the former verse, so long as he was alive, because I
thought still that God would restore him to his Health again, and grant him a
longer time to stay with me his loving Father, but now, seeing that it cannot
be obtained, I Will fr^t my self no more, for now he is dead, dead, dead; now he
is dead and gone, now he is past calling back again, wherefore, or to what end
should I fast, can I bring him back again? And thus much concerning the manner
of David's Mourning for his Son; wherefore that which shall have the next place
in my discourse, is concerning the reason this Princely Prophet, and good King
gave, why he would not continue any longer in his sorrowful condition, and that
is, Can I bring him back again? can I revive him? can I put life into him? No,
it is beyond my Skill, to add one Moment to any man's life, I can neither call
him back, nor go to him my self, now he is dead, and gone, all the world cannot
save him alive, I must follow him, but he shall not return to me. Here you may
see an acknowledgment of his own imbecility, and weakness in recovering his
dead Child, can I bring him back again? It has been experienced, and found
possible for a man, from the ashes of a Plant, to revive the Plant, and from
its cinder to recall it to its stalk, and leaves again, but to call those that
are ascended up to Heaven, or descended into the world of Damned Souls, is far
beyond the power of Man; Abraham being full of faith as it is Evident, Heb. 11.
19. having commanded that his son Isaac should be offered, thought that God
would raise him up again from the dead: therefore, why did not David hope the
same, the reason, as Peter observes, upon this place in my Text, is diverse.
Abraham had the promise concerning his Son Isaac, he knew that God would do
whatsoever he desired, rather than his promise should not be fulfilled,
therefore he came with a willing mind unto that offering: but David had not
such promises concerning this his dearly beloved Son, but rather a threatening,
seeing he was ready to die, or just newly dead; wherefore being not encouraged
in the least (his own Conscience telling him, how it was Impossible, unless God
the efficient cause of our Life, by whom we live, move, and have our being,
would restore him to Life again) fully desolved with himself to leave off
sorrowing, and to prepare himself to go to him, seeing he was not to return;
But now, etc. and this brings me unto the last thing considered, and that was
his confidence how he should follow, etc. Here you may see how that David did
not doubt in the least, but that his sweet Babe was ascended up to Heaven,
which is far beyond thought, and glorious beyond report, and that he himself
should follow quickly after; some are of opinion, and will not stick to
maintain their damnable doctrine with devilish Arguments, that Infants dying
unbaptiz'd are not capable of salvation; which is as false as God is true,
else, what became of those Children of Bethlehem and in the coasts thereof,
from two years old, and under, among whom questionless some were uncircumsized
or not baptized, when Murdered by bloody Herod, who would not suffer the King
of Heaven, and Earth, and the whole World, to Reign in Jury, certainly their
condition is very good, for although he had power to hurt their innocent
Bodies, yet he had not power to hurt their poor harmless Souls, being hid with
Christ Jesus, that sinless Babe, in God. Our Savior seems to have a special
love for Children above all other, which made him say in his holy Gospel,
suffer the little Children to come unto me, and forbid. them not, for of such
is the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 10. 14. Now David knowing no less, might well
believe that his Child was received into Heaven. O blessed Babe, which came to
the wished Haven without any Tempest; enjoying the com^orts of another Life,
before thou knew the cruel miseries of this Life, having thy head crowned with
happiness, before thou were covered with hair; thy dear Father (although a
King) could never have pleasur'd thee in this vail of misery, as thou art how
in the Kingdom of Heaven, where Likewise now the Father is. But now he is dead,
so that you may see David's shall go, came at last to is gone. The life, and
spirit of all our actions is the Resurrection, and stable apprehension; that
our ashes shall enjoy the fruit of our pious Endeavors; without this all
Religion is a fallacy: how shall the dead arise? is no question of a true
Christians Faith. Job was ever confident that our estranged, and divided Ashes
should unite again, that our separated dust after so many pilgrimages, and
transformations into the parts of Minera's, Plants, Animals, Elements, should
at the voice of God return into their Primitive shapes, and join again to make
up their primary, and predestinate forms; as it is evident by his own words;
for, says he, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth; and though after my skin worm^ destroy this Body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes
shall behold, and not another* Job 19, 25, 26, 27. what is made to be Immo^^^l.
nature cannot, nor will the voice of God destroy. As at the Creation of the
World, all that distinct species that we behold, lay involved in one Mass, till
the fruitful voice of God separated this united multitude into its several
species? so at the last day, when those corrupted relics shall be scattered
in, the wilderness of forms, and seem to have forgot their proper habits, God
by a powerful voice, shall command them back into their proper shapes, and call
them out by their single, and individuals; then shall appear the fertility of
Adam, and the Magic of that sperm that has dilated into so Many millions,
seeing our Souls are Immorral, nature cannot, nor will Almighty God destroy;
wherefore David that Princely Prophet and good King knowing this, and being
fully persuaded, that his Child was gone to Heaven, and that he should follow;
left off his Doleful mourning, rised from his law, and ^amentable lodging,
changed his clothes, washed his hands, went to prayer and brake his long fast,
ever cheering up himself, knowing that he should quickly follow, as you may see
here by his own words read unto you, But now he is dead wherefore should I
fast, can I bring him back again? I stall go to him, but he shall not return to
me.

The EJACULATION.
GOod Lord, is it so that there is no returning from the Grave? Then assist us
by thy divine Grace to improve every Inch of Time, before we ^o down to the
Grave, and be seen no more. Is ^t true that our Dear and Pi^us Relations that
are ^ead and gone will never return to us again? ^hen let us prepare to follow
them to an happy ^ternity; Good Lord, now seeing all this is rea^y ^tue, let us
live as men and women that have ^lready one foot in the Grave, Oh let the death
^ others show the weakness of our own Bodies and ^e many Grey-hairs that are
^ere and there upon our head put us in mind of our winding sheet, and of the
day of judgment, which is approaching very swiftly toward every one of us: Let
the daily instances of our dying Relations take such a living Impression upon
our hearts as may deaden then toward all objects on this side Heaven. Good
Lord, let us all be all for Heaven, let all our thoughts be Heavenly thoughts,
let all our speeches be Heavenly speeches, and let all our Actions be
Heavenly-Actions, and let all thine ordinances prove Heavenly ordinances to us,
ever drawing up our Hearts from Earth to Heaven, seeing we must quickly return
to Dust; Good Lord, it is a vain Imagination for any Man to think that he can
be happy without God, who is the Author of all happiness; or to think that
finite and sensual objects can satisfy infinite and spirtual desires? or to
think that Temporal uncertainties are more valuable, and more desirable than an
interest in Jesus Christ and Eternal Glory. What Joy? what inexpressible Joy
will a good Conscience afford us; when we come to be arrested by the cold hands
of Death, when we come to make our beds in the silent Grave. We must needs
confess it is contrary to Reason, and much more inconsistent with Grace, that
we should prefer Earth before Heaven; Yea, there is as little Reason for it,
that we should endeavor to grasp so much of the Creature into our hand^, when
as one Death-Gripe will soon cause us to let go our fastest hold of Created
Enjoyments. Oh! therefore why should we go about to build a nest for our selves
among the Stars, when we have seen so many of our dearest A^quaintance and
nearest Relations carried to the Grave before us; and there made a Feast for
the Worms to feed upon: Good Lord, therefore do thou make us to know our End,
and the measure of our Days, what it is, that so we may be thoroughly convinced,
how frail we dre; let us remember that we have no continuing City here, and
therefore it will be necessary for us to seek one that is to come. Let us not
spend our flying Daie^ in ^^er Impertinences, but let us look after that
Eternal Inheritance which will never fade away. O! let us all improve our Time
and Talents for God, that when our Bodies return to the Grave, from whence
there is no coming back, our Souls may go to God that gave them.

Bury my Dead out of my sight. SERMON V.
GENESIS xxiii. 4. Give me a possession of a Burying place with you, that I may
bury my Dead out of my sight.
THis is the conclusion of all Flesh; they were never so dear before, but they
come to be as loathsome and intolerable now. When once the Lines and Picture of
Death is drawn over the Fabric of Man or Woman's Body, (as it is said here of
Sarah) all their Glory cease, all their good Respect vanishes away, their
best Friends would be fainest rid of them: even Sarah that was so goodly and
amiable in Abraham's sight, must now out of his sight, he must bury his dead
out of his sight.

But Abraham, as the Father of faithful men, and a Pattern to all loving
Husbands in all Ages ensuing, does not this till such time as the dead Sarah
grows noysom to all that look upon her. As long as he could by his Mourning
and Lamentation prosecute her without offense to his Eyes, and danger to his
Health, he did it: but now the time is come, when Earth must be put to Earth,
and Dust must return to Dust. There is no place for the fairest Beauty above
Ground, when once God has taken Life and Breath from it; it must go to its own
Elements, and to the Rock and Pit from whence it was hewn, thither it must
return.

After he had performed this, perhaps he mourned three or four Days for his
Wife; he knew this Mourning must have an end, he knew that he must commit her
to the Ground. Therefore when he had thus moderated himself, as first to show
by his Sorrow that he was a loving Husband, and then to show in the ceasing of
his Sorrow that he was a wise man, and a faithful Christian, He comes to
desire a possession of burial.

Give me. What? A possession of burial.
First, A possession. He would have it so conveyed, as no man might make claim
of it, but that it should be for him and his for ever. Therefore it was, as it
were, a Churchyard that he begged, such a one as was capable, and had
sufficient scope and room for his whole Posterity in the time to come.

Give me a possession, a burying-place.
Here is the end why he would have this Possession. A strange kind of
Possession.

Behold Abraham; see how he begins to pos^ess the World, by no Land,
Pasture, or earable Lordship: The first thing is a Grave. So every Christian
must make his Resolution. The first Hou^hold-stuff that ever Sele^cus bought in
Babylon was Sepulchre-stone, a Stone to lay upon him when ^^ was dead; that he
kept in his Garden.

Give me a Burying Place to Bury my Dead.
Behold, he calls here Sarah, his Dead, he calls her not Wife, though it is
said after in the Text, that Abraham buried Sarah his Wife; yet that is in
repesct of the time of her life, when they lived together, and in respect of
the former Society, and Converse they had, but now he speaks to the point, she
is no more his Wife, but his Dead.

My Dead.
Yet notwithstanding, though she was not Abraham's Wife, yet she was Abraham's
Dead. This must teach a Man after he is freed by remaining for the Dead. A Man
is bound to lament and sorrow for his Dead, as Abraham did here, to love the
Memory of the Dead, to speak well of the Dead, when occasion serves, to
commend them for their Virtues, to use the Friends of the Dead (as far as is in
their power) with all Courtesy, to be good to the Children of the Dead, to be
good to all that come of that Issue for their sakes. Let me bury my Dead.

Lastly, it follows, why he would bury his Dead Out of my sight.
A strange thing, Out of my sight. The best Friend in the world cannot endure
the sight of a dead Body, it is a ghastly sight, especially when it comes to
that dissolution, that the parts begin to have an evil savor and smell, as all
have when they are Dead; then to keep themselves in Life and Health, it is
necessary to avoid them, to bury their Dead out of their sight.

And what so sweet a sight once to blessed Abraham, as Sarah? What so sweet a
spectacle to the World, as Sarah? The great Kings of the World, set her as a
Parragon, and she came no where but her Beauty enamoured them; she was a sweet
prospect in all Eyes, every Man gazed on her with great content, to see the
Beauty of God, as in so many lines marked out in the face of Sarah. Yet now she
is odious, every Eye that looked upon her before, now winks and cannot endure
to look upon her, she must be taken out of sight.

Oh bethink your selves of this, you that take pride in this frail Flesh, that
prank up your selves, to make you Graceful in every Eye; you that study to
please the Beholders; you that are the great Minions of the World; you that
when Age begins to purle your Faces, begin to redeem your selves with
Paintings; think of this. Mother Sarah the beautifullest Woman in the World, is
loathsome to her Husband, her sweetest Friend, when once she is dead.

The Funeral Procession. SERMON VI.
ECCLES. 12. 5. Man goes to his long home, and the Mourners go about the
streets.
ALthough I might in the Kings (King Solomon's) name command, yet I will rather
in the Preachers (his other style) humbly entreat your religious Attention to
the last Scene, and Catastrophe of Man's Life, consisting of two Acts, and
those very short.

1. The Dead's Pass, he goes, etc.

2. The Mourners March, they go about, etc.

Little Children newly born, take in their first Breath with a sigh, and come
crying into the World, as soon as they open their Eyes they shed Tears, to help
fill up the Vale of Tears, into which they were then brought, and shall be
after a short time carried out with a stream of them, running from the Eyes of
all their Friends. And if the Prologue and Epilogue be no better, what shall we
judge of the Scenes and Acts of the Life of Man, they yield so deep springs of
Tears, and such store of Arguments against our abode in this World, that many
reading them in the Books of Hegesi^s the Platonic, presently brake the Prison
of their Body, and leaped out of Ci^. prim, tus^.
the World into the Grave; others concluded with Silenus, Optimum non nasci,
proximum quam primum mori, that it was simply best never to be born, the next
to it to die out of hand, and give the World our salve, and take our vale at
once.

The dead go directly to their long home, the living fetch a compass and round
about: the termini of which their motions shall be the bounds of my Discourse
at this present.

Old Men are a kind of Antipodes to young Men; it is evening with them, when it
is morning with these; it is Autumn in their Bodies, when it is Spring in
these: The Spring of the year to decrepit old men, is as the Fall: Summer is
Winter to them, and Winter death; it is no pleasure to them to see the
Almond-tree flourish, which is the Prognosticatour of the Spring, or the
Grasshopper leap and sing, the Preludium of Summer; for they now mind not the
Almond-tree, but the Cipress; nor think of the Grasshopper, but of the Worm,
because they are far on in their way to their long home, and the mourners are
Cupressus funeria.
already in the streets, marshalling as it were their Troops, and setting all
in equipage for their Funeral, no dilectable objects affect their dull and
dying Senses, but are rather grievous unto them; desire fails because Man
goes to his long home, that is, it does in the best, and should in all, for
what a preposterous thing were it, for a Man that has one foot already in the
Grave, and is drawing the other after, to desire to cut a cross Gaper, and
dance the Morris? or for him that is near his eternal Mansion House, to hanker
by the way, and feast and revel it in an Inn.

By long home, according to the Chaldee Paraphrase, is here meant the Grave, or
the place where our Bodies, or (to speak more properly) our Remains are
bestowed and abide till the time of the Restitution of all things, the place
where all meet who lived together, the rendevouze of all our deceased Friends,
Allies and Kindred, even as far as Adam: this home may be called a long home,
in comparison of our short homes, from which we remove daily, these Houses we
change at pleasure, that we cannot: there our Flessi, or our Bones, or at least
our Ashes or Dust shall be kept in some place of the Earth or Sea, till the
Heavens shall be no more. Job 14. 12. I answer.

By Mourners are here meant all that attend the Corpse to the Funeral, whether
they mourn in truth, or for fashion: and they are said here to go about the
Streets, either for the reason alleged by Bonaventure, quia predolore
quiescere nequiunt, because they cannot rest for Hearts Grief and Sorrow, or
they go about the Streets to call company to the Funeral, or because they fetch
their compass, that they might make a more solemn Procession to the Church or
Sepulcher. Among the Romans, the Friends of the deceased hired certain Women
whom they called Prefi^^^, to lament over their dead: for the most part among
the Jews this sad task was put upon Widows, for they took it upon themselves,
as the words of the Prophet imply, and there were no Widows to make
lamentation, and of the Evangelist also: Acts 9. 39. and the Widows stood by
weeping for Dorcas; and indeed Widows are very proper for this employment: When
a Pot of water is full to the Brim, a little motion makes it run over, Widows,
that are Widows indeed, and have lost in their Husbands all the Joy and Comfort
of their Life, have their Eyes brim full of Tears, and therefore most easily
they over flow.

There are but Three things appertaining to Man here.

1. Life. 2. Death. 3. Burial.
And see they are all Three in the Text.

1. Man goes, there is his Life. 2. To his long home, there is his Death. 3.
And the Mourners go about the Streets, there is his Burial described by
Pariphrasis.
And so I am upon the first Stage.

The Doctrine.

Man's Life is a Voyage, his Death the term or period of this Voyage, his Grave
his home, and Mourners his Attendance. The Hourglass is running, whether the
Preacher proceeds, or makes a pawse, and the Ship is sailing whither it is
bound, when we sleep in our Cabbine; so whether we wake or sleep, move or rest,
be busy or idle, mind it, or mind it not, we walk on toward our long home.

We are expiring and dying, from the running of the first Sand in the
Hourglass of our life, to the last, from the moment we receive Breath, to the
moment that we breath out our last gasp.

Thus the Man in my Text goes, or rather runs still in his natural Course,
that is, every Man.

I need not direct any Man in his Natural Course from Life to Death, every Man
knows it, and whether he knows it or no, he shall accomplish it, the Spiritual
Course is more considerable, which is itinerarium ad Deum, a Journal to
Eternity, a Progress from Earth to Heaven; this Progress a Man begins at his
Regeneration, and in part ends in his Dissolution by Death, but wholly and
fully after his Resurrection; the way here is Christ; the viaticum the blessed
Sacraments; the light the Scriptures; the guides the Ministers of the Word; the
Thieves that lie in wait to rob us of our Spiritual Treasure the Devils; our
convoy the Angels; our stages several virtues and degrees of Perfection, the
City to which we bend our course, Jerusalem that is above, wherein are many
Mansions, or eternal houses,

I am now come, though long first, to Man's long home, which cannot be
described in a short time, and therefore I leap into my last stage, which as
you may remember was:

The Application of the Text to this sad Occasion.

I must now use in the Application of my Text, a method direct contrary to that
which I followed in my Explication; for therein first I showed you how the
natural Man goes to his long, and the Spiritual to his eternal home; and after
how, and why, and what sort of Mourners went about the Screets lamenting the
deceased; but now I am to speak of the Mourners, who have already finished
their circular motion, and then of the direct motion of the Man, the man of
quality, the man of worth, the Man of estate and credit, who is already arrived
at his long Let, and now entering into his long home.

Touching the Mourners I cannot but take notice of their number and quality;
the number is great we see, yet we see not all who yet are the truest Mourners,
pouring out their Souls to God with tears in their private Closets.

Illa dol^t vere, quae sine test dolet.
Her portion of sorrow like Benyamins, is five times more than any others,
whose loss of a Husband, and such a Husband is invaluable. Secondly the quality
of the Mourners is not ^lightly to be passed by, debeter iis religiosa mora;
for, not only great store of the Gentry and Commons, but some al^o of the
Nobility, the chief Officers of the Crown, and Peers of the Realm; not Religion
only and Learning, but Honor and Justice also has put on Blacks for him,
thereby testifying to all men their joint-respect to him, and miss of him.

Let them who have lived in credit die in honor; let them who in their life
time did many good Offices to the dead, after they are dead receive the like
Offices from the living. Out of which number, envy it self cannot exempt our
deceased Brother. Of whose natural parts perfected by Art and Learning, and his
moral much improved by Grace. I shall say nothing by way of Amplification, but
this, that nothing can be said of them by way of Amplification. All Rhetorical
Exaggeration will prove a diminution of them* In sum, he was a most provident
Householder, loving Husband, indulgent Father, kind Landlord, and liberal Patron.

The Night before he changed this Life for a better, after an humble Confession
of his Sins ingeneral, and a particular Profession of the Articles of his
Belief, in which he had lived, and now was resolved to die, he added, I
renounce all Popish Superstition, all Man's Merits, trusting only upon the
Merits of the Death and Passion of my Savior; and whosoever trusts on any
other, shall find when he is dying, if not before, that he leans upon broken
Reeds. Here after the Benediction of his Wife and Children, being required by
me to ease his mind, and declare if any thing ^ay heavy upon his Conscience; he
answered, nothing he thanked God. He besought all to pray for him, and himself
prayed most servently, that God would enable him patiently to abide his good
will and pleasure, and to go through this last and greatest work of says and
Patience; and the Pangs of Death soon after coming upon him, he fixed his Eyes
on Heaven from whence came his help, and to the last gasp, lifted up his hand,
as it were, to lay hold on that Crown of Righteousness, which Christ reaches
out to all his Children, who hold out the good ^ight of Faith to the end.

Earth to Earth, and Dust to Dust. SERMON VII.
GENESIS iii. 19. Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return.
THE Remembrance of Death among other Remembrances, is as Bread amongst other
Mea^s; howbeit it is more necessary for the poor thirsty Soul, than Bread for
the hungry Body; for a Man may live many Days without Bread, but the Soul
cannot do so without the remembrance of Death: which like that Serpent Regulus,
by no Charms can be charmed And it is the general Opinion of the best and most
Holy Writers, That the most perfect Life is a codtinual Meditation of Death.
When our blessed Savior said, If any man will follow me, let him deny himself,
and take up his Cross daily. Commanded not that we should bear upon our Backs
that heavy burden of the Wooden-Cross, but that we should always set Death
before our Eyes, making that of the ever blessed Apostle St: Paul, to be our
impress, I die daily. In the Second Book of Kings, it is reckoned, that the
good King Josias did cleanse the People from their Altars, Groves, and high
Places, where innumerable Idolatries daily increased: And to amend this ill, he
placed there in their stead, Bones, Skulls and Ashes of dead Men. Whose
Judgment herein was very discreet; for from Man's forgetting of his Beginning
and his End, arise his Idolatries; and so reviving by those Bones the
remembrance of what they were before, and what they shall be hereafter, he did
make them amend that mischief. Very many, nay, numberless are those Men which
adore the Nobleness of their Lineage; and out of a desire that they have, to
make good their Descent and beginning, they multiply Co^ts one upon another,
hang up Escutcheons, Blazon forth their Arms, tell vou very large Histories of
their Pedigrees and Genealogies, and many ^m^s most of them mere Lies and
Fables. The good Prophet Ezek^el ^^d represent these unto us, in those Twent^
five young Men which were Besotred and (...) ^^ beholding the laboring Sun,
that glorious (...) and vast Eye of all the World* whose g^ upon the Waters,
and hatched in Six Days all the World; which by way of Exposition, signifies
the adoring of the Glory of their Birth. But leaving these to themselves, as
silly Fools who glory in the Gold that glisters, God Almighty comes here unto
old Adam with a (...) of Death* and reaches him another Lesson, saying* Dust
thou art and unto dust thou shall return. The end ever holds a correspondence
with its beginning; Naked came I out of my Mother's Womb, and naked shall I
return. The Rivers come from the Sea, and thither again they return, and so
does the laboring Sun from the East, and thither it retires again. That Image
of Gold, Silver, Brass and Iron, that had its Feet of Earth, must in the end
turn to dust. Ba^ak having asked, Where are the Princes of the Nations? makes
answer himself, and says, The earth has swallowed them up all? Now to comment
upon this same place, we may make the like question, and give the very
self-same Answer, Nonne omnia Pulvis, nonne Fabula? nonne in paucis ossibus
memoria eorum conservatur? The very greatest and famousest of us all, have
been, are, and shall be but dust; and there is no Memorial to be left of us,
but a few rotten and stinking Bones. But to proceed, because in Preaching,
Plainness is ever counted the best Eloquence. In these words, (as they offer up
themselves unto our consideration) you may with me, (as they naturally arise
from the express words in my Text) observe these two regardable Circumstances.

First, How these Mortal Bodies of ours are said to be Dust.

And then secondly, How they shall return to Mother-Earth from whence they
came. Now of these two in their due order severally.

And first of the First, and that is, How we are said to be Dust. Now as for
the Walls of Flesh, wherein the Soul does seem to be immured before the
Restoration, it is nothing but an Elemental Composition, and a Fabric that
may fall to Ashes: All Flesh is Grass, is not only Metaphorically but Literally
tr^e; for all those Creatures we behold, are but the Herbs of the Field,
digested into Flesh in them, or more remotely Carnified in our selves. Nay
further, we are what we all abhor. Anthropophagi and Cannibales, Devourers, not
only of Men, but of our selves, and that not in Allegory, but a positive Truth;
for all this huge Mass of Flesh which we behold, came in at our Mouths; yea,
this Frame which we look upon, has been upon our Trenchers: In brief* we have
devoured ourselves* Man is such a frail, sorry and base Creature, that the good
Prophet Jeremy calls him to his own Face thrice Earth at one Breath, saying* O*
Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the Word of the Lord, Jer: 22. 29. Man is Earth by
Procreation, Sustentation, and by Corruption.

First, He is Earth by Procreation; for the first* Man is called Adam, that is,
red Earth; Of the dust of the Earth made he Man. Genesis 2. 7. The Patriarch
Abraham, acknowledging the baseness of his beginning, said unto the Lord, I am
but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27. Now Almighty God (the Creator of all things)
made this Earth (of which he made Man) of nothing, according to the Text, God
created the Heaven and the Earth. He made not this Heaven and Earth of another
Heaven and Earth, but he Created both as having nothing, but nothing whereby
and wherewith to build this goodly Frame, and so consequently proud Man in
respect of his Materials, is brought unto nothing: And therefore our Princely
Prophet David says, Psalm 144. 4. That Man is like a thing of naught. Yea, and
to confirm this the better, St. Paul that ever blessed Apostle in his Epistle
to the Gala^ians, says, If any Man seem to himself that he is something, when
he is nothing, he deceives himself in his imagination, Gal. 6. 3. Adam begat
Cain and Abel, Genesis 4. Cain signifies Possession, Abel Mourning or Vanity; to
teach us that Possessions are but Vanity and vexation of Spirit; yea, Vanity of
Vanities, all vanity, Eccles. 1. 2. And as Adam begat Sons like to himself, so
his Sons also Sons like to themselves, of a loathsome Excrement, carried in
those Members of the Body which are least honorable, brought forth into the
World with intolerable Pain, so vile and so soul, that I shall spare to speak,
wanting Epithites whereby to express my self; only give me leave to Cry out
with our Princely Prophet David, saying, What is Man (O God) that thou art
mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou visitest him; or with St. Paul, O
Man, what art thou who pleadest against God? As if he should have said, (as
Cyprian said once to Demetrius) Consider how base thou art in respect of God,
even as Clay in the hand of the Potter; and then I think thou will not enter
into dispute with thy Creator. That any Man is miserable, let it suffice him
that he is a Man, that is* Infelicitatis tabula, nec non Calamitatis fabula, a
Map of Miseries, and as it were the Table of Troy: whomsoever thou see to be
miserable, thou may without all doubt conclude he is a Man; and therefore
the first Voice uttered by the newborn Babe, is Crying, hereby Prophesying,
that he is come into a World full of Care and Grief, Crying, and taking it
grievously to heart because he is a Man, Blushing because he is Naked, Weeping
and wailing because he is born into a most wicked and miserable World, and
murmuring because endued but with a dull Genius, and made up of so base matter,
which every Disease like a Storm is ready to totter down. God Almighty Created
Adam of the basest matter, even of very Dirt, but this Dirt being Molded by
God's own Hand, and Inspiring it with so much Wisdom, Counsel and Prudence, it
may be called Cura Divini Ingenii, the Curiousness of God's Wit: But Man
growing proud hereupon, and hoping to be a God himself, God doomed him to
Death, and wrapped him again in his dirty Swaddling Clouts, with this
Inscription, Pulvis es, and in pulverem reverteris, Dust thou art, and unto
Dust thou shall return. Adam did not without some Mystery cloth himself with
green Leaves; for he gave therein as it were a sign and token of his vain and
foolish hopes. But as the Mother when the Be has stung her Child's Finger,
runs with all haste to get a little Dirt, and claps it to her little One, which
does assuage the Swelling, and give it ease: So those busy Bees of Hell daily
stinging us, and striking into our Breasts the Poison of their Pride and
Arrogance, Almighty God with a Memorandum of Death, with a Dust thou art, and
unto dust thou shall return, abates this Pride, and tells us of that swelling
Arrogance of ours. In Ezekiel, the King of Tire said* I am a God, but he was
answered, that he was (...) man, that is, base, vile and miserable: So holy
^a^id said, Let the Nations know that they a^^ but* (...)* that is, base and
vile: and St. Paul said, Are ^ot men? 1 Cor. 3. When we see a man swallowed up
sometimes in the misery of the Body, and sometimes of the Soul, we say in the
conclusion, he is a Man. Now if instead of the Gold of the Angels, there was
found Rust, and that so fine Cloth as that was not without its Moths, and that
incorrupted Wood without its Worm; what will become of those that are but Dust,
who dwell in Houses of Clay? Verily they must (as fearful of their own harm)
repeat this Lesson, Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return One asking
the question, Why God (having Created the Soul for Heaven) did knit it with so
straight a Knot to a Body of Earth, so frail, and so lumpish? Whose answer was,
That the Angels being overthrown by their Pride, He was willing to repair and
to help this Presumption in Man, a Creature in his superior part as it were
Angelical, but having a heavy and miserable Body* which might serve as a Stay
unto him, that if the nimbleness of his Understanding should puff him up, yet
that Earth which Clogged his Body should humble and keep him down. Those that
entered Triumphantly into Rome, had a thousand occasions given them to incite
them to Pride, Arrogance and Vanity: As their great number of Captives, their
Troops of Horse, their Chariots drawn with Elephants or* Lions, and their
Ladies looking upon them from their Windows, and the like: But the Senate
considering the great danger of the Triumpher, ordered one to sit by his Side,
to whisper this still in his Ear* Remember thy self to be a Man. The Princes of
the Earth have many Motives to make them forget themselves, not regarding the
Complaints of the Poor and Needy; yet as the Wise Man says, Wisdom* 7. 5. No
King had ever any other beginning of Birth* they are as other Men, the
Offspring of the Earth, and the Children of Men, and to them it is also said,
Dust thou art, etc. But to proceed.

As Man is Dust and Earth by Procreation, so likewise he is Dust and Earth by
Sustentation, and that in two respects; In regard of Aliment and Indument, Meat
and Apparel: It is truly said, That of* which we consist, we are nourished
with; Elements are Aliments, where we begin, we do receive; all Meats for our
Bodies in Health, and all Medicines for the same, being Sick, are Earth and
Earthy, even Dust and Ashes as we our selves are; we feed on the Things of the
Earth, and walk and sleep thereon: As for Apparel and Ornaments, we borrow
Wool of the Sheep, Hair of the Camel, Silk of the Worm, Furies of the Beasts,
and Feathers of the Fowls of the Air; like unto Aesop's Crow, having some Plume
from every Bird, something from every Creature. Flowers are richly decked,
Plants with an infinite variety of colored Leaves adorned, and other Animals
as well Vegetative as Sensitive, comely covered; only Man, that unhappy and
base Creature, is born to nothing but Beggary and Misery: So that we may justly
exclaim and cry out with the good Prophet David, saying, What is Man, etc. Nay,
what are we? If that the good Prophet Jeremy, who was Sanctified in his Mothers
Womb, did bewail his Condition, what may we do who are Born in Sin, and
Conceived in Iniquity, being Formed of most base and unclean Matter? God
Created Stars and Planets out of Fire, Birds out of Air, Fish out of Water, but
Man with other Animals out of the Slime of the Earth; therefore remember and
consider, O Mrn! what thou art, and thou shall find thy self much worse than
any other Creature whatsoever besides, even Dust and Ashes. Now from this
Principle I will infer three or four Conclusions of very great Fruit and
Consequence.

The First is this, If thou art Dust and Ashes* wherefore art thou proud, thou
Dust and Ashes? Of thy Beginning? No; of thy End? No; Of what then? If thou
should see thy self Seated between the Horns of the Moon, think on the
baseness of thy beginning, and thou shall then see clearly that Pride was not
born for Man, nor Anger and Pettishness appointed for Woman's Condition; Pride
cannot suit with Dirt, nor Curstness with Woman's Softness. Lord cleanse me
from my secret sins, and spare thy Servant from those that are strangers: By
Aliens you may understand those of Pride, for it is a Stranger as it were, and
another kind of thing, differing much from Man's base and vile Condition. There
is not any Sin more alien and strange to* Man's Condition than Pride, or that
does carry with it less excuse. Those Fools that are Painted forth, going about
to build a Tower that should overtop the Clouds, and reach to Heaven. Genesis 11.
4. did in their very first word say, Come let us make us Bricks; Bewraying
their Foolishness: What? go about upon Earth to rear a Foundation that should
emulate Heaven, which is far beyond Thought, and glorious beyond Report! God
Almighty said unto Ezekiel, Take thou a Tile, and pourtray upon it the City of
Jerusalem, the Walls, the Ditches, the Towers, the Temple, and a great Army of
Men, Ezekiel. 4. 1. Strange, yet true we see it is, that the Strength of Cities,
the Power of Armies, is contained in a poor brittle* Tile-stone* The good
Prophet Isaiah threatened those of Mo^^ with Whips and Scourges, Isa. 16.
because they insulted, and proudly triumphed upon the Walls and Towers of his
City: Speak Punishment unto those that rejoice in Walls that are made of Brick.
What, can earthen Walls raise up such Pride in Men? Samuel being to Anoint
Saul, God gave him for a Sign that he would have him Prince over his People,
That he should find two Men as soon as he was gone from him, near unto Rachels
Sepulcher: God might have given unto him some other Sign, but he chose rather
this to give him, to quell the Pride and Haughtiness of this new Honor; as if
he should admonish and put you in mind, that the Ashes of so fair a Creature as
Rachel, should read a Lecture unto you, what you must be. And this is the
reason why the Church, though she might use other Metaphors to express the
Misery and shortness of Man's Life, as is often made mention of in the Ornament
of Grace, as by a Leaf, a Flower, and a Shadow; yet it makes more particular
choice of Dust and Ashes, because the other are Metaphorical, these Literal:
for nothing more properly appertains unto Man than Dust, and therefore the
Scripture terms Death, a Man's returning again unto the Earth from whence he
came. The Flower, the Leaf and the Fruit, have some good in them, though of
short continuance; as Color, Odor, Beauty, Virtue and Shade, and albeit not
good in themselves, yet they are the Image and Representation of Good; but Dust
and Ashes speak no other good. Amongst the Elements, the Earth is the least
noble, and the most weak, the Fire, the Water and the Air, have in them Spirit
and Actitude; but the base Element Earth, as it were a Prisoner laden with
Weightiness. A certain Poet styles the Earth Bruta, not only for that it has
an unpleasant Countenance, as Deserts, Quicksands, Dens, and Caves; but also
for that it is an Inn of Serpents, Tigers, Panthers, and the like, so that it
is good neither to the Taste, to the Smell, to the Feeling, nor to the Hearing,
nor yet to the Seeing. Thou being therefore Earth, why art thou Proud, thou
Dust and Ashes? And thus far of the First.

Now the Second Thing regardable, is, If thou art Ashes, why such a deal of
Care in Pampering thy Body, which the hungry Worms are to devour to morrow?
Consider those rotting and stinking Carcasses of your Relations, that lie here
under the Ground, and the very thought thereof will moderate your desire of
being over-dainty and curious in cherishing your own. Isaac on the Night of his
Nuptials, placed his Wifes Bed in the Chamber where his Mother died. Tobias
spent all the Night with his Spouse in Prayer, being mindful of the harm which
the Devil had done to her former Husbands; as being advised from Heaven, that
he should temper with the remembrance of Death, the Delights and Pleasures of
this short Life of ours. The Camomile, the worse you treat it, and the more you
tread upon it, the better it thrives; other Plants require Pruning and tending
to make them fruitful; but this Herb has a quite contrary condition, that with
ill usage it grows the better. It is the pampered Flesh that brings forth
Thistles and Thorns, but the Flesh that is trodden down and humbled, that
yields store of Fruit: And this is likewise concerning the Second.

Now the Third thing to be considered, is, If thou art Dust, and to Morrow must
become Dust and Ashes, why such a deal of coveting of Honors and Riches, which
on a sudden may take themselves Wings and fly away. Esau sold his Birthright
for a Mess, of Pottage, but he excused his so doing, for that he saw his Death
was so near at hand: Behold I am ready to die* what will this Birthright
profit me? But to be brief, as Man in respect of his beginning and proceeding,
is Earth, even so he is Dust and Ashes in respect of his ending, which is the
last thing now to be handled; for the Lord himself denounced (as it is evident
in the words of my Text,) Out of it wast thou taken, for dust thou art, and
unto dust thou shall return. When that Death (mounted upon his pale Horse like
a Sergeant sent from above, upon Action of Debt, at the Suit of Nature) comes
with a Habeas Corpus, to pull down these Clay Walls, wherein our Immortal Souls
are kept close Prisoners, within the narrow compass of these mortal Bodies of
ours; then shall our Dust return unto the Dust as it was; then, yea even then,
we shall be Terra a Terrendo, because then every one shall tread on us. A
living Dog is better than a dead Lion; every Thersites will Insult over Hector,
and every Scrub run upon Accilles. Every Child is ready to mangle the strong
Oak when it is down, and he that durst not look Caesar in the Face, is now bold
to pull him by the Beard. Our Bodies are not only Houses of Clay, Job 4. 19.
but as they be earthly, so Tabernacles, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Set up this Day, and
happily taken down the next: And therefore the Years of Man are termed Days in
holy Scripture, as the Days of Noah, the Days of Lot, and the Days of Elias,
because they lived but a few Days; as the Patriarch Abraham, Few and evil have
been the Days of my Pilgrimage, Gen, 47. 9. Although time may be divided into
past, pr^sent and future, yet there is no time belonging essentially to our
Life, but even the very Now, because the time past is certainly gone, and the
future time uncertainly to come; and therefore our blessed Lord and Savior
Christ enjoined us to pray, Give us this day our daily bread, Matthew. 6. 11. Not
this Age, Month or Week, but only this Day, because we may not care for to
Morrow* and therefore says wise Solomon, Boast not the self of to morrow, Prove.
27. 1. For thou know not what a day may bring forth. All flesh is grass,
says Isaiah; Grass withered or green. Oh Fool! this Night thy poor Soul may be
fetched from th^^* and so thou shall have no need of daily Bread to Morrow.
Josiah was a virtuous Governor, 2 Kings 23. and vet he had but his time. In
the the days of Josiah the Son of Ammon, Jer. 1. 2. Noah was a very upright
honest Man in his time, Genesis 6. 9. and yet he had but his time. In the days of
Noah, 1 Pe. t 3. 20. Herod was a most mighty Man, and yet he had but his time.
In the days of Herod King of Judah, Luke 1. 5. If we be as strong as Sampson,
and as mighty as Alexander, this Tyrant Death in time will take us all away;
Moses upon Mount Abarim, Aaron upon Ho^, and Methuselam after 99 years, were
all cut down and brought to dust again, as they were. Although the good Prophet
Daniel Prophesied of one who should have a time, and a time, and a half time,
yet as it appears in the Revelation of St. John, all is but a time, and that
a short time too. For although Antichrist exalt himself above all that is
called God, yet he shall one day perish as a Man; he came from Earth, and
(notwithstanding his double Honor, and triple Crown) he must (being Dust)
return to the Earth as he was, and see Corruption. Wherefore I say unto you, as
the good Prophet Jeremiah did unto them of old, O Earth! Earth! Earth! hear the
Word of the Lord. Remember what thou was, what thou art, and what thou shall
be, when thou leavest this sad World behind thee. Thou wast in thy beginning a
most miserable Wretch, yea a filthy stinking Worm, Conceived and Born in Sin;
thou art now a Sackful of Dirt, and hereafter thou shall be nothing but a Bait
and Banquet for Worms. In thy Beginning thou wast nothing, and now nothing
worth; and if thou repent not of thy damnable Sins, thou art in danger
hereafter to be worse than nothing; conceived in Original Sin, now full of
Actual Sin, and if that thou still continue in thy Wickedness, thou may one
Day feel the Eternal Smart of Sin: Begot in Uncleanness, Living in Unhappiness,
and Dying in Anguish and Uncomfortableness. Remember I pray you from whence you
came, and Blush; where you are, and Lament; and whither you must in spite of
your Teeth, and Tremble. Brag not of any thing in you, or on you; neither what
you have been, are, or may be: for in respect of your base, weak and frail
Flesh, you are a Clod of Earth, are so still, and in the end shall become
nothing else but a Coffin of Earth under ground. Thy Grave shall be thy House,
and thou shall make thy Bed in the Dark. Thou shall say to Corruption, thou art
my Father, and to the Worm, thou art my Mother and Sister. Our Flesh dissolveth
into Filthiness, Filthiness into Worms, and Worms into dust; so our Flesh which
is Dust, tha^ is nothing, returns into nothing, that is Dust at last.

And thus I have showed you at large, how we are said to be Dust, and likewise
how we shall at last return thither again.

Wherefore now (to be brief) to put a Period to all, Remember what you are, and
Meditate Daily and Hourly upon what you shall be, lest that Death (like a
Thief) steal upon you, as it does upon many nowadays: For Meditation i^* like
Gunpowder, which in a Man's hand is Dust and Earth, but if you put Fire
thereunto, it will overthrow Towers, Walls, and whole Cities. A light
Remembrance, and a short Meditation of what you are, is like that Dust which
the wind scatters away; but a quick lively Memory, and enflamed
Considerations of your own wretched Estates, will blow up the Towers of your
Pride, cast down the Walls of your Rebellious Nature, and ruin those Cities of
Clay wherein you live. As the Phoenix ^annowing a Fire with her Wings, is
renewed again by her own Ashes; so shall you become new kind of Creatures, by
remembering what you have been, are, and what you shall be; that you are but
Dust, and shall return unto Dust again. Moses casting Ashes into the Air, made
the Inchanters and their Enchantments to vanish. The Ashes scattered by David,
put the King out of doubt, and made it appear unto him, that that was no God
which he adored: Job came forth from his Ashes in better Estate than he was
before: And as Joseph came out of Prison from his torn and tattered Rags, and
had richer Robes put upon him, so you from out of these your Ashes, shall be
stripped of the Old Man, and put on the New. The forgetfulness of other things
may be good sometimes, but of your selves, what you are, and shall be, never.
This will require a continual Remembrance, therefore this cannot be to often
inculcated, Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou shall return.

THE EJACULATION.
GOod Lord, we confess that Man is but a Worm of Yesterday, his Production was
out of the Dust, and must thither return in his ultimate Resolution: for (as we
have heard) Dust we are, and unto Dust we shall return. Let us therefore
always be in a readiness for our last Change, seeing we know not how soon the
silent Grave may involve us under its Wings, where we shall lie in Obscurity,
till the last Trumpet shall sound, at the Morning Day of the Resurrection,
Arise ye Dead, etc. Good Lord, though now we appear a^ living Objects of thy
Favor* yet we know not how soon the Scene may be altered; for this very Day we
now breath in, may be the last we shall ever count: and so many ways may the
Thread of our frail Lives be snapt asunder, that we cannot promise our selves
an Hours time upon Eart; a little Stone from the Housetop, as we pass in the
Streets, a slip of our Foot, or the stumbling of our Horse, a sudden mischance
(among a Million that ^ay befall us) which we know not of, may reduce us uo our
first Original, and leave us a pale Carcass to be Sacrificed to the gaping
Grave. Oh let us often therefore consider where will be our Eternal abode, when
the black Attire of our Funeral is over, and all ^^r Weeping Friends gone to
their several Houses and Homes. Let us often think how meanly and poorly ^lad
we shall enter into our Coffins, with only one poor Shroud and other Dresses
fitted to cover us; and what will become of our rich Attire, our haughty
Deckings, our overcurious Trimmings, in the Grave, whither we are all agoing?
And when we are Arrested by the cold Hands of Death, how Fale and Wan to all
shall we seem? Even ready to nauseate our Spectators: Good Lord, let such
Thoughts as these keep us humble, and keep down all proud aspiring Thoughts,
that shall at any time arise in our corrupted Hearts: For it is true, Dust we
are, and unto Dust we shall return.

Job xxiv. 20. The Worms shall feed sweetly on him.
THat is, the Grave shall be no securer to him than to others, there the Worms
shall feed upon all men, and they shall feed sweetly on him, or it shall be a
kind of sweetness and pleasure to him to have the Worms feeding on him, which
is no more then what Job said upon the same Argument, (Chap. 21. 23.) The Clods
of the Valley shall be sweet to him.

In these words you have Job describing the state of a Dead man laid in the
Grave, he tells you the Worms shall feed sweetly on him. After Job had but
spoke of Man's Conception in the Womb, he next tells you of his Corruption by
the Worm, so suddenly does a man step out of the Cradle into the Coffin, that
sometimes there is no space between them both.

The Worms shall feed sweetly on him.
Those that have formerly fed upon their Sweetmeats, the time hasteneth when
the Worm shall feed sweetly on them: As all Wooden Vessels are liable to be
Worm-eaten, though they be never so furiously wrought, so will the neatest
Body, the finest Face, be shortly a Worm-eaten Face.

The Design of the Expression and of the Context being to convince us of the
certainty of our Deaths, and the uncertainty of our Lives: I shall conclude
this Subject with telling you,

That no person can seem so brave and youthful at the present, but for ^ught
any thing he knows he* may the next Hour be a Banquet for the Worm; to feed
upon,

Prepare to follow. SERMON VIII.
ISAIAH 8. 38. Set thy House in order, for thou shall dye and not live.
Dearly Beloved,

I Am now about to speak of that which will shortly render me unable to speak;
and you are now about to hear of that which will also shortly make you
incapable of hearing any more, and that is Death. It will be but a little while
before Death will cause both the Speaker to be Dumb, and the Hearer to be Deaf.
Oh that I might therefore this day, speak with that seriousness unto you, as
considering the time draws on apace, when I shall be Silenced by Death, and
never more have an opportunity to speak one word unto you. And Oh! that you
might Hear this day with that diligence and reverence, as considering that
after you are once Nailed down in your Coffins, and Covered with the Dust, you
will never hear one Sermon more, or one Exhortation, or one word more, till you
hear these words pronounced by the great Judge of the Quick and Dead, Surgi^^
Mortui, and venite ad Judicium; Arise ye Dead, and come ye unto Judgment. What
is said in my Text, as it is likely you have often heard it with your Ears, so
now you may ice it accomplished, It is appointed unto all Men once to die.
Death has long since come into our Nation, and has summoned many to make
their appearance in another World, yea, you know that Death has already entered
into our Streets, and has not been afraid to step over our Threshold, and to
seize upon those that have been standing round about us; yea, it has come into
our very Bed-chambers* and has suddenly snatched away those that have been
lying in our very Bosoms: So that we have had warning enough of the near
approaches of Death unto our selves, and without doubt some of us have had the
Sentence of Death within our selves, (as the Apostle speaks;) and therefore
it is high time for you and I seriously to consider what is said in my Text,
Set thy House in order, etc.

Something we shall briefly speak now in order to the explanation of the words,
that so you may once more hear (before you feel) the meaning of them; It is
appointed or enacted by the Court of Heaven; Statutum est, it is a Statute or
Law (more firm and certain than the Laws of the Medes and Persians) which is
never to be repealed or abrogated. We are not therefore telling you what may,
but of what must inevitably come to pass. It is appointed unto Men, that is as
much as to say, unto all Men, once to die. It is an indefinite Expression, and
so is to be understood of all the same kind, without some special exception
from this general Rule. And indeed such an exception there is to be found in
the Scripture; for, says the Apostle, We shall not all Die, but some shall be
Changed, in a Moment, in the twinkling of an Eye; there shall be some at the
end of the World, who shall not pass under Death, but yet they must pass under
a Change, which is thought will be equivalent unto Death. But for the present
time, and according to the common Method and Course of Providence, no Man or
Woman has any ground to expect that they shall escape the stroke of Death; for
it is appointed unto Men, that is, unto all Men, once to Die: Death will no
more spare him that wears a Crown upon his Head, than him that carries a Spade
in his Hand, as the Poet Elegantly expresses it.

Pallida Mors aequo pulsat pede
Pauperum tabernas, Regumque Turres, etc.
And the Scripture speaking of Kings, uses this Expression, I have said ye are
Gods, but ye shall die like Men.

But what is the meaning of the Phrase to Die? I can assure you if you know not
yet, it will not be long e're you will know the meaning of it: The Philosopher
describes Death thus, Est privatio Vitae, ^^ Anime separationem a Corpore: As
Spiritual Death is the Separation of God from the Soul, so Temporal Death is
the Separation of the Soul from the Body; When those two (the Soul and Body)
which have like Twins, dwelt lovingly together under the same Roof, must be
parted asunder, and enjoy no more sweet and intimate Communion one with
another, till the time of re-unition at the General Resurrection. This is that
which must once be done, every one must here take their turn.

And though this happens to some at one time, and to others at another time,
yet first or last, it will happen to all* The Greek word ( Thanatos) which
signifies Death, is taken from a word which signifies extendere, and indeed
Death stretches out it self so far that no Man can live out of the reach of
it. As surely as thou wast once Born, so surely shall thou once Die.

Let me but ask you this one plain Question, and your own Conscience shall be
the Judge in the Case: Could thou still remain a Drunkard or a Swearer, if
thou did but once seriously consider that thou must once Die? Or could thou
so eagerly set thy Heart upon the empty, lying and dying Vanities of this
World, did thou but once seriously consider that thou must once, (and it may
be before to Morrow.) be taken out of this World? Or could thou neglect the
means of Grace or Delight in Profaneness, did thou but seriously consider
that thou must once die, and it may be before ever thou enjoyest another
Praying or Preaching opportunity? To die is much, and as this must be once
done, so there is more to be done than this, for after this comes Judgment.
Whether the particular or general Day of Judgment is here to be understood,
needs no debate, seeing both will certainly follow after Death.

As for the certainty of Death* you need not look into your Bibles for a proof
of that; I shall only desire you to open your Weeping Eyes, and let them but a
little while be fastened upon the Dead Corpse that now is before you, and if
afterward you can question this Truth, I shall say no more to you at present,
but that it will not be long e're others may say of thee, as the Apostle Peter
did to Saphira, Acts 5. verse 5, 6, 7, compared with the 9 and 10. Verses. And
Ananias fell down and gave up the Ghost; and the young Men arose, wound him up,
and carried him out and buried him: And his Wife not knowing what was done,
came in; and Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have agreed to tempt the
Spirit of the Lord? Behold the Feet of them which have buried thy Husband are
at the door, and shall carry thee out: Then fell she down straightway, and
yielded up the Ghost; and the young Men came in and found her dead, and
carrying her forth, buried her by her Husband.

The same Bier, and it may be the same Persons which have carried thy
Neighbor, thy Husband, thy Wife, thy Brother or Sister already to the Grave,
behold they stand ready to do so much for thee: And let every one consider with
himself, that he may be the very next in the Town or Family, for whom the Bier
may be fetched to carry him unto his long home. And then as for the certainty
of Judgment, though every one has a sufficient Proof in his own Conscience of
the truth of this, yet for as much as some have seared Consciences, and
therefore would put off the Evil Day, and say with those, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. And
there will come in the last days Scoffers, walking after their own Lusts,
saying, Where is the Promise of his Coming? since all things continue as they
were from the beginning, etc. You may therefore Consult these plain Scripture
Proofs, Eccles. 11. 9. compared with Romans 14. 11, 12. For we shall all stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, yet that is not all, but as it follows,
So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God. 2 Cor. 5. 10. For
we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in the Body, according to that he has doae, whether it
be good or bad.

ISAIAH xxxviii. Set thy House in Order, for thou shall Die, and not Live.
MAN'S Body (before that dismal Conquest we all deplore) as well as the Poor
Soul was conditionally Immortal, and so to this very day had ever continued, if
it had not been for the damnable Sin of Disobedience committed by Adam and Eve
our First Parents; But this was no sooner Gained than Lost, and the time of
Man's Life ever since has been as a Point, the Substance of it ever flowing,
the Sense obscure, and the Whole Composition of the Body tending to Corruption:
If that you should live three hundred years, or as many thousand of years; yet
with all remember this, that at the last you shall be compelled by Death, Gods
all-resting Bailiff to lay down these rotten, ruinous, and clay-decaying
Tabernacles of yours, for Dust you are, and unto Dust you shall return, and
peradventure you shall not have a good warning beforehand, as the good King
Hezekiah had here, but be thrust out of House and Harbor, in less than an
hours warning; For Death, which will put a period to every Man's days, 2 Timothy 4.
7. is like a Sergeant sent from above upon Action of Debt at the Suit of Nature
mounted upon his Pale Horse will come on unawares, rap at your Doors, Alight,
Arrest you all, and carry you bound Hand and Foot into a Land as dark as
Darkness it self, from whence you shall be summoned at the last dreadful Audit
to the Bar of Justice in the high Court of Heaven, when your Bill shall be
brought in, how that you have ever Rebelled, and most notoriously transgressed
against the Lord of Hosts, both in Thought, Word, and Deed, and have ever spun
away our time as though that Death which is the end of all flesh would never
follow, wherefore to the intent that Hezekiah, that good King might be made
more certain of his fatal Destiny, occasioned by our first Parents, and have
the less account to make at the great and terrible day of Doom (when Christ
Jesus the Worlds Savior shall descend from Heaven, which is the center of all
good wishes, with his Heavenly Host of blessed Angels riding in Pomp, and great
Majesty upon the Wings of the Wind, with the loud sounding Trumpet of God, and
the all tearing Voice of the Archangel to judge both the quick and Dead) God
sent unto him the good Prophet Isaiah to encounter with him, and to put him in
mind of his mortal Song. The whole verse runs thus, In those days was King
Hezekiah sick unto Death, and Isaiah the Prophet, the Son of Amoz came into
him, and said unto him, thus says the Lord. Set thy House in order, for thou
shall die and not live. These words, as they distribute themselves, do consist
of 2 Principal and Essential Parts.

First of an Admonition, or earnest Exhortation, Set thy House in Order.

And then secondly of a sound and undeniable Reason, which is threefold
Affirmative and Negative

First Affirmative, for thou shall Die, and the Negative, and not Live. Set thy
House, etc. Now of thief in their due order severally, and first of the
Admonition, or earnest Exhortation, Set thy House in Order, in which you have
these three things regardable.

First the Reason warning, which was Almighty God by the mouth of the Prophet
Isaiah, as is made manifest in express terms in the former part of the Verse:
And Isaiah the Prophet, the Son of Amoz, came unto him, and said unto him, thus
says the Lord.

Secondly, the Person warned, or exhorted, which was none other but even good
King Hezekiah, and by him all other.

And then thirdly and lastly the matter of the Exhortation, and that was to Set
thy House in Order. Now of these which shall have the first place in my
Discourse shall be of the Person exhorting* (...) that was God. Adam who had
attained u^ state of Perfection in his Life and Conversation, relying wholly
upon Natures first intentions never so much as once dreamed of Death, which is
a Separation of Soul and Body, or any Alteration, until Almighty God, unto whom
all hearts are open, no secrets hid, seeing his corrupt and base nature, came
unto him, and told him plainly, and roundly to his face, how that he was but
Dust and Ashes, and thither should return again, Genesis 3. 19. Thus Almighty God
by the mouth of Moses the Faithful was ever warning the Israelites (being ever
a most stiff-necked, and rebellious Generation) of their Mortality. Deuteronomy. 32.
21. saying, They have moved me to Jealousy with that which is not God, they
have provoked me to Anger with their Vanities; And I will move them to
Jealousy with those which are not a People, I will pro^oke them to Anger with
a foolish Nation; for a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn unto the
lowest Hell, and shall consume the Earth with her increase, and set on fire the
Foundation of the Mountains; I will heap mischief upon them, I will spend my
Arrows upon them; they shall be burn with hunger, and devoured with burning
heat; and with bitter Destruction; I will also send the Teeth of Beasts upon
them* with the poison of Serpents of the Dust, and to raise this Blister the
higher, the Sword without, and Terror within, shall destroy both the Young
Man, and the Virgin, the suckling also, with the M^n of Gray Hairs, verse. 25.
Thus Almighty God did threaten them, if that they would not set their House in
Order, and repent, that he would bring them to the Dust again, wherefore Moses
being a true Mirror of pity* out of his most tender Love, and boundless
Affection toward them all in general, lest that Almighty God, should send
forth his sharp piercing Arrows, and give them mortal Wounds in his heavy
Wrath, and cruel Anger, cries out most bitterly, by way of Exclamation, saying,
O that they were wise, then would they understand this, and consider their
latter end. Thus the Father of Spirits, and Lives, having out of a Chaos, or
nothing, created all, and fashioned Man after his own Image, seeing his corrupt
and base Nature too inclinable unto all sorts of Wickedness, by a sudden
Metamorphosis, transforms him into what he was again, just like the Cat in the
Fable, which when she would not change her manners, having all her members made
after the form of a Woman, according to hearts desire, was turned into a Cat
again. Thus far concerning the first particular Circumstance, the Son warning
even Almighty God by the mouth of Isaiah the Prophet? wheresore now to breviate
my Discourse in fewer Words, lest that I should be too prolix in the
prosecution, I shall proceed unto the second thing, subservient to this
Explication, and that is the person warned, or here to set his House in Order,
which was none other, but even Hezekiah that good King of Judah, who brake down
the brazen Serpent, 2 Kings 18. 4. Who did receive presents from the King of
Babel. 2 Kings 20. 12. Who restored all things that his Predecessors had taken
out of the Temple, and established pure Religion among his People. 2. Chron.
29. 2.

And lastly who ordained Priests, and Levites to serve in the Temple, and also
who appointed for their maintenance, 2 Chronicles. 31. 2. This, yea, even then was
he unto whom Almighty God ( who has no delight in the Death of a Sinner, but
rather that he may turn from his Wickedness, and Live,) sent the good Prophet
Isaiah, saying, set thy House in Order, for thou shall die, and not live.
Hereupon I might insist longer, but that I shall demonstrate unto you as
occasion is offered, and now proceed unto the third particular Circumstance
regardable in my Text, the matter of this Exhortation, and that was to set his
House in order, which is the scope of my Sermon, and the main thing. Set thy,
etc. Now by this word House, you may understand, even every Humane Body, which
although at its first Creation, was a most solid, sound, and incorruptible
Substance; yet, by the entrance in of sin became capable of all sorts of
Maladies; it is true, before that we knew what a damnable thing sin was, we had
strong Houses, but ever since God Almighty lets us dwell in Paper thatched
Cottages, and clay Walls, every Disease like a tempestuous storm totters us,
and is ever and anon ready to overwhelm us. Now this ruinous House, and all
decaying Tabernacle, which by the corruption of sin is become as a Pesthouse,
fetide, filthy, and unclean, before it can be set in order, must be swept clean
and thoroughly rinced of all sins infective dregs.

First it must be thoroughly purged from the guilt of blood, which leaves such a
stain behind it, that the whole Land could not be cleansed but by the blood of
the shedder; for even so did holy David, who although he was a renowned, and
glorious King, and holy Prophet of God, a Man justified even of his Enemies,
thou art more Righteous than I; esteemed of his Subjects, thou art worthy of
ten thousand of us, a Man more learned than his Teachers: Yea, a Man even after
Gods own Heart; yea no way respecting the name, or applause of Men, but is
content to shame himself for evermore, to record his Sins to his own shame, so
that he may procure Gods Glory, and the good of his Church, set thy House in
order, and not shroud in his head, nor run into a Bush as Adam did, but writing
his fault even in his Brow, and pointing at it even with his finger, casts
his Crown down at the Lambs feet with the 24 Elders; with the poor Publican
falls grovelling to the Earth, thumps his breast, strikes upon his thigh, wrings
his hands, and ever pours out his poor soul before the Lord of Hosts, and thus
humbling himself unto the Dust of Death, at length from the bottom of his
heart, with grief, shame, and fear, cries out most bitterly, and betakes
himself unto a Psalm of mercy, saying, Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God*
thou art the God of my health, and my tongue shall sing of thy Righteousness,
make my House clean by cleansing me from the guilt of blood, and then shall I
set forth thy praise. Ever get your Houses thoroughly purged from that Sin,
which is an high offense against Almighty God, who has given it in command,
saying, Thou shall not kill, and if not another, much less thy self, for thou
must love thy Neighbor as thy self, first thy self, and then thy Neighbor as
thy self, the nearer, the dearer. I kill, and give life again, says the Lord
of Hosts; we are not masters of our own lives, but only stewards, and therefore
may not spend them, or end them, when, and how we please, but even as God
Almighty, who bestowed them, lest that we come, and defile our Bodies, which
ought ever to be kept clean, and set in order. As murderers are enemies against
God, whose image they deface against their Neighbors, who are all members with
them of one Common, weal, and politic Body, so are the most cruel Enemies
against themselves, because by natural instinct every Creature labors to
preserve it self, the Fire ^^^yeth with the Water, the Water fights with the
Fire, the most silly Worm does contend with the most strong Man to preserve it
self, and therefore we are not to butcher our Neighbors, or our selves, but to
expect Gods pleasure, and leisure to let us depart in peace, seeing that we
must all die, and not live. That bloody Tyrant Nero had his hands* so stained
with the guilt of innocent blood, that when God saw that he would not repent,
and set his House in order, caused him to die both a sudden and a shameful
Death, and thus God dealt with many more, whom I shall leave to your
consideration, wherefore that you may not taste of the same sauce, while it is
said, to day, set your House in order, get them thoroughly cleansed from all
guilt, and especially from the guilt of Blood, and then, when you die you shall
receive incorruptible Crowns, you shall be like Kings and Princes, all Coheirs
in the Kingdom of Heaven, which for excellency is far beyond thought, and
glorious beyond report.

Secondly, As the Body, before it can be set in Order, must be thoroughly
cleansed from the guilt of blood; so must it likewise be purged throughout, and
scoured well of all the Pollutions, and Corruptive Dregs, which Adultery leaves
behind it, they are not a few, it is a Quotidian Fever to the Corpse, a Canker
to the Mind, a Corrosive to the Conscience, and a mortal Bone to all the Body.
It is an efficient cause of more cruel Maladies in the Body than any thing
beside.

First, it sets the Body on fire, which ever after consumes away by an
incurable Consumption.

Secondly, it brings the Body into a Dropsy, which by no skilful Physician
with all his cunning Medicines, and drawing Issues can be once cured; till that
Tyrant, and all-devouring Death come with its sharp stinging Arrows, and
execute its office. Concupiscence is like a fire, and our Bodies unto seething
pots which cannot be cooled, but either by taking away the fuel, by keeping it
in continual motion, by casting in of cold water, or lastly, by taking it
altogether from the fire. Therefore let every man in the fear of God, use these
means prescribed for the cooling of intemperate Lust boiling in his flesh.

First I say, let him take away the fuel, let him refrain himself from eating,
and drinking too much, lest at last Lust command like a Tyrant; for saturity is
the father of wantonness, and uncleanness, the Daughter of surfeiting, sine
Cerere and Libero friget Venus, without Nectar and Amrbosia Concupiscence
cannot long continue, for Lady Venus dwells-still at the sign of the Ivy-bush:
where there is cleanness of Teeth, usually there is no filthiness of Body, but
if that we stuff our Corpse as full as they can hold, making our mouths as
Tunnels, our throats as Wine-pipes, and our bellies as barrels, we must expect
nothing but Lust ever to Tyranize over us.

Secondly, let every one keep his Body in continual Action, for Concupiscence
is begot of an idle Brain, and hatched in a lazy Body.

Quaeritur Aegistus quare sit factus Adulter?
In promptu Causa est, desidiosus erat.
Egistus complaining why he should be made an Adulterer, was quickly answered,
because he was idle. The Crab-fish being more subtle than many other Fishes
against the coming of the Flood, when that the Oyster never sails to open,
flings into her a little Stone, that she cannot shut her self again, and so the
Oyster is devoured by the Crab; our Adversary the Devil is like unto the Crab;
and we just like the Oyster, if that he find us idle and gaping, he takes his
opportunity to confound us. Idleness is the Devils Pillow, says Origin, and
therefore like a pestiferous and dangerous Plague is to be shun of all: Cupid
shoots still in a slug, and therefore hits none, but such as are sluggish.

Thirdly, Let every Man stir to cool his Body by washing of himself thoroughly
with his Tears, as David did, who watered his Couch with his Tears, and whose
Eyes became a Fountain of Tears. David and his people lifted up their Voices,
and wept so long that they could weep no longer.

Fourthly, As the Pot is cooled by taking it altogether from the Fire; so
indeed may the Lust of the Body, by shuning opportunities and occasions of Sin,
for Liberty makes Thieves. Daniel, although but a young Man, was so endued with
the Continency, that he did not only all he could to suppress Lust in himself,
but also reproved the Lascivious Elders. Joseph a young Man resisted the
Temptations of his own Mistress, and likewise St. John the Blessed Evangelist,
although very young, almost a Boy, did what as in him lay to bridle his Nature,
and to keep his House in order: Now seeing that filthy Lust does not only
dishonor, but also pollutes our Vessels, our Clay Bodies, let us take Saint
Paul's advice, which is to abstain from its every kind, for although it does
seem a Paradise to the Desire, yet it is a Purgatory to the Purse, a Plague to
the Body, and a Hell to the Soul; and that which may stir up the Wanton the
most, a Sin against his own Body; Do thou then love thy Flesh? Abstain from
Adultery, for it is rottenness to thy Bones; Do thou thy Soul? Abstain then
from it. Lord, for it is very unhonest; Or do thou love thy Credit? Be sure
then likewise that thou abstain from it, for it is very dishourable. This heat
is an Infernal Fire, whose Fuel is Fullness of Bread* and abundance of Idleness;
Evil Communications are the Sparks, Infamy the Smoke, Pollution the Ashes, and
the End Hell, wherefore seeing this, get your selves thoroughly cleansed from
this Infectious Disease, and suffer not Sin to reign in your Mortal Bodies, but
with all haste, set your House in order, for you shall die. As the Body before
it can be set in order, must first be purged of all Blood-guiltiness, and then
of all those Distempers occasioned by Adultery, so must it likewise be Scoured
from top to toe of all Pride and Arrogance which are the other proper Sins of
Satan; they that are proud, and vainglorious, must of necessity be ever
Factious; seeing that bravery ever stands upon comparisons; and likewise very
violent, ever to make good their own vaunts; they are seldom or never at love
with their Neighbors, it is true, one Tradesman will love another, and one
Drunkard, according to Horace, will take Delight in the Company of another,
sitting Hour after Hour, drinking of Soul-sick Healths; but for one proud Man
to associate with another, and to love him as himself, is a thing seldom or
never seen; just like the Foolish Jea clothed with the Peacock's Feathers, he
ever thinks himself Chief among all, though according to Natures Ordination a
mere Ignoramus; he is ever casting beyond the Moon, till that he bring himself
to destruction, which may well be so according to that of Solomon, Pride goes
before destruction, and a haughty mind before a full, Prove. 16. 18. The good
Prophet Isaiah had such an invettered hatred against the Sin of Pride, that he
pronounced a woe against Ephrin the very Crown of all Arrogance; saying, Woe
unto the Crown of Pride, Isa. 28. 1. for it shall bring a Man very low, when
humility shall raise him full high, as you may see by the words of the ever
blessed Virgin Mary, who says, Luke the 1. 52. that the Lord has put down the
Mighty from their Seat, and has exalted the Humble and Meek. This Sin corrupts
the whole World, therefore that you may get your selves free from all its
Infections, fly it as you would the Plague or Pestilence, and with all haste
set your House in Order, for you shall die, and not live. 4. The next Malady
that you must get your selves Cured of before that your Houses can be set in
order, is Envy, Hatred, and Malice, a Sin which has been of too long standing:
It was very common in Hesiod's time, and not only among the Potters and
Singers; but also among the very Vagrants, whereupon he took occasion to say,
One Potter (says he) there envies another, one Singer hates another, and one
Beggar pronounces a woe against another? A Man that has no Virtue in himself
ever is envying Virtue in another, and not in those that are far distant, but
even in those that are full near, and dear unto him; -- feriunt summos Fulmina
montes; as high Hills are most exposed to Thunder, and as the fairest Flowers
are the soonest nipt by the venomous Cantharides; even so the most Eminent
Gifts and Graces in Men, are the greatest griefs of the Malicious and Envious
Misers, this Sin is a repining grief for other Men; Happiness; it is an evil
Eye which wishes good to no Man, but to it self; although the Squint-Eye, Male
content and Envious Wretch does thus ever Travel with Mischief, and bring forth
ungodliness, still (...) of himself like the raging Sea, and stiring up strife
all the day long; yet let him remember that this course of Life must be
altered, that he must get his Body thoroughly drenched from all Envy, Hatred,
and Malice (the greatest Antagonist against Love, which ought to be embraced
for all) and Get his House set in order, for he shall die and not live.

Fifthly, The Body must first be purged from the Corruptions of
Blood-guiltiness. Secondly, from the cruel Maladies occasioned by Adultery.
Thirdly, of all putrifactions brought in by Pride and Arrogance, and fourthly,
the infections procured by Envy, Hatred, and Malice; so likewise it must be
ever kept free from all Covetous, and greedy desires, the root of all ill, and
the very Metropolis of all Villainy. Judas was not sooner made Buyer, but that
he shut himself into his Purse, and became a Slave to a few pieces of Silver
his own Prisoners, so that indeed at last it was more easy for a Camel to
enter into the Eye of a Needle, than for him being conjured into the Circle of
his Purse to get out again. This Sin is so sweet that it leads almost all Men
unto Destruction, whom it once possesses; What was it but only Covetousness
that brought Dives to the Pit of Hell, where being ever tormented with its
Scorching Flames is still dying, yet never dead, always crying out, O Immortal
Death, O deadly Life, what shall I term thee, for if that thou be Life,
wherefore do thou kill? and if Death, how do thou still endure; for in Life
there is some ease and comfort, and in Death an end; but in thee there is
neither ease, nor end. O my dear and well beloved Friends, consider this; and
get your selves Cured of this Malady, which of it self is able to bring a Man
unto the Pit of Hell, fly it as a secret Enemy in your ^own Bos, myea, and both
in Body and Mind to. As our outward form, so much more our inward form should
make us loath and detest this abominable Sin of Covetousness, which turns topsy
turvy all Humane Society, and sets more at odds, than naked truth brings to
Unity, Peace, and Concord.

Pronaque cum spectant animalia caetera terram
Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad Sydera tollere vultus.
In the first Creation of things, when God made all Creatures Irrational,
looking down to the Ground, then made he Man, a Rational Creature after his own
Likeness, with a Countenance tending to Heaven, and all to put him in mind,
although he was made de terra and ex terra, of the Earth and out of the Earth,
never like the Worldling to mind the things of the Earth; but to keep his Body
still clean swept, not suffering the least Dust, or filthy Rust to be in his
Mortal Corpse. But further, as the Body must be made clean, and purged of all
those stinking Dregs, which those forementioned crying Sins have left in it;
even so it must be ever kept clean from those Distempers which Drunkenness and
Gluttony procure. This most beastly Sin of Drunkenness began presently after
the Flood, and has almost drowned the whole World with another Deluge.

The Tuscans were so much addicted to this, that they were never well; but in
drinking, and quaffing of Soul-sick healths, and so were the people of Germany,
whereupon was said,

Germani possunt cunctos tolerare labores,
O utinam possunt tam been far sitim.
O I wish, says the Poet, seeing that the People of Germany can endure any
thing, that they could but refrain themselves from Drinking too much. Likewise
it was said of one Borosus, that he was Born bibere, non vivere, to guzzle
their time away and not live; and thus it may be said by too many nowadays,
who unless instead of it apply their Hearts and Minds to Sobriety and
Temperance, shall not only procure to themselves loss of Estate, sickness of
Body, but also to the poor harmless Soul Everlasting woe, and misery; O
consider this, you that rise early in the Morning, and continue till Night in
drinking of strong Healths; yea you that cannot afford your self natural Rest,
but like the Hog betake your self to any sad Lodging for a while, and so return
to your drunken trade again, still drinking other Men's Healths till that you
drink your own away; never calling to Mind;

Vna Salus sanis nullam potare Salutem,
Non est in poto vera Salute Salus.
That the Health of the sound is to drink no Health, but to his own. He, that
is a common Drunkard, can but of necessity break all the Commandments of God.
For first instead of giving that honor due unto Almighty God his Creator, he
makes a God of the Creatures loving it with all his Heart and Mind; ever having
more Gods than one. Secondly, he is ever ready to Blaspheme, and to back all
his words with execrable Oaths. Thirdly, ^e is ever ready to commit Murder, as
Alexander the Greatest did, who when he was Drunk slew his Friend Clitus.
Fourthly, the Drunkard is ever ready to break the Seventh Commandment by reason
of his large Commons and lewd Companions. Fifthly, the Drunkard breaks the
Eighth Commandment as well as the rest; for although, like a cunning Fox he may
refrain to take up at home, yet if it be to be had abroad, he is sure to have
it; but indeed, that which is the worst of all is that he robs God of his due,
which is of his poor Soul, which he has purchased with his most precious
Blood; and so brings both his Body and Soul to utter ruin and destruction. (O
thou that spins away thy time, like a Swine in drinking, and eating;) ever have
this in remembrance, and set thy House in order, for thou shall die and not
live. There are many more rusty* and filthy dregs of Sin, which as well as
those must be scoured out of the Body before that it can be set in order, as of
Lying, Swearing, Cursing, and such like; but those I shall leave to your
consideration, hoping that you will not suffer the least of them to have any
place in your Mortal Bodies.

And so proceed a little further concerning the very matter of our discourse,
the thing that we are all warned unto, which is to set our Houses in order, for
we must die, and not live. Set thy House, etc. As it is the Custom among the
Nobles and Peers of this Realm, when that they know of the Kings coming to give
them a visit, to have all about them in order and decency; so indeed ought
every one of us to set our Houses in order, to keep our Bodies, which are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost ever clean and decent, and still furnished with all
sorts of Heavenly Graces to entertain such a Glorious Prince, who has writ on
his Thigh King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. It will not be long ere he come,
for St. James said, In his time behold the Judge stands before the door, and
likewise, it was St. John's the Baptist Text, saying, Repent for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand, he may come to day, or he may come to morrow, therefore make
your selves ever ready, and set your House in order, for you shall die, and not
live. First, you must furnish your selves with love, which is the complement of
the Law, and an earnest desire of interchangeable affection between Christ and
the Soul. Secondly, you must furnish your selves with Charity, which of all
Virtues is still Chief, for St. Paul the Bishop of the Gentiles, comparing it
with Faith and Hope, tells you that it is the Chief, for it ever Edifieth,
still suffers, never envieth, yea, and still continues, 1 Cor. 13. 8.
Thirdly, you must get your selves furnished with patience, that with all
alacrity and cheerfulness of Heart, you may endure all things for Christ's sake.
Fourthly, you must get your selves furnished with Humility, Virtue, which when
the Lord of Heaven beholds it in you, which caused him to sink into your
Hearts. Fifthly, you must get your selves furnished with Hope of Everlasting
Faith and Salvation. And then sixthly and lastly with Faith, which is an
evidence of things not seen, thus you must get your selves set in order, etc.

And thus far of the matter of this Admonition, and earnest Exhortation. Now I
should come to the Reason, which is twofold, affirmative, and negative;
Affirmative, thou shall die; and Negative, and rot live. Set thy House in
order, for thou shall die, and not live.

Now of these severally, and first of the reason affirmative, thou shall die.
Now there are three kinds of Death. First, the Death of the Body, which is a
natural Death. Secondly, the Death of the Soul, which is a Spiritual Death. And
then thirdly and lastly, the Death both of Body and Soul, which is Eternal
Death. But that which good King Hezekiah was warned of, was but only the Death
of the Body, which according to the Statute Law Decreed in that High Court of
Parliament of Heaven, all Men shall once taste of, no Man can escape it, for so
says St. Paul, it is appointed unto all Men that they shall once die, to all
once, to many twice, for there is a second Death, and that is truly a Death,
because it is Mors Vitae, the Death of Life; the other rather a Life, because
it is Mors Mortis, the Death of the Death, after which there shall be no more
Death. Now as Job says, Man's time is appointed, his Month determined, and his
day numbered, yea, and (as Christ Jesus the Worlds Savior says) his very last
hour is limited; he was made of the Mould of the Earth, he shall return again
to the Earth: And as all have one Entrance into Life, the like going out shall
they have to Death: Nothing we brought in, nothing we shall carry out. Naked
come I out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return. A Change then shall
come which of the wicked is to be feared, of the godly to be desired, and of
all people to be daily and hourly expected. Remember them that have been before
you, and that shall come after you, that this is the Judgment of the Lord over
all Flesh to taste of Death. All Men shall once die, for as much as all have
sinned, and been disobedient unto the Laws of God. This Death of the Body is
not a dying, but a departing, a transmigration, and Exodus of our Earthly
Pilgrimage, unto our Heavenly Home; yea, a passage from the Valley of Death
unto the Land of the Living: Although our Souls and Bodies are separated for a
while, yet shall they meet again in the receptacle of Blessed Saints and Angels
with much joy, and receive an incorruptible Crown. The Body is a Pri^on to the
Soul, and Death a Jail-delivery, that frees the poor harmless Soul of those
Grievances, which formerly it did endure. Length of days is nothing unto us,
but much grief, and Age the durance of long Imprisonment; wherefore if that you
would but seriously consider this, you might find Death to be rather a Friend
than an Enemy, and by consequence rather to be desired than shunned as Simeon
did, as it is evident, Luke 2. 29. saying, Now, Lord, let thou thy Servant
depart in peace, according to thy Word, which by some is used thus; Now, Lord,
I hope that thou will suffer me to depart in peace, and keep my poor Immortal
Soul no longer within the small circumference of this Mortal Body. The Thief
upon the Cross laid down his Life most joyfully, because he saw Christ, and did
steadfastly believe, that he should pass from a place of pain and misery, unto a
Paradise of Pleasure, and so did St. Stephen, Acts 7. 56. The Royal Preacher
King Solomon, lest that his Son should be deprived of such Happiness, does by
an Emphatical Irony dissuade his Son from those youthful Lusts, and sensual
Pleasures, whereunto he feared that he should naturally be addicted, and that
by the consideration of that dreadful account, he was to give unto God at the
great and terrible day of the Lord; desiring him most earnestly not to let his
House stand out of order, but ever to remember his Creator in the days of his
youth, for old Age will come, says he, and then thou shall not be so fit by
reason of much weakness and infirmities. Or else, Death may seize upon thee,
For Dust shall return unto the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return
unto God who gave it, Eccles. 12. 7. In a moment, yea, at the twinkling of an
Eye, when once this Tyrant Death comes, it will sweep us all away. It is the
Custom among us here to let Leases, one, two, or three Lives, but God lets none
for more than one, and this once expired, there is no hopes of getting the
Lease renewed, he suffers Man sometimes to dwell in his Tenement threescore
Years, and ten, Psalm. 90. 10. Sometimes to fourscore, but secures none far from
home, and that for several Reasons. First, to bridle our curiosity lest that we
should search after things too high, for quae supra nos, nihil ad nos, those
things that are above us, are nothing to us. Secondly, to try our patience
whether that we will put our whole trust, and confidence in him, although we
know not the time of our departure and dissolution; and then thirdly, to keep
us in continual watchfulness, for if that we should know, when Death would come
with a Habeas Corpus to remove us, it would make many more careless than they
are, though indeed the best of us are careless enough. Here Men do know the
date of their Leases, and the expiration of the Years, but Man is merely a
Tenant at will, and is put out of Possession at less than an Hours warning.
Wherefore now* while it is said to day, set your Houses in order, seeing that
you must die, and not l^v^. It is not sufficient at the last Hour of Death to
say, Lord have mercy on me, or, Lord into thy hands I commend my Soul. But even
in all our Lifetime, yea, and especially in our youth, we must strive ever to
set our Houses in order, for we shall die and not live. Samson was very strong,
Solomon very wise, and Methusalem lived many years, yet at last they with many
more were brought to Mother Earth. If it seem pleasant unto you at the present
to let your rotten and ruinous Houses stand out of order, yet with all
remember, what the Prophet says, The day of Destruction is at hand, and the
times of perdition make haste to come on. Art thou a young Man in the April of
thine Age, and have thou thy Breasts full of Mill^, and does thy Bones run full
of Marrow, as Job speaks, and thereupon do promise to thy self length of
days, yet thou must know, also, that a man, even at the highest pitch of
health, when he has that same Fencer-like kind of strength, is nearest danger
in the Judgment of the best Physicians, remember with all that observation of
Seneca, Young Men (says he) have Death behind them, Old Men have Death before
them, and all men have Death not far from them; we may in a manner complain
already that the great God of Battle threatens an utter ruin to all the World,
the Earth has trembled, the Lights of Heaven have been often darkened,
Rebellions have been raised, Treasons have not long since been practiced,
Plagues of late have been dispersed, Winds have blustered, Waters have raged;
and what wants there now, but those two Arrows of God, even Sword and Fire from
Heaven for us to be consumed. Is it now think you a time to buy, to sell, to
eat, to drink, and to live securely in sin, as they did in the days of Noah,
and think of nothing else; is it now a time to say unto Almighty God, as the
Nigard does unto his Neighbor, come again to me to morrow, as that drousie
Sluggard does, Prove. 6. 10. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little
foulding of the hands to sleep. The foolish Virgins supposed that the
Bridegroom would not have come like an Owl or a Batt in the night, there is
time enough, said they, what needs all this haste; but poor Fools, they were
excluded. Oh! I cannot forbear, my very Heart even bleeds within me to think of
it, yea, all the faculties of my Soul and Body are stricken with horror and
amazement, while I declare unto you, how that many Thousands now are doubtless
in Hell, who purposed in time to have set their Houses in order, but being
prevented by Death, are for ever condemned. O here I could heartily wish (with
Jeremy) that I had in the Wilderness a Cottage, Ye^, I could (wish with Job)
that I were a Brother to the Dragons, and a Companion to the Ostriches, whilst
I think of that wish I am now uttering; nay, I could willingly desire (with the
Princely Prophet David) that my Heart were full of Water, and that mine Eyes
were a Fountain of tears, that I might weep Day and Night, for the too too
common Sins of this our Age in every kind. Now you are in your preparations for
Eternity, and therefore had need to be very watchful over your selves, to see
that you set your Houses in order, for you shall die, and not live. And this
brings me now unto the very last thing observable in my Text, and that is of
the reason Negative, and shall not live, set thy House, etc. Chrysostom prying
into the base Nature of Man, and finding him ever out of order, teaches him a
sevenfold consideration of himself.

First, What he is by nature, what he is in himself? Dust and Ashes, Genesis 18. 2.

Secondly, What is within him? much sin.

Thirdly, What is before him? a burning Lak^, which is spoken of Isai. 30. 33.

Fourthly, What is above him? an offended Justice, Deuteronomy. 32. 16.

Fifthly, What is against him? Satan, and Sin, two notorious, and deadly E^

Sixthly, What is before him (...), and worldly vanities.

And then seventhly and lastly, He desires man seriously to consider, what is
behind him? in^^llable Death, for semel aut bis morimur omnes; Some once, some
twice, we must all die, and not live, You cannot, like Enoc^, H^b. 11. ^5. be
translated* but must suffer Death as well as other Men, being common to all.
Whatsoever thou do affect, whatsoever thou do project, so do, and so
project all at once, who for any thing thou know, may at this very present
depart out of this Life. Hypocrates, although he could not cure till Death came
upon him. Heraclitus, who writ many natural Tracts concerning the last, and
general consolation of the World, could not find out a Remedy, or a Medicine
for his Distemper, but died out of hand. Thus you may see, how that God spares
none, but sends one thing or other to bring us to our long home. And thus far
concerning, the Death of the Body shall suffice, which was the Death good King
Hezekiah was forewarned of: Wherefore now I shall but only speak a word or two
of the Soul, and likewise of the Death of the Soul, and Body, and so conclude.

First, as there is a Natural Death, viz. the Death of the Body, so likewise
there is a Spiritual Death, viz. of the Soul, when it is deprived of those
Graces, which formerly God did bestow upon it, for as the Soul is the light,
and life of the Body, even so Almighty God is the light, and life of the Soul.
When he takes his holy Spirit from us, then we walk in the shadow of Death,
this Death is an ill Fruit of Sin; therefore let us set our Houses in order.

But secondly, As there is a natural Death, and a spiritual Death, so likewise
there is an eternal Death, called in the Ornament of Grace the second Death.
This Death, as well as the Death of the poor Soul is lamented by God. Esaias 59.
2. As I live (says the Lord) I desire not the Death of a Sinner, but rather
that he may turn from his Wickedness and live. I might now likewise add a
fourth Death, and that is a civil Death, an undoing of our Credit, and honest
Reputation, which many Men die, but this I shall leave to your consideration,
and so conclude. O my dearly beloved Friends, consider what you are all by
nature? What is within you? What is above you? What is below you? What is
against you? What is before you? What is behind you? and that is, infallible
Death; For here is not one here amongst you, be he never so strong, never so
healthly, but that within the Revolution of a few years shall be brought in
spite of his teeth unto the Grave. Wherefore let your Houses be daily perfumed
by a Morning and Evening Sacrifice of Prayer, Praise unto Almighty God, both
which were appointed under the Law, Exodus 29. 38. 39. And this shadowed what
was to be performed under the Gospel. God renews his Mercies to you every
Morning, and protects you from manifold dangers every Night, whereunto you are
subject, and you be so ungrateful as to banish all his benefits out of your
Memories who is every Moment so mindful of you.

As therefore, beloved, you tender the Salvation of your poor Souls, look home,
and mourn for your Original sin, steep your Eyes in Tears, write Letters of
discomfort upon the Ground as you go* let the streams of your sighs, and the
sweet Incense of your Prayers rise up like Mountains before the Lord of Hosts,
and bed^wing your Cheeks with tears; make your humble Confession unto God
Almighty, not of sin alone, but of all your sins, of what nature, degree, or
height soever they be, and by your unfeigned Confession so accuse your selves,
that you may not hereafter be accused of the Devil, and so judge your selves,
that you be not judged of the Lord. In a word, that you may escape all those
torments, which by reason of sin are incident both to Body and Soul, seeing the
night is far spent, and the day is at hand, while you have time, set your
Houses in order, for you shall die, and not live.

THE EJACULATION.
GOod Lord, let us be always setting our Houses in order, that we may be really
willing, and truly fit to die when Death shall seize us: Let us be always a
preparing for our last Change, for it is the living only who are in a capacity
to praise Thee. The Grave, into which we are all going, is a place of silence,
where there is no praying to Thee, nor praising of Thee; neither are any that
go down thither capable of securing their eternal welfare; in the Grave there
is no Preaching, nor hearing; there we shall be altogether insensible of the
actings of God, and be altogether incapable of acting any thing for God: Oh!
that we therefore, who are within a few steps of our long and last home, might
seriously consider, what a vain thing it is to dream that we shall ever enjoy
our worldly Relatives, or that we shall ever possess* our worldly
accommodations. What need have we then to be setting our Houses in order; for
it is certain, we shall once die, and how soon we know not. O^ then! let your
Thoughts, Words and Actions, be such as may best become dying persons, seeing
all that would dye comfortable must set their Houses in order be^re they depart.

Look on every day as your last. SERMON IX.
JAM. 4. 14. What is your Life? It is even a Vapor that appears for a little
time, and ufterward vanishes away.
THere is nothing that does evidently set before Men's Eyes the Deceits of the
World, and the vanity of things present, as does the due consideration of the
uncertainty, shortness and frailey of Man's Life; for all humane Pride, and the
whole glory and pomp of the World (having Man's Life for a stay and foundation)
can certainly no longer endure the same Life abides; so that Riches,
Dignities, Honors, and such like, howbeit, a Man may enjoy them for a small
space on Earth, yet do they never continue longer with him, than unto the Grave.

The consideration whereof, together with this present occasion offered, have
caused me amongst all other places of Holy Scripture to make choice of these
words which I have now read unto you; in which (as in a most bright shining
Glass) we may behold both the frail Constitution of Man's Nature, as also the
short continuance of his Life here on Earth, it being but a Vapor, and What is
your Life?

This whole Chapter contains four Dehortations; the first is from Lust, unto
the fifth Verse; the second from Pride, to the Tenth; the third from speaking
evil of our Neighbor, to the Thirteenth; the last from Presumption of words,
to the end of the Chapter; to dissuade from which sin, he uses two arguments
especially; the first is drawn Ab incertitudine rerum, from the uncertainty of
things, and that is contained in the words immediately going before my Text, the
second is drawn a Vanitate Vitae, from the vanity of Man's Life, and that is set
down in the words of my Text. Which words contain two general parts, a Question
and an Answer; What is your Life? There Is the Question; the Answer follows in
the next, It is even a Vapor, etc.

First of the Question, What is your Life? Wherein observe, that Life is
twofold; for there is a Created Life, and there is an Increated Life; the
latter is only to be found in God, the former is a quality in the Creature,
whereby it lives, and moves, and acts it self.

Now Created Life is twofold, Spiritual and Natural: Again, Spiritual Life is
twofold; sometimes it is taken for the Life of Grace, which God's Children only
do enjoy in the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ in this World; which by way of
excellency, is called the Life of God; not so much for that it is from God, as
also all other kinds of Life are, as because God lives in them that are his,
and approves this Life in them: And it is called (for the same respect) the
Life of Christ, because Christ lives in his through a supernatural Faith and
Spirit; and they live unto God, and conform their Life unto his Will: And it is
called a new Life, a Christian Life, and a renewing of the Mind, Will and
Affections. This Life is opposed to Death in Sin, and to the old Man. Sometimes
it is taken for the Life of Glory, whereby the Soul (being joined again to her
Body) shall lead a Life, which the Apostle calls Spiritual; not in respect of
the Substance, but of the qualities, 1 Cor. 15. 44. whereby the Faithful shall
live for ever, and it is laid up in Christ, and the end of the World shall be
disclosed, and which is opposed to the second Death, and it is called Eternal
Life. Thus much of the Spiritual Life.

Now the Natural Life also is twofold; for either it may be taken generally for
the Life of all Creatures, whereby they live, move, and have their being; or
more particularly for the Life of Man, which natural Life in Man is the act and
vigor of the Soul, arising from the conjunction of the Body with the Soul;
this Life is given by God, continued by Meats and Drinks, and other necesary
helps, and ended by Death; this is the Life properly meant in this place.

It is even a Vapor, etc. A Vapor (according to the Philisophers) is a thin
fume extracted out of the Earth, by the Sun in the night time, but in the
morning (or before) it is scattered with the Wind, or dispelled with the Sun; or
else, if the Sun do not appear in his Brightness, it falls away of it self to
the Earth from whence it came, or was drawn by the heat of the Sun. Such as is
the nature of a Vapor, even such is the Life of Man; for he is extracted out
of the Earth by the Sun of Righteousness, and he either perishes before he
sees the Sun, or else in the Morning of his Youth; or if he escape the mid and
noontide of his growth, yet at the last he falls away by Age to the Earth
from whence he was taken. The Text thus explained, we may observe these Points
of Doctrine for our Instruction.

The first is the Frailty of our Constitution, in these words, It is even a
Vapor.

Secondly, the Shortness of our continuance, Which appears for a little time.

Thirdly, The vanity or nullity of our Life after Death, in these words, And
afterward vanishes away.

First, Of the Frailty of our Constitution; the Apostle does not compare the
Life of Man to Silver or Gold, or Iron, or Brass: which are durable Substances;
or some Body that is Corpus perfect mixtum, that is, perfectly mixed or
compounded of the four Elements; but to a Vapor that is Corpus imperfecte
mixtum, that is, such a Body that is imperfectly mixed; and that for two
Reasons: First, because it has not perfectum Miscibilium numerum, that is, all
the Elements in it; then also because it has not perfectum Mixtionis modum,
the true manner of a mixed Body, and therefore it vanishes away into Air;
either per attenuationem, by rarefaction and attenuation (as the Philosopher
speaks) aut ^per condersationem, when it returns to the Earth from whence
it came* And well might this our Apostle compare the Life of Man to such an
Imperfect Body as a Vapor is: For first, if we consider our Birth, we are
brought forth in the danger of our selves and them that bear us. Our Feet are
not our own, neither are they able to carry the bulk and trunk of our Body; our
Tongues are not our own, our Hands are not our own; but we lie bound and
wrapped for many Months together; we Live, and yet we seem not to breathe; in
our Youth we are liable to many Diseases: If it be true that the Physicians
say, our Eyes are subject to an hundred Perils, how much more is the whole
Body? Some cry, My Head, My Head, as the Shunamites Child; some are troubled
with lame Legs, as Mephibosheth, some with Gouty Feet, as Asa; some are pained
in the Belly, as Jeremy. This is that miserable Frailty which the Prophet
Isaiah signifies in these words; Almighty God said unto his Prophet, Cry; and
the Prophet answered, What shall I cry? God said unto him, All Flesh is Grass,
and all the glory thereof like the Flower of the Field, the Grass withers,
the Flower fades away, but the Word of the Lord continues for ever: Upon
these words St. Ambrose says thus; Truly it is even so, for the glory of Man
flourishes in the Flesh like unto Grass; which although it seem to be great,
it is in very deed but little; it buddeth like a Flower, and fades like Grass,
so that it has no more but a certain flourishing in appearance, and no
firmness and stability in the Fruit. For what firmness can there be in the
matter of Flesh? Or what good things (of any long continuance) are to be found
in so weak a Subject? To day thou may see a young Man, in the flourishing
time of his Age, with great Strength, Lusty, and jetting up and down in the
Streets in great Bravery, with a jolly lofty Countenance; and if it so fall
out, that this very next Night he be taken with some Disease, thou shall see
him the next day with a Face so far altered and changed, that whereas before he
seemed very amiable and beautiful, he shall now seem ill-favored, miserable
and loathsome to behold; nay, Man's Fading away is such, and so sudden
oftentimes, that there can be no reason given of his Death; for many have gone
to Bed well in the Even, that in the Morning have be found dead in their Beds;
and many suddenly have dropped down in the Highways and Streets, as they have
walked about their Affairs: And this is no wonder, if we consider the Substance
of Man's Body, which being a Building compact of green Clay, is easily
overthrown with a small puff of Wind. This being then the frailty of our
Constitution, the consideration thereof should be used, to put away and abandon
our natural Pride, and make us humble our selves under the Hand of God. An
Example hereof we have in Abraham, who said, Genesis 18. 27. Behold, I have begun
to speak to my Lord, who am but Dust and Ashes. Mark here how the consideration
of his frail condition, made him to abase and cast down himself in the sight of
God: In like manner, if we could but consider how Frail we are, it would
straightway pull down our Peacocks Feathers, and make us with Job, to abhor our
selves in Dust and Ashes.

Secondly, The next Point I am to treat of, is the shortness of our
continuance, intimated in these words, Which appears for a little time, etc.
Man that is Born of a Woman (says Job) is of short continuance and full of
Miseries; he shoots forth as a Flower, and is cut down; he vanishes also as
a Shadow, and continues not, Job 14. 1, 2. In which words, in that Job
compared Man to a Shadow and a Flower, he notably sets forth the short
continuance of Man's Life; a Shadow we see, if the Sun be never so little
overclouded, it vanishes away; and a Flower, we know, is a comely and
beautiful thing, yet for all that, there is nothing sound more sading and
vanishing; even so Man during the time of his Childhood and flourishing Youth,
seems to be of a wonderful Comeliness, but his Beauty is of small Price,
because it is more brittle than Glass, seeing that Man carries always the
Cause of Death in his Veins and Bowels. We see at this day, what a great matter
it is for one to live Threescore and Ten, or Fourscore years, and this is
commonly the ordinary Race of Man's Life; insomuch as when they live so long,
they account themselves not to be evil dealt withal, as the Prophet signifies
when he says, The days of Man are at the uttermost but Threescore and Ten
Years; and if the Strongest do reach to Fourscore, what follows is but labor
and grief. Now if we should deduct those years which Infancy and Childhood
spends, if also we should take away that time which passes away when we
sleep, it would be a small number of Years that would remain; which remnant if
we should compare with the Life to come, it would seem but as a drop of Water
compared with the whole Sea; so short is his Fading Life in regard of that
which lasts always. Neither is our Life so short only, but as it is short, so
is it uncertain, how long it shall continue; for though there is nothing more
certain than Death, yet is there nothing more uncertain than the hour of Death;
and therefore a certain Philosopher compared the Lives of Men to Bubbles that
are made in Water pits, when it raineth, of the which some do vanish away
suddenly, even at their very rising; others do endure a little longer, and out
of hand are decayed; others do continue somewhat more, and others less: So that
although they do all endure but some little time, yet (in that little) there is
great variety. This being then the shortness and uncertainty of our Lives, it
should teach us so much the rather to embrace our Saviors Counsel in the
Thirteenth of St. Mark's Gospel, Watch, because ye know not the day nor the
hour: The which is as much as if he had more plainly said, Because ye know not
that Hour, watch every hour; and because ye know not that day, watch every day;
and because ye know not the Month and the Year, watch therefore every Month and
Year. And to make this matter more plain by a Similitude: If thou should be
invited to a Feast, and being set at the Table, see before thee many and
sundry sorts of Meats, a Friend of thine secretly admonishes thee, that among
so many dainty Dishes* there is one Poisoned; what in this Case would thou
do? which of them dare thou touch or raste of? would thou not suspect them
all; I think (though thou were extremely hungry) thou would refrain from all,
for fear of that one where the Poison is. It is made manifest unto thee
already, that in one of thy seventy Years, thy Death lies hidden from thee,
and thou art utterly Ignorant which year that shall be, how then can it be, but
that thou must suspect them all, and fear them all? O that we understood the
shortness of our Life! how great Profit and Commodity should we then receive by
the Meditation thereof!

Thirdly and lastly, the vanity and nullity of our Life after Death, intimated
in these words, and afterward vanishes away: The whole Course of Man's Life is
but a flying Shadow, a little spot of time between two Eternities, which will
quickly disappear; the same Earth which we now so negligently tread upon, may
suddenly receive us into her cold Embraces. Well may Life then be said to be
vanishing away, Though now we are in perfect Health, yet before to morrow some
dear Friend or other may passionately follow our Hearse to the Grave. Our time
past is like a Bird fled from the Hand of the owner out of sight, and our
present time is vanishing away, and on Earth we have no abiding.

But here consider, if Life be so vanishing and uncertain a thing, then

1. This reproves those that Squander away their precious time, as if their
abode on Earth would be too long to prepare for Eternity, if they did not
mispend it half; but it is time for us to cry out, The time past is more than
enough to have wrought the Will of the Flesh, 1. Pet. 4. 3. or as it is Romans
13, 14. It Is high time to awake out of Sleep.

2. If Life be thus vanishing* then be not over solicitous as to future Events,
but willingly submit to a Divine Providence; be not so much concerned for to
Morrow, do not cumber your selves with too much Provision for a short Voyage.

3. If Life be thus short and vanishing, then do much work in a little time;
shall we loose any of that time which is so fleeting and so uncertain. And thus
I have briefly shown you the frailty of the Life of Man, and the profitable use
we might make of this Consideration, That our Life is ^^^ a Vapor which
appears for a little time, and afterward Vanishes away.

4. If Life be so short and uncertain, then look upon every day as your last;
so did the Apostle Paul, who said, I die d^^l, as there is nothing more certain
than Death, so there is nothing more uncertain than the time of Death. We are
all Tenants at Will, and therefore the great Landlord of Heaven and Earth may
turn us out of our Clay Houses when he pleases. It was a worthy Custom of a
Roman Emperor that would have his Man come every morning to his Bed side, and
pronounce these Words.

Remember thou art a dying Man; certainly such are justly to be reproved, who
look upon Death as at a great distance from them. It is a common saying of
some, that they thought no more of such a thing, than of their dying day;
surely it argues a very wicked frame of Heart to be so forgetful of Death, when
it is that we are to expect every minute, and know not but each day that comes
may be our last.

THE EJACULATION.
GOOD Lord, what is the Life of Man? is it not like unto a Vapor, which
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away? Is it not like unto a
Bubble, which quickly swells to a considerable bigness, and as quickly
sinketh again? Is it not like unto the Grass which grows up and flourishes
in the Morning, but is cut down before the Evening come?

Oh Lord, though Life be sweet, yet common experience shows that it is short;
and as our Life is short in it self, (though we should live to the very outside
of the strength of Naeture) so will it seem much shorter, if it be compared
with Eternity it self: And yet as short and as uncertain as our Life is, we
have a long work to dispatch before we go away from hence, and be seen no more;
we have a great way to go by a setting Sun; a great Race to run by a short
Breath; and if Life be but as a Vapor, how little reason have we then to
squander away precious time? Yea, how great reason have we to redeem the time
that is past, and to improve every Inch of the present time: Let us remember
that we have no continuing City here, and therefore it will be necessary for us
to seek one that is to come: Good Lord, therefore do thou make us to know our
end, and the measure of our days, what it is, that so we may be thoroughly
convinced how frail we are.

Dying Christian. SERMON X.
Being the last Sermon this Author Preached at Grafham, in Huntingdonshire.
Beloved Brethren,
THE Lord has set it home upon my Heart, ever since I came amongst you,
earnestly to desire and to pray for the Salvation of your Souls; it has been
no small Encouragement to me to lay forth my weak endeavors in the Ministry,
when I consider that he which converteth a Sinner from the Error of his way,
shall save a Soul from Death, and hide a multitude of Sin, James 5. 20. To save
a Soul from Death, is so glorious an Employment, that herein I cannot choose but
rejoice with the Apostle, when I see the word of the Kingdom working
effectually in any Soul.

I bless God every day without ceasing, that he has given me a full proof of
my Ministry in the Hearts and Consciences of some, even in this place, since I
came among you, so that I may say with Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 2. and they indeed are
and shall be unto me, and I unto them a Crown of rejoicing at the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and on their behalf I pray, that their Faith may grow
exceedingly, and that their Love unto Jesus Christ, and unto all Saints* may
every day more and more abound, and I commend them unto God, who is able to
keep them from falling, and to present them faultless before the presence of
his glory with exceeding Joy.

As for others, I am jealous over them with a Godly Jealousy (as the Apostle
speaks) continually praying, that they may not be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ, but that they may hold fast the mystery of Faith
in a pure Conscience.

Some indeed there are, that cause me secretly to groan in my Spirit and my
Heart. I even bleed over them, and I do pity them in the Bowels of Jesus
Christ, fearing least they should (like the five foolish Virgins) fall asleep,
and hereafter endeavor to enter into Glory when the Door is shut. But now,
dearly beloved, being come to Preach my last Sermon amongst you, I request you
all both good and bad to attend with double diligence, to what shall be spoken
unto you from that sweet portion of Scripture which you find recorded.

PHILIPIANS I. XXIII. For I am in a straight between two, having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ which is far better.
IN these Words are these two Parts, First, a Declaration of St. Paul's desire,
For I am in a straight between two, having a desire to depart; Secondly, an
Inclination of the ground of it, which was this, because he might be with
Christ; the word signifies solvere Anchoram, to loosen the Anchor, or to cut
the Cable, that the Ship may sail after. While St. Paul's Spirit was tied up by
the Flesh, he desired it should be loosened by Death, that it might Sail after
into Glory. Spiritual Desires, they are always quickest and strongest,
whenever they are nearest the perfect enjoyment of their desired Object,
Christ. As the motion of every natural Body is quickest and strongest, the
nearer it comes to the Center; so the nearer fullness of Glory, the more fervent
the Soul is in its desires after Christ. Sirs, my Text is usually the dying
Expression of a living Saint; for when a believer draws near to his End, he
sings most sweetly, like the Swan and earnestly cries out, Make haste my
beloved, he having a desire to depart, to be with Christ, evermore: upon a
dying Bed, a Christians Pulse beats strongest Heavenward. We groan, as being
in a great straight, knowing, to depart is far better, much more better; as if
he should have said, Oh! there is no comparison between the enjoyment of God in
the State of Grace, and the enjoyment of God in a State of Glory.

And here methinks, I hear the dying Christian joyfully breathing out his
earnest and longing desires, for a Dissolution, in the very words of a late
Grave and Serious Poet, who in an Heavenly Rapture, and sweet Ecstasy of
Spirit, spoke in the following manner, viz.

Why lingrest thou bright Lamp of Heaven? why
Do thy Steeds tread so slowly on? must I
Be forced to live when I desire to die?
Lash thou those Lazy Jades, drive with full speed,
And end my slow-paced days, that I may feed
With Joy on Him, for whom my heart does bleed.
Post blessed Jesus, come Lord flee away.
And turn this Night into the brightest Day,
By thine approach, come Lord, and do not stay.
Take thou Doves-Wings, or give Doves Wings to me,
That I may leave this World, and come to thee,
And even in thy glorious presence be.
I like not this vile World, it is mere dross,
Thou only art pure Gold, then sure it is loss
To be without a Throne to enjoy a Cross.
What, though I must pass through the Gates of Death,
It is to come to thee that gav'st me Breath,
And thou art better (Lord) than Dung-hill-Earth.
When shall I come? Lord tell me, tell me when?
What, must I tarry Threescore years and Ten,
My Thirsty Soul cannot hold out 'till then.
Come dearest Savior, come, unlock this Cage
Of sinful Flesh, lovingly stop the Rage
Of my Desires, end thou my Pilgrimage.
Give me a Place on High, to Sit and Sing
Anthems of Praise to thee mine only King,
Whose rattling Sounds may make the Heavens Ring.
But here I know the timorous Soul will object against this truth, and say, Oh,
how can the Christian so earnestly desire to be with Christ in the fullness of
Glory? were it indeed but a short step into Glory, or were the way strewed with
Roses and Flowers, and with all the Spices of the Merchant, it might be so, but
there is a Lion in the way (as Solomon speaks in another case) there is Death
the King of Fears, that stands srowning upon the Soul at the last cast when the
Soul is upon its very Entrance into Christ, his prepared Mansions of eternal
Glory; and therefore it were more desirable, to dwell safely upon the Earth in
a sensible Heaven made up of the greatest worldly profits, and the most
delightful creature Comfort, rather than to venture over the terrible mountain
of Death (the very Epitomy of all Discouragements) into the doubtful possession
of those invissible Depths of spiritual Glory, which the Scripture tells us, is
only attainable after this Life.

I answer, that by nature of this Objection, you may presently know the name of
the Objector. It comes from off a carnal heart, and fully speaks the temper an
Epi^urean Will, that is, against leaving its carnal interest in the Earth, for
uncertain interest in Heaven But Death, though it be an intervening Cloud,
which seems to darken or cast a mist upon the Luster, and Comfort of a
believers spiritual enjoyment in God; yet it does but seem to do so, and indeed
it does not at all extinguish the earnest desires of a serious lively Christian
after Christ in the fullness of Glory, and that especially when the believing
Soul looks upon Death under these Considerations.

First, that to die is no worse a rhing than to tread in the very steps of
Jesus Christ, we might indeed have been afraid to die if Jesus Christ had not
first stepped into the cold grave before us, but if we will show our selves true
Soldiers unto Christ our Captain, we must not fear to venture, where he has
broken the way before us; Now Christ has died that he might by his Death
procure the Death of Death, and that he might free Believers from the fear of
Death, the sting being taken out of it.

Secondly, Death is only ordained to refine, and not to ruin Nature, Death
ends our sins and miseries, and not our life, as it may be made out unto you by
this following Illustration, those Trees, which seem dead in the Winter, yet
they revive in the Spring, because the Body and the Arms of the Tree, they are
joined to the Root, where the Sap lies all the Winter* and by means of this
conjunction the Root it conveys life unto all the parts of the Tree. And the
Bodies of Believers they have the Winter to, when as they are turned into the
Dust, but their Life it is hid with Christ, at last they are revived and raised
up into Glory.

Now here you may observe the great difference of Tempters, according to the
various Complexions of Men's Spirits; the Atheist he dares not die for fear of
being put out of his being, and the prosane Person he dares not die for fear of
exchanging his present bad being for a worse, ^ut the Believer he earnestly
desires to die, that besides this present temporal being he might enjoy a
future eternal well-being.

Indeed to a wicked Man* the best had been, not ^o have been, and this next
best, were to live long; ^ was ill with him, that ever he was born, and worse,

A Carnal Man's continual cry is this, Dum Spiro, Spero, I love to live, for my
present hope is my only help; for indeed, such an one has only help in this
Life; but a Christians common Expression is this, Dum Exspiro Spero, Expiration
is my Expectation, for such an one has hope in the Life to come, when a wicked
Man dies, he thinks he shall live worse, but a Christian when he dies he knows
he shall live better, he cries with the holy Apostle, for one to live is
Christ, and to die is gain. Job. 19. 25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and he
shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth, and though after my Skin Worms
destroy this Body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.

Thirdly, Death was never intended to be as a privation of good, but as a
privilege for good to the Believer, and it is attended with these several
Privileges.

First, Corporal and Temporal Death, it serves to set out the Beauty and
Excellency of eternal Life* It is Gods usual method to set out one contrary by
another, Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescurt* In War God commends Peace
to us. In Adversity* Prosperity, in Sickness, Health, and in Death, he commends
eternal Life to us.

As the Limner lays the Foundation of a curio^ Picture in a Dark Groundwork,
so God does often times lay the foundation of our sweetest Mercies i^ the
greatest miseries; and this he does that ^^ Mercies may appear more lovely in
our eyes; a^ thus he sets off the joys of Heaven by the troubl^ we meet with on
the Earth. It is said of Zeno the he was wont to eat bitter things, that he
might t^^ better taste sweet, and he would say, sweet thin^ were nothing worth,
if they were not so commen^ed to us. And so bitter Death, it is but an E^gine
devised by infinite Wisdom, and for ^^ set out the Unspeakable sweetness of
Everlasting Joys.

God could as easily have received all his redeemed ones into the immediate
embraces of Divine Love and Glory, without letting them know what it was to be
tempted, to be afflicted or to die, but only for the better sweetning and
endearing fullness of Glory to them.

Secondly, Deaths mortal Wound, it is but preparatory to an immortal weight of
Glory. Death it is the midnight of all troubles and sorrows, which is in Travel
with a morning of everlasting Joy, and Comfort. Death it is the Saturday or
last day of our Weekly labors, which ushers in a Sabbath of eternal rest. Rev.
14. 13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me. Write, Blessed are the
Dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from their Labors, and their Works
follow after them.

Here the Believer has labor without rest, but in Heaven he shall have rest
without Labor* Death tends indeed to a Believers perfect everlasting reign and
rest.

The Believer* Afflictions upon Earth, they are forerunners of Deliverances,
they are as throws to the Birth of future Comforts. The Whale which swallowed
up Jonah, God appointed as the means of bringing himself to the Shore. And so
the trouble which we often times think may swallow us up, it brings us to our
harbor Death, it lands us safely upon Glory. One excellency sets out the state
of a dying Christian in these Words. Per Augusta ad Augusta, per Spinas ad
rosas, per Procellas ad Portum, per Mortem ad Vitam migramus.

Lastly, Death it is as a Bridge that all Saints must walk over to the
everlasting Hill of endless Peace, to the perfection of Grace, to the
participation o^ Glory, to the full possession of Christ.

1. Death it leads us to the perfection of Grace, the believer would live that
he might be more perfect, but when he dies he is perfect indeed, a dying life,
that is, a dying to sin, it frees us from a living Death, well doing fits us
for dying. Holiness frames us for Happiness.

2. Death it leads us to a participation of Glory, the consummation of Grace is
the incoation of Glory, Grace that puts the Soul into a capacity of enjoying
glimps of God as in a Glass darkly, but glory brings the Soul, ad visionem
bea^ificam, into an immediate converse with God face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
For now we see through a Glass darkly, but then face to face; now I know in
part, but then I shall know even as I am known.

3. Death it leads us into a full possession of Christ, Luke 23* 43 This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise, so says Paul, Then shall we be ever with
the Lord, comfort, comfort ye one another with these words, to be always with
Christ will be very comfortable indeed. Death that deprives us of commerce with
men, yet it delivers us up into an immediate communion with God and Christ, and
the blessed Angels; Saints in Heaven shall be as the Angels, nay, says John,
now are we the So^s of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, we
know that when he shall appear, we shall ^e like him, for we shall see him as
he is. Death speaks the sad disjunction of the Soul from the Body, and the sure
and sweet Conjunction of the Soul with Christ, and therefore says Paul, and
every Christian, when he is in a right temper, I have a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, which is best of all.

And thus I have endeavored to lay open before you those Soul supporting, and
Soul encouraging Arguments, the consideration of which, makes the believing
Soul so willingly, and so boldly, to look Death in the Face, to invade Death in
its own Quarters, which is indeed but as a Passage or Bridge* whereby the Soul
is carried over unto the Mountains of Mirrh, and unto the Hill of Frankincense,
where it shall lie down with Christ on his Green Bed of Love, which is perfumed
all over with the fullness of increated Glory.

And thus having showed you many Arguments, the Consideration of which does
much facilitate a Believers passage through Death into Glory. I shall in the
next place, for a further Illustration of this truth* present unto you the
admirable carriage and department of some famous Christians, since Christ his
time, as in Relation to their contempt of Death, and earnest desiring to be
with Christ in Glory; and in this Relation, I shall begin with I^nati^^, who
lived while Christ was upon the Earth, and so proceed to several other
remarkable Instances in successive Generations.

Ignatius, when he was sent by Trajan the Emperor to Rome, there to be
devoured of Lions for his free reproving of Idolatry; instead of fearing Death,
he thus courageously expressed himself. I wish, says he, that I could see those
wild Beasts that must tear me in pieces, I would speak them fair to dispatch me
quickly, and if that would not do, I would incite them to it.

Hierom of Prague, the renowned Bohemian Martyr, he uttered these words, with
much cheerfulness, at his very giving up the Ghost, Hanc animam in flammis
affero, Christ, tibi; freely do I burn for the sake of Christ.

Oecolampadius lying upon his Death Bed, and a certain Friend coming to him,
Oecolampadius asked him what news, unto whom his Friend answered, I know none,
but says he, I can tell you some good news, nam ego subit^ cum Christo
regnabor, I shall suddenly be with Christ upon his Throne.

Melanchton, a little before his Death, he would often say, capio ex hac vita
migrare propter duas causas; primum, ut frurar desiderato conspectu filii Dei,
deinde ut liberer ab immunibus Theologorum odiis; I desire to die to enjoy a
sight of Jesus Christ, etc.

But what need I tell you of the resolute and undaunted Carriage of Christians
in former ages, we need look no further than upon the carriage of Christians in
latter Ages.

Casper Obevian, the famous Lawyer, lying upon his Death Bed, he would often
say, O Lord let not my journey be long deferred ere I be with thee. I desire to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ, he had rather depart this Life, and take
but one Feast in Glory, than take many fees and still live in this miserable
World.

Strigelius, the learned Suetzer, falling sick, he would often say, Seperare se
finem vitae suae ad esse, He hoped this Sinful Life was now at an end, that he
might enjoy God perfectly.

Grin^us, the learned Helvetian, died with these words in his mouth, O
praeclarum illum diem, cum ad illud animarum concilium Caelumque profiscar: Oh
fairest day! when I shall make a journey to Heaven? that convocation of Souls;
should I but relate the dying Speeches of Mr. Rollock, the learned and devout
Scotch-man, they would melt any Heart that shall hear them, he breathed out
these words with his Life.

I Bless God, says he, I have all perfect Senses, but my Heart is in Heaven:
And Lord Jesus why should thou not have it; it has been my Care all my Life
time to devout it unto thee, I pray thee therefore take it that it may live
with thee for ever, Come Lord Jesus put an end to this sinful miserable life,
haste Lord, tarry not, come Lord Jesus and give me that life, for which thou
have redeemed me. Nay further, that I might* Christians, leave your Spirits in
this sweet temper of contemning Death, and desiring to be with Christ in Glory,
where I should much rejoice and indeed earnestly pray that I might meet you
all. I shall yet mind you of some remarkable instances in this kind, even in
our own Nation.

Mr. Cooper, that famous Champion for the Truth, when he was brought to be
burnt at the Stake in Queen Mary's days, and there having a box set before him
with a pardon in it, as soon as he perceived so much, he cried out, If you love
my Soul away with it, if you love my Soul away with it.

Dr. Tailor, when he was brought to Hadly in Suffolk to suffer Martyrdom for
his Profession of Christ, the History says, he was as merry in his going from
London, as though he had been a going to some Banquet or Bridal. And when he
was brought unto the place of Execution, he kissed the Stake uttering these
Words. Now I am even at home, Lord Jesus receive my Soul into thy Hands.

Before Mr. Bradford was Martyr`d, his dear Wife came running into his Chamber,
and said Mr. Bradford, I bring you heavy news, for to morrow you must be
burned, your Chain it is now a buying, but when Mr. Bradford had heard these
Words, he lifted up his Eyes to Heaven, and said, I thank God for it. I have
looked for this a long time, this news comes not to me suddenly but as a thing
that I waited for every day and hour, the Lord make me worthy of it.

And when he was brought into Smithfield to be burnt, where there was another
young Man to suffer with him, he turned himself to the young Man, and said, Be
of good Comfort Brother, for we shall have a merry Supper with the Lord Jesus
Christ this Night.

Bishop Jewel lying upon his Deathbed; he would often say, Now Lord let thy
Servant depart in Peace, break off all delays, Let me this day quickly see the
Lord Jesus, And observe further, one standing by him, and praying with Tears
that the Lord would be pleased to restore this Godly Bishop unto his former
Health, he over-hearing of him seemed to be very much offended, and replied
thus, I have not lived so, that I am ashamed to live any longer, neither do I
fear to Die, because I have a merciful Father.

And now truly Friends, out of the tender Affection which I bear unto all your
Souls, I could heartily wish, that this might be the dying Language of you all,
that you might every one be able to say from a good and clear Conscience, at
last, I have not lived not so that I am ashamed to live longer, neithe^ do I
fear to die, because I have a merciful Father.

And further, I do protest in the presence of God, with Saint Paul, in the 4th,
to the Phillip at the first Verse, That it is my greatest joy and richest
Crown, if that ever since I came among you, I have spoken any thing leading to
mutual Love and Peace. And if all my pains and endeavors among you in much
weakness have taken any effect upon any of your Spirits, to win you unto a love
of Christ, that so you may be holy here, and happy hereafter, I shall sincerely
rejoice.

But I shall say no more at this time, but only conclude with the words of
Saint* Paul, Phill. 4. I pray mark the words, for they will be the last I shall
speak among you.

Verse 1. My Brethren, dearly beloved and lo^ged for, my joy and crown, so
stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved. Verse 4. Rejoice in the Lord always,
and again I say Rejoice. Verse 5. Let your moderation be known unto all men:
The Lord is at hand. Verse 6. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto
God. Verse 7. And the peace of God which passes all understanding shall keep
your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Verse 8. Finally, Brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; if there be any Virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things. Verse 9. Those things which ye have both learned and
received, and heard and seen in me, do: so I have received them from Christ;
those things do and follow. And the God of Peace, shall be with you.
THE EJACULATION.
GOOD Lord, let our Souls be filled with breathings and pantings after Grace
and Glory, Let us be ever willing (with St. Paul) to depart and to be with
Christ. Let us daily look and long to be in Heaven, where we shall sit down in
the same Throne with our blessed and glorious Redeemer, where there will be no
more sinning nor sighing, nor more weeping for dead and dying Friends. Let us
long, long to be there, where time will be no more, but all will be swallowed
up in an endless Eternity of joy and delight. Lord* let us often ponder upon
the blessed state above* for certainly, one deep and serious consideration of
the never fading Glory of the other world is enough to wing our hearts with
earnest desires (as we have heard it did thy Holy Saints and Martyrs) to depart
and leave this vain world to be with Christ. And good Lord, let us, when we
leave a weeping House) and the many instances of our dearest Friends going so
often to the Grave before us, show that we must quickly follow) be received
into that Celestial Mantion above, which will prove an eternal House of Joy.

The Eye that has seen him shall see him no more. SERMON XI.
Upon ACTS 20. 38. Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, That
they should see his Face no more.
IN the latter part of this Chapter you have the Declaration of two things*
First, You have declared the Carriage of the Apostle Paul, that was, he
Preached while he was at the Church of Ephesus. Secondly, You have declared the
Character of the Church of Ephesus, when they were parting with this Blessed
Preacher, in the words that I have read, and the verse before, or the two last
verses, and it was full of Love, and manifested in three things;

1. They fell upon his Neck and kissed him, that is the close of the 3^. verse.

2. They accompanied him unto the Ship, when he was to launch into the Ocean:
They went with him as far as they could, as some of them it may be will to the
very edge of Eternity.

3. They showed to him their Love, by their Weeping, and Sorrowing at parting:
They cannot part with dry Eyes.

They sorrowed most of all, especially for this, that they should see his Face
no more. It was not so much that Paul was to go from them, but that they should
see his Face no more.

From this practice of this Church, I would lay down this Doctrine, That it is
the property and practice of the Saints and People of God, to be sorrowful and
affected at the final parting with their Pastors and Teachers, This was that
that most of all cut their Hearts, That they should see his Face no more.

That Patriarch Jacob, that wrestled and prevailed when he came to die, as you
read in Gen 49. and the last verse, That he pulled up his Feet into the Bed,
and he is goone: Now see what a Mourning there was for him in Genesis 50. 1. Joseph
fell upon his Fathers Face and kissed him, and verse 3. And the Egyptians
mourned for him threescore and ten days; here was a mourning for Jacob, and
verse 10. They came to the Threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond Jordan, and
there they Mourned with a great and very sore Lamentation: And made a Mourning
for his Father seven days.

The young Prophet in the 1 Kings 13. who without doubt in the main was
Faithful to God, though seduced out of his way, and out of his Life by an old
Prophet, whereby a Lion was appointed by God to destroy him, but see now how
the old Prophet was affected with it as soon as he hears it, causes the Ass to
be Sadled, and goes and brings the Carcass home to the City to Mourn, and to
Bury him, and laid him in his own Grave, in the 30. verse, and brings all to
Mourn over him, and charges his Sons that when ^e was dead, that they Bury him
in the same Sepulcher where the Man of God was, and lay his Bones besides his
Bones.

I shall now instance in the New Testament, it was so with them of Ephesas when
they parted with Paul, They should see his Face no more. He had been such a
Preacher that they could not part with him without Tears, or with dry Eyes.

Devout Men also carried Stephen to his Burial, and made great Lamentation over
him.

When Christ was carrying to be put to Death, there followed him a great
multitude of People, and Women which also bewailed and lamented him, There was
great lamentation: Oh they could not part with Jesus Christ without lamenting*
That they should see his Face no more. But it will be here objected in the next
verse, that Jesus Christ in Luke 23. 28. turned to those Women that wailed and
wept, and said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but for your selves.
That therefore there ought not to be weeping or lamenting for the departure of
any Eminent Saint, seeing he forbids it for himself, it argues indeed we should
not weep for them, but for the want of them, which is ours.

Why should those that are Hearers be deeply affected at the final departure of
Holy Ministers. I answer, This arises from the love that is between them: There
is a mutual Love between a Faithful Preacher and a Sincere Hearer.

Where there is Love, there is Mourning in the absence of it.

It Is said that Israel loved Joseph more than all his Children, and therefore
when News came to Jacob that Joseph was not* Oh! says Jacob, ver. ^5. I will
go down into the Grave unto my Son mourning. So David lamented for Absolon, Oh
Absolon my Son, my Son Absolon; and David lamented exceedingly for Jonathan in
that 1 Kings. I am distressed for thee my Brother Jonathan; if you love your
Preachers so as its said of them that could pull out their Eyes for them while
living, you will even weep out your Eyes for them now dead.

I could tell you of a thing that I have looked upon as a Piece of Prophecy, it
was Printed and Writ Ten Years before the Fire of London, and it was this.

London look to it, what Heaven's a doing,
Thy Flames are coming when thy Lots are going.
When I consider who is gone, and who are going, I dread. What became of Prague
when Jerome was dead? What became of Germany when Luther was dead? And what will
become of England when such as these are dead.

Let me call upon this Congregation this Evening, that we would be in the
Ephesians Practice, they Mourned when Paul was going, and they should see his
Face no more. Your Preacher is gone, And you shall see his Face no mo^e. I
would I could raise you to their height of Mourning.

He begat you in Christ Jesus, though none of his own, but Christ's, and you may
get one to succeed him, but not to exceed him, but I desire that Man to tell me
where.

The Good Man's Epitaph. SERMON XII.
REV. 14. 13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth; so says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.
THE Scripture will afford us many Texts for Funerals. Methinks there is none
more fit, nor more ordinarily Preached on than two: And they are both of them
Voices from Heaven.

One was to Isaiah the Prophet. He was commanded to cry. The Voice said, Cry.
And he said, What shall I cry? All Flesh is Grass, and all the goodliness
thereof, is as the Flower of the Field.

You will say, That is a fit Text indeed; so is this here; A Voice from Heaven
too. But St. John is not commanded to cry it, as Isaiah was; he is commanded to
write it.

That that is written is for the more assurance. It seems good to me (says
St: Luke in his Preface to his Gospel) Most excellent Theophilus, To write to
thee of those things in order, that thou might know the certainty.

Philosophers (who saw no further than the Clouds of Humane Reason) could say,
A wise Man's Life should be a continual Meditation of Death.

Joseph of Arimathea had his Sepulcher in his Garden, and Jesus Christ at the
Publicans Feast, falls into a serious discourse of his Passion, and Ascension,
to teach us that in times and places of greatest Pleasure, we should put our
selves upon Theams of Mortality. Heathens indeed had their Buryingplaces
without their Cities, but Christians in and about their Churches, as signify
that in our Devotions, we should think upon our dissolutions, which was one
reason why Alphonsus King of Arragon used to confess, that dead Men were his
best Friends; they gave him sound and seasonable Counsel, to remember Mortality
here, and provide for Eternity hereafter.

To this end; St. John in his Book of the Revelation, is sometimes advising us
to make Preparation for Death.

And sometimes encouraging us against the approaches of Death, by describing
the glorious Reward of the Saints departed, as in this Text, Blessed are the
dead, etc.

From whence we may observe that they that die in a state of Grace, live in a
state of Glory. This Observation I take to be the Scope and Quintessence of the
Text, and therefore shall make it the proper Subject of my present Discourse.

First by way of Explication, to show what it is to die in the Lord. That
implies two things especially. 1. To die in the Lord is to die for the
Confession of the Faith. 2. To die in the Profession of the Faith of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

3. And lastly, To die in the Lord, is to die in the peace of a good
Conscience. A Conscientious Man dies Blessedly, howsoever, or whenever, or
wheresoever he dies; therefore when St. Paul had received the Summons of Death,
he fled to the Castle of his good Conscience; there he sat like Noah in his
Cabin, in an Ark* pitched within and without. I am ready to be offered, and
the time of my departure is at hand; and here is my Comfort, I shall go to my
Grave with a Conscience as clean as my Winding Sheet; it follows, I have fought
a good Fight, finished my Course, kept the Faith, henceforth is laid up for me
a Crown of Righteousness.

This Truth is confirmed by a double Reason, They Rest from their Labors, and
their Works follow them. Their Blessedness consists in two things. 1. In a
cessation from all Sin and Misery, They Rest, etc. 2. In a possession of all
Glory and Felicity, Their Works follow them.

First, They Rest, etc. The Kingdom of Heaven is often in Scripture termed a
Rest, a place of Rest.

The World indeed is a troubled Sea, but Heaven is the Haven of Rest; the World
is an Egypt, a place of Burden and Bondage, but Heaven is a Canaan, that
resembled by the Bosom of Abraham, a place of sweet Refreshment, and
Soul-satisfying Rest.

The Saints departed Rest from the Labors of their

Corruptions. Afflictions. Temptations.
And lastly, They Rest from the. Labor of their particular Calling and
Vocation, which is toilsome and troublesome, ever since God past this Doom upon
Man for his offense in Paradise, In the Sweat of thy Brows shall thou eat
Bread. Indeed, Man in the state of Innocence, was not excused from Labor:
Paradise, which was Adams Storehouse, was his Workhouse too; God put him into
the Garden, not to sleep in those sweet Bowers, not to spend his time idly in
those pleasant Walks, but to dress and keep it ( ut operaretur) that he might
work and labor in it, only here is the difference, Labor then was a
Recreation to the Mind, and now it is an Affliction to the Body.

The second-Reason is laid down in the last words of the Text, Their Works
follow them, therefore they are Blessed: Their Happiness is not only privative,
consisting in a freedom from Sin and Misery, but positive also, in a possession
of all Peace and Glory, in a consummation of Grace, in a perfect Fruition of
God, and a Blessed Communion with the Lord Jesus Christ.

Their Works follow them, not their Works in kind, but their Works in Issue and
Effect, the Fruits and Reward of their Works, the Blessings of God which lie in
the Promises to Works of Piety and Charity, These follow them to Heaven: Indeed
Faith leads the way, that must be our Harbinger to take up our Lodging in the
New Jerusalem, that like the Star in the East, leads us to Bethlehem, where
Christ is, but then good Works follow after, they are our Attendants to the
Court and Kingdom of Glory.

The Use, If the Saints departed rest from their Labors, here is then comfort
in the general against all Crosses and Calamities in the World, and in
particular against the fear of our own Death, or the Death of Friends.

Blessed are the Dead, they rest, etc. Death (like Lot's Angels) plucks us out
of the Sodom of Sin and Misery, and places us in Zoar, a City of Rest and
Tranquillity: Like Peter's Angel, it shakes off the Chain of Mortality, and
opens the Iron-gate, the Gate of Pearl into the New Jerusalem; like Lazarus his
Angel, it conducts the Soul from Earth to Abraham's Bosom, from this Vail of
Tears to the Kingdom of Glory. Moreover, as Death helps us to our Rest, so it
is our Rest: Why should we fear it?

The Scripture terms it but a taking away of the Soul to Peace, a sweet Sleep
of the Body. Our friend Lazarus sleeps, and the Patriarchs are fallen asleep,
St. Stephen fell asleep: Our Burying-places are but Dormitories,
Sleeping-places. The Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come; and he
shall enter into Peace, they shall rest in their Beds. Such a Blessed Rest have
the Righteous in Death; as our Savior wept, because his Friend Lazarus was to
be deprived of it; it is both the Observation of an Ancient Father, and the
Resolution of an Ancient Council, concerning Christ's weeping over Lazarus, John
11. 35. Doluit Lazarum, non dormientem, sed resurgentem. Christ did not weep
because Lazaras was dead, and taken out of the World, but because he was to
return from the Grave into a Troublesome World after he was gone to his Rest.

It may be for the same Reason, the Thracians of old used to lament at the
Birth of their Children, but rejoice at their Funeral.

The time will come that we must part with our Isaac's, our Benjamin's, nearest
Friends, and dearest Comforts. Then remember my Text; if they die in the Lord,
take no care for them, they are Blessed, they are at their Rest.

But some will say, Shall we meet with our Friends again departed in the Faith?
Yes, without peradventure, if we walk in ways of Obedience to the end.

It was David's Comfort upon the death of his Child. While the Child was living
he fasted and wept, and la^ upon the Ground; but when it was dead, he arose and
anointed himself, aad eat Bread. His Reason is very strong and convincing.

1. An impossibility of Recovery, He shall not come to me.

2. An assured Hope of meeting again in Heaven, But I shall go to him. He shall
not come to me, that would be for his loss, to part with his Rest in Heaven,
for a restless condition on Earth; but I shall go to him, I have not lost him
for ever, we shall meet again as comfortably as Jacob and Joseph met in Egypt;
meet again in Heaven and never part. Now you know it never troubles us to see
the Sun set, because we know it will rise again in the Morning; it never
troubles us to part with a Friend when he goes to Bed, because we hope to see
him again in the Morning. Beloved, the Death of a Friend is but like the
setting of the Sun, or the uncloathing of a Man when he goes to Red, there will
be a glorious appearing in the Morning of the Resurrection, and therefore St.
Paul condemns immoderate sorrow for the dead, I would not have you sorrow as
those that have no hope. Nature will be sorrowful, but let Grace moderate the
sorrow, and keep it within the bounds of hope; and the ground of hope is set
down, If ye believe that Jesus died, and is risen again, even so also them that
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.

It Is true, the Scripture mention some that shall not die, as they that shall
be found alive at the Coming of Christ to Judgment. St. Paul tells us in plain
terms, we shall not all sleep, but we shall be changed. The meaning is, they
shall not so sleep, as to continue in the state of the dead, but be changed in
a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye; yet such a change, as they shall have a
dissolution, and in the same moment, a redintegration, a real Death, and a real
Resurrection, though no sleeping in the Grave of Corruption.

You see one Generation passing, and another Generation coming, one Friend and
Neighbor drops into the Grave after another, and when your turn shall be you
know not. This you may be assured of, Death will come certainly, and it may be
speedily, it may be suddenly. What Man is he that lives, and shall not see
Death? Psalm. 89. 48.

Now I beseech you embrace and improve these few directions, in order to a
Pious Life, and a Peaceable Death.

First, if you would live to the Lord, and die in the Lord, labor for
exemplary purity of Life: Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom, but he that does the Will of the Father.

Secondly, If you would live to the Lord, and die in the Lord, give the World a
Bill of Divorcement, otherwise it will clip your Wings, and clog your Souls,
and hinder your pursuit of Heaven; there is nothing in all the World that is
worthy of your Affections, nothing but what is transitory, and unsatisfactory,
and therefore look on it and pass away.

Gregory Nazianzen, speaks of a Land which had abundance of Curious Flowers in
it, but no Corn for Bread to satisfy the Peoples Hunger; the World is very
like that Land, here are many Flowers, which may please our Senses and our
Fantasies, but here is no Corn for Bread, no substantial satisfying Comforts.

As Death should be the Subject of your Meditation, so Heaven the Center of
your Affections. Richard the First, sometimes King of England, gave charge that
his Bowels should be Buried at Charron, but his Heart at Roan, the Faithful
City, the City of his Love. Truly the World deserves but our waste parts, we
may Bury our Bowels in the Earth, but our Hearts should be laid up in Heaven,
the Royal City, the New Jerusalem.

That so after a troublesome Life, we may have a peaceable Death, and after
Death a glorious Reward of Everlasting Rest in Heaven, according to this voice
from Heaven in the Text. Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, for they
rest from their Lab^urs, and their Works follow them.

I have now done with the Text, and now come to address my self unto that sad
occasion, which has given my present Discourse this Mourning Suit. The
occasion of our present meeting is to Solemnize the Funeral of our deceased
Neighbor and Friend, to do our last office to her Body, by affording it the
benefit of a Christian and Comely Burial.

Concerning whom, I might upon very good and warrantable Grounds, enlarge my
Discourse in the description of the blessedness, both of her Life and Death,
but as the Orator said, Quid opus est verbis? What need is there of words, when
her deeds are so manifest.

She died the death of Moses; he died leisurely, God gave him notice of his
Journey beforehand, for his better preparation, Go up to the Mount and die: So
departed she from the World, not before she expected Death, not before she
provided for Death. God was pleased in Mercy to give her warning, before she
flitted, to ring her Passing Bell in her Soul many days before she died; and
whereas many are flattered with hopes of Life, till the very Hour of Death; yet
she was upon a meditation of Death from the first beginning of her sickness:
Death was not sudden to her, either in respect of Expectation, or Preparation;
she had her Wedding Garment on, and her Lamp trimmed with Faith and a good
Conscience, she was ready for Death, and ripe for Eternity; behold she is
coming to the Grave, and she comes as a shock of Corn from the Field in due
Season.

Hopes of a joyful Resurrection. SERMON XIII.
JOB. 19. v. 25, 26, 27. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the Earth. And though after my Skin, Worms
destroy^s his Body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. Then I shall see for my
self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another, though my Reins ^^ consumed
in me.
AS if he had thus argued: He that waits by Faith in the Redeemer of the
Resurrection of his Body to eternal Life, after Death has done its worst, is
not a wicked man, or an Hypocrite, as you have charged me.

But such is my Faith; I believe in the Redeemer, and I look to rise (after
this body is consumed and eaten of Worns) to an eternal happy Life; therefore I
am not such as you judge me to be, neither wicked nor hypocrite. You account me
as rejected of God, yet I know that God is my Redeemer, I know that he lives
for ever, and that he is mine for ever, and therefore do not think, because I
have no hope of this life, that therefore I despair of life: Do not take upon
you, that you only know these mysteries, and that I am ignorant of them, as my
Friend Bildad concluded in the 18th. Chapter (this is the portion of Man that
knows not God,) for even I also know that my Redeemer lives, and shall stand
upon the Earth at the latter day.

In the former Verse we have considered and improved the Confession of Job's
Faith in the Redeemer.

First, As living or eternal.

Secondly, As rising from the Dead, or raising the Dead to Life.

Thirdly, As judging both the Quick and Dead. He in these two Verses enlarges
the Confession of his Faith concerning his own personal Resurrection. Which,

First, He asserts in the Close of the 26th Verse, In my flesh shall I see God.

Secondly, In the strong actings of his Faith he assures himself of it,
notwithstanding all the difficulties that might obstruct and hinder it in the
26th Verse, and in the Close of the 27th. Though after my Skin Worm destroy
this Body; though my Reins be consumed within me, yet I believe I shall see
God: These Impediments do not weaken my Faith.

Thirdly, He declares the Benefit or Happiness which shall accrue unto him
after the Resurrection of his Body, which he does.

First, In those words, I shall see God.

Secondly, In those, I shall see him for my self. In both which Expressions, he
sets forth the Happiness of the Saints after the raising of their Bodies but of
the Grave, and the reunion of Soul and Body.

Fourthly, He maintains the identity of his flesh or body in the Resurrection,
or that the same body which falls shall rise. And this is in a twofold notion.

First, An identity specificial, it shall be the same Body in kind.

Secondly, An identity numerical, or individual, shall be the same particular
Body he had on Earth, and laid down in the Earth. Both which are evidenced and
evinced from those passages in the Text: I shall see him in my flesh; Mine eye
shall behold, and not another. I, my, mine, and not another, imply nothing, if
not himself, or no other thing but himself.

From all we may collect, how excellent a confession of Faith Job made about
that great mystery of the Resurrection, and how firmly his Soul was established
in it.

Verse 26. And though after my Skin Worms* destroy this Body. As if he had more
largely said; `After I am dead, and laid in the Grave, where Worms do not only
eat my Skin, and consume this upper Garment, but my whole Body also: yea, and
not only the outward Limbs and Members of my Body, but my very Bowels and
Entrals. Though my Reins be consumed within me: though Worms devour, and
rottenness invade whatsoever I am, or have of a Body, though I am spent from
Head to Toe, from Skin to Reins, without and within, yet notwithstanding all
this, I believe that I shall rise again, and see God in my flesh.

And mine Eyes shall behold, and not anoother.

We have in this Text, see, and see, and behold. The word in the original is
different from what we had before, I shall behold him. It signifies more th^n
the bare seeing, or the gathering in the Species of any object into the eye* It
signifies a very vehement beholding; a critical discerning, view, and sight of
the thing. Whom I shall behold, That is, with deep intention, both of Eye and
Mind, to find out and rejoice in all the Excellency, Beauty, Glory, and Worth
that is in him. A Man may come into a Room, adorned with goodly Pictures, he
sees them in passage, he ^ath a transient view of them, and he takes some
pleasure in this view. Another beholds them, to see the Workmanship, how the
lines are drawn, and Features shadowed to the life; he views with Skill and
Art, this pleases much, and gives the accurate Beholder high contentment. So
here, Mine eye shall behold him: That is, I shall even set my self to take a
view of him, to gather up (as it were) into my self the Idea's of his divine
Perfections, and so to receive all those delight and contents which ri^e from
such an excellent object.

Mine Eye shall behold, and not another; that is, the ^ight which I shall have
of God in my glorified State, shall not be at the second hand, but such I shall
have my self. The joy which I shall then receive shall not be of any report or
narrative that others shall give me of the Glory of God. I shall see with mine
own Eyes, not others, or not by another.

The knowledge we have here, is but like that which the Samaritans had of
Christ by the Woman's report; but that which we shall have in Heaven shall be
like that which they had of Christ when himself came personally among them, and
spoke immediately. Or we may illustrate it by that of the Queen of the South:
The knowledge which we have of God here, and of his Glory and Excellency, is
like that of the Queen of the South in her own Country; there she had a report
of Solomon's Person, of his Government, of his Riches and Dignity, and such a
report, as did not only affect and astonish her, but provoke her to undertake
that great Journey, that she might see for her self, and her Eyes behold, and
not another; and when she came to the Court at Jerusalem, and beheld Solomon in
his Person and Attendance, when she observed the service of his Table, and
heard his wisdom, there was no more Spirit in her, (1 Kings 10 5.) thas is, she
was as one astonished, whose Spirits are sunk and dissipated. Where the natural
Spirit does not act, it is said not to be. When we come to the Court of Heaven,
as the Queen of the South to Solomon's Court, and there behold how much God is
beyond, and above all that we have hitherto heard of him here at home in our
own Country, we shall be rapt up into admiration, and there shall be indeed no
more of this low and narrow Spirit in us for ever.

All these conceptions about, and interpretations of the Text, are pious and
profitable; but that which I rather take to be the proper meaning of these
words ( Mine Eye shall behold, and not another) is this; Job (as was touched in
giving the analysis of these two Verses) speaks here of the Identity of his
flesh in the Resurrection: I shall see him, I shall see him for my self, mine
Eyes shall behold him, and not another. That is, I, the Man who stand here
before you, the same who Job now speaks; I the very same numerical Person
shall see God in this very flesh, and with these eyes; they shall be indeed new
dressed and dyed, trimmed, and made fit to come into the presence of the great
and glorious God; yet it shall be even this flesh, and these Eyes, in which I
shall come into the Presence of God, and and behold my Redeemer. I shall be
altered from what I was, but I shall not be another than I was, I shall be
changed into a better condition, but I shall not be changed into another
person. My qualities shall have a perfective alteration, but I shall retain the
same matter, and be the same man. A man raised glorious and immotal, is what he
was, except his Morality, and has no more than he had, except his Glory. The
Philosopher acknowledges there may be a specificial, but not a numerical
Restoration of that which is corrupted. But Job's Faith was clearer than
Aristotle's reason: He believed a Personal Resurrection, Mine Eye shall behold,
and not another; I shall not be changed into another Person, whatever changes I
undergo, I shall be Job still, the same Job. Hence observe:

Every Man at the Resurrection shall receive the same Body that now he has,
and be the same M^n which now he is.

One of the Ancients has a large Discourse upon this subject, wherein he
discovers some, who though they granted the Soul immortal, yet denied the
Resurrection of the same Body: Such were the Marcionites, Basilidians, and
Valentinians. These, says he, went halves with the Sadduces in their opinion.
The Sadduces denied Spirits. Hence ( Act; 23. 6.) Paul perceiving that the
Assembly was mixed of Sadduces and Pharisees (and wisely considering, that if
he did but mind them of their differences between themselves, they would not so
strongly agree and combine against him) he made his advantage of it, by
professing openly that he was a Pharisee. And the sacred Historian tells us
what the peculiar tenants of the Sadduces were, ( v. 8.) The Sadduces say there
is no Resurrection, neither Angel nor Spirit, (they denied both) but the
Pharisees confess both. They held, that there were immortal Spirits or Souls,
united to the bodies of Men, that those bodies should arise, and be reunited to
the Soul. They also confessed that there were Angels, who are Spirits
subsisting properly without Bodies Now, as the Sadduces denied the Resurrection
of the Body, so others denied the Resurrection of the same Body: These he
calls sharers or halvers in the Sadduces Opinion; though not so grossly as
they, yet too too grossly departing from the Faith. And indeed, they who deny
the Resurrection of the same body, do (by implication) altogether deny the
Resurrection of the body: For if the same numerical Body should not rise, it
could not be called a Resurrection; Resurrection is the rising of that which
fell, and the taking up of that which was before laid down: So that it would be
the Creation of a new Body, not the Resurrection of the old, if it were not the
same Body. And it conduces much to the comfort of Saints, and may be the
terror of wicked Men, to keep close to the Faith of this Article. The Apostle
seems to touch it (2 Cor. 5. 10.) We shall all appear before the Judgment Seat
of Christ, that every one may receive the things he has done in his Body,
according to what he has done, whether it be good or bad. That hand which has
been doing for Christ, that very Tongue which has been speaking for Christ,
that whole Body which has been moved, and acted for Jesus Christ, as an
instrument of his Glory, that shall receive the Reward: As also that Hand, that
Eye, that Tongue, that Foot which has moved, and stirred against Christ, that
also shall be punished, and receive according to the evil committed in the
Body. Judgment would not be exact, unless as there has been a copartnership
between Soul and Body in their works, so also they should be Copartners both
in reward and punishment.

If it be objected, how can the same numerical Body rise again, especially in
such cases, when thousands of Carcasses are mingled, and their Dust
promiscuously heapead together, or scattered abroad? When the Bodies of Men are
devoured by wild Beasts, and digested into the substance of Fowls and Fishes,
especially when the Bodies of Men are eaten and concocted into the Bodies of
other Men? How can these numerical Bodies rise? I answer, first, if we will not
rest in matters of Faith, till we have a clear rational account of them, our
Faith may quickly be at a stand. I answer, secondly, that as it is easy to
make Objections against Faith, so Faith has one answer as easy as these
Objections. The Apostle gives it, and into that all such doubts must be
resolved ( Phil. 3. 20.) For having showed the present condition, or
disposition of the Spirit of Saints in the former Verse; Our Conversation is in
Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. He
presently shows what the future condition of the Saints Bodies shall be. Who
shall change our ^ile Bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious
Body. (How is this, Who puts this vile Body into such a Glorio^i fashion?
Trouble not your selves for that, there is power enough to do it, it is done,)
according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.
This is an answer to the hardest Objections, Christ can subdue all things,
therefore those which are hardest.

There is no difficulty to Omnipotency.
You ask how the same Body can be restored? I ask how the first body was
Created? Tell me how God Created Heaven and Earth out of nothing? So that as
the Apostle speaks ( Heb 11. 3.) Things which are seen* were not made of things
which do appear: How were these things done? If you argue by reason, you will
be posed and gravel'd in these as wall as in that other; yea, you will be at a
Wall, and notable to answer above that which is ordinary, and every day done,
and shall continue to be done in all the Generations of Men ( Solomon puts the
question Eccles. 11. 5.) Tell me how the Bones grow in the Womb of her that is
with Child: Can you tell how the Child is framed? Thou can not give an
account of thy own Production, nor find out the Work of God in forming the
Body? Therefore as to the manner how such things are done, we must have
recourse only to the Almighty power of God, to the All-powerful God, who is
able to subdue all things to himself. Mine Eye shall behold, and not another.

Though my Reigns be consumed within me.
I touch upon the Interpretation of this Clause, before, as it suits with that
passage, verse. 26. Though after my Skin, Worms destroy this Body, and though my
Reins be consumed within me. Though I be totally consumed, Skin without, and
Reins within, yet notwithstanding I believe that I shall rise and see God. Thus
it was joined with the first Words of the 26th. Verse, to show the triumph of
Faith over all Difficulties that lie in the way of the Resurrection.

The Yearly Mourner. SERMON XIV.
JUDGES 11. ult. And it was a Custom in Israel that the Daughters of Israel
went yearly to lament the Daughter of Jeptha the Gileadite four Days in a Year.
TO a place appointed for their meeting to this end, possibly to the place
where she was Sacrificed, to express their sorrow for her loss, according to
the manner, or to discourse of (so the Hebrew Lamed is sometimes used) the
Daughter of Jepthah, to Celebrate her Praises, who had so willingly yielded up
her self for a Sacrifice.

We find our Savior weeping over Lazarus's Grave, insomuch as the people could
infer thence, See how much he loved him, John 11. 35, 36. I know no Divinity
that excludes Humanity; but delights always to plant it self in soft Breasts*
and either make or finds good Nature. I find in the Catalogue and Spawn of
highest Crimes (which the dregs of these last times should bring forth, want of
natural Affection reckoned, 2 Timothy 33.

So then, it is not only not unlawful, but a Duty to Mourn with those that
Mourn, if you will receive the Apostles Prescription, Romans 12. 15. It is in the
Scripture noted as an extreme Judgment and Curse on the Wicked, Job 17. 15, (
Psalm. 78. 64.) his Widows shall not weep, as either wanting leisure from other
Sorrows, or liberty from their Cruel Enemies.

Tears are the first Office we do for our selves, and the last for others.

They may not please themselves, that can with dryest Eyes behold the
Sicknesses, the Losses, the Funerals of Friends, as who had attained a greater
measure of Religion or Discretion, or the Spirit, or who had subdued their
Desires to a perfecter Resignation, and submission to Gods Will. Let them
question themselves whether this stoutness, proceeds not from a Spirit void of
Sense and Natural Affection, and not from an humble Resignation to the
Providence and Pleasure of God; whether this Ca^m arise not alike to that of
the dead Sea, from a Curse?

On the other side, Though Religion forbids not Mourning, yet it forbids us to
Mourn as those that have no hopes; though it excludes not all grief, yea it
moderates our Grief, and teaches us to turn our sadness to an holy sorrow.

Weep not, She is not Dead but Sleeps. SERMON XV.
LUKE 8. 52. And all wept and bewailed her; But he said, Weep not, she is not
dead but sleeps.
OUR Life is divided into Labor and Rest, which Nature wisely has contrived
into waking and sleeping, in an admirable manner providing the preservation of
our being by a seeming dissolution of it We must intermit it to continue it:
Die we must one half of the natural day, that we may live the other. Lie down
and sleep (as it were) to die in the night, that we may awake and arise to live
on the Morrow; so well acquainted is our Life with Death, that our whole Age
appears the Changes and Intercourse of both. Nay this kind of Death is that
which continues Life; such is the Frailty of the Creature, that it immediately
owes its being to a kind of not being, to a privation, though not simply of
Life, yet -- Tali -- to something very well like Death. For tell me, strongest
Constitution! How long can thou labor without the relief of rest? How long
can thou awake without refreshment of sleep?

But would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are
asleep, that ye sorrow not, as others that have no b^pe; For if we believe that
Jesus died and rose again; even so them which sleep in Jesus, God will bring
with him, as affirms St. Paul. 1 Thessalonians 4. 13. 14. John 11. 12.

Whence it appears, that if she sleep, she shall do well; and shall we take it
ill, that our Friends are well? Shall we be troubled upon Earth, because our
Friends are at rest under it? Forbid it Religion! Perea^ contristatio, u^i^anta
est consolatio* Be not ye sad because your Friend is gone to a state of Joy.

If Nature sadned at departure, will let fall a Tear, let Faith gladned with
Hopes of meeting again, wipe away that Tear. Wrestle not with the Decrees of
Heaven, nor murmur at the procedures of its Providence; 'twas God that closed
her Eyes in sleep, that forbids your Eyes to weep. Weep not (for) she is not
dead ^ut sleeps.

The Division of this Text is made to my hand*s by the meeting of this
Congregation, three Parties are visible in the presence. Which discover three
parts legible in the words.

1. The Dead, -- She. 2. The Mourners, -- All wept. 3. The Preacher. -- he
said, Weep not.
Weep not. This (I said) is the Mourners Comfort, to improve it into practice,
thereby to lessen the number, or to lighten the weight of their Mourning. I
profess my self unfurnished of any other Argument, than the numberless
Felicities and weight of Glory, which Crown those that are not Dead but Sleep.

Yet whilst we live in this Valley of Tears, natural Affection will so far
prevail upon our Reason, that even the Father of the Faithful, when he was to
sow his nearest Relative in the Earth, could not but Water it with a shower
from his Eyes. For Abraham came to Mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her, Genesis
23. 2.

Attend the first words Christ spoke to a Woman after his Resurrection, was it
not, Wh^ weepest thou? Joh. 20. 15. Indeed before Christ had opened the Gates
of Death, Mar^, nay the whole World had cause enough to weep. But now Christ
the Head was risen, and had made way for all his Members to follow; now Jesus
had beaten Death at his own Weapon, and killed it by dying, since he has
changed the Grave into a Bed, Death into Sleep, and made the Land of Darkness
the ready way to the place where Light dwells. Tears are both unreasonable
and unseasonable, why weepest thou? is as much as weep not.

Considerable are the Siren and the Swan, whose different Fate is thus: The
Siren Sings away her Life in wanton Airs, and Charms of Lust, the treacherous
Inticements to Destruction, but when she dies, she breathes out her Soul in
Howlings, Sighs and Sobs, in Pangs and Horror. The Swan, who spends her days in
Innocence as white as her Livery, in pensive Notes of Sadness, mournful and
black as her Feet, when she dies she expires in joyful Anthems, the voice of
joy and gladness.

So when Death calls the Aged Swan from Streams;
She dying, sings her own glad Requiems.
Good People, had you the Reversion of a Rich Living, or Office, would you weep
because it is fallen into your Possession? Invidi non amantis, 'twere more of
Envy than Love to bewail an Earthly Happiness. I close, as Jesus to the
Daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for me, ^ut weep for your selves, not for me
that am dying, but for your selves that are living; for your selves that have
refused my Doctrine, despised your Savior, condemned your Innocent and
Righteous Prince.

For the Sins and Sufferings of the Living, I confess, there is weeping work
enough for him who has Jeremy's wish, His Head a Fountain of Tears to weep day
and night: But for the dead that die in the Lord weep not. Weep not, she is not
dead but sleeps.

The Application.
Since the Fa^e of Rest in the state of Separation; and Happiness, at meeting
again of Soul and Body, depends upon the Holiness at parting: Let us be
composed in both, that neither the disorder of the Body, nor multitude of
Business, either ill done, or undone* may disturb the quiet of the Soul.

Before Men go to Bed they put off their Clothes, or else they sleep both
unhandsomely and uneasily. So let your Souls divest those Habits which Sin and
Custom has too long made fashionable,

Lastly, Good Men before they go to Bed they always pray. St. Paul advises,
Pray always, though not with the Lip, yet with the Life.

When Survivors see a Soul that has lived long in this Region of Holy Duty, to
ascend to Heaven as the Angel, Judge. 13. 20. In the Flames of the Altar, their
Charity and Hopes are sufficiently instructed to say, Nolite flere. Weep not,
she is not dead but sleeps.

The Character.
I have done with the Text that I brought hither to you, and now apply my self
and discourse, to that Text that brought you hither to me; from that I
presented to your Ears, to that presented to your Eyes: I close the Book of
Life, and now open the Book of Death.

So St. Ambrose Interred Theodosius; Nazianzen, the Immortal Athanasius; and
St. Hierome, the excellent Lady Marcella: Nay, St. John has taken short Notes
of a Sermon made by Christ at the Funeral of Lazarus, John 11. 12, 13, etc.
wherein are Discourses of Faith, Resurrection and Glory, raised from the Dead,
and applied to the Living. I need no other, because I can follow no better
precedent, Therefore hear me, or rather hear her speak, for the Dead can speak,
Heb. 11. 4.

Our dead Sister speaks first in the dignity of her Extraction, fairly
proclaimed to you by the Herauldry of her Hearse, but fairer far in the
suitable Character of her Life, the worthiness of her Birth had no other
influence on her, but to engage her to worthiness of Action, which she so nobly
improved, that the Virtue of her Life dignified the Honor of her Descent; so
the Glory she received from her Father on Earth, by the Acts of Humility, and
Charity, she enhansed to the glorifying her Father which is in Heaven.

Her Beauty, which was a depository from Heaven, she beautified with so much
Piety, and adorned with so much Religion, as if she had been entrusted to
preserve* both the Luster and the Virtues of the Celestial Bodies in her
Epi^ome.

But the Beauty of her Soul was a Sun to this Taper, from whence her starry
Actions received a mighty Splendour.

When she spoke, Wisdom dictated and Wit delivered, she hung her Language at
your Ears as Jewels, much of worth in a small bulk; and as Jewels her Speech
was Rich, both in Luster and in Medicine; the Conceits of her Mirth would raise
a Smile, but the Gravity of her Conveyance commanded Reverence.

Her Reproofs, like Lightning, quick, but short, such as would melt the Blade,
yet not singe the Scabbard; kill the Sin, but preserve the Sinner.

Her Promises were made in her Head, but bept in her Hand; as a Nail fastened in
a sure place, driven by Understanding, and clenched by Affection.

Her Attire neither fordid nor curious, nor too early in, nor too late out of
Fashion; not like those Mushroom Gentry, who declare their late rise from
Peasantry and Poverty by the Herauldry of the Dirt and Rags on their Back.

Her Table was both wholesome and handsome enough to satisfy the Stomach of
the hungry, and well enough to fancy the Palate of the Curious: yea when the
Sword had Carved her Meat to the fifth part* her good Cheer was as much as ever.

Her Visits were like the Sun's, beneficial wheree're she came, and treading in
her Saviors steps, She went up and down doing good*

Her Access was free but not loose, her Door, as her Heart, was open to all
Friends; so that without much shifting the Scene she would easily make her
House a Court, an Almes-house, a School, and an Hospital all in a day.

She had Treatments for the Greatest, who came as Agrippa and Bernice with
great Pomp. She had Relief for the Poorest; who as Lazarus, lay at the Gate^;
Instructions for the Ignorant, and Charitable Remedies for the Sick; Christian
Applications for all, feeding the Hungry, cooling the Thirsty, clothing the
Naked, visiting the Sick, and harboring the Traveller; what God requires in
acts of Neighborhood here, and Reward hereafter, the whole Voyzenage can
witness with me, and for her, that she was a great parallel to Dorcas, Acts 9.
36. This Woman was full of good Works and Almesdeeds which she did.

Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, she did them, therefore if there
be any virtue or any praise, let her have it.

Her Relation as a Wife, shows her, without disparagement, a rare example and
standard to her Sex.

Society is the most precious Comfort in Nature, the richest Jewel in her
Cabinet, Adam not in perfect Paradise, not happy without it; of all Societies
with Man, that of a Wife is nearest, being made of his own Rib; and dearest,
lying in his own Bosom.

Her Affection was great as Jonathan's, wonderful and passing the love of
Women, 2 Samuel 2. 26.

Marriage made her Husband and her one Flesh, but Love made them one Soul. She
Married not only his Person, but his Interests and Concernments, loved his
Loves, wished his Desire, as inseparable as Ruth and her Mother-in-law, Ruth 1.
16, 17. not to be parted but by Death. She owed him an Affection equal to her
Life, being often ready to lay it down for his Preservation, as appears by her
Swouning at any News might threaten ill to him, as if her Soul conceived it but
Duty to be Bail for her Husband.

The Head of the Woman is the Man, 1 Cor. 11. 3. so her Husband wore the
principality, she received influence from him, and gave conformity to him. But
a Virtuous Woman is a Crown to that Head, Prove. 12. 14. so she gave safety,
plenty, and honor to her head, as Crown may signify. The Heart of her Husband
did fasely trust in her she did do him good and not ill all the days of her
life. Longer she is not obliged; -- Till death us depart -- was their
agreement; Death ends her natural Relation, and enters her into a Divine; which
she began here by her Religion.

Her Religion was not as her Sex, Female; that is, all Face and Tongue, but
pure and solid, not despising the Form, but delighting in the Power of
Godliness. She attired not her Devotion as the Lacedaemonians did their Gods,
according to the several Fashions of each City, so to gain Reputation from Man;
but she persevered in the constant substantials of Religion, so to gain Grace
and Favor from God.

To whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be Glory and Honor, now and for ever.

Good Night.
NOW art thou drawing near thy home, Heaven is within sight, and its Melody
almost within hearing, thy Lord has the Curtain in his hand ready to draw it,
to show thee all that glory that hitherto he has been but telling thee of, and
give thee a Possession of all that which hitherto thou have enjoyed only in
Hopes and Title. What do thou fear and shrug, and tremble at, Oh my Soul,
thou peevish froward Creature? Shall his Angels stand waiting to convey thy
departed Soul home with Songs of Triumph? And shall nothing of all this abate
thy Fears, silence thy Complaints, and bring thee to a Cheerful Submission?
Fear not then my Soul, but ^oldly throw thy self into his Arms, who will
certainly keep that safe which thou committest to him.

But what if I was willing to bid adieu to my Fathers House, and leave this
World, and all its Enjoyments behind me, as being sufficiently tired with the
Frustrations of a pursued Happiness therein? Yet methinks, the change I shall
pass at Death, will be so very great and amazing, I fear I shall not bear it.
To go hence from them I know, to a Place and Company I never knew or saw in all
my Life; to leave my Friends, Relations, Neighbors, with whom I have a long
time lived, and with whom I have familiarly conversed, to go into a Country
where I may not meet with one face I know; how strangely shall we look on one
another? What little content do I take in any company on Earth, where I meet
with sh^^ess? Will it not be so in Heaven? Answ. Art thou truly Godly? said the
pious Wadsworth, in his Answer to the Fear of Death; and do thou say thou
know none in Heaven? that is strange. Who is he whom you call Father every
time you pray? what are you born of God* united to God by faith and love? and
hold communion with him, and yet not know him?

Well, say thou, but if I know him, it is b^ very little, I never saw him in
all my Life? (...) what if thou have not seen him with thy (...) eyes? yet have
thou not believed in him whom thou have not seen, and rejoiced with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory? Though thou have not known him after the Flesh,
yet thou have after the Spirit.

But comfort thy self, though thou have known him but little, and that through
a vail darkly, yet he knows thee most perfectly: He knows thee by name, and
separated thee to himself from the Womb, and effectually called and justified
thee; he knows thee by thy name; and knows thy dwelling, and visits thee
every morning, and is with thee living, and will not leave, thee dying; and
when he has taken thee to himself in the Heavens, thou shall know him as he
knows thee, that is intimately, perfectly.

But say thou, if I know in some measure God and his Son, the Lord of that
City, I know no more: There are ten thousands of Angels there, and I know not
one of them* and as many Spirits of just men, some little acquaintance I had
with some of the latter on earth, but since arrived thither, they are so
transfigured, so wonderfully changed, I shall not know one of them when I see
them.

What if thou know not one Angel in all the Heavens? is it not enough that
many of them may know thee? But how do I know that? How? thou have been their
special Charge ever since thou wast born to Jesus Christ. Are they not all
ministering Spirits to them that are Heirs of Glory. How kindly did an Angel
comfort Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, when they early came to visit the
holy Sepulcher of our Lord? How well did he know their Persons, and their
Business; when he said, Mat. 28. 5. Fear not, I know that ye seek Jesus, which
was crucified; he is not here; for he is risen, as he said: Come see the place
where the Lord lay, and go quickly, and tell his Disciples that he is risen
from the Dead, and behold he goes before you into Galilee, ^here shall ye see
him so, as I have told you. What Discourse could be more kind, friendly, and
fami^iar than this?

But that thou should think thy self an utter stranger to all the Spirits of
the Just, is more strange, when there may be some of thy near Relations ^here,
and many of those that thou have had for many years such sweet Eellowship in
the Ordinan^es of the Gospel. If I shall sit down with Abra^am, Isaac, and
Jacob in the Kingdom; surely, I shall know them to be such.

Besides, their Natures in Heaven are all perfect^y gracious and holy, and I
shall be like them, and ^e shall all know each other to be so; and what ^iness
can there possible be among such, who are ^^tisfied in each others sincere love
and affection? ^hou may be acquainted with a thousand Saints ^ Angels in an
hours time as if thou had known ^^em a thousand years.

And if this be so, be not, poor Soul, amazed at this great change of Company
at Death: For it is but as dying Doctor Preston said, I shall change my Place,
but not my Company.

Return therefore to thy Rest, Oh my Soul; for God will assuredly deal
bountifully with thee; So that Death will bring a Goodnight to thee here, and
a good Morrow hereafter.

The End of The House of Weeping
The House of Weeping,
SERMON I. The certainty of a Dying Hour.
HEB. 9. v. 27. It is appointed unto Men once to Dye, but after this the
Judgment.
Dearly Beloved,
I Am now about to speak of that which will shortly render me unable to speak;
and you are now about to hear of that which will also shortly make you
incapable of hearing any more, and that is Death. It will be but a little while
before Death will cause both the Speaker to be Dumb, and the Hearer to be Deaf.
Oh that I might therefore this day, speak with that seriousness, sensibleness,
and suitableness unto you, as considering the time draws on apace, when I shall
be Silenced by Death, and never more have an opportunity to speak one word unto
you. And Oh! that you might Hear this day with that diligence and reverence, as
considering that after you are once Nailed down in your Coffins, and covered
with the Dust, you will never hear one Sermon more, or one Exhortation, or one
word more, till you hear these words pronounced by the great Judge of the Quick
and Dead, Surgite Mor^ui, and v^nite ^d Judicium; Arise ye Dead, and come ye
unto Judgment. What is said in my Text, as it is likely you have often heard it
with your Ears, so now you may see it accomplished, It is appointed unto all
men once to dye. Death has long since come into our Nation, and has summoned
many to make their appearance in another World; yea, you know that Death has
already entered into our Streets, and has not been afraid to step over our
Threshold, and to seize upon those that have been standing round about us; yea,
it has come into our very Bed-Chambers, and has suddenly snatched away those
that have been lying in our very Bosoms: so that we have had warning enough of
the near approaches of Death unto our selves, and without doubt some of us have
had the Sentence of Death within our selves, (as the Apostle speaks;) and
therefore it is high time for you and I seriously to consider what is said in
my Text, It is appointed, etc.

Something we shall briefly speak now in order to the explanation of the words,
that so you may once more hear (before you feel) the meaning of them; It is
appointed or enacted by the Court of Heaven; Statutum est, it is a Statute or
Law (more firm and certain than the Laws of the Medes and Persians) which is
never to be repealed or abrogated. We are not therefore telling you of what
may, but of what must inevitably come to pass. It is appointed unto Men, that
is as much as to say, unto all men, (...), it is an indefinite Expression, and
so is to be understood of all the same kind, without some special exception
from this general Rule. And indeed such an exception there is to be found in
the Scripture; for, says the Apostle, We shall not all Dye, but some shall be
Changed, in a Moment, in the twinkling of an Eye; So that this general Rule in
my Text is to be understood with an Exceptis excipiendis: There shall be some
at the end of the World, who shall not pass under Death, but yet they must pass
under a Change, which is thought will be equivalent unto Death. But for the
present time and according to the common Method and course of Providence, no
Man or Woman has any ground to expect that they shall escape the Stroke of
Death; for it is appointed unto Men, that is, unto all Men, once to Dye: Death
is a sure Striker, it never misseth, and is certain to have its blow, and it
will strike home, it will hit the Nail on the Head, and it will smite down
every one that stands in its way; whether Poor or Rich, young or old; it will
no more spare him that wears a Crown upon his Head, than him that carries a
Spade in his Hand, as the Poet elegantly expresses it:

Pallida Mors aequo pulsat p^de
Pauperum tabernas, Regumque Turres, etc.
And the Scripture speaking of Kings, uses this Expression, I have said you
are Gods, but ye shall dye like Men: So some have thought Kings to be no less
than Gods, when they have seen them sitting upon their Thrones; yet it will
appear that they are no more than men, when they shall be seen lying in their
Tombs. But what is the meaning of the Phrase to Dye? (...). I can assure you if
you know not yet, it will not be long e're you will know the meaning of it: The
Philosopher describes Death thus, Est privatio Vitae, ob Animae separationem a
Corpore: As Spiritual Death is the Separation of God from the Soul, so Temporal
Death is the Separation of the Soul from the Body; When those two (the Soul and
Body) which have like Twins, dwelt lovingly together under the same Roof, must
be parted asunder, and enjoy no more sweet and intimate Communion one with
another, till the time of re-unition at the General Resurrection. (...), This
is that which must once be done, every one must here take their turn, and that
is indeed to be turned off from the Stage of this present Life, into the bottom
of the Grave: And though this happens to some at one time, and to others at
another time, yet first or last, it will happen unto all once. The Greek word
((...)) which signifies Death, is taken from a word which signifies extendere,
and indeed Death stretches out it self so far, that no Man can live out of the
reach of it. As surely as thou wast once Born, so surely shall thou once Dye;
and though this is but once to be done, yet seeing it will be done to the
purpose, it should be more than once thought on beforehand; yet one serious
thought of once Dying, and of what will come after, will certainly deaden the
Soul as to the Actings of Sin, and quicken it unto the Actings of Grace. Let me
but ask you this one plain Question, and your own Conscience shall be the Judge
in the Case: Could thou still remain a Drunkard or a Swearer, if thou did
but once seriously consider that thou must once Dye? or could thou so eagerly
set thy Heart upon the empty, lying and dying Vanities of this World, did
thou but once seriously consider that thou must once; (and it may be before to
morrow) be taken out of this World? or could thou neglect the means of
Grace, or delight in Profaness, and slight Seriousness and Heavenly-mindedness,
did, thou but seriously consider that thou must once Dye, and it may be
before ever thou enjoyest another Praying or Preaching opportunity? (...), To
dye is much, and as this must be once done, so there is more to be done than
this, for after this comes Judgment. Whether the particular or general Day of
Judgment is here to be understood, needs no debate, seeing both will certainly
follow after Death. I think there are none but are afraid to look grim Death in
the Face, and therefore Death is called Rex Terrorum, the King of Fears: But
once to dye, and after that is past, that Judgment should pass upon every one,
this is indeed a terrible expression, and may well be a dreadful consideration
unto every one who has no Interest in Jesus Christ; (who has not him to be
his Advocate, who shall then be his Judge.) And this you will certainly find
and feel to be true, whether you fear it or not; for God has appointed it, and
if none can disappoint him, then all must first dye, and after that be judged,
etc.

And thus having Explained the Words of my Text, I shall next show you what
Observation or. Doctrine may be drawn from them, and it is this:

Doct. That it is past all dispute, that all Men must pass through Death and
Judgment.
As for the certainty of Death, you need not look into your Bibles for a Proof
of that; I shall only desire you to open your Weeping Eyes, and let them but a
little while be fastened upon the Dead Corpse that now is before you, and if
afterward you can Question this Truth, I shall say no more to you at present,
but that it will not be long e're others may say of thee, as the Apostle Peter
did to Saphira, Acts 5. verse. 5, 6, 7. compared with the 9. and 10. Verses: And
Ananias fell down and gave up the Ghost; and the young Men arose, wound him up,
and carried him out and Buried him: And his Wife not knowing what was done,
came in; and Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have agreed to tempt the
Spirit of the Lord? Behold the Feet of them which have buried thy Husband are
at the door, and shall carry thee out: Then fell she down straightway, and
yielded up the Ghost; and the young Men came in and found her dead, and
carrying her forth, buried her by her Husband.

The same Bier, and it may be the same Persons which have carried thy
Neighbor, thy Husband, thy Wife, thy Brother or Sister already to the Grave,
behold they stand ready to do so much for thee: and let every one consider with
himself, that he may be the very next in the Town or Family, for whom the Bier
may be fetched to carry him unto his long home. And then as for the certainty
of Judgment, though every one has a sufficient Proof in his own Conscience of
the truth of this, yet for as much as some have ^eared Consciences, and
therefore would put off the evil Day, and say with those, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. And
there will come in the last days Scoffers, walking after their own lusts,
saying, Where is the Promise of his coming? since all things continue as they
were from the beginning, etc. You may therefore Consult these plain Scripture
Proofs, Eccl. 11. 9. compared with Romans 14. 11, 12. For we shall all stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ; yet that is not all, but as it follows,
So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God. 2 Cor. 5. 10. For
we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in the body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. Now when you are about any badness, and doing any evil, I dare
say you never think of this sudden and strict account that you are to give to
God of all your Thoughts, Words and Deeds: But howsoever, we shall next show
you the reasons and grounds, why it will and must be thus, that all must dye,
and that all must come to Judgment. The reasons of the Doctrine then are,
First, We have Gods ( Ipse Dixit) (...), for it. God has said it shall be so;
and if his words be true who is Truth it self, and if he can make good the
words which have once passed out of his Mouth, who is Almighty, you must all
Dye, and after that come to Judgment; and tell me, when God has once said it
that it shall be so, who can say it shall not be so, and make good his words
when he has done? Secondly, All have ^inned, and therefore all must Dye and be
Judged, Romans 5. 12. Wherefore as by one Man sin entered into the World, and
Death by sin, and so Death passed upon all Men, for that (or in whom as it is
in the Original) all have Sinned: in whom, etc. Treason stains the Blood, the
first Man Adam having sinned, and all that were in him, (as we all were)
deriving Guilt from him, so we must all come under the same Penalty of Death,
which he by sinning made himself and his Posterity obnoxious unto. Thirdly, The
Justice and Mercy of God requires it should be so; for as God will openly
manifest his Justice by the Punishing of unbelieving Sinners, (who in this Life
have escaped Punishment by the hands of Divine Justice) so he will openly
manifest his Mercy in the Pardoning and Saving of all Believers (who have
seemed in this Life to serve God without Reward.) You may read to this purpose
at your leisure, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. compared with Matthew. 25. 31, 33, 34,
41. Though now there seems to be little difference between the Godly and the
Ungodly, between the Righteous and the unrighteous, between those that serve
the Lord and them that serve him not; yet then it will be a plain Case, that it
was better to be a poor Believer, than a rich Unbeliever; then it will be put
out of all doubt, who was the wisest, and who shall be the happiest Man,
whether he that preferred Christ before the Creature, or he that valued the
Creature more than Christ: yea then will appear a great difference between the
Sanctified and the Glorified: though the Sanctified were happy in enjoying of
God on Earth, in having Communion with him in Duties and Ordinances; yet will
the Glorified be more, yea most happy, when they shall fully and perfectly
enjoy immediate Communion with God, without the use of all means, according to
the Philosophical Maxim, Finis nobilior est mediis; The principal ultimate End
is more excellent in it self, and more desirable and valuable than the Means
conducing unto the End: But this you that have feared, loved, obeyed and served
the Lord in this World, will most understand in the World to come.

We shall next come to make some brief USE of the Doctrine: and the USE is
Fourfold.

1. Of Information. 2. Of Reprehension. 3. Of Consolation. 4. Of Exhortation.
1. USE of Information.
And we may* hence be Informed; that if it be certain (both in Scripture and by
common experience) that all must dye, and after that be Judged; then it argues
gross* Ignorance for any one to think, that it is possible for him to make such
a Covenant or agreement with Death and Judgment, that they shall not come near
him. Indeed such Atheists and Fools there have been, as the Scripture speaks,
and it is likely some such there may be amongst us. But has God appointed that
thou must once dye, and afterward come to Judgment? Then what art thou, Oh
poor Worm, that thou should once Dream that thou can null or make void
this Ordinance and Decree of Heaven? Shall the weak Earthen Vessel, (as the
Prophet speaks) rise up against the Potter, and say, Now I am made, I will
not be broken in pieces? or do thou know how to bribe Death, that it may
always stand at a distance? If any shall think that he may escape Eternal
Judgment, let me desire such a one to make sure how he may escape in the first
place Death: for if thy old sinful Companions (to whom thou have sometimes in
thy Cups spoken thus desperately) shall see that thou can not Ward off the
Stroke of Death, they will not have any reason, or thy self, to believe that
thou can put by the Day of Judgment. The Hebrew word (...) or (...), which
signifies Death, is from the root (...), which signifies to dye surely, or to
dye suddenly, which fully intimates the nature of Death unto us, which is
always sure and often sudden. He that lives the longest (if any may be said
to live long) must dye at the last; and he that lives most Years, lives but a
few Minutes or Moments in respect of Eternity; and upon this consideration
Methuselah, which was the longest Lived Man, was indeed but a short Lived Man:
It was good old Jacob's Answer unto King Pharaoh, when he asked him how old he
was, Few and evil (says he) have been the days of the Years of my Pilgrimage;
and Job tells us, that Man who is born of a Woman, is but of few days: in the
Hebrew the Expression is ((...)) short of Days; Winter days are the shortest
days, and indeed the Life of Man is but a short Winter day, as it follows,
short of days and full of Trouble. This Life is but a momentaneous Life, and
yet Ex hoc momento pendet aeternitas: as short as our Life is, yet we have a
great work to do (namely the securing and seeking the Salvation of our Souls*)
and if this work be not done before our time be done, we shall be undone to all
Eternity.

2. USE of Reprehension.
And it serves justly to reprove those who being convinced in their
Consciences, and knowing very well, (even as well as the Preacher can tell
them) that they cannot possibly escape either Death or Judgment, yet do they
never prepare for Death, or once think how they may stand in the day of
Judgment. Read what is written Psalm. 14. 5. The ungodly are not so, and
therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment: If God himself knows who
shall be Damned, and who shall Perish for ever and ever, this will be the case
of all unrepenting and unbelieving Sinners; as the Scripture says, Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish; and whosoever believes not, shall be
Damned; and yet it may be, thou art so far from Repenting and Believing (though
Death may be very near thee) that thou do not know to this very day, what
saving Repentance or a true justifying Faith is. It may be necessary for you to
think on Job's Question, Man gives up the Ghost, and where is he? or whither
goes his Soul when it is once gone out of his Body? Is his Soul gone to Heaven
or to Hell? into everlasting Happiness, or into Everlasting Misery and
Torments? It will be worth the while to make this Preinquiry of the future
Estate of thy Precious and Immortal Soul. It is related of Saint Gregory,
Bishop of Neo-Caesarea, that he blessed God for this great Mercy, that when
first he undertook that great Charge upon him, he found not above seventy
Believers, and when he left them, he had not in all his Jurisdiction so many
Unbelievers. It will be a Crown of Rejoicing to every good Minister that can
say so much, and much more cause of rejoicing will every one have to himself,
who can prove himself to be such an one in the great day of Judgment; but
Unbelievers, as they must shortly pass under the Pangs of Death, so they must
next expect to pass under the Pains of Hell, if God knows what will become of
them after this short Life is ended.

3. USE of Consolation.
You that are Believers, you must also expect to pass through Death and
Judgment, but yet this will be a great and sufficient ground of Confidence and
Comfort unto you, that Death shall meet you without a Sting, and you shall have
boldness in the day of Judgment, upon the account of Jesus Christ the
Righteous, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57. I cannot say that any Believer shall not
pass under a black Cloud, or that he shall not Walk through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, but this I can say, as once did Athanasius, concerning the
Persecution which was under the Emperor Valens, Nubecula est, and cito
transibit: You shall but come under a little Cloud, and when that has once
passed over your Heads, you shall find and feel the Light of his glorious Face,
who Sits upon the Throne Shining sweetly and warmly upon your Souls.

Last USE of Exhortation,
And that in a word or two, is this: Oh live as Men and Women that know, and
certainly believe that you must once Dye, and after that come to Judgment. It
is an excellent Character that is given of Origin, Quemadmodum do^uit sic
vixit, and quemadmodum vixit sic docuit; that is, he Preached as he practiced,
and he practiced as he Preached; he Taught as he Lived, and he Lived as he
Taught; such a Preacher is indeed sent of God, who having first read his Text
in the Pulpit, others may afterward read the Exposition of it in his Life and
Conversation: And so I say unto every Hearer of me this day: Do you talk as you
walk, and do you walk as you talk; even like those that know and believe, and
consider that they must shortly, and may suddenly pass through Death and
Judgment.

Such a Consideration would, I am sure, put you upon new Thoughts, new
Resolutions, new Discourses and new Actings: shall I say of any of you that
hear me this Day, that you do not believe or think that you must once Dye, and
afterward come to Judgment? I dare not say so of any of you; yet this I will
say, if you do verily believe so much, it will soon appear in your Expressions
and Actings.

For all such that shall enter into Heaven, Heaven must first enter into them,
and they do here lead a Heavenly Conversation, who shall Live in Heavenly Glory
hereafter.

Amen.
The EJACULATION.
OH Lord our God, in thee, and by thee we live, move, and have our being: As
thou did at the first breathe into Man the Breath of Life, and he became a
living Soul; so when thou shall be pleased to command that Breath again out of
Man's Body, then will he presently become a dead Carcass; and so short is the
Life of Man, that many times he does but Cry and Dye, yea sometimes his Mothers
Womb does prove his Tomb, so that he does not once Cry to tell the World that
he did once Live.

Neither is the Thread of Man's Life at any time Spun so strong, or drawn out so
long, but at one word of thy Mouth it is soon snapt in two: Seeing therefore we
do but Live to Dye, we beseech thee (Oh Blessed God) let us Dye to Live; let us
live well, that so we may dye well; let Death never surprise us unlooked for,
or unprepared; nor let it ever seize upon us in an unconverted unregenerate
State while we live, that so when we Dye Corporally, we may live Spiritually
and Eternally with thee in a State of Glory.

Good Lord, let us not so live as to be ashamed to Live any longer, or to be
afraid to look grim Death in the Face, when it comes to separate our Souls from
our Bodies, and to summon our Souls to make their appearance before the great
Judge of the Quick and Dead. Let us with thy Servant Job wait all our appointed
time, until our Change does come: indeed it will be our greatest Wisdom to
wait for Death, which always waits for us, and to expect that at all times,
which will come at some time, and may come at any time.

Let us Pray, and Preach, and Hear, and so spend our time, as those who know
and consider that all they do, they do it for Eternity, and we shall never have
but one cast for Eternity: Heaven and Glory is here to be won or lost for ever.

Blessed God, thou have taught us in thy Word, that it is better to go to The
House of Weeping, than to the House of Feasting, for that is the end of all
Men, (and thou have said That the Living will lay it to Heart:) Oh Lord, we
have this day been at the House of Mourning and Weeping, and we have seen the
end of one, yea, of many of our Friends and Acquaintance, within a short space
of time, (and in the Death of our Friends we may read our own Death) and yet
shall not we who are left behind them in the Land of the Living, lay these
awakening Instances of Mortality to Heart? shall we hear and see daily our
nearest and dearest Relations giving up the Ghost, and departing out of this
World into another World; and yet shall we once think that we shall ever live
to enjoy the Treasures and Pleasures of this present evil World? But seeing,
Lord, this World is a dying World, and all its glory is a dying glory, let our
Minds and Hearts therefore be set upon the Glory of Heaven, which is a never
fading Glory: Oh did we believe and consider how much better a Believers future
Estate will be, than his present State is, then should we think that Time is
too long before we do, and that Eternity will be too short when we shall enjoy
our Gracious Redeemer upon his Throne of Glory: Let us ever live as those that
have one Foot in the Grave already. Thousands and Millions, yea innumerable
Millions of Thousands are gone to their Graves before us, and do we think, that
we that are but enlivened Dust, animated Shadows, dying lumps of Clay, can keep
our dying Bodies from being a Feast for Worms, or keep our Souls from being
turned out of their Tenements of Clay, from seeking new Lodgings ^n another
World? Oh! let us therefore every day be looking into our Graves, and
familiarize Death unto our Thoughts, before it comes; let us consider how many
signal admonitions thou do daily give us of our approaching end; Is not every
Distemper and Sickness of Body as it were a little Death, and a fair Warning to
put us in mind of our last Change? The Gray hairs which are here and there upon
our Heads, the deep wrinkles which are engraven upon our Foreheads, the loss of
Teeth, the Dimness of Sight, our Deafness in hearing, our Palsie-hands, our
feeble trembling Limbs, and the frequent Sight of seeing Friends laid out in
their Winding Sheets for Dead, and carried to their Houses of Clay, the silent
Grave, are Circumstances and Symptoms serving to remind us, that the time draws
near wherein we must Dye, and that our departure is at Hand: Let us therefore
live as dying Men, and let us dye as Living Christians; let us set our House
and our Heart in order, remembering the Text, It is appointed for all Men once
to Dye, but after this the Judgment.

SERMON VI. All Men both good and bad shall arise to Judgment.
ISA. xxvi. xix. Thy dead Men shall live together, with my dead Body shall they
arise: Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy d^w is as the dew of
herbs, and the Earth shall cast out the dead.
I might spend an hours work in delivering unto you the several opinions of Men
concerning the meaning of these words; I find such difference among the Learned
about the Interpretation thereof.

Some would have them to bear this sense: That the Prophet by (the earth
raising up of her dead signifies) the delivering of Gods people, the Jews, who
being trodden on, and oppressed by their enemies (as dead) should have a
resurrection: that is, a reparation of their decayed Estate; they should have a
time of refreshing; even as the Dew makes the leaves to spring; that is, they
should have a time of deliverance.

Many other Opinions I might recite unto you: But I will not trouble you with
them at this time: But because there is not one word in my Text, but may very
well fall upon the common place of the Resurrection (as Junius and Tremellius
Hyeron. August: Lyra, and all the most judicious Interpreters have well
observed) I reduce whatsoever may be spoken of them to these two heads: either
to the Resurrection of the dead in Christ, or to the Resurrection of those
which are contemners, and despisers of God: both which, as the Nothern Rivers
have many turnings, yet they all meet in the main Ocean: so the Elect, and the
Reprobate (though there be main difference, and discrepancy betwixt them) yet
they all meet in the general Resurrection, all (I say) must arise: The Godly
unto everlasting glory; to eternal bliss and happiness: The Wicked, to
perpetual Torments and Condemnation.

Having thus set the letter of my Text in tune, and showed you the general
drift and scope of the words: I proceed now to the particular meaning, and
interpretation of them.

Thy dead Men shall live, etc. As there has been a Death; so there must be a
Resurrection. Gods people, that have dyed from the beginning of the World, or
shall die to the end of it hereafter, are but as the seed sown in the Earth:
They must endure rottenness for a while: but being ^owen in dishonor, they
shall rise in glory. The miseries they endured in this life, ^hey were but the
tokens and forerun^ers of Death: But let them hope, yea, ^et them know
assuredly, that there will ^ome a day of refreshing: when God shall say unto
these bones, I will cause ^reath to enter into you, and you shall ^ive, and
will lay sinues upon you; and will cause flesh to grow upon you; and will cover
you with skin.

Mr. Gualter says, that Nulla Consolatio ^nta est, quanta mortuorum
Resurrectio. ^here is not any Consolation of a Christian ^o great in his life,
as the Resurrection ^f the dead. And therefore it cannot be, ^ut that it must
needs be a most singular comfort, to know that one day there shall be a
Resurrection.

Now that there shall be a Resurrection of the flesh again at the last day, is
a matter most clear, and manifest, for the Argument of the Resurrection follows
a Majori ^d minus: from the greater unto the less. Did God make Bodies again,
when they are turned into Dust, which is a less matter*

Man's Estate in this life is unsettled: All the miseries, calamities, troubles,
and vexations of this life, as they have their Recessus, so have they their
Accessus also. As they have a departure, so have they a return: But after the
Resurrection there shall be no sorrow any more, nor vexation, or anguish: God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; so all grief from the hearts, and
sorrow from the souls of such as are his, even in the Kingdom of Salvation.

I hope there is no mist before your eyesight, but that in my Text (as in a
most clean glass) you may behold all this, which I do tell you. For herein is
presented unto your view a most perfect proof o^ the Resurrection to come: and
how you may behold the persons that shall appear at the Resurrection, most
lively and excellently described unto you.

Thy dead Men shall live, etc.

See here are many Members make the whole Body: nay, the whole Body of my Text
is but as one Member: I find a repetition, and reiteration of the same things
again.

As the whole Sea is but water, and the east drop thereof is water: so the
whole bulk of my Text is but Resurrection; and every small limb, and lineament:
every part, and member thereof, that is Resurrection also.

For first, thy dead Men shall live: with ^y dead both shall they arise: What Is
all this but a manifest proof of the Resurrection?

Secondly, Awake and sing: Who? with the dead: nay, dead carcasses* You that
dwell in dust; under-earth Citisens: This ^s a Resurrection also.

Thirdly, The earth shall cast up? What? why, the dead: which is a probability,
and necessity of the Resurrection, what ^hen is here but a manifest, evident,
and ^pparent truth of the Resurrection? But ^et, though every part of my Text
seems to be a proof of the Resurrection; Yet as it is said of Bees that they
are not so like, but there is some accident, by which they may be known one
from another: so although all those members of my Text be alike, yet they have
some discrepancy, by which they may be known one from another.

Shall any demand? when the elect, and chosen people of God have a dissolution
of Soul and Body: Whether their hope of rising any more dies with them? I
answer no: The dead shall live. I, but they will reply, They shall live: that
is true, their spirit shall live: but as for their Body that shall never rise
at all: But I tell you in the second place, they shall have Corpora resurrecta:
with their Body shall they rise.

But, they will further ask by whose authority shall they rise? who shall be
the Author of that Resurrection? I tel^ them, here is an Awakc: the voice of
the Lord shall cause it: with the sound of the Trumpet they shall be raised.

But yet one may further object: gra^ they shall arise, and with their Body:
an^ awake: better is it for them not to arise and awake: than to rise, and be
raised to misery: But I answer they have, Arise, and sing: the Resurrection
then shall be a joyful end.

But yet, perhaps they will say, show some probability: show us some sign: Why,
behold the herbs, and flowers in the garden show it: The dew is as the dew of
herbs.

If you shall ask me, how they shall arise? Why, The Earth shall cast them out.

The first proposition then shows the entity of those that rise at the last
day. The dead shall live.

The second is an Exposition of the former: With my Body shall they arise.

The third is a Confirmation: Awake: Showing by whose means they shall rise.

The fourth is a Congratulation at their arising: showing the quality of those
that shall arise: They shall sing.

The fifth is brought in as an illustration, or probability showing the
Resurrection: It shall be ^s the springing up of herbs by the dew.

The sixth shows the necessity of the Resurrection, as the conclusion of all.
The Earth shall cast out her dead.

Thy dead Men shall live. These words show the Entity, and Restoration of
life, that shall be unto the dead at the general Resurrection at the last day.

The Dead shall live, says my Text: Yea, I say these Subjects; these Dead;
these Carcasses; this Dust, inveterate Dust; these under-earth Citisens (as I
said before) they shall live, they shall rise again. Though these Bodies have
lain a long time putrefying in the earth, yet this shall not hinder Gods divine
power; but he will raise them up again.

For shall the Potter do what he will with his clay, and shall not God do what
he will?

But it may be objected: First, that these seem to imply a main opposition, or
rather impossibility; that Death, and life should be coupled together. For what
is Death, but a privation of life; a separation of the Soul, from the Body? and
yet not only Dead, but even twice Dead (as I may say) shall live, shall rise
again.

Another objection, or doubt that may arise is this. Walk but some pa^es back
look but to the fourteenth verse of this present Chap. and you shall find that
the Dead shall not live; they shall not rise again. Why, how can this be? what
does the holy Ghost say, yea, and nay; can sweet and bitter water come from the
same fountain? Can sweet, and sower fruit come from the same tree? Shall they
live, and not live again; and yet both true?

For the better clearing of this doubt and the reconciling of these places, we
must distinguish of Life, and Resurrection: for there is a Resurrection unto
glory: and there is a Resurrection unto condemnation.

We must also put a difference betwixt. the Dead: for by (Dead) we may
understand either the wicked, which are Dead ^n sins and trespasses: or the
Godly; which are Christ's Dead.

That saying in the fourteenth verse that *the Dead shall not live, neither
shall rise) ^s to be understood of the wicked, who as he Just (which are meant
in my Text) shall never rise, that is, to glory.

But when it is said in my Text ( Thy ^ad Men shall live) by (Dead) we must
^nderstand the Godly, which are pro^erly said to be Christ's Dead: And thus (by
^hrists Dead) we may understand, first, all those which are dead in the Lord,
such as died in this faith, in this law, and favor: as died Gods children by
adoption and grace. Secondly, we may understand those also; All Martyrs which
have laid down their lives, and shed their most precious blood for Christ's
sake. For all these Dead shall live unto God as we read, Rev. 14. 13. Blessed
are the Dead which die in the Lord. Which indeed is most true, for that Death
is not to be feared which a man dies for Gods cause. For they that die so,
shall be happy out of hand, and free from all labors hereafter: Yea, they
shall be rised unto life, and glory; And have everlasting rest with them in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

True it is that all men must die; both good and bad: Statutum est hominibus
semel mori; It is appointed unto all men to die*

If Death come to attach the Body, there is no supersedeas, nor quare impedit,
will serve the turn.

Death is like that common net in the Ghospel which gathers all into it, both
great and small.

Death is like the gathering Host of Da^ that sweeps all away with him. All
bot^ ^earned, and unlearned: high and low: ^^ich, and poor: do meet together in
^is, that there is one condition of them ^ll as concerning Death.

Though Noah lived five hundred years: ^^ough Lamech lived seven hundred ^venty
and seven years: though Methuselah lived nine hundred sixty and ^^ne years:
Genesis 5. Yet in the Epilogue of ^^eir history, I find that they all returned
unto their Dust.

And whatsoever the Chronicles of the ^ings of Judas and Israel omit (I stand
^t upon it,) yet still I find this recorded them all, that they died, and were
^ried with their Predecessors and Fathers. Death is that Symbolum that must be
paid: ^^en we have eaten and drunk to our ^ntent, the reckoning must be paid.

We soon run the race of our life: Mors ^ima linea rerum; Death is the utmost
of all. Our life it is not unfitly* compar^^ unto a line: for it is linea
circumducta; a line that is drawn round: fluit in lon^; it goes forwards and
about: But the last, it runs to the same point again. ^st we were, and to Dust
we shall return. But what then, is there no fan to purge the chaff from the
wheat, is there no difference betwixt the good and the bad? Do all die alike?
yea surely (Beloved) there is a main difference, read but the 11 of Exodus: and
there you shall find that the Lord puts a main difference between the
Israelites and the Egyptians. So you see there is a difference betwixt the son
of the free Woman, and of the bond Woman: betwixt Jacob, and Esau. For if you
mark my Text, says it not that all Dead shall live again: (but thy dead Men
shall live) meaning Christ's dead. Those which die in the Lord, and for the Lord
Those which live by his Spirit, and die in his favor. I say, which live by his
Spirit, for there are some which live by the Spirit of Christ; others which
live by the Spirit of Antichrist: Some live by the spirit of the Lamb; others
by the spirit of the Dragon. But the Promise in this place ^ made unto the
Godly: These are they which shall live, and which shall rise again.

But you will demand the second time what then, shall not all rise? Shall not
the wicked rise, as well as the godly? Yet surely, they shall rise also: But
yet not there is a difference between the risin of the one, and the rising of
the other. For the righteous they shall rise; they shall spring; Nay they shall
live indeed: being branches planted by the fountain of living water: who feed
at the very Tree of life: They, I say, shall rise as the Sun in the morning
more fairer, and brighter to shine, as the Stars in the Firmament for ever and
ever.

But with the wicked it shall not be so: they shall rise, but it shall be to
their pain; their body shall rise, that is, they shall have their full, and
complete Body: but their fire shall be never extinguished. This fire shall not
extinguish them, neither shall they extinguish this fire: but shall be as
Salamanders of Hell fire for ever more.

They shall rise indeed, but it shall be to their ruin, and their greater
ruin; and their great fall? like as Jesabel got her up to the top of a high
chamber to be cast down out of the window thereof.

Or, as Lucifer to go to mount above God, and to be tumbled down into Hell.

Or, as Herod to be richly apparrelled, ^o be exalted high in a throne; and to
all down eaten with worms. This of the Resurrection of the wicked; they shall
not rise unto glory as the godly: but their rising shall be to perpetual
torment, and condemnation.

I come now to my second Point, and Proof or Argument of the Resurrection Awake
and sing. Where the Prophet by a figure called a Prosopopeia, brings in ou^
Savior Christ speaking thus unto the Dead; Awake and sing. Who? why you that
dwell in dust.

This is but a Pariphrasis mortuorum: and A Paraphrase of the Dead (as we call
it* for Awake and sing you that dwell in du^^ it is as much as it he had said,
Awak^ and sing you Dead.

But what shall the Dust make answer says David? The dust an Element of
uncircumcised Ears. Will thou show a mira^^ to the Dead; or shall the Dead rise
up a^^ praise thee? Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave, or thy
faithfulness in destruction? Who shall praise thee in the pit? etc*

Behold (says Abraham) I am but Du^ and Ashes, and yet dare I to speak un^ my
Lord? And yet we know that howbeit he was made of Dust, he was ^^ then turned
into Dust again, and if ^ could say so being not then Dust inde^ (for then he
was alive) how much rather might he have said, shall I speak to my Lord? shall
I make answer, when I am turned and resolved into Dust? But methinks I hear
some say. This seems to be a matter altogether impossible, that those that
dwell in Dust should awake and sing, for how, or by what means shall they that
have lain a long time putrefying in the grave, and afterward been resolved
into Dust, how shall they be raised, or how can they awake, and sing? Surely
(Beloved) it is not the sound of a trumpet, nor the voice of any inchaunter, or
the sound of any waters that can do this: Neither is it the roaring of a Lion;
or the voice of Thunder: all these (I say) cannot do it, but it must be the
voice of the Lord, even that powerful voice of his that must do it. This is the
instrument by which he shall cause this earth to hear, I say, it is the power
of his word, which is more powerful than the rod of Aaron, or the cup of
Joseph, in the which he devined, that must do this. Yea, it must be that word
whereby he made the Deaf to hear: the Dumb to speak: cleansed the Leapers:
which say to the Devil, be thou dumb thou foul Spirit, and he shall forthwith
be dumb*

Awake, and sing, etc.

But how shall they awake, who have no previledge above the Idol Baal, that
they cannot wipe off the Dust from their own faces? Where are those cristal
glasses which were so long since broken? how shall they awake? how shall these
windows be opened, which have so long since been dampened up with clay? how
shall they sing the song of the Lord in a strange language? how shall they
sing? Where are these harps of their tongues? these well tuned Cymbals? Surely
they are hanged up in the willows, while they lie in the land of forgetfulness,
yet the day shall come (and it is not far off) when all mountains, and graves
shall open; nay let earth, earth, earth, earth upon earth keep down man; yet
shall he arise* and God of this despised, unvalued, and contemptible Dust,
shall build up the walls of his celestial Jerusalem.

Again, it is the powerful voice of God, which sends men to judgment. For
before I end this Point, I must speak of the quality as I noted before. For
here also I find a main difference between the godly* and the wicked. For
howsoever to awake ^ay belong to both, yet to awake and ^g; I find this proper
only to the godly. These blessed ones shall not only awake, ^ut when they are
awaken, they shall ^g, that is, they shall awake to their ^y.

But, what then, shall the Wicked sing ^^so? No surely: For as one observes
^ery well, Musica in luctu importuna: Mu^ck in mourning does not well agree.
Their hearts shall lie heavy within them: ^ut the Elect, when this day shall
come, ^ey shall lift up their heads: for the ^^me of their Redemption draws
nigh. They shall not rejoice only, but they ^^all leap, and exalt for joy at
the sight of their Savior, with the applause of their ^ands they shall make
Heaven, and Earth ^ ring.

Then shall these ever Blessed say to the ^icked: Non vobis pars, non sors
nobiscum: ^ou have no part, nor lot of inheritance ^ith us. Your joy shall be
turned into hor^ur, and dread: your singing into howl^^g: your clapping of
hands into gna^ing of teeth. Begone from us: depart ^om us; for you have no
skill of the tune ^^ the Lamb.

And thus you see that howsoever to arise, and to awake may belong unto the
Wicked, as well as to the Godly, yet they have no part, nor portion in this joy
mentioned in my Text, which shall be at the general Resurrection.

For thy Dew is as the Dew of herbs, and the Earth shall east up her Dead.

Here we have two kinds of proofs of the Resurrection. The first an Inducement
a Probability, or Comparison drawn from the course of Nature. Thy Dew, etc. The
other is an Argument very necessary, forcing, strict: Yea of great constraint.

The Earth, etc. The one allureth surely, and gently to bring forth. The other
implies a necessity; a matter that needs must be: as who should say, the Earth
must be as a weak stomock that certifieth she must cast up what she has taken
down into her bowels.

The Similitude then stands thus: For thy Dew is as the Dew of herbs, That is
even as the morning dew sweetly, and softly falling on the herbs does make them
grow, and spring up: Even so shall the spirit, and power of the Lord gently
call for these Creatures, and they shall as it were spring out of the Earth.

But say the Earth will not render when the Lord shall call? say she plead
Antiquity of possession so many thousand years? yet she must render; and though
she does render, yet does she yield up that which never was her own, she must
cast them up.

That there shall be a Resurrection then, even things in Nature probably do
show it, Consider but the Phoenix of Arabia of whose Cinders when she is dead,
another bird springs up, Consider but the Lillies of the field how they
sprout, and spring out, being allured by the deaw, and the sweet influence of
the Sun in the Summertime; Look upon the Herbs, walk into your Gardens, see
the fragrant flowers, whose roots in the Wintertime ^ye hid under Earth as if
they were dead, yet in the spring revive and flourish again in a most beautiful
manner.

Though the Oak and the Elm in the Wintertime having cast their leaves ^eem
dead, yet there is a sustance in them.

Though winter has blurred and disfigured the beautiful face of nature, and
robbed her of all comeliness, yet when the Spring returns, God spreads his
Carpets of Egypt on the Earth, and clothes it with a Joseph's party colored
Garment, diverse storks of most beautiful flowers do spring up and appear, There
is a bare Corn thrown into the Earth, yet it comes forth with a goodly green
stem, and billows, and plants upon the Ground.

Nay the flies, and those other ludi* bria naturae, scorns of nature, howsoever
they seem dead to us in Winter, lying in holes, yet in the Spring time revive,
Nay faetus in utero, the birth in the wom^ shows it; which lies as an heavy
lump, seeming dead unto us and ye comes forth alive. These all are
probabilities that there shall be a Resurrectoi^ a Goal delivery of those
Prisoners which the Earth now holds fast. The Earth she cast out the dead.

If these soft instillations, and shower will not prevail; if this deaw will n^
serve to call forth this dead; God has flood (as my text says) The Earth she
cast them up, If she be unwilling to let h^ Prisoners come forth, God shall
ra^sack her bowels, and make her to vo^ up what she has swallowed. God she say
to the Earth Give, and to the Sea Restore; so that not only the Earth but also
the Sea married to the Earth, and having her arms folded about her lovers
bosom, she I say the Sea, (as Jonas his Whale) shall cast up those in her
belly; Nay, has any beast swallowed up any bit of the Body of Gods Saints and
chosen, they shall find that they have swallowed a morcel too hard of digestion
which shall trouble their stomachs very much, they shall cast it up also.

Would you know the reason hereof in a word? The truth of this matter is proved
by an Argument, drawn from Gods power, for as the Prophet speaks, shall ^he
cause to bring forth, and shall he himself be ^^arren? shall he cause to
travail, and shall be not bring forth? Suerly God, which by his power has made
all things, and given the Earth, and all things that are ^o serve for man's use,
shall not he (when that day comes) cause the Earth to cast up ^er dead? he
that has made man of nothing, shall he not be able to raise him again out of
the dust at the last day? far be it from us (Beloved) from thinking so; but
rather let us steadfastly believe, and be persuaded, that it is impossible that
the Earth should hold down man; God commanding it to cast up; and therefore,
though the ship, and the ship-master: the Wagganer, and the Waggan: I mean the
Soul the governor of the body, and the body the receptable of the Soul may be
severed and parted for a time by death, yet they shall one day meet, the one
shall return to the other, these whom the Almighty has put assunder, these can
he join again at his pleasure. For if he has done the greater, then need we
not doubt but that he is able so do the less. He which has made the body of
nothing, doubtless is of power sufficient to raise it out of the dust at the
last day.

To come then to some use. Here then first of all is matrer of great
consolation to the Children of God, in that the Love will raise them up again
to Glory at the last day. The consideration whereof may comfort us exceedingly
under the Cross. For so many are the troubles, and afflictions that the
Children of God are subject unto in this life, that if they did not call to
mind, and remember that there shall be a Resurrection, that a time of
refreshing shall come when they shall be freed of these miseries, and these
tears shall be wiped from their eyes, they would never be able to hold out. For
if the Children of God had hope only in this Life, they were of all men most
miserable; but here is there comfort, that though they have their Hell in this
life, they shall have their Heaven hereafter; all which is most lively set
forth in this Text.

When Rachel had born six sons to Jacob, she said God has endowed me now with
an exccllent Dowry, now will my husband dwell with me, because I have born him
six sons.

Beloved, could we not be content to live, yea, to dye with this sentence which
has born, and brought unto us these six places of consolation? suerly it is a
sentence much to be embraced, for it offers exceedingly great comfort unto us.

Wherefore let us often meditate of it: let us often have recourse unto it:
yea, let it be as a Sanctuary, or place of refuge for our troubled Souls to
fly, and resort unto, when as we shall be pressed with any misery, or
affliction whatsoever.

The EJACULATION.
Good Lord, if it be true, that at the last day the Earth shall Cast up all
that ever it received into her cold embraces, and if it be likewise true, that
all the wicked shall then be doomed down to Eternal Torment, let us then be
preparing our selves for that day, that we may be able to receive it with joy
when it comes, and that we may hold up our heads with comfort, to think that
our Redemption draws nigh; Let not Death find us out of our way, because such
a surprise would be attended at last with a miserable Resurrection, Let our
conversation be in Heaven, from whence we expect that our Savior should come,
that he may change our vile Bodies into the likeness of his own most Glorious
Body, Good Lord, let our hearts and souls be there now, where we hope our*
Bodies and Souls shall be for ever hereafter; and let our choicest Affection,
and chiefest Meditations be set, early set, and earnestly set upon that state
which will be our Eternal State; that so we may be everlastingly happy both in
body and soul, when our bodies, shall arise to Judgment at the last day.

SERMON VII. A Glorious Resurrection for them that sleep in Jesus.
ROMANS viii. xi. He that raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your
mortal Bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you.
THese words, Beloved, are a most comfortable Conclusion, showing and declaring
the certainty of the Resurrection of the Bodies of the Saints to an Immortal,
glorious, happy life at the last day, wherein we may more particularly note.
First, The Action Quicken. Secondly, the Object, or rather (if ye will) the
Subject that shall be Quickened, your mortal Bodis. Thirthly the Author, or
Efficient Cause (God) deled by an effect, the raising up of Christ. Fourthly,
the means whereby God shall quicken them, by his Spirit. Lastly, the Condition
of the Persons, whose mortal Bodies shall be quickened. And they are such as
have the Spirit of God dwelling in them, as appear by the last words, By his
Spirit that dwells in you.

The Text thus opened, and the sense thereof being made clear, and manifest,
the main Point that offers it self to our considerations is this.

Doct. That there shall be a Resurrection of the Bodies of the Saints at the
last day. This for the general.

And this is a matter very comfortable to the people of God, that there shall
be a Resurrection: Nulla consolatio tanta est, quanta mortuorum Resurrectio,
says Mr. Gualter. There is no consolation of a Christian so great in this life
as is the Resurrection of the Dead, and therefore Tertullian calls it the
Christian's hope, and so it is indeed; For if in this life only the Christian
had hope, he were of all Men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19.

Toll spem Resurrectionis, etc. and resoluta erat observantia nimis pietatis;
Take away the hope of the Resurrection, says Chrysostom, and you take away
all care of Piety, and Godliness out of the World.

And indeed, what makes the Husbandman to take such pains in tilling, manuring,
and sowing of his ground; but the Hope of a joyful harvest, wherein he shall
reap the fruits of his labors?

What makes the Labourer to subject himself to so much pains, and labor all
the day long, but that he hopes for a time of rest wherein he may be refreshed?

What makes the liberal and charitable Man disperse his wealth unto the Poor,
but that he looks for a day of payment, wherein he shall be sure that what he
has laid out, shall be paid him again, Prove. 19. 17.

But all this is the Resurrection unto the Sants of God.

For first, it is as the Christians* Harvest: For though he have Sown in tears
all his life time by reason of the continual afflictions thereof, yet he shall
be sure to reap in joy at the Resurrection.

And this did animate, and encourage them to undergo any torture of the Body,
rather than they would be subject to the rack of an evil Conscience.

And this may serve as a strong ground of Comfort unto us, if God at any time
should call us to suffer for his Name (for as yet we have not resisted unto
blood.

This is an honor that God does not vouchsafe to all his Saints) say this may
serve as a notable means to support us in our sufferings, that though Tyrants
may rage never so much, and Persecuters may wrack their malice upon the Bodies
of the Saints (as they did in the Primitive Church (for they cast the Bodies of
the Christians to be devoured of wild bests, nay they threw them into Rodanus,
thinking, (thereby to hinder their Resurrection) yet I say, let them do their
worst, and yet they can by no means disapoint the Christian of his hope of a
glorious Resurrection.

So that a Christian in the midst of his sufferrings, may say of his tormentor,
as once Socrates speak of his Accuser, occidere me potest, ledere vero non
potest. Well may he kill me, but he shall never ill me. For though Persecuters
kill the body, yet they cannot berieve a Christian of that Happiness, and Glory
that God has given unto the Souls in the day of the Resurrection. This is to
be thought on as a means to support our languishing Spirit.

Then it will be unto him a day of sweet rest, wherein he shall be refreshed
after all his painful labors, and travails taken in the service of God, which
will be no less comfortable unto him, than the gladsome morning to a sick man,
which has tossed, and turned up and down wearily all the night long.

And it shall be the Christians pay day also (so our Savior calls it, Luke 14.
14.) because then (he having his reward, with him) will come forth of every
ones debt, and reward their goodness with glory.

And such a day Beloved, there shall be unto all the Elect, and dear Children
of God. As they have had a day of Death: so shall they have a day of
Resurrection.

All the people of God that have died from the beginning of the World, or shall
die to the end of it hereafter, are but as the seed sown in the ground, they
must endure rottenness for a while: But being fowen in dishonor, they shall
rise in honor: being sown in corruption, they shall rise in glory.

All the mysteries they endured in this Life, they were but mortis praeludia,
the tokens, and forerunners of Death: but let them hope, yea, let them know
assuredly, that there will come a day of Refreshing (as St. Peter calls it,)
Act. 3. 19. when God shall say unto these dry Bones, I will cause breath to
enter into you, and you shall live, and will lay sinews upon you, and will
cause flesh to grow upon you, and will cover you with skin.

That there shall be a Resurrection, even things in nature probably do show it.
And therefore St. Paul sends the Atheist to learn this lesson from the seed
that is sown in the ground. O Fool (says he) that which thou sowest is not
quickened except it die. 1 Cor. 15. 36.

And the Ancient Fathers send us to the Phoenix of Arabia (out of whose
Cinders, when she is dead another bird springs up) to learn the self same
thing.

And indeed the Phoenix is a notable Emblem of the Resurrection: and we want
not ressemblance thereof daily before our eyes, considerer but the trees of the
forest, the flowers of the garden, and the Herbs of the field!

We see that the Tres in winter being despoiled of their Leaves, the Garden of
the Flowers, and the Fields of the Grass, do seem utterly to die, and to
perish: But when the spring time comes, they putting on their green Carpets,
and particoulered Garments, like Joseph; they all wax as fresh, and flourishing
as ever they were before: So the Body, which during the Winter of many Ages is
deprived of her beauty, and turned to rottenness, does at the Spring time of
the Resurrection not only recover its former Beauty, but obtains a far more
excellent Glory.

Nay, the mutual vicissitude, and intercourse of things: the setting, and
rising of one and the same Sun; sleep, and waking: labor, and rest: night, and
day: the day that dies into the night, and yet revives again, and is with his
former brighteness revived to the whole World: all these are probable Proofs of
the Resurrection.

But besides these, we have infallible testimonis, and Arguments proving the
certainty of it.

For first, this was shadowed in holy Scripture by sundry Types, and Figures.
So God showed this in a vision to Ezechias, when he saw a field full of dry
Bones receiving at Gods Comandment, Flesh, and Nerves, and Fire. See Ezech. 37.
to the 12. For this was not only a Prediction of the Deliverance of Israel out
of Babel; but also a typical confirmation of the Resurrection of our Bodies.

So Jonas being restored alive out of the Wales belly (wherein he had lain
three days, and three nights) was a type of the Resurrection.

Secondly, that we should not doubt of the certainity of it. God has given us
examples of many particular Persons raised already from Death to Life, both in
the Old and New Testament. As of the Widows Son of Sarepta raised up by Elias,
1 Kings 17. 22. Of the Shunamitish woman's Son raised by Elisha, 2 Kings 4* 34,
35. And of a certain man at the touching of Elishas bones lying in the
Sepulcher, (13. 21.) These in the Old Testament.

And in the New Testament, we find not only that our Savior Christ did raise
himself by his own power never to die any more, but that he raised others also:
as the Rulers Daughter: the Widow of Naim's Son, and Lazarus of Bethania, when
he had lain four days putrefying in the Grave; yea, many also at his Death: not
that they might die any more as Lazarus, and the rest: But rather (as some
think) that they might accompany him into Life eternal, by whose power they had
risen, that they might be undoubted Testimonis of his quickening power, and why
then should any think it impossible for God to raise all the Bodies of the
Saints to Life at the last day?

Thirdly, we have divine Testimonies in in the Scripture proving the* necessity
of it: Thy dead Men shall live (says the Prophet) even with my Body shall they
rise* Awake and sing ye that dwell in Dust. For thy deaw is as the deaw of
herbs, and the earth shall cast out the Dead, Isa* 26. 9. See also concerning
this matter, Dan. 12. 2. Job 19. 25, 26.

So our Savior also in the fifth of John 28. 29. speaks plainly to this
purpose, The hour shall come (says he) in the which all that are in the
Graves, shall hear his Voice, and they shall come forth that have done good,
unto the Resurrection of Life: but they that have done evil, unto the
Resurrection of condemnation.

Fourthly, the faith of the Resurrection is grounded on the power of God, who
is omnipotent, with Whom is possible that which with Men is impossible, Who
calls those things, which are not, as though they were, Romans 4. 17. With Whom
nothing is impossible, Luke 1. 37.

And the Argument drawn from Gods power, it follows, A majori ad minus: from
the greater unto the lesser: For did God make our Bodies of the Dust* and
cannot he (think you) repair our Bodies again, when they are turned into Dust,
which is a less matter? Qui potuit id quod non erat producere, ut aliquid
esset, id quod jam est, cum ceciderit, restituere non potuerit? says Cyril: He
that could bring out that which was not, and make it to be something, shall we
think that he* cannot raise up again, that which now is, after that it has
fallen? Far be it from us (Beloved) to think so; but rather let us steadfastly
believe that he that made us of nothing, is as able to restore us from nothing:
For what though this may seem strange unto us? as indeed it is a matter very
wonderful (the Budding of Arons Rod, Numb. 17. 8. was very admirable; but the
raising of our Bodies is more wonderful,) yet let us remember, that it is God
that does this. Consider the Author (says Augustine) and take away the doubt.

Fifthly, the Justice of God requires that it should be so. For it is a
special part of Gods glory to show forth his mercy on the godly, and his
Justice upon ^he wicked, in rewarding them according to their works, as the
Apostle says, God will reward every man according to his works, to them, that
by continuance in welldoing seek glory, and honor, and immortality, Life
eternal: but unto them that disobey the truth, that be contentiouss, and obey
unrighteousness, shall be indignation, and wrath, Romans 2. 6. But in this Life
God rewards not men according to their doings; and therefore Solomon speaking
of the estate of all men in this world, ^aith, All things come alike unto all,
and here is the same condition to the Just, and Unjust, etc* Ecclesiast. 9. 2.
Nay, which is more: here the Wicked flourish, and the Godly are afflicted. The
Ungodly have hearts ease, and all things at will: whereas the Godly are
oppressed with all kind of miseries, and are as sheep appointed for the
slaughter. It remains therefore, that here must needs be a Resurrection after
this Life, that the righteous man obtain a reward of Gods free mercy, and the
wicked Man be justly condemned ^^ everlasting pain, and misery.

Lastly, it is apparent from the Resurrection of Christ. For he arose not f^
himself as a private man, but in our roo^ and steed, and for us; and if he the
hea^ be risen, then the members also mu^^ needs rise again.

For we are united, and kint unto him by the bond of his spirit, and his
Resurrection is a sure pledge of our Resurrection, ^ being risen as the first
fruits of them the sleep, see 1 Cor. 15. 20. ^o come then ^^ some use and
application.

The first Use of Confutation.
This may serve in the first place ^^ confute the Adversary and gainsayer ^
this Truth, and Doctrine.

The Atheist scoff at the Resurrection to come, esteeming death to be the l^^
end of all things. The Philosophers cou^^ed it a strange thing, and hard to ^^
believed. Let Paul preach of the Resu^rection to come, and he shall be count^^
but a babbler for his pains; see Acts. 1^ 18. he shall be esteemed, and reputed
^^ Festus no better than a madman, see Ac^ 26. 24. The Saduses they denied the
R^surrection to come. Hymenaeus, and ^hilaetus not discerning the spiritual
Re^^rrection from the body, said The Resur^ection was past already, see 2 Timothy
2. 18.

The Thiliasts abusing that place Rev. ^0. 5. Dream of a Resurrection but for a
^^ousand years: During which time, they ^magin that Christ shall reign with the
^aints here on earth in great pleasure, and ^elights. All which are justly
confuted ^^om this very place.

The second Use of Instruction.
Secondly, this should teach us not to ^ourn immoderately for the dead, as men
without hope, since when Christ comes again, ^e will bring them with him, see 1 Thessalonians. 4. ^4.

This should teach us also to strengthen ^ur faith in this Article of
Christianity, ^ere being nothing that seems more im^robable to the eye of
humane reason, ^en that the body should be raised again ^ life, after it has
lain along time rotten and putrified in the grave.

3. And that we may be fully assured ^ereof, we must do three things, 1st. We
^ust pray to God for his spirit as the pledge ^it. 2dly. We must labor for a
true and lively faith in Christ who is the Resurrection, and the Life, and in
whom, whosoever believes he shall not dye; John 11* 26. 3dly. We must be sure
of the first Resurrection, that the Body be dead i^ respect of sin, and the
Soul be raised up t^ a lively care of newness of life. Shall we believe that
they will raise our bodies, an^ shall we doubt whether he will give us foo^ and
raiment; and bring us out of danger, and distresses, far be it from us! Bu^
rather let us believe his promiss though there be never so great unlikelyhood
o^ the accomplishment in respect of outward means, and apearance. Thus di^
Abraham the Father of the faithful. Rom* 4. 18. and so must we also if we would
b^ reputed the true children of Abraham.

The third Use of Consolation.

Thirdly, this may serve to comfort u^ against the natural fear of Death, for
^^ there be a Resurrection of our bodies after this life, then Death is but a
passage* or middle way from this life, to eternal life.

If a beggar should be commanded t^ put off his old rags that he might be
clothed with rich and costly garments; would ^e be sorry because he should
stand naked ^ while till he were wholly to be stripped ^f his rags? No suerly,
Well, thus does ^od when he calls a man to death he, ^ds him put his old rags
off him, and ^orruption, and be clothed with the rich ^obe of Christ's
righteousness, and im^ortal glory, 2. Cor. 5. 1.

Your mortal Bodies.
Doct. 2. In that the Apostle says, ^at the Lord shall quicken our mor^al
bodies, (that is the same that now ^^e mortal by reason of sin) I note in the
^ext place to our comfort. That the same ^odies that now we carry about with us
shall ^^ raised up, and none other for them, the ^^me I say in substance, and
the same in ^umber.

Sim. For as the wheels of a Clock being ^ken in sunder, and the joints thereof
^ade clean, when it is joined, and set together again is the same in number: so
^^all the Essence, and substance of man's ^ody be all one, which (though
disolved* ^^all again be joined together of God, and shall rise again, the
infermities thereof ^eing done away.

The Lord keeps all the bones of the Saint (says David) there shall not one
of them b^ broken, Psalm. 34. 20.

And the holy man Job is bold to say: my self shall see him, and mine eyes sha^
behold him, and none other for me, Job. 1^ 27. see also concerning this Matter
i^ 1 Cor. 15. 25.

Reas. 1. Because God has consecrate^ bodies of the faithful to be temples
unt^ himself, 1 Cor. 3. 17.

2 Because Christ whose members w^ are, and to whose body our bodies shall be
conformed, recieved again that body which he carried about with him, Joh^ 2. 19.

3 Because every one shall bear in hi^ body that which he has done, be it goo^
or evil, 2 Cor. 5. 10.

4 The justice of God requires, it should be so; For as Turtullian very well
to this purpose, Absurdom est, and Deo indignum ^^ haec quidem car^ lanietur
illa vero coronetur* It stands not with the Justice of God tha^ our body should
be torn in suffering, and another should receive the crown.

Shall the body of Paul be scourged, and another for it be glorified? shall
Paul ^ear in his Body the marks of the Lord Jesus, and not bear in the same
body the crown of his glory? far be it from us Beloved, that we should think so.

But though the same body shall be raised, yet we are to know; that new
faculties shall be added to it. I say it shall be endowed with new qualities in
the Resurrection. For as the Apostle says, God shall change our vile Body,
that it may be made like unto his glorious body. Philip. ^. 21. Now if any
desire to know wherein this glory shall consist; I answer briefly in these six
things, which shall befall our bodies at the Resurrection.

First, the first is Immortality: so as they can never die again; for as the
Apostle ^aith, this mortal must put on Immortality, 1. Cor. 15. 53.

Second, Is Incorruptibleness. They shall never be inclined to putrefaction, or
any corruption. So says the Apostle, this corruptible must put on
incorruption, see the place before alleged.

Thirdly, Spiritualness: It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
Body, says the Apostle, verse. 44. Spiritual I say n^ in essence, and
substance: but in cond^tion, or quality. See verse. 4. 17.

Fourthly, Strength. For it is sown weakeness, but shall rise in power. verse.
43.

Fifthly, Perfection. For in the Resu^rection all defects, and deformities shall
be done away, and the body shall arise i^ perfect beauty.

Sixthly, Shining, and Splendour. For the Bodies of the Just shall be clothed
wit^ heavenly glory, and divine Beauty a with a robe. Then shall the Just Men
shin^ as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father Matthew. 13. 43. And they that
turn many a righteousness shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.
3.

1. Use. Confut. This may serve first to confute the Maniches, who affirmed
that the Soul should put on new bodies i^ steed of the former. By that means
making a creation of new bodies, not a Resurrection of the same.

2. Instruct. This should teath us to be willing to lay down our bodies; for
why should any be unwilling to die, that is assured he shall rise again to an
immortal glorious, and happy Life.

Secondly, this should teath us to take ^eed how we lay down our bodies, seeing
^hey shall be raised to Immortality at the ^ast day, that we sin not against
them ^s those do that defile their bodies, that should be prepared to
Immortality, with ^horedome, drunkenness, and such like ^ncleanness: but rather
this should make ^s careful to possess our Vessels in holiness, and in honor,
as the Apostle speaks 1 ^hess. 4. 4. And to use our bodies, and ^very part, and
member of them as in^^ruments of righteousness of Gods glory, and of doing good
in every one of our ^laces, and callings whereunto God has ^alled us.

For why Beloved? Consider of it I be^eech you! We must one day see the Lord
^ith these very eyes, that now we carry about us: and how shall we be able to
^ook on him with defiled eyes? How then ^all the adulterous eye, the coveteous
^ye, the envious eye, the haughty, and ^ornfull eye, be able to look God in ^e
face?

We commonly say of a man that has ^one some vile notorious wicked act, that
^en take notice of, and cry shame upon* he will never be able to show his face
amongst honest men again; and how do we think that a wicked profane wretch: a
filthy adulterer, a common blasphemer, a beastly Drunkard, a cursed Usurer, or
the like, shall be able to show his face before the most great, and glorious
Majesty of God? who has pure eyes, and cannot behold iniquity and sin? Every
one, be he never so wicked, and vile (whether he will or not) must one day
appear before the Lord face to face.

Then those eyes of thine, that now perhaps are full of Adultery (as St. Peter
speaks) and cannot cease to sin: The ears that now are opened to receive false,
and scandalous accusations of thy brethren: the mouth that now can power out
nothing, but cursing, and bitterness; rotten, and filthy speeches: the hands
that are now defiled with filching, stealing; and taking of cursed interest
money; and the feet that are swift to shed innocent blood, shall come before the
glorious presence of the Lord.

Then that body that now thou abusest to filthiness, and have made a monster by
thy disguised attire, and wearing of new fangled fashions, shall be presented
before the Lord, the righteous Judge of all the World. And then thou will wish
that the hills, and mountains would fall on thee and cover thee from the
glorious presence of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb, but all in vain.

O that every Wicked wretch would consider of this, and lay it to heart, that
these very eyes, and no other, shall one day see the Lord, that so he might in
time prepare himself to meet the Lord. For assure ourselves, that without
holiness, no man shall ever see the Lord to his Comfort, Heb. 12. 14.

And since the bodies of the Saints shall be raised up to such glory (as has
been showed) this should teach us also to live here on earth as those that do
believe, that there shall be a glorious Resurrection.

Thus we should be steadfast, and unmovable in all conditions of life.

We should live as men devoted wholly to the service of Christ, whose we are
both in life, and Death.

We should strive to abound in the work of the Lord, rousing up ourselves to
the care of well doing, studying to keep a conscience void of offense toward
God, and man. Nay our minds should run on that time, our hearts should be
affected with it, and our conversation should be in Heaven.

We read of St. Hierome, that this saying ran in his mind, and sounded always
in his ears: Arise ye dead, and come unto Judgment. And this always to be
sounding in our ears, and our thoughts ought to run upon it, to this end, that
while we have time we may prepare ourselves to meet the Lord at the last day.

3. Use of Consol. Thirdly, here is matter of consolation to all the children
of God; and the consideration thereof may serve to fill the hearts of Gods
chosen with most sweet, and comfortable refreshings, and that in many regards.

For first, whereas the Godly are subject to manifod afflictions, and miseries
of this life, here they may find a sufficient stay to quiet, and calm their
minds, if they consider that after this short life is ended, there will ensue a
glorious Resurrection. Thus we see the holy man Job in the greatest extremity
of all his misery, made this the Comfort to his soul, that one day he should
rise again in which he should enjoy the glorious presence of his Redeemer: See
Job. 19. 26.

Secondly, it may Comfort the Saints of God against the persecutions of the
body; yea, and death it self. We read of the Saints of God in the days of
Antiochus, that they were racked, and would not be delivered, and why so,
because they looked for a better Resurrection, Heb. 11. 35.

No doubt but they counted the Redemption from the rack a thing much to be
desired; yet, they knew that the Redemption from Hell, and the Resurrection to
eternal life was much more to be sought for, without which condition they would
not be delivered, and no marvel, for what though the rack might rend their
flesh, and disjoint their Lims? yet they knew well enough, and were fully
assured that at the Resurrection, all should be conjoined, and perfected again.

The EJACULATION.
GOod Lord, let us when we die, sleep in Jesus, that we may obtain a Glorious
Resurrection, when this World shall have an end; for though we are, as we have
heard, but enlivened Dust, gilded pieces of Clay, sinking Bubbles, and dying
shadows, yet these dying Bodies of outs shall at the last day (when the Trumpet
shall* sound arise ye Dead) enter into Eternal Glory, or Everlasting Peace: Oh
let us consider how glorious a Creature man was, when he first came cut of his
Creators hand, for thou did make him but a little lower than the Angels, thou
did crown him with Glory and Honor, thou did make him the very Summons and
Epitomy of the whole World; he was made the very Master-peice of all thy works,
the very Flower and Miracle of Nature; he was even then a small draught of the
divine Nature, and a bright Beam of the increated light: But how Glorious
indeed will he be, when he shall be raised at the Resurrection, and shall shine
as a resplendent Sun in the Firmament of Glory. Good Lord, therefore let us not
be strangers to the relish of Heavenly things, but let us live as those who
hope to be Heirs of Eternal Joys when this World shall have an end. Let us look
up to God, and let us look out to Eternity, let us consider that our hastening
Time will soon have an end, and we shall never more be trusted with another
space of Time to prepare us for Heavens Glory. Oh, let us not therefore set our
affections upon any things, which we can carry no further with us then the
Grave, but let us live in a daily serious belief, and in a joyful expectation
of that endlest Glory, and that Glorious Resurrection, which will be the
Portion of all those, who live in the Love, and die in the Faith of our Lord
Jesus, for thou have promised a Glorious Resurrection to them that sleep in
Jesus.

AN ELEGY Upon the Reverend, Mr. John Dunton, Author of the House of Weeping.
LIKE a bright Lamp, whose mounting Flame aspires,
To its Original, those Heavenly Fires:
Till the fomenting Oil consume, it turns
Twinkling to Ashes, and no longer burns:
So his Divine^ Soul, though closed within
An interwoven case of flesh and sin,
Mounts to its pure Original, and strives
By lighting others to amend their lives.
'Till nature quite extinct with fixed desires
Of Heavens Enjoyments, his blessed Soul expires.
Farewell dear Sir, had powerful art a Charm,
To snatch your Life from Deaths surprising Arm,
We would not fail to re-imbarque your Spirit,
Gone to possess what Glorious Souls Inherit
In highest bliss; (that sweet Christaline Iste.)
Where God and Saints for ever, ever Smile.
It Is lovely to be Humble, Faithful, Kind,
This was the Emblem of the Authors mind.
Who Is soared aloft (leaving Earths dusty Round,
Where sweetest Joys in one ill hap are drowned,)
To those Harmonious Orbs, where now he sings
Melodious Anthems to the King of Kings,
Where, in the glit'ring Rank of Angels bright,
He took his place with radiant Sons of light;
His race was long, and nimbly he did run,
To reach Heavens Glory by that Setting Sun,
(Which guilds the Spheres, which garnisheth and braves
The lower World) which scores us out our Graves,
And being gone to th'place his heart designed,
He here has left a Weeping House behind;
Which dolefully, like a loud Passing Bell,
Rings out to The World the Authors last Farewell
O. O.
An EPITAPH upon the Author of this Book, Mr. John Dunton, who was Interred in
the Chancel at Aston-Clinton, November. 9th. 1676.
IN spite of the Grave, bright Saint thou shall survive,
Our grateful Age will keep thy name alive:
Heavens great Ambassador, on Earth thou'st lain,
The League being struck, Heaven called thee home again.
Yet Death has left of thee* Great Soul, behind
So much, that we our loss shall not quickly find.
Nor can thy Name a dull Oblivion know,
Thy Works will an Eternity bestow.
Over Time and Fate thou wilt an Ovation have,
And now do Triumph over Death and Grave.
S. A.
FINIS.
Deathbed THOUGHTS.
The PROEMIUM.
BUT Oh my Soul! What ails thee to be thus suddenly backward and fearful, no
Friend has more freely discoursed of Death in speculation; no Tongue has more
extolled it in absence. And now that it is come to thy Bedside* and has drawn
thy Curtains, and takes thee by the hand, and offers thee service, thou
shrinkest inward; and by the paleness of thy Face, and wildness of thine Eye,
bewrayest an amazement at the presence of such a Guest. That Face which was so
familiar to thy Thoughts, is now unwelcome to thine Eye. I am ashamed of this
weak irresalution. Whitherto have tended all thy serious Meditations? What has
Christianity done to thee, if thy fears be still Heathenish? Is this thy
Imitation of so many worthy Saints of God, whom thou have seen entertain the
violentest Death with Smiles and Songs? Is this the fruit of thy long and
frequent Instruction? Did^^ thou think Death would have been content with
words? Did thou hope it would suffer thee to talk, while all others suffer?
Where is thy Fath? Shall Heretics and Pagans give Death a better welcome than
thee? Has God, with this Sergeant of his, sent his Angels to fetch thee; and
art thou loath to go? Rouse up thy self for shame, O my Soul! and if ever thou
have truly believed, shoke off this Unchristian diffidence, and address thy
self joyfully for thy glory.

All motions tend to rest. Return then to thy rest, O my Soul! for God has
dealt bountifully with thee.

But Lord spare me a little before I go hence and be seen no more, that my
DEATHBED THOUGHTS may be all employed in the Contemplating of that Eternity
into which I am now a launching.

Sect. 1. The Daily Remembrance of Death.
HAppy is he, who always, and in every place so lives, as to spend his every
last moment of Light, as if day were never to return. Epictetur most wisely
teaching this; Death, says he, and Banishment, and all that we look upon as
Evils, let them be daily set before thy Eyes: but of all most chiefly Death. So
shall thou think upon nothing that is too low, nor too ardently covet any thing.

Miserable diminitive Mortals, wherefore do you teach long Hopes? Wherefore do you
undertake such a vast heap of Business? That shall be perhaps to Morrow, a mere
Spark and Ashes. Walk curiously, O Man! That dismal Goddess continually hovers
over our Heads; and waits for the last Sands of our Lives Hourglass with an
unwearied and never-sleeping Eye; and wilt not thou watch after her?

What e're beginning has, an end does fear.
We all must go,
Old EAcus within those shades below
Whips on the Moments that protract us here.
Nor can any Age struggle with Death. As soon as we are Born we are subject to
that Tribute; and are the Stipendiaries of Death.

-- When first our trembling sight
Beholds the dazzling Beams of unknown light.
Then we begin to die. The same Death menaces the Queen, that threatens the
Handmaid. Therefore believe every day that shines to be thy last. Say every
Evening, this day I stand at the Gate of Eternity.

Sect. 2. The remembrance of Death is a powerful Remedy against all Sins.
THE serious remembrance of Death shakes off all sense of pleasure, and turns
Honey into Wormwood. The Expectation of Death, says Chrysostom, suffers us not
to be sensible of the Delights and Pleasures we enjoy. And indeed what is it
not able to do, when considered not only in the Extremities of the Fingers, and
as it were in the Hair, but over the whole Body. Death spares no Age, nor no
Degree of Dignity. Here dies a young Man, there an Infant, there an old Man.
Another by Poison, or a Fall, another by a slow Rhume, another by a quick
descent of Humor; here lies another oppressed with a mighty Shower, or the
Waves, there lies another struck with Thunder. Among so many doubtful, so many
various, so many sudden Accidents, what security, or what mind to sin among so
many Incertainties? Therefore, since we daily die, think upon the Hourglass,
whether the old fashioned one running Water, or the new one running Sand. Do ye
not find that by dropping of the Water, and the passage of the Sand the upper
Glass empties and the lower Glass fills? Consider that it is so with Life,
every moment something slides away, the present Life empties, and flows into
another. Nothing is here safe; not the Hour of the Hour, nor the Moment of the
Moment. Happy he, to whom every day is the last; more happy he, to whom every
Hour; most happy he, to whom every Moment is the utmost period of his Thoughts.
He will abstain from the wickedness of his hands who believes every Hour
decreed, every Moment his last. O vain Hope! How many do thou deceive? How
many, to whom thou promisest old Age, do thou cut off in the midst of their
Course? Believe therefore that may happen to thee, which happ'ns to many. How
many has Death prevented in the midst of their wickedness, and cut off half the
Crime? How many fall with a revengeful Mind, though with an Innocent Hand? How
many snatched away in the attempt, have received the reward of their Impiety?
Many in the very Moment of a wicked Action begun, have been forced to leave
their ill designs unfinished. What if thou should be in the number of those?
What Hour or Moment is more certain to thee than to another? Now who can expect
a Crime from such a Thought, as with the Crime expects Death, and with Death,
Punishment. No prudent Man plays or sports in the midst of a Storm. No Man at
the brink of a Precipice meditates mischief. No Man is merry unarmed in the
midst of his Armed Enemies. More stupid is he, whom the perpetual fear of
Death, when every Hour is doubtful, every Moment uncertain, dares those things
that procure an unhappy Death to Eternity. O Fools! Whither do we run to be
punished for ever? Wherefore do we not follow the Council of the Son of S^ras?
In all thy work, says he, remember thy last, and thou shall not sin.

Sect. 3. The end of a good Life is all.
Out of Seneca.
TELL me, my Dear Seneca, whom Pliny with an Elogy to be envied calls the
Prince of Learning, tell me what thou think of Death, especially immature?
Heark'n Youth, give ear complaining Age; like a Comedy, so is Life, which it
matters ^ot how long, but how well it is acted. It imports not where thou
make an end, leave o^ where thou please, only put a good period. No other
is the Opinion of Epictetus. Remember, says he, that thou art the Actor of the
Fable, as the Poet directs. If short, of a sh^^t; if long, of a long Fable. No
otherwise, said Varro, They live not best, who live longest, but they who live
most uprightly. Most plainly so it is; it matters not, where, when, or how we
end. When God please; we must die; but let us put a good period to our Lives.

Sect. 4. All Men, no Men.
Out of Arbiter. Heu, heu, nos miseros, quam totus, Homunicio nil est. Alas!
What miserable things are we,
The frame of Man is only Vanity.

VErily so it is. But alas by much the more miserable, by how much the less we
acknowledge our selves to be so. The whole little Man is nothing, as the
ancient Satyrist well observes; but if I may dare to say so, then he begins to
be something, when he knows himself to be nothing. O Man, know thy self and be
wise. For Death equals Lillies with Thorns.

O miserable and vain Men! What are we? Learning and Fame are Smoke. We Dust,
that mere Opinion, the other Wind, And we that are alive, vigorous and
flourishing, shall shortly be reduced to say, We have lived. This single Exit
all Men make. Our Life decreases by increasing; and the very day we breathe in
we divide with Death: For every day some part of our Life is diminished. As the
last drop does not empty the Glass, but what flowed out before, so the last
moment does not alone bring Death, but only consummates our Being.

Sect. 5. Mortals are of one little Day.
THE day Lilly is a Flower, whose Beauty perishes in a day. There is also a
Bird haunts the River Hypanis, called Haemerobios, or the Bird of one day;
ending its Life the same day that it begins; dying with the dying Sun, and
traveling through the Ages of Childhood, Youth and Old Age in one day. In the
Morning it is hatched, at Noon it fluorishes, in the Evening it grows old and
dies. But this is more to be wondered at in that winged Creature, that it makes
no less provision for one little day, than if it were to live the Age of a Crow
or a Raven, To this little Animal the Life of Man is most fitly to be compared.
It inhabits by the River of gliding Time: But more fleet than either Bird or
Arrow. And often only one day determines all its Pomp, oft-times an Hour, and
as often a Moment. Wherefore then do we think of Years and Ages, frequently no
longer had then Flowers, or the shadows of Flowers; or then any thing, if any
thing can be, more short and fading than those Flowers.

It is a wonder greatly to be admired, that this swift Brevity of Life should
be divulged by all the Prophets, be confirmed by the Writers of all Ages, and
yet that miserable Men should be deaf to all their Exclamations. Ezechias cries
out by Isaiah the Prophet, From the Morning till the Evening thou shall
conclude my days. The Royal Psalmist cries out, My days have past away like a
shadow. Josiah the King cries out, Man springs up like a Flower, and is trod
down, and vanishes like a shadow. Behold Man is like a Bubble; all thy Life is
the flight of a shadow. Can thou then dream of any Mansion or Abiding place
here? Wherefore do thou covetously scrape together; wherefore do thou
scrape and rake, as if to live the Age of Nestor. Death is at thy Back, Thou
shall go hence, before thou fear thy departure, unless thou art afraid
betimes. Make haste, Eternity is at hand.

Sect. 6. The same is delivered with greater Confirmations.
THE Life of no Man is otherwise than short* but the shortest of all is their
Life, who forget what is past, neglect the present, and are in no fear of the
future. Most excellent is the saying of Job, they that saw him shall say, where
is he? Like a fleeting Dream he shall not be found, (yet Dreams are vain, and
nothing swifter than flight) he shall pass away like a Nocturnal Vision. My
days, says he; were swifter than the Racer, they fled away and saw no good,
(this said the most Wealthy of Men. They took their flight like Birds carrying
Apples, like an Eagle flying to his prey. Because we are of yesterday and
understand nothing; because our days are like a shadow upon the Earth. Truly,
our days are but a shadow upon the Earth; and there is no delay. We Banquet and
Revel, and there is no delay. We indulge to sleep, and snore till Noonday, and
there is no delay. Prodigal of our time, we go to Plays, and invent voluptuous
ways of Idleness, and yet there is no delay. Our years pass, glide and fly
away. No Man has so much the favor of Heaven as to promise himself to Morrow.
Thus while we dream, we pass to Eternity, either the Celestial or the Infernal.
It was an excellent saying of Suidas, Oh Mortal; but of one little day, that
only know the present, not foreseeing future things, consider that Eternity to
which ye are going.

Sect. 7. The Hope of Long Life and VVishes are vain.
WHat shall I do, said the Rich Man in his Heart, because I have not room for
the Fruits of my Land? I will do this, I will pull down my Barns and Build
bigger. Miserable Soul, alas! Thrice miserable! Will thou enlarge thy Barn? To
Morrow the Grave shall be thy Habitation; Oh that it prove not Hell. This Night
thy Soul shall be taken from thee, and who shall inherit what thou have scraped
together? Thy Virtue, if thou had any; thy Vices shall go with thee. Neither
shall thou take with thee any other Companions hence* Most like the Fate of
this Rich Man was that of Senecio in Seneca, who considering this fleeting Life
of ours which we enjoy at Mercy, Every day, says he, every hour shows us what
nothings we are, and by some new Argument still admonishes us of our frailty,
while they compel us covetous of Eternity to look after death. Senecio
Cornelius, a Roman Knight, a Man of extreme sragality, no less careful of his
Patrimony than of his Body, when he had sat all day till night by his friend
sick a Bed beyond all hopes of recovery, when he had Supp'di well and cheary,
was taken with a violent Distemper the Quinsey, scarcely retained his Breath
within his contracted Jaws till Morning, so that he deceased within a few
hours, after he had performed all the Duties of a sound and healthy Man. He
that turned and wound his Money both by Sea and Land. He that left no sort of
Gain un^ry'd, in the very Flood of his Prosperity, in the very Torrent of his
over^lowing heaps expired.

Thus it happens that when men most spend their time in toil they spend their
last Breath: Like the Winds, that when they blow most vehemently, loose their
force, most quickly then allayed, when they have raged most furiously. The most
admirable Job, almost by way of complaint interrogates the Diety; And do thou
so soon cast me down? Learnedly Tertullian and truly thus, says he, The
Sailing Ships, free from the Capherean Rocks, not tossed by Tempests, nor tumbled
by the vast Waves, but steering with a flattering gale, making swift way, on a
sudden with one* sh^g* loose all their hopes of safety. No other are the
Shipwracks of Life, and the Calm Events of Death.

How stupid a thing then is to dispose of Age? We are not then Lords of to
Morrow. How great is* the madness of those that commence long hopes? I will
buy, I will build, I will sell, I will appoint, I will bear honors, and then I
will repose my old Age in seizure. But all things, believe me, are uncertain to
the Fortunate. No Man can promise himself any thing of what is to come. What we
enjoy s^^ps through our hands; that very Hour a chance may happen and
disappoint all. We propose to our selves long. Voyages and tedious stays e^re
we return to our Country: Affairs of War and Council, slow Actions, prolix
Business, a long S^ri^s of Toil, Labor, and Employment. We begin Suites,
hoping the long Life of Nestor, and the Fortune of Metellus. When in the mean
time Death is at our Elbow, and from the Precipice of Life throws us headlong
into the Sea of Eternity.

Sect. 8. Man is Dust.
REmember Man, that thou art Dust, and to Dust shall return. This sad Verse our
Mother the Church repeats, when she covers the Heads of her Children with Dirt;
and admonishes ^s of our Mortality, at the same time, when we least think of
it. Herein the Church imitates the Eagle. Who when she would encounter the
Heart, shakes the dust which she has gathered upon her Wings into the Hart's
Eyes, and fixing her Talo^s between his Horns, she claps his Head with her
Wings, till he fall headlong from some Precipice. Thus the Church surprises Man
running into forbidden Impiety, as it were in the mid way, and strews his Head
with this Funeral Powder. The same thing says the Priest at the Interment of
the Body. Remember, says he, O Man, that thou art but Dust, and to Dust thou
shall return. This he speaks not to the Dead Corpse, but opportunely and in its
place to those that stand about the Grave.

Philip of Macedon was wise in this, who daily admonished by that Verse, (
Philip, thou art but Man) carried himself more moderately.

But the Cranes teach us these things. They when they keep their watch in the
Night, hold a Stone in one of their Feet, which falling from them when they
fall asleep, accuses them of carelessness by the noise. The same Birds when they
cross the Sea, carry Sand in their Throats. The Gravestone taxes Men of
Vanity* and the dust that covers them. The Calf which the Hebrews worshipped
was a Golden one,* but reduced into Powder* Nebuchadnezzar's Image was terrible
to behold, but broken with the Fall of a Stone. The Apples of Sodom are fair to
sight, but being broken they fall to dust. Man swelling in his Pride, boasts
his Fortune and his Riches; yet all his Vanity must be crumbled into Ashes.
This is the beginning of Humane Pomp, and this the end. Therefore do what is to
be done, Eternity is at hand.

Sect. 9. Man truly Miserable.
IT IS hard to say whether Nature be a better Mother to Man, or a more cruel
Stepdame. In the first place one Creature among all the rest she clothes with
the spoils of others. The rest she covers variously with Shells, Rinds, Hides,
Thorns, Wool, Bristles, Hair, Feathers, Scales, and Fleeces. Frunch and Trees*
with Bark, which sometimes proves a double safe. guard against Cold and Heat.
Only Man she produces naked, and throws him upon the bare ground to weep and
wail, while no other. Animal is born to Tears, in the very dawn of Life. No
sooner Man is Born, but he becomes a Captive with all his Members tied and
bound. A crying Creature Lord of all the rest: Yet there, he lies with Feet and
Hands fast Chained. He begins his Life with Capital punishment, only for one
fault, for being Born. What Madness is that in those, who from such beginnings
as these think themselves Born to Pride. The first hope of strength, and the
first office of time makes him like a four-footed Beast. When is Man able to
go? When to speak? When are his Teeth prepared for Food? How long remain these
Symptoms that betray him weak beyond all other Creatures. Now so many Diseases;
so many Remedies, as often vanquished by new and unknown Diseases. We find
other Creatures how quickly they perceive their own Natures, and presently some
swim, others walk, some fly, others creep. But Man knows nothing without
teaching, not so much as to go, to speak, or feed himself: Briefly, he does
nothing naturally of himself, but cry: Only to one Creature crying is natural;
to one Creature Luxury, to one Ambition, to one Avarice, to one Superstition,
to one an Immense desire of Living. Yet is the Life of no Creature more frail,
the Lust of no Creature is more, the fear of none more confused, nor the fury
more vehement. Lastly, all other Creatures live quietly with their several
kinds, they congregate together, and oppose their Enemies: The Lions Fight not
with Lions, no^ do Serpents Serpents bite. Nor do the Monsters of the Sea prey
but upon various kinds; but Man's chiefest Mischiefs proceed from Man himself*

Sect. 10. What then is Man?
IF we believe the Ancients, Man is the Sport of Fortune, the Image of
Inconstancy, the Mirror of Corruption, the Spoil of Time, the Slave of Death, a
walking Sepulcher, the Figure of Frailty, a thin Shadow, a mere Dream, a
Breathing Carcass, a living Death. If thou ask Seneca, What is Man? He will
answer, A weak, frail, naked Body, naturally unarmed, needing the help of
others, liable to all the Injuries of Fortune, the Food of every wild Beast, a
Victim to the Stronger ^^c.

If you ask the Sacred Writers, Man is the Bait of Worms, a Skin full of Dung,
the Sport of Calamity, a Pattern of Imbecility; he is a flying Post, a sailing
Ship, a Bird upon the Wing, a vanishing Smoke, a light Froth, a scale of Envy,
the drop of a Bucket, the turn of the Balance, a drop of Dew before Morning,
the Guest of one day, a Flower, Grass, altogether Vanity, Dust and Ashes,
Emptiness and Nothing.

And yet we little Miserable Animals compile vast Nomenclators full of specious
Tities; we ambitiously desire great Names, and without any prejudice to our
Ears, we hear the Titles of Magnificent, most Illustrious, Happy, Pious, most
Potent, most August, most Invincible, the Best, the Greatest. What can we do
more, unless we should imitate Sapor King of the Persians, in an Epistle, which
he thus began to Constantine the Emperor. Sapor King of Kings, Companion of the
Stars, and Brother to the Sun and Moon, to Constantine my Brother wishes
Health. Or rather, let us borrow Names from the Bisnagentian King, who was wont
to be Saluted the Bridegroom of good Luck, the God of great Provinces, the King
of most Potent Kings, Lord of all the Armies of Horse. The Master and Teacher
of those that understand not how to speak, Emperor over three Emperors,
Conqueror of whatever he saw, Preserver of his Conquests, whom Eight parts of
the World sear; a Knight to whom there is none to be compared, a Vanquisher of
every one that boasts in Strength, the Hunter of Elephants, Lord of the East,
South, North, West, and Sea. All this Peter Irricus relates. Are here Titles
enough? If you please let us add a Series of Eulogies, which the Sultan set^
before his Epistles in this Order. Omnipotent Salmander before Carthage, Lord
of Jordan, Lord of the East, Lord of Bethlehem, Lord of Paradise, Prefect of
Hell, Supreamest Emperor of Constantinople, Lord of the Dry Fig, the Lord by
whom the Sun and Moon steer their Course, Protector of John the first Priest,
Emperor, King of Kings, Lord of the Christians, Jews, Turks, the God's Friend.
In a Style not much unlike to this, Solomon wrote to our Caesar: To Charles the
Fifth always most August Emperor, Solomon his Contemporary, sprung from the
Victorious and most Noble Family of the Ottomans, Emperor of Trebizond and
Constantinople, Lord of the World, and Conqueror of the Earth, etc. What would
ye have more? O truly Splendid Misery? O Ashes and Nothing! O Vanity of
Vanity! Most shameful is that Ignorance, when Man forgets himself to be Man.

Sect. 11. To the Haters of Funerals.
HEnce therefore not Men, but Kites, which though most Rapacious, and always
hungry, yet never taste any or prey upon Funeral Diet. You though most curious
in other things, will hardly be persuaded to touch any thing that smells of the
Coffin or of Embalming. More grateful to you is any Supper under any Tree. than
a Banquet under Yew or Cyprus. All the Preparations of Libitina you perfectly
hate, desiring nothing more than utterly to abolish the remembrance of Death.
But here behold the Delirium that possesses ye, when the Sacred Letters clearly
admonish us, that it is better to go into the House of Mourning than of
Feasting But you had rather do any thing else than piously mourn, and remember
Death. But beware that while ye dread a short mourning, you are not forced to
wait Eternally.

Sect. 12. Our Life is but a Life of Tears.
EVery one of us, says Cyprian, when he is Born, and received into the Inn of
this World, begins his Journey in Tears. Every one may say of himself.

As I began, in Tears I end my Life,
For all my Life is but a Mourning strife.
Thus all begin, thus all Men end their years;
When Born they weep, and Die expending Tears.
Thus in those Tears, as in a Shipwreck found,
In his own Waves each single Man lies drowned.
He Is only blessed that so does pass the Frith,
To have no cause of weeping after Death.
Would thou have an Abstract, an Epitome of all Humane Life? Daniel the
Archbishop and Elector of Mentz in Germany, in a little Book of Prayers wrote
with his own hand these Precepts of Living.

1. Life short. 2. Beauty deceitful. 3. Money flies away. 4. Empire envied. 5.
War pernicious. 6. Victory doubtful. 7. Friendship fallacious. 8. Old Age
miserable. 9. Death happiness. 10. Wisdom, Fame Eternal.
That Heavenly Wisdom that brings us to Kingdoms never destitute, never to be
invaded, eternal.

Sect. 13. God the Comfort of our Tears.
ACknowledge the voice as well of the Comforter, as of the Promiser. With him I
am in Tribulation, he shall deliver me, and I will glorify him. And this
truly, for God is at hand to those that are afflicted in Mind, and will save
the humble in Heart. Concerning these Promises St. Austin has been perspicuous.
Fear not, says he, when thou art in Affliction, lest God should not be with
thee: God is present with those that are afflicted in Mind. He assists in the
Conflict, (consider) who proclaimed the Conflict. God does not so behold thee
striving for the Race, as the people look upon the Chariot Driver. They can
shout and bawl, but know not how to help. They can prepare the Crown, but
cannot afford strength. For Man is but Man, and no God. And perhaps, while he
looks on, he labors more as he sits, than the other in the Contest. God when
he beholds his Wrastlers, assists his Invokers. For the voice of the Wrastler
is in the Psalm. If I said, my foot was moved, thy Mercy shall assist me.
Therefore when thou beginst to be afflicted, summon up thy Faith, and thou
shall know the Virtue of it; for he will not forsake thee. But thou therefore
think thy self forsaken, because he does not deliver thee, just when thou
would have him. He delivered the Children out of the Fire. He that delivered
the three Children, did he desert the Maccabees? Far be any such thought. He
delivered both these and them. Those Corporally, that unbelievers might be
confounded; these Spiritually, that the Faithful might imitate. For the Lord is
at hand to those that are afflicted in mind, and shall deliver the humble in
Spirit. God is above, the Christian beneath* If he would that the high God
should be near him* let him be humble. Great Mysteries, my Brethren, God is
above all things. Do thou exalt thy self? Thou do not move him. Do thou
humble thy self? He will descend to thee. Therefore invoke to thy Aid this most
faithful Assistant; he will be present, at one sigh, so it be serious. And God
shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes; and there shall be no more death;
neither sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain, for the
former things are passed away. Most truly said the same St. Austin, with how
much sweetness does he bewail himself, that prays! More delightful are the
Tears of those that pray, than the pleasures of Theaters.

Sect. 14. Our Nativity our Death.
NOT the end of my Life, says the dying Theban but a more ample and better
beginning. For now, Fellow Soldiers, your Epaminondas is Bo^a^ because he so
dies. For why should we indulg^ to human Grief, or envy the Gods, since they
divide their Immortality between us.

A Nation Bordering upon the Thracians, and i^ Customs agreeing with them, has
this one peculia^ to themselves. That when an Infant is Born, the Relations
sitting about it, weeping and wailing en^ merate the Miseries which the Child
is to endur^ On the other side, when a Man dies, they bury hi^ with Joy and
Exaltation, recounting from ho^ many miseries he is delivered. Deservedly the
Notion claims to it self the Applause of Wisdom who celebrate the Birth of Man
with Tears, a^ his Funeral with Pomp and Gladness. Therefo^ disclaim the
Natural Sweetness of Life that causes Men to act and suffer many shameful
things; and then the end of thy Life will be far more happy than the beginning.
Wholesome was the Doctrine of the second Pliny, Therefore, says he, many were
of Opinion, that thought it best never to be Born, or immediately to die. Thus
Sitenus, being taken by Midas, and asked, what was the best thing could happen
to Man? For a while stood silent. At length, being urged to speak, he answered,
That the best thing, was never to be Born, the next, to die the soonest that
might be.

This I must not omit very wonderful, unheard of, and pleasant in the Relation.
Lodowic Cortusius, a Lawyer of Padua, forbid to his Relations all Tears and
Lamentations by his will. And desired that he might have Harpers, Pipers, and
all sorts of Music at his Funeral, who should partly go before, partly follow
the Corpse, and leaving to every one a small Sum of Money. His Bier he ordered
to be carried by twelve Virgins, that being clad in Green, were to sing all the
way such Songs as Mirth brought to their Remembrance; leaving to each a certain
Sum of Money instead of a Dowry. Thus was he Buried in the Church of St. Sophia
in Padua, accompanied with a hundred Attendants, together with all the Clergy
of the City, excepting those that were black. For such by his Will he forbid
his Funeral; as it were turning his Funeral Rites into a Marriage Ceremony. He
died the 17th of July 1418.

Admirable was the saying of St. Bernard, Let them bewail their Dead, who deny
the Resurrection. They are to be deplored, who after Death are Buried in Hell
by the Devils, not they who are placed in Heaven by the Angels. Precious is the
Death of the Saints, as being a Rest from their Labors, the Consummation of
Victory, the Gate of Life, and the entrance into perfect security. Apparently
said the wise Hebrew, Better is the hour of Death, than the day of our Nativity.

Sect. 15. Death every where.
SEveral miserable People who deem it more convenient to die than live, torment
themselves by what means to rid themselves out of the World. Whether to whet
their Knives, temper their Poison, make use of Ropes, or Precipices; as if it
required so much Ceremony and Labor to dissolve and untye the weak knot that
holds the Body and Soul together. None of these did Coma, the Brother of
Diogenes need. His Soul shut close up in his own Breast found out the way, For
a little study serves to retain that good, the frail possession whereof is
shaken with the least puff of Violence. Death is every where, and lies lurking
in all places and at all times. Wherever thou go thou shall find him
prepared; he is never unprepared, but meets thee at every turn.

But when only Death is enough for one Man to desire, wherefore before the last
Death, do so many Deaths assassinate miserable Man; so that the Question may
not be asked in vain.

If all my Life makes but one little drop,
Why then so many Deaths my Course to stop?
Hear St. Bernard, Let the continual Meditation of Death be thy chief
Philosophy. And therefore variety of Death disturbs thee. Whatever happens to
others, says St. Bernard, may happen to thee, because thou art a Man. A Man of
Earth Clay out of Clay. Of Earth thou art, by the Earth thou live, and out of
the Earth shall tho^ return, when that day comes that often comes, and perhaps
may come this day. Certain it is, because thou shall die, though it be
uncertain when, or how, or where. Because Death expects thee every where, if
thou be wise, expect that every where. It Is the saying of Annaeus; Uncertain
it is, says he, in what place Death may expect thee; therefore do thou expect
Death in every place.

Sect. 16. Death is at home to every Man.
WE trifle, and at distance think the Ill,
While in our Bowels Death lies lurking still.
For in the Moment of our Birthday Morn,
That moment Life and Death conjoined were Born.
And of that Thread with which our Lives we measure,
Our Thievish hours still make a rapid seizure.
Insensibly we die; so Lamps expire,
When wanting Oil to feed the greedy Fire.
Though living still, yet Death is then so nigh,
That oft-times as we speak, we speaking die.
There is a Fish in the Northern Ocean near Muscovy, which is called Mort. This
Monster of the Sea has very great Teeth; so that as Cardanus relates, the
Handles of Swords are made of the Teeth. Every one of our Bodies is a Pond, O
Mortals! wherein we nourish this Fish called Mort; and therefore not to be
sought at such a distance from us; Every Man's Death is at home.

Sect. 17. Death Inexorable.
THough Rocks be deaf; and blind be Tigers rage,
Though furious War'gainst Man the Billows wage*
Morsels will Tigers tame, and the soft Gale
Of Western Winds upon the Waves prevail:
But fire cer than the Waves or Tigers Rage,
Deaths untamed Fury no Prayers can assuage.
The Parcae, to whose Distaffs, Spindles, Shears, the Ancients committed all
the power of Life and Death, are inexorable, not to be moved by all the
Supplication in the World. For when

The Parce in their Order come,
Beyond command there is no delay,
No putting off the Appointed Day.
There Is no beseeching those cruel Spinstresses: So precisely do they observe
their day prefixed. According to this Conception Painters and other Artificers
describe the Triumpher over all Human kind. For they Picture him without Ears;
as not hearing the Prayers of any; blind also, as not moved with the Tears of
any. He is Painted without a Tongue or Lips, that Men should not think to
receive the least word of Comfort from him: He is Painted without Flesh, to
show that he wants all sense of Humanity. Only his Nerve, Arteries and Muscles,
his Bow and Arrows, his Darts and Stings remain behind to strike poor miserable
Mortals. And surely then, if ever he showed his rage, and insulted over the
World, when he assailed Christ himself the Son of God, the Author of Life, at
what time the very Rocks wept, the Earth trembled, the Stars bewailed, the Sun
grew pale, and Angels mourned; acting a dismal Tragedy upon the Life of Life it
self. Whoever thou art, if thou art a Man, Death will be inexorable to thee.
Therefore be mindful of Death, the Hour flies; from thence my admonition.
Therefore is every day to be reckoned as thy last, and as the first of Eternity.

Sect. 18. Most certain Death is most uncertain.
WHat more certain in Human things than Death? St. Bernard exclaims, What more
uncertain than the Hour of Death. It sits at the Doors of old Men, and lies in
ambush for the young. Therefore, boast not of to Morrow, not knowing what to
Morrow will bring forth. This the Venunian Lyrick was not ignorant of.

Who knows whether the Gods to this days sum
Will add to Morrow, though but just to come?
Most perspicuously says St. James the Apostle, Go too now ye that say to day
or to morrow we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy
and sell, and get gain; whereas ye know ^ot what shall be on the morrow. For
what is ^our Life? It is even a Vapor that appears for ^ little time, and
then vanishes away. Whereas ^e ought to say, If the Lord will we shall live
and ^o this or that.

We shall all go, all -- all -- for we all die and ^^k into the Earth like
Water, that never returns. neither can thou be ignorant that thou art so
be^tten, as to remember that there is a Law set at ^e same time by the Nature
of all things, both for ^ceiving and restoring thy breach. And as no ^an dies
that has not lived, so no man lives that ^ll not die: Though when he shall die
is uncer^^. And therefore Christ, stirring us up by a ^st faithful Exhortation,
Take ye heed, watch ^d pray, for ye know not when the time is: And ^n repeating
the same again, VVatch ye therefore, ^h he, for ye know not when the Master of
the ^^e comet^, at evening, or at midnighe, or at the Cockcrowing, or in the
Morning; lest coming suddenly he find you. And what I say unto you, I say unto
you all, VVatch.

Sect. 19. Death to many sudden, to all unlook't for.
WHO will not stand upon his guard against the Efforts of Death that threatens
us every Hour, who has appointed no time when he intends to meets us? He
creeps, flies, leaps upon us, with a tacit motion, a stealing pace, making no
signs before hand, without any cause, without any caution, in sickness, in
health, in danger, in security; so that there is nothing sacred or safe from
his clutches.

Sound and merry was Tarquin, when he was choked with a Fish-bone* Healthy
also was Fabius, when a little Hair that he swallowed with his Milk, cut the
Thread of his Life. A Weezel bit Aristides, and in a moment of time he expired.
The Father of Caesar the Dictator rose well out of his Bed, and while he was
putting on his Shoes he breathed his last. The Rhodian Ambassador had pleaded
his Cause in the Senate even to admiration, but expired going over the
Threshold of the Courthouse. A Grape-stone killed Anacreon the Poet, and if we
may believe Luciar, Sophocles also. Lucia, the Daughter of Marcus Aurelius,
died with a little prick of a Needle. Cn. Brebius Pamphilus, being i^ his
Pretorship, when he asked the time of the day of a certain youth* perceived the
to be the last Hour of his Life. The Breath of many is in haste, and unexpected
Joy expels it. A^ we find it happened to Chito the Lacedemoni^^ and Diag^ras of
Rhodes, who embracing their So^^ that had been victors at the Olympic Games,
at the same time, and in the same place presently expired. Lastly, Death has
infinite accesses, through which he breaks into our Houses. Sometimes through
the Windows, sometimes through the Vaults, sometimes through the Copings of the
Wall, sometimes through the Tyles; and if he cannot meet with any Traitors
either in the City or in the House; I mean the humors of the Body, Diseases,
Catarrhs, Pleurisies, and the like, which the makes use of as Ministers in his
Councils. He ^tears up the Gates with Gunpowder, Fire, Water, Pestilence,
Venom, nay, wild Monsters, and Men themselves as bad; he leaves no Engines
untryed to snatch and force away our Lives.

Mephiboseth, the Son of Saul, was slain by Domestic Thieves as he was
sleeping at Noon upon his Bed. Fulco, King of Jerusalem, as he was Hunting a
Hare, fell from his Horle, and was trampled to death by his Hoofs, gave up the
Ghost. Josias, of all the Kings of Judah, David excepted, for Piety, Sanctimony
and Liberality the chief, was unexpectedly wounded with an Arrow and died in
his Camp. The Holy Ludovicus in the 57th year of his Age, upon the African
Shore, in the midst of his Army, the Pestilence there raging, died of the
Distemper. Egillus, King of the Goths, a most excellent Prince, was killed by a
Mad Bull, which the madder people, not enduring the seve^ity of his Laws had
let forth. Malcolm the first, King of Scotland, after many examples of Justice,
while he was taking cognizance of the Actions of his Subjects by Night, was on
a sudden suffocated* have not many gone well to Bed, that have been ^ound dead
in the Morning? Of necessity the Soul ^^ght to stand upon its guard. Vzza, a
person of no small Note in David's Lifeguard, when he attempted to stay the
shogging Ark, as it was carried in Triumph to Jerusalem, was presently struck
from Heaven, so that he died by the Ark. The hand of God armed a Lion out of a
Wood against the Prophet, that had eaten contrary to his command. The sudden
voice of Peter compelled Ananias and Saphira to expiate their Crime by as
sudden a death, whose Souls the greatest part of Divines believe to be freed
from Eternal Punishment thereby. But enough of Ancient Examples.

In the year 1559. Henry the Second King of France was slain in the midst of
his Pastimes and Triumphs and in public Joy of the people. For while he
Celebrated the Nuptials of his Daughter at Paris, in a Tilting, the Splinter of
a broken Lance flew with that violence and pierced his Eye that he died
immediately. In the year 1491. Alphonsus the Son of John the Second King of
Portugal, being about Sixteen years of Age, a Prince of great Hopes and Wit,
(...) to Wife Isabella the Daughter of Ferdinand King of Spain, whose Down was
the Ample Inheritance of her Fathers Kingdoms. The Nuptials were Celebrated
with the preparations of six hundred Triumphs. Every Plays, Running, Racing,
Ti^ting, Banquets. So much Plenty, so much Luxury, that the Horse-boy and
Slaves glistered in Tissue. But Oh immens^ Grief, hardly the seventh Month had
passed when the young Prince, sporting a Horseback upon the Banks of Tagus, was
thrown from his Horse to the ground, so that his Scull was broken, and (...)
wounded to death. He was carried to a Fishe^ House, scarce big enough to
contain him and (...) of his Followers. There he lay down upon a Bed Straw and
expired. The King flies thither with t^ Queen his Mother. There they behold the
mise^^ble Spectacle; their Pomp turned into Lamentation, the growing Youth of
their Son, his Virtues, Wealth, like Flowers on a sudden disrobed by the
Northwinds blast, and all to be Buried in a miserable Grave. O the sudden
Whirlwinds of Human Affairs! O most precipitate Falls of the most constant
things!

What shall I remember any more? Basilius the Emperor was gored to death by a
Heart, while he was entar gled in a troublesome Bough. The ancient Monument in
the Camp of Ambrosius, near Aenipon^us, witnesses, That a Noble Youth, though
under Age, set Spurs to his Horse to make him leap a Ditch, twenty foot broad:
The Horse took it; but the Rider and the Horse fell by a sudden, and almost the
same kind of death. That the Spoils of the Horse, and the Garments of the Youth
speak to this day.

But this sudden Fate is common, as well to the good as to the bad, neither
does it argue an unhappy condition of the Soul, unless any person in the Act of
burning Impiety feel, himself struck with the Dart of Divine Vengeance. Such
was the Exit of Dathan and Abiram, whom the gaping Earth miserably swallowed
up, obstinate in their Rebellion against Moses. Such was the End of those
Soldiers, whom for their irreverence to Elijah, Heaven consumed with Balls of
Fire. Such was the End of the Hebrew, whom the Revengers Sword passed thorough,
finding him in the Embraces of the Midianitess, turning his Genial into his
Funeral Bed.

So many Pores of the Body, so many little doors for Death. Death does not show
himself always near, yet is he always at hand. What is more stupid than to
wonder that that should fall out at any time, which may happen every day. Our
Limits are determined where the inexorable necessity of Fate has fixed them.
But none of us knows how near they are prefixed. So therefore let us form our
Minds, as if we were at the utmost extremity. Let us make no delay.

Notes upon the first Paragraph.
DEath has infinite accesses. So it is indeed; and to what I have said I add.
It is reported, that a certain person dreamt that he was torn by the Jaws of a
Lion. He rises, careless of his Dream, goes to Church with his Friends; in the
way he sees a Lion of Stone gaping, that upheld a Pillar; then declaring his
Dream to his Companions, not without Laughter. Behold, said he, this is the
Lion that tore me in the Night. So saying, he thrust his hand into the Lions
Jaws, crying to the Statue, Thou have thy Enemy, now shut thy Jaws, and if thou
can bite my hand. He had no sooner said the word, but he received a deadly
wound, in that place where he thought he could have no harm. For at the bottom
of the Lions Mouth lay a Scorpion, which no sooner felt his hand, but he put
sorth his sting and stung the young Man to Death. Are Stones thus endued with
anger? Where then is not Death, if Lions of Stone can kill? In the same manner
died the young Hylas, who was killed by a Viper that lay hid in the Mouth of a
Bears resemblance in Stone.

What shall I mention the Child killed by an ^sicle dropping upon his Head from
the Penthouse? Of whom Martial laments in the following Verses.

Where next the Vipsan Pillars stands the Gate,
From whence the f^lling Rain wets Cloak and Hat,
A Child was passing by, when strange to tell,
Upon his Throat a frozen drop there fell,
Where while the Boy his cruel Fate bemoan`d,
The tender point straight melted in the wound.
Would Chance have us adore her lawless will?
Or tell where Death is not, if drops can kill?
Thus has Death infinite Accesses; then nearest, when it is least thought of.

Sect. 20. An Antidote against sudden Death.
HEre Reader, though out of order, I will give thee three Prayers as Examples,
made against sudden Death. It is at thy choice, every day to make use of one or
all cordially and sincerely. They are designed so many, it being but reason
that we should fall three times, at the Feet of Christ, when we beg so great a
Boon. For this we must know that in this respect there can be no Man too
cautious or too provident.

The first Prayer.
MOst Merciful Lord Jesu, by thy Tears, by thy Agony and Bloody Sweat, by thy
Death I beseech thee, deliver me from sudden and from unexpected Death.

The second Prayer.
O Most Gracious Lord Jesu, by thy most sharp and ignominious Stripes and
Coronation, by thy most hitter Cross and Passion, by all thy Tender Goodness
most humbly I beseech thee, that thou would be pleased not to permit me to
depart out of this Life by a sudden death, without receiving my viaticum for
Heaven.

The third Prayer.
O My most Loving Jesu, O my Lord and God, by all thy Labors and thy Pains, by
thy precious Blood, by those Sacred Wounds of thine, by those thy last
Exclamation upon the Cross, O my sweetest Jesu; my God, my God why have thou
forsaken me; by that loud cry of thine, Father into thy hands I recommend my
Spirit, most earnestly I beseech thee, that thou will not take me hence in
haste. Thy Hands, O my Redeemer made me, and formed me throughout. O do not
suddenly cast me headlong. Grant me, I beseech thee, time of Repentance; grant
me an Exit happy, and in thy favor; that I may love thee with my whole Mind,
that I may praise and bless thee to all Eternity.

Nevertheless, O merciful Jesu, all things are in thy power; nor is there any
one who can resist thy will. My Life depends upon thy nod; that must end when
it is thy pleasure. Neither do I desire, my most gracious God, but that my will
should be conformable to thine. In whatever place, at whatever time, by
whatever Disease thou art pleased to call me home, thy will be done All these
things I commit to thy Goodness, and to thy Divine Providence. I except no
place or time, no sort of Death, though never so ignominious: This only one
thing, I beg of thee, O Christ my God, that I may not die an unexpected and
sudden Death: Nevertheless, not mine, but thy will be done. If it so pleases
thee, that I must die a sudden Death, I do not repine. Let thy will be done in
all things, O God. For I hope and trust, through thy great Mercy, for the sake
of which I make this only Prayer, that I shall die in thy favor and grace;
wherein if I depart, not sudden death can separate me from thee. For the Just
Man, though prevented by Death, shall be happy. There is no Death can be
unexpected, to him whose Life has been always provident.

Wherefore, if I have not space and time (which is only known to thee, O God,)
wherein to commend my self to thee; behold I do that now, and as submissively
and as ardently as I am able, I send up my Prayer to Heaven to thee. Have mercy
on me, O God, according to thy tender loving kindness; thy will be done, O
Lord, in Heaven, and in Earth, into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Thou have
redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth. Let all Created Beings bless and praise thee,
O God. In thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me not be confounded for ever.

Sect. 21. The Days of Man's Life are few and evil.
HOW old art thou? Threescore. And how many art thou? Seventy. And how many art
thou? Fourscore. Ah! my good friends, where are your years? Where are thy
Sixty? Where have thou left thy Seventy? Where will thou find thy Fourscore?
Wherefore do thou number thy lost years. Elegantly answered Laelius, that
Wise Man, to a certain person, saying, I am Sixty years of Age. Thou call
these Sixty, answered he, which thou have not. Neither what is past, nor what
is to come is thine. We depend upon a point of flying Time, and it is the part
of a great Man, to have been moderate.

The Egyptian Pharaoh asking the Patriarch Jacob, how many are the years of thy
Age, the old man answered, The days of the years of my Pilgrimage are a hundred
and thirty years, few and evil. Hear ye, O Tantalus`s that thirst after extent
of fading Life; and know that ye are but Pilgrims not Inhabitants, nor are ye
Pilgrims for a long Journey neither* Your Life is both short and evil. Short,
because perhaps to be ended before this very Hour that we divide with Death No
man but must know it to be evil that enjoys it. It affords us Brambles sooner
than Roses to be trod upon. And yet still will ye loyter and delay in these
Bushy and Thorny places! So forgetful of your Country. Famous is the Sentence
of St. Gregory. This Life is the way to Heaven. But most of the Travelers are
so taken with the pleasantness of the way, that they had rather walk slowly
than come quick to their Journeys end. Oh most miserable Franticks! We are
taken with Flowers, and pick up little glittering Stones, but neglect immense
and unbounded Treasures. We scrape together the filth of the Earth, and the
froth of Caverns, forgettful what great and real Treasures we lose, while we
labor after such as are false. Miserable and vain Creatures! What has a
Pilgrim to do with Flowers and Pibbles, if he return not to his Country? What
matter is it if he leave those behind, if he come to his Country. To labor in
this way, to be wearied, to sweat, to endure all inconveniences, is to be
looked upon as the chiefest point of Gain. For thy Country will please thee so
much the more, by how much the more ungrateful thy* Exile was.

Sect. 22. How a Young Man may Die an Old Man.
AS we may meet with old Men, not old Men but Children, so we may meet with
young Men, not young Men, but stricken in years. Barlaam the Hermit an old Man
of Seventy years, when Jehosaphat the King asked him how old he was, answered
Forty five, at which when the King admired, he replied, that he had been absent
from his Studies Twenty five years; as if those years which he had spent upon
the Vanity of the World had been quite lost. So Similius, being Buried in the
Cares of the Court, and living rather for his Emperors sake than for his own,
caused this Inscription to be put upon his Tomb. Here lies Similius, an old Man
of Seven years of Age. The Book of Samuel relates of Saul that he was the Son
of one year when he began to Reign, but that he Reigned Two years over Israel.
Saul at the beginning of his Reign was as free and Innocent from all wickedness
as a Child of one year old, but he continued in this purity but one year,
though he Reigned Twenty years in all. Many attain to old Age betimes, and
before they are old. But the most of Men, never; who when they are old, yet
retain the Vices of Children still; so that they die Children of a hundred
years of Age. The Happiness of Life consists not in the length or extent
thereof, but in the use of it: And it may often happen that he that has lived
long, has not lived at all. Wherefore there is nothing more infamous than a
childish old Man, who has no other Argument to prove his long Life but his Age.
Elegantly St. Ambrose concerning St. Agnes. Infancy was reckoned in her year,
but a vast Age of mind. The Oracle of Divine Venerable old Age is not lasting,
nor to be computed by number of years: But the Senses of men are gray, and old
Age is an immaculate Life. And therefore the Manners rather than the Hairs of
men are to be esteemed Venerable. Only he is worthy of more reverence who is
old betimes. An honest Life is the best old Age.

Yet, you will say, a man so early dead might have proved a great Man, and
serviceable to his Country. Rather (which is more to be feared, he might have
become like others. Behold young men, whom Luxury drives into all Vice, over
whose Head there passes not a day without some signal Crime. Therefore he is
taken away, lest Evil should change his Intellect, or lest a Fiction should
deceive his Soul. Whoever comes to the Extremity of his Fate, he dies an old
Man. Ofttimes in a long Life, the least thing to be considered is that he has
lived. It Is much more glorious to be old in Virtue, than in time. He has lived
long enough, who has said well. He has sought well that overcomes.

Sect. 23. A PARADOX.
Whoever will, has lived long enough.
A Short time of Age, is long enough to live well, says Tully. No man dies so
soon, who intends not to live better than he has done. A Beardless Youth has
numbered* years enough, who has lived to Virtue and Eternity, for which he was
Born. Has he not spoke enough, that can persuade with one word or a nod? Has he
not said enough, who arrives happily at his Port. But best of all, he that
soonest attains it. So that death prevent not our Meditation, the swifter, the
more happy it will be.

But I (says the Macedonian King in Curtius) who number not my years but my
Victories, if I number the Gifts of Fortune have lived long enough. How much
more truly he, who Consecrates all his Life to God, and only studies to serve
and please his Master faithfully, may say, I who count not these years wherein
I serve God, but my desires, if I rightly compute the Benefits of my God, have
lived long enough. So it is most certainly; he lives a Hundred, yea, a Thousand
years, yea, Ages themselves and serves God, whoever sincerely and cordially
desires to serve his God so long, were it permitted him so long to live. For
God accepts the will for the deed: With whom to intend a pious Action, is
oft-times as much as to have performed it. So he may be a Martyr, and expend
his Blood with a Christian Valor, though he die in his Bed. So a Man may live
long, and act, and suffer courageously for Christ, whoever earnestly desires to
live to that end. There is no man that dies not at his day, whoever dies by the
Decree of the Divine Will.

Sect. 24 You are to Die, to Die.
A Vgustus the Emperor, Peragia being taken, punished abundance of the
Citizens; and to those that besought his pardon, or desired to excuse
themselves, he only made this short answer, Moriendum est, You are to Y, (...)
Thus he caused three Hundred to be slain like Victims upon an Altar Built to
Julius Caesar.

Justin and Irenaeus, most noble Writers among the Ancients, smartly observe,
that after the Sentence of Death pronounced against Adam, that never any
Mortal, according to Gods Calendar, live a whole day. For as the Prophets and
Apostles testify, one day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand
years is as one day. But no man lived a thousand years; therefore no Man ever
lived a whole day. Thou art to die. Though thou have attained nine hundred
years, and upward, thou art to die. This is most certain from Divine Oracle,
from Human Reason and Experience. Divine Oracles six hundred times proclaim,
Moriendum est. You are to die. Reason it self by evident demonstrations
convinces, that whatever is composed of contraries is liable to Corruption; and
therefore, Thou art to die. Experience, the Mistress both of Fools and Wise
Men, pointing to the vast heaps of the Dead, persuades our Eyes that never yet
any one of all the number of Mortals, could escape the power of death. Thou art
to die is clearer than the Sun, Thou art to die. Does any Thunder from Heaven
more loudly pierce our Ears, like this Sentence, Thou art to die. Here no Man
must be deaf; will they, nill they, they are forced to admit these dreadful
sounds. This thunder pierces their unwilling Ears. Thou art to die, whether in
the favor or in the wrath of God.

Aeschylus of old, Death, said he, is the only God dess, among all the rest,
that regards not Bribes; nor admits the least particle of sweet hope. Wherefore
wisely Seneca, Let us afflict our selves, ^aith he, with this thought, Let us
repeat this often to our selves, Thou art to die. When? It is better thou
should not know that. Death is the Law of Nature; Death is the Duty and
Tribute of Mortals; then to be paid, when it is exacted. Wherefore laying all
other things aside, meditate upon this alone, that thou may not fear the name
of Death. Make that, by frequent Contemplation, familiar to thee: That if it
should so happen, thou may be willing to meet it.

Sect. 25. The Remembrance of Death is variously to be renewed.
1. THey say, that the Skull dried in a Furnace, and beaten to powder, and
mixed with Oil, cures a Gangrene, or a Cancer. To grind, as it were the
Scalps, and Bones of dead men by serious Contemplation, and apply them instead
of an Ointment, heals all manner of Contagion of the Mind.

2. Plato was of Opinion, that any Man became so much the wiser, by how much
the more lively he considered Death, Therefore he gave this Law to his
Disciples studious in Philosophy, that when they went a Journey, they should
never cover their Feet. Whereby that Wise Man insinuated, that the end of Life
was always to be thought on.

3. Nicholas Christophorus Radzivile, Prince of Poland, affirms that in Egypt,
they who excelled others in Prudence and Age were wont to carry the long Bones
of dead Men Carved out of Wood or Ebony, show them one to another, and thereby
exhort one another to Contemplation. They also introduce the remembrance of
Death at their Tables, and conclude their Banquets with this sad Sentence,
Memento Mori, Remember to Die.

4. Caliph, King of the Tartars, in the City of Bagdat, upon a Festival Day,
which they call Ramadan, being resolved to show himself to the people, rode
forth upon a Mule, clad in Vestments, that glistered with Gold, Silver, and
precious Stones; but over his Tulipan he wore a black Vail, signifying that all
his Pomp was one day to be Clouded by the shades of Death.

5. Justinian the Emperor being dead, a Coverlet was thrown over him, wherein
were wrought in Phrygian Work, the Effigies and Figures of the Vanquished
Cities and Barbarous Kings, whom he had overcome. Behold the Image of Death
among Pageants, Scaffolds, Triumphs and Victories. Death plays with Empires,
and knocks as well at the Towers of Kings, as at the Cottages of the Poor. Pope
Martin the Fifth had this Symbol of a speaking Picture, or of silent Poesy.
Upon a Funeral Pile, kindled and ready to burn, lay the Popes Triple Crown, the
Cardinals Hat, the Archbishops Cap, the Emperors Diadem, the Kings Crown, the
Ducal Cap and Sword, with this Motto. Sic omnis gloria Mundi. Thus all the
Glory of the World.

6. I cannot but approve the Answer of a certain Marin^r, who being asked where
his Father died, in the Sea, said he. And when the other asked him the same
question concerning his Grandfather, his great Grandfather, and his great great
Grandfather, the Mariner still returned him the same Answer. Then inferred the
other, And do not thou fear to go to Sea? To which the Seaman waving a reply?
And where did your Father die? In his Bed, said the other; where your Father,
your Grandfather, and the rest of your Ancestors? They all, said the other,
died in their Beds. Then said the Mariner, and do not you fear to go to Bed, so
Fatal to all your Predecessors? Very Elegantly, and somewhat above a Sailors
Genius. Let our daily Contemplation be like that of Justus Lipsius, who falling
Sick, as he was taking his Bed, cried out, ad Lectum, ad Lethum, To the Bed, to
the Grave. Oft-times they that sleep sleep to death, which is but the Sister of
sleep.

7. John, Patriarch of Alexandria, who took his Name from given Alms, while he
was living and in health, caused his Monument to be Built, but not to be
finished, for this reason, that upon Solemn days, when he performed Divine
Service, he might be put in mind by some of the Clergy, in these terms. Sir
your Monument is yet unfinished, command it to be finished, for you know not
when the Hour may come.

8. When the Emperor of the East was newly chosen, no person had liberty to
speak to him, before the Stone-cutter had showed him several sorts of Marble,
and asked him, of which his Majesty would be pleased to have his Monument made.
What was the meaning of this, but only to intimate these words? O Emperor exalt
not thy self: Thou art but a Man, thou shall die like the meanest of Beggars;
therefore so govern thy Kingdom, which thou art to lose, that thou may gain
an Eternal Kingdom.

9. Domi^ian the Emperor gave a Banquet to the Chief of the Senate, and the
Order of Knighthood after this manner. He hung his House all with Mourning. The
Roofs, Walls, Pavements, Seats, were all covered with black, bespeaking nothing
but sorrow. Into this Funeral Dining Room were all the Guests introduced by
Night, without any Attendants. By each was placed a Bier, with every one his
Name inscribed upon it, with such Candles as they were wont to burn in their
Monuments. They that waited were clad in black, and encompassed the Guests with
Funeral Salutations. They Supped in the mean time with a deep silence: Domitian
in the mean time began a Discourse relating to nothing but Death and Funerals:
While the Guests in the extremity of Terror were ready to die for fear. What
then? Domitian thought he had given wholesome admonition to himself and the
Senators. But the Mountains brought forth, and a ridiculous Mouse was the
Birth. More rightly the Egyptians, who chastise the Mirth of their Banquets
with a mournful Epilogue.

Sect. 26. A new Shirt, black Letters.
THE Turkish Moschee at Caire in Egypt was Built by this means. Assan Basha, a
person as well Cunning as Covetous, resolving to raise himself a Name in the
World by some great Structure, yet not willing to be at the Cost himself, found
out this Trick. He caused Proclamation to be made in all places, that he
intended to erect: a vast and sumptuous Temple to Gods Now that the work might
go on the more prosperously, he promised large Wages to all that should come to
help forward the Work. And a certain day was appointed to divide the Money.
This Proclamation assembled together a vast multitude. not only from all parts
of Egypt, but from several other Regions and Kingdoms; against their coming
Assan had caused a great number of new Shirts and Vests to be prepared. Which
done, those that came to receive Wages, were ordered to pass singly out of the
great Court, where they met into another Court equally as big through several
little by Doors. Where they were stripped of their old Garments, and new Shirts
and Vests imposed upon them. All this was done to that intent, that whatever so
many thousands had brought to bear their Expenses, should be left in that
place. For in those Countries the people are wont to sow their Money in their
Shirts or their Vests. Thereupon a hidious Outcry and Lamentation arose among
the people. But the Basha contemning the Clamours and Cries of the people,
threw all their Clothes into a vast Fire and burnt them. Which huge Bonfire
produced such vast heaps of Silver as easily sufficed for the Edifice. Thus
Death deals by us; it takes from us against our Wills our old Garments, and
clothes us with a new Sepulcher: For we, as St. Paul says, that are in this
Tabernacle, do groan, being burdened, not for that we would be uncloathed, but
clothed upon. But in vain we resist. Death derides our Clamours, our Tears;
whether we will or no, the old Garment must go off. Uncase and be gone, All are
tied to the same Condition. Who happens to be Born, of necessity must die. We
are distinguished by Intervals, but our Exit is the same.

But hear how the Cruelty of this most Covetous Man was revenged. The Turkish
Emperor being informed of Assan's Wickedness, sent Ibram Basha to him with
Letters, wherein he severely commanded him, that so soon as he had received the
Letters from Ibram, he should immediately send his own Head to Constantinople.
Such Fatal Letters as those the Turkish Emperor is wont to write with his own
hand, and to bind about with black Silk; and generally they contain these
words, Send me thy Head. Whoever thou art, King or Caesar, when the Emperor of
Heaven sends thee his black Letters there is no resisting, no excuse, no
deprecation will serve. `Tis in vain to fly or delay, the Sentence is decreed.
Therefore do this and trample upon necessity. What thou should be compelled
to do against thy will, that do of thy own accord. Send thy Head; not to a
Tyrant, but to a Father; not to a Man, but to God. Make no delay, but be
willing to die. For why should not the Will prevent Necessity. `Tis the part of
Necessity to submit, but of Virtue to be willing.

Sect. 27. Every Day is to be observed.
PLatonius in Stobelas, `Tis not enough, says he, to spend the present day
well, unless thou spendest it so as if it were to be thy last. The last day
lies hid, that all days may be observed alike. But thou will say, these
Contemplations upon Death are s^d things, and do but hasten Death. Thou art
deceived, the Wise Man calmly meditates upon it; no otherwise than he beholds
the Winds and the Sails of a Ship as the Instruments that bring him into the
Haven. This is our Folly and Error altogether. We are willing to be tossed by
the Waves and Billows, yet fear the place whither Nature and reason carries us.
From Nature we know, We are all carried to the same place.

-- The Glass of all Men runs.
But if we look at reason; who that enjoys it can deny the Argument. What is
here but tumbling and tossing, Cares, Miseries, Griefs of Body and Mind? What
do thou fear? Behold the Port. But indeed, as they who are Imprisoned would
escape, and often might, unless the Keeper kept the Door locked; so here that
Jailor hinders us, call Love of Life. He is to be repelled, and that he may be
so, we are to think full often upon that which is but once to be suffered. And
because the last Day is uncertain and unknown, let every day be suspected.
Hereby thy Mind will be the more Courageous, thy Life the more Correct, more
Gladfom, and free from Care; for what can terrify or disturb him,

Whom of all fears that fear most Terrible,
The fear of instant Death can never quell.
The Dart foreseen does less harm. Death frequently meditated upon strikes with
less force.

Sect. 28. The Coffin the last Comfort of our Pride.
ABraham, that great Person, when he, by the command of God, had been forced as
a Pilgrim, to war der from place to place, minded nothing more than the
Purchase of a Burying-place. That he would have to be so surely his own, that
he might possess it by all the Right and Law imaginable. For this reason he
paid down the Money demanded of the Seller, Current Money among the Merchants.
Nor was it enough for him that the Purchase should be publicly made; he
required that all the Inhabitants of the Country should be witnesses of the
Bargain. Whereby that person of high Credit intimated, that nothing is more a
Man's Property than his Sepulcher, which he may truly above any thing else call
his own; according to the Example of Abraham, the best of Men always reckoning
it among their chiefest Cares, to take care of their Sepulchers.

The Emperor Maximilian the First, three years before he died, caused his
Coffin, made of Oak, to be put up in a great Chest, and carried along with him,
wherever he went; and provided by his Will, that his Body should be put into
it without Embalming, wrapped in Linen, without any Embalming or Disembowelling,
his Nose, Mouth and Ears only being filled with Quicklime. What meant that
great Personage? Only to have his Monument always in his sight, to give him
this continual Document, Think upon Death, that it should also farther say,
where do thou amplify and extol thy self; wherefore do thou possess so
much and covet more? Thee whom so many Provinces and Kingdoms will not contain,
a little Chest must hold. But why did he put the Lime into those hollow parts?
Behold the Spices that Embalmed him. Maximilian, that thou were great thy
actions declare, but this more especially before thy Death.

What need I call to mind the Bier of Ablavius, who being Captain of the
Pretorian Bands, a Prince among the Courtiers of Constantine the Great, an
insatiable Devourer of Gold, which he thought upon more than his Tomb. This
Person. Constantine taking by the Hand, How long, said he, Friend shall we heap
up Treasure* and speaking those words, with the Spear that he held in his Hand,
he drew out the form of a Coffin in the Dust, and then proceeding* though thou
had all the Riches in the World, yet after thou art dead a place or Chest, no
bigger than this, which I have here marked out, must contain thee; if so large
a piece of Ground do come to thy Lot. Constantine was a Prophet: For Ablavius
being cut into Bi^s, had not a piece left big enough to be Buried.

The Emperor Charles the Fifth, of Famous Memory, most piously imitating that
Maximilian whom I have mentioned, long before his Death withdrew himself of his
own accord from public Affairs, and having resigned his Cares to his Young and
Vigorous Son, shut himself up in the Monastery of St. Justus in Spain, only
with twelve of his Domestics, applying himself to Religious Duties. He forbid
himself to be called by any other Name than Charles; and disclaiming with
Business the Names of Caesar, and Augustus, contemned whatever savoured of
Honorable Title. This also is farther reported, that long before the
resignation of his Empire, he caused a Sepulcher to be made him with all its
Funeral Furniture, which was privately carried about with him wherever he
went. This he had five years by him in all places, even when he Marched against
the French to Millaine, causing it every Night to be placed in his Chamber.
Some that waited on him imagine the Chest had been full of Treasure, others
full of Ancient Histories; some thought one thing, some another. But Caesar
well knowing what it contained, and wherefore he carried it about, smiling
said, that he carried it with him for the use of a thing which was most dear to
him in the World. Thus Charles continually thought upon Death, and every day
could say; I have lived; rising every day to Heavenly Gain.

Many others have happily imitated Charles the Emperor, who have been used,
twice every day to contemplate their Coffins, the Monument of their Death.
Gen^bald Bishop of Laudanum, lay in a Bed made like a Coffin for seven years
together, all which time he lived a most severe Life.

Ida, a Woman of applauded Sanctity, long before her Death caused her Coffin to
be made, which twice a day she filled full of Bread and Meat, which she twice a
day gave liberally to the Poor. The Study of Virtue is the best preparation for
Death. No Death can defile Virtue. He easily contemns all things, who always
meditates upon this, that he is to die.

Sect. 29. What is Life?
IT is a Flower, a Smoke, a Shadow, the Shadow of a Shadow. A Bubble, Dust,
Froth, Dew, a Drop. It is Ice, the Rainbow, a wasted Torch, a Bag with holes in
it, a ruinous House, treacherous Ashes, a Spring day, a most inconstant April,
one twang of a Harp, a broken Bucket, the Wheel of a Well, a Spiders Web, a
little drop of the Sea, a slender Stalk, a Solstitial Plant, a short Fable, a
shooting Spark, a little Cloud, a Bladder full of VVind, a Doves Neck
glistering in the Sun. Life is a thin Glass, a tender Leaf, a fine Silk Thread,
a Golden Apple rotten within. If a shadow be nothing say whar is the Dream of a
shadow. A thousand such like things may Humane Life be compared to. To me they
seem to have spoken most truly, who call Life the shortest Dream of a shadow,
We will abbreviate the Business. Life is

A Dream, a Bubble, Ice, a Flower, and Glass:
A Fable, Ashes, and the fading Grass;
A Shadow, a small Point, a Voice, a Sound;
A blast of VVind, at length it is nothing found.
Poor miserable Mortals! what Riches do we seem to heap, what Honors do we
invest our selves withal, what Pleasures do we seem to enjoy? yet all these are
but a Dream, how short, and how vain? They have slept out their sleep, and all
the Men whose hands were Psalm. 76. ver. 5.
mighty have found nothing. O Men, you dreamt that you were happy and blessed;
but of all those things which ye had, which ye hoped for, what do ye retain?
These were the Dreams of those that waked, and the mere Toys of Dreamers. Now
punishment opens your Eyes, that Sin shut before.

Life therefore what is it? I will tell ye in short. The time of Humane Life is
a Point; Nature, Inconstancy: Sense, Obscurity: The whole Body, a composure
easily corrupted. The Mind, a Rover; Honor, Smoke; Riches, Thorns; Pleasures,
Poison. And in a word, all things pertaining to the Body, a River; all things
belonging to the Mind, a Dream. Life is a warfare; and the Habitation of a
Stranger in a Foreign Land; the Shop of innumerable Mis^ries. Fame after
Death, Oblivion. According to Ausonius.

How! wonder Men should die! the Hours decay,
Ma ble and Fame it self to Death give way.
Before Death to complete thy days in Virtue is the Noblest Designs.

Sect. 30. Life a Mimick.
ALL Life is a Comedy. We are the Actors* One plays a King; another a Beggar.
One takes upon him the Person of a Prince, another of a Physician, another of a
Husbandman. Whatever part God has imposed upon us, that we ought decen^ly to
perform. Neither does the praise consist in this, for thee to act an Emperor or
a Duke. Whatever part thou acts, thou shall win applause, so thou performedst
it well. Which is the seasonable admonition of Epictetus. Remember, says he,
that the Actor is to be the Actor of such a part as the Composer pleases If he
would have thee act a Begga^, be sure to represent that person ingeniously. So
do, i^ thou art to act a Lame person, a Prince, of a Plebeian. This is thy Duty
to play thy part well; but it is the business of another to choose it.

Augustus the Emperor, the last day of his Life, asked his Friends that were
about him, whether he seemed to them to have acted the play of Life well?
Adding this little Clause; if so, give me your applause.

Seneca, most admirably concerning this Comedy of Life; I must often, says he,
use this Example, For this Mimicry of Life is by no Simile better Expressed,
which has assigned us those parts, which through our fault and ignorance, we
act amiss.

Laertius in Leno, faith, that a wise Man is like a good Actor, who whether he
be to represent the Person of Thersites or Agamemnon, does both well.

Therefore we must not take notice, what we now are, but what we are to be,
when we have put off our Vizards and our Habits. Nor matters it whether we take
up the part of the first or last Actor, so we act well.

Sect. 31. The Type of Humane Life.
OLD Balaam propounded to Jehosaphat the King, the John Damascen. Hist. c. 23.
deceitful Joys of Humane Life. A certain Person, says he, flies from a
Unicorn, which is a fierce Creature; in his flight he is ready to tumble into a
deep Ditch; but as he is tumbling, catches ^old of a Tree which preserves him
from the fall. While he clings to the Tree, contemning his past danger, he
sees two Mice, the one white, the other black, gnawing the Root of the Tree,
and now got as far as the very Pith. Then looking into the Ditch, he spies at
the bottom a terrible Dragon breathing Fire. Lastly, casting his Eyes about, he
spies the Heads* of four Asps reaching out of the adjoining Well. At e^gth
neglecting all these sights, he perceives a small quantity of Honey distilling
out of the Tree. Wherefore now forgetful of the Unicorn, the Mice, the Dragon,
and the Serpents, he falls to licking the sweet Honey. And this said Bartaam,
is the Type of Humane Life. The Unicorn represents Death, that every where
persecutes Mankind. The Ditch is the World full of Calamities. The Tree which
we hold by, is our Life confined within certain bounds. The two Mice, Night and
Day, which by little and little consume that Tree. The four Asps, the four
Elements, whose Repose being disturb, presently follows a disunion of Soul and
Body. That Fiend and fierce Dragon, represents the Jaws of Hell, always open to
devour us. The drops of Honey, signify the fil^hy Pleasures of this Life, and
the deadly sweetness of Vice. Allured with this noxious Sweetness, we neither
fear Hell, nor think of Heaven, contented to die voluptuously. Thus Barlaam to
Je^saphat. O certain, O most certain all these Sayings! If we are wise, we
should believe every Hour the last; Eternity hangs at every moment of Life.

Sect. 33. The Prologue of Life, the Narration, the Epilogue.
THE Prologue of Humane Life, is, To be Born; The Narration, To Grieve; The
Epilogue, To Die. The Explanations of this Oration, are Moan. and Tears, or
Joy, which is worse than Weeping. Most learnedly Seneca, Behold, says he, all
Mortals. There is amp^e and daily occasion of weeping; one tedious Want calls
to daily Labor* another restless Ambition sollicites; another is in conti^^al
fear for the Riches he enjoys, and is tired with his own Wishes; Another Care;
Another turmoiling Torments; Another the continual throng of Clients. This Man
grieves that he has Children; another that he has lost his; a third, that he
never had any. We shall want Tears* before the occasion of shedding them. Do
thou not see what a kind of Life Nature has promised us, that has ordered
Weeping to be the first Omen that attends our Bi^th. This is our beginning,
with this the Series of our Years agrees, and thus we spend our Days.

This is that which most deserves our Tears, and which they never can
sufficiently wash away; that none of us seriously considers, that there is a
time when we must leave this Habitation. We consider it, it is true, but
cursorily, and, as it were, dreaming. Hence we live as if we were always to
live. Our Frailty seldom pierces deep into our Minds: Nor do we observe how
much time has slid away; but as if it were, out of an inexhaustible Stock; we
trifle away so many Hours, so many Days, so many Months, and so many Years. We
are most profuse of our Time, and never mind the irreparable loss of it; in
which only thing, Covetousness is allowable. Thus the greatest part of Life
slips away from Evildoers; the greatest part from those that do nothing, and
the whole from those that are active in another way. Who is he that sets a
value upon Time, that prizes a Day, or understands that he dies daily? Hence it
is, that we forget what is past, neglect the present, and fores^e not what is
to come. But when we shall come to the last push, then miserable as we are, too
late we shall understand, that we were ill employed while we did nothing. Let
us do this therefore; let us embr^ce every Hour, as if this Day to die: So let
us order the Narration of our Life, as if present we were to make our Epilogue;
while Life is delayed, it runs beyond us.

Sect. 34. All Life short, even the longest.
MOst truly said Ann^us, There is no Life but what is short. For if we regard
the Nature of Things; the Lives of Nester and Statilia were short, who caused
it to be writ upon her Tomb, That she lived Ninty-nine Years. Behold how a
little old Woman glories in her Age; what would she have done had she
completed the Centure?

Amaranthus in the Fables, speaking to the Rose; Oh, what a Flower is the Rose!
how fair, how lovely! Deservedly men call thee happy for thy Beauty, for thy
Odor* for thy Color, O Queen of Flowers. To whom the Rose; Indeed, said she,
O Amaranthus, I excel in Beauty, however I flourish but a very short time, and
though no hand touch, nevertheless I quickly fade: But thou flowrest
continually, and live always fresh and gay; I had rather have less beauty,
and enjoy a longer life. The Life of Mortals is like that of the Rose, short
and quickly fading; and though no outward force extinguish it* yet na^urally
and insensibly it vanishes. Not without cause therefore the greatest of
Physicians exclaims: We understand not how our Life passes, but we perceive it
is st^ln away. The Space of Time gr^nted to us, flies with such a swift and
rapid Motion, that unless it be some few, Life forsakes some as it were in the
very Cradle. We have but a little time, and the most part of that we trifle
away in S^oth and Luxury. O improvident Mortals! the Body which we bear about
us, is not a Mansion, but an Inn, which is to be left, when thou art burdensome
to the Master of the House. Therefore O Christian, make haste to live piously,
and believe every Day to be so many Lives: He that shall so prepare himself,
shall securely dare Death; no Man shall die ill, that lives well.

Sect. 35. Not the longest, but the honestest Life is the best.
WE are not to strive to live long but so long as is sufficient, that life is
sufficient, which is fulfilled. That life is fulfilled, when any man passes
from his own into the divine Will, and well employs that little time which is
allotted him. What does fourscore years avail that man that idly spends them?
He did not live, but was dead while he lived. Nor did he die late, but every
day; for to live imprudently and wickedly, is not to live ill, but to die
daily: But thou say, he lived fourscore years; but consider from what day
thou reck'nst his death. Another is snatched away flourishing in the midst of
his course; but he had done the duty of a good Man and a good Christian; though
his Age were imperfect, his Life was perfect: The other numbered fourscore
years, certainly he did not live so long, but he was in being unless thou will
say, he lived in the same manner as Trees are said to live. Life is to be
measured by the Act and Offices of Virtue. not by Time; therefore let us praise
and place him in the number of the Happy, who well employed that life he had;
the Just shall remain in eternal remembrance; the memory of the just with
praises: For he saw the true light; he was one of many; and he lived, and now
lives in Heaven. Why inquire thou how long he lived; he lived to Immortality,
he has out* stripped ^^^^ and erected his own Remembrance: And as a body of mean
stature may be perfect, so in a lesser space of time a life may become perfect.
Happiness is not fixed in diuturnity of time, but in Virtue; neither is he that
sings oftenest to the Harp, but he that sings best is to be commended. While
thou art only in being, it is another; When thou art a good Christian, it is
thy own; That require from thy self, that thou may not measure out thy Time
ignobly in Vice; so to lead thy life, that thou may not be carried beyond the
Mark. Thou demandest what is the utmost space of Life? to live to true Wisdom;
to confirm thy Will in all things to the Will of God, is the truest wisdom.
When we die, it is not the longest but the chiefest end concerns us. Death walks
over all, nor is it any very long space that we precede one another* He that
kills, follows the slain; it is the least thing of which we are most sollicitous
about: For what is it to the purpose how long thou shunnest what cannot be
avoided? The best life is not the longest, but the most upright.

Sect. 36. We do not live the greatest part of our Lives.
I Cannot doubt the truth of what the Ancient Poet said;

-- It Is but a little term of life --
That we are said to live. --
All the rest of our life, is not life but only time; both urgent Business
encompasses us, and Vices importune us lulled in pleasure; we have hardly any
leisure to return to our selves; we are held on at leisure for our selves, but
for others. No man is his own man; so that we spend the greatest part of our
lives in not living, at least we do not live to Heaven nor to God. How much
time does our Meals, our Recreation, our Play, our Discourse, our Sleep, our
Idleness takes up? How much do litigious Suits and Diseases snatch from us? How
many Thieves do steal away our Lives, while we perceive not what we lose? The
following Verses, though not so terse and neat, very lively express our Madness.

A man lives fourscore years, not often more,
Of which in meat and drink some half a score;
In play as many, twenty years in sleep,
Till seventeen in our childish years we heap
And nothing do; for years diseases claim.
Therefore the time that we expend to frame
Our selves to virtue and learning, is in brief,
But the fourth part of all that tedious life.
What a little is left us of that which is our own; many there are whom their
Misfortunes will not give leave to take breath; many, whom their prosperity.
For we lay not hold upon time to stop the fleetest thing in Nature; but let it
slip as a superfluous thing and easy to be recovered. What keeper of time so
sparing, that may not find something worthy to exchange with his time? We
trifile with the most precious of all things, and there is no reckoning made of
that which cannot be sufficiently valued. Like them that sleep in Ships, who
are driven along by the Winds, though they perceive not the motion, and when
they wake. wonder to see themselves ready to be landed, Thus the course of our
life hastens away, while we sleep and neglect the inestimable price of Time.
When we should wake for a better life, we admire to see our selves at our
Journeys end; Death is to many, as the Harbor to the Sailer, he sails well
that does not Shipwreck in the Port.

Sect. 37. Delay is the greatest blemish of Life.
WE delay and put off every thing unless it be Vice, which for the most part
takes up our whole time. In other things we are always (...) full of Promises,
and say to oue selves, to Morrow this shall be done; the next Week I will not
fail to repent; next Year I intend to lead a new life. Thus Days, Months and
Years slide away, while we procrastinate, while we promise, and never stand to
our Promises. Excellently Seneca; Thou shall hear, says he, most people
saying, At Fifty I intend to retire, at Sixty I intend to give over Business:
And whom do thou take for Surety of thy longer life? Who will warrant things
to pass, as thou disposest them? Art thou not ashamed to reserve the Remains
and Dregs of Life to God? and to appoint that time for Devotion, which thou
can no otherwise employ? How late is it then to begin to live, when thou art
just at the end of it? What a foolish Oblivion of Mortality is that to defer
wholesome Admonition, till the fiftieth or sixtieth Year, and to seek to begin
thy Life at an Age to which few attnin.

Sigismund the Second King of Poland, because of his pero^tual delay and
heaviness in weighty Affairs, was called the King of tomorrow. Such are we
certainly, Men of tomorrow; we delay all things, most willing also, if we
could, to put off Death it self; but the business of dying admits of no delay,
suffers no put offs: Therefore to use the old Proverb, If thou would be long
old, be old betimes; which thou may be, by suffering no delay: We by losing
the best of things, lose all. Truly said Chrysologus, Then a man desires to do
well, when death has deprived him of the Opportunity of acting. We stalk to
death most commonly with the same steps, as they that walk in their sleep;
first we begin to delay and procrastinate wholesome things, then to act a
little more closely, then to neglect and omit altogether what things are to be
done* ^^^ ^^ we sweetly sleep and perish.

O Mortals, Over-late is to Morrow's life, live to day; pay your Salary to day;
mourn for your Sins to day, for who has assured ye of to morrow? What may be
done to day, why defer ye to another day perhaps never to come? To defer good
Actions was ever noxious, and over-late.

The greatest loss of life, delay is still;
For who delays, seems not to have a will.
Let us make haste therefore, and consider how much we should add to Swiftness,
if the Enemy were at our back; if we should perceive the Horseman just at the
heels of the Fugitive. This is the case Necessity drives, let us make haste and
escape; let us shelter our selves in Security, and often consider, how amiable
a thing it is to finish our lives before death: The greatest comfort in death
is, to have delayed nothing.

Sect. 38. The Hunting of Death.
WIlliam the II. D. of Bavaria, Father of the Poor, the Defender of all
Religious men, whom after his decease, had the Tongues of a^l men been silent,
the Tears and Lament^tio^s of so many Mourners at his Funeral, had sufficiently
^x^old. This most Praiseworthy Prince, I say, when he returned home from the
Council of Basil, where he preceded in Caesar's place, dreamed, That he saw a
Heart of an extraordinary bignets; that upon the one side of his Horns he
carried Bells, on the other lighted Tapers. This flying Animal was pursued by a
Huntsman and his Pack, all other ways being stopped, the affrighted Beast fled
into the Churchyard belonging to St. Marie's Church, there the poor Heart
falling into a Grave that was opened for a person that was to be buried, was
there taken and killed. Upon this the Prince awoke, and examined with himself*
what the meaning of the Dream should be: The next day also he declared to hi^
Nobles, what he had dreamed. Several Interpretations were made upon it, which
when Duke William had heard; I, said he, am that Heart, who am shortly to end
this mortal life, I will be buried in the Temple of the Blessed Virgin. The
Event verified both the Dream and the Presages; For in a short time Sickness
and Death laid the Body of Prince William in the Grave, while his Soul took her
Flight to those Azure Mansions above. A good Death is the beginning of a most
blessed Eternity.

Sect. 39. Wherefore upon the daily sight of Funerals, we do not consider
Death.
THE Devil, a most skilful Painter, paints so well according to the Rules of
Optics; that which is before us, and nearest to us, we may think most remote.
Thus as if we were to live a Thousand years, we promise to our selves a long
Security from Death. Hence we behold Funerals, and laugh, as if it were never
to be our Turn. We daily die, and yet we think our selves etern^l.

Sir Th^mas Moore, that no Age might delude any Person with the hopes of a
longer Life, gives this Admonition. As he that is carried out of Prison to the
Gallows, though the way be longer, yet fears not the Gallows the less, because
he comes to it a little the later; and though his Limbs are firm, his Eves
quick, his Lungs sound, and that he relish his Meat and Drink, yet this is
still his Affliction, that he is upon his Journey: Thus are we all carried to
the Gibbet of Death, we are all upon the way, only parted by some little
Intervals. They do not leave us at our Death, but go before us. But thou will
say, I am in Health, I perceive no likelihood of Death. Whatever thou say,
thou art upon thy Journey, and we are upon the Road as thou art. But I, say
thou, have not attained my Thirtieth year. Thou were in the way at Twenty, yea,
at Ten; even at one year, nay, at the first Hour; only go on, shortly thou will
be at thy Journeys end. But I sleep well, relish my Meat and Drink well. Fool
that thou art! Death minds none of these things. We are in the way, see, where
the Gibbet threatens thee. But a little while and thou shall expire; and with
thee all thy Pomp and Luxury dies. All our Life is the way to Death.

Sect. 41. A most Compendious, and the best Permeditation upon Death.
Happy to be in Death, first learn to live,
That thou may happy live, to dye first strive.

THis is the Sum of all; this is the Art of Arts. To live well we must learn,
as long as we live; and which some perhaps may more admire, all our life long
we must learn to dye. So many great Men, leaving all their lumber behind, when
they had renounced their Riches, their Pleasures, and their Offices, have
employed themselves in this one thing to the last, that they might know how to
live. But many of these, confessing they had not learnt their Lesson, have
departed this Life. But how shall they know this that never endeavouted to
learn? Most Mortals care not for living well, but for living long. Some then
begin to live when they are ready to leave the World. Hence it is that we are
empty of all those Comforts, which we desire at the end of our Lives; fearful
of death, and ignorant of living. Whoever then desires to learn the Art of
living, let him first learn the Art of dying. Perhaps, some may think that
needless to be learnt, which is but once to be made use of. Therefore, it is,
that we are with all diligence to apply our selves to this Study: For that is
always to be learnt, of which, whither we know it or no, we can never make the
Experiment. The great matter is not to live, the great matter is to dye.

Sect. 42. To day, for me, to morrow, for thee.
FRancis the First, King of France, being taken by Charles the Fifth, when he
had read, at Madrid, Charles's Impress upon the Wall, Plus ultra. Farther yet;
added thereto, To day for me to morrow for thee. The Victor took it not ill;
but to show that he understood it; wrote underneath, I am a Man, there is no
humane accident but may befall me.

Elegantly, Gregory Nazianzene, The Head (quoth he) grows gray; the Summer of
Life is at Hand. The Sickle is sharpn'd against us, and I fear, least while we
are asleep, and lulled in hopes; the terrible Reaper come. But thou will say,
old Men fear, I am young. Be not deceived, Death is not perfixed to any Age.
The same Bier to day carries an old Man, to morrow beautiful Youth; to day a
strong lusty Man, to morrow a Virgin, or an old Woman. Seneca speaks to the
purpose. Death, says he, ought to be ^et before the Eyes of young, as well as
old Men: For we are not summoned by the Censers Books, wherein the Ages of
every one are set down. Such a Partial Citation might serve for War, but not
for Death. The last Farewell, and Admonishment of all dying Men, is this. To
day, I; to morrow, Thou. But the Dead alter the Sentence, and they cry; I,
yesterday; Thou to day. Be mindful of Death; be mindful of Eternity; which I
yesterday, thou to day or to morrow shall begin, never to end with either.

Sect. 43. Therefore Live, while thou have.
NOT for thy Wit, not for thy Body, not for thy Pleasure, not for thy Virtues
sake, but for Heaven and for Gods sake. Live and Act, as well suffering for
God, as acting and laboring. For thou know not how long thou shall subsist,
nor how soon thy maker will take thee away. Most wisely admonishes the wisest
of Preachers: Whatever thou take in Hand to do, that do with all thy power;
for in the Grave that thou go unto there i^ neither Work, Counsel, Knowledge,
nor Wisdom, Therefore, as the Apostles exhorts us, Let us not be weary in well
doing, Gal. c. 6. v. 9, 10.
for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not: While we have therefore
time, let us do good unto all Men. Thou have begun to Labor, prosecute thy
labor begun, with a continual Industry. Never cease, nor intermit that Labor
which may bring to Heaven: For there is no moment of thy Life, wherein thou
may not gain, and increase thy Heavenly Treasure. In this manner therefore
labor without ceasing. The time of rest shall come, which no labor shall ever
interrupt. The Life of Man is a Warfare upon Earth; and Job 7. v. 1.
like the days of a Bond-Servant are his Days. A Hireling, says St. Gregory,
asswages the Pains of his Labor with the thoughts of his wages. A Hireling is
sollicitous, least any day should pass him without work, for he knows that the
Night is for rest, and that the Day is appointed for Labor. Do thou therefore
Labor, while it is day; while thou have an opportunity to Work. The Night
comes, says the voice of Truth, when no Man can John 9. v. 4.
work. Therefore work, while the Sun favors thee. There is one that will pay
thee for thy Labor. Thou have a perpetual and most accurate Overseer of thy
work, who is God; who keeps the number of the Hairs of thy Head, so does he
keep an account of thy least Failings, and of the smallest of thy Actions, done
in Honor of Him. Never question it, he numbers all thy steps. With one leap,
yea, with one step thou have finished thy whole Journey to Eternity; but take
heed that thou fixest thy Feet right. For such shall thou be to Eternity, as
thou went at thy Death.

Sect. 43. If to Morrow, why not to Day.
THere is but one, and that a most ponderous Chain that holds us fast the Love
of Life, which as it is not always to be contemned, so there is an allay to be
allowed it; so that nothing may hinder us, but that we may be always prepared,
to do that presently which is at some time to be done. Life is not imperfect,
so it be upright. VVhere-ever thy end happen, if thy Life be good, thy end is
safe.

St. Austin, Bishop of Hippo, went to visit another Bishop of his Familiar
Acquaintance lying in Extremity; to whom, as he was lifting up his Hands to
Heaven, to signify his Departure. St. Austin replied, That he was a great
support of the Church, and worthy of a longer Life; to whom the sick Person
made this answer. If never, 'twere another thing, but if at any time, why not
now?

Death calls upon all Men alike. Thither we must all come sooner or later; of
that we are certain; we doubt not of that thing, but of the time. What then?
Does not he seem to be the most fearful and imprudent Creature of all, who with
so much earnestness desires the delay of Death. Would not he be the
Laughing Stock of others, who being Condemned among many, should beg to be the
last Executed? Yet this is the Folly we are guilty of. We think it a great
happiness to die last. The Capital Punishment is destined to all, and by a most
just determination. Now what matters it, whether we go out first or last, out
of this Life, as Men go out of a Theater. We must depart, i^ then at any time,
why not now. To day perhaps Death spares us: That Is nothing, to Morrow he will
be with thee. The Sword will seize thee; a Stone waits for thee, a Fever lies
in Ambush. Thou art never nor in no place safe. There Is a necessity of going.
If then to Morrow, why not to Day? If at any time, why not now!

Sect. 44. Why Death is Terrible.
DEath is the same to all Men, but the Wages by which it happens are various.
One expires while he is feeding, another slumbering falls into an Eternal
Sleep, another in the act of Impiety extinguishes. Here one drops by the Sword,
another Drowns in Water; another Fires consumes. Some by the s^ing of Serpents
die, while others are Buried in the sudden fall of Ruins. Others by the
Contraction of their Nerves are tortured to Death. Others are cut off in their
Youth, others in their Cradles. Sometimes an Infant comes into the World to
take its farewell of Life. The Exit of some is milder, of others harsher. But
how mild and gentle Death may seem to be, however it brings something of
Horror with it, and that for this reason, because it seems to deprive us of
many Happinesses, and to take us from that plenty to which we are accustomed.
This love of our selves, and desire of self-preservation, is the Chain that
clogs us. There is also a natural fear of darkness, to which Death is thought
to be our Conductor; which has engaged the Wits of many to augment the Terrors
of Death.

But that which most augments the fear of Death is this, that present things we
know, whither we are to go we know not, and therefore are afraid. Therefore is
the Mind to be enured by much Exercise, that it may not be afraid of that
Eternity into which we are to enter. Eternity is that we are to think upon day
and night; as they that would bring themselves to endure hunger, must enure
themselves to fasting by little and little: So the Soul that is to be
translated from this inconstant World to a stable Kingdom, must accustom it
self to endure Eternity. Let it every day salute the Gate of Eternity, every
Moment believe that it waits there: Whatever it acts, let it act for Eternities
sake; and only observe this one form of action. I read, I write, I paint, I
meditate, I watch, I speak, and all for the sake of Eternity Whoever aspires to
Eternal Triumphs, let him learn to Combat Eternity.

Sect. 45. Death is sudden, but beautiful.
CHaeremon, as Palladius Bishop of Helenopolis witnesses, while he sits, while
he works, while he acts as a healthy person, dies. So sitting, so working he
was found, but dead. Virtue can beautify any sort of Death

Philemon, a Comedian, contested with Menander, perhaps not his Equal, yet his
Emulator. This Person recited upon the Stage, a play that he had newly made.
But when he was moving the more sprightly Affections in his third Act, a sudden
shower scattered the Auditory. Thereupon he promised the rest the next day. The
next day a vast multitude met together, in so much that the Theater was
thronged; but no Philomon came. Some blamed the slowness of the Poet, others
excused him. But at last tired with expectation, and sending to seek him, the
Messengers found him dead in his Bed His Book was in his Hand; and his Eyes
fixed upon his Book. So that the Messengers stood a while astonished at so
sudd^n an Accident, and the Miracle of so lovely a Death. Returning to the
people, they related, that they expected Philemon had finished his last act at
Home; leaving the World to give him their last farewell and plaudite; to his
Friends a sad occasion of Mourning and Lamentation. For that now a Noble Poet
having put off the Mask of Life, his Bones, and not his Verses where to be read.

If we look at this present Life, the most wished for death is, to die, not
fearing death: But much more desirable is it, to die in action, and to be
busy at our work, that death it self may not prove idle. It was the wish of
Cyprian the Martyr to be slain for the sake of God, while he was discoursing of
God. It is a high Encomium for any Man, that not only the Devil, but neither
Death himself should find him idle.

Sect. 46. We must watch and pray.
BEcause ye know not at what Hour the Son of Man will come. The Romans watched
in their Arms, yet sometimes without their Shields, that they might have
nothing to lean upon, to invite them to sl^ep* It is thy duty to watch, O Man,
and to watch armed. Ardent Prayers to God, are the true Arms of Christians. The
shield that encourages sleep is the vain hope of a longer Life. The frequent
Cries of the Roman Soldiers in their Watches were, Wake, wake, Mars wake. Thus
they encouraged one another to constancy in watching. The Heaven it self day
and night waking and incessantly toyling, admonishes thee to watch. Do thou
grow deaf, or art thou falling asleep? Hear the voice of Christ, watch and
pray. According to the relation of St. Mark, Christ made a Sermon; in the
Conclusion whereof he thrice Mark c. 13. v. 33, 35.
repeats these words; first, Take ye heed, watch and pray. Secondly, Watch ye
therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the House comes, at even, or at
midnight; whether at the Cock-crowing, or at the dawning, lest if he come
suddenly, he find ye asleep. Lastly, And that I say unto you, I say unto ye
all, watch. With the same Admonitions, and by the Mouth of St. Matthew, he
cries to us, Watch Mat. 24. v. 24.
ye therefore. for ye know not what hour the Lord does come. And again, Watch
ye therefore, because ye know neither the day nor the hour. The same he repeats
upon Mount Olivet; Watch and pray, lest ye enter into Temptation. Upon the same
Text he preaches in St. Luke. Watch ye therefore, at all times praying. The
same, watch ye, how often does St. Paul reiterate? These claps Thunder upon us,
to shake off all sleepiness and drowsmess from us. We are deaf, yea dead,
indeed, if these loud Exhortations will not wake us. Whoever thou art, that
sleep in Vice. awake. Thou know the Fate of the Egyptians. The slaying
Angel entered Egypt, and made a vast slaughter. Remember the Lot of the Ten
Virgins. There was a Call in the middle of the Night, and they that were
prepared were admitted to the Nuptials, but the drowsy Sleepers were excluded.
Do thou remember the Folly of the Gluttonous Servant? His Lord came unlookt
for, and at an Hour when he least thought of him. Have thou considered the good
Father of his Family? He wakes at all Hours, that at no time the House-breaker
may get in. Do thou remember thy Savior? He was Born at Midnight. And
probable it is that he will come at Midnight to the last Judgment of the World.
Therefore watch, and believe every day thy last.

Sect. 47. We are to trust in God.
HE whom God assists, though in the midst of the Waves of the enraged Sea, he
shall be able to withstand the Storm with a Courageous Heart. Let Troubles
surround him, let Sorrows overwhelm him, let the Devil roar and grin, a Soul
that trusts in God need never be afraid. Though Hell be moved, and the World
tumble, fearless he shall behold the Ruins; he shall rise a Victor; and like
the Marpesian Rocks contemn the vain threats of the Ocean. Thus Job, thus David
behaved themselves, Job speaking to God with a firm Confidence in him. Set me,
says he, by thy side, and let the hand of whomsoever fight against me. He
provokes and Challenges the Camp of the Enemies of God, let come who will he is
ready to meet them.

But, says David, though I walk through the midst of the shadow of Death, I
will fear no evil, for thou art with me. Behold a strong Faith! Though I am in
the extremity of danger, though wrapped in the horrid darkness of Eternal Night,
and that Death stood nearer than the shadow to the Body, trusting only in the
presence of God, I will despise all those Terrors. Most certain I am that in
his presence, there is a most safe and impregnable Refuge. For because the Lord
is my Aid, I will not fear what Man can do unto me. The Lord is my Light and my
Health: Whom shall thou fear? If Armies were Encamped against me, my Heart
shall not be afraid. Though I were to withstand the power of a whole Battle, my
Confidence should be in God. We are to trust in God, so much the more, by how
much the less we can trust to our selves. He ranges his Army under the Enemies
VValls, who trusts in God. To trust in God is to be above all Enemies.

Sect. 48. When it shall please God.
TO a Blessed Life a long Series of years contributes nothing, neither is Life
to be reckoned by years or wrinkles, but by just performances. But that, When,
disgusts the most part of Mortals. They know they are to die, and are willing
to die, but not yet. They are willing to pay Nature her Debt, but not yet: They
desire to be loosed from the Chains of the Body, but not yet. So ingeniously do
we poor Mortals rave: We desire an end of our Miseries, but not yet; we would
be Blessed and Happy, but not yet. We would, and we would not die. We are
unjust to complain at the same time, that we are miserable, and that our
Miseries are at an end. There is no reason to grieve or weep, when we cease to
be what we were unwilling to be: Is it because thou would have many steps to
thy Death that thou buildest thy self so high a Gibbet; and is it because thou
would take a slow prospect of thy Funeral, that thou desire so many years?
Alas thou art to go either to day or to morrow.

Tobias the worthy Son of a most worthy old Man, but old himself, attained to
the Ninety ninth year of his Age. Yet when Ninety nine years were expired in
the fear of God, they Buried him with joy. Could Tobias, in our judgment,
Expostulate with God or complain. Why Lord, do thou now break off my Life?
Why did not thou permit me to make up the full hundred? What other Answer
would God return? It so pleased me: Now die, and reckon all thy past years as
clear gain. Therefore we must die when it pleases God, not when it pleases
Tobias, Raguel or Ananias.

But I know what deceives many. When Death knocks, we believe the Exactor comes
before his time. Fools; then it is time; when it pleases God. Wherefore do ye
delay? Wherefore do ye pretend immature Age? Wherefore do ye expect a Truce?
Wherefore do ye think upon delay? Thou were ripe for Death long before? But
grant thee thy own time, thou will be never the more ready or the more
prepared. After all thou will desire delay, the more thou stay'st, perhaps the
less prepared. Delay has made many the worse. It Is a bad preparation for Death,
to be unwilling to die. He has performed half of the Act who now is willing.
The desire of Death is to be shaken off, and thou art to learn, that it matters
not when thou suffer whatever it behooves thee to suffer. How well thou have
lived, is the main business, not how long; and often it happens well, when
there is no delay. Therefore lay all hankering thoughts aside; and thus resolve
with thy self, whatever God pleases let that be done.

Sect. 49. We must have recourse to God in all things.
ALas! poor miserable Creatures; alas insipid Fools: When we are ill, we take
cur flight over the whole Orb with the wings of our Thoughts. We beg petty
Comforts from things Created, with an ignominious Beggary. We call Friends and
Enemies to our aid; we implore the help of all; only God we pass by: or at
least apply our selves to him last of all. What madness is this! to desire
help from those that cannot afford it; not to desire it from him, who alone can
give it us.

Therefore whenever, and as often as thou art ill, let thy first Groans, thy
first Prayers, thy first Complaints be put up to God. Open thy Cause to God;
declare to him all thy Sufferings. Where do thou fly about the World, and
beg at the Cottages of Beggars? Wherefore do thou bow in vain to every Coach
that whirls by thee? Throw thy self at the Door of that only Rich Person who
can free thy Soul from its necessities. Thus did Moses, who in all Cases of
Doubt and Extremity had recourse to the Tabernacle, where he consulted God
himself. Thus was Joshua deceived by the Gibeonites, because he would not
consult God beforehand. Apply thy self to God in thy Afflictions, and upon all
other occasions. The Woman that was troubled with an Issue of Blood for twelve
years, and had suffered many things of many Physicians, at length came to the
Physician of Physicians; from whom alone she obtained that Cure, which she
could not have from many in twelve years. It is a main matter to know from whom
thou expectest a kindness. It is an Argument of extreme Poverty to beg from
Beggars.

Sect. 50.
WE have said, that recourse must be had to God in every thing. Therefore a
happy end is so desired from none but God. Of which I will annex a short
Example.

First Prayer.
Eight Verses, chosen out of the Psalms of David by St. Bernard, which he is
reported to have repeated every Day for a Happy Hour of Death.

ENlighten my Eyes that I sleep not in death; lest my Enemies say, I have
prevailed against him, Psalm. 12. v. 3, 4.

Into thy hands I recommend my Spirit; for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou
God of Truth, Psalm. 31. v. 6.

At last I spoke with my Tongue, Lord let me know my end, and the number of my
days, that I may know how long I have to life, Psalm. 39. v. 4, 5.

Show some good token upon me for good, that they which hate me may see it; and
be ashamed; because thou, Lord, have helped me and comforted me, Psalm. 86. v.
17.

Thou have broken my Bands in sunder; I will offer to thee the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving, and will call upon the Name of the Lord, Psalm. 116. v. 14, 15.

I had no place to fly to; and no Man cared for my Soul.

I cried unto thee, O Lord, and said, Thou art my Hope and my Portion in the
Land of the Living, Psalm. 142. v. 5, 6.

Omnipotent Sempiternal God, who did prolong the Life of Hezekiah, miserably
imploring thee; grant me thy unworthy Servant before the day of my Death, so
much time to live, that I may be able to deplore all my Sins, and may obtain
from thy Compassion, Pardon and Favor.

Omnipotent, Gracious, and Merciful God, I most humbly beseech thee, by the
Death of thy Son, grant me a happy and a blessed Hour, when my Soul shall
depart out of my Body.

Lord Jesu, Crucified Christ, by the Bitterness of the Death. which thou did
suffer for me upon the Cross, chiefly when thy Soul departed from thy Body,
have Mercy on my Soul at the last Hour, who live and reignest with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, for ever and for ever,

Amen.
The Second Prayer.
For a Happy Departure.
MOST Merciful Lord Jesu, if this be the Condition of a Dying Man, if in such
Dangers and Extremities my Spirit must depart out of this Life, whither shall I
fly but unto thee, Oh my God? Do thou take care of my Soul, that it may not
perish in that dreadful Hour. Grant me, I beseech thee, according to the
multitude of thy Mercies, and by that servent Love and Grief, wherewith thou,
who art Life it self did die for me; that I may have the Combat of Corporal
Death always before my Eyes; and that living, I may so do, as, dying, I would
desire to have done; and that I may expend my time and study in nothing more,
than that I may Spiritually die to my self; and may mortify all the Passions
of my Senses; that so after this Life, I may live with thee, Happy and Blessed
to all Eternity.

The Conclusion of the first Chapter. To the Reader.
DO this, meditate upon this, O Man; and while thou art well, learn to be sick,
learn to die. To do both, is a rare piece of Art; which whether thou know or
no, it is not lawful for thee to try; but when thou can not err without the
loss of Eternal Felicity. We err but once in dying, but that Error is never to
be amended to all Eternity.

Therefore to abide, as being still to depart* But for the most part abide
within thy self, and search every cranny of thy Conscience. Whatever thou
enjoyest, look upon it as the Lumber of a place where there is no Habitation.
Thou art not suffered to carry out any more than thou broughtest in with thee.
Therefore act and bestir thy self. Approve thy self right in the sight of God.
Thou art to go hence. Believe that thou stand always at the Gate of
Eternity. Eternity is that we must look after. Pleasure is short; Punishment
Eternal. The labor is Easy; the reward Everlasting.

Therefore we have given wholesome Instruction; we have taught, that Death is to
be contemned, but the thoughts of it never to be laid aside. Now we will give
the same Admonitions to the Sick.

CHAP. II. The Remembrance of Death is Recommended to the Sick.
Sect. 1. The Introduction; and whether Sickness be an Evil?
CAnnus, is a Town in Caria, in a Pestilent Air, and unwholesom for the
Inhabitant. These People when Stratonious the Musician, and wi^ty Man, beheld,
he recited the Verse in Homer to them.

Like as the Leaves, just so the People are.

Thereby he taunted their Icterical, Yellowish and Wan Complexions. But when
the Caunians had given him a very rugged Entertainment for defaming their City,
as sickly and unwholesom, Stratonicus returned upon them again; Must I not
dare, said he, to call that a sickly place, where the dead walk? More wittily
and more smartly than before.

But why do we deny, and lift up our Noses? We are most like to Leaves. Very
plainly Job; Will thou break a Leaf, says he, driven to and fro. As if he had
said; When I am but a Leaf, liable to all the Inconveniences of Life, afraid of
every Gust, will thou hasten me with the wind of thy indignation? I shall fall
of my self, without any constraint of thine. Are not Men Leaves, whom Sickness,
like dry Leaves and juiceless Flowers, tosles to and fro, and variously sports
with? Clement of Alexandria, being of the same Opinion; Go to, said he, Men of
an obscure Life, like the Generation of Leaves, infirm Creatures* Images of
Wa^, things like shadows, frail, unfledged, living but the Life of one day.
Certainly we are Leaves, shaken by every puff of wind. Sometimes a little
Fever; what do I say? Nay a little Cough, a little drop falling upon the little
wicket of the Throat, mortifies this Leaf, and throws it into the Grave.

But whether or no is Sickness a Benefit, and Death an Evil? No, Mortal, no; it
is not, says Epictetus. Health well used is a good thing; ill used, a
mischief: And therefore we may reap Benefit by Sickness. What do thou say of
Sickness? I will show thee its Nature; then I shall be quiet, I shall think my
self well dealt with, I shall not flatter the Physician, I shall not wish for
Death. What would thou more? Whatever thou shall give me, that will I make
happy, prosperous, honorable, to be desired. But there are some that deny
this, and say, Take heed of being sick, it is an ill thing. To them Epictetus
again, That is as much as to say, says he, Take heed that thou do not feign
three to be four, it is an ill thing. How evil? If we so think of it as we
ought. What harm will it do me? Rather will it not do me good? If therefore I
so think of Poverty, Sick, or Troubles of Church or State, as I ought, is not
that enough to me, will it not be profitable.

Truth, Love thee, O Epictetus, How agreeable are all these things to Christian
Doctrine? This Foundation being laid we shall here te^ch ye to be mindful of
Death in Sickness, and not to be afraid of his coming.

Sect. 2. The sick Person to his Friends. To Sickness. To the beginning of a
Mortal Disease. To Death. To Christ our Lord.
To his Friends.
Hence with your unseasonable mourning; This is not a place for Wailing, but
for Prayer: But I depart early from you; Early, take heed ye mistake not; I was
ripe for death as soon as I was born, yea, before I was born. What I was, when
born, I know; a weak frail body, liable to all Reproach, the Food of Sickness,
the Victim of Death. Behold, who e're thou art, take Hope or Substance, to
Morrow not to be, or else to be elsewhere,

To Sickness.
Must I then now be sick? The time is come for me to try my self. The
courageous Man does not show himself either in Battle or at Sea. There is a
Courage also in the Bed of Sickness: Shall I leave a Fever, or that me? We
cannot always continue together: Hitherto I enjoyed Health, now my business is
with Sickness. Sickness I know is the first Messenger of Death. I believe St.
Gregory for that, who truly and piously; The Lord knocks, says he, when by the
anguish of Sickness, he declares the approach of Death; to whom we presently
open, if we receive him with Affection.

The very Fables teach me to receive this first Messenger of Death with a
contented Mind. They relate, how that an old Man lay sick, and when Death was
ready to snatch him away, the sick-man desired that he would defer the fatal
blow awhile, till he made his Will, and prepared such other things as were
necessary for so long a Journey. To whom Death; F^nd Banquet for the Grave,
said he, could thou not prepare in so many Years; that have had so many
warnings from me already? To whom the old Man; I take thy Truth to witness, I
never had any warning from thee. To whom Death replied; Now I find old men will
lie: A hundred, nay a thousand times I have admonished thee, when I took away
not only thy equal in years, but also young Men, Children, Infants, while thou
lookst and wepst: But I appeal to this Truth, forgetful old man, did I not
forewarn thee, when thy Eyes grew dim, thy Hair waxed gray, thy Ears grew deaf,
all thy proud Senses defective, and thy whole Body wasted? These were my
Messengers, these knocked at thy Doors, but thou would not be spoken with;
thou were often and daily warned, I can stay no longer, come and go along with
me. He ill prepares himself for Death, who prepares so late.

To the beginning of a mortal Distemper.
When I consider my Life, the multitude of my Sins, the small number of my
Deeds, good God! I am pinned up, and in streights on every side: But it is
better for me to fall into the hands of the Lord ( for his mercies are
manifold) than to live and multiply my years and my sins: What I should be,
thou Lord, know full well. Perhaps I should fall from thy Graee, should I
live longer* Death, thou art at hand; take me away, so that I may preserve the
Favor of my God; or rather so that the Favor of God may preserve me, which is
the only thing, O Christ Jesu, which I beg of thee, and through thee.

To Death.
Why with a slow Consumption, cruel Death,
Do thou d^prive me slowly of my Breath?
Such preparation needs not for my end:
Strike quickly then, for I will never contend.
Why should thou spend thy Quiver on my head?
When one poor single blast will blow me dead.
For what is man? A battered and leaking Ship, that will split with one dash,
without the force of a Tempest; the Body of man consisting of infirm and fluid
parts, comely in the outward Lineaments, not able to endure Cold, Heat or
Labor, that consumes and wastes of it self, fearing its own nourishment, the
plenty or want whereof is frequently the ruin of it; to himself only a
profitable and vicious nourishment, nicely to be looked after and preserved: A
life enjoyed at pleasure, liable to a thousand Diseases, and without Diseases
devoured by it self. Do we admire at this once dying, wherein thou may find
private and concealed Dea^hs? His smell, his taste, his weariness, his
watching, the humors of his Body, his meat and drink, to man are deadly.

To Christ.
I would not die, but live, he seeks to live,
That in thy love, O Christ, to die does strive.
I do not stand in fear of those things, which thou, O God, do appoint for
me. I follow thee, O merciful Father, I follow thee: And wherefore should I
refuse, when thou call me nearer to thee? It Is much better for me to be
dissolved and be with Christ. This is that which I desire; For Christ is life
to me, and Death is gain.

Sect. 3. An Antidote against Grief.
WHerefore art thou troubled? wherefore art thou perplexed? Thou art in the
hand of God, and he takes care of thee. But thou art afflicted and sick. What
evil can that be which proceeds from the Fountain of Goodnsss? God would have
thee to be his own, and therefore shuts thee up, and retains thee within the
Lattices of Sicknes^, least thou should go astray from Heaven.

A little Bird weary of the Cage, desires liberty; but while it is in the Cage,
is both loved and fed by its Master: While she is at liberty, who can believe
her free from the Fowler, or from the Snare? Thus believe me, it is a great
thing to be the Captive of the Lord thy God, it is to be looked upon as a great
Favor, to be bound a little while, to be cut and wounded by ^^m, that will
spare thee to Eternity.

Sect. 4. Not always Draughts of Sweetness.
GOD sometimes, O sick Man, gives the Cups of bitterness; thou drankst the
sweet Liquor while thou were in health. Why do thou make Faces? why do
thou refuse the Cup? Think upon that of Job, Shall we receive good at the hand
of God, and shall we not receive evil. Ungrateful Mortals! we know not the
Benefits we receive, but by losing them: Thou will be a good Valuer of lost
Health for the future: Thou may remember also, that when thou were in health,
thou did often recreate thy self beyond the bounds of Sobriety. Now therefore
let me persuade thee, cheerfully to take this bitter Cup, and bear this
punishment imposed upon thee for thy former Ryots. Formerly at at the Latin
Festivals, when the Chariot-Drivers strove for Victory, they that overcame,
drank Wormwood: Do thou now drink that thou may overcome.

He undeservedly Metheglin sips,
That to the bitter will not lay his lips.
Sect. 5. The contempt of Death is a Christian Generosity.
NO Man ever governed his Life well, but he that contemned it. We are not so
silly, but that we understand we must one day die; yet when Death approaches,
we hang back, we tremble, we lament: But would not he appear to thee a very
Fool, that should weep because he had not lived a thousand years before? These
things are well coupled, thou neither were, nor will be: thou art ordained for
that point of time wherein thou liv'st, with that thou may extend, how far
would thou prolong? Why weepest thou? what is it thou would have? thou
losest thy labor: Thou shall go thither, whither all things created go. What
is there that thou can call a Novelty? Thou were born under this Law: This
happened to thy Father, to thy Ancestors, to all before thee, and will happen to
all that come after thee. It is established and decreed; Death seizes upon all;
we are born to die. Consider in thy Mind the vast throng of those that went
before thee, of those that are to follow thee, and those that are to go along
with thee. Many thousands of Men and Creatures at this very moment that then
fear to die, are now making several and various Exits out of this World.
Take a view of the whole World; the new, the unknown: Most certain it is, that
every moment Millions are born and die, and many die the same death. Now
could thou think that thou should never come to that end, to which thou art
always going. Death is a safe Road to Rest; neither is there any thing of evil
in Death, but only the fear of Death: therefore if we would live quietly, the
Soul must be always ready. Shall I fear my end, when I know I must have an end?
when I know that all things have their end? Shall I fear my last gasp, that
puts an end to all my Sighs? Why should I fear to restore that which I received
upon that condition? But you will say, it is a difficult thing to contemn
Death. It Is Death, but to him that knows how to Live.

He that his hours on Virtue does expend,
Neither does wish for, nor yet fears his end.
We do not deny, but that there is something terrible in Death^, there we must
learn, not to be afraid of it. No Man learns to be contented upon a Bed of
Roses, to sit down at a Banquet; but this to be exercised, not to give way to
Grief. He cheerfully embraces Death, who has long composed himself to want for
it: And this is the greatest Argument of a generous Mind, not to fear thy
departure: For he knows whither he shall go, that remembers from whence he
came. Such a person was Theodosius the Emperor, of whom Saint Ambrojs was wont
to say, I loved the man, whom when he died, was more grieved for the state of
the Church, than for his own Condition. Therefore do thou make it thy business
not to fear Death.

Sect. 6. An Example of the Contempt of Death.
NInachtus the Governor of Malaca in Judea, being commanded to resign his
Authority, could not brook the Indignity, ignorant of true Honor and solid
Virtue. Therefore making a Funeral Pile of Lignum Aloes, and other Odoriforous
Woods, He spread a square Scaffold, which he had erected, near to the Pile,
with rich Tapestries and sumptuous Carpets: Then he appeared himself upon the
Scaffold, glittering in a Robe of Tissue, set with precious Stones, and
discoursed to the People of his Actions, and the whole Course of his Life: And
having declared the Kindnesses which he had showed the Captive Pottugalls, at a
time of necessity; he most saoly and bitterly complained of his being
undeservedly put by his Command: Then reproaching the Ingratitude of the
P^r^ugalls, (such fatal Fury did his Ambition inspire him with) he threw
himself headlong into the burning Pile, a Contemner of Death.

Aelian relates a Contempt of Death not much unlike this. The end of Calamus,
says he, is worthy to be mentioned, if not to be admired. It was thus; When he
had taken his leave of Alexander, the Macedonians, and a long life, he made him
a Funeral Pile in the fairest part of the Suburbs of Babylon, composed of
Cedar, Cypress, Myrtle, Laurel, and o her sweet Wood; and having performed his
usual exercise of Running, he ascended the Pile, and stood Crowned upon the
heap of Word; the Sun whom he Adored, shining all the while. Which done, he
gave the Macedonians a Sign to kindle the Pile: Which being now all of a light
Fire, Calanus wrapped up in Flames, stood still unmoved, till he fell as the heap
fell, and expired in the midst of the Ashes. Alexander, admiring the Courage of
the Man, is reported to have said, That Calanus had vanquished more Potent
Enemies than he. For Alexander had waged War with Prous, Taxilus and Darius;
but Calanus with Labor and Death. Shall the vain Heathens show so much Courage
in Death, and Christians, trusting in God, be afraid and tremble? Death is not
an evil, but the fear of Death is an evil. Let us, I beseech ye, examine things
themselves, and not the Nature of things. If we believe Seneca, Death is the
best Invention of Nature, the Remedy of all Evils. Why therefore do we fear at
last? Immortal Peace, Eternal Joy will entertain us. Let us take Courage from
the despair of longer Life. Make that a Virtue, which would be necessity.
Certainly a prudent Christian does nothing unwillingly; he avoids all
necessity, because he wills what that would compel him to. Let us therefore do
willingly, what we cannot but do. Let us with a contented Mind expect our end,
or rather our beginning. He shall be always serene and calm in his Mind who
contemns Death.

Sect. 7. A Man ready to dye.
ZENO, the Critic, as Swidas relates, as he was going out of his School,
chanced to stumble, and hurt his Toe. But he believing himself called to the
Grave, struck the Ground with his Hand, adding these Words, I come, Wherefore
do thou call me? Thus the old* Man of Ninety Years of Age, died, without ever
being Sick. Hunger was a great Friend to Zeno; for he frequently fasted till he
fainted. But willingly Zeno made himself so sick, that he might not be sick,
and that he might enjoy a quiet old Age, free from Diseases: Both he attained
to according to his wish. Let us not wonder at the shortness of our Lives, nor
the incertainty of our Health: For we wast our Health, and our Lives, with
Giuttony and Drinking, never thinking our selves satisfied, till our crammed
Bellies be as hard as a Drum. Ridiculous, yea, Mad Men, we shorten our Lives by
those things, which ought to lengthen it. But that proceeds from this, because
we will not be persuaded, that Abstinence has so great a power to prolong Life.
But daily experience tells us, that the saying is true; so much food as you
spare, so many days you add. But to the Business.

Vrsinus, the Priest, as St. Gregory witnesses, being comforted, with a
Celestial Vision, in his Sleep, often cried out, I come, I come, I return
thanks; and when he had declared to the standers by what he had seen, he
repeated the same Words, I come, behold I come; and with these Words in his
Mouth he expired.

A Mind prepared for Death, thus speaks, I come behold I come. It Is too late to
layter here; we strive in vain against the Stream; Nature is a Mother, not a
Step-dame. Do thou accuse Nature? O Theophrastus, as if less favorable to
Man than Beasts, certainly she intended more to him than to them: For which is
best, to suffer quickly what thou art no more to fear, or to fear long what
thou art slowly to endure? Nature gives a long torment to Man, when she grants
him a short Life.

-- For always all Men must expect,
Their Day perfix'd. --
What art thou then afraid of? Is thy Life taken from thee? Not only so; but
also the fear of Death and most Evils of Life. This is the general choice of
most Men, rather to suffer quickly what we ought, than to continue long in fear
and pain. There is little difference, says the second Pliny, between suffering
and expecting Misfortunes. Only that there is a Measure of Fear and not of
Grief: For thou may bewail and grieve for what thou know has happened;
thou fear what may happen.

Therefore, come Death, I am thy Debtor, I will pay what I owe, when ever God
requires me. Therefore freely, willingly,

Will I the number of my days complete,
And straight surrender up my soul to fate.
Hoping to ascend from the dark Grave to everlasting Light. Death is not an
Evil, but Punishment after Death is an Evil.

Sect. 8. They fear Death, who foresee it not.
MOST certain it is, that nothing terrifies so much, as an unexpected necessity
of dying. Behold how they, who are subject to the power of another, being
commanded a long Journey, pack up their things in haste, sollicitous and sad;
how they murmur because they had no longer warning. As they are upon their
departure they often look back, pretending this and the other Obstacle. Now there
is no longer Journey than to Die; no way more crabbed, more dark, more hard to
find, none more suspicious and infested with Robbers. Besides there is no
return again. Therefore we must the more heedfully take care that we leave
nothing behind. There is a necessity of going thither, fellow Soldiers, said
the Roman Captain, from whence there is no necessity of returning. There is
only one remedy, to answer being called, and to obey being commanded! Alas, How
improvident are they, who never take care to provide for thy Journey? They take
care to fare well, the rest they commit to Fortune.

Smyndirides, that debauched young Man, was wont to brag, that in Twenty Years,
he had not seen the Sun rising or setting, being contiaually either a Bed or at
his Rio^. I fear one of you may find many like him among the Christians, who
make Gluttony, Playing, and Drinking, their greatest Business. To these will
happen, that which Cicero, in his Epistles, foretold to Brutus. Believe me,
says he, you will be ruined unless you provide well. Thus it will happen to
all unwary People, that want foresight. Foresight is necessary in all things,
especially in those things that are never to be done but once; where one
mistake draws a thousand along with it. This is the Condition of Death, one
Error causes a thousand Mistakes. To err once there, is to perish eternally. O
blind Mortals, it will happen to you, as it happens to them that shut their
Eyes against their Enemies Swords, in a Battle, as if they were not to feel the
danger which they see not. Ye shall be smitten, ye shall die, ye shall be
sensible, and feel the stroke; but whether blind or seeing, that is at your
choice. You refuse to think upon Death which you must shortly think upon and
seel. The sufferance would soon follow when the Consideration precedes.

Sect. 9. They fear Death, who are negligent of Life.
NEither is there any Question to be made of this. They chiefly fear to die,
who know not how to live; who believe no other Happiness but that of the Body.
Who only know how to eat well, drink well, and sleep well, and place all their
Heaven in pleasure; persons certainly most obedient, but to their Bellies, not
to the Divine Will. Of whom St. Gregory truly said, They know not what the
Celestial Souls desire, who set their Hearts upon Earthly Delights.

A prudent Christian, that takes no more care of the Body than of a mean and
abject Slave, looks upon Death no otherwise than a Morning departure out of a
dark, unpleasant and incommodious Inn. Whoever thou art thou can not fear thy
Exit as of this Life, if thou hopest to enter into the other. Thy fear arises
from hence. For though there are many causes vulgarly given of this fear; yet
they all vanish upon the hopes of a more blessed Life. He who seriously aspires
to Heaven fears not these Baubles. To such a Man, Labor, Sadness, Grief,
Contempt, Ignominy, Loss, Servitude, Poverty, Old Age, are nothing else but the
School of Experience, the Time of Patience, and the Honor of Victory.

Sect. 10. Three Things hardly supportable in Sickness.
IN almost all Sickness three things are hardly supportable, Fear of Death,
Pain of the Body, Discontinuance from Pleasure. But as hot Diseases are Cured
by cold, cold by hot Medicines* so are they Cured by their own Antidotes.
Therefore the fear of Death is to be Cured by Love, but by Divine Love; a
little Dose of Divine Love will dispel the fumes of vain fear. He that loves
Christ will the less love Life; and shall perceive the love of Christ to him.

-- By words alone this is not proved,
Love, Marcus, love if thou would be beloved.
Pain of the Body is to be asswag'd by tranquillity of Conscience: A guiltless
Mind is a wonderful Consolation to the Sick. And indeed a pure Conscience is a
potent remedy against all Torments. That also asswages pain, as St. Gregory
intimates in these words. More easily will the Sick Person endure pain, if he
bear but this in his mind:

The most Just God will have me suffer this.

But Discontinuance from Pleasure, will nothing at all afflict him who thinks
upon Eternal Joys. Those which leave, are vain, short, and filthy, and before
they are forsaken frequently leave their admirers; those which we promise our
selves, Immense, Stable and Eternal. He easily contemns Fading Delights, who
sincerely hopes for Eternal.

Sect. 11. Sickness the Sport of Virtue.
THou art well smitten, if thy Conscience be smitten. Sickness is the School of
Virtue; it is also called a kind of Slaughterhouse of Vice, whoever is sick is
a Scholar in this School. On the other side, Sickness is the Slaughterhouse of
Virtue to some, and the School of Vice; while they are well, they are mad.
While they are well, they have a hundred Businesses; the Business of God is
their last care. How many are Chaste, while they are Sick; when they recover
they return to their former filthy Lusts. Such people would do better Sick, to
whom health is so dangerous. These therefore God ties them to the Bed of
Sickness, that they may be at leisure to themselves, and may mind their
Salvation: Forsake Vanity and look after Heaven. Sickness intangles the Body in
a thousand Miseries, but frees the Soul from as many. It Is the saying of St.
Paul, Though our outward Man perish, yet the inward Man is 2 Cor. 4. v. 16.
renewed day by day. Hence though Sickness seem evil, nay the worst of
Sufferings, it then becomes the best, when it renders the Sick Person more
holy. Many when they feel the pain, correct the crime. A sick Soul seldom
inhabits but in a healthy Body.

Sect. 12. The Sickness of the Body is the Salvation of the Soul.
SIckness exhorts to Parcimony; disswades from Lust, and is the Mistress of
Modesty. Do thou lay aside all Care, whatever happens to the Body thou art
safe, to the Mind be in health. For the sickness of the Body has been of great
advantage in many to the health of the Soul. That sublime person raised from
nothing, from the Water below, elevated to the Stars, who keeps the Keys of
Heaven, whose only shadow expelled the Distempers and Diseases of the Body;
being once asked why he suffered his own Daughter to lie under the Oppression
of a violent Disease? made answer, It is convenient for her. How know thou
but that it may be as convenient for thee? The same Person, when he found his
D^ughter might be safely Cured, recovered her, and made her fit to Cure others.
Do thou also take care that thy health may do thee good, and perhaps thou shall
recover. Lastly, take care of thy Soul above all things, and offer it up to the
Heavenly Physician to be Cured. And as to what remains, hope if not for what is
needful for, yet for what is convenient fot thee. Sickness is a very unpleasant
Companion, but a faithful, which often pulls ye by the Sleeve, and admonishes
thee of thy condition. A saithful Admonisher is a most certain safeguard in
danger. If the Sickness be remediless, be silent and rejoice, for that thou
shall be the sooner free from a loathsome and ruinous Prison. Most excellent was
the saying of Gregory Nazianzene. A sick Soul is near to God.

Sect. 13. Sickness admonishes us of Eternity.
HOW great a Benefit is this, that the Miseries of this present Life, by a
short Experience should admonish us of Eternity. Therefore let the sick person
labor to avoid infinite Miseries, while so impatiently endures the
Bitternesses here; let him learn by pains not long lasting to avoid pains
Eternal, which neither Pothecary nor Physician, no Drug nor Herb, not Death it
self can Cure. There are several ways to Death; but, but one to Eternity.

Anaxagoras dying in a Foreign Country, when his Friends asked him, whether he
would be carried back into his Country, There is no necessity, said he, and
added the reason, for the way is wide enough every where to the Infernal
Shades. This answer may as well be fit those who are Traveling up to Heaven. O
happy and profitable Flame of a Fever, because short! O dreadful Funeral Piles
of Hell, because Eternal.

Some Remedies are made out of some Poisons, and oft-times a small and present
pain admonishes us to prevent the approach of Excessive pains that threaten to
twinge us: And that which was troublesome became profitable. Thus every Disease
the more it perplexes and torments us, the more it admonishes us of Eternity,
either in perpetual Joy or Misery. Let the healthy take care, let the sick be
mindful whither they go. Pleasure and Sorrow here are bounded within very
narrow limits. All the Felicity of Mortals is Mortal; and within the same
bounds are all Miseries restrained.

For bright Eternity no limits knows.
So that, an Age of Time, a Tittle shows.
Sect. 14. Therefore is Death to be desired.
I Have said, Infirmity of Body is often to be desired, to the end thou may
be the sooner a Freeman and a Victor. This did he desire who said, Most gladl^
therefore will I glory in my infi^mities. For my strength is 2 Cor. 12. v. 9,
10.
made perfect in weakness; therefore have I delectation in Infirmities. As a
good Sword may be often in a bad Scabbard, so in weak and sickly Body of^-times
lies hid a stout and courageous Mind. That strength is to be desired which
neither Time nor Fortune decays. A sick person is not fit to carry Burdens, or
for digging and delving, but to exercise his patience, and maintain and
increase his Faith. So a Shipboard, the stronger Row, but the more prudent
stand at the Helm. Life is like a Ship, ^ossed with the Waves of Business, and
the Sea of the World; it has its Oars, and its Helm. If thou can not perform
the meaner Offices, apply thy self to the more noble. The true and generous
strength of Man is in his Soul. The Body, the Soul's House, how strong or how
weak it is, is nothing to a Guest of a few days: If the House fall, there is a
necessity of removing somewhere else; and being hence excluded, that necessity
carries us unto a perpetual Mansion. Strength is perfected in weakness; so that
although it seem so bad, yet is that evil so much the rather to be desired, as
being the prevention of a greater. The condition of most is then most
prosperous, when most infirm and weak.

Sect. 15. What is to be read in Sickness*
ZEm the Son of Demius, having consulted the Oracle to know how he might lead
the best Life, had this answer given him. If he made himself of the same color
with the dead, that is, if he conversed with the dead. Or as Suidas expounds
it, if he read the writings of the Ancients. To dwell among Books, being to
live among the dead. And this familiarity with the dead is the best Life. But
it is the same madness to lay before the Sick whole Libraries, and huge
Volumes, as to set before them full Meals of Flesh. A little Broth or a small
Sallet must serve them, so a little Book is enough for them for several Months:
However still something is to be read to the Sick, if the Disease and Pain will
give leave, but they are to be read as they eat. What they eat, they do not
presently swallow, but chew first. So what they read, they must not carelessly
pass over, but they are to consider, and as it were to weigh every little
sentence. Otherwise to read is to neglect. But let the Sick Man's only Book be
Christ Crucified. Let him read that Book continually, wherein he will find as
many Comforts, as Words and Wounds.

Sect. 16. In Sickness we are often to pray.
SO I say we must always pray in sickness. Neither is this a thing of any great
difficulty to a sick person. For either with his Tongue if he have strength
enough, may he pronounce his Prayers to God. Or if his Tongue be numm'd, or
that his voice be intercepted by weakness, a suppliant Mind is to be lifted up
to Heaven, while the Body lies quiet, but only for some ardent groans that
distinguish these private Colloquies with God in Sickness. But there is also a
sort of Sickness that does not only interrupt the voice, but even oppresses the
very Soul it self: But then Patience and Suffering are to be offered up for
Prayers to God, to whom Pain is a grateful Sacrifice, so that Patience be
joined with it. He prays well, who suffers well. Neither may he be said to
pray, but to obtain by Prayer of God, who sends such Eloquent Messengers to him
as Pain and Patience. But let him be such a sick person, whose Speech may be
interrupted, whose Mind may be broken, and whose Patience may be at a loss. Yet
there is a way for him to pray. Let him look about, he shall see some sitting,
some standing by him, ready to help and assist him. How easy is it then to
cast in a word by the by; how easy is it for him to point or cry to his
Friend, say this Prayer, read this Psalm, or that Paragraph. Who so
hard-hearted, as to deny so small a Duty to the Sick? So that when a sick
person cannot pray with his own, he may with another Lips. And therefore I
repeat this again, Pray always in Sickness. We can never unseasonably have
recourse to God.

Sect. 17. In Pain, and at other times, what is to be meditated upon, what to
be done every day.
A Man that trusts in God, though oppressed with Miseries, and full of Pain,
may rightly say this; while I breathe I hope, and so much always the better the
nearer to my end I find my self. Seneca has most excellently Philosophized
concerning pain. No Man, says he, can feel excessive pain and long; for thus
has Nature most favorable to us ordered it, that pain should be either
tolerable or short. For the intense excess of grief finds an end. Therefore
this is the Comfort of vast pain, that thou must of necessity cease to feel it,
if thou feel it overmuch. But this is that which troubles the unskilful in
the pains of the Body: They are not content with their Souls alone, they have
still so much Business with the Body. And therefore O Sick Person, accustom thy
self by degrees to wean thy Soul from thy Body, and to converse with thy better
and more Divine part; but with thy Body, the frail and weak part no more than
needs must. And though pain is seldom so constant but that it has some
intermission; therefore do not think that all Exercise of the Soul is to be
omitted, when thou lie sick, when thou feel pain. Above all things, take
care that thy Morning Prayers, and thy Evening Examination of thy Conscience,
as much as in thee lies, may make a due progress: If thy Tongue fail thee, let
thy Mind pray. Never begin the Night, nor compose thy self to sleep, till thou
have examined thy Conscience: In the daytime when thy pain-ceases or relaxes,
take a good Book, and there read and weigh every Period; every Day set aside a
small Hour for Prayer, pious Groans, and humble Ejaculations; so thou will
believe thy self to have prayed an Hour in Heaven.

At the beginning and end of all thy Prayers, refer thy self wholly to the will
of God with a prepared Obedience. All which things are so far from difficulty,
that a dying man may perform them, as well as he whose Pain is not so severe.
If thou can not, or rather will not perform these Duties, yet for that one
little Hour patiently endure thy Pains: Make not thy Misery more intolerable
than it is, nor burden thy self with Complaints. Pain is the Lighter of
Opinion and Conceit, and not to the Weight. On the other side, if thou beginst
to exhort thy self, and say, It Is nothing, or else it is very little, let us
endure, it will be over by and by; thou will make it easy while thou believ'st
it so. Every Man is miserable as far as he believes himself to be so.

Sect. 18. We are of one Opinion in Health, of another in Sickness.
LAcides the Philosopher, when he had lost the most of his Houshold-Goods; We
dispute, says he, otherwise in the Schools than we live at home. Thus the
Healthy well suggest a thousand Consolations to the Sick: But where is that
sick person who is able to comfort himself. How like Glass is our Srength,
cracked with the least crush. We think our selves made of Brass, when we are in
health, and in a manner challenge pain; but when they come, we fly them, we
fall, we lie down before any Conflict with the Enemy. We are Men, thou say,
and dying Bodies are not able to endure the force of Pain, I deny not but that
Humane Bodies are frail, yet not so infirm, but that they have strength enough
to endure any Affliction; unless the Mind be weaker than the Body: It Is our
softness that causes so many Deserters of Courage, while they refuse all
Extremities as intolerable* But Courage dies, if you take away the Subject of
it, which is, Difficulty.

Sect. 19. Pious Ejaculations to God in all Sickness and Infirmity.
O Lord, my Strength, my Power and Refuge in time of Trouble, Jer. 16. v. 19.

It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3. v. 18.

O Father, Let Job be well tried, because he has answered for wicked men, Job
34. v. 36.

Before I was troubled, I went wrong; but now have I kept thy Word, Psalm 119.

Therefore have I delectation in Infirmities, in Rebukes, in Necessity, in
Persecutions, in Anguishes, for Christ's sake; for when I am weak, then am I
strong. 2 Cor. 12. 10.

And now, O Lord, deal with me according to thy will, and command my Spirit to
be received in peace. Tobias, c. 3. v. 6.

Sect. 20. Certain Vices of Sick-people.
FIrst, To listen after Curiosities, News and Trifles.

2. Not to give Ear to the Admonitions of Death.

3. To complain of those that look after them.

4. To refuse their Diet as ill dressed.

5. To find fault with the Bed, as ill made.

6. To believe they are not well looked after, and therefore to murmur and be
angry.

7. Seldom to discourse of God and divine things.

8. Not to be resigned in all things, and submissive to the will of God.

9. To believe some things intolerable, and not digest all things with a
Christian Patience.

Now I would fain know of thee, O sick Man, what concerns it thee, what is
transacted in Germany, France, Italy, or Spain? Do thou rather enquire what is
done in Heaven among the Saints? Or what is done in Hell, among the Cursed. Let
the dead bury the dead. Do thou only mind thy Salvation; that is the only one
thing necessary. What have thou to do with News and false Reports? Thou do
not profit thy self thereby, but offend others. Why art thou angry with those
that mind thee of the approaching danger? Know 'em, they are the Heralds of
Death. I beseech thee do not imitate those old Men, many of which perhaps thou
have known, to whom it was death to hear any one disccursing of Death. Have
thou not hitherto profited more then so childishly to fear Death? Have tho^ not
learnt in so many years calmly, quietly, and undisturbedly to die? What are
thou afraid o^? Commit thy self entirely to the will of God, and* thy business
is almost done. If thou will believe those who have had a large prospect into
Truth; All life is a punishment.

Here I seasonably cite to thee the words of the wise Roman: Being thrown,
says he, into this deep and unquiet Sea, flowing with uncertain Tides, now
advancing us with sudden increase of Riches, now again leaving us upon the
barren Sands of greater Losses, we can never stand fixed in any place. We float
up and down, are washed one against another, and sometimes we make an absolute
Shipwreck, but are always in fear. Neither is there any Port, but that of
Death, to them that sail in this stormy and tempestuous Ocean.

But every Man's Credulity deceives him, and a willing forgetfulness of Death,
for the sake of those things which he loves. Daily we behold the Funerals of
persons known and unknown; yet we mind other business, and account that
unexpected, which was foretold us all our lifetime before. It Is not the
injustice of Nature, but the depravedness of humane Reason that takes it ill to
forsake that place, to which it was admitted but of Courtesy. He is unjust who
will not leave the disposal of the Gift to him that gave it. And an extreme
piece of Covetousness it is, not to look upon what a man has received as gain,
but what he restores as a loss. Ungrateful is he that calls the end of Pleasure
an Injury. A Fool, who thinks there is no good but what is present; immediately
all pleasure leaves us, and is snatched away almost before it comes. Overnarrow
and circumscribed are his Joys, who thinks he possesses only what he has and
sees. Therefore let us rejoice for what is given, and restore it when it is
required Death seises upon one at one time, he will pass by none. Therefore let
the Soul lie upon the watch, and never be asraid of that which will necessarily
happen, which is uncertain, and always to be expected. I know not whether it be
a greater piece of Folly to be ignorant of that Law of Morality, or more
impudent to deny it. All Men, all Creatures look toward their latter end; who
ever is born, is destined to die, and prepared for an Eternity.

Sect. 21. Certain Theses which the Sick are to contend against with all their
might.
The first, Concerning God.
It Is an Impiety against God, the chief Parent of the World, to complain in the
least, as if he should send a Sickness either too troublesome, or too
unseasonable. Rather let us say with Job, As the Lord pleases, let it be done;
the Name of the Lord be praised. And with the blessed Quire, let us sing, He
has justly done all things; For whether God wound or heal, he shows the Care
and Affection of a most compassionate Father toward us.

The second, Concerning the sick Party himself.
A more violent Disease requires not longer or more constant Prayers, but a
longer and more constant Patience; by which whatever is accounted difficult, is
more easily performed. The seasonings that make Sickness pleasant, are frequent
Groans to Heaven, the remembrance of Afflictions suffered by all the Saints.
Repeated Ejaculations, sometimes to the Holy Trinity, sometimes to Christ for
constant Patience, and a happy passage out of this Life.

The Third, Concerning other Men.
We are to submit as well to the Physicians of the Body, as the Soul. To those
that come to visit us in Sickness, we are to show a good Example of Patience
and a composed Mind. And though the Disease be grievous, though many things
afflict us, though some things displease us, other things are not done to our
minds, never to fret and murmur. All our Troubles are to be seasoned with the
hope of Reward. Our Deeds and Sayings to be rendered commendable by Submission
and Patience.

Sect. 22. The Thirst of a Sick-man, how to be cured.
MOst sick People are afflicted with Thirst, especially they that are in
Fevers. We will show them Fountains, whence they may take their fill.

A Thief notorious for the murder of several, was taken in the lower Austria,
and fastened to the Wheel, where his Thighs were first broken, to prolong the
Torment of an extraordinary Criminal, for a terror to others. But this
Malefactor showed himself a man, and began to be a most Religious Christian in
the midst of his Torments; for at every word, he breathed out nothing but
Patience and Repentance. He called upon God continually, implored Pardon for
his Crimes, and like a Pretcher, began to dehort the Standers by from wicked
Courses, such as he had taken. By this it grew toward Evening, when the
Multitude flock^, some as Comforters of so great a Sufferer; though indeed only
as Spectators of a generous Patience. For he prostrate to his Punishment, that
he might find a better Life, asswag'd his present Pain with the Hope of future
Happiness; and gave God thanks, who in his Wrath had remembered Mercy, and had
chastised him to spare him. But in that slow Torment, which it was thought
would have lasted three days, he only prayed a quick Death to end the Fury of
his Pains, or the opportunity of a Shower to assuage his burning Heat and
Drought. It was observed that he had the Assistance of both; for toward
Sunset there fell a plentiful Shower, and in short, while after his Torments
and his Life ended both together.

Behold, O Christian, thou have also thy Wheel, though a more gentle one; thou
art tied to thy Bed as to that Wheel: And perhaps not only Pain but Drought may
afflict thee. Therefore that a seasonable Shower may fall upon thee, cause thy
Bed to be made in Golgotha, at the foot of that Cross, to which the Savior of
the World was nailed, from whose Body fell Showers of Blood. There drink, there
refresh thy self, there satisfy thy self; being well^ssured that thou shall be
the more perfectly cured, the more largely thou drinkest.

Sect. 23. The Sick-man's Handkerchief.
CRosildis the Queen of the Franks, as Gregory Turonicus reports, being cruelly
used by Amalan^ her Husband, sent a white linen Cloth dipped in her Blood, to
her Brother Childebert, as much as if she should have wrote to her Brother, and
have said, See thou these Marks, Childebert, and can thou brook them? Can
thou behold the Sufferings of a Sister and wink at them? Will thou not revenge
and deserd m^.

Behold, O Sick-man, Christ sends thee a Handkerchief, nay two; the one from
Mount Olivet, liliberally dyed in his Blood; in the other, thou see his Face
besmeared with Sweat, Spittle, Blood, and Tears, while he dragged his own Cross
to Golgotha. These linen Clothes Christ sends to thee be-purll'd with his
Blood, wherein he has wrote these words; This Sweat, O mortals, your Sins
forced from me: Can you see these and not abandon your former wicked life?
Certainly no person mo^e truly bewails suffering Christ, than he who begins to
hate those things for which Christ suffered.

Sect. 24. The Sick man's Bed.
THE Sick-mans Bed burns, though upon Sard^n^pa^^s's Down, ^r the Roses of
Smyrd^^ides, is, may be soft. Sm^ndi^^des a young man, samous for his
Effeminacy, finding that the tender Feathers hurt his Skin, would needs try
whether he could lie any softer upon a Bed of Roses, and yet that fragrant and
soft Lodging was too hard for his delicate and tender Sides, because the
Feathers had wheal'd his Skin the Night before.

A Sick-man, though he lay upon Hare's-wool, or Partridge Feathers, would think
he lay hard. But he is to be pardoned* his Pains cause him to complain. But we
can show you Beds much more uneasy. Laurence the Martyr, had a beginning
Gridiron for his Bed After him Vincentius the Martyr, and many others. This was
a hard and uneasy Bed indeed, yet Love made it soft and easy.

The Persians formerly inflicted, a most severe Punishment upon the Persians,
which was called Scaphismus,; for the Christian that was to be tormented, was
laid upon his Back between two hollow pieces of Wood, with his Head, Hands and
Feet out: For his Food, he had Honey and Milk, poured into his Mouth against
his will. Thus in the D^y-time he was exposed to the heat of the Sun, with his
Eyelids distended upward and downward. His Head, Hands and Feet were also at
the same time anointed with Honey, which brought infinite swarms of Flies and
Wasps to feed upon his bare Flesh, so that the Corruption extending to the
enclosed parts, engendered Worms; which together with the Flies and Wasps made a
tedious Banquet upon his miserable Carcass. And this Torment was the Martyr
forced to endure, sometimes fifteen, sometimes seventeen, and sometimes more
D^ys together. Consider this Bed, O Sick man, this miserable and tormenting
Lodging of a suffering Martyr; How gentle are thy Pains to his! How soft is thy
Bed to this! How is thy Disease a matter of nothing to these Torments! Be
silent therefore, and preserve thy Patience. He that is a Companion of the
Cross, shall be a Companion of Paradise. It was an excellent Saying of the
blessed Salvianus; To me it seems to be a kind of health, for a man to be only
sometimes in health.

Sect. ^5. The Garden of Christ is the delight of a Sick-man.
WHen Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his Disciples over the
Brook Kedron, where was a Garden, i^to which he entered and his Disciples, John
18. v. 1. Enter this Garden, O Sick-man, all the Saints invite thee: Here shall
thou hear things to be admired, and see things more wonderful. In this Garden,
Joy it self began to grow sad. My Soul is exceeding heavy, even to death, tarry
ye here and watch. I beseech thee, let these words concern thee, O sick Man.
Tarry here a while, and watch with thy Lord. The Spirit is ready, but the Flesh
is frail. O Father, if thou will, remove this Cup from m', nevertheless, not my
will, but thine be done. Yet the third time he reiterates this Prayer. Father
if this Cup cannot pass from me unless I drink it, thy will be done. In these
streights, O Christ, there is no Man living that can mitigate the least of thy
pains: None that can supply thy place, that can give the least word of
Consolation to thy Sorrows. Thy chiefest Friends forsake, thy Disciples more
forward in their Tongues than Hearts, renounce thee; a little before prepared
to be bound and die with thee, anon seeking which way to save themselves by
flight. Only thou alone, O Christ, watchest, prayest; thou do both labor and
sweat. O happy Garden, be purpled by thy Lord, and studded as it were, with the
starry drops of his Blood. Thou heardst those groans and sobs, those sighs
intermixed with Tears, those Prayers interrupted with deadly Moans; privy to
the Sorrows that overwhelmed Christ, to the Sleep, that seized his Disciples.
Others talk of the Gardens of Adonis and Alcinous; they were Trifles, wild
Fields overgrown with Brambles, compa^ed to thee. The Elysian Fields are
nothing in respect of thy Dignity. Nor should I err, to say, thou were a
Paradise more happy than the first. O happy Earth, that drankest the Blood of
thy Lord, on which before never fell so precious a Dew. But, Oh Earth, did
not thou blush to be pressed with so Sacred a weight; to be sprinkled with so
noble a Liquor. Yes certainly, thou did begin to blush, be-scarleted with
that most precious Vermillion, when the new Gardener had watered thee with his
Distilling Purple. From this Gardener^let the sick Man learn to pray. In this
Garden to gather Posies, is to join together several Acts of Patience.

Sect. 26. Christ's Bed among the Olives.
THere is no more effectual Comfort to a sick Man than that Bed of Christ in
the Shades of Olivet. But Oh! it is very hard and full of pain. Behold and
attend. No sooner was Christ entered into the Garden, but he began to fear,
look pale, be troubled, groan, display his sadness, confess his heaviness,
betray his Anguish in his Countenance, to desire Companions in his watching and
his prayers, often to go and return to and fro from his Company, yet no comfort
or quiet could he find. And then behold again how he falls upon his Knees, how
he entreats the wrathful Father, how he interrupts his words with sighs, and
begs that the Cup may be removed, yet not desiring his own, but the will of the
Father to be done. How he wiped off the trickling Sweat from his bloody Cheeks.
In this Fatal Bed of Earth, O Spectacle to be bewailed of Men! Even to be
lamented* by the Angels themselves. And his Luke 22. v. 44.
Sweat was like drops of Blood trickling d^wn to the ground. Thus Christ wept
and lamented with his whole Body; the Tear^ and those bloody ones burst forth
every where. Suci^ haste did the Divine Love make to our Salvation, that by
Bands seemed to him to be delayed, the Scourge and Pill^r to be tardy, and the
Thorns and Nails to tarry too long; the very Cross it self seemed to be
deferred. So God loved the World. O immense Love, for the fulfilling whereof,
one Death was ^ugh, which before Death, caused Li^e^^ to die; so that the most
Loving Jesus, was constrained to perish Limb by Limb, to consume Drop by Drop,
and by the slow distilling of his Blood to breath out his Soul several ways:
And yet he loved more, than he suflered; and more he desired to endure, than
Humane Nature was able to bear. Death seemed to him the slightest of his
Punishments, nor was it enough for him to die once in Golgotha, unless he had
died before in Gethseman. It had been a small thing for him to have expired
between Thieves, had he not reaked before with bloody Sweat, to show how he had
been Scourged. O Christ! As yet the Roman Executioner does not appear, the
hooked Wyre does not yet tear thy Flesh. The great Nails are not yet driven
through thy Hands and Feet, and yet already such plentiful Fountains of Blood
flow from thee. What will become of thee to Morrow, when thy whole Body shall
be but one Pool, one continued Wound? To day only Rivers, to Morrow Seas of
Blood will flow, and this little Bed among the Olives will seem soft in respect
of that cruel and severe Lodging upon the Cross.

In either of these, O my sick Friend, lay thy self down, and thou will
presently feel ease from all thy pains. Thou will easily bear thy own, when
thou considerest the Torments of thy Lo^^^.

Sect. 27. The Consent and Harmony of Humane with Divine Will.
AS there is nothing more easy for the healthy, for the sick, or for dying
persons to do, so there is nothing more profitable than to will what God will.
This is to be practiced Day and Night, Morning, Noon and Evening perpetually,
constantly, by Sick and Healthy, and by all Men. Epictetus was a most wise
Doctor in this, by the bare instructions of Nature. I think that better, says
he, what God will have done, than what I my self. I wait upon him as a Servant;
I desire what he desires; I wish for what he wishes. Whatever his will is that
is mine. And that he may show the manner how, in all Humane Affairs the will of
God is to be followed, adding this Moreover. Always, faith he, I choose to will
that which is done. For whatever is done (sin excepted) is done by the will of
God. For which reason this most wise Philosopher admonishing every Man; never
require that those things which are done, should be done according to thy
Disposal. But if thou art wise, be content that things are done as they are. He
that accommodates himself to necessity is wise, and is privy to the Humane
Mysteries.

Epictetus discoursing more affirmatively of conforming the will of Man to the
Divine Will; I should desire, says he, to be seized by death, employed in no
other business than in curing my will, that being free from trouble and
impediment I might say to God^, Have I ever violated thy Precepts? Have I
misapplied the parts which thou gave me? Have I ever accused thee? Have I
ever found fault with thy Government? I fell sick because it was thy will.
Others fell sick, but I willingly. It was thy will, I should be poor, I was
content. I never was in command, because it was thy Will. I never for that
reason coveted or sought after Honor. Did thou ever see me the sadder for
this? Did I ever approach thee with a Countenance cheerful? Prepared to obey
whatever thou command. Would thou have me abandon the Gaiety of Masks? I
am gone. And I return thee most hearty thanks that thou wi^t be pleased to admit
me to thy Enterludes, to behold thy Works, and understand thy manner and order
of Government. Let such a Death as this seize upon me, either Thinking,
VVriting or Reading.

O Heavens! How like a Christian, how like a Wise Man, how like a Divine
Person! What do we do, O Christians? What shame possesses us if we blush not at
these things? We are Brute Beasts, yea, Stones and Rocks, if our Senses return
not to us, upon this bright and resplendent Information of Nature. But let the
Rebels to Divine Will hearken; let them hear and answer to Epictetus, requiring
from them nothing but what is ^ust. Show me, says he, any one who is sick and
happy, in danger and happy; that dies and is blessed. Show me, says he, a Mind
that is of Gods Mind, one that never acouses God nor Men, finds fault with
nothing that befalls him, who is in wrath with no Man, who envies no Man; then
show me the person, who of a Man desires to become a God. Certainly it may be
done by this Conjunction of wills. Therefore let not the sick person refuse to
be wise with the same Epictetus: And let him say, Carry me, O God, and thy
Divine Will, whither I am by thee appointed. For I will follow cheerfully. For
if I obstinately and wickedly hang back, I shall be compelled to follow.
Therefore if it be the will of God, let it be done.

Therefore let us in all things, in Sickness, in Death, submit to the Will of
God; or let us confess our Antipathy and Aversion against all that is good and
right: He desires to be wicked, who for the nonce refused to be good.

Sect. 28. Despair to be prevented.
THere is nothing more dangerous than despair, nor can the Enemy of Salvation
find out any thing worse for Man. For all other things are mitigated by their
own Cures. This is the chiefest and the last of Mischiess, so that when it
oppresses the Departing Soul, there is no room for any remedy. Therefore is it
always, especially in the end, more vehemently to be withstood, because it then
presses on with greater force, and there is no delaying such Councils as are
fit to be taken for thy Salvation. The neglect of the last Hour is altogether
irreparable. He shall never rise again, whose fall is deadly there. Therefore
at length awake, O sick Man; it is better never wake till the Evening. What is
ill delayed, is worse omitted. Lift up thy Eyes to Heaven; the Breast of thy
Crucified Lord is always open, his Embraces always expanded; his Wounds always
prepared to health. Neither is there any necessity of long Prayers. Repent that
thou have been in an Error, and thy desire possibly is granted Say from thy
Heart, I have sinned. Thou may hope God is propitious to thee. Promise
amendment; and thou may obtain pardon. There is no sin of Man so great, but
the Mercy of God is above it. Hope for this; Hope makes not ash^med. Cor. 5.
v. 5. Psalm. 145. Isa 50. v. 2.
The Lord is loving unto every Man; and his Mercy is over all his Works. Here
the Lord himself* Is my hand shortened, that it might not help? or have I not
power to deliver?

But we are for the most part altogether deceived: Fervent in sin; after sin
committed, cold* We exult in sin, despair when we remember our sins. Many sin
out of hopes of pardon. Both bad, but this latter far worse. Therefore cast
away that fatal burden of sin: There is one, who being sought to, will take it
from thy Shoulders, who has taken greater burdens from others; to whom there
is nothing hard or difficult. Only do thou make no delay. And though there be
no excuse for a slothful delay; yet a late amendment is not without
commendation. It is better to repent late than never. Therefore take to thy
self Courage and Breath; a few Tears will extinguish the Flames of Hell. An
humble and a contrite Heart God will not despise.

Sect. 29. The hope of better Life mitigates our Miseries.
With Seneca, I demand of thee, O my sick Friend, why do thou wonder at thy
Miseries? Thou art Born therefore, that thou should lose, that thou should
perish, that thou should hope, that thou should fear, that thou should
disquiet others and thy self too, that thou should fear and wish for death,
and which is more, that thou should never know thy condition, nor when thou
were safe. Besides that every thing of future is uncertain, only that we are
certain to decay for the worse; the Journey to Heaven is more easy, when we
have dismissed our Thoughts from worldly Conversation. For so they become
lighter and freer from Dregs. Great Genius's never covet a long stay in the
Body, they long to be gone; they hardly brook these narrow, they desire to
wander through sublimity, and take a prospect from above of things below.
Therefore it is that Plato cries out, The Soul of a wise Man always leans
toward Death. This it desires, this it meditates upon, covetous of higher
Objects. And how clear is that of Plato, concerning a better Life? He, says
he, that spends his Life in the study of Wisdom, seems to be the person who
will die with confidence, full of good hope, that he shall obtain great
rewards, if he die. This the Ancients saw in the dark; and thou can not see
it by the light of the Sun. What then, my sick Friend, do the things of the
Earth trouble thee? Shortly thou shall inhabit Heaven. Thither aspire* and
whatever miseries thou feel, thou will feel them the less.

Sect. 30. True Hope is a Blessed Life.
I Do not for this make use of either Poets or Philosophers. It Is a serious
thing. I will drink to thee out of the Fountain of Divine Eloquence. Therefore
lay aside thy sadness, and with a certain hope, say with the Doctor of the
World, I know whom I have believed, and I am 2 Timothy 1. 12.
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against
that day. Wherefore art thou afraid, O Man, of short hope? hear the Son of
Syras, Who fears the Lord, stands in awe of no Man, and is not afraid, for
the Lord is his hope and strength. Blessed c. 34. v. 14, etc.
is the Soul of him that fears the Lord; in whom puts he his trust, and
who is his strength? The Eyes of the Lord have respect unto them that love him,
he is their mighty protection and strong ground, a defense for the health, a
refuge for the hot of noon day, a succor for stumbling, and a help for
falling. He sets up the Soul, and lightneth the Eyes; he gives health,
life, and blessing. The Kingly Prophet how Courageous is he* how undaunted,
having a prospect of his own Funeral. I will lay me down in peace, Psalm. 4. v.
9.
and take my rest; for it is thou Lord only that make me dwell in safety.
What that safety is, he expresses in another place. For thou have been my hope,
and a Psalm. 61. v. 3, 4.
strong Tower for me against the Enemy. I will dwell in thy Tabernacle for
ever; and my trust shall be under the covering of thy wings. But thou will say,
my Impatience makes me hope ill* Here I will help thee again: Cry with David,
Thou art my hope, even from my Psalm. 61. v. 4.
youth. Frequently this King cried out. God is my Salvation, God is my Hope;
and also exhorts others to do the same: Trust in him, O ye people, pour out
your hearts before him. Wherefore do thou not follow him that goes crying so
loudly before thee? Say therefore from thy Soul, O think upon thy Servant
according Psalm. 119
to thy word, wherein thou have caused me to put my trust: The same is my
Comfort in my Trouble. And with Jeremy the Prophet. I nevertheless obediently
followed thee as a Jer. 17. v. 16, 17.
Shepherd, and have not taken this Office upon me uncalled. Thou know it
well. Be not thou terrible unto me, O Lord. For thou art he in whom I hope,
when I am in peril. Hear him in another place. Leave 31. 16.
off from weeping and crying, withold thine Eyes from Tears, for thy labor
shall be rewarded, etc. Job is most confident in this. Though he slay me I will
trust in him. Job 13. 15.
The same he utters upon the brink of Death. After darkness I hope for light.
Was there ever, says the Son of Syrach, any one confounded that put his trust
in the Lord? Whoever continued in his fear and was forsaken? Or whoever did he
despise that called faithfully upon him? For God is Gracious and Merciful. He
forgiveth sins in the time of Trouble, and is a defender of all that seek him
in the Truth. And Hosea, Therefore hope still in thy God; for, whoever put
their trust C. 12. 6.
in God, are not overcome; Besides, That the Lord is good unto them that put
their 1 Mac. 2. 61. Lam. 3. 25, 26.
trust in him, and to the Soul that seeks after him. The good Man with
stilness and patience expects the health of the Lord. Truly, says Nahum, the
Lord is Gracious, and a strong hold in the day of Tribulation, and knows them
that trust in him. And we 1 John 3. 2.
also know, says St. John, that when he shall appear we* shall be like him,
for we shall see him as he is. And every Man that has this hope in him, purges
himself, even as he is also pure. Hope therefore most firmly in Ps. 116. v. 9.
the Goodness of God, and thou shall walk before the Lord in the Land of the
Living.

Sect. 31. Tranquillity proceeds from true Hope.
TVrn again, O my Soul into thy rest, for the Lord has rewarded thee. Art thou
wearied with so many sorts of Labor; behold, the Lord is at hand, and he will
put an end to all thy Labors. The beginning of thy rest is Sickness and Death.
Cease therefore, O my Soul, to be willing to be miserable, and to consume thy
self with so much turmoiling. Painful Beginnings thou will say. It Is very true.
But thou know that no days are less quiet than those that are next to rest.
No days less Holidays than those that precede Festivals. So it is with thee.
But thy rest shall be Eternal. The preparation tires thee, shortly the Paschal
without end shall follow. Go to then, and expend a little Labor and Grief. By
and by thou shall behold the Gate, not that which leads out of this Life; but
that which leads to Eternity. Then had thou but begun to labor, it would
prove sufficient, if he for whom thou labourest think it so. Therefore, O my
Soul, dismiss vain things to vain people, and turn thee to the Lord who has
rewarded thee. His Mercies toward thee has been innumerable; thou may sooner
number the Sand of the Sea than them; by which he designs to open thee the way
to Heaven. Bernardus Clarevallensis recommended this particularly to his
Friends, to cast the Anchor of their hope in the safe Bay of Divine Mercy.
Therefore let that Verse of the Psalmist. In thee, O Lord* have I put my Psalm.
31. 1.
trust, let me never be put to confusion.

Sect. 32. Comfort in Pain.
THen should I have some comfort, yea I would desire him in my pain that Job 6.
10.
he would not spare, for I will not deny the words of the Holy One. With this
Comfort therefore while my pains do burn me, I will warm my Zeal, and recollect
my Courage, when* the Excess of my Torments shall bring me certain hope of
Death. For I know that while the pains as it were of Childbirth Crucify me,
the Rest and Tranquillity of another Life is preparing for me; and that the
Mercy of God shines over me, either inflicting Death, or defending my Life.
Therefore let not God be delayed through any commiseration of me. For if I die,
I shall escape free and secure from my Sins, nor shall I ever any more resist
the will of God, as one that has left this Life, and the Inconstancy of
Mortals. Yet I am very much afraid of my weakness, lest I should faint in the
right road, and in my holy purpose. Seeing then that hitherto, through the
Mercy and Grace of God, I have remained steadfast in the truth, I would not
depart from the Innocence of my Life, though I have a firm hope, that it will
never be that I shall contradict the will of God, but rather that I may be
always able to attend and wait upon it: Which when God shall be pleased to
fulfill in me, I am so far from praying against it, that I shall rather esteem
it as a great favor. For when I ought to endeavor to be hol^, there is
nothing which I can receive at the hands of the most holy and pure of Spirits,
God, that can be harmful, if not rather profitable for me. Come then pains and
exercise my patience, as God has given ye leave. To begin to die, and not to be
in pain, scarce happens to any Man. Through pains we pass to Death. That is the
high road. A little while we must be in pain, that we may not be in pain to
Eternity.

Sect. 33. Patience mitigates all pains.
PAin is a sharp, cruel, horrid, sad, bitter thing, contrary to Nature, hateful
to the Senses, yet which by the assistance of our Age may be mitigated, or else
little or nothing felt. He that in this Combat unwillingly turns his Back, but
makes a resistance cordially and with all his might, is always Superior, always
gets the Victory. Why, O Clay, do thou murmur against the Potter? He designed
from Eternity one Vessel for Honor, another for Dishonor, another for another
use, yet all Brittle and Mortal. Wherefore then do thou repine? Complaints
and Repinings are but an addition and increase of the Distemper. For nothing so
much exasperates the heat of a Wound, as the impatience of enduring the pain.
All repining turns to its own Torment. Thus while the wild Beast moves the
snare he is taken. Thus while the affrighted Birds disorder the Lime-twig, they
hang by the Feathers. There is no Yoke so strait that does not less hurt him
that bears it willingly than him that resists. There is but one mitigation of
terrible pains, which is to suffer, and submit to necessity. Wherefore then
do thou add a Disease of mind to sickness of Body? Making thy self more
miserable by murmuring, and provoking him the more thereby, who beholds the
Sufferings of Men from above, and considers their Patience, with a design to
reward it.

But the sick Man objects; thou can not make me not to feel what I feel. My
tender sick Friend, if no where else, at least suffer patience to inhabit in
thy Ears. I do not deny pain to be pain, but I say it may be lessened by
patience. Which if it take not away all sense of pain, yet it gives thee the
Victory over pain, while thou have strength to endure it manfully. Therefore
the Mind is to be roused up, to be armed and embattelled against its Enemies.
An unprepared and impatient mind is dejected at the least Misfortunes; like a
Coward, that upon the sight of the Enemy throws away his Arms and flies; thus
the thought of pain Exanimates a sluggish mind, which had it held but out the
Buckler of Patience had proved a Victor over pain. Patience not only augments
the Courage of the Mind, but mitigates the sharpness of the pain. So that if it
be never so violent, however begin then to hope: Excess of pain promises an
end. For extremity of Grief is the beginning of Joy. This is the ^aw of
Contraries; the one arises from the conclusion of the other.

But are we not ashamed that so many Christian Boys and Girls have joyfully
endured what we Men could not bear without weeping and complaints?

Why tremblest thou? Resume thy Courage; hope in God, the end is at hand. The
pains are terrible but short. And it is a Noble thing for a true Christian,
neither to give way to pleasure nor to pain.

Sect. 34. An Example of Patience in a Beggar.
BEhold, I beseech thee, lying at the Pool of Bethesda, a Beggar; a Beggar do I
say? Yea a diseased Beggar. Alas, Poverty it self is a disease long and redious
enough. If pain of the Body attend it, the evil is redoubled, which cannot be
endured but by a double portion of patience, as in this Paralytic. He was so
indigent that no body would help him into the troubled Waters. No body would so
much as compassionate his Poverty. All* What a hard case it is to be at the
same time, both poor and sick? This Man's Disease was not of a Months or a Years
standing. He had lost the use of his Limbs Thirty and Eight years; a breathing
Carcass, a Funeral before Death, and buried while he yet lived. Sick people
think a Day a Month, a Month a Year, a Year an Age: How many Ages could this
Man but think so many Years? Yet behold his patience, he lost not his meekness
of Mind. Neither in this desperate Sickness had he wasted all his hope and
patience. He envied no body, he repined at no body, he reproaches no body. He
accuses no Man, condemns no Man; wishes no Man his ill Fate. Neither does Curse
himself, nor the day of his Birth; nor blame Fortune, nor his Parents; much
less does he murmur against God, complain of Heavens Cruelty, or stand upon his
own Innocence; nor does he chide the slowness of Death. Nor does he prepare to
make himself away; but patiently expects help, and still hopes; nor is he
importunate with Christ, contentedly satisfied that he had only not concealed
his Miseries from his Savior. Thou, who are sick, can thou imitate this poor
Man? Certainly thou ought, or else thou can not hope for Heaven.

Sect. 35. A Type of Patience in a Great Prince.
THou may complain that either still Saints, or vulgar and mean people are
propounded as Examples of patience. Why then, O Man, can thou not imitate
Christ upon the Cross? St. Lawrence upon the Gridiron? Imitate Lazarus waiting
for the scraps. Imitate Alexius in the narrow Dungeon, and there ending his
Life. But there are State Examples. Certainly, there are not wanting Examples
for thee to follow.

Behold great Princes, who but few years ago, so took care of their Bodies, as
not to neglect the health of their Souls.

Bishop Daniel, when complaints were brought him, that the wild Beasts spoiled
the Corn. It Is well, said he, I will soon remedy this Disease, I had rather
want all sorts of Venison, than that my Subjects should be endamaged thereby.

Where are now those complaining sick people? so indulgent to themselves, who,
when every thing falls not out according to their desire, fret and fume like
Madmen. Let us imitate the Purple, if we refuse to imitate the Beggars Rags:
Let us imitate Princes and Captains upon the Bed of sickness. It Is the sign of
a sluggish Soldier, when neither the Example of his Comrade, nor his Captain
will move him.

Sect. 36. An Example of Patience in a most Potent King.
NO good Man ought to be afraid of the Torments of the Body, no, not of Death
it self. Why should he either fear one or the other, who is conscious to himself,
that a Man ought not to fear any thing but death?

Philip the Second, King of Spain, a great Example to Posterity, contested with
so violent a Disease, that all the worst of Diseases, seemed to have conspired
against him in one. No part of his Body was free from pain. Thou would have
said this Prince and greatest of Kings might have been called, The Balance of
Calamity, and the Tabernacle of Sickness. The chief Diseases that afflicted him
were, 1. The Gout. 2. Ulcers in his Hands and Feet. 3. An Aposthume in the Knee
and right Muscle. 4. A continual Fever. 5. The Dropsy, and perpetual Drowth.
6. A Tertian Ague. 7. A Dy^entery. 8. Want of Sleep. 9. He could not be any way
turned in his Bed. One of these Diseases had been torment enough. But he with
the same generous Mind as when he was well, and with a Christian patience
sustained the violence of all these Diseases; so much the more sound and lively
in Mind, by how much he was the weaker in Body. A most Illustrious Example of
Christian Patience. This Philip had learnt from Job that great Prince in the
Land of Vz, whom the loss of so many Flocks, so much Wealth, so many Children
could not move from his Patience. Naked his nakedness delighted him, and
miserable his miseries. Naked he came into the World, and naked* he should go
forth, was his Song, praising God for his Calamities as for his Benefits. The
Lord gives and the Lord takes away, let the Name of the Lord be blessed.
Corruption he embraced as his Sister, and the heaps of Worms as his Brother.
Whence this Brazen Wall, this threefold Fortitude, encompassing a Breast so
surrounded with misery. Because he knew himself guilty of no evil, no sins
affrighted him. The Devil had taken his Kingdom of Riches from him, but he
could not deprive him of his Empire over a patient and upright Mind. Do thou
expect one more potent than Job? Attend then, for it requires Attention.

Sect. 37. A Specimen Pattern, Mirror of Patience, a most absolute Example,
even Christ the Lord.
O All you, that pass by the way, behold and see if there be Lam. 1. C. ^2.
any, sorrows like mine. Thus Christ calls to thee from the Cross* Thou passest
by this Road of Calvary, when thou art in Distress. But thou do only pass by,
because thy pains, whatever they are, were nothing to this Sea of Grief; they
were but Resemblances of Sorrow. His Pain, when Crucified, was real Pain, in
whom there was no Part free from Pain. His Bones, his Nerves, his Veins,
whatever escaped the Scourge and Thorns, tormented by the extending Engines.
Nor is there any that dares afford the least Word to assuage these unspeakable
Torments. His weeping Friends, (and how many of them?) Avail nothing, his
Fugitive Disciples leave him; his insulting Enemies torment him, and whom they
pierced with Nails, before, now they Stab with Ignominious Reproaches and
Revilings. The Father himself forsakes the Son in Torments. No Comfort to his
Soul, in all this extremity of Anguish. Yet, in the midst of all these
Miseries, he never complained, never repined, never made any evil Imprecation,
nay, he implored the Pardon of all. He gave as many Documents of Patience, as
he received VVounds and Injuries. Behold now and see, if thy Grief be like the
Grief of thy Lord, and Savior. Thou do not love Christ, if thou refusest to
suffer.

Sect. 39. Patience is the complete Armor of a Sick Person.
DEmosthenes being asked, What he thought most Essential to Eloquence?
Answered, Action. Being demanded what next? He replied, Action. Being asked a
Third time, he still answered Action. Should it be asked, what is most
necessary for a sick Person? He answers best, that answers Patience. If again,
What is most profitable for a time (...) Christian, as before, Patience.
Should it be a third time asked, What is most becoming in Sickness; the same
reply serves again, Patience. Single Patience claims all these three
Advantages. To one and the same Patience, first, second and third Laurel are to
be yielded as of right. This we may believe out of Divine Luke 21. 19.
Writ. Possess ye your selves by your Patience. No otherwise St. Paul: For ye
have need of Patience, that after you have done the Will of God, ye might
receive the Promise. What would thou have, O impatient Man? seeing that
through much Tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Where thou
are pricked, there grows the Rose that crowns thee. Truth it self proclaims,
whosoever does not bear the Cross, and come after me, cannot be my Disciple.
Therefore take the Counsel of St. Austin, and suffer what thou art not willing
to suffer, that thou may obtain what thou would willingly have. Solomon
also presses this home. My Son, refuse not the Prove. chapter 3. v. 11, 12.
chastning of the Lord, neither faint thou, when thou art corrected of him: For
whom the Lord loves, him he chasteneth; and yet delights in him, even as a
Father in his own Son.

Believe the same thing said to thy Tutelar Angel, as was said to Tobias.
Because thou wast accept, and beleved of God, Tob. c. 12* v. 13.
it was necessary that Temptation should try thee. But this every one is
certain of, that Worships thee, O God; That if his Life be in trying, it shall
be crowned; and if it be in Trouble, that God shall deliver him, and if his
Life be in chastening, that he shall have leave to come to thy Majesty. For
thou have no Pleasure in our Damnation; after a storm, thou may have the
weather fair and still; and after weeping and heaviness, thou give great joy.
Thy Name, O God of Israel, be praised for ever.

Therefore, blessed are ye that weep, for ye shall laugh. The Potters Vessels
are tried by the Furnace, and Just Men by the Temptation of Affliction.
Therefore, composed to all Patience, let the Sick Man say, I will bear the
Wrath of the Lord, for I have offended him, till he sit in Judgment upon my
Cause, and set that Micah 7. v. 9*
I have right. Then will he bring me forth to the Light, and I shall see his
Righteousness. If that Heavenly Wrath be too terrible that Purges, How severe
is that which Damns. This no Patience can move, the other, but a moderate
suffering will bend. Wherefore, O my Sick Friend, compose thy self to all
sorts of Patience. Patience is necessary for thee above all things; perhaps the
Meat does not Relish: this is common with sick People. Thy Sleeps, Are they
short and interrupted? Patience. The Sick never Sleep so sound as the Healthy.
Thy Pains, Do they afflict thee? Be Patient. That Is the property of the
Disease. That Is the thing which is called Sickness. Perhaps thy Attendance
displeases thee. Be Patient; it is a hard matter to please the Sick. Perhaps
thou want Friends to comfort thee. Be Patient, Christ thy Lord ^s the best
Comforter. The Elector of Branderburg came to Visit Charles the Fifth, being
Sick of the ^out, and advised him to make use of his Physiti^ns. To whom
Charles replied, the best Remedy, ^n this Disease, is Patience: The complete
Armor ^f a Sick Man, is Patience; being so guarded, he ^eed fear neither
Sickness, Pain, nor Death: He is ^roof against the blows of his Enemies, and
shall ^ertainly overcome; for Patience overcomes all things.

Sect. 40. We must go at last, we are but Guests.
OUR Life is like an Inn. We live in a strange House, by Sufferance. We are no
sooner entered in, but we are sent packing again: As the Remembrance of a
Stranger, that tarrieth but one day, and then departs. We are all Strangers,
says St. Austin. He is a Christian that knows himself to be a Pilgrim in his
own House, and in his Country. Our Country is above, there we shall not be
Strangers. Here every one in his own House is a Stranger. If he were no
Stranger, he were not to depart; but he must depart, therefore, he is a
Stranger; but he leaves his House to his Children. Thy Father made room for
thee, and thou must make room for thy Children. Since we are thus transitory,
let us do something that may not be transitory; that when we come thither,
whither we are to go, we may find our good Works there. Therefore, since we are
but Guests, let us not refuse to go; there is no more comfortable Journey to a
Pilgrim, than to return into his own Country.

Sect. 41. There is a certain limit of Life.
THE Number of his Months are known unto thee, says Job Chapter 14. v. 5.
Thou have appointed him his Bound^ which he cannot go beyond. What do thou
labor, wh^ do thou toil for, O Man? Thy days are numbered t^ thee. Call the
Physicians of the World about the^ Podalyrius, Plachaon, Aescalapius,
Hippocrates, Gallen, they cannot all add one hour to thy Life, beyond what God
has appointed. Thou may drink Medicines, swallow Gold and Pearls, to prolong
thy Life; yet thou can not extend the Bounds, which thou art not to go
beyond. Be as cautious as thou will; decline all the dangers of Life; take
Remedies betimes, thou can not increase the number of thy Months, which God
has determined: Wish, Vow, Pray; it signifies nothing: The Limits of thy Life
are set, and thou can not go beyond them, do what thou can. Thou believe
the Sands of the Sea to be Numberless, yet, he has the number of those, who had
the number of thy Years, Months, Days, Hours, and Moments* from all Eternity.
What ever thy Art or Industry may promise thee, they cannot add one Minute to
thy Life. Feed plentifully upon Dainties; drink the choice of Wine; exercise no
more than Health requires; take thy full rest, yet thou art Mortal; and when
thou art come to the Goal of thy Life, bid the World adieu; prepare to give an
account, the Tribunal calls thee. There is no delay, no respit, no prolonging;
go we must. There is an account to be given, and therefore make no Excuses.
This was not concealed from Seneca; No Man, faith he, dies too soon, in whose
power it was not to live any longer than he lived.

Every one has his bounds set, which will ever remain wherever they are set;
neither can Art or Favor remove them. Though a hundred Physicians, five
hundred Friends, a thousand Kindred surround thy Bed, none of them can help
thee; there is but one, and that is God alone, that can help thee* Thou l^sest
Eternity, if at the moment of thy Death, thou forsakest God: Or if upon thy
Departure, before thou do not return, and* art not received* into Favor. The
last moment of thy Life pronounces Sentence upon thee; as thou Die, and
Fallest, so shall thou Rise. Ah! begin to be Wise, and to Live to God. Whatever
Employment or Business thou take in hand, remember Eternity.

Sect. 42. The first small Objection of the Sick.
I Could easily Comfort my self, when I was sound and well; I made nothing to
defy absent Evils.

But now, Eneas in his glittering Steel.
Cannot support the tedious pains I feel.
Alas, I said one thing while I stood firm; but now I feel another thing, now I
lie thrown upon my B^d. Abundance of Men contemn Death, but it is when they
think themselves beyond the reach of his Dart; but when a Man comes once to be
penned up in the wrestling place with Death, he begins then to dread the Enemy
whom he despised.

What say thou, my sick Friend? Why do thou complain against thy self? Why
do thou change thy former good Resolutions? As if it were the part of a
Wrestler to brag and boast out of the hearing of his Enemy, but when he comes
into the wrestling Place, to sink and grow faint-hearted. Stand my Friend, and
hear: Thou have overcome* if thou art willing to overcome, and can keep thy
self from Despair. Behold Christ, not only the Spectator of the Combat but the
Assistant; and he that with his own hands reaches thee all the Weapons thou art
to make use of. But perhaps they are not fit for thee, no more than Readiness
Armor for David. Do thou refuse the Scourges, the Thorns, the Cross? Take
the shield of Patience, that will cover thee, and keep thee safe; the rest
commit to God. Thou know that of Abraham to his Son, God will provide*

Another Objection.
Behold I dye, that might have lived longer; certainly thou could not, for
if thou could, most certainly thou would. But thou would have said
this, I desired so to do, or I hoped so to do. And in that I believe thee, as
all men are Covetous of life; I have lived but a little while, thou criest. Q
What if thou had lived longer, would not thou have made the same complaint?
All the spaces of Life are unequal and uncertain, yet all short. Some perhaps
have lived Fourscore Years. What has he now more than he that lived but Eight?
unless we account Cares, Troubles, Pains, Vexations, and Sins for Advantages:
Or what would he have had more, had he lived Eight Hundred? Unless thou reckon
the Virtues of the Person, and not his Years. What were the Nine Hundred Ninety
Nine Years of Methuselah? but a Vapor that appears but a little? Let us live
never so long, ^we shall say we have lived but a little while. If then we are
so willing to Live, let us seek that Life which will be perpetual, which though
it be not here to be found, yet is here to be sought: But I die (say thou)
when I intended to do good. There are some that are always intending to do
good, but can never find the way to begin. Thou I believe art one of those. But
if thou once beginst to do well, never doubt, though thou do not complete thy
Work; but that the infailible valuer of all things, will deduct nothing from
thee; the reward shall be entire, not only of thy Deeds, but Intentions. Be of
good Courage, the direct and short way to reward is to die.

Sect. 45. Against other Complaints of the Sick.
THE Complaints of the Sick are almost innumerable, they can hardly speak
without murmuring: How often do we hear them cry out, Oh miserable me! Oh
afflicted me! Oh who so overwhelmed in Pain as I am. But they that more
narrowly examine the business, will change their Notes, and cry, `Tis well,
`tis very well, `tis Gods pleasure: O happy, O blessed me, corrected not by a
Tyrant, but by a Father; God be praised; Glory be to God. Heaven reward all my
Benefactors. This is that, my sick Friend, that becomes thee, and behooves thee.
Seneca admonishing the same thing; Do not, says he, make thy miseries more
grievous to thy self than they are. Complaints of past Griefs are idle, and
these common Sayings; Never had any man such a time on it: What Torments, what
Miseries did I feel! No body thought I would ever have recovered; and the like.
They may be true, but they are past; what signifies it to remember past
Troubles, and to be miserable, because thou were so. Therefore lay aside two
things, the Fear of what is to come and the Remembrance of past Sorrows.
Wherefore then do thou complain in vain, and fester thy Wounds with the Nails
of Impatience? I am miserable thou say. Rather blessed Humanity is in a good
Condition, in regard no man is miserable, but through his own fault. Blessed is
the Man whom God chasteneth, for whom he loves he chastises. He makes a
Wound, and he heals; he wounds, and his hand makes whole again. Know thou
not, that the Wound which the Surgeon makes is the beginning of the Cure. Do
thou therefore not mind the Wound, but the hand of him that wounds, and thou will confess thy self to be much more in health, than when thou were at the
best. But say thou, I feel a most vehement pain; No question, if thou
endurest it effeminately. But as the Enemy makes the greatest slaughter upon
them that fly, so is all pain more heavy to him that succombs under it. But
the Torture is intolerable. It is not for the stout to endure slight Pains.
Think upon so many hundreds of Courageous Martyrs. Seneca relates, That there
was a certain person, who while the Veins of his Legs were cutting, read in a
Book all the while. But say thou, My Disease will let me do nothing. How,
nothing: Alas it is thy Body that is only infirm and sick, not thy Mind.
Therefore if thou be a Racer, thy Feet are only bound, if a Smith, or other
Handicraftsman, thy hands are not at liberty. But if thy Mind fail thee not,
thou may hear, thou may learn, thou may remember, though sick. What more
do thou believe, thou do nothing if thou art temperate in sickness? If thou
show that thy Disease may be overcome, at least endured? There is room for
Courage in the Bed of Sickness. Thou have business enough; strive with thy
Disease, and thou have done enough.

Sect. 46. The Sick-man to himself, against himself.
WHat do I do? Must I thus die before I am gray? We are all in this Error,
that we think none fit for Death but the Aged, when Infancy and Youth also go.
An immaculate Life is an old Age, and the most lovely Age of all, is an honest
Life. It is better that the Intellectuals of Men, than their Heads should be
gray. He is wealthy in the endowments of old Age, who worships God, leads a
prudent life, and lives well, It is more noble to be aged in Virtue, than by
the gift of Time. But there is that covetousness of Life, that when we come to
die, though never so decrepid, we think our selves all to be young men. But why
do thou number thy few days? God has wrote down thy time of living in the
Tables of his Providence. In the other World there are not that accuse God
because he did not spare them a longer Life, but because he lived no better.
Therefore do thou mind that, and remember Eternity. It is no loss to lose a
point of Time, and gain Immortality. Most generously said the Macedonian King,
I measure my self, said he, not by the Span of my Life, but by the Scene of
Perpituity. Do thou measure thy self so, not by the end of thy Years, but by
Eternity that has no end.

Sect. 47. The Patient Man to God.
MY God, the desire of my Heart! I a most miserable Creature, a most vile Worm,
lie here tied to my Bed; without the use of Hands or Feet, an idle, sloathful,
benumbed, unprofitable Servant, a burden to the Earth, enduring nothing for thy
sake. Yet I desire, O God, I desire to labor for thy sake, to suffer Heat,
Cold, Weariness, Affliction, Anguish, nay, Torments for thy sake.

This the blessed Dominic taught me, who being oppressed with violent Pains,
and advised by his Friend to desire of God, to deal more mildly with him, made
this answer, If I did not believe thee to speak out of Ignorance, I would not
endure thy sight. And then throwing himself upon the bare Ground, I give thee
thanks. said he, my most kind Lord, for these Miseries which thou have sent me
to endure. Increase my Pains, multiply my Torments, send me a bundred
Infirmities, for I know thou will send me Patience with all.

Can I say more than this? It is too little that I suffer, O God, add still
more and more to my Pains. I have deserved more severe Chastisement than thou
inflictest upon me, O my most merciful God. Spare me not, Lord, burn, cut and
tear my Flesh. so thou grant me Eternity. Had I a hundred Bodies, I would
endure a hundred Crucifyings, so I might please thee. and be reckoned in the
number of thine, O most merciful Father. Thy will bedone, Lord, with me, for I
know how ea^^e it is to serve thee, who equally rewardest both the Deed, and
the reallity of Intention.

I am by thee composed to rest, O King of Goodness; but the Night is coming
werein I can work no longer. Yet though my Sickness has taken from me the pain
of working, it has not taken from me the Will nor the Desire. I am willing,
Lord, I am willing, and while any Breath remains in me, I am prepared to suffer
what thousands of thy Servants at this time suffer for love of thee. I am
willing to suffer Contempt, Reproaches, and false Accusations for thee, Stripes
and Scourges for thy sake, and to die a thousand Deaths for thee. If my
strength fail, whither I cannot creep with my Hands and Feet, thither my
Desires shall fly, and convince thee of the readiness of my Will and Affection.

But will these eager Desires open the Gate of Heaven to me? Should I actually
perform all these good Intentions, and suffer what the most devout of men have
suffered for thy sake, shall I be worthy* of the sight of God? I know for all
this, I am unworthy. How then shall I make my way to Heaven? O Infinite
Goodness, if thou have not Compassion upon me, I am forlorn. There is but one
Sanctuary, one Refuge from this just Indignation. Thy Mercy, Lord, that is a
vast and immense Ocean. Into this Ocean, into this Gulf I throw my self
headlong, out of a certain hope that in those Waters I shall be safe from the
Flames of Hell. I* cry out therefore with David:

Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy mercy.

According to the multitude of thy mercies, blot out my iniquity.

But in the utmost of my Extremities, in the last hour of my Life, when my Soul
is departing out of this Tabernacle, let all my Sighs and Gaspings repeat this
wholesome Prayer.

Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy Infinite mercy.

Sect. 48. The sick Patient Covenants with God.
THat great and almost the last Ornament of the African Church, Fulgentius,
conspicuous for his Learning and Sanctimony, seventy days before his Death
continually cried out,

Lord give me first Patience, then Pardon. This the holy man used as a Buckler
against the violence of his Sickness. Yea, the more vehemently his Grief
assailed him the more vehemently he cried out,

Patience, Lord, patience.
After that Pardon.
This is a most sweet way of Covenanting with God, neither to desire Wages
before Labor, nor Triumph before Victory, nor to shake off the Yoke of Death
without Pain.

Thus as Death is a Punishment to the Wicked, so to the Righteous it is a
Bridge and entry that leads to Eternity. So true it is that Death commands the
unwilling, but serves and obeys the Willing.

Sect. 49. Thanks be to God, should be the continual Song of the sick Patient.
SAint Cyprian, when he heard Galerias the Proconsuls Sentence read to him, It
is our pleasure that Thuscius Cyprianus die by the Sword; gave no other Answer,
but Thanks be to God. Saint Laurence Roasted upon a Gridiron, cried out, Thanks
be to God. Euplius the Martyr who was Beheaded with the Gospel hanging about
his Neck, often repeated these words, God be thanked. Truly said Saint
Augustine, What better thing can we bear in our Minds, or utter with our Lips,
or express with our Pens, than Thanks be to God! Nothing can be more quickly
said, more gladly heard, nor more acceptably understood, than Thanks be to God,
who has endued thee with so much Faith. In Adversity, says Saint Chrysostom,
the Wicked curse, the Christians give thanks. When we please God, we shame the
Devil. For at the same time thou give Thanks, God eases thy Pain, and the
Devil departs. There is nothing more holy than the Tongue which in Adversity
Gives God thanks. Tertullian, commending Job, That good man, said he, upon the
receipt of all his had tidings, still used no other expression, but Thanks be to
God.

John Avila, the most skilful Teacher of the Inward man, was wont to say, That
in Calamities and Afflictions, one Thanks be to God was worth more, than six
thousand in prosperity and health. For in Prosperity to give Thanks, is common
to all men, but in Adversity particular to the Righteous.

Therefore, O my sick Friend, so frame thy Mind and Tongue, that the worse it
is with thee, the more readily thou may say, Thanks be to God. Then shall
thou be said to imitate thy Crucified Lord, when thou shall have the Courage in
the midst of thy Sorrows, to say, Let Troubles vex me, Grief torment me, Want
Oppress me, Thanks be to God. Let my Pains rage, my Torments multiply, Thanks
be to God. These Ejaculations penetrate Heaven. This is Music most pleasing to
God. To this St. Paul exhorts us, In all things give thanks, in 1 Thessalonians. c. 5.
v. 8.
Sickness, in Health, in Want, in Plenty, in Adversity, in Prosperity: In all
things give thanks. For many times Sickness, Want, a comfortless Condition,
loss of Dignities, are a greater benefit of God, than of all things flowing
according to thy wish. In no pains, at no time let the Sick-person think it a
burden for the Sick-person to cry, Thanks be to God. So much the more noble is
thy Patience, so much more graceful thy Giving of thanks, by how the more
vehement thy Disease and Pains are.

Sect. 50. The true Confidence of a Sick-man in God.
TO Die is a serious business. And we may well demand of the Patient, Will thou
commit thy self to the Cast of Eternity? Thou art going a long and unknown
Journey; and whither would thou? To this the sick Patient does best to
answer, that does not murmur; I am grived, I am compelled: But rather replies
with a cheerful Mind, willingly, freely, I resign my Spirit to God. Thus I
commit my sef to Eternity. Thus glady to God.

Le^ the Healthy be of this mind, of the number of which, rightly said one, I
have already begun to die; now* I die, I waste and am consumed, now I travel to
Eternity: And because the Mercy of God knows no end, therefore I travel
undauntedly. In the, O Lord, I have put Psalm. 31. 1.
my trust; Let me never be put to confusion. And though the Sacred Scriptures
afford me a thousand Instances, I will not despise the Light of Reason, which
enlightne^ the wise Roman. For what the ancient Heathen thought of Death, and
our passage from Death into Eternity, he thus teaches us:

When that Day shall come which shall separate this mixture of Divine and
Humane* I will leave this Body where I sound it, and return my self to God: Nor
am I now without him, though detained by this Ponderosity of Earth. These
delays of Mortal Age, are but a Prelude to a better and a longer Life. As we
are Nine Months in the Mothers Womb, before we are sent forth into this Place;
so by that space of time between our Infancy and old Age, we are prepared for
another Birth of Nature* Another Original attends us, another Condition of
Life. That Interval fits us to brook the Brightness of Heaven; therefore let us
undauntedly expect that peremptory Hour, no^ the last to the Soul, but to the
Body* That Day which thou art afraid of as thy last, is the Birthday of thy
Eternity. These Thoughts will suffer nothing abject, nothing sordid to reside
in thy Mind. These Thoughts command us to approve our selves to God, to prepare
our selves to God, to propose Eternity to our selves; of which he that has a
true Hope and Confidence, shall not fear those numerous Hosts, when awakened by
the trembling Sound of the last Trumpet.

Sect. 51. Constantly.
COnstantly, I beseech thee, Constantly; there is no Patience if Constancy be
wanting. But one will say, it is not two, three, four, or five Weeks, that I
have layn thus. Another will say, this is the sixth, the tenth, the sixteenth
Month that I have layn in this miserable Condition. Others will cry they have
been visited ten, thirteen, or more Years. Persevere, I beseech ye, persevere,
and reserve your selves for a Celestial amendment. The patient Man continues,
though he has been afflicted for many more years. It is but a point of time,
says he, that this Sickness has held me, when I consider Eternity.

Happy was that Servant, who has the Great Gregory for his Applauder; who from
his Childhood to his Infancy being afflicted with the Palsy, so that he could
not lift his Hand to his Mouth, yet by hearing could remember all the Bible by
Heart, and while he lay all that time a dying, continually had in his Mouth
that one Sentence, Thanks be to God. To him all the Calamitous Days of his
Sickness seemed nothing to Eternity.

The blessed Lydwick a Virgin of Schiedam, lay sick eight and thirty Years,
contesting with ^ strange variety of all sorts of Maladies. In those eight and
thirty Years, she scarce eat so much Bread as would suffice as strong Man for
three Days, and hardly took the rest of three Nights. Yet in this crowd of
Miseries, her continual Prayer was, O kind Jesu, have mercy upon me.

Coleta another Virgin, had sustained an incredible burden of Pain and Misery
for above fifty Years; she hardly slept one Hour in eight Days. Upon Festivals
and Sundays her Pains augmented; and sometimes she labored under Distempers of
Mind as well as Sickness of Body: Yet in the midst of all, she would still cry
out; I desire to be a Theater and Stage for all sorts of Diseases to play their
parts, that so I may become a grateful Spectacle to God and Angels. She might
have said with St. Bernard. My Labor is but the labor of one Hour in respect
of Eternity, yet if more, I value it not, through my extreme love.

Therefore my sick Friend, if thou numberest the Days and Years of thy
Sickness, call them a Moment: If thy Patience and Constancy out-vye them, hope
for the Eternity of the blessed. The Labor is small, the Pain short, the
Recompense eternal.

Sect. 52.
THat as well the Healthy as the Sick, may put inpractice, and bring forth what
they have determined in their Minds; we have added the following Prayers.

1. Prayer.
To be said by the Healthy, the Sick, and them that lie a dying.
OH my sweetest Lord Jesu Christ, in the Union of that Charity, whereby thou
did offer thy self to the Father to die, I offer thee my Heart, that thy good
Will and Pleasure may be satisfied upon me and by me. Sweet Jesu, I make choice
of and desire thy good Pleasure, though Adversity, Sickness, and Death press
hard upon me, and commit myself entirely to thy most faithful Providence, and
thy most holy Will. For I hope and beseech thee, that thou will direct me, and
whatever belongs to me, to thy Glory, and the Salvation of my Soul.

2. Prayer.
For the preservation of Conformity with the Divine Will.
LOrd Jesu Christ, who for thy Glory and our Salvation, do intermix Joy and
Sadness, and permittest for our profits, Prosperity and Adversity; I return
thanks to thy Goodness, that thou were mindful of me, and have visited thy
unprofitable Servant with this small Affliction. I implore thy Favor, that I
may reap the Fruit and Advantage of this Visitation of thine, and that I may
not be hindered by my Impatience or Ingratitude. What thou art able to do, I
humbly beg of thee, to remove this present bitter and troublesome Cup from me,
as thou did listen to the Tears of King Hezechia, and did miraculously
raise him from his Bed of Sickness. Yet not my will, but thine, which is just
and holy, be done. In thy Hands is all the Authority of Judging and Determining
concerning thy Children: Neither is there any one that better knows than thee,
what Physic is most convenient for the cure of our Diseases. O my most loving
Father, Reprehend, Chastise, and Afflict me here, that thou may spare me
hereafter. I know thy Rod does profit many, when thou do Chastise thy beloved
Children; and that then do purge and try thy Elect, before thou do Crown
them. My Heart is prepared, O God, my Heart is prepared, when and how thou
please, to submit to thy Paternal Rod, and that my Patience should be tried
by Affliction; In thee have I put my trust, O Lord, let me never be confounded.
I submit and commit my self entirely to thy most holy Will. Though thou slayest
me, yet will I not cease to hope in thee, thou Fountain of Life; My desire is
in thy hands.

3. Prayer.
For Patience.
MOst Omnipotent God, thou know how vile and frail this work of thy Hands
is, how it is shaken by the least blast of Wind, and vanishes again into dust;
so that there is nothing wherein I can trust to my own strength, who in the
Contest of the Flesh against the Spirit, feel so many Commotions of Anger,
Impatience, Pusillanimity; Diffidence, and Mistrust, upon the slightest Assault
of Sickness. Therefore I implore thy Help, most Heavenly Physician, thy Divine
Physic, which is Patience; For Patience is the chief of Consolation in the
most bitter of Sicknesses.

Grant me, I beseech thee, O Lord, with a present and contented Mind, I may be
able to endure Joy and Sorrow, sweet and sour, as proceeding only from thy
Paternal Providence, because thou directest all things for the trial and profit
of thy Children.

Let thy Spirit, I beseech thee, teach me, through whose Comfort and
Assistance, there is nothing too hard for us to perform, that I may know how to
possess my Soul in Patience till Death. Thou art a God who considerest the
stings of Affliction, under which we labor. Yet I, though I have not yet
resisted to the shedding of my Blood, yet against my will I have had the
Experience of the weakness of the Flesh, and force of contending Nature.
Therefore, Lord, help my imperfection so much the more, that both my strength
may be perfected in Infirmity, and that I may be able sincerely to testify,
that thy Rod and thy Staff, they have Comforted me.

4. Prayer.
Containing a Resignation of a Man's Self to the Will of God.
OLove ineffable, O most sweet Jesu, my God and Christ, should promise me the
best of worldly favors, or what I my self would desire, I would beg of thee
the utmost of what I now suffer. This I beg a thousand times over, that thy
will may be fulfilled and satisfied upon me, and by me in all things.

5. Prayer.
After Receiving of the Sacrament.
GLory be to thee, O Christ, who out of thy goodness have been pleased to visit
and refresh my sick Soul. Now let thy Servant, O Lord, depart in peace
according to thy Word. Now I hold thee, O Divine Love, nor will I any more let
thee go. Now to the World and all worldly things I bid adieu. Now rejoicing I
come to thee, O God. Nothing, O sweet Jesu, nothing shall separate me from
thee. For I am united with thee, O Christ; In thee will I live; in thee will I
die, and in thee, if it be thy pleasure will I remain to all Eternity. No more
do I live now, but Christ lives in me. My Soul is weary of this Life. I desire
to be dissolved and be with Christ, and to die a Gainer. Now will I fear no
evil walking in the shadow of Life, because thou, O Lord, art with me. As the
Heart pants after the Rivers of Water, so pants my Soul after thee, O God.
My Soul has thirsted after God the Fountain of Life, when shall I come and
appear before the Face of my God?

Bless me, O Loving Jesu, and dismiss me in peace, because I am now truly
thine, and to all Eternity will I not forsake thee. What have I now more to do
with the World? O my sweet Jesu, Into thy Hands, Lord Jesu, I commend my
Spirit, Receive me, O Celestial Love, that I may be happy in thy Embraces to
all Eternity, and may for ever rest in thee.

A Conclusion of the Second Chapter.
To the Reader.
THese things I have therefore said, for the -- comfort of the Healthy and the
Sick, that they may not be altogether without Comfort, partly to stir them up
to vigilance, partly to strengthen them that they may overcome, prepared
against all Assaults of Death. An ill death is not only the worst but the most
indeliable and inexpiable of all Errors in the Word.

Now I come to give some Precepts to the Dying, not to see them read, but to be
read in health, to profit them, in that dreadful Hour.

CHAP. III. The Remembrance of Death is represented to Dying People.
Sect. 1. The Art of Dying well is briefly Taught.
NOT to know how to die is the most miserable piece of Ignorance in the World.
Therefore that we may learn that which we ought to learn all our Lives, there
are five things that conduce to good Death.

First, A free and undaunted Mind. This is that which is of chiefest moment,
and upon which the rest depend. It is a great satisfaction for our offenses so
willingly to abandoned what is most dear to us. Therefore, says David, an
Offering of a Free-heart-will I give unto thee. There is nothing so acceptable
to God nor so profitable to Man, as a free and ready Mind, and a generous Trust
in God.

Secondly, A Will made and Debts discharged* *It Is an Error never to think of a
Will till Death is at the Door.

Dispose of thy Goods while thou art well in thy Senses. Moreover, as to the
giving away of such things as are at our disposal.

Sect. 2. Nine causes why we are to Di^ with a contented Mind.
BEfore all things consider the death of thy Savior, and thou will fear thy
own with a most contented Mind. Compare, I beseech thee, thy Bed to his Cross;
thy Pillows to his Thorny Diadem; thy Food with his Gall; thy Drink with his
Vinegar, thy Pains with his Torments. Tho^ did die in the midst of thy
Friends and Comforters, he in the midst of his Enemies and Revilers. Thou among
thy Helpers and Assistants; he expired deserted by all. For thy health so many
Medicines are still prepared. His extreme thirst wanted the refreshment of cold
Water. Yet he the Lord and chief of all. Thou a Servant most vil^ and mean. Him
all these Miseries befell both Innocent and Undeserving; thee for thy Deserts
an^ Impiety. And therefore thou have no reason ^ complain.

2. The chiefest Grace of the Supreme King is ^ Good Death. To die well is to
avoid the danger ^ Living ill. But he dies well who dies willingly* Who does
not readily rise from a hard Bed? They only desire to lie long, who cherished
by the hea^ are loath to leave a warm Nest. If it be ill wit^ thee in this Life,
wherefore should thou not willingly pass to a better. If well, it is time for
th^^ to make an end, lest Prosperity cast thee as it doe^ many into a late but
fatal Ruin. It Is a hard thin^ for the Fortunate to die. How many Men a^
Condemned to perpetual Torments, who had the^ died Children or young had gone
to Heaven.

3. The Saints and all our dearest Friends invi^ us to them. But, say thou,
we must leave o^ Friends and Companions. Unadvisedly spoken, ^hou art going to
them. Where are thy Parents? Do not thou hope in Heaven? And that* thou ^halt
also go thither. But these are things uncer^ain and only hoped for. Very right
there is no Man hopes for what he sees, or is certain of. And therefore God
affords thee an occasion for that Ver^ue. He commanded thee to hope for Heaven,
he would never promise it thee certainly. And yet ^hou art carried thither
still with a certain hope, though to a thing to thee uncertain. A Creditor ^as
no reason to mistrust a Faithful Debtor. God ^^ become thy Debtor. Consider
thou to whom ^hou art a Creditor. Does not St. Paul cry out ^ith joy, I know
whom I have believed.

4. Consider, O Man of little Soul the extraor^inary alacrity of Mind, and the
ardent desire to ^e of many Martyrs, who contemned all the pre^arations of
Death, and suffered the severest Tor^ents with a smiling Countenance. Certainly
nei^^er Death nor Labor is terrible, but the fear of ^eath or Labor.
Therefore let us applaud the ^ying of him, who said, Death is no evil, but to
(...) shamefully. Children are frighted with Hob^blins for want of knowledge.
What is Death? Hobgoblin: Turn the Argument, and thou shall ^d it so. Yet
neither Children nor Infants, nor ^dmen fear Death; and therefore it is a most
^ameful thing that reason should not afford us that ^^curity which reason
produces. Death is a Tri^^te and a Duty to be paid by all, why then art ^ou
troubled? Why do thou not pay the Debt ^^u owe; for Death allows no
privileges: No (...) was ever exempted, or shall be. The World, ^^th St.
Basil, is Mortal, and the Region of them (...) die.

5. What is a long fear of Death but a long Torment? Do thou live long? Thou
art long in Torment. Well said Tertullian, That is not to be feared that frees
us from all fear. But thou will say, It Is a terrible thing in Sickness to
foresee Death creeping on by degrees. Worm of a Man, what would thou have?
Did not thy Savior Christ foresee his Death, and that a most sharp one, for
thirty years and more? Art thou better than he? But because thou do not so
much fear Death, as the previous Inconveniences of Death, hear Epietetus, And
shall not thou, says he, depart with a firm and constant mind, but trembling
and cowardly, because of thy fine Clothes, or thy gaudy Silver Plate? Unhappy
Man! Was it thus that hitherto thou have lost all thy time? What if I prove
Sick? Thou shall be honestly Sick. Who shall Cure thee? God. I shall lie hard.
But as a Man. I shall not have a convenient House. It Is an inconvenience to be
Sick. What shall be the issue of the Disease? Nothing but Death. Therefore do
not thou believe that the Fountain of all Evil, is the chief mark of a
degenerate and dastardly Mind, is not so much death it self as the fear of
Death. Therefore exercise thy self against it; make use of whatever thou
hear or read, as weapons to Encounter it. So shall thou know there is no
other way for Man to gain his own Liberty.

6. From how many Evils art thou freed by Death. To die is to shut up the Shop
of all Miseries. Excellently well said Pliny. That is the condition of Life,
that Death becomes the Haven for the best of Man and the chief benefit of
Nature. And therefore let every one provide himself of this as one of the
principal Cures for his Mind, that of all the Benefit which Nature affords Men,
there is none better than a seasonable Death. Caesar in Salust affirm^ Death to
be a Cessation from Misery to the afflicted and no Torment. Therefore the Wise
Man always considers what manner of Life he led, and not how long. For Nature
provided us a place to Lodge and Sojourn in but not to inhabit, lends us the
use of Life, like that of Money, are not payable at a certain day. Why then
do thou complain if she call it in when she pleases; since she lent it upon
that condition.

7. The Prison Doors are set open by Death; and do thou fear to go forth.
Rather rejoice: Hitherto thou were a Captive, now thou shall be free. How
foolish a thing it is to depend upon Hope, or Happiness, and be afraid to go at
large to that which always remains, and to change for a moment of dying a
perpetual Immortality. The Prison is open, haste thee to a better place.

8. Death is the way; yea, it is the Gate that leads us into our Country, to
Eternal Life, to Immortal Joy. For Death is not so much the end of Life as the
beginning of Life. Learnedly said St. Bernard. The Just Man dies but securely,
whose death as it is the Exit out of this present Life, is the Entry into a
better. But thou will say, To live long how pleasant a thing it is; but how
uncertain is it whether Divine Grace will not forsake thee before thy Sin. And
who is there that has not often reason to be afraid for his perseverance, which
no holiness of Life can merit. It Is a Gift, and given gratis. Therefore he that
desires this Gift let him reconcile himself to the Giver.

9. But the Reason of Reasons is the Will of God, whose Eternal pleasure it was
that thou should yield to Nature at this time, in this place, and through
this Disease. What would thou more? It was Gods will; it so seem pleasing to
God. This is that will, that can will no evil. Therefore the Son of Syrack
gives this advice; Humble thy self before thou be sick, and while thou may
sin, show thy Conversation. But all these Reasons I do shortly sum up thus.

1. The Death of Christ. 2. The Grace of God. 3. The Invitation of the Saints.
4. Examples of those that were before us. 5. The Things to be feared. 6. The
end of all Evils. 7. Enlargement out of Prison. 8. Entrance into Paradise. 9.
The will of God.
Sect. 3. Therefore Death is not to be feared.
THerefore do willingly, O Christian, which otherwise thou would be forced to
do unwillingly. What is done by a willing Mind becomes light, and ceases to be
necessity where the will takes place. The wise Man is so instructed as to
consent to what he cannot withstand. Therefore I am secure and fear nothing.
Nature a most kind Parent, never made any thing terrible. It Is only the Error
of Men that makes Death formidable. We are afraid of Death, not because it is
evil, but because it is not known to Men. If thou art revolving any thing
sublime in thy Mind; if thou art rearing any high or lofty structure despise
those low and poor mistakes of the Vulgar, and admire those Precepts whose
imitation leads thee the true way to Glory. We have innumerable Examples of
those that die happily and cheerfully. Rather imitate him among the Ancients
that made this Dialogue between himself and the Minister of Death Thou shall
die. Since the Fall it is the Nature no^ so much the punishment of Man, Thou
shall die. Upon this condition I came into the World. Thou shall die. It Is the
Law of Nations to repay what has been borrowed. Thou shall die. Life is a
Pilgrimage, when thou have traveled as far as thou have designed, thou must
return home again. Thou shall die. I thought thou would have told me some
News, I came for this purpose. As soon as I was Born Nature set me my Bounds.
Why should I be offended? Thou shall die. It Is a vain thing to fear what I
cannot avoid: He that stays the longest cannot fly it. Thou shall die. I am not
the first nor the last, many went before, and many shall follow* Thou shall
die. What wise Man ever took it amiss to be set at Liberty. Whatever begins
must end. Thou shall die. It is not grievous because but once to be suffered.
They are Eternal Pains that torment. Now is Death less to be feared than
formerly. For then the Gate of Heaven being not so open, all Men bewailed for
this.

Noctes atque Dies, etc.
Both day and night stands open the Infernal Gate
Of swarthy Dis --
But now we can Sing,

Both day and night to Zealous Faith and Hope
The splendid Gate of highest Heaven stands open.
So that it matters not how terrible and threatening Death appears. It Is the
most inconsiderable what he desires of us. He never thought of Death that lived
well, nor loses any thing who gains all things.

Sect. 4. How the Holy Men do desire, yet fear Death.
LET us behold Paul, says Gregory, how he loves what he seeks to avoid. How he
avoids what he loves. He desires to die and yet sears to be spoiled of his
Flesh. Why so? because though the Eternal Victory over-joy him, yet the present
pain disturbs him: And though the Love of the Recompense overcome him, yet he
cannot be unsensible of the twitches and pangs of Torment. For as a Courageous
Soldier just before the Battle palpitates, trembles, looks pale, yet is still
instigated by his Anger. So a Holy Man seeing the approach of his Suffering, is
shaken by the weakness of his Nature, fears the approach of Death, and yet
rejoices to die. And because there is no passage but through Death, therefore
trusting he doubts, and doubting trust; rejoicing he fears, and fearing
rejoices. Because he knows he shall not attain the Garden of Repose, unless he
get over the Hill that lies between. David showed his fear of Death when he
cried out, Lord take me not away in the midst of my Age. Neither was Abraham,
Jacob no^ Elias free from that fear though it were but moderate.

Arsenius a Man of a Hundred and Twenty years of Age, after he had served God
Five and Fifty years, being ready to depart the World, began to be afraid and
to shed Tears; which his Friends admiring. And do thou Father, cried they,
fear death? To whom he, Verily, said he, ever since I have taken upon me
Religious Orders, I have always been afraid of this Hour. To which purpose
Seneca spoke very perspicuously. Therefore, says he, the stoutest Man, while
he is putting on his Arms looks pale, and the fiercest Soldiers knees tremble
a little at first. Charles the Fifth in all Warlike Expeditions most
Courageous, in all Dangers most undaunted, yet when he put on his Armor before
a Battle, was always wont to look pale, and quiver for fear, but after his Arms
were on, like an Armed Giant breathing nothing but a Lion-like Valor, like an
Iron Giant he flew upon the Enemy.

Thus the best of Men desires and fears Death. But it is better to die with
Cats, than to live with Antony. He overcomes death who dexterously suffers
himself to be overcome by Death.

Sect. 5. An Ill Death follows an Ill Life.
AS the Tree when it is cut falls which way it bends. So which way we bend when
we live, that way we fall when we die. It would be a strange thing that a
commendable death should conclude an ill-spent Life. A Courtier of King Ken^ed,
who studied more to please his Lord than his Savior Christ, when he came to
die, he did not so much seem to neglect, as to delay the care of his Soul. But
at length seeing the Devils triumphing about him, with a List of his wicked
Actions, in despair he expired.

When the Impious Chrysaurius desired respite, respite but till Morning he
expired with a denial. Thus Jezabel and Athaliah, thus Benhadad and Belshazzar,
thus Antiochus and thousands of others, as they lived so they ended their days.

Sect. 6. A good Death follows a good Life.
MOST truly said St. Austin, That is not to be thought an ill death which St.
Ambrose gives us this Rule; A sincere fidelity and a discerning foresight. Or
Charity with Prudence, and Prudence with Charity.

Thirdly, Sole care of Salvation. This is the one thing necessary. St. Austin
ten days before he died, admitted no body to see him, but the Physician and the
person that brought him sustenance, and that at set Hours. All the while
employing himself in Prayers, Groans and Tears; leaving this Rule behind him,
That no Man ought to depart hence without a worthy and competent Repentance.

Fourthly, To Receive the Sacrament. In this Affair delay is always dangerous.

Fifthly, An Entire Resignation of thy self to the Divine Will. All Men perhaps
cannot show an undaunted Spirit; but all Men can show a willing Mind. Therefore
let the sick Patient often repeat those words of the Lord Christ; Even so, O
Father, for so was it thy good pleasure. He cannot well miscarry, that so
effectually reconciles himself to his Judge.

Sect. 7. How to recover Time lost.
WHoever he be that desires to recover his lost time, let him remove himself
from all time and place, and betake himself to that Now of Eternity, where God
lives. In God all things lost are to be found. Let Man plunge himself into God
in this manner.

Most Eternal God, O that I had lived as purely, as obediently, as holily, from
the beginning to the end of the World, as all those Men did, who best pleased
thee in the practice of all manner of Virtues, in continual Miseries and
Afflictions. Oh that I might be able to bear thee that Love wherewith all the
Blessed, and all thy Holy Angels bear thee. For all that I can do and more is
due to thy Mercy and Love. But now, O Lord, have Mercy upon me according to thy
Knowledge, and thy good Pleasure.

He recovers his lost Hours who sincerely grieves for having lost them.

Sect. 8. A short Life how to be prolonged:
A Man of an upright Mind is to live not as long as is convenient, but as long
as it behooves him. Wisdom cries out, though he was soon dead, yet fulfilled he
much time. For how has he not fulfilled all times who passes to Eternity. For
as much time as he has spent, not in Series of Years or Number of Days, but in
Devotion, and an unquenchable desire of profiting in Piety, so much does he
deservedly claim of true Life. For he retains in Virtue what he lost in time.
And therefore an unwearied study of profiting, and a continual going forward to
perfection, is reputed for perfection.

Sect. 9. There is an End of all Things but of Eternity.
IT IS the Sense of St. Gregory, all the length of the time of this present Life
is known to be a point, and has its end. Which the same Gregory confirming.
It Is but little, all that has an end. For whatever tends to a Nonentity by the
course of time, ought not to seem long to us. Those very moments that seem to
delay it drive it on. St. Austin is more plain. All this time, says he, I do
not mean from to day till the end of the World, but from Adam to the end of the
World, is but a drop compared to Eternity. All things else have an end, but
Eternity has none. There is nothing in the World but has an end; Banquets,
Balls, Pleasure, Laughter, have all an end, but Eternity has none. Wherefore
then do we set our Minds upon vain things? Nothing but what is durable will
delight a great Mind. Whatever had a beginning shall have an end, only Eternity
has no end.

Why boasts the fond vainglorious World.
Whose Joys are transitory?
Like to the Potters brittle Ware
Is all her Pomp and Glory.
Ah! where is Solomon the Wise,
Or Sampson strong in Fight;
Where is the lovely Absalom;
Or David's dear Delight?
What is become of Caesar now?
With all his Trophies around.
Where Is Aristole? Tully where,
In Learning so profound?
So many Men of Might and Fame
With all their Honor won,
In the short twinkling of an Ese
Are vanish`d all and gone.
The fleeting Banquet of our Joys
Swift as our shadows run.
In the short twinkling of an Eye
Th` are vanish`d all and gone.
Sect. 10. The Consideration of a Dying Man.
Says the Master of Patience, Job, The waters pierce through the very stones
by little and little, and the Floods wash away the Gravel and Earth; so shall
thou destroy the hope of Man. Thou prevailest still against him, so that he
passes away. Thou changest his Countenance, and put him from thee, Job c.
14. v. 19, 20. How few Ceremonies God uses, when he would send a Man out of
this into another World. He changes his Countenance, and commands him to be
gone. When death is at hand, the whole Face is changed. The Nose becomes sharp,
the Eyes sunk and hollow, the Skin of the Forehead hard and wrinkled, the
Color of the Face grows pale, with several other Mortal Symptoms, that make
such a strange and dismal alteration in the Countenance that it seems to be
quite another thing. So that when God changes the Countenance of Man, he sends
him ^orth; Go now, says he, go Man, into thy House of Eternity. Upon so small
a point of Death depend so many Ages not to be numbered by Ages.

Sect. 11. Of Dying in a standing Posture.
IT was a saying of Vespasian, That an Emperor ought to die standing. I also
say that it becomes a Christian to die no otherwise than standing.

In the year 1605* at Vienna the Night before Christmas day, a Soldier
standing Sentinel in a small wooden House was frozen to death; in the Morning
he was found standing, but not watching; for he had finished the VVatch of the
Night and of his Life both together. In the same manner died another, who was
frozen to death, and had done Living before he had done Riding; for the Horse
knowing the way carried his Master to Constance into his public Quarters very
faithfully. Q. Curtius testifies, that some of Alexanders Soldiers were frozen
to death against the Trunks of Trees; and were found not only as if they had
been living, but as if they had been talking together, being all in the same
posture as death seized them.

We read that Leodeganius the Martyr, having his Head cut off, raised himself
upright, and stood immovable for above an Hour. Peter also the Martyr being
upon his Knees, yet kneeled upright after his Head was off. In the times of
Dioclesian and Maximilian, Vrsus and Victor the Martyrs, after their Heads were
cut off walked with them a good way in their Hands: And so did not only die
standing, but stood after they were dead.

Thus it becomes a Christian to die standing, and a dying Christian must stand
and fight; he stands and fights well, who being supported by God, fears not to
die.

Sect. 12. Some dead before death.
'TVVas a wise saying of Alexandridas, That we should die before we are
compelled to die. St. Paul makes this A^^everation, I die daily. Gregory the
Great describing his own condition, Me, faith ^e, bitterness of Mind, and
continual trouble and pains of the Gout so violenly afflict; that my Body is as
it were like a dried Carcass in the Sepulcher, so that I am not able to rise
out of my Bed.

Cosmo de Medici lying at the point of death, and being asked by his Wife, why
he shut his Eyes so, especially when he was awake, made answer, I desire so to
accustom them, that they may not take it ill to be always closed. It Is the best
way of dying then to shut the Eyes, when any Allurement of pleasure assails
them. O shut thy Eyes and so die that thou may not always die, whoever thou
art that love Integrity. Most wisely Seneca Councels Lucilicus, Endeavor
this before the day of thy death, that thy Vices may die before thee.

Sect. 13. Of those that have been Buried by themselves.
PAcuvius, Tiherius Caesar's Procurator in Syria so largely endulged himself
every day to Drinking and Gluttony in that manner, that he was carried from his
Dining Room into his Bedchamber in the midst of the Applauses and Symptoms of
his Domestic Servants, that all the way sang to him after the manner of a
Funeral Dirge, Vixit, vixit. He has lived, he has lived; what was this but
every day to cause himself to be carried forth and buried? Of whom most
excellently Seneca. What* ^aith he, this Man did out of an evil Conscience, let
us perform with a good Conscience, and going to sleep* let us cheerfully sing*
vixi* I have lived; if God add to morrow to our Lives* let us gladly accept of
it; he is the most happy, and the most secure enjoyer of himself, who without
any solicitude expects to Morrow.

Labienus, who furiously Satyriz'd upon all Men, and was therefore called
Rabienus, so far hated, that all his Books were burnt; this Labienus could not
brook, nor would survive the Funerals of his Will, but caused himself to be
carried into the Monument of his Predecessors, and there to be shut up: Nor did
he only put an end to his Life, but Buried himself alive. But more to be
admired was he, who being buried alive, was unburied when dead. Storax, a
Neopolitan, a Man some few years since of great Wealth, delicate and proud; who
being Keeper of the public Stores of Provision, when he had been tardy in his
Office, drew the fury of the samished Multitude upon him; he seeking for
refuge, hid himself in the Sepulcher of St. Austin; where being fonnd at length
and stoned to Death, he was prosecuted with that rage that the people tore his
Flesh bit from bit, and threw his broken Bones about the Streets, which
produced this Epitaph upon him.

Storax, who living in a Tomb lay hid,
Yet wanted, strange to tell, a Tomb, when dead.
Albertus Magnus, the wonder of his Age, having resigned his Miter of
Ratispine, returned to Cologne, to the Learned Poverty of his Order. There he
lost the remembrance almost of every thing as had been foretold him. Yet was he
not so forgetful, but that he remembered every day to approach the place of his
Burial, where he constantly said his Prayers for himself as if he had been
Buried.

S. Severus Governor of Ravenna, entered into his Monument alive, and placing
himself between his Daughter and his Wife, which had been dead some years
before, expired upon the place.

Macarius the Roman stood three years Buried up to the Neck in Earth.

Philotomus a Presbyter of Galatia, lived six years among the Sepulchers of the
dead, that he might overcome the fear of Death.

Philemon of Laodicea, as Suidas testifies, the Disciple of Timocrates the
Philosopher, and Master of Aristides in the Six and Fiftieth year of his Age,
threw himself in a Sepulcher, having almost starved himself to death, to ease
the pains of the Gout. And when his Friends and Relations bemoaned him, and
endeavored to persuade him to come out of the Sepulcher, Give me, said he,
another Body and I will rise.

But the next is an Example of more Piety. Two Anchorites lived in the
Pterugian Rock near the River; one of which grown old and dying was Buried in
the Mountain by his Companion. Some few days after the Disciple of the Old Man
deceased, going to a Countreyman, that was at Plough in the bottom; Do me but
one kindness Brother, said he, take thy Spade and Mattock and follow me. Being
come where the old Man lay Buried, the Anchorite showed the Countreyman the
Grave. And having so done, Dig, said he, here I desire thee, while I pray in
the mean time. When the Grave was dug, and that the Anchorite had finished
his Prayers, embracing the old Man, Pray for me, said he, Brother; and throwing
himself alive upon his Master thus Buried by himself, he gave up the Ghost.

These things may be admired, but not imitated, unless the Holy St. Paul
intimates. You are dead, says he, and your Life is hidden with Christ in God.
Most Excellent is that Admonition of the Philosophers; Live as it were lying
hid. For he lives well that absconds himself well* Such a one is honestly
buried by himself, and to his great Advantage. Who too much known to all men,
dies unknown to himself. He dies most quietly, who ever buries himself alive in
that manner.

Sect. 14. Considerations upon the Sepulcher.
The next third Season, within Plithia's Walls,
Will bring me to my longed for Funerals.

THus Socrates foretold his own Death; and truly, here the City Plithia
signifies no other than the Coffin, and the Sepulcher, whither, whatever
Treaties makes a hasty speed. The Old Poet sang of Alexander the Great.

But having entered once that mighty Town,
Whose Sun-bak'd Walls were of such high Renown,
Contented in a Coffin then he lay;
Thus Death alone makes the most true display.
What little things Men's Bodies are, --
There is no House or Habitation so certainly our own, as the Grave. This the
blessed Jacoponus, a Person as Religious as Facetious, most aptly taught* A
Citizen of Tudertum, had bought a pair of Cock Chickens, and spying Jacoponus,
in the Market, desired him to do him the Favor to carry them home for him,
desiring him withal that he would not fail. To whom Jacoponus, be certain, said
he, that I will not fail to carry them home; and so went directly to the Church
of St. Fortunatus, where that Citizens Monument was, and hid the Chickens as
well as he could. The Citizen returning home, in the first place, enquired for
his Chickens: All the Servants denied they saw any such thing: thereupon, the
Citizen returning back, and finding Jacoponus; I thought, said he, thou would
deceive me, as thou usest to do, But where are the Chickens? said he, To whom
Jacoponus, I carried them home, as you ordered me: Thereupon, the Citizen
denying any such thing to be done; come along with me, said Jacoponus, and
believe thy own Eyes; and so saying, earried the Citizen to his Monument, and
lifting up the Stone; Friend (said he) Is not this thy House? Which the Citizen
acknowledged to be true, and there received his Chickens again. Therefore, most
truly, says Job, I know, because thou will deliver me to Death, where the
House is appointed for all living Creatures.

Sect. 15. Nine Wills*
VEry truly said Pliny the younger; the common Opinion is false, that the Wills
of Men are the mirror of Manners.

1. Zilka bequeathed his Skin to make a Drum, and his Flesh to the Fowls of the
Air, und Wild Beasts; and commanded his Soldiers to spare neither Churches nor
Monuments. He died of the Sickness, in the year 1424.

2. There was a Woman that left her Cat, by Will, five Hundred Crowns, for her
Cats Food, as long as she lived. O the ridiculous Fosteries of Humane Thoughts.
Augustus said of Herod, I had rather be his Hog than his Son. A Man might as
well have said, I had rather have been this Woman's Cat than her Servant.

3 A Famous Usurer, being at the point of Death, sending for the Public Notary
and Respesses, caused his Will to be written in these Words; Let my Body be
returned to the Earth, from whence it was taken; but my Soul be given to the
Devils. His Friends astonished at his words, advised, rebuked him, but he again
and again persisted, saying, Let my Soul be given to the Devils, for I have
unjustly scraped together the most of my Estate. To them belongs the Soul of my
Wife, and the Souls of my Children, who that they might have where withal to
spend upon Clothes, Feasting and Luxury, put me upon the wicked Trade of Usury.
To them also belongs the Soul of my Confessor, who encouraged my wickedness by
his silence. And so saying he breathed his last.

4. St. Jereme rebukes the Covetousness of Heirs, with this Fable. A little Pig
bewailed the Death of its Dam. with a most bitter gruntling; but hearing the
Will read, and that there were a heap of Acorns, and some Bushels of Pease left
him, he held his Peace; and being asked wherefore he ceased his Lamentation so
suddenly; Oh, says he, the Acorns and the Pease have stopped my Mouth. This
is the Humor of most Heirs now adays. They gape after the Legacies, make
Inventories of the Goods, and tell the Money; let what will become of the Soul
of the Testator; let him rest as he has deserved. But let us view another sort
of Wills.

5. The Holy Martyr Hierem, the fourth day before he was carried to Execution,
left his Estate to his Mother and Sister; but to Rusticius, who was chief in
Authority in the Commonwealth of Aneyra, his Hand already cut off.

6. The Holy Hilarion, at Fourscore years of Age, made Hesychius his Heir, in
these Words. All my Wealth, that is to say, the Gospel, and one Hair Vest, my
Coat, and little Cloak, I leave to my most loving Friend Hesychius. And this
was all the Inventory of his Goods.

7. Antonius the Great, made his Will, in these Words. As for the Place of my
Burial, let no man know, but your own Love. My Felt, and old Cloak, give it to
Athanasius, the Bishop, which he gave me when it was uew. Let Serapion, the
Bishop, take the other, which is somewhat better. Do you take my Hair Garment.
And so farewell. My Bowels for Antony is going. He had no sooner ended these
Words, but extending his Legs, he gave admittance to Death.

8. The Patriarch of Alexandria, John of Alms, wrote his Will thus. I give
thee thanks, O God, that at my Death, of all my Revenues, it has pleased thee
to let me have remaining, but one third part of a pound. When Alexandria first
made me their Patriarch, I found Fourscore Hundred pieces of Gold; to this the
Friends of Christ added an unspeakable quantity of Money, all which, that I
might give to God that which was Gods, I expended upon the Poor; wherefore what
remains I also give to them.

9. To this may be added, the Will of a certain Christian, changing only the
Name, the Year, and the Day.

I Achathius, Victor, have been running to Eternity, from the year 1581. upon
the 15th. of August, and have Eternity in my mind. Now I commend my Spirit to
God; and because I cannot deny the Earth what belongs to it, I bequeath my Body
to the Earth, and to the Worms. Of my Goods, there is nothing now mine, but
good will, which I carry with me to the Tribunal of God; the rest I thus
dispose.

1. I forgive all my Enemies from the bottom of my Heart.

2. I am sincerely sorry for all my Sins.

3. I believe in Christ Jesus, my most loving Redeemer. And in this Faith, I
desire the Sacrament of the Church.

4. I hope for Eternal Life through the goodness of God.

5. I love my God, with all my Heart, above all things, and resign my self up
fully to his holy will.

Most absolute prepared to be well, to be sick, to live or die, when it shall
please the Lord. The will of God be done.

Unless every Christian so order his Life, and his last Actions, he is to be
thought to have lived ill* and to have died worse. The last Hour consumates
Death, but is not the cause of it; which was preceded by a good Death: For
nothing makes Death ill, but what follows Death. Good Seed brings a good
Harvest. The Highway to a good Death, is a good Life. I may not unfitly compare
Life and Death to a Syllogism. The end of a Syllogism, is the Conclusion; the
Conclusion of Life Death: But the Conclusion is either true or false, according
to the Nature of the Antecedents; so is Death good or bad, as the Life before
was good or bad. Thus St. Paul severely prononnces, saying, Whose end shall be
according to their Works. 2 Cor. 11. 15.

Memorable is the Death of that Holy Martyr, Felix, who being led to Execution,
rejoicing to himself, with a loud Voice; I have, said he, preserved my
Virginity, I have kept the Gospels, I have preached the Truth, and now I bow my
Head a Victim to God. There is a Relation of one who died suddenly in his
Study, and was found with his Finger pointing to that Verse, in the Book of
Wisdom, c^. 4. v. 7. which says. Though the Righteous be overtaken with Death,
yet he shall find rest, precious in the sight of the Lord, is the Death of his
Saints whether slow or sudden.

The Copious St. Bernard, being near his end, Because, says he, I cannot leave
you great Examples of Religion, yet I commend Three things to your Observation,
which I remember observed by my self. 1. I less believed my own than the
Judgment of another. 2. Being injured, I never sought Revenge. 3. I never would
offend any Person.

Gerard, the Brother of St. Bernard, upon his Deathbed, broke out into that
Davidean Rapture, Praise the Lord in Heaven, Praise him in the Highest; Where
is thy Victory, O Death? Where is thy Sting, O Grave? Gerard, through the midst
of thy very Jaws passes not only securely, but joyfully and triumphantly to his
Country. He cannot die ill who has lived well.

Sect. 16. As we Live, so shall we Die.
The weary Huntsman in his rest, all Night
Dreams of new Sports. and of his past Delight.

IN the same manner, those things that pleased us in our Health, we are
delighted with at our Deaths.

Antiochus miserably afflicted the Jews; and Maximin^s, the Emperor had
designed the utter Exterpation of the Christians. At length, they both fell
into a most lamentable Disease; and when they saw no other way, the one
besought the Jews, the other the Christians, to pray to their God for their
Recovery. Like Esops Crew, which being taken desperately sick, cautioned his
Mother, as she sat by him, not to weep for him, but rather pray to the Gods
for his Recovery. To whom she replied, O my Son, which of the Gods do thou
think will be propitious to thee that has robbed the Altars of every one of
them.

Therefore, as we live, so we die; so are we reprieved and condemed, so
destined to Heaven or to Hell.

Sect. 17. A good Death to be desired.
I Pray God my Soul may die the Death of the Righteous, and that my last end
may be like his, cried the Prophet Balaam. How much more rightly had he wished.
Let my Soul live the Life of the Just, that it may also die the Death of the
Just. It Is a Ridiculous thing to desire a good Death, and fly a good Life.
It Is a Labor to live well, but a Happiness to die well; he that refuses to
pass the Red Sea, must not think to eat Manna. He that loves the Egyptian
Servitude, shall never reach the Land of Canaan. Piously and Elegantly St.
Bernard, Oh that* I may fall, says he, frequently by this Death; that I may
escape the Snares of Death; that I may not feel the deadly Allurements of a
Luxurious Life, that I may not besot my self in sensual Lust, in Covetousnes,
Impatience, Care and Trouble, for worldly Affairs.

This is that Death which every one ought to wish for, who designs a Life that
shall never know Death. Before Death, to die to Sin and Vice, is the best Death
of all.

Sect. 18. Sleep the Brother of Death.
PAusanias relates, that he saw a Statue of Night, in the shape of a Woman;
holding in her right Hand a little white Boy sleeping, in her left, a little
black Boy, like one that were a sleep. The one was called Somnus, Sleep; and
the other Lethum, Death, but both the Sons of Night. Hence it is that Virgil
calls Sleep the Kinsman of Death.

Gorgias Leontinus, being very old, was taken ill. In his Sickness he was
visited by a Friend, who finding him fallen asleep, when he waked, asked how he
did? To whom Gorgias made answer; Now Sleep is about to deliver me to his
Brother.

Whoever thou art, O Christan, before thou layst thy self to Sleep, examine thy
Conscience, and wipe away the stains and spots that defile it. There are many
who have begun to sleep, and die both together; and ended their Lives before
they had stepped out of their Sleep. The Brother of Death is to be feared, and
not only cautiously, but chastely to be fallen into. He that sleeps not chastely,
shall hardly wake chastely.

Sect. 19. The forerunners of Death.
THE forerunners of Eternity, is Death; the forerunners of Death, are Pains,
and deadly Symptoms. One deadly Symptom, if we believe Pliny, in the height of
Madness is Laughter, in other Diseases an unequal Pulse. But the Eyes, and the
Ears, show most undoubted Prognostics of Death. Experience teaches us, that
when sick People talk of going Journeys, and endeavored to escape ou^ of their
Beds, when they pull and pick the Blankets, they are near Death. Augustus, the
Emperor, a little before he expired, suddenly terrified, complained that he
was carried away by Forty young Men. Which says Suetonius, was rather a
Presage, than a sign of any Delirium, for so many Pretorian Soldiers, when he
was dead carried him to his Funeral Pile.

When Alexander went by Water to Babylon, a sudden Wind rising blew off the
Regal Ornament of his Head, and the Diadem fixed to it: This was looked upon as a
Presage of Alexander's Death, which happened soon after.

In the Year of Christ, 1185. the last and most fatal end of Andronicus
Commenus being at hand, the Statue of St. Paul which the Emperor had caused to
be set up in the great Church of Constantinople, abundantly wept: Nor were
these Tears in vain which the Emperor washed off with his own Blood.

Barbara Princess of Bavaria, having shut her self up in a Nunnery, among other
things allowed her for her peculiar Recreation, she had a Marjoram-Tree of an
extraordinary bigness, a small Aviary, and a Gold Chain, which she wore about
her Neck: but fourteen days before she died the Marjoram-Tree dried up; the
B^rds the next Night were all found dead; and after that the Chain broke in two
in the middle. Then Barbara calling for the Abbess, told her that all those
Warnings were for her, and in a few days after died, in the Seventeenth Year of
her Age: After her death above twenty other Virgins died out of the same
Nunnery.

Several other Presages there are that foretold the death of Princes and great
Men: As the uuwonted Howlings of Dogs, the unseasonable noise of Bells, the
Roaring of Lions, etc. Therefore said Pliny, The Signs of Death are
innumerable, and that there are none or very few Signs of Safety or Security.
What do all these things Admonish us, but only this; Remember, O man, that thou
art a man; think upon Eternity to which thou art hastening: Go to, prepare thy
self, thou art called to that Tribunal of God; as thou did live, shall thou
be judged.

Sect. ^o. What Answer is to be given to the Messenger of Death.
SAint Ambrose having received the News of his Death, when his Friends bewailed
him, and begged of God to grant him a longer space of Life; I have not lived,
as to be ashamed to lieve among you, neither do I f^^r to die, because we have
a graci^us God.

Saint Austin, nothing troubled at the News of his Death; He never shall be
great, says he, who thinks it strange that Stones and Wood fall, and that
Mortals die.

Saint Chrysostom a little before his Death, in Exile, wrote to Innocentius, We
have been these three Years in Banishment, exposed to Pe^^ilence, Famine,
continual Iucursions, unspeakable Solitude, and continual Death. But when he
was ready to give up the ghost, He cried out aloud, Glory be to thee, ^O God,
^or all things.

Let a dying Christian imitate these most holy Persons, and repeat these
Sayings often to himself; Thanks be to God; Glory be to thee, O God, for all
things* I have watched long enough among thorn^, Labored long enough in Storms*
Now because I see the end of my Watching and my Labor, Thanks be to God: Glory
be to God for all things; For Life is tedious, Death a certain gain.

Sect. 21. Death is better than a sorrowful Life.
IT is better once to Die, than to be always Dying: We daily Die, we have lost
^^^ Childhood, our Youth is gone. All our Time even to Yesterday is slid away.
These things Gregory Nazianzene comprehending in a few words, There is no good
among men, with which there is not something of evil mixed. Riches are a Snare;
Poverty a Fetter, Honor a mere Dream, Empire dangerous, Subjection troublesome,
Youth is the Summer of Life, Gray* hairs the Sunset of Life, Matrimony a Bond*
Children the growing Crop of Care, Fullness breeds Petulance, Want begets
Impatience. Whatever we behold in this World, is like the World in a perpetual
motion. Whatever seemed stable, is now doubtful, (...) with the perpetual
volubility of Day-night (...), Diseases, Sorrows, Pleasures and Calamities;
Death is most certain. Elegantly St. Austin; Death, says he, is only certain,
all things else uncertain. A Child once Conceived perhaps is born, perhaps not,
but perishes in Abortion. If he be born, perhaps he grows up, perhaps not*
perhaps he grows old, perhaps not: Peradventure he shall be Rich, peradventure
Poor; perhaps he shall attain to Honor, peradventure live Contemned; perhaps
he shall have Children, it may be not; perhaps he shall die in his Bed, it may
be slain in the Field: But who can say, perhaps he shall die, perhaps not.

The first Book of Maccabees thus describes the Death of Alexander; Then he
fell sick, and when he perceived that he should die, Alexander had wished for
several Worlds in hopes of Victory, and thought with himself that he had
performed Achievements that deserved Eternal Annals. Nevertheless after so
many and such great Victories, overcome at length he fell, not only into his
Bed, but into his Tomb, contented with a small Coffin. Peter Alfonsus reports,
That several Philosophers flockt together, and variously desca^ted upon the
King*^ Death. One there was that said, Behold now four Yards of Ground is
enough for him, whom the spacious Earth could not comprehend before. Another
added, Yesterday could Alexander save whom he pleased from Death, to Day he
cannot free himself. Another viewing the Golden Coffin of the Deceased:
Yesterday* said he, Alexander heaped up a Treasure of Gold, now Gold makes a
Treasure of Alexander. This was their Learned Contention, yet all ended in
this; Then he fell sick and died.

Thus forgetful of our selves, what Mountains do we raise to our selves in
Thought. We revolve in our Minds Immortal, I wish they were Heavenly Things,
whilst Death surprises us in the midst of our vast Undertakings; and that which
we call Old Age, is but the Circuit of a few Years. Wherefore do we trust to
Death? Behold through what slight Occasions we lose our Lives. Our Food, our
Moisture, our Watchings, our Sleep, are unwholesome to us without their due
measure. A small hurt of a Toe, a light pain of the Ear, a Worm in the Tooth,
make way for Death. The little Body of Man is weak, frail, subject to Diseases;
this Air, these Winds, those Waters offend him. therefore let us believe the
Son of Syras, Death is better than ^ bitter Life, and Eternal Rest better than
continual Sickness. So that it is much better to be an Inhabitant on Earth,
than a Pilgrim in Heaven.

Sect. 22. The Happiness of Death.
BLessed are the dead that die in the Lord; even so says the Spirit, that they
may rest from their ^^bours, and their works follow them. To die in the ^^rd,
is the same thing as to die a Servant of the ^^rd; as the Scripture speaks
concerning Moses, Moses my Servant is dead. As if God had said, says Cajetan,
Though he were once a Sinner, and was not then my Servant, nevertheless he died
my Servant. He so died, that whatever he was, or whatever he did, was mine; for
a Servant wholly belongs to the Master: And let such a Servant of the Lord sing
that Song of Simeon at his death, Lord, now let thy Servant depart in peace
according to thy word. Altogether in peace, and that Eternal; in the beginning
whereof all the Warfare of good men is at an end, never more to be rekindl'd.
For such Servants of God die in the Lord, who dying, rest in the Besom of God,
and so resting, sweetly sleep in death. Thus Stephen among so many Showers of
Stones, in such in the midst of the Tumult and Dinn of the Enraged Multitude,
slept in the Lord. Thus Moses the Servant of the Lord, died by the command of
God. Thrice happy and blessed are such, that never more shall be miserable. The
death of the Just* faith St. Bernard, is good, because of its Rest, better
because of its Novelty, best of all by reason of its Security. Blessed, and
again thrice blessed are such, for their Works follow them: They follow them as
Children follow their Parents, as Servants follow their Masters, as Scholars
follow their Teacher, and Soldiers their Captain. They follow them to the
Tribunal of God, to the Court of Heaven; as Peers follow their Prince, whither
these Noble Servants are only admitted.

Sect. 23. The Farewell of a dying Person to the living which are to go the same
way.
THere are many things of which it behooves me to Repent, of Virtue often
neglected, and Time ill spent. How much did it become me to have been more
patient, more submissive, more studious of daily Death. How small a Spark of
Divine Love did glow in me! Pity me, O God, pity me, according to thy great
Mercy! Spare a Sinner, O Infinite God; through the Passion and Blood of thy
dear Son. But I have also offended you both in Word and Deed; Pardon me; you
find me both Consessing and Sorry, and deny me not this Provision for my
Journey, the pardon of all my Transgressions. Let not your Virtue decrease by
my Example, which was always bad. You have before your Eyes the Lives of the
Saints, to which yours must conform. Enable their Patience, Submission, and
Obedience to the utmost of your power. I also return you thanks for your Pains,
for your Assistance, for your Advice, and for your Love. God the inexhaustible
Fountain of Goodness, and the Immense Ocean of Love, recompense your Affection.
God is certainly most Liberal to those that Commit themselves to his most holy
Providence. Obedience is a most Noble Virtue, Patience is absolutely necessary,
Submission is a most excellent Virtue, and Contempt of our selves, Poverty is a
Virtue beloved of Christ, Charity is the Queen of Virtue: Yet* above all the
Virtues, Faith in God seems to me to have something singular and most
excellent, and a Plenary Resignation of a Man's self to Divine Providence,
which the holy Scripture so commends, and which is continually in the Mouth of
the Kingly Prophet, and which Christ endeavors to inculcate into us, by so
many Arguments drawn from Flowers, etc. little Birds. The Virtues of this
Faith, and the Tranquillity that attends it, he only knows and finds, who in
every thing as well small as great, most perfectly trusts in God, and confines
himself to rely upon his Providence and Will Neither do I believe there is any
man who had this Hope and Trust in God, but that strange and hidden Mysteries
befell him. Therefore let us trust in God, and commit our selves wholly to his
Will and Protection.

I, whom ye here see, am cited to the Tribunal of God, to give an Account of
Sixty Years. All my Deeds, Words and Thoughts, are open to this Judge. Nothing
is concealed from him. All my Life's Actions shall receive their definitive
Sentence. How I tremble! for it is a terrible thing to stand in Judgment before
God. But in this Extremity there is that which comforts me: Therefore though I
am a wicked Servant, my Lord is Gracious and Infinitely Good, who will
acknowledge his Servant though he have been bad. And now God be with you all
that Survive: Farewell all you that are to follow me in your order.

Sect. 24. The last Admonitions of Dying People.
AS the Sun toward his Setting, shines often forth more pleasantly; So Man the
nearer he is to Death, the wiser he is. Hence those Admonitions of dying
People, which Wisdom has so much applauded.

Cyrus being about to die, My Son, said he, when I am dead, close up my Body
neither in Silver nor in any other Metal, but return its own Earth to the
Earth again. His last Words were, Be grateful to your Friends, and you will
never want the Power to punish your Enemies. Farewell my dear Son, and tell
these my Words to your Mother also.

Wisely says Theophrastus, upon his Death Bed, Many fine and pleasant things
does Life impose upon us, under the pretense of Glory, then the Love of which
there is nothing more vain. Hither may be referred the saying of Severus, the
Emperor. I was all things, but nothing avails.

Constantius, Father of Constantine the Great, upon his Deathbed, as he was
resigning his Empire to his Son, with a wonderful Cheerfulness; Now (said he)
do I almost esteem Death above Immortality. I leave a Son, Emperor. Here is the
Man, that after 270 years has wiped away the Tears of the Christians, and
avenged the Cruelty of Tyrants* Christ was truly in Arms with Constantius.

Lewis, King of France, gave these his last Admonitions to his Son. Beware my
Son, that thou never commit any deadly Sin; rather suffer all manner of
Torments. First, chose such about thee as will not be afraid to tell thee what
thou art to do, and what to beware. To thy Parents give all Obedience, Love and
Reverence.

Ferdinand* the Great, King of Castile, falling sick of his last Sickness,
caused himself to be carried to the great Church, in all his Royal Robes, where
putting off all his Royal Ornaments, and as it were restoring God his own, he
put on a Hair Cloth, and casting himself upon the Ground, with Tears in his
Eyes. Lord, said he, the Kingdom which thou gave me, I return to thee again,
seat me, I beseech thee, in Eternal Light.

Charles King of Sicily, spoke these Words, Oh the Vain Thoughts of Men!
Miserable Creatures, we are delighted with Honor, heap up Treasure, and
neglect Heaven. O the happy Fate of the poor, who content with little Sleep in
Tranquillity. What does now my Kingdom, what do all my Guards avail me? I might
have been Miserable, without all this Pomp. Where is now the power and strength
of my Empire? The same necessity involves me, as hampers the meanest Beggar. Of
so many Thousands of Clyents, Servants and Flatterers, there is not one that
will or can accompany to the Tribunal of God. Go Mortals go, and swell your
Breasts with great Thoughts; to Day or ^^ ^orrow, ye must die. Farewell Earth,
would I could say, welcome Heaven.

Nor must we forget the most Holy and Opulent of Kings, the Son of the Hebrew
Nation, David, who being near Death, I says he, am going the way of all the
Earth, and then turning to his Son, But thou my Son Solomon, said he, keep thou
the watch of the Lord, thy God, that thou walk in his Ways, and keep his
Statutes and Precepts. If thou seek the Lord, thou shall find him; but if thou
forsakest him, he shall cast thee off to Eternity. A terrible Exhortation, and
enough to have pierced a Heart of Adamant.

Thus Death devours all, cuts off Kings, lays Nations wast, and swallows the
People up; deaf to Prayers, Riches, Tears, no^ to be overcome by any humane
force. Only the Wiseman dies contented the Fool murmurs at his departure.

Sect. 25. Christ is invited.
ABide with me, O Lord, for it draws toward Night, and the day is far passed.
The day of my Life hastens toward Night* and there is no Joshua to stay the
Sun; or prolong the Day. But as the Sun is daily buried under ground, yet every
Morning revives; so I and all that live shall go to the Earth* but we shall
return from the Earth clearer than the Sun it self.

Therefore, O Christ, O my most Gracious Savior, abide with me; behold it
draws toward Night. My Eyes, my Ears, all my Senses fail me; but do thou, I
beseech thee, not fail me, O most loving Jesu, and all the rest, I most
willingly abandon. Begone all other things; I dismiss and give ye leave. My
Creator is with me, it is enough. It is well with me. But that thou may
tarry with me till Night, even till Death; still I cry, abide with me, O Lord,
for it draws toward Night.

Sect. 26. The dying Man is encouraged.
WHen thou have not the convenience of reading much, behold a few Verses not a
little useful to ease thy Troubles, and confirm thy mind. Consider that St.
Cyprian whispers these Words into thy Ears* When we die, we pass to
Immortality. Nor can we attain to eternal Life, unless* we depart from hence.
Neither is this an Exit, but a Passage, and a flight to Eternity, after the
short Conclusion of a Temperate Race. How preposterous, how perverse a thing it
is, when we desire that the Will of God should be done, when he calls us forth
of this World, that we should not straight be obedient to his Will? We strive,
we struggle, and like headstrong Servants we are haled into the presence of
God, with Sadness and Sorrow; forced rather by Necessity, than won by the tie
of our Obedience; and is it reasonable we should be honored by him with
Celestial rewards, to whom we go unwillingly? Wherefore do we desire and pray
that the Heavenly Kingdom may come, when our Earthly Captivity so much
delights us? Wherefore do we so earnestly wish for the fulfilling of Christ's
Kingdom, when we had rather serve the Devil here, then reign with Christ there?

Then shall the Servants of God enjoy Peace, and a calm and quiet Rest, when
freed from the troubles of this World, when having vanquished Death we come to
immortality. When to see Christ, it shall be our joy, when we can have no joy,
but by seeing Christ. What blindness of mind, what madness is it, to be in love
with the Oppressions, Pains and Tears of this World, and not rather to make
haste to that joy which can never be ^ak'n from us?

Death is therefore the Hav'n of all Mortals. O happy Shore, O secure Port!
wherein none but the obstinate can Shipwreck.

Sect. 27. Faith in the Resurrection.
THis Flesh of ours now lives; though shortly to return to its Clay, to its
mouldring Dust; to be the Food of Fish, Locusts, Ants* and poisonous Vermin.
And yet, after all this, the same Flesh shall rise; and the Butcheries of
Executioners, and the Coats of Martyrs shall be crowned. Neither ^^ thou dream
of any Flesh than the former, unless thou can imagine God unjust to give the
reward to any other than that which has won the Prize, or that he should
receive another to his Heavenly Rest, than that which won the Prize. The same
Soul in all things, which in this Flesh fought the good fight, stood steadfast;
learnt God, put on Christ, sowed the hope of Salvation, the same shall reap.
The same Flesh that with the Soul ran through the whole Order of Life, endured,
bled, with the same Soul, its Companion, shall reap the reward. Lazarus was the
same after he had been four days in the Sepulcher as before. The same the Son,
after the Mothers Tears were tried up as before: The same was Christ, after his
being entombed as before. Neither does any aid of Sepulture deprive God of his
Omnipotency, or put a stop to his Goodness. The some was the Tongue of the Rich
Man, that was fed with Banquets, and that which was scorched in the Infernal
Flames, and begged to be relieved by the Finger of the more happy Beggar; the
same Flesh shall be rewarded or punished according to its Merits. Is not God
able to enliv'n the Clay, with the same breathing of his Spirit as formerly? He
that formed the Muscles, the Bones, the Nerves, the Veins* the Marrow, out of
the same Clay, Can he not form the same, out of the same again? Is there a
necessity that what perishes once should always Perish? By what Law? Behold,
that I may not stumble thee with any higher Philosophy; behold thy Universal
returning, Order of all things; that is a testimony and argument of returning
Man. Summers and Winters revolve, Springs and Autums have their turns. The
light of Sun and Stars return with the morning Splendour, or the natural
Darkness had obscured. Thou would think the (...) dead, and the Branches only
fit for the Fi^e yet we see them revive again, and thicker clad than before;
and what the cold Kills, the heat of Summer restores more. Beautiful, as if
decay it self paid use. Not that these things, in all things, prove the
Reparation of Human Life but lead us to it. Would thou have more signal
Arguments? We have a pledge in Christ, in whom we Usurp Heaven, and the Kingdom
of God. Would thou have it in Man? The mortified and putrified Flesh of
Lazarus; wise Flesh. Moses and Elias, made known to the Apostles, demonstrated,
that the same Habit and Condition of Body is still preserved in Glory. And the
departed Souls delivered out of the Prisons of this Flesh, and returned to
their own pure Light and Substance; yet desire nothing more than to be clad
with this refined Clay, and in the former Matrimonial Society, to continue a
Life with the same Flesh, never to be dissolved; that they which endured
together may enjoy the same equality of Glory, like Christ their Captain, who
ascended Flesh and Bone into Heaven, a Pledge and Argument of our future Purity.

Therefore, let us not be sad. When the old House falls a fairer will rise in
the stead. He not only believed without a Cause, but lived for no Cause, that
thought himself born to Perish.

Sect. 28. The hope of Resurrection, our greatest Comfort.
JOB almost buried in the Grave of innumerable Calamities* yet with a vast
alacrity of Mind; I know (says he) that my Redeemer Lives, and that I shall
rise out of the Earth, at the latter day, and shall be covered again with my
Skin, and shall see God in my Flesh; when I my self shall see, and mine Eyes
shall behold, and none other for me. This my hope is laid up in my Bosom.
Christ also as it were returning an Answer to Job; I am the Resurrection and
Life, says he; whoever believes in me, though he be dead shall live.

There will most certainly come a day, that will restore us to Light, and
therefore ought to depart contentedly.

It Is reported that there is a Bird in the East Indies, called Semenda, which
being sensible of her approaching Death, fetches Wood into her Nest, sings
sweetly, and by the clapping of her Wings sets it a Fire, where being consumed,
out of the Ashes grows a Worm, which afterward comes to be a Bird of the same
Nature. A plain Symbolum of the Resurrection.

Mirmeius, the Roman Orator, a great Antagonist of the Christians: see (says
he) how for our comfort all nature points out our Resurrection. The Sun sets
and rises, the Stars fall and return. Flowers decay and refluorish; the
withered Trees recover their Vendure. Seeds return their several species. Thus
the Body deceased, like Trees in Winter, cover their Vigor with a feigned
dryness. We are also to expect the Spring of the Body. I know that my Redeemer
Lives, and that I shall rise again at the last day.

Sect. 29. The hope of Heaven.
WHat would thou? What desire thou? Would thou live? And would thou not
die? So live then that thou may once live happy. For to live, and not to live
happily, is a kind of death, or the way to death. In Heaven thou shall live,
never to die. Therefore thou shall live happily, for thou neither shall nor
can suffer pain, because there is none there. There thou shall enjoy thy
Wishes* nor can thou be put out of possession. Eat O ye Cant. 5. 1.
Friends, drink and be merry, O ye beloved. This Banquet has no end. St.
Austin* cries out, O sempiternal Life, and tempiternally blessed; where joy
without sorrow, rest without labor, dignity without fear, health without
sickness, life without death, happiness without calamity, where all good things
perfect in charity. The Gates of Jerusalem shall be built of Saphyrs and
Smarayds, and of precious Stones, the whole Circuit of her Walls. The Streets
of the City shall be pure Gold, transparent as Glass, and through her Villages
shall Allelujahs be sung.

Therefore blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be always
praising thee. I believe verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of
the living.

Sect. 30. Sighs to Heaven.
Show me thy Glory. Show me all thy Exodus 35. verse. 18.
Good.

Isa. 61. 3. When will thou give unto them that mourn, beauty in stead of
ashes, joyful Ointment for sighing, pleasant raiment for a heavy mind.

Job 6. 8, 9. 10. O that I might have my desire, and that God would grant me
the thing that I long for. O that God would begin to smite me. That he would
let his band go and take me clean away. Then should I have some comfort; yea I
would defy him in my p^i^* that he would not spare, for I will not deny the
words of the Holy One.

Job 7. 2. For as a bond-servant desires the shadow* and as the hireling would
sain have the reward of his work.

Psalm 15. 1. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? who shall rest in thy
holy place?

Psalm 27. 45. One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will perform, even
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold
the fair beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.

Psalm 42. 1, 2. Like as the Heart desires the Waterbrooks, so longs my Soul
after thee, O God. My Soul is a thirst for God, yea, even for the living God.
When shall I come to appear before the presence of God? Now when I think
thereupon, I pour out my heart by my self. I went by with the multitude, and
brought them forth to the house of God.

Psalm 55. ^. O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away and be
at rest.

Psalm 60. 9. Who will lead me into the strong City?

Ps. 65. 4. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and receivest unto thee; he
shall dwell in thy Court.

Ps. 73. 1. Truly God is loving unto Israel; even to such as are of a clean
heart. Verse. 24. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth
that I desire in comparison of thee. Verse. 25. My flesh and my heart fails,
but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

Psalm 84. 1. O how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts. Verse. 2. My
Soul has a desire and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord V. 10. For
one day in thy Courts is better than a thousand years.

Psalm 116. 9. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

Psalm. 120. 5. My Soul has long dwelt among them that be Enemies to peace.

Psalm 122. 1. I was glad when they said unto me, we will go into the house of
the Lord.

Psalm 138. 1. By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept^ when we remembered
thee, O Sion. Ver. 4. How shall we sing the Lord's Song in a strange Land? If I
forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand finger forget her cunning.

Ps. 142. 9. Bring my Soul out of prison, that I may give thanks unto thy Name.
Which thing if thou will grant me, then shall the righteous resort unto my
company.

I desire to be dissolved and be with Christ.

Sect. 31. An Abstract of the Comforts against Death.
FIrst Death kills our familiar Enemy the Body. There is no mischief more
pestilential than a Bosom-Enemy. The Flesh lusts contrary to the Spirit, and
the Spirit contrary to the Flesh, Gal. ^. 1^. These are contrary one to another.

2ly, Death breaks the Door of the Prison wherein we are locked up: But as old
Prisoners, many times long acquaintance with the place detains us not unwilling
in the midst of our Fetters and Suffferings. But the best of Kings desired to
be delivered out of Custody.

3ly, Death eases us of a vast Burden; for why, a corruptible Body is heavy to
the Soul, and the Earthy Mansion keeps down that Understanding that museth
upon many things: No man can swim with this Burden.

4ly, Death puts an end to our Pilgrimage. What is Mortal Life, says St.
Gregory, but a way? Consider my Friends, what it is to be aweary, upon the way.
Our present Life is full of pain, a perpetual sirugling, and yet we cannot
forsake it without Tears.

5ly, Death brings us out of all Danger. The most Fortunate Man that lives is
subject to many Dangers; and Danger is hardly avoided without danger. He has
only escaped all Dangers, who is out of this Life.

6ly, The necessity of Death. Nobly said the wise Roman, There is no greater
comfort in Death, than Death it self. He would not live, that would not die.
Death carries with it an impartial and unvanquishable Necessity. For the first
part of Impartiality is Equality.

7ly. The Death of Christ. To the Contemplation of this, St. Paul exhorts us:
Let us, says he, run with patience unto the Heb. 12. Battle that is set before
us. Looking unto 1. 2. Jesus the Captain and Finisher of our Faith; who for the
Joy that was set before him, erdured the Cross. To the Members of this Head
this is the greatest Consolation: For that the Members should not fear Death,
the Head endured the utmost violence of Death. The Author of Life by dying set
open the Gates of Heaven. Why do we fear to die?

8ly, The Hope of Resurrection. Wherefore do we expostulate with Death? He does
not deprive us, but introduces us into Life. The Day will shine that will recall
us from our Graves. We shall all rise. Which sundry Arguments demonstrate unto
us, as has been already showed.

9ly, Immortality it self. Death is the end and passage; the end of Calamity,
the passage to Calamity. Hence the death of the Just is called their Birthday.
Hence also that other Saying, Death is but a Sport to a true Christian. And
that no man might fear this Sport, Prudentius in his Hymns, has these Lines.

That which you see, believe me, is no pain,
And but a minute does prolong its reign.
Nor does it silly man of life deprive;
But life reforms, by keeping life alive.
Thus the best, and all the best of men have the same beginning of Happiness,
as end of Mortality.

Sect. 32. Against those that Die unwillingly.
SO it is, we generally fear Death, neglect Life, and die unwillingly: And yet
this is Ingratitude, not to be content with our time allotted. They will always
be but a few Days, says Seneca, if they be numbered. The Prolongation of Life
nothing avails to Happiness. How much more satisfactory is it to put a good
Value upon our own, than to value the Years of another. Did God think me worthy
of this time? This is enough. He might have added more, but this is a Favor.
Here opportunely Horace.

But having his completed time enjoyed,
Let him, like a full Guest, the Room avoid.
Who would endure a Guest that at the end of a Banquet should cry, I have not
filled my Belly Who can praise that man, who departing out this life shall
complain and say, I have not lived long enough? and bemoan himself as if his
life were broken off in the third Act? It Is not only a shameful but a
ridiculous Complaint. The bounds are set; but whether a long Life or a short,
there is to be an end of it. So it pleases the Author of Life.

The have eat and drank enough, enough have played.
And now Time calls that will not be delaid.
Most admirably Epictetus; Thy Honor is at end, be gone, depart, gratefully,
modestly; give place to others: Others must be born, as thou were; and being
born, they must have Habitations and Food? But should not the first depart,
what would be left? Why art thou insatiable? why art thou not satisfied? why
do thou stifle and crowd the World. But more admirably than Epictetus. St.
Austin; At what time soever God would have thee make thy departure, let him
find thee ready; For thou art a Stranger, and not Master of the House: The
House is only let to thee, nor have thou any certain Lease of it. What said the
Lord thy God; When I please, when I say the word, be gone, depart. I will turn
thee out of thy Inn, but I will give thee a House. Thou art a Pilgrim upon
Earth, thou shall be a Tenant in Heaven.

He more earnestly expects, more confidently hopes for Heavenly Pleasures, who
denies himself Earthly Delights.

Who life does count severe,
Less cause has death to fear.
Sect. 33. Delay is the Rock of dying People.
WE have admonished the Healthy, the Sick, we must also admonish the Dying, to
beware of this Rock, Delay. How many thousand People have made an ill end, only
because they have delaied those things which were not to be delaied. Why, O
dying Friend, do thou set apart to Morrow, or the next Day for thy Salvation?
To Morrow is not thine, to Day is. To Day, this very Hour, even now do what is
to be done. Where will thou be to Morrow, or next Day.

Emylius and Pluterch, that the approach of the Theban Exiles being reported to
the Magistrates of the Thebans, they being in the midst of their Jollity took
no notice of it. At the same time Letters being brought to the Chief
Magistrate, wherein all the Counsels of the Exiles were discovered, and
delivered to him at the same Banquet, he laid them under his Cushion, Sealed as
they were, saying, I defer serious Business till to Morrow. But this Deferrer
of Business with all his Friends was that Night surprised and killed. Thus
Death uses to surprise those that delay, while they deliberate, while they
muse, while they defer, he comes and strikes with his unlookt for Dart. S^aint
Austin, a most faithful Monitor, thus instructs one that promises, I will live
to Morrow. God has promised thee pardon, but neither God nor Man has promised
thee to Morrow. If thou have lived ill, live well to Day. Fool, this Night thy
Soul shall be taken from thee. God calls thee now, exhorts thee now, expects
that thou should now repent, and do thou delay? He is not so patient in
suffering, as never to be just in revenging. He has divided his times. Do not
say then, To morrow I will repent; to Morrow I will serve God. For though God
has promised thee Pardon, he has not promised to add to Morrow to thy delay.
Delay not thy Conversion to God, for then God will be angry and destroy the
work of thy hands. The Day is to be prevented, that so often* is accustomed to
prevent.

Sect. 34. A ready Mind.
I Will receive the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. This
Cup is bitterer, yet my Savior drank it up, and from the bloody Cross drank
the same to me that I should pledge him. This Cup is the fatal Cup of Death
which Christ, which those most dear to Christ, which all Mortals drink through
an inevitable necessity. Why should I alive refuse it? Who ever began to live,
must cease to be, that he may begin that life that never shall decay. Both Good
and Evil, Life and Death, Poverty and Riches, proceed from God. What meanest
thou then vain Fear? would thou not that I should drink the Cup which the
Father provided for me, which Christ mingled for me? I am Mortal* and do I
wonder at Death?

When Alexander the Macedonian lay sick, and that some of his Spiritual
Flatterers seemed to hint to him, as if Philip his Physician had mingled Poison
in his Physic; the King receives Philip just then coming to him with the
Poison prepared; with one hand he gave him his Friends Letter, with the other
he received the Poison from him* and as he put it to his Mouth, he fixed his
Eye upon the Physician's Face, to try whether he could discover any Marks of
Guilt in his Face: but perceiving none, and being thereby confirmed in the
Fidelity of his Physician* he forthwith drank off the Poison. So will I do,
when my dear Jesus, my Physician and Savior shall reach me that wholesome Cup
that is to procure my Eternal Rest, while I drink it, I will fix my Eyes
continually upon this Physician's Face, upon the Countenance of my Crucified
Lord, wherein I shall read his Love toward me, and fearless I will take off the
Cup, which the more of Love it has, the more it has of Salvation.

Sect. 35. The dying Person arms himself with Faith, Hope and Charity.
THat this may be the more readily and easily done, we have set down certain
Forms for the Exercise of Faith, Hope and Charity.

To Faith.
I do protest (in the presence of God, his Holy Angels, and the Church both
Triumphant and Militant) that I believe what ever the Holy Universal Church
believes, and that I live and die in the Faith, which the same Universal Church
Profession (in Union which, and under her Head) our Lord Jesus Christ. From
which, whatever is dissonant, I utterly reject and abandon.

To Hope.
I have set God always before me; for he is on my right hand, therefore I shall
not fail.

Wherefore, my heart was glad, and my glory rejoiced; my flesh also shall rest
in hope.

For why, thou shall not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy One to
see Corruption.

Thou shall show me the Path of Life; in thy presence is fullness of Joy, and in
thy right hand is pleasure for evermore. Psalm. 16. v. 8. etc.

To Charity.
What shall I return to the Lord for all his Benefits. I will receive the Cup
of Death from the hand of God, and call upon the Name of the Lord. I will call
upon God with Praises, and I shall be safe from my Enemies. Into thy Hands, O
Lord, I commend my Spirit. Thou have created me, O God, thou have redeemed me,
thou have sanctified me; thine am I alive and dead. I offer my self up entirely
to thy will. Jesu, Son of David, have mercy upon me.

Sect. 36. What is always to be in the thought and Mouth of a sick and dying
Christian.
IN sickness, O Christian, if thou art asked, how thou do? or how is it with
thee? Beware of returning any other Answers but these -- As God will -- As God
pleases -- As the Lord's pleasure is -- So let it be done -- According to the
good pleasure of God -- As it pleases God, so let his will be fulfilled in
Earth, as it is in Heaven.

Nor will it be amiss to have these threefold Prefaces continually in thy lips,
and in thy mind, as well in thy Sickness, as at the hour of thy Death.

1. Blessed be God to all Eternity.

2. Have mercy on me, O Lord, according to thy loving Kindness; though I am not
worthy of the least of thy mercies, O God.

3. Oh, Lord, my God, I surrender my self wholly up to thy will, let thy will
be done.

Sect 37. Certain Precepts to be particularly observed by a dying Person.
FIrst, Not to depend upon the Merits; but with all thy Sins and Omissions to
cast thy self into the Fathomeless Ocean of Divine Mercy.

Next, To adhere steadfastly and constantly to the belief of the true Holy
Church; and to receive the Holy Sacrament.

Thirdly, To forsake all the frail and passing Vanities of this Life; and to
unite thy self to God, with all thy Soul and Affection. To breath after the
Land of Promise, where thou may be able to offer up a lasting Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving to God for all his Mercies.

Fourthly, To offer up thy self, a Living Sacrifice to the Glory of God, for
his great good will toward thee, and to endure patiently for his sake all the
pains and troubles of Sickness, and the bitterness of Death.

Fifthly. To set continually before thy Eyes, the terrible Death and Passion of
thy Lord Christ, that so thou may unite thy Body and Soul, with the wounded
Body, and afflicted Soul of Christ.

But the safest way is, whatever thou would do in the utmost extremity of thy
Sickness, to begin to do that in the prime of thy Health.

Sect. 38. Refreshments for a dying Person.
COme my People, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy Doors about thee.
Hide thy self for a little while, till the Indignation be overpast. Isa. 26.
^0. When I was angry, I hid my Face from thee for a little season; but through
everlasting goodness I have pardoned thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer, Isa.
54. 8.

Why art thou so full of heaviness, O my Soul? And why art thou so unquieted
within me. Put thy trust in God, for I will yet give him thanks for the help of
his Countenance, Psalm 42. 6.

For we are the Children of the Holy Man, and look for the Life which God shall
give unto them that never turn their belief from him, Tob. 2. 18.

Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in Heaven, that one of
these little ones should perish, Mat. 13. 14.

For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him, should not perish but have Everlasting Life, John 3 16.

But if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous. And he is the Atonement for our Sins, not for our Sins only, but
for the Sins of all the World, 1 John 2. 1.

Verily, verily* I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and believes in him
that sent me has Everlasting Life, and shall not come into Damnation, but is
escaped from Death unto Life, John 5. 24.

All that the Father gives me shall come unto me, and him that comes unto me
I will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6. 37.

I am the Resurrection and the Life; he that believes in me, yea though he
were dead yet shall he live.

And whosoever lives and believes in me shall not dye eternally, Joh. 11. 25,
26.

In my Fathers House are many Mansions, 14. 2.

If God be on our side who can be against us* Who spared not his own Son, but
gave him for us all; how shall he not with him, give us all things? Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is he that justifies; who is he
that co^demnesh? It is Christ which dyed, yea rathe^ which is raised again,
which is also on the Righ^ Hand of God, and makes Intercession for us, Ro^* 8.
31, etc.

For no Man livech to himself, and no Man dy^th to himself; for if we live, we
live unto the Lord. Whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords.

For we know that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were destroyed, we
should have a Building of God, even a Habitation not made with Hands, but
Eternal in Heaven. For therefore sigh we, desiring to be farther clothed with
our House which is from Heaven; for if that we be clothed, we shall not be
found naked, 2 Cor. 1, 2, 3.

Now also Christ shall be magnified in my Body, whether it be by Life or by
death. For Christ is to me Life, and Death is to me Advantage. Having a desire
to depart and be with Christ, Philip. 1. 20, 21.

But our Conversation is in Heaven, whence also we look for the Savior; who
shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like his glorious Body.

This is a f^ithful saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ
Jesus came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am chief, 1 Timothy 1. 15,

But he that shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved, Mat. 24. 13.

Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2. 10.

These Fountains refresh and cool the hot Baths of death, he shall happily swim
therein, who plunges himself over Head and Ears in these Rivolets.

Sect. 39. The Sighs and Prayers to God proper for a Dying Person.
ENlighten my Eyes, O most merciful Jesu, that I sleep not in death. Lest my
Enemies say, I have prevailed against him, Psalm. 13. 3, etc.

Lord Jesu Christ, Son of the Living God. Lay thy Passion, Cross and Death
between thy Judgment and my Soul.

O Lord Jesu Christ, remember not our old Sins, but have mercy upon us, and
that soon, for we are come to great misery, Psalm. 79. 8.

Sweet Lord Jesu Christ, for thy glories sake, and for the Effectual Virtues
sake of thy Sufferings; cause me to be written down among the number of thy
Elect.

Enter not into judgment with thy Servant O Lord, for there is no Man righteous
in thy sight.

I worship thee O Christ, I bless thee because thou have redeemed the World by
thy Sufferings. Savior of the World save me, who by thy Cross and Blood have
redeemed me.

O most merciful Jesu, I beseech thee that with thy precious Blood which thou
did shed for Sinners, that thou would wash away all my iniquities. O Blood
of Christ purify me; let the Body of Christ save me; let the Water from
Christ's side wash me; let the Passion of Christ comfort me.

O kind Jesu hear me; hide me between thy Wounds: Permit me not, O merciful
Jesu, to be separated from thee; in this my Hour of death call me; command me
to come to thee, that I together with thy Saints may praise thee to all
Eternity. Cast me not from thy Countenance, nor take thy Holy Spirit from me.

Sect. 40. At the Moment of Death.
NOW Lord according to thy good pleasure deal mercifully by me, and command my
Spirit to be received in peace. Sound into the Ears of my Mind those sweet
words; this day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Now let thy Servant depart
in peace, because mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.

O Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, permit me to enter into the number of thy Elect. O Jesu,
Son of David, have mercy upon me O Lord Jesu, make haste to help me, O Lord
Jesu, receive my Soul.

Sect. 41. The true Confidence of a Dying Person in God.
HEre I confidently aver with St. Bernard. Let another pretend to Merit; let
him boast of enduring the heat and burden of the day; my desire is to adhere
to God, and to put my hope in the Lord.

And though I am conscious to my self, that such was the naughtiness of my
passed Lise, that I deserve to be forsaken of God, yet will I not cease to
rely upon his Immense Goodness, and to hope that as hitherto his most Holy
Grace has afforded me strength to endure all things, so the same will still
uphold me, and enable me to finish my course. Therefore this one thing I beg of
thee O God, that thou will never suffer me to distrust of thy Goodness, though
I know my self to be weak and miserable. Yea, though I should perceive my self
in that Terror and Consternation ready to fail, like St. Peter, upon one blast
of Wind, let me remember him; let me call upon Christ; Lord make me whole.
Then, O then shall thou stretch for h thy Hand and save me stom sinking. But if
thou suffer me to go farther yet with Peter, to run headlong into denial;
then such is my hope that thou will look upon me with an Eye of Mercy and
Compassion, as thou look upon Peter, and grant me a new Confirmation of
Eternity. This I am certain of, that unless the fault be mine the Lord will not
forsake me. I acknowledge that saying of St. Austin, God may save some without
good works, because he is Good; but he condemns none but for their evil works,
because he is Just. And therefore I commit my self to him with a full hope and
confidence in him. If he suffer me to perish for my Sins, yet his Justice shall
be magnified in me. Yet I hope and most certainly hope, that his most merciful
Goodness will most faithfully preserve my Soul, so that his Mercy rather than
his Justice shall be praised in me. Nothing can happen to me against the will
of God. Whatever he pleases, to whom ever it seem ill, is still the best to me.
Whatever pleases thee, that will I, that will I, O God.

Sect. 42. The Last Words of Dying Persons.
AVgustus the Emperor died with these words in his Mouth. Live mindful of our
Nuptial Knot, and so farewell. How much more holilv would these Christians do,
that direct their last words to the Beginning and Creator of all things.

Dyonisius the Areopagite, being condemned to lose his Head, with a Christian
Generosity, contemning the Reproaches of the Spectators, Let the last words of
my Lord upon the Cross, said he, be mine in this World; Father into thy Hands I
commend my Spirit.

Basil the Great* lying at the last period of Life, after he had piously
instructed his own Friends, breathed out his Soul with these last words, Lord
into thy Hands I commend my Spirit.

St. Bernard upon his Deathbed, Oh Christian, said he, despair not of this
Infirmity. Christ has taught thee what thou ought to say in all the dangers
of death, whom to fly to, whom to invoke, in whom to hope. Therefore do thou so
behave thy self, that at the hour of death, thou may be able to say, In thee
Lord have* I trusted let me not be confounded to Eternity.

Therefore let the last words of a dying Person be directed to God. All his
Prayers, Wishes, Desires, and last Hopes must ever tend to him. Let the dying
Person say from the bottom of his Heart; To thee Lord I turn my face; to thee I
direct my Eyes.

Sect. 46. Let the dying Person imitate the Penitent Thief in Golgotha.
Lord remenber me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Happy Thief, who in the
School of Christ had learnt more in three Hours, than the Unhappy Iscariot in
three years.

Lord God! How great is the Abyss of thy Judgments. Thy Friends and Kindred are
silent; thy Disciples forsake thee; the Angels appear no^. Where are those
thousands fed by this Crucified Lord? Who of all that multitude speaks* one
word for so great a Benefactor? Yet the Thief against his Companion pleads the
Cause of Christ, and justifies his Innocence; take off all Scandals from him,
and convicts the Multitude of Murder. Nor was the Son of God ashamed of such
an Advocate; but rather applauded him. Nor was the happy Rhetorician wanting in
his Cause. But we truly, said he, are righteously punished, for we receive
according to our deeds, but this Man has done nothing amiss.

Oh how truly may I say the same of my self. I justly now dye, I receive
according to my Deeds, but my God and my Lord did nothing, that he should dye,
and dye in so much Torment. And therefore may I truly use this Prayer, Lord
remember me because thou art come into thy Kingdom. And because thou art now in
thy Kingdom look upon me weeping in this Exile, and admit me going hence into
thy Kingdom. This I beg of thee for the sake of thy Scourgings, thy Thorns, thy
Cross, and through thy Torments and thy Death.

Therefore what remains but for me to throw my Soul into his Bosom, who alone
considers its Pains and Sufferings, He knows what conduces to the Salvation of
Souls; I wait for thy Salvation, O Lord.

Sect. 47* A Heliotropian Receipt against all Sickness and Death.
THE Heliotrope is a Flower, which as we find by daily Experience, turns it
self with the Sun from East to West, and doing the same even in cloudy
VVeather; and in the Night, for want of the Sun contracts and shuts up the
Beauty of its Colors. Let the will of Man always wait upon Divine Pleasure,
continually turning and winding it self to the beck of Sacred Power, though the
VVeather be cloudy. Nor can any day in all the life of Man be more cloudy than
the day of our death. Then let the dying Person with fixed and steadfast Eyes,
like the Heliotrope, ^urn himself to his only Sun. This let our Saviors words
teach us.

Even so, O Father, for so was it thy good pleasure. After this manner, my dear
dying ^riend speak altogether. In all things to be done, to be avoided, to be
endured and born, according to thy Lords Example always say; Even so, O Father,
even so; always submitting thine to the most holy Will. Even so, O Father,
even so, both now and for evermore.

Philip the second King of Spain, groaning under the pains of a desperate
Disease, was wont continually to repeat these words of our Savior. Father, not
mine, but thy will be done. And one time among the rest, as the Passion of
Christ was read to him, while the Surgeons were Lanching open an Aposthume,
he caused the Reader to stop at these words. So highly did that great King
value this Heliotropian Rec^it, as well in Health as in Sickness.

This Heliotrope cures Sickness, Death, and all sorts of Diseases. He is far
from Destruction, who in his will is so near to God.

THE Fatal Moment.
When we dye our Everlasting state is to be determined! After Death the
Judgment. The moment of our departure hence will pass us over to the Righteous
Tr^bunal of God. It will make us either to shine with the Angels above, or to
set with the Devils* It will either fix us in a joyful Paradise, or in an
intolerable state of Woe* So that we may say with Nieremberg, How many things
are to pass in that Moment? In the same is our Life to finish, our Works to be
examined, and we are then to know how it will go with us for ever and ever? In
that Moment I shall cease to Live, in that Moment I shall behold my Judge, in
that moment I must answer for all my public and my secret Actions, for all
that I have ever thought, or spoke, or done; for all the Talents, the Time, the
Mercies, the Health, the Strength, the Opportunities and the Seasons, and Days
of Grace that I have ever had, for all the Evil that I might have avoided, for
all the good I might have done and did not, and all this before that Judge, who
has beheld my ways from my Birth to the Grave; before that Judge who cannot be
deceived, and who will not be imposed upon. Little can he that has not been
brought near to Death and Judgment know what Thoughts the Diseased have when
they are so. Little, very little does a Soul in Flesh know what it is to appear
before the Great God. This is so great and so strange a thing, that they only
know it who have received their final Sentence; but they are not suffered to
return to tell us how it is, or what passes then; and God sees it fit it should
be concealed from us who are yet on this side the Grave. But who does not
tremble to think of this mighty Change, and of this Moment that is the last of
Time and the beginning of Eternity; that includes Heaven and Hell* and all the
Effects of the Mercy and Justice of God.

Who does not tremble when he considers that Infinite and Holy Majesty before
whom the Angels cover their Faces; that considers him Omniscience, and his
Greatness, and the mighty Consequences of that Sentence, how sudden it is, and
how irresistible, and that it is an irrevocable Decree, and by a Word of this
mighty Judge we live or dye for ever. It is no wonder if the thoughts of it
make us shrink and quiver. It is a greater wonder that when some or other, whom
we know, are almost every week going to such a place and state as this, we who
are not yet Cited to the Bar, are no more concerned, and use no more endeavors
to be ready for it.

Oh my Friends, when you come to the Borders of the Grave, when you are within
an Hour or two's distance from your Final Judgment, and your unalterable state;
what a mighty Change will it cause in your thoughts and your apprehensions. You
will then know and feel it. Then, when the Perspective is turned, and the other
World begins to appear very great, and this very little. This that I have
represented to you is a part of that which we call dying.

It is a great Mercy, and greatly to be acknowledged that God allows us so much
Time wherein to prepare our selves for this final and irrevocable Doom. It is
an instance of his Patience that is truly Divine, that notwithstanding our many
repeated Sins he has not cut us off. It is his great Me^cy that gives us leave
to appear in his Courts before we appear at his Tribunal, and that he affords
us such large notice and warning that so we may be ready for our Last Trial,
whereon so very much depends.

THE TREATMENT OF OUR Departed Friends AFTER THEIR DEATH In Order to Their
Burial.
WHen we have received the last Breath of our Friend, and closed his Eyes, and
composed his Body for the Grave, then solemn and appointed Mournings, are good
Expressions of our dearness to the departed Soul, and of his worth, and our
value of him.

The Church in her Funerals of the dead, used to sing Psalms, and to give
thanks for the Redemption and Delivery of the Soul, from the evils and dangers
of Mortality.

But it is good that the Body be kept veiled and secret, and not exposed to
curious Eyes; neither should the dishonours wrought upon the Face, by the
changes of death, be stared upon by impertinent persons. When Cyrus was dying,
he called his Sons and Friends to take their leave of him, to touch his Hand,
to see him the last time, and gave in charge, that when he had put his Vail
over his Face, no Man should uncover it. And Epiphanius his Body was rescued
from inquisitive Eyes by a miracle. Let it be interred after the manner of the
Country, and Laws of the Place, and the Dignity of the Person; for so Jacob
was Buried with great Solemnity, and Joseph's Bones were carried into Canaan,
after they had been embalmed, and kept 400 years, and devout men carried St.
Stephen to his Burial, making great lamentation over him. And Aelian tells us
that those who were the most excellent persons, were buried in public, and men
of ordinary Courage and Fortune had their Graves only trimmed with Branches of
green Olives, and mourning Flowers, together with a few sprigs of Rosemary and
Bays.

But nothing of this concerns the dead in real and effective purposes; nor is
it with care to be provided for by themselves, but it is the duty of the
living; for to them, it is all one whether they be carried forth in a Chariot
or a wooden Bier, whether they rot in the Air, or in the Earth, whether they be
devoured by Fishes or by Worms, by Birds or by Sepulchral Dogs, by Water or by
Fire, or by delay.

Concerning doing honor to the dead, the consideration is not long; anciently
the Friends of the dead used to make their Funeral Orations, and the Custom
descended, and in the Channel of time it mingled it self in the Veins of the
Earth, through which it passed. And now a days, Men that dye are commended at a
price, and the measure of their Legacy, is the degree of their Virtue. But
these things ought not so to be, the reward of the greatest Virtue ought not to
be prostitute to the doles of common Persons, but preserved like flourishing
Laurels and Coronets, to remark and encourage the noblest things.

But that which is most considerable is, that we perform the will of the dead,
the Laws oblige us, and will see to it; but did they not, certainly it is the
noblest thing in the World, to do an act of kindness to him whom we shall never
see again, but yet has deserved it of us, and to whom we would do it if he
were present: And unless we do so, our Charity is Mercenary, and our
Friendships are direct Merchandise, and our Gifts are Brokage; but what we do
to the dead, or to the living for their sakes, is Gratitude, and Virtue for
Virtues sake, and the noblest portion of Humanity, Kindness and Love.

The Reasons why we shut the Eyes and Mouth of the Dead.
IN the first place, when our dear Friends and Relations are dead, we close
their Eyes and Mouth, which a Learned Author says, is a Custom that was used by
the Primitive Christians, to represent that the death of the Faithful is,
according to the Oracles of Scripture, nothing else but a Repose; since after
having been asleep for a while, they shall be awaked to Eternity. Moreover by
shutting their Eyes and Mouth, we do intimate, that the dead are no more to
take delight in the Objects of this visible World, their Employment now being
steadfastly to behold all the Ravishing Beauties of the other World, and
continually to praise God, who is the Glorious and Bountiful Dispenser of them.

The Reasons why Dead Bodies are often Kissed, Washed, Perfumed and Clothed:
Together with the Customs of several Nations in the Burial of their Dead.
MAny Persons, 1. Kiss, and kindly Salute their dead Friends and Relations, to
show the natural tenderness and love they had for the deceased; but this Custom
is now quite abolished with us in many places, though this practice ought not
to be altogether discommended. 2. As for the usage that is in some Countries,
of washing the dead, St. Chrysostom tells us, that it was derived at first from
the Person of our Lord and Savior, whose precious Body was washed as soon as
they took it down from the Cross. And we read in the ninth Chapter of the Acts
of the Apostles, that a Woman of Joppa called Tabitha, whom St. Peter restored
to Life, had been washed before she was laid out for the Grave. The Indians
burn their dead.

3. The Custom of Perfuming and Embalming the Corpse, has in our days been
(especially in England) much observed. And indeed the very reason, why the
Primitive Christians were so careful to perfume the dead, was, because they
regarded them as so many Members of the Mystical Body of the Redeemer of the
World. Tertullian in his Apology, upbraiding the Heathens with the vast
expenses of sweet Scents and Perfumes, consumed in the Temples, tells them that
those Odours would be better employed, in perfuming and embalming the Bodies of
Christians, and their dear Friends departed. At the Canary Islands they bury
their Dead with a Bottle of Wine standing by them.

4. As concerning the manner of Apparelling the Dead, all Christians use not
the same practice; for some do only cover them with a large Windingsheet, as
they do in France: And others dress them in the very same Clothes they were
wont to wear, as in Italy, and several other places. And others dress them and
lay them in their Coffin, in a white Shirt, a clean Cap ( with their Toes tied
with a black Ribband) and sometimes (as a late Act of Parliament enjoins) in
Flannel; this is the Custom ^^ England. And likewise here it is the Custom ^o
s^^ the Body when dressed in order to the Grave, either in the Entry, or the
principal and most public Room of the House, and that for this reason, and
that by this sight, those that pass by it at the Funeral, may be taken off from
Terrestrial things, and fix their thoughts on those that are Heavenly, by being
thereby put in mind of their latter end, and that it will not be long before
they must lie in the like posture too, in order to be carried on their Friends
Shoulders to their Graves, as this their Friend or Relation is now to be
carried. The Chinese always before they Bury their Dead (if he was a Married
Man) bring him to his Wife, that so she might first kiss him, and bid him
farewell.

The manner of Burying the Dead in England, with the Reasons of the Pomp and
Ceremony wherewith the English carry their Dead to the Grave.
NOW having thus f^r taken care of the dead Body, the next thing is to consider
the reasons and manner of the Pomp and Ceremony, wherewith the English carry
their dead to the Grave, the manner is thus.

The whole Company of Invited Guests (being the Relations, Mourners for, and
Friends of the deceased) march in a sorrowful Procession, first to the Church,
and then to the Grave, attended with more or less Pomp and Ceremony, according
to the Quality of the Party deceased: At the Head of this solemn attendance,
the Minister that is to bury the Corpse, walks before the Corpse (and if the
party deceased was a Person of Quality or Fashion) then goes a vast number of
young Blew-Coats (Boys and Girls) singing Psalms and Hymns most-melodiously all
the way to the Church; next to these Ranks now recited, goes a huge crowd of
Mourners and other People, that accompany the Corpse, whereof usually some are
weeping and lamenting, whilst others are swooning, and sometime almost fainting
away by reason of grief for the party deceased. (Though such excessive
lamenting usually lasts not long, as appears plainly by the story of a Woman,
who did passionately follow her Husband to the Grave, and would by all means be
buried alive with him, yet (being of a base and wanton temper) as soon as ever
the black attire of her Husbands Funeral was over, the next day she married a
brisk Youngster, with whom she lived jocundly all her-days.)

But to proceed, if `tis not a Person of Quality that is diseased, this great
Ceremony in England is rarely observed.

Last of all, when they are arrived at the Church, after the usual Ceremonies
are over, and Funeral Sermon preached, the Corpse is Interred in the Chancel (if
it was the Body of a Rich and Honorable Man) or Churchyard, if it was the
Body of a Mean and Ordinary Person:

The exact Method that ought to be observed in Funeral Processions, for most
Ranks and Degrees of Men.
FIrst Children of the Hospital. Two Conductors* Poor Men. Gentlemen's Servants
in Cloaks. Gentlemen in Cloaks. Gentlemen in Gowns. Adlermen in Black. The
Preacher. A Penon of his own Arms, Helm and Crest. The Coat of Arms. Chief
Mourners. Two Assistants. Aldermen not in Black. Master of the Company if, etc.
Master of the Hospital. Then all Gentlemen not in Black. Neighbors and others.

THE Funeral Solemnity.
I Might here enlarge upon Mourning for, and the Ancient Customs and Manners of
Burying the Dead in all Nations, throughout all the habitable World.

The Ancient Romans did use them that were dead after two manners, and they had
two kinds of Obsequies; the first and most Ancient was to cover the dead with
Earth, and to bury them as we do; the other to burn their Bodies, but this
manner did not continue long.

Numa Pompilius was the Inventer of Obsequies, and he Instituted a High Priest,
who had the Charge. The first Honor which they used to perform in the
Obsequies of Famous Persons, was to commend the Party by an Oration. Valerius
Publicola made a Funeral Oration on the death, and in the praise of Brutus. In
like manner Julius Caesar, being but Twelve years old, commended his
Grandfather; and Tiberius at the Age of Nine years praised his Father. The
second Honor was to make Swordplayers to Fight. Marcus and Decius Sons to
Junius Brutus, were the first that did practice this, in Honor of their
Father. The third Honor was, to make a Feast of Magnificent Furnishment. The
fourth was a distribution of Meat to all the common People. And such (as I have
said before) as could not be Buried with the like, and so great Pomp (for the
Expenses were insupportable) were buried in the Night time, by the Vespilions
clothed all in white, who carried the dead Body to his Grave. They had likewise
an Order, that within some while after the Obsequies, they would strew diverse
Flowers and sweet Odours upon the Sepulcher, as the Roman people did upon the
Funeral Monument of Scipio. And also they accustomed yearly to Garnish, Deck,
and Adorn the Tombs or Graves of the Dead, with Posies, Crowns and Garlands of
all sorts of Flowers. Husbands (says Saint Jerome ad Pammachum) were wont to
straw; spread, or scatter over, and upon the Graves and Sepulchers of their
deceased dear Wives, Violets, Roses, Lillies, Hyacinths, and diverse Purple
Flowers; by which uxorious Office they did mitigate and lessen the grief of
their Hearts, conceived by the loss of their Loving Bed-fellows. The like
expression of Mutual Love Wives showed to their buried Husbands.

Now above all Flowers in these Ceremonious Observances, the Rose was in
greatest request, and had the sole pre-eminence, as Kirman relates. To which
Jo. Passeratius in his Rosa thus alludes.

Manibus est imis Rosa grata, and grata Sepulchris,
Et Rosa flos Florum.
Unto the Tombs and Spirits of the Dead.
The Rose is grateful, of all Flowers the Head.
And Anacreon in praise of the Rose thus sings in one of his Odes: I will use
the Latin Translation.

Rosa, honor, decusque florum
Rosa, cura amorque veris
Rosa, caelitum voluptas.
And in another Ode in commendation of the Rose more aptly to this purpose,
thus,

Medicatur haec and aegris,
Defendit haec sepultos.
The Rose full many griefs does Cure,
Defends Corpse laid in Sepulture.
The Ancient Ethnicks did hold the springing of Flowers, from the Grave of a
deceased Friend, an argument of his happiness; and it was their universal wish,
That the Tomb-stones of their dead Friends might be light unto them; and that a
perpetual Springtide, of all kind of fragrant Flowers, might incircle their
verdant Graves. According to this of Persius Sat. 7.

Dii majorum umbris tenuem and sine pondere terram
Spirantesque crocos, and in vina perpetuum ver.
Lie Earth light on their Bones, may their Graves bear
Fresh fragrant Flowers; let Springtide still live there.
But to come back again. The magnificence in burning the Bodies of the dead,
did far exceed in charges all other kinds of Funeral; for which the Bodies of
Persons of principal regard (as you may read in the Travels of George Sandys)
they burnt rich Odours, Gold, Jewels, Apparel, Herds of Cattle, Flocks of
Sheep, Horses, Hounds, and sometimes the Concubines and Slaves whom they most
respected, to supply their wants, to serve their delights, and attend upon them
in the lower Shades. The expression of such a Funeral Fire, wherein the Body of
Archemorus was consumed, is thus set down by Statius the Theban, in his sixth
Book, Translated by Sandys.

Never were Ashes with more Wealth repleat;
Gems crackle, Silver melts, Gold drops with heat:
Embroidered Robes consume, Oaks, fatned by
The Juice of sweet Assyrian Drugs, flame high:
Fier'd Honey, and pale Saffron hiss: Full Bowls
Of Wine poured on, and Goblets (gladding Souls)
Of black Blood, and snatched Milk. The Greek Kings then
With Guidons trail'd on Earth, led forth their Men
In seven Troops; in each Troop an Hundred Knights round
Circling the sad Pile with sinister Rites:
Who choke the Flame with Dust. Thrice it they
Their Weapons clash; four times a horrid sound
Struck Armours raised; as often the Servants beat
Their bared Breasts, with outcries. Herds of Neat,
And Beasts half slain, another wastful Fire
Devours, etc.
With the like Solemnity, or far greater, the Funerals of Patroclus were
performed by Achilles, for with him were burned, Oxen, Sheep, Dogs, Horses, and
twelve stout and valiant Sons of Noble Trojans. Achilles pulls off the Hair off
his Head, and casts it into the Flame; and besides institutes certain Funeral
Games to the Honor of his slain Friend, the Glory of the Greekish Nation,
Patreclus, which is Recorded by Homer in the 23d Book of his Illiads; of which
this is the Argument.

Achilles orders justs of Obsequies,
For his Patroclus, and does Sacrifice
Twelve Trojan Princes: most loved Hounds, and Horse,
And other Offering to the honored corse.
He institutes besides a Funeral Game,
Where Diomed for Horse-race wins the same.
For Foot, Ulysses; other otherwise
Strive, and obtain, and end the Exequies.
They used to quench these Funeral Fires with red Wine, and gathering the Bones
together, to include them in Urns, which they placed in or upon some sumptuous
rich Monument, erected for that purpose.

Many more Ceremonies were observed in the magnificent ordering of both kinds
of Funerals, as well of such as were Buried in the Earth, as of these Burned in
these costly Piles of VVood. The Custom of burning the dead Bodies continued
among the Romans, but until the time of the Antonine Emperors, An. Dom. 200. or
thereabouts; then they began to Bury again in the Earth. Manutius de leg. Rom
Fol. 125, 126.

They had, at these Burials, suborned counterseit hired Mourners, which were
Women of the loudest Voices, who betimes in the Morning did meet at appointed
places, and then cried out mainly; beating of their Breasts, tearing their
Hair, their Faces, and Garments, joining therewith the Prayers of the defunct,
from the Hour of his Nativity, unto the Hour of his Dissolution; still keeping
time with the Melancholic Music. (This is a Custom observed at this day in
some parts of Ireland, but above all Nations the Jews are best skilled in these
Lamentations, being

Fruitful in Tears; Tears, that still ready stand
To sally forth, and but expect command.)
Amongst these Women there was ever an old aged Beldam, called Praefica,
superintendent above all the rest of the Mourners; who with a loud Voice did
pronounce these words, Ire licet; as much to say, He must needs depart; and
when the dead Corpse were laid in the Grave, and all Ceremonies finished, she
delivered the last Adieu in this manner, Adieu, Adieu, Adieu, we must follow
thee, according as the course of Nature shall permit us.

The manner of these lamentings, (says George Sandys in his Journal) may of
old appear by this Ironical personating of a Father following the Exequies of
his Son, introducted by Lucian in these words: O my sweet Son, thou art lost,
thou art dead: Dead before thy day, and have left me behind, of Men the most
miserable.

To Mourn after the Interment of our Friends, is a Manifest Token of true Love;
by it we express that Natural Affection we had to the departed, with a
Christian-like Moderation of our Grief, whereby our Faith to Godward is
demonstrated. For as God has made us living, so has he made us loving
Creatures, to the end we should not be as Stocks and Stones, void of all kind
and natural Affection, but that living and loving together, the love of the one
should not end with the life of the other.

Our all Perfect and Almighty Savior Christ Jesus, wept over the Grave of dead
Lazarus (whom he revived) whereupon the standers by said among themselves,
Behold how he loved him.

The Ancient Romans, before they were Christians, mourned nine Months, but
being Christians, they used mourning a whole year, clothed in black for the
most part, for Women were clothed partly in white, and partly in black,
according to the diversity of Nations.

These Examples considered, I observe that we, in these days, do not weep and
mourn at the departure of the dead, so much, nor so long, as in Christian duty
we ought. For Husbands can buy their Wives, and Wives their Husbands, with a
few counterfeit Tears, and a sour Visage masked and painted over with
dissimulation; contracting second Marriages, before they have worn out their
Mourning Garments, and sometimes before their Copemates be cold in their Graves.

AN ACCOUNT Of the Death and last Sayings Of the most Eminent Persons, from the
Crucifixion of our Blessed Savior, down to this present time.
Funeral Orations have been anciently used both within and without the Church,
without among the Heathens, within among both Jews and Christians, David, 2 Samuel 1. 19. sets forth the Praise of Saul and Jonathan his Son; The Beauty of
Israel is slain upon his high places. And memorable is that Funeral Oration of
Saint Jerome for his Paula, and her Daughter Eust^chium: And good reason since,
not only Life but the Death of Saints is precious in God's sight; let it be so
in ours, if both the one and the other be spoken of, we ought not, nor can
without Injury to the Pious Souls deceased, bury in silence those Ver^ues and
Graces of God which were Eminently visible in their last Exit, not only for
God's Glory who was Author, but also for Example and Comfort of the Survivers:
And how can we doubt that the Sound of the Praises of the Godly, will ^ause the
most Dissolute one time or another to ^ish, Oh that I might die the death of
the righteous, and that my latter end may be like his.

For these holy Purposes, I design here to give you an account of the Death and
last Sayings of the most Eminent Persons, from the Crucifixion of our Blessed
Savior, down to this present time.

It was a Custom in the Primitive Times, to Transmit to Posterity what would be
most Remarkabe and Exemplary to present as well as to future Ages: And I hope
such Precedents will not appear unnecessary; since Divine Authority informs our
weak Judgment, that St. Luke made one Treatise of all that Jesus began to do
and to teach, Acts 1. 1. Which blessed Pattern was fully delineated by that
holy Apostle for our Imitation, and whose Holy Example we must endeavor to
follow, if we expect to be his Disciples.

It was the Wish and earnest Desire even of Dives when in Flames, That Abraham
would send Lazarus to his Brethren to warn them of coming to that dismal place
of Torment; as we find it, Luke 16. for he conceived a Message from the Dead
would operate more powerfully than the Arguments or Persuasions of the Living:
And in this following Account, we may be said to allow you that which was
denied to this Man, while we Treat you with a seasonable Banquet, Served up by
Repentance, through the Grace and Mercy of God, even upon the Brink of the
Grave.

THE Death of Christ and his Apostles, etc.
The Death of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.
NO sooner had our First Parents, by eating the Forbidden Fruit, forfeited
their State of Happiness; but the All-wise Creator, out of the Abundance of his
Mercy and Goodness, found a means to rescue them and their Posterity, from the
Power and Malice of Satan, and gave them a Promise, That the Seed of the Woman
should break the Serpent's head, Genesis 3. 15, All which was fulfilled by our
blessed Lord and Savior.

The Son of God, and Second Person in the Trinity, was born of the Virgin Mary,
and made Man, whose Birth and Glorious Triumph over Death, the Grave, and Hell,
the Patriarchs and Prophets ^ll along had foreseen.

After our Blessed Savior, that Glorious Son of ^ighteousness, had run his
Course, he undertook ^o satisfy his Father's Justice, by making a Pro^itiatory
Sacrifice for the Sins of lost and undone ^an, and suffered himself to be
Tempted, Be^^ayed, Scourged, Spit upon, Reviled, Crowned ^ith Thorns, and
lastly, submitting even unto the ^eath of the Cross; all which had been exactly
^^etold by the Prophets. Though it happened not after the common manner, but
was attended with such dismal Darkness, and terrible Earthquakes. Insomuch,
that a Heathen Philosopher at that Instant declared, That either the God of
Nature suffered, or the World was at an end. But he could not long rest under
the power of the Grave, but as a Victorious Captain, breaking the Bonds of
Death, he led Captivity Captive, in spite of the Malice of his Enemies, who set
a Guard upon him; for as we have it, Matthew. 28. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. In the end of
the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week, came Mary
Magdalene and the other Mary, to see the Sepulcher, and behold there was a
great Earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from Heaven, and came and
rolled away the Stone from the door, and sat upon it, his Countenance was like
Lightning, and his Raiment white as Snow, and for fear of him the Keepers did
tremble, and became as dead men, and the Angel answered and said unto the
women, fear ye not, for I know that ye seek Jesus that was crucified, he is not
here, but is risen as he said, come see the place where the Lord lay.

The Death of St. PETER.
WHen he was at Rome, he Prophesied the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the
Jewish Nation by Vespasian: But about that time the Persecution growing hot
against the Christians, especially upon Nero's return from Achaia in great
Pomp, he, at that time resolving to glut himself with Innocent Blood, caused
several thousands of the Christians to be shut up in Prisons, and among^^ the
rest St. Peter, for whose Preservation the Prayers of the Christians were still
put up to Heaven many of the chief of them, who could gain Acce^^ persuading
him earnestly to make his escape, alleging, that the preservation of his Life
would be very useful to the Church. The which (after many denials) he attempted
by getting over the Wall, which being effected, and coming to the City Gate, is
there said to meet our Lord, who was entering the City, when knowing him, he
asked him, Lord, whither art thou going? from whom he received this Answer, I
am come to Rome to be Crucified a second time.

By which Answer, St. Peter apprehending himself to be reproved for
endeavoring to fly that Death which was allotted him, and that our Savior
meant he was to be Crucified in his Servant, he returned again to Prison, and
delivered himself to the Keekper, and so continued till the Day of his
Execution with great cheerfulness. Having Saluted his Brethren, and especially
St. Paul, who was at that time his Fellow-Prisoner, he was led to the top of
the Vatican Mountain, near the River Tiber, about three Furlongs without the
City, and there Crucified with his Head downwards; it being his own desire so
to die, alleging that he was unworthy to suffer after the same manner that his
Lord and Master had suffered; and so having run the race that was set before
him, he (undoubtedly) obtained the reward laid up for him in the Highest
Heavens.

The Death of St. PAUL.
HOW long St. Paul continued in Prison after he had received Sentence to die,
is uncertain; but the Day of his Execution soon came; but what his preparatory
Treatment was, whether he was Scourged, as Malefactors were wont, in order to
their Death, is not known. As a Roman Citizen, by the Valerian and Porcian Law,
he was exempted from any such Ignominious and Infamous Punishment, though by
the Law of the Twelve Tables, Notorious Malefactors Condemned by the Centuriate
Assemblies, were first to be Scourged and then put to Death. And as Baronius
informs us, That in the Church of St. Mary, beyond the Bridge in Rome, two
Pillars are yet to be seen, to which St. Peter and St. Paul were Bound and
Scourged before their Executions.

As our Apostle was led to Execution, he is said to have Converted three of the
Soldiers who Guarded him; which the Emperor hearing, commanded that they
should be put to death: St. Paul being come to the place appointed for his
Execution, which was near the Aquae Salviae, three Miles from Rome, after he
had exhorted such as came ^o see his Tragedy, to Repentance, and recommended
his Spirit into the hands of his blessed Lord and Master, he kneeling down, had
his Head stricken off with a Sword.

St. Chrysostom declares, That his cheerful submitting to Death, and his
constant Courage till the last, was a means not only to Convert his
Executioner, but several others, who afterward suffered Martyrdom for the
Faith of Christ. He was Executed, as far as can be gathered, in the Sixty
eighth. Year of his Age. And thus the great Apostle, after he had Preached the
Gospel to the Gentiles, and either in Person, or by his Epistles, visited most
of the known World; and, as Theodoret tells us, in the Isles of the Sea,
(whereby he undoubtedly means Britain) he received first the Crown of Martyrdom.

He was Buried in via O^^iensis, about two Miles from Rome, Over whose Grave,
about 318 Years after Constantine the Great, at the request of Pope Sylvester,
built a stately Church, and endowed it with many rich Gifts and Privileges.

The Death of St. ANDREW.
When he was Condemned, the Pro-Consul ordered him to be Scourged; and as he
was going to be Crucified, the People cried out, He was a just and good man;
yet he was fastened upon the Cross with Ropes, that he might be the longer
dying; the Cross being two Beams set in the fashion of the Letter X. From this
Cross, after he was fastened to it, he Preached to the People for the space of
two Days; and by his admirable Patience, Courage, and Perseverance, Converted
many to the Faith, During his hanging there, great suit was made to the
Pro-Consul for his Life, but our Apostle desired them not to Intercede for him.
For that he was greatly desirous to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.
Praying earnestly to Heaven, that he might at that time finish his Race, and be
crowned with Martyrdom: And so it happened, for he there gave up the Ghost.
After which, his Body being taken down, was Embalmed at the Command of
Maximilia, whom he had Converted, and afterward laid in a stately Tomb
prepared for that purpose, where it continued till the time of Constantine the
Great, and was at his command brought to Constantinople, and buried there in
the great Church which he had founded to the Honor of the Apostles.

The Scots for many Ages past, have had such Veneration for him, that they
Styled him the Patron of their Country, bearing his Cross in their Standard.

The Death of St. JAMES.
A Short time after his Imprisonment, Sentence of Death was passed upon him;
and as he was led to the Place of Execution, according to Clemens Alexandrinus,
the Soldier or Officer who Guarded him to the place of his Martyrdom; or as
Suidas will have it, his Accuser being Convinced, by the Courage and Bravery of
the Apostle, in his cheerfully going to his Death, came and fell down before
him, asking Pardon for what he had done, upon which the blessed man raised him
from the Ground, embraced and kissed him, saying, Peace my Son, peace be to
thee, and a pardon of thy faults: Whereupon, before all the Assembly, he openly
confessed his Conversion, declaring the Christian Faith to be the only means of
Salvation; declaring, that he was ready to die for the same, which accordingly
he did, they being both Beheaded at the same time.

As for the Body of our Apostle, it being Interred near Jerusalem, was from
thence brought into Spain, and there said to do many Miracles; but what Credit
is to be given to that, I leave to the Reader's Judgment.

The Death of St. JOHN.
HE died, said the Arabian, (as Kirsten has it in the Lives of the Four
Evangelists) in the expectation of his blessedness; from which he infers, that
he died peaceably, and not a violent Death; although Theophylact and others, do
conceive that he died a Martyr.

Many there are likewise who have cherished a fond Opinion, that he never died,
but rather that sleeps in his Grave; alluding to the words of our Savior upon
Peter's enquiry, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?
John 21. 23. Others say, that having commanded his Grave to be dug* he went
into it, and ordered such as went with him to fasten down a great Stone upon
the same, and come the next Morning and look into it, which they did, and found
nothing there but the Grave-cloaths; from which, as Nicephorus relates, they
concluded he was Ascended, he having intimated some such thing before his lying
down.

The Death of St. PHILIP.
THis Apostle was seized and carried to Prison* and being Sentenced, he was
cruelly Scourged, and hanged by the Neck against a Pillar; though some would
have it, that he was Crucified; but however, during the Execution, such a
terrible Earthquake happened, that the Earth began to open, so that the
affrighted people cried to Heaven for Mercy, upon which it instantly stayed.

The Apostle being dead, his Body was taken down by St. Barnabas, his Companion
in the Ministry of the Gospel at that time, and Mariamne St. Philip's Sister,
who bore him Company in all his Travels: After they had taken him down, they
decently Interred him, and when they had confirmed the people in the Faith of
Christ, they departed thence.

The Death of St. BARTHOLOMEW.
HIS Sentence was to be Crucified, and when the Day of Execution came, he went
cheerfully to embrace his Death, Comforting and Exhorting his Profelytes to
keep steadfast in the Faith and Doctrine that they had received, which was able
to make them wise unto Salvation: and so continued to instruct them to the last
moment of his Life. Several there are that affirm he was Crucified with his
Head downwards, and that he was fleied alive; which cruel usage, as Plutarch
relates, was common in that Country.

After his Death, his Body was removed to Darus, a City in the Borders of
Persia, from thence to Beuevent in Italy, and from thence to Rome.

The Death of St. MATTHEW the Evangelist.
WE find in an ancient Author, that he suffered Martyrdom at Naddabar, a City
of Aethiopia, but what kind of Death he died, is not mentioned; and as
Dorotheus reports, he was Buried at Hierapolis. During his Lifetime, he was a
great Assertor of the true Religion, a Contemner of Worldly Treasure, which is
evident by his leaving so gainful a Calling to follow our Savior: As for his
Humility, he exceeded many of his Fellows, which may well be observed in his
Writings, where he gives them the Pre-eminency: His Age at the time of his
Death is not certainly known* though some are of Opinion he died in the Seventy
Year, and^.

The Death of St. THOMAS.
THE Brachamans or Heathen Priests, were so enraged against St. Thomas, that
they sought always to destroy the Apostle, as hoping by that means to extirpate
his Doctrine, which by being embraced on all hands, had near spoiled their
Trade: So that one Day when he was praying alone in a solitary place, they came
upon him with Stones, Darts and Spears; and having grievously wounded him, one
of them run him through the Body with a Spear: His Body being taken up by his
Well-willers, was Buried with great Solemnity in the Church that he had built,
which was afterward greatly enlarged.

The Death of St. JAMES.
HE was took up by force and thrown down from the Battlements; notwithstanding
which Fall, He reared himself upon his Knees and prayed for them, the which
whilst he was doing, such Villains as they had appointed for that purpose, fell
upon him with Clubs and Stones, till one among the rest, (notwithstanding the
entreaty of many to save his Life) with a Fuller's Club beat out his Brains,
and by that means gave his Soul a passage to the Eternal habitations of Bliss
and Joy that fade not away.

He died in the Ninty fourth year of his Age, and Twenty four after Christ's
Ascension, to the grief of all good men* Gregory Bishop of Tours informs us,
that he was buried upon Mount Olivet, in a Tomb which he had caused to be
erected during his Life: In which ^e had buried old Simeon and Zacharias,
though Hegesippus will have it, that he was buried near the Temple in the place
where he was Martyred, and that there being a Monument erected for him, it
continued there for many years after.

The Death of SIMEON the Zelot.
THE Devil that great Enemy of our Salvation, stirred up the Multitude to
persecute him, whose barbarous rage in a short time after Crowned him with
Martyrdom; as not only Dorotheus and Nicephorus affirm, but also expressed in
the Menologies, where we are informed that St. Simeon went at last into
Britain, and having enlightened the Minds of many with the Doctrine of the
Gospel, he at length was Crucified by the Infidels, and buried there, but as to
any particular place of his Burial no mention is made.

Some there are who tell us, that after he had Preached the Gospel in Egypt,
he went to Mesopotamia, where meeting with St. Jude, they journeyed together
into Persia, where having planted the Gospel, they were both Crowned with
Martyrdom.

The Death of St. JUDE.
NIcephorus tells us, that after all he came t^ Edessa, where A^garus was
Governor, an^ where the other Thaddaeus who was one of the Seventy, had been
before him, and there perfecte^ what was begun; and having by his Preaching an^
Miracles established the Gospel, he died a peaceable and quiet Death. But
Dorotheus affirms the he was slain at Berytus, and buried there in a stately
Tomb, although by the General Consent of the Latin Church, he went Preaching
the Gospel in Persia, where after he had brought many over to the Faith, and
established the Christian Religion there for many years; he at last was for his
reproving and strongly opposing Idolatrous and Diabolick Devices of the Magi,
by their procurement cruelly put to Death.

The Death of St. MATTHIAS the Apostle.
HE was treated with all manner of Rudeness and Inhumanity; from whom for all
his Pains and Labor, about saving their Immortal Souls, and directing them in
the way to everlasting Life, he was at last Marty'd by them, Anno Christo 59,
or as others will have it, 64. The manner of his Death is uncertain, though
Dorotheus reports, he was Martyred at Sebestople, near the Temple of the Sun,
(past doubt for reproving their Idolatrous Worship, in Adoring the Creature
instead of the Creator) and was buried there. Another account we have, that he
was seized by the Jews as a Blasphemer, and after being stoned, was beheaded.
When as the Greek Offices, seconded by several Breviaries, relate, that he was
hanged upon a Cross: And farther it is said, that his Body was for a long time
kept at Jerusalem, and conveyed thence to Rome by Aelen, Mother to Constantine
the Great, where some Bones, said to be his, are showed with great Veneration
to this day.

The Death of St. MARK.
WHilst St. Mark was intent at Divine Worship, the barbarous Multitude broke in
upon him, and fastening Cords about his Feet, dragged him through the Streets in
a most inhumane manner, so that his Flesh was torn off by the Cragginess of the
way; not being satisfied with this, they cast him into a Prison near the Sea,
where he was comforted in his Agony by a Divine Apparition. The next Morning
they drew him forth, till by the extreme effusion of Blood his Spirits failed,
and he gave up the Ghost; after which, as Metaprastus adds, they kindled a
large Fire and burnt his Body; the remains of which being preserved by such as
he had Converted to the Christian Faith, were deposited in the place where he
was wont to Preach, and such part of him as remained, was afterward carried to
Venice, and there kept in a Church built to the Honor of that Evangelist,
being one of the stateliest Piles now extant in Europe.

The Death of St. LUKE.
SOme there are that say, he died a Natural Death; but Nasianzen, and Polinus
Bishop of Nola, with some others, affirm, that he received the Crown of
Martyrdom.

Nicephorus gives us this following account, viz That Saint Luke coming into
Greece, successfully Preached the Gospel, Baptizing many Converts into the
Christian Faith, and working many Miracles; till at last a party of Infidels
(encouraged by their Priests, whose Idolatrous Worship the Evangelist sharply
reproved) fell at unawares upon him, and sorcibly dragged him to the place of
Execution, where not having a Cross in readiness, they hanged him upon an
Olive Tree, in the 80th Year of his Age.

But certain it is that he was put to Death; some affirm that his Body was at
the Command of Constan^ine the Great, or his Son Constantius, brought to
Constantinople, and there solemnly Interred in the great Church, Founded there
to the Honor of the Apostles.

THE DEATHS OF THE Primitive Fathers.
The Death of IGNATIUS.
Ignatius was born Twelve Years before the Crucifixion of our Savior, having
with his Eyes beheld him in the Flesh; he being, as many think, one of those
little Ones that our Savior commanded his Disciples to suffer to come unto
him: Nay, some affirm, that it was he whom our Blessed Lord set in the midst of
his Disciples, when they contended about Superiority. However, he was endued
with a more than ordinary Portion of the Divine Spirit, and succeeded St. Peter
in the Pastorship of the Church of Antioch, where he labored diligently in the
Ministry of the Gospel, Converting and Confirming many to the Christian Faith,
being a great opposer of the Heresies or Erroneous Opinions that had sprung up
in the Church.

When the day of his Martyrdom came, he cheerfully said, I am Gods Corn, when
the wild Beasts have ground me to powder with their Teeth, I shall be his
white* Bread. He suffered Martyrdom the 11th. year of Trajan, being, as many of
the Ancients affirm, Torn to pieces by wild Beasts in the Theater to make the
Tyrant sport. And thus ended the Life of this good Man, who upon many occasions
was wont to say, My Love is Crucified, meaning either Christ the Object of his
Love, or that his darling Sins and Affections to the World were Crucified; and
in another place he declares, that he beheld the Lord after his Resurrection
before he Ascended.

He used to say, That there is nothing better than the peace of a good
Conscience.

Of Patience, Other Graces are but parts of a Christians Armor; as the Shield
of Faith, the Sword of the Spirit, etc. But Patience is the Panoply or whole
Armor of the Man of God.

The Death of POLYCARP.
HIS Enemies thirsted after his Blood, and there* upon desired the Proconsul
that he might be thrown to the Beasts; but he alleging the time for the Game
of Beasts was past, they prayed that he might be exposed to the Flames, to
which last he consented; and thereupon the multitude led him away, crying, This
is the Doctor of Asia, the Father of the Christians, the Overthrower of our
Gods, who has taught many, that our Gods are not to be Adored. Every one of
them fetching Wood from their Shops and Houses.

When the Pile was reared, the Holy Man put off his Apparel, being assisted
therein by the Faithful Christians, that came to take their last Farewell of
him, striving to touch his Body, as accounting it no small Honor. When he was
naked, the Infidels offered to nail him to the Stake; but he desired them to
forbear, saying, Suffer me even as I am, for he that has given me strength to
come to this Fire, will give me patience likewise to persevere therein, without
your fastening me with Nails.

He died Anno Christi 170. In the midst of the Fire, he said this Prayer.

O God, the Father of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, through whom we have
received the Knowledge of thee: O God, the Creator of all things, upon thee I
call, thee I confess to be the true God: Thee I glorify, O Lord receive me,
and make me a Companion of the Resurrection of thy Saints, through the Merits
of our great High Priest, thy beloved Son Jesus Christ; to whom with the
Father, and God the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory for ever,

Amen.
The Death of DIONYSIUS AREOPAGITA.
HE was Condemned to be Beheaded; the which to put him to greater Torment, was
done with a blunted Sword, on the top of the Mount without the City, where
kneeling he said with an Audible Voice, O Lord God almighty, thou only begotten
Son, and Holy Spirit; O Sacred Trinity, which art without beginning, and in
whom there is no division, receive the Soul of thy Servant in peace, who is put
to death for thy Cause and Gospel. After which he submitted his Head to the
strokes of the Executioner; Suffering Anno Christi 96, and of his Age 110.

The Death of JUSTIN Martyr.
AFter his having painfully preached the Gospel in many Countries, he came to
Rome, where he had many Contests with the Philosophers and Sages; and was at
last by the procurement of one Crescens, Condemned, and accordingly Beheaded,
Anno Christi 139. and as Epipharius has it, under the Reign of Adrian, some
time before he Prognosticated his death. So sell this Faithful Labourer in
Christ's Vineyard.

He used to say, That which the Soul is in the Body, that are Christians in the
World: For as the Soul is in, and not of the Body, so Christians are in, but no
part of the World. And also, It is best of all not to sin; and next to that. to
amend upon the Punishment. Furthermore, That it is the greatest slavery in the
World, to be subject to ones Passions.

The Death of IRENAEUS.
THis Holy Man being taken, with several of his chief Friends, they were led to
the top of a Hill, on which were placed Crosses on one Hand, and Idols on the
other; and they put to their Choice, either to embrace the Idols, and Live, or
be Crucified: Upon which, they joyfully chose the latter, suffering Martyrdom
Anno Christi 182. and of Irenaeus his Age 60, o^ as some will have it, 90.

He compared the Heretics and Schismatics to Aesop's Dog, that lost tbe
Substance of Religion, whilst they gaped too earnestly after the Shadow.

Concerning the Vanity of Earthly things, he said, What profit is there in
that Honor, which is so short-lived, as that perchance it was not Yesterday,
neither will be to Morrow? And such Men as labor so much for it, are but like
Froth, which though it be uppermost, yet it is unprofitablest.

The death of TERTULLIAN.
HE died Anno Christi 202. and of his Age 63.

He used to say of Repentance, If thou be^st backward in thoughts of
Repentance, be forwards* in thoughts of Hell, the burning flames whereof, only
the tears of a penitent Eye can extinguish. Of Satan's Power, If the Devils
without Christ leave, had no power over the Gadarens Swine, much less have they
power over Gods own Sheep. Of Faith, We should not try Men's Faith by their
Persons, but their Persons by their Faith. Of forgiving Offenses, It Is in vain
to come to the God of peace, without peace; or to pray for the remission of our
Sins, without forgiving others. We must not come to make an Atonement with God
at his Altar, before we have made an Atonement with our Brother in our Hearts.

The Last Sayings of CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS.
AFter the death of Pontenus, Clemens succeeded him in that Office, from whence
he received the Name of Alexandrinus. He was Famous for all manner of Learning,
and was ordained Presbyter in Alexandria, where he propagated the Christian
Faith.

His Sayings were these: Such as adorn themselves with Gold, and think
themselves bettered thereby, are worse than Gold, and not Lords o^ it, as all
that have it ought to be.

Out of the depth and bowels of the Earth, has God discovered and showed Gold
unto Men* and they have made it the occasion of all Mischief and Wickedness.

Gold to many Men is much dearer than their Faith and Honesty: And the love of
it makes Man so Covetous, as if they were to live here for ever.

The Death of ORIGIN.
HE died in the Reigns of Gallus and Volusianus Anno Christi 220. and of his
Age 69.

Concerning Gods Providence, he used to say That Gods Providence has ordained
all things for some end and purpose He made not Malice, and though he can
restrain it, yet he will not* for, if Malice were not, Virtue would not have ^
Cont^a^^, and so could not shine so clear. For the Malice of Joseph's Brethren
was the Mean^ whereby God brought about many admirable works of his Providence,

The death of St. CYPRIAN.
CYprian said to his Executioner, Do whatever shall be in thy power; and
thereupon he putting off his Clothes, delivering them to his Deacons, bidding
them give ^is Executioner five Twentypieces of Gold for the kindness he was to
do him, to express he freely forgave him. Then pulling a Vail over his Eyes, he
kneeled down and had his Head smitten off with a Sword, suffering Martyrdom for
the Testimony of his Lord and Master, Anno 259. and in the 70 year of his Age,
as some have it.

He used to say of Charity, Let no^ that sleep in thy Treasury that may be
profitable ^o the Poor. Of the Heart and Tongue; Two things never wax old in
Man: The Heart ever imagining new Cogitations; the Tongue ever uttering the
vain Conceptions of the Heart. Of Resignation That which a Man must necessarily
part with, it is Wisdom for a Man to distribute it fo, that God may
Everlastingly reward him. Of Pride, Women that Pride themselves in putting on
Silk and Purple, cannot lightly pu^ on the Lord Jesus Christ. Again, They which
Color their Locks with Yellow and Red, begin betimes to Prognosticate of what
Color their Hair shall be in Hell. Again, They which love to paint themselves
in this World, otherwise than God Created them, may justly fear, that at the
Resurrection their Creator will know them. Of Alms-deeds, He that gives an Alms
to the Poor, offers a sweet smelling Sacrifice unto God. Of Injuries, All
Injury of Evils present is to be neglected, for the hope of good things to come.

Twelve Attributes (he said) was in the Life of Man, viz. A Wise Man without
good works; an Old Man without Religion; a Young Man without Obedience, a Rich
Man without Alms; a Woman without shamefacedness; a Guide without Virtue; a
Contentious Christian; a Poor Man that is Proud, a King that is Unjust; a
Bishop that is Negligent; People without Discipline; Subjects without Law.

The Last Sayings of ARNOBIUS.
HE was a Famous Professor of Rhetoric in Sicca, a City in Africa; after his
Conversion he applied himself to some Bishops with great earnestness, to be
Baptized and admitted into the Church.

When he was Master to Lactantius he used this Expression, That Persecution
brings Death in one hand, and Life in the other, for while it Kills the Body it
Crowns the Soul. He lived under Dioclesian, between 300 and 330.

The Death of EUSEBIUS.
HE lived to a good old Age. for the most part in Peace and Tranquillity; Dying
Anno Christi 340.

He used to say, That Moses wrote the Old Law in dead Tables of Stone, But
Christ writ the perfect Documents of the New Testament in Living Souls.

The Death of LACTANTIUS.
HE was a Man of great Parts, both Morally and Divinely Wise; he was always
Liberal, for whatsoever he received, he again distributed it to such as were in
want; insomuch, that notwithstanding the many Rich Presents he received at the
hands of the Emperor, he died very Poor.

He used to say of Piety, That Godliness always enriches the Possessor.

The Death of ATHANASIUS.
AFter all the Storms that were raised up against him, he died in peace at
Alexandria, Anno Christi 375; having been Bishop of that See 46 years, during
which time he had been in many great Perils and Hazards of his Life; for not
only Bishops, but Emperors and Nations sought his Destrustion: But God
delivered him out of their hands, to the Glory of his Name; for his only trust
was in God alone, which caused him often to say, Though Armies should Encamp
a^out me, yet I would (...) fear.

The Death of HILARIOUS.
HE Traveled to Italy and France, instructing the Bishops in those parts in
the Catholic ^aith: He was very Eloquent, and wrote many Treatises in Latin,
also Twelve Books of the Trini^^, Expounding the Canon, containing the Clause
(...) One Substance, being of sufficient proof against the Arrians. He died
under Valentinian and Valence, Anno 355.

The Death of CYRILLUS.
IN the midst of all his Affictions, he kept his resolution to die in the Faith.

He used to say, concerning the benefit of Hearing; Some come to Church to see
Fashions, others to meet their Friends; yet it is better to come so, than not at
all: In the mean time the Net is cast out, and they which intended nothing
less, are drawn into Christ, who catches them, not to destroy them, but that,
being dead, he may bring them to Life Eternal. He died Anno 365.

The Death of EPHREM SYRUS.
HE died Anno 404. He used to say, concerning Perseverance; The resolute
Traveller knows that his Journey is long, and the way dirty, yet goes on in
hopes to come to his House: So let a Christian* (though the way to Heaven be
narrow, though it be se^ with Troubles and Persecutions) yet let him go on,
till he has finished his Course with Joy; for Heaven is his Home. Concerning
the Soul, he used to say, `He that feasts his Body and starves his Soul, is
like him that feasts his Slave, and starves his Wife, He died Anno 404.

The Death of BASIL.
B^sil died at Caesarea, when he had sat Bishop there eight years, departing
this Life, Anno Christi 370. At his departure he uttered these words, Into thy
hands, O Lord, I commend my Spirit.

He used to say of Self-knowledge, To know thy Self is very difficult: For as
the Eye can see all things but it self, so some can discern all faults but
their own. Of Love, Divine Love is a never-failing Treasure; he that has it is
Rich, and he that wants it is Poor. Of the Scriptures, It Is a Physicians Shop
of Preservatives against Poisonous Heresies: A pattern of profitable Laws
against Rebellious Spirits: A Treasury of most costly Jewels against Beggarly
Elements: And a Fountain of most pure Water, springing up to Eternal Life.

The Last Sayings of GREGORY NAZIENZEN.
IN his Minority he joined Studies with Basil, and accompanied him to Athens
and Antioch, where he became an Excellent Orator.

There is so much Perfection in all his Writings, and such a peculiar Grace,
that he never tires his Reader; but he always dismisseth him with a thirst
after more. Concerning P^eaching, he used to say, That in a great multitude of
people of several Ages and Conditions, (who are like a Harp with many Strings)
it is hard to give every one such a touch in Preaching, as may please all, and
offend none. He lived under Theodosius, Anno 370.

The Death of EPIPHANIUS.
When he found himself Sick, he said to his Friends, God bless you my
Children, ^or I shall see you no more in this Life. He died Aged 115.

He used to say, this was his Antidote against Hatred: That he never let his
Adversary sleep; not that he disturbed him in his sleep, but because he agreed
with him presently, and would not let the Sun go down upon his Wrath.

The Death of AMBROSE.
AFter Ambrose had sat Bishop about Sixteen years, Death summoned him to lay
down this troublesome Life, for a Life more lasting: Before his Death, he
resolved to provide a Shepherd for his Flock, and for that purpose sent for one
Simplicianus, and ordained him Bishop in his stead after having given many
Godly Exhortations t^ such as were about him, he gave up the Ghos^ dying in the
third Year of Theodorus, Anno Christ 397.

He used to say of Repentance, When Gold (...) offered to thee, thou usest not
to say, I will come again to morrow and take it, but art glad of present
possession: But Salvation being proffered (...) our Souls, few Men haste to
embrace it.

He used to say of true Charity, It is not much to be enquired how much thou
give, with what Heart: It Is not Liberality, when the take by Oppression
from one, and give it to another. Of Conscience: A clear Conscience should
not regard slanderous Speeches, nor think that they have more power to Condemn
him, than his own Conscience has to clear him.

The Death of GREGORY NISSEN.
HE lived under Constantins, Julian, Jovian, Valentinian, Valence, Gratian, and
Theodosius the Great: He was President in the Council of Constantinople,
against the Macedonian Heretics, 492.

Amongst his Similitudes, he compared the Userer, to a Man giving Water to one
in a Burning Fever, which proves prejudicial: So the Userer, though he seems
for the present to relieve his Brother, yet afterward he torments him. This
Character he also gave the Userer: He loves no Labor, but a Sedentary Life: A
Pen is his Plough; Parchment his Field; Ink his Seed; Time is the Rain to Ripen
his greedy desires; his Sickle is calling in his Forfeitures; his House the
Barn where he Winnows his Clients; he follows his Debtors as Eagles and
Vultures do Armies, to prey upon dead Corpse. Again: Men come to Userers as
Birds to a heap of Corn; they covet the Corn, but are ca^cht in the Nets.

He died under Valentine and Valence.

The Death of THEODORET.
HE died in the Reign of Theodosius Junior, not with Age, but hard Studies.

He used to say, That the Delights of the Soul are to know her Maker; to
consider his Works, and to know her own Estate.

The Death of HIEROM.
HE died Anno Christi 422, and of his Age 91. He wrote many large Volumes,
being a Man of singular Chastity, of great Wit, slow to Anger, and in Learning
exceeding most of his Time.

His usual Prayer was, Lord, let me know my self, that I may the better know
thee, the Savior of the World.

An Excellent Saying he had of Christian Fortitude: If my Father was weeping on
his Knees before me, my Mother leaning on my Neck behind, my Brethren, Sisters,
Children and Kinsfolks, howling on every side to retain me in a single Life, I
would sling my Mother to the ground, run over my Father, despise all my
Kindred, and tread them under my Feet, that I might run to Christ.

Of Chastity; That Woman is truly Chaste, that has liberty and opportunity to
Sin, and will not. Of Virtue; All Virtues are so linked together, that he that
has one has all; and he that wants one wants all. In all his Actions he ever
fansied this sound in his Ears, Arise ye Dead, and come ^^ Judgment.

The Death of CHRYSOSTOM.
THE exact year of his death I find no where set down, but that he flourished
in the (...) shoprick of Constantinople, Anno Christi 400, is (...) certain.

He used to say of Lust: As a great shower of Rain extinguisheth the force of
Fire; so Meditation of Gods Word, puts out the Fire of Lust in the Soul. Of the
danger of Riches: `As a Boat over-laden sinks, so much Wealth, drowns Men in
perdition. Of Love; A Bulwark of Adamant is not more Impregnable then the Love
of Brethren. Of Temptations; The Devils first Assault is violent, resist that,
and his second will be weaker; and that being resisted, he proves a Coward.

The Death of AUGUSTINE.
HE died Anno Christi 430, of his Age 75, and of his Ministry 40. He was a Man
of a Charitable Disposition, very sparing in Diet, and a hearty Lover of all
good Men.

His Table was more for Disputation, than for Revelling; and had Engraven upon
it,

He that does love an absent Friend to jeer,
May hence depart, no room is for him here.
He Collected together several Precepts of a Christian Life, which whoever
perused it, might see their Duty; this he called, A Looking-glass.

His usual Wish was; That Christ when he came, might find him either Praying or
Preaching. When the D^na^ists upbraided him of Levity in his Minority; Look
(said he) how much they blame my former faults, by so much the more I commend
and praise my Physicians.

He used to say of Marriage; Humble Marriage is better than Proud Virginity.

Of Death; There is nothing that more abateth Sin, than the frequent Meditation
of Death; he cannot die ill that lived well; and seldom does he die well, who
lived ill.

Of Christian Thoughts; A Christian at home in his House must think himself a
Stranger; and that his Country is above.

Of Riches; If Men want Wealth, it is not to be unjustly gotten; if they have
it, they ought by good Works to lay it up in Heaven.

He so admired the Seven Penitential Psalms; that he had them hung up in great
Letters within his Bed-Curtains, that so he might depart in the Contemplation
of them.

The Death of CYKIL of Alexandria.
HE was Famous for Wit, Eloquence, and Piety.

Concerning Charity he used to say, It Is the best way for a Rich Man to make
the Bellies of the Poor his Barn, and thereby to lay up Treasure in Heaven.

Of Modesty; Where the Scripture wants a Tongue of Expression, we need not lend
an Ear of Attention; we may safely knock at the Council-door of Gods Secrets;
but if we go further, we may be more bold than welcome.

He lived under Theodosius Junior, and died Anno 448.

The Death of PETER CHRYSOLOGUS.
HE was a Man of an Excellent Wit, and by his Example and Ministry, wrought
upon many Souls.

He used to say of Charity; Let not thy Care be to have thy hands full, whilst
the Poors are empty; for the only way to have full Barns, is to have Charitable
Hands.

And; Virtues separated, are annihilated; Equity without Goodness, is Severity;
and Justice without Piety, Cruelty.

He lived under Martian the Emperor, having been Rishop above 60 Years. He died
Anno 500.

The Death of PROSPER.
PRosper having (under Martian) continued 20 years in that Episcopal See* he
fell sick; many of his Friends coming to v^^it him, and perceiving them to weep
bitterly, he comforted them with these words, The Life which I have enjoyed
(said he) was but given me upon condition to render it up again, not grudgingly
but gladly; for me to have stayed longer here might seem better for you, but
for me it is better to be dissolved. So falling into fervent Prayer, he with
great Alacrity resigned up his Spirit into the hands of his Creator; dying Anno
Christi 466.

His usual Sayings was, of Conscience, That it was his utmost endeavor to keep
a Conscience void of offense, toward God and Man.

Of Vice; Thou shall neither hate the Man for his Vice, nor love the Vice for
the Man's sake.

Of Pride; Consider what thou art by Sin, and shall be in the Grave, and thy
Plumes will fall; for every proud Man forgets himself.

Of Gods Secrets; Those things which God would have searched into, are not to
be neglected; but those which God would have hidden, are not to be searched
into; by the latter we become unlawfully Curious, and by the neglect of the
former, damnably Ungrateful.

The Death of FULGENTIUS.
WHen Fulgentius fell Sick, during which sickness, he behaved himself with
wonderful Patience and Humility; and when his Physicians told him a Bath would
do well for the recovery of his Health, he answered, What tell you me of a
Bath, can any Bath preserve the life of him who has run his natural course,
that he shall not die? and why persuade you me, now I am at the point of death,
to abate of that rigor, which I all my life have used? When having taken leave
of those that came to visit him, and distributed what Money he had to pious
uses, he yielded up the Ghost, dying Anno Christi 529, and of his Age 65,
having sat Bishop 25 years.

He used to say, If want of Charity be tormented in* Hell, what will become of
the Covetous? In his greatest Suffering he would say, We must suffer more than
this for Christ.

The Death of GREGORY the Great.
HE never could read these words, Son, remember that thou in thy Lifetime
receivedst thy good things, etc. without Horror and Amazement; lest he by
enjoying such Dignities and Honors, should lose his Portion in Heaven. He dyed
Anno 605.

The Death of ISIDORE.
HE so wasted his Body with Labors, and enriched his Soul with Divine
Contemplations, that he seemed to live an Angelical Life upon Earth.

He used to say of a Guilty Conscience; All things may be shunned, but a Man's
own Heart; a Man cannot run from himself; a Guilty Conscience will not forsake
him wheresoever he go^s.

Of the danger of Pride. He that begins to grow better, let him beware lest he
grow proud, lest Vainglory give him a greater overthrow than his former Vices.
He dyed 675.

The Death of Venerable BEDE.
IN his Sickness he was wont to encourage himself with the words of the postle,
Heb. 12. 6. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he
receives. And when he beheld some of his Scholars weeping over him, he
comforted them with these words, The time is come, ^^ my Creator pleases, that
being freed from the Fl^^^* I shall go to him, who made me when I was not, ou^
of nothing. I have lived long, and the time of m^ dissolution is approaching,
and my Soul desires to see my Savior Christ in his Glory. And so gave up the
^host* Anno Christi 735, and of his Age 64. Some affirm, that whilst he was
Preaching to his Congregation, a loud Voice was heard (but from whence it came
none could tell) Well done, Venerable Bede. Upon his Tomb was found this
Epitaph.

Here lies Entombed in these Stones,
Of Venerable BEDE, the Bones.
The Death of JOHN DAMASCENE.
DAmascene having finished his Course, he yielded to Death, in certain hope of
a Glorious Crown of Life and Immortality; dying about the Year 750. He wrote
many Books, but especially his Three Books of Parallels of the Holy Scriptures,
and his Four Books of the Orthodox Faith.

The Death of THEOPHILACT.
HIS Chief Work was to reform the Churches, into which many Errors had crept,
especially in Bulgaria; so that continuing a Faithful Pastor for about three
years, he then yielded up the Ghost, and exchanged for a better Life. He was a
Man of great Patience; Mild and Meek in all his Actions; exceeding most of his
time in Learning.

He used to say, That comes forward in the World, goes back in Grace; his
Estate is miserable that goes Laughing to Destruction, as a Fool to the Stocks
of Correction.

The Death of ANSELM.
HE used to say, That if he should see the shame of Sin on the one hand, and
the pains of Hell on the other, and must of necessity choose one, he would
rather be thrust into Hell without Sin, than go into Heaven with Sin.

A while after his return to England, he dyed, in the Ninth Year of King Henry
the 1. Anno 1109. Aged 76.

The Last Sayings of NICEPHORUS.
HE was one of great Learning and Judgment. He wrote an Ecclesiastical History
in Greek, and Dedicated it to Andronicus.

He used to say, Christ asked Peter three times if he loved him; not for his
own Information, but that by his threefold Profession, he might help and heal
his threefold denial of him. He lived under Andronicus Senior, 1110.

The Death of BERNARD.
HE lived with great applause, till the 63 year of his Age, when retiring to
his Monastery, he fell sick, and calling all his Disciples about him, when he
perceived them weep, he comforted them, saying, My Fatherly love moves me to
pity you my Children, so as to desire to remain here; but on the other side, my
desire to be with Christ, draws me to long to depart hence; therefore be of
good comfort, for I submit to the will of our Heavenly Father, to whose
protection I leave you. And thereupon he resigned his Spirit into the Hands of
his Redeemer, dying Anno Christi 1153, and in the Sixty third year of his Age.

Upon entering the Church, at the Door, he usually said, Stay here all my
Worldly Thoughts, and all Vanity, that I may entertain Heavenly Meditations.

The Death of PETER LOMBARD.
HIS usual Sayings were these, There is in us evil concupiscence, and vain
desires, which are the Devils Weapons bent against our Souls, whereby when God
forsakes us, he overthrows us with deadly Wounds. Let none glory in the Gifts
of Preachers, in that they edify more by them: For they are not Authors of
Grace, but Ministers. The Instruction of words is not so powerful as the
Exhortation of works; for if they that teach well, neglect to do well, they
shall hardly profit their Audience.

He dyed on the 13th of August, 1164. and lies Buried at Paris, and has this
Inscription upon his Tomb:

Here lies Peter Lombard, B. D. of Paris, who composed the Book of Sentences,
and the Glosses of the Psalms and Epistles.

The Death of Alexander Hales.
HE was Born at Hales in Gloucestershire, carefully Educated, of an Excellent
Wit, and very Industrious.

His Sayings were, of Patience, A Soul patient when wrongs are offered, is like
a Man with a Sword in one hand, and a Salve in the other; who could wound, but
will heal.

Of Faith, What the Eye is to the Body, Faith is to the Soul; it is good for
Direction if it be kept well: And as Flies hurt the Eye, so little Sins and ill
Thoughts torment the Soul.

Of Humility, An humble Man is like a good Tree; the more full of Fruits the
Branches are, the lower they bend themselves. He dyed Anno 1245.

The Life of Bonaventure.
TO keep himself employed, he wrote the Bible over with his own Hand, and so
well used it, that he could readily Cite all the material Texts by heart.

After this he was made Doctor of Divinity, in which he continued for a
considerable time doing all the deeds of Charity that lay in his power to
perform, likewise persuaded others to do the like: So that at last, spent with
tedious Studies, Nature decayed in him, and he falling sick, gave up the Ghost,
dying Anno Christi 1274, Aged 53, and was Buried in a Stately Sepulcher in the
Cathedral.

The Death of Thomas Aquinas.
When any one offered him promotion, he was wont to say, I had rather have
Chrysostom's Commentary upon the Gospel of St. Matthew. In all his Sermons he
framed his Speech to the Peoples Capacities, and hated Vice in any, though he
loved their Persons never so well. He dyed as he was going to the Council
Summoned at Lions, Anno Christi 1274.

His usual Sayings were these, of Spending our Time, Make much of time,
especially in that weighty matter of Salvation. O how much would he that now
lies frying in Hell, rejoice, if he might have but the least moment of time,
wherein he might get God's favor!

Of Death, The young Man ha^h Death at his Back, the old Man before his Eyes,
and that is the most dangerous Enemy that pursues thee, than that which marches
up toward thy F^ce.

Of Repentance, Remember that though God promises forgiveness to repentant
Sinners, yet he does not promise that they shall have to morrow to repent in.

The Death of John Wicklif.
HE was an English Man by Birth, descended of godly P^rents, who sent him to
Morton College in Oxford, where he profited in Learning, and in a short time
was Divinity Reader in the University, which he so well performed, that he
obtained a general Applause from all his Auditors; he was a Man of great Piety,
often bewailing the vicious Lives of the Clergy.

After all the Persecution and Malice of his Enemies, he dyed in peace, Anno
Christi 1384. But after his Death many of his Famous Writings were burned by
the Popish Clergy.

The Death of John Huss.
IN Degrading him they were so cruel as to cut the Skin from off the Crown of
his Head with Shears, and to disannul the Emperors Letters of safe Conduct,
they made a Decree, That no Faith should be kept with Heretics.

After which, they prepared for his Execution, and put a Cap upon his Head,
painted with Devils; the which he joyfully put on, saying, That since his Lord
and Master were for his sake a Crown of Thorns, he would not disdain for his
sake to wear that Cap: When he had put it upon his Head, a Bishop standing by,
said, Now we commit thy Soul to the Devil; but Huss lifting up his Hands and
Eyes to Heaven, said, Into thy Hands Lord Jesus I commend my Spirit, which thou
have redeemed with thy most precious Blood. Then they Burnt his Books, at which
he with a joyful Countenance said to the People, Think not good People that I
die for any Heresy or Error, but through the hatred and malice of mine
Adversaries.

As he lifted up his Face in Prayer, the Cap fell off, whereupon a Soldier put
it on again, saying, He should burn with his Masters the Devils whom he had
served. Then rising up, said, Lord Jesus assist and help me, that with a
constant and patient mind, by thy most gracious help, I may bear and suffer
this Ignominious Death, whereunto I am Condemned, for the preaching thy most
Holy Gospel.

As they were binding him to the Stake with a Chain, he said with a merry
Countenance, That he would embrace that Chain for Christ's sake, who for his
sake had been bound with a far worse.

When the Fire was kindled, he began to sing with a loud Voice, Jesus Christ,
the Son of the Living God, have mercy upon me: The which, after he had repeated
three times, the flame stopped his Breath; his Heart being afterward found,
they roasted it upon a Stake, and gathering up his Ashes, they cast them into
the Rhine. He suffered Martyrdom, Anno Christi 1415.

The Death of Hierom of Prague.
HIS Enemies passed Sentence upon him, after which, they put a Paper about him,
painted with red Devils, to make him odious to the People; as likewise a Paper
Mitre on his Head, which he took very patiently, saying, Our Lord Jesus Christ,
when he suffered Death for me, did wear a Crown of Thorns upon his Head, and
for his sake I will wear this Cap.

As he went to the place of Execution, he sung Psalms, and coming to the place
wh^re John Huss was Burned, he upon his Knees put up his Prayers to Heaven;
after a while they bound him to the Image of John Huss, Carved in Wood, which
they had set up instead of a Stake, and there with admirable patience he
sustained the sury of the Flames; when at the giving up the Ghost, he with an
Audible Voice said,

This Soul of mine in flames of Fire set free,
O! Christ my Savior, now I offer thee.
The Death of Martin Luther.
FAlling Sick he soon grew exceeding weak, yet putting his trust in God, he
supported himself to Comfort his Friends beyond measure: Insomuch that the day
before his Death, he dined and supped with Melancthene and the rest of his
Accomplices: But after Supper his Pain increasing, he retired to pray, and then
went to Bed and slept till Midnight; but being awakened by the Pain, and
perceiving his Life near at an end, he called his Friends about him, and said,
I pray God to preserve the Doctrine of the Gospel amongst us, for the Pope and
the Council of Trent have grievous things in hand. After which, he prayed, and
earnestly desired of God that he would defend his Church against the Pope, and
all his Adherents.

When he was about to die, Justus, Jonas and Caelius, bid him be constant and
persevere in the Faith he had taught and held to the last: To which he
answered, Yea, and soon after gave up the Ghost, dying Anno Christi 1546.

He was a Man of great Temperance and Abstenence; oftentimes had the Papists
hired Ruffians to kill him, but they had never the power to do it; the Devil
one time appeared to him (as he was walking in his Garden) in the shape of a
huge Boar, but he so flou^ed him that he soon vauished. He was wont to say, God
would give Peace* to Germany during his Life, but woe to them that should live
after him.

The Death of Zuinglius.
ZVinglius being the sout^h time run in with a Spear, he fell down upon his
Knees and said; Well, they can kill the Body, but cannot kill the Soul.

When the Soldiers came to strip the slain, Zuinglius was fonnd alive, lying
upon his Back with his Eyes up to Heaven; whereupon they asked him if he would
have a Priest to Confess him, to which he answered, No; they then bid him call
upon the Virgin Mary, which he refusing, they thrust him in with a Sword, and
so expired without setching a Groan; as soon as they knew it to be him, they
cut his Body in four pieces and burnt it, the next day his Heart was sound
unperished by the Fire, though the rest of his Body was consumed.

Before this Battle a Comet appeared, which he said Prognosticated his Death,
and declared it openly in his Sermons, Fourteen days before he fell in Battle.
He was slain in the year 1531.

The Death of Oecolampadius.
AN Ulcer broke cut in his Os Sacrum, that he was forced to keep his Bed; and
though all means was used for his Cure, he told 'em his Disease was Mortal, and
said, I shall be presently with the Lord. Then putting his hand to his heart,
said, Here is abundance of Light. Next Morning he repeated the 51 Psalm, and
presently after said, O Christ save me, and so fell asleep in the Lord, Anno
1531. aged 51.

The Death of John Frith.
HE was condemned to be burnt as an Heretic. When ^e* came into Smithfield, he
with an undaunted Courage went to the Stake, no sooner fastened, but the fire
was kindled. He continued till the last with such Constancy and Patience, that
many were converted and began to pray to God to receive his Soul; but Dr. Cook
forbidding them, saying. They ought to pray for him no more than they would for
a Dog, which uncharitable Expression made many blame him.

He suffered Martyrdom, Aano Christi 1531. He wrote many Treatises, some were
burnt during the Reigns of King Henry the Eight, and Queen Mary* and some were
saved by Providence, for on Midsummer-Eve, Anno 1626. A Cod-Fish being brought
into Cambridge Market, when it was cut up, these Writings of John Frith were
found in its Belly, wrapped in Canvas, which were afterward Printed, to the
rejoicing of all good Christians, viz.

A Preparation for Death. A Preparation to the Cross. The Treasure of
Knowledge. A Mirror to know your self. A Brief Instruction to teach one
willingly to die, and not to fear Death.
Which Treatises, preserved Providence, have no doubt pr^*

The Death of Thomas Bilney.
HE Preached the Gospel, till the Bishop of Norwich imprisoned him, who would
have persuaded him from his stedfastness; but upon refusal he received Sentence
of Condemnation.

The day before his Execution, eating heartily, he said, I imitate those who
have a ruinous House to dwell in, yet bestow cost as long as they may to hold
it up. Then discoursing about Fire, he ^ut his Finger in the Candle, and said;
I find by Experience, that Fire is hot, yet I believe though the Stubble of my
Body be wasted, my Soul will be purged. At his Execution the fire being
kindled, he lift up his Hands, crying, Lord I believe; ^o yielded up his Spirit
unto God, Anno 1531.

The Death of William Tyndal.
THE English Merchants at Antwerp, hearing of his Imprisonment, became suitors
for his Deliverance; but Philips with his Money, prevailed beyond their
Entreaties. Being at last brought to his Answer, although his Enemies could lay
nothing to his Charge, yet the Attorney proceeded to condemn him, and delivered
him to the Magistrates to execute him.

When brought to the Stake, he cried with an audible voice, Lord open the Eyes
of the King of England, then being strangled, fire was s^t to the Wood, and he
consumed to Ashes, Anno Christi, 1536. Within a short time after, the Judgment
of God overtook Phillips, who betrayed him, insomuch that he was eaten up with
Lice.

Death of Bertholdus Halerus.
HE was born in Helvetia, 1502. and from his Childhood much addicted to
Learning. Several Disputations he held with the Helvetians, especially with
Eccius the Pope's Champion. In his time Popery was extinguished in many places;
and sh^rly after he died with an immature Death, Anno 1536. aged 44.

The Death of Urbanus Regis.
ON Sunday (in the Evening) he complained of a pain his Head, yet was cheerful
and went to Bed; early in the morning, rising out of his Bed, he ^^ll upon the
Floor, and seeing his Wife and Friends mourning, he comforted them, and
commended himself to his Maker, and within three hours he died. May 23. Anno
1541. He often desired God he might die an easy and sudden Death, wherein God
answered his Desires. He wrote several Treatisss, which his Son Ernest digested
together, and Printed at Norenburg.

The Death of Caralostadius.
HE underwent great Afflictions, by Printing some of his Books concerning the
Lord's Supper; the Senate of Zurick forbidding their People to read them; but
Zuinglius exhorted them first to read, and then to pass judgment on them;
saying, Caralostadius knew the Truth, but had not well expressed it. He went to
Basil, where he taught ten years, and there died of the Plague, Anno 1541.

The Death of Capito.
HE went to several places; as Str^^burg, where he met with Bucer, whose Fame
spread so far, that the Queen of Navarre sent for 'em; so that France owes the
beginning of her Reformation to Capito and Bucer. He was prudent, eloquent, and
^dious of Peace; the better part of his time he employed in Preaching, and
giving wholesome Advice to the Churches; at length returning home, in a general
Infection he dyed of the Plague, Anno, 1541. aged 63.

The Death of Leo Judae.
HE Translated part of the Old Testament, out of the Hebrew; but the work being
so Laborious, and being Aged, he dyed before he had finished it, Anno. 1542.
aged 60.

Four days before his Death, sending for the Pastors of Zurick, he made a
Confession of his Faith, concerning God, the Scriptures, the Person and Offices
of Christ; concluding, To this my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, my hope and my
salvation, I wholly offer up my Soul and Body; I cast my self wholly upon his
mercy and grace, etc. And so recommended to God, the Senate and People of
Zurick.

The Death of George Spaladius.
HE was born at Noricum, and brought up in Learning, especially in the
knowledge of Humane Atrs; wherein he profited so much, that the Elector of
Saxony made him one of his Privy Council* He continned in his Office till the
time of his Death, which fell out, Anno. 1545. aged 63. He wrote many
Treatises, but especially a Chronicle, from the beginning of the World to his
time.

The Death of Myconius.
IN several Countries he preached the Gospel, sincerely, and purely, though to
the hazard of his Life; at last he fell into a Consumption, and wrote to
Lutber, That he was sick, not to Death, but to Life* He dyed Anno, 1546. aged
55.

The Death of John Diazius.
FInding he could not pervert his Brother Diazius from the Truth, he acted the
Hypocrite, and told him, he was in love with his Doctrine; then he would have
persuaded him to go into Italy, Spain, Rome, and Naples, and there privately
spread his Doctrine; but John Diazius refusing, his Brother then took leave of
him, in order to his Journey; but privately he and the Cut. Throat stayed at a
Village, and purchased a Hatchet of a Carpenter; then going disguised, the
Villain pretended to bring Letters from his Brother, which, whilst John was
reading, the Executioner struck the Hatchet into his Temples, upon whicb he
died immediately. The Murderers were afterward apprehended, but by the
practice of Papists, who highly applauded the Fact, and to hinder the current
of Justice, they pretended the Emperor would have the hearing of the Cause
himself. Six years after Alphonsus hanged himself about the Neck of ^is own
Mule; a fair reward for so foul a Fratri^ide.

The Death of Gasper Cruciger.
HE was a Man of great Learning, very Religious, and delighted much in Luther's
Books and Do^rine.

He often contemplated the Footsteps of God in nature, saying with St. Paul,
That God was so near ^to us that he might almost be felt with our Hands.
^onsidering the Vicissitude of Earthly Things, he ^ten repeated this Verse.

Besides God's love, nothing is sure,
And that forever does endure.
In his sickness he caused his young Daughters to repeat their Prayers before
him, and then himself prayed fervently for the Church, and those his Orphans;
concluding, I call upon thee with a weak, yet with a true Faith: I believe thy
Promises, which thou have sealed to me with thy Blood and Resurrection etc. He
spent the few days which remained in prayer and Repentance, and so quietly
ended his days, November the 16th. Anno 1548. aged 45.

The Death of Matthias Zellius.
HE was not only famous for Learning, but for other Christian Virtues:
especially Modesty Temperance and Charity, having a special care of the Poor:
for being invited to Supper by one of his Colleagues, and seeing much Plate was
offended and went his way without eating: but afterward so far prevailed with
him, that he sold his Plate and was more open-handed to the poor, he dyed 1548.
aged 71.

The Death of Vitus Theodorus.
HE often disputed with his Papistical Adversaries and overthrew all their
Arguments: at leng^^ he was called to be a Pastor at Norimberg, his ow^
Country, where he preached the Gospel with great Zeal and Eloquence, to the
great Advantage of h^^ Auditors: he dyed, Anno. 1549.

The Death of Paul Fagius.
FAgius died of a burning Fever, or as some say, was poisoned by the Papists:
so that Anno 1550. he was intombed at Cambridge, from whence, in the Reign of
Q. Mary, the Papists (having condemned him for a Heretic) took his Bones and
burnt them.

The Death of Martin Bucer.
IN his Sickness, Learned Men came to visit him, especially Doctor Bradford,
who one day taking leave of him to go preach, told him he would remember him in
his Prayers, whereupon Bucer with tears in his eyes, said, Cast me not off, O
Lord, now in my old Age, when strength fails me. A while after he said, He
bath afflicted me sore, but he will never, never cast me off. Being desired to
arm himself with faith, and a steadfast hope in God's Mercies against the
Temptations of Satan, He said, I am wholly Christ's, and the Devil has nothing
to do with me, and God forbid that I should not now have experience of the
sweet Consolation in Christ. Then with a smiling Countenance gave up the Ghost,
and was interred nobly by the King's Commandment: But in Q. Mary's time his
Bowels being taken up, ^hey were burnt with Fagius's. He died Anno Chri^i, 1550.

The Death of Gasper Hedio.
HE preached vigorously against Masses, Indulgences, and Auricular Confession;
and wrote many Books against them. What time he could spare from his
Ministerial Function, he employed in writing Commentaries and Histories, until
the year of his Death, which was, Anno 1552.

The Death of Oswald Myconius.
AFter the Death of Oecolampadius, he was made chief Pastor in Basil, where
voluntarily laying down his Divinity Lectures (upon some grudges the University
had against him; he inclining to Luther's Opinion, about the real presence in
the Sacrament,) he wholly applied himself to his Pastoral Office. He died, Anno
1552. aged 64.

The Death of George, Prince of Anhalt.
HE was a great Divine, Learned in the Law, and skilful in Physic; he
conferred with Camerari^^, about the mutation of Empires, their Period, and
Causes; about Heavenly Motions, and the effects of the Stars. The last Act of
this Prince his Life expressed his Piety, using frequent Prayer for himself,
and all the Princes of that Family; he often pondered upon these Texts, God so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. No Man shall take my
Sheep out of my Hands. Come unto ^^ all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and
I will give you rest. He died Anno 1557. aged 47.

The Death of Justus Jonas.
HE employed himself much in Disputations about Religion, in defense of the
Truth, and in School Divinity. Several Churches were reformed by him, and
committed to his charge. He was a Man of an excellent Wit, great Industry, and
Integrity of Life, joined with Piety, and one whom Luther, and most of the
famous Men of that Age, highly esteemed. He died, Anno 1555. aged 63.

The Death of John Rogers.
HE was hurried to Newgate. On the fourth of Febraary; the Keeper told him he
must prepare for Execution: at which not being at all concerned, said, Then if
it be so, I need not tie my points. Before he went to the Flames, he was
carried before Bonner Bishop of London, who earnestly persuaded him to recant,
and live; but he utterly refused life upon such conditions, exhorting such as
stood about him to repent and cleave fast to Christ. As he came out, his Wife
with Nine small Children about her, and one sucking at her Breast. waited to
see him, of which he took his leave, bidding them trust in the Lord, and he
would plentifully provide for them. After which he went courageously to the
Stake, and with admirable patience embtaced the Flames, being the first that
sealed his Testimony with his Blood, during the Reign of that bloody Queen,
suffering Martyrdom, Anno Christi 1555.

The Death of Laurence Saunders.
During his Imprisonment, he wrote to his Wife and Friends in this manner: `I
am merry, and I trust I shall be so, maugre the Teeth of all the Devils in
Hell. Riches I have none to bestow amongst you, but that Treasure of tasting
how sweet Christ is to hungry Consciences, (whereof I thank my Savior I do
feel part) that I bequeath to you, and to the rest of my Beloved in the Lord.

They offered to release him, if he would Recant; to which he replied, That he
did confess Life and Liberty were things desirable, but that he would not
murder his Conscience to save his life; but by God's Grace, said he, I will
abide the worst Extremity that Man can do against me, rather than do any thing
against my Conscience. And when Gardener threatened him with Death, he said,
Welcome be it, whatsoever the Will of the Lord be, either life or death; and I
tell you truly, I have learned to die; but I exhort you to be ware of shedding
innocent blood, for truly it will cry aloud against you.

After a Year and three Months Imprisonment, he was brought to the Stake, which
he embraced, and afterward kissing, said, Welcome Cross of Christ, welcome
everlasting life. The Fire by the malice of his Enemies being made of green
wood, put him to exquisite Torments, but he endured them with a Christian
patience, as being well assured when his fiery Trial was at an end, he should
receive a Crown of Life that fades not away. One thing I shall not think amiss
to insert: When the Nation was in fear of Queen Mary's bringing in Popery, Mr.
Saunder's being in company with Doctor Pedleton, and seeming to be much
dejected, Pedleton said, What man, there is much more cause for me to fear,
than for you; forasmuch as I have a big and fat Body, yet will I see the utmost
drop of this Grease of mine melted away, and this Flesh consumed with Fire,
before I will fo sake Jesus Christ and his Truth which I have professed. Yet
when Queen Mary came to the Crown, he turned Apostate.

The Death of John Hooper.
BEing come to the County of Gloucester, where he suffered, he was received by
the Sheriff, who with a strong Guard conveyed him to the place of Execution,
being met by thousands of people, who bewailed his Condition, and sent up their
Prayers to Heaven, that he might be enabled to bear his Sufferings patiently,
many of them weeping to see so Reverend a Person fall into such misery; but he
comforted them, and told them, That he was unworthy who refused to suffer
reproach or death for the sake of the Lord Jesus, who refused not for our sakes
to suffer a shameful and ignominious death upon the Cross. And hereupon he
began to exhort them to be steadfast in their Faith, but the Popish Varlets
would not suffer him to proceed. Then he addressed himself to the Sheriff,
saying; Sir, my request to you is, that I may have a quick Fire. which may soon
dispatch me, and I will be as obedient as you would wish: I might have had my
life with grrat advancement, as to temporal things, but I am willing to offer
my life for the Testimony of the Truth, and trust to die a faithful Servant to
God, and a true Subject to the Queen. Then kneeling down, he continued i^^
^ervent Prayer for the space of half an Hour, with an exalted and cheerful
Countenance, and then rising up, suffered them to fasten him to the Stake;
where such was the malice of his Enemies, that they had prepared green Wood,
yet before the Fire was kindled, a Pardon was offered if he would Recant, but
he cried out with a Christian Zeal, If you love my Soul away with it; and then
three Iron ^oops being brought to fasten him to the Stake, he said, If you had
brought none of these, I would have stood patiently: and thereupon he took one
of them and put it about his middle. When the Reeds were set up, he embraced
and kissed them, putting them under his Arms, where he had two Bags of
Gunpowder: The Fire being kindled, he continued three quarters of an Hour in
praying, and crying out, O Jesus, thou Son of David, heve mercy upon my Soul.
Thus fell this blessed Martyr in the bloody Persecution under Queen Mary, Anno
Christi, 1555.

The Death of Rowland Tailor.
THE Night before his being carried to Hadly to be burned, his Wife, Children
and Servants were permitted to come to him, with whom he prayed very servently*
and gave them all his Benediction.

The next Morning the Sherist received him; and by the way he was greatly
solicited by the Sheriff of Essex to Recant. To which he only answered; Well, I
perceive that I now have been deceived my self, and shall deceive many in Hadly
of their Expectations. At which the Sheriff told him, It was a gracious Saying,
and desired him to explain it, hoping he intended to Recant. Why, said Doctor
Tailor, I did propose to my self once, that I should have been buried in Hadly
Churchyard, in which I now see I shall be deceived, and as for my deceiving of
others of their Expectations, is, that I being a man of a Corpulent Body, might
have fed many Worms, who now must be content without me.

Bing come within two Miles of Hadly, a great number of people came to meet
him, greatly lamenting the state into which he was fallen; but he comforted
them, saying, Be patient, as for me, I thank God, I am almost at home; and have
not past two Miles more to go over, before I come to my Father's House.

When the Fire was kindled, he extended his Arms toward Heaven, and with a
Voice ravished with Joy, continued, saying, Most merciful Father of Heaven, for
Jesus Christ my Savior's sake, receive my Soul into thy Hands, till one with a
Halbert beat out his Brains. Thus died this blessed Martyr, Anno 1555.

The Death of John Bradford.
VVHhen he came to Newgate, several came to visit him, to whom he gave Ghostly
Consolation; and the next Morning the Sheriff came, and conveyed him together
with a Youth of about 18 years of Age to Smithfield, where the Stake was
prepared. When he came at the Stake he kissed it, as likewise a Faggot that he
took up, and then falling flat upon his Face, in token of Humility, he prayed
for a good space, till the Sheriff ordered him to rise; putting off his
Raiment, he was together with the Youth fastened to the Stake, when as he cried
with a loud Voice, Repent, O England of thy Sins* beware of Idolatry, beware of
false Antichrists, take heed they do not deceive thee. Then turning to the
young Man, who was an Apprentice to a Merchant in London, he said, Be of good
comfort Bothers, for we shall have a merry Supper with the Lord this Night. And
then embracing the Reeds he said, Strait is the Way, and narrow is the Gate
that leads unto everlasting life, and few there be that find it.

The Fire being kindled, he held his Hands in the Flames, and with a Christian
patience suffered the burning, without so much as stirring the Body, dying a
Glorious Martyr, in the Bloody Year, Anno 1555.

The Death of Nicholas Ridley.
AFter his Degradation, he was delivered in order to his Execution: At
Supper-time his Keepers Wife weeping to think he must suffer the the next day,
he comforted her, saying, I pray be patient and cheerful, as I am, for by this
Grief you express, it is plain you love me not; and with a cheerful Countenance
invited them all to his Wedding, saying, To Morrow I shall be married: And when
some offered to watch with him, he refused their kindness, saying, That he
should sleep as well that Night as ever he did in his life.

When the Morning was come, the Sheriff and others, came with a great Guard to
convey him to the place of Execution; also Dr. Latimer, who was Condemned with
him: Dr. Ridley dressed himself in his Episcopal Garments, and shaved himself,
as if he had been going to an Earthly Wedding. Upon his way, he looking behind
him espied Dr. Latimer coming after, and called to him with a cheerful Voice,
saying, O Brother, are you there? Yes, said Dr. Latimer, I have after you as
fast as I can. Then turning to Dr. Latimer at the place of Execution, he
embraced him, and bid him be of good comfort; For said he, `God will either
assuage the heat of the Fire, or give us strength to endure its Fury with
patience: And so going to the Stake he kissed it, then kneeled down, and prayed
for a good space; when rising up, and being about to speak to the people, the
Popish Locust run and stopped his Mouth.

When the Smith was knocking in the Staple that fastened the Chains, he said, I
pray thee good Fellow, drive it in fast, for the Flesh will have its course.
The Fire being kindled, he stood in the Flame a long while before he died, by
reason of the ill making of the Fire, and then saying, Into thy hands, O Lord,
I commend my Spirit, Lord, receive my Soul, he gave up the ghost, suffering
Martyrdom, Anno Christi 1555.

One thing is worthy of Note, and may be counted a Prophecy, which was this;
Dr. Ridley then Bishop of London, long before King Edward's death, as he was
crossing the Thames in a Boat, the Wind arose so high that all that were with
him were in fear of present drowning; but he comforted them, saying, Fear not,
for this Boat carries a Bishop that must be burned and not drowned.

The Death of Hugh Latimer.
WHen he was brought to the Stake, he looked with a cheerful Countenance, not
being dismayed at the approach of Death: After he had prayed awhile, he
unstripped himself, and said to Bishop Ridley, Brother, be of good comfort, and
play the Man; for I trust by God's Grace, we shall this Day light such a Candle
in England, as shall never be put out* adding, That he knew God was Faithful,
and would not suffer him to be tempted above what he was able to bear. Then
embracing Dr. Ridley, he was bound to the Stake, and the Fire kindled; then he
cried with a loud Voice, O Father of Heaven, receive my Soul: and stroaking his
Face with his Hand, he gave up the ghost, dying a glorious Martyr at Oxford,
Anno Christi 1555.

The Death of John Philpot.
WHen he came to Newgate, he was put into a place by himself, and had word
brought him the next Morning, that he must suffer; when with a cheerful
Countenance, he replied, I am ready, God grant me strength, and a joyful
Resurrection. And after having retired awhile to pray, he came forth, and was
conveyed into Smithfield, where he no sooner came, But he ^e'l on his Knees,
and with a loud Voice cried, I will pay my V^ws in thee, O Smithfield; then
rising up, he kisled* and embraced the Stake, saying, Shall I disdain to suffer
at this Stake, when my Lord and Savior refused not to suffer a most vile Death
for me? Having poured out his Soul to God, he suffered* himself to be bound
with the Chain; and when* the Fire was kindled, he commended his Spirit into
the Hands of the Father of all Spirits, and patiently* gave up the ghost,
suffering Martyrdom, Anno Christi 1555* and of his Age about Forty Nine.

The Death of Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury.
THE Popish Doctors frequently visited him in Prison, and used all the
Arguments they could to persuade him to a Recantation; but he absolutely
resolved for a considerable time, but at last through humane Frailty, and
desire of Life, he did subscribe to a Recantation. The good Bishop being soon
greatly afflicted, and troubled in his Conscience for what he had done, burst
out into a flood of Tears, and after his Speech came to him, he lifted up his
Hands toward Heaven, saying; O Lord forgive me this great Sin, against thy
Holy Name; which through the weakness of the Flesh, I have unadvisedly
committed. And then addressing himself to the People, he desired them for Jesus
Christ sake, to pray for him; that God would pardon his Sins, and especially
that of his Recantation. But, said he, This right hand, that signed so wicked
an Instrument, shall first perish in the Flames. Then they pulled him down, and
hurried him away to the Fire, which was made in the same place where Ridley and
Latimer had suffered, stopping his Mouth lest he should any more speak to the
People; who were not a little grieved, to see the Primate of England cast down
from all his Honors, and in the end so barbarously mis-used.

When he came to the Stake, he fell on his Knees and Prayed; but was
interrupted by the Papists who followed him with his Recantation, saying, Have
you not signed it? Have you not signed it? Then he was tied to the Stake, his
Clothes being first put off, and the Fire being kindled to him, some time
before it came at his Body, he stretehed forth his right Hand, and held it in
the Flames till it fell off, without any more than once drawing it back. And
after having recommended his Spirit into the hands of our merciful Redeemer the
Lord Jesus; he died like a Lamb, ending his Life with the same Meekness as he
had lived; suffering Martyrdom for the sake of the everlasting Gospel, Anno
Christi, 1556, and of his Age 72.

The Death of Conrade Pelican.
HE was born in Suevia, and educated at Zurick. He was a candid, sincere, and
upright Man, free from Falsehood and Ostentation. He departed this Life upon
Easter Day. Anno* 1556. aged 78.

The Death of John Bugenhagius.
HE was born at Julin, near Stetin, in Pome^ania, being well educated in
Grammar, Music, and other liberal Sciences. He used great diligence and
industry in converting many to the Truth: drawing near to his end, he often
repeated this Portion of Scripture. This is life eternal, to know the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. He died Anno Christi 1558. aged 73.

The Death of Philip Melancthone.
HE was sent for by the Elector of Saxony to Lipsich; to examine those that
were maintained by the Elector to study Divinity: In which he used great
Diligence, and after he returned to VVitterberg; and fell sick of a Fever, of
which he died.

Sickness daily increased, yet he so far strove against the power of his
Disease, that he would often rise to his Study. The last Words he spoke, were
to his Son-in-Law, Doctor Pucer, who when he asked him what he would have, he
replied; Nothing but Heaven, therefore trouble me no more with speaking to me.
After this he lying silent* whilst the Ministers prayed by him, he gave up the
Ghost, Anno Christi 1560. and in the sixty third year of his Age, having been a
constant Preacher of the Gospel, for the space of 42 years.

The Death of John Laseus.
HE was a man of an excellent Wit, and Judgment, and took great pains to have
composed that difference in the Churches, about Christ's presence in the
Sacrament, though it did not succeed. The King of Poland had such an esteem for
him, that he used his Ad^ice in Affairs of great importance. He died Anno 1560.

The Death of Augustine Marlorat.
MArlorat was taken and carried before the Constable of France, who after
several Examinations, condemned him of High* Treason, which was to be drawn
upon a Sledge, and to be hanged upon a Gibbet, before our Ladies Church* in
Roan, his Head to be stricken from his Body, and set upon a Pole on the Bridge
of the said City; which Sentence was accordingly executed. Anno 1562. aged 56.

The Death of Peter Martyr.
BEing worn out with Travel, and daily Study, he after a while* fell sick, when
calling together the principal Pastors of the Chtrch, he made to them an
excellent Confession of his Faith, concluding, This is my Faith, and they that
teach otherwise, to the withdrawing Men from God, God will destroy them. And so
taking his Leave of all his Friends, after having made his Will, he gave up the
Ghost. Anno Christi 1562. and of his Age Sixty-two.

The Death of Amsdorfius.
HE was born in Misnia, of noble Parents, and educated at Wittemberg. He was
recommended by Luther to instruct several Churches at Maegdeburg, Gos^aria, and
Naumberg; where he carried on the great Work of Reformation. He having attained
to 80 years of Age, died Anno 1563.

The Death of Wolfangus Musculus.
MVsculus being destitute, at Strasburg some Fortifications were mending, where
he hired himself a Labourer, to work by the Day; comforting himself with this
Dystich.

A God there is, whose Providence does take
Care for his Saints, whom he will not forsake.
Much Popish Malice he met with, but God delivered him from their Revenge. At
length, being seized with a violent Fever, he died. Anno 1563. and of his Age
66.

The Death of Hyperius.
HE was born at Ipres in Flanders, of noble Parents, and was well educated. His
Care was great in reforming the Church, and abolishing the Popish Fooleries,
out of the Service of God, and and to establish a holy Scriptural and
Ecclesiastical Discipline. And in these Employments having worn out himself, a
Catarrh and Cough seized him, complaining also of pains of the head, breast,
and sides; which often were so great, as made him sweat, as if he had been
seized wish a Fever. He died Anno 1564. aged 53.

The Death of John Calvin.
CAlvin being settled in pastoral Charge of Geneva, he continued to Confute
Heretics, Papists, and stirrers up of Sedition; to heal* Breaches and
Division, being Courageous even in the worst of times, and as an Undaunted
Champion of Christ, not to follow his Standard till Death, who Conquers all,
Conquered him; for having made his Will, he received the Sacrament, and
earnestly prayed for the Churches. He on the Seventh of May, Anno Christi 1562.
yielded up his Spirit into the hands of his Maker, dying in the 55* Year of his
Age.

His Funeral Solemnities were personned at the Charge of the Senate, almost all
the City being present. He being Buried, as himself desired, in the
Churchyard, where a stately Tomb was erected to his Memory.

The Death of William Farellus.
WHere ever he came Romish Malice attended him; being so powerful in Prayer and
Preaching, that he gained thereby no small Congregations. When he heard of
Calvin's Sickness, he could not satisfy himself, though he was seventy years
old, but he must go to Geneva, to visit him. He survived Calvin one year, and
odd months, and died aged 76 years. Anno 1553.

The Death of Vergerius.
THE Devil stirred up many Adversaries against him, especially the Friars, who
accused him to the Inquisi^ors; but to avoid their Rage, he went to Padua,
where he was a Spectator of the miserable Estate of Francis Spira; which so
wrought upon him, that he resolved to go into Exile, and accordingly he went
into Rhetia, where he preached the Gospel of Christ sincerely, till he was
called from thence to Tubing, where he ended his days. Ann^ 1565. his Brother
being dead before him, ^ot without the suspicion of Poison.

The Death of Strigelius.
AFter his going through many Troubles` he fell sick, and said; He hoped his
Life was at an end, whereby he should be delivered from the Frauds and Miseries
of this evil World, and enjoy the blessed Presence of God, and his Saints to
all Eternity, He died Anno 1569, aged 44.

The Death of John Brentius.
FAlling sick of a Fever, he was endued with Patience, saying, That he longed
for a better, even an eternal Life. He died Anno 1570. aged 71. was buried with
much honor, and had this Epitaph,

With Voice. Style, Piety, Faith, and Candor graced
In outward Shape, John Brentius was thus faced.
The Death of Peter Viretus.
HE went to several places, and carried on the Work of Reformation with Vigor
and Success; but Popish Malice lurked in Corners, insomuch that they attempted
to poison him, and laid wait for his Life. He was very learned, eloquent, and
of a sweet Disposition. He died Anno 1571. aged 60.

The Death of John Jewel.
IN his Sickness, going to Preach, he was desired by a Gentleman to return
home; the Gentleman alleging that one Sermon was better lost, than by Impairng
his Health, to lose so good a Pastor: But his reply was, That it best became a
Bishop to die preaching in a Pulpit, That his great Master the Lord Jesus's
Words might be fulfilled, who says, Happy art thou my Servant, if when I come I
find thee so doing. And thus continued this good Man, till his Sickness
increasing, and Nature visibly decaying in him, he was obliged to take his Bed;
and so far was he from fearing Death, that he rather desired, as longing to
enter his Masters Joy, often repeating the Words of old Simeon: Lord, now
let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy
Salvation. One standing by, prayed for his Recovery, which he hearing, said; I
have not so lived that I am ashamed to live longer, neither do I fear to die,
because we have a merciful Lord; a Crown of Righteousness is laid up for me,
Christ is my Righteousness. Father, let thy Will be done, thy Will I say, and
not mine which is depraved and imperfect; this day let me quickly see the Lord
Jesus. And so in a certain and assured hope of everlasting Happiness, he
resigned his Spirit into the Hands of his Redeemer; dying Anno Christi 1571.
and of his Age Fifty*

The Death of Zegedine.
HE was driven by Popish Cruelty, from several Places, but where ever he went,
he took so much delight in breeding up Youth in Religion and Learning, that he
called it his Recreation. Many hardships he endured in his Travel; for being
taken Prisoner by the Turks he was made an Object of their Fury, for refusing
to abjure the Christian Religion; yet God delivered him out of all his Trouble,
and he died in Peace. Anno 1572. aged 67.

The Death of John Knox.
FAlling Sick, he gave order for his Coffin, and being asked whether his pains
were great, he answered, That he did not esteem that a pain which would be to
him the end of all Troubles, and the beginning of Eternal Joys. Often after
some deep Meditation, he used to say, Oh serve the Lord in fear, and Death
shall not be troublesome to you. Blessed is the Death of those that have part
in the Death of Jesus. One praying by his Bedside, asked him if he heard the
Prayer? Yea, said he, and would to God that all present had heard it with such
an Ear and Heart as I have done; adding, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. He ended
this Life 1572* Aged 62.

The Death of Peter Ramus.
HIS Fame grew so great that he was chose Dean of the University, and Studied
the Mathematics, wherein he grew exquisite. The Civil Wars now breaking out,
he left Paris, and fled to Fountain-bleau; but not being safe there, he went to
the Camp of the Prince of Conde, and from thence into Germany. When the Civil
Wars was ended he returned to Paris, and remained the King's Professor in
Logic, till that horrible Massacre happened on St. Bartholomew's day, wherein
Thousands were slain by the bloody Papists. He was then Locked in his own
House, till those furious Villains brake open his Doors, and in his Study ran
him through, and being half dead threw him out of the Window, so that his Bowels
issued out on the Stones, then they cut off his Head, and dragged his Body
about the Streets in the Channels, at last they threw it into the River Sein,
Anno 1572. Aged 57.

The Death of Henry Bullinger.
MR. Bullinger fell Sick, and his Disease increasing, many Godly Ministers came
to Visit him, but some Months after he recovered and preached as formerly, but
soon Relapsed; when finding his Vital Spirits wasted, and Nature much decayed
in him, he concluded his Death was at hand, and thereupon said as follows.

If the Lord will make any farther use of me and my Ministry in his Church I
will willingly obey him, but if he pleases (as I much desire) to take me out of
this miserable Life; I shall exceedingly rejoice that he will be so pleased to
take me out of this miserable and corrupt Age, to go to my Savior Christ.
Socrates, (said he) was glad when his Death approached, because he thought he
should go to Hesiod, Homer, and other Learned Men deceased, and whom he
expected to meet in the other World; then how much more do I joy, who am sure
that I shall see my Savior Christ, the Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
and all Holy Men which have lived from the beginning of the World. These (I
say) I am sure to see, and to partake with them in Joy; why then should not I
be willing to dye, to enjoy their perpetual Society in Glory?

And then with Tears told them. That he was not unwilling to leave them for his
own sake, but for the sake of the Church. Then having written his Farewell to
the Senate, and therein admonished them to take Care of the Churches and
Schools, and by their Permission chose one Ralph Gualter his Successor, he
patiently resigned up his Spirit into the Hands of his Redeemer, dying Anno
Christi 1575. and of his Age 71.

The Death of Edward Deering.
DRawing near his end, his Friends requested something from him for their
Comfort and Edification: The Sun shining in his Face, he replied, There is but
one Sun in the World, nor but one Righteousness, and one Communion of Saints;
if I were the most excellent of all Creatures in the World, if I were equal in
Righteousness to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, yet had I reason to consess my self
to be a Sinner, and that I could expect no Salvation but in the Righteousness
of Jesus Christ; for we all stand in need of the Grace of God; and as for my
Death, I bless God, I feel, and find so much inward Joy and Comfort in my Soul,
that if I were put to my Choice, whether to die or live, I would a thousand
times rather choose Death than Life, if it may stand with the Holy Will of God.
He dyed Anno 1576.

The Death of Peter Boquinus.
THE Popish Party being incensed against him, sought all means to destroy him,
so that he was forced to fly to Heidelberg; where, upon a Lord's Day, visiting
of a Sick Friend, he found his Spirits fail, and said, Lord receive my Soul,
and so quietly departed, Anno 1582.

The Death of Abraham Bucholtzer.
HE was full of Self denial, Humble, and an Enemy to Contentions.

He used often to meditate upon Death, and used this Expression, it has always
formerly been my Care, in what Corner soever I have been, to be ready when God
called, to say with Abraham, Behold, my Lord, here I am; but now above all
other things, I should be most willing so to answer, if he would please to call
me out of this miserable Life, into his Glorious Kingdom; for truly I desire
nothing so much as the happy and blessed Hour of Death. He dyed Anno 1584. Aged
Fifty Five.

The Death of Gasper Olevian.
AMortal Sickness seized upon him, and preparing himself for Death, he
expressed to a Friend, That by that Sickness, he had learned to know the
greatness of Sin, and the greatness of God's Majesty, more than ever he did
before. The next Day he told John Piscator, That the day before, for four Hours
together he was filled with ineffable Joy, so that he wondered why his Wife
should ask him whether he were not something better; whereas indeed he could
never be better. For (said he) I thought I was in a most pleasant Meadow, in
which, as I walked up and down, me thought that I was besprinkled with a
Heavenly Dew, and that not sparingly, but plentifully poured down, whereby both
my Body and Soul were filled with ineffable Joy. To whom Piscator said, That
good Shepherd, Jesus Christ, led thee into fresh Pastures. Yea, said Olevian,
to the Springs of Living Waters. Then repeating some Sentences out of Psalm 42.
Isa. 9. Matthew. 11. etc. he said, I would not have my Journey to God long
deferred; I desire to be dissolved, and to be with my Christ. In his Agony of
Death, Alstedius asked him, Whether he was sure of his Salvation in Christ,
etc. He answered, Most sure; and so gave up the Ghost, Anno 1587. Aged 51.

The Death of John Wigandus.
HIS strength decaying, he fell sick, and preparing for Death, he made his own
Epitaph.

In Christ I lived and died, through him I live again;
What Is bad, to Death I give, my Soul with Christ shall reign.
So praying, he resigned up his Spirit to God who gave it, Anno 1587. Aged 64.

The Death of John Fox.
MR. Fox together with his Wife and some others, went to Antwerp, and so to
Basil, which was then a place of free reception of poor distressed Fugitives,
who were forced to leave their Countries for the sake of the Lord Jesus, and
his Everlasting Gospel. And here he undertook to correct the Press, and at such
leisure times as he could spare, he wrote part of the Acts and Monuments of the
Church, a Work Famous to all Posterity. And in this station he continued till
the death of Queen MARY, whose death he had a little before foretold. Upon
certain notice of which, he, with several Pious and Learned Men returned into
England, and were kindly received by Queen Elizabeth, where Mr. Fox prosecuted
his Work begun at Basil, and so labored therein, that he soon brought it to a
period.

He finishing this great Work in Eleven years space, searching all the Records
himself.

He now growing in years, and by reason of his former Hardships, his great
Study, Travel and Labor, he was reduced to a very weak Condition, he laid down
the troublesome Cares of the World, to prepare himself for Death.

He resigned up his Spirit into the Hands of the Father of all Spirits, dying
Anno Christi 1587. in the 70th year of his Age.

The Death of George Sohnius.
HE was full of Humility, Piety and Patience, falling sick, he bore it with
much Patience, and with fervent Prayer, often repeated, O Christ! thou art my
Redeemer, and I know that thou have redeemed me. I wholly depend upon thy
Providence and Mercy, from the very bottom of my Heart, I commend my Spirit
into thy hands, and so dyed Anno 1589. Aged 38.

The Death of James Andreas.
THE year before his death he would say, He should not live long. That he was
weary of ^his Life, and much desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
which was best of all.

Falling sick, he sent for James Heerbrand, saying, I expect that after my
death many Adversaries will rise up to asperse me, and therefore I sent for
thee, to hear the Confession of my Faith, that so thou may testify for me,
when I am dead and gone, that I dyed in the true Faith. The night before he
dyed, he slept partly in his Bed, and partly in his Chair. The Clock striking
Six in the Morning, he said, My Hour draws near. When he was ready to depart,
he said, Lord into by hands I commend my Spirit. He dyed Anno 1590. Aged 61.

The Death of Hierom Zanchius.
ZAnchy being grown old, had a liberal Stipend settled upon him by Prince
Cassimir; and ^oing to Heidleberg to visit his Friends, he fell sick, and
quietly departed in the Lord, Anno 1590. ^ged 75.

The Death of Anthony Sadeel.
HE sell Sick of a Pl^urisie, which he Prophetically said, would be Mortal; and
withdrawing himself from the World, he wholly conversed with ^od. He dyed Anno
1591. Aged 57.

The Death of William Whitaker.
FAlling Sick of a Fever, a Friend asking him how he did? he replied, O happy
^ight! I have not taken so sweet a sleep since my disease seiz^ upon me. But
being in a cold Sweat, his Frie^ told him, That Symptoms of Death appeared
(...) him; to whom he answered, Life or Death is w^ come to me, which God
pleases; for Death shall b^ advantage to me; for I desire not to live, but
only far as I may do God and his Church Service. He d^d Anno 1595. Aged 47.

The Death of Robert Rollock.
HE said, I bless God, I have all my Senses enti^ but my Heart is in Heaven;
and, Lord Jes^ Why should thou not have it? It has been my C^ all my life
long to dedicate it to thee, I pray thee t^ it, that it may live with thee for
ever. Falling i^ a Slumber, and awaking, he desired to be dis^ved, saying, Come
Lord Jesus, put* an end to this ^serable life; haste Lord, and tarry not.

Then some bewailing their loss of him, to the he said, I have gone through all
the degrees of t^ Life, and now am come to my end, why should (...) back again?
O Lord help me, that I may go thr^ this last degree with thy assistance; lead
me to (...) Glory which I have seen as through a Glass: O the were with thee.
Some saying the next day was t^ Sabbath, he said, Thy Sabbath, O Lord, shall be
my Eternal Sabbath.

Then he breathed out, Haste Lord, and do tarry; I am weary both of nights and
days: C^ Lord Jesus, that I may come to thee: Break these (...) strings, and
give me others: I desire to be dissolv^ and to be with thee. Haste Lord Jesus,
and defe^ longer. Go forth my weak Life, and let a better ceed.

One standing by, said, Sir, Let nothing tr^ you, for now your Lord makes
haste; to which he said, O Welcome Message, would to God my Funeral might be to
m^rrow. Thus he continued fervent in Praye^ till he resigned up his Spirit unto
God, Anno 1593. Aged* 43.

The Death of Nicholas Hemingius.
BEfore his Death he grew Blind, and much diseased; desiring then to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. Some time before his Death he Expounded the
103 Psalm to the admiration of all his Auditors. He dyed Anno 1600. Aged 87.

The Death of Daniel Tossanus:
DAniel Tossanus falling sick, he Comforted himself with these Texts of
Scripture, I have fought the good fight of Faith, etc. Be thou faithful unto
the Death, and I will give unto thee a Crown of Life: We have a City not made
with hands, Eternal in the Heavens; many other places he recited. He dyed Anno
1602. Aged 61.

The Death of William Perkins.
HE was Born at Marston in Warwickshire, and was Educated at Christ's College
in Cambridge.

He wrote many rare Treatises; which for their Excellency were Translated into
most Languages. All he wrote was with his Left Hand, with which he stabbed the
Romish Cause, as one well expressed.

Though Nature thee of thy Right Hand bereft,
Right well thou Writest with thy Hand that is Left.
In his last Fit, a Friend standing by, prayed for a mitigation of his Pains;
to whom he said, Pray not for an ease of my Torments, but for an en^rease of my
Patience. He dyed Anno 1602. Aged 44. He was Buried at the Charge of Christ's
College with great Solemnity. Dr. Mountague preached his Funeral Sermon upon
this Text, Moses my Servant is dead. His Works are Printed in Three Volumes in
Folio.

The Death of Francis Junius.
BUT being at Lions, he escaped an Imminent Death, which made him acknowledge
God's Providence in his Miraculous Deliverance, and to confirm his Belief, he
earnestly desired to read over the New Testament, of which he gives this
Account: when I opened the New Testament, I first met with St. John's first
Chapter, In the beginning was the Word, etc. I read part of it, and was
presently convinced that the Divinity and Authority of the Author did excel all
Humane Writings: My Body trembled, my Mind was astonished, and I was so
affected all that day that I knew not what I was* Thou wast mindful of me, O my
God, according to the multitude of thy Mercies; and called'st home thy lost
Sheep into thy Fold. And from that day he wholly bent himself to Pions
Practices.

He dyed Anno 1602. Aged 57.

The Death of Thomas Holland.
BEing Ancient, he employed his Time in Prayer and Meditation, and often used
to sigh forth, Come, O come Lord Jesus, thou Morning Star. Come Lord Jesus, I
desire to be dissolved and to be with thee. He dyed Anno 1612. Aged 73.

The Death of James Granaeus.
IN the midst of his Pains he used to say,

As Death's sweet, so to rise is sweet much more,
Christ as in Life, so he in Death is Store.
On Earth are Troubles, sweet Rest in the Gra^e,
^th' last Day we the lasting'st Joys shall have.
He dyed Anno 1617. Aged 77.

The Death of Robert Abbat.
ABbat drawing near his End, he desired to make a Confession of his Faith, but
being faint and weak, he referred his Friends to his Writings, saying, That
Faith which I have published, and defended in my Writings is the Truth of God,
and therein I die, and so departed Anno 1618. Aged 58.

The Death of John Whitgift.
THE Queen had a great Esteem for him, and was pleased to be so familiar, as to
call him Her Black Husband; at her* Death he was present, and administered to
her what Comfort she desired; when King James came to the Crown, he much
reverenced the Archbishop, and when he fell sick, King James visited him, and
labored to cheer him up; but he had laid the Death of Queen Elizabeth so much
to heart, that in a few days he departed in the Lord A^no 1603. Aged 73.

The Death of Theodore Beza.
HE often used the Apostles saying, We are his Workmanship created in Christ
Jesus to good Works. And that of St. Augustine, I have lived long, I have
sinned long, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Also, Lord perfect that which
thou have begun, that I suffer not Shipwreck in the Haven: And that of Bernard,
Lord, we follow thee, by thee, to thee; we follow thee, because thou art the
Truth; by thee, because thou art the Way* to thee, because thou art the Life.
He dyed upon a Sabbath day, when rising in the Morning he prayed with his
Family, and finding himself weak, he desired to go to Bed again; but sitting
down on the Bedside he departed without the least Sigh or Groan Anno 1605.
Aged 86.

The Death of William Cowper.
FAlling Sick, he used to say, My Soul is always ready in my Hand* ready to be
offered to my God. Where, or what kind of death God has prepared for me, I
know not; but sure I am, there can no evil death befall him that lives in
Christ, nor sudden death to a Christian Pilgrim, who (with Job) waits every
Hour for his Change: Yea (says he) many a Day have I sought it with Tears, not
out of Impatience, Distrust or Perturbati^n, but because I am weary of Sin, and
fearful to fall into it.

In his Sickness he used these private Meditations. Now my Soul be glad, for at
all Parts of this Prison, the Lord has set, to his Pioneers to loose the Head,
Feet, Milt and Liver are failing; yea the middle strength of the whole Body,
the Stomach is weakened long ago. Arise, make ready, shake off thy Fetters,
m^unt up from the Body, and go thy way.

I saw not my Children when they were in the Womb, yet there the Lord fed them
without my knowledge: I shall not see them when I go out of the Body, yet shall
they not want a Father.

Death is somewhat Driery, and the Streams of that Jordan between us and our
Canaan run furiously, but they stand still when the Ark comes. Let your Anchor
be cast within the Veil, and fastened on the Rock Jesus; let the End of the
Threefold Cord be buckled to the Heart, so shall you go through. He died, Anno
1619.

The Death of Andrew Willet.
GOing from London, his Horse threw him, and by the Fall broke his Leg, which
was presently set by a Bone-setter; and being confined to his Bed, he would
meditate upon Hezekiah's Sickness and Recovery, Isaiah 38. especially on the 9,
10, 13, and 15 Verses. Hearing a Bell Toll, he peradventure had apprehensiors
of Death, which oceasioned him to discourse with his Wise concerning Death. and
our blessed Hopes after Death, and the mutual Knowledge the Saints have of one
another in Glory. Then he repeated the first Verse of the 146 Psalm, and said
it was a most sweet Psalm; but stirring to ease himself, he fell into a Trance:
his Wise crying out, he looked up, and used these last words, Let me alone, I
shall do well: Lord Jesus -- and so departed, Anno 1621. Aged 59.

The Death of David Pareus.
AT A^villa he wrote his Body of Divinity, which having Finished, he said,
Lora, now let thy Servant depart in peace, because he has Finished that which
he desired. He earnestly besought God that he might lay his Bones at
Heidleberg, which not long after he returned thither safely, where he was
received with much joy; but his former Disease of a Catarrh returning upon him,
being sensible of approaching Death, he frequently opened his Mind to Henry
Alting, and others, and so quietly departed, Anno 162^. Aged 73. His Works are
in 3 Volumes.

The Death of Robert Bolton.
MR. Bolton falling sick of a Quartane-Ague, and finding himself weaker and
weaker, he Contemplated upon the four last things, Death, Judgment, Heaven and
Hell, and being asked if he could be content to live, if God would permit him:
He said, I grant that Life is a great Blessing of God; neither will I neglect
any means that may preserve it, and do heartily desire to submit to God's Will;
but of the two, I infinitely more desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. When the Pangs of Death were upon him, he breathed out; I am now
drawing on apace to my dissolution; hold out Faith and Patience, your Work will
quickly be at an end. He died, Anno 1631. Aged Threescore.

The Death of William Whately.
IN his Sickness he comforted himself with that Promise, Psalm 41. 1, 2.
Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in the t^me
of trouble, the Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of languishing, etc. A
little before his death, a Friend pr^ying with him, That God would be pleased,
if his Time were not expired, either to restore him, or put an end to his
Pains: He lifting up his Eyes toward Heaven, one of his Hands, in the close of
that Prayer gave up the ghost, shutting his Eyes, as if he was fallen into a
soft Slumber, Anno 1639. Aged 56.

The Death of Anthony Wallaeus.
HE was much troubled with the Stone in the Kidneys, and Hypocondraical Wind,
which still increasing upon him, he called his Family, and exhorted them to
fear God; then taking his leave of them, he fell asleep, out of which he never
awaked, only strived a little when his Pains came upon him; so on the
Sabbath Day at a Eleven of the Clock he resigned up his Spirit to his Maker,
Anno 1639. Aged 66.

The Death of Henry Alting.
HE sell fick at Groaning of a Catarth and Fever, accompanied with great Pains
in his Back and Loins, which caused often Faintings. The day before his death*
he sang the 130th. Psalm with great Fervency: In the Evening he blessed his
Children, and exhorted them to fear God, and to persevere in the Truth of the
Gospel. Being sensible of the time of his Departure, by his Prophetic Spirit,
he accordingly died, about Three of the Clock, August 25. Anno 1644. Aged 57.

The Death of Frederick Spanhemius.
HIS last Sermon he preached a^ Easter, upon Phil. 3. 24. Who shall change our
vile Body, that it may be like his glorious Body, etc. He prayed earnestly to
God to continue his Blessings to his Family, and never suffer them to be
seduced to Popery; he prayed likewise that in the Pains of Death, he might with
all his Soul breath after God, and migh beforehand have some taste of the
Glory of Heaven. Having ended his Prayers, his Voice and Strength failed him,
and so about Sunsetting he quietly departed, and slept in the Lord, 1649. Aged
49.

The Death of Sir John Oldcastle.
HE was sent for before the Council; when the Bishop proffered to absolve him,
he replied, He had never trespassed against him, and therefore had no need of
his Absolution. When they told him unless he would recant, they would condemn
him as a Heretic. He bid them do as they thought best; for, said he, I am at a
Point, that which I have written, I will stand to it to the death. Then
kneeling down, he lifted up his Hands toward Heaven, and said, I shrive me
here unto thee, O Eternal and Ever-living God, in my frail Youth I offended
thee, O Lord, by Pride, Covetousness, Wrath, Uncleanness, and many Men have I
hurt in my Anger, and committed many other horrible Sins, for which good Lord,
I ask thee forgiveness: And so with Tears in his Eyes, he stood up, and turning
to the People, he said, Lo, good People, for breaking God's Laws and his holy
Commandments, they never yet accused me; but for their own Laws and Traditions,
they bandle me most cruelly, and therefore they and their Laws, by God's
promise should be utterly destroyed. Then they proceeded farther to examine
him, but he returned such Answers to their Questions, as made many wonder at
his Wisdom; yet they proceeded to read the Bill of Condemnation against him as
a Heretic. After which, he lifting up his Eyes toward Heaven, said, Lord God.
Eternal, I beseech thee of thy Infinite Mercy, to forgive my Persecutors. After
that he was sent to the Tower.

The Sentence against him was, That like a Traitor, he should be drawn through
the Streets of London, to the Gallows in St. Giles in the Fields, and there
hanged, and afterward burnt upon the Gallows as he hung.

The Death of Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex.
HIS Enemies durst not bring him to a Trial, but procured an Act of Attainder,
whereby he was Condemned before he was Heard; yet the King after his death,
repented this Haste, and wished he had his Cromwell alive again. Being mounted
the Scaffold, he made an humble Confession, and begged the Prayers of all those
which were present; then in a pious Prayer he recommended himself into the
Han^s of the Almighty, and at one Blow his Head was severed from his Body, Anno
1541.

The Death of the Lady Jane Gray.
THE Morning before her Exit from this World, her Husband, the Lord Guilford
Dudley, was conveyed to a Scaffold on Tower Hill, where he penitently ended his
Life; his Head and Body being laid in a Cart all bloody, was brought to the
Chapel, and exposed to the Sight of this sorrowful Lady; a Spectacle more
dismal than the kneenest Axe of her Death. And now her own part is to be acted
upon a Scaffold, erected upon the Green within the Tower; where being mounted
with a cheerful Countenance, she looked upon the People, and with great
Constancy, directed her self after this manner: That she was come thither to
die for an Offense which was committed by a Device, not of her own seeking;
then wringing her Hands, and protesting her Innocence, she desired them to take
notice, that she died a good Christian, and requested their Prayers.

Then kneeling down, she repeated in English the 51 Psalm; after which, her
Gentle woman helped her off with her Gown, and the Hangman on his Knees asked
her forgiveness, which she forgave him freely, and prayed him to dispatch her
quickly. Looking upon the Block, and knecling, she said, Will you take it off
before I lay it, down? No, Madam, replied the Executioner; then she tied a
Handkerchief before her Eyes, and feeling for the Block, said, What shall I do?
Where is it? Where is it? Being guided, she laid her Head upon the Block, and
giving the Sign, she said, Lord, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit. Then
receiving the Fatal Blow, she ended this Life, Anno 1554. Aged 16.

Her Death was much lamented, but did not g^ unpunished, for the Judge which
passed her Sentence, shortly after fell distracted, crying out continually,
Take away the Lady Jane from me.

The Lady Jane Gray had a curious Vein in P^etry: In her Troubles she composed
these Lines.

Think nothing strange, which Man cannot decline,
My Lot's to Day, to Morrow it may be thine.
If God protect me, Malice cannot end me:
If not, all I can do will not defend me.
After dark Night,
I hope for Light,
This Epitaph was also made on her.

My Race was Royal, sad was my short Reign;
Now in a better Kingdom I remain.
The Death of Sir Philip Sidney.
SIR Philip lay for the space of 25 Days, enduring his Pains with admirable
Patience, and at length resigned up his Spirit into the hands of his Redeemer,
October 16. Anno 1586.

Upon him was made this Epitaph.

Apollo made him wise,
Mars made him stout;
Death made him leave the World
Before his Youth was out.
The Death of Galeacius Carracciolus.
SIckness the Harbinger of Death, seizing upon him, which proceeded from
abundance of ^heum: this was produced by his long and weari^ome Journeys, which
he had formerly taken by ^and and Sea, for his Conscience sake: His Phy^^cians
despairing of his Cure, he wholly sequestered himself from all Worldly
Cogitarions, and taking ^is Farewell of his Wife and Friends, saying, He ^ould
lead them the way to Heaven. Then he desi^ed God to receive him, and
acknowledge him ^or his own, and so quie^ly departed, 1592. A^ed 74.

The Death of Katherine Bretterg.
ONce she took the Bible in her hand, and joyfully kissing it, said, O Lord,
it is good for me to be afflicted, that I may learn thy Statutes. The law of thy
mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver. Then she desired her
Husband to beware of Popery, and to let her little Girl be brought up in the
Fear of God, saying, So shall I meet her in Heaven, wh^m I must now leave
behind me on Earth.

Once she was very dull in Prayer, and when she came to, Lead us not into
Temptation, she said, I may not pray, I may not pray, for Satan interrupts me;
yet her Friends left her not till she had gained the Conquest.

She repeated often, We have not received the Spirit of Bondage to fear again,
but the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The Verse of Psalm
13. ult. she often repeated cheerfully.

Many Pious Meditations she used, but the last was this; My Flesh and my Heart
fails, but God is the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever. He that
preserves Jacob, and defends his Israel, he is my God, and will guide me
unto Death. Then she departed this life without any motion of Body, May ult.
Anno 1601. Aged 22.

The Death of John Lord Harrington, Baron of Exton.
FRom the First Day of his last Sickness, he apprehended the approach of Death,
and so readily prepared himself for it; he made Confession of his Sins, and often
confessed his Faith, and undoubted hope of Salvation in Christ; and when Death
approached, he breathed out, O my God, when shall I be with thee? And in the
midst of these longing Desires, he departed Anno 1613. Aged 22.

The Death of Phillip de Mornay, Lord of Plessis Marley.
BEing displaced from his Government of Samur, he betook himself to a Private
Life, and made his Will for the peace and good of his Family; being seized upon
by a continual Fever, and no hopes of Recovery, he would often say, I fly, I
fly to Heaven, and the Angels are carrying me into the bosom of my Savior:
then would he repeat the words of Job; I know that my Redeemer lives, I shall
see him with mine eyes, and I feel, I fell what I now speak. He dyed in the
74th. Year of his Age.

The Death of John Bruen, of Bruen*Stapleford, in the County of Chester,
Esquire.
FAlling Sick, the morning before his Death, diverse Friends took their leaves
of him, and hearing some make motion of Blacks, he said; I will have no Blacks,
I love no Proud nor Pompous Funeral, neither is there any cause of Mourning,
but of rejoicing rather in my particular. Immediately before his Death, lifting
up his hands, he said: The Lord is `my portion, my help, and my*trust, his
blessed Son Jesus Christ is my Savior and Redeemer, Amen. Even so says the
Spirit unto my Spirit; therefore come Lord Jesus, and kiss me with the kisses
of thy mouth, and embrace me with the Arms of thy Love, into thy hands do I
commend my Spirit, O come now, and take me to thy own self. O come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly, O come, O come, O come. So his Spirit fainting, he yielded up the
Ghost in January, Anno 1625. Aged 65.

The Deaths of the KINGS and QUEENS of England, since the Reformation, to this
present.
The Death of King Henry the VIII.
KING Henry being grown Fat, fell into a languishing Fever, and by Will
appointed his Successor and Council. did on the 28th. of January 1547. in the
56 Year of his Age, and 38 of his Reign; leaving Issue by Queen Jane, Prince
Edward; by his first Wife Katherine of Spain, the Lady Mary; and by Ann of
Bullen, the Lady Elizabeth, who all Successively came to the Crown.

The Death of King Edward VI.
ABout three hours before his Death, his Eyes being closed, thinking that none
heard him, he made this Godly Prayer.

Lord God, deliver me out of this miserable and wretched Life, and take me
amongst thy C^osen: howbeit, not my Will but thy Will be done; Lord, I commit
my Soul to thee. O Lord, thou know how happy it were for me to be with thee;
yet for thy Chosen* sake, send me Life and Health, that I may truly serve thee*
O my Lord God, bless thy People, and save thine Inheritance; O Lord God, save
thy Chosen People of England. O my Lord God, defend this Realm from Papistry,
and maintain thy true Religion, that I and my People may praise thy Holy Name
for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake. Then turning his Face, and seeing some by, he
said; Are you so nigh? I thought you had been further off Many servent Prayers
he made, but his last Words were these, I am faint, Lord have Mercy upon me,
and take my Spirit; and so committed his Pious Soul into the hands of his
Heavenly Father. He died July 6. 1553. in the Seventeenth Year of his Age. He
Reigned Six Years, Five Months, and Eight Days; he was the one and Fortieth
Sole Monarch of England, and was Buried at Westminster.

The Death of Queen Mary.
HER Husbands absence, and the disappointment of proving with Child, brought
her into a Sickness, whereof she died, November 17. 1558. having Reigne^^ 5
Years and 4 Months. Cardinal Pool, dying the day before, but sometime before
she declared to him; That if when she were dead they would look into her Heart,
rhey would find Callis her great Distemper. In her Reign there suffered 5
Bishops, 21 Divines; and in all 277 Persons.

The Death of Queen Elizabeth.
Lopez, a Jew, Physician to the Queen, 1594.
was Executed for attempting to Poison her. In 1600. the Earl of Essex having
incurred the Queens Displeasure in Ireland, and more by scandalous Speeches,
and a kind of open Rebellion at his House in London, being condemned by his
Peers, is Beheaded. On the 24th. of March 1602. died Queen Elizabeth, having
Reigned above 44 Years in as Troublesome times as any, yet full of Honor, and
most happy in the Love of her People. She was Interred in Henry the Seventh's
Chapel at VVestminister.

The Death of King James, the First.
THis King was Interred at Westminster with great Solemnity; his Queen was
Ann, Daughter of Frederick the Second, King of Denmark, by whom he had two
Sons, Henry and Charles, and three Daughters, Elizabeth, Mary, and Sophia, the
two last dyed young.

The Death of King Charles, the First.
HE was led through the Park to the Scaffold before White Hall, where having
declared that he died a Martyr for the Laws and Liberties of his People, he
made a Confession of his Faith, asserting, that he died a true Son of the
Church of England; then he betook himself to his private Devotions, and so
patiently submitted his Royal Head to Martyrdom, from the hand of a disguised
Executioner. His Body was put into a Black Velvet Coffin, and afterward wrapped
in Lead, was on the 7th. of Feb. following Interred at St. George's Chapel, at
Windsor, in the same Vault with King Henry the 8th, in presence of the Duke of
Richmond, Dr. Juxon, and others; but the manner appointed in the Liturgy could
not be obtained to be used, nor had he any Epitaph affixed; but only on the
Sheet of Lead, on a thin Plate fastened on the Breast, this plain Inscription --
-- King Cha^les 1648.

The Death of King Charles, the Second.
ON Monday, Feb. 2. 1684. the King was seized with a violent Fit of an
Apoplexy, which deprived him of his Senses, but upon speedy Application of
Remedies, he returned to such a Condition as gave some Symptoms of his
Recovery, till Wednesday Night, and then the Disease was so violent, that he
lay in a languishing Condition until Friday, Feb. 6. and then expired. He had
Reigned Thirty six Years, and Seven Days, and was in the 55th. Year of his Age.
He was Interred in Henry the Seventh's Chapel, being the Forty-sixth Sole
Monarch of England.

The Death of Old Mr. Eliot, of New England.
WHILE he was making his Retreat ou^ of this evil World, his Discourses from
time to time ran upon, The coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. It was the Theme
which he still had Recourse unto, and we were sure to have something of this,
whatever other Subject he were upon. On this he talked, of this he prayed, for
this he longed, and especially when any bad News arrived, his usual Reflection
thereupon would be, Behold some of the Clouds in which we must look for the
coming of the Son of Man. At last his Lord, sor whom he had been long wishing,
Lord come, I have been a great while ready for thy coming! At last, I say, his
Lord came, and fetched him away into the Joy of his Lord.

He fell into some Languishments, attended with a Fever, which in a few days
brought him into the Pangs (may I say? or Joys) of Death: And while he lay in
these, Mr. Walter coming to him, he said unto him: Brother, Thou art welcome to
my very Soul. Pray, retire to my Study for me, and give me leave to be gone,
meaning, thar he should not, by Petitions to Heaven for his Life, detain him
here. It was in these Languishments, that speaking about the work of the Gospel
among the Indians, he did after this Heavenly manner express himself. There is
a Cloud (said he) a dark Cloud upon the Work of the Gospel, among the poor
Indians. The Lord revive and prosper that Work, and grant it may live when I am
dead. It is a work, which I have been Doing much and long about. But what was
the word I spoke last? I recall that word, My Doings: Alas, they have been poor,
and small, and lean Doings, and I Will be the Man that shall throw the first
Stone at them all.

It has been observed, that they who have spoke many considerable things in
their Lives, usually speak few at their Deaths. But it was otherwise with our
Eliot, who after much Speech of and for God in his Lifetime, uttered some
things little short of Oracles on his Deathbed; which, it is a thousand pities,
they were not more exactly regarded and recorded. Those Authors that have taken
the pains to Collect, Apophthegmata Morentium, have not therein been
unserviceable to the Living; but the Apophthegms of a Dying Eliot must have had
in them a Grace and a Strain truly extraordinary; and indeed the vulgar Error
of the signal sweetness in the Song of a Dying Swan, was a very Truth in our
expiring Eliot; his last Breath smelt strong of Heaven, and was Articled into
none but very gracious Notes; one of the last whereof, was, Welcome Joy! And at
last it went away, calling upon the standers by, to Pray, pray, pray! which was
the thing in which so vast a portion of it had been before Employed.

This was the peace, in the end of this Perfect and Upright Man; thus was there
another Star ferched away to be placed among the rest that the third Heaven is
now enriched with. He had once, I think, a pleasant Fear, that the old Saints
of his Acquaintance, especially those two dearest Neighbors of his, Cotton of
Boston, and Mather of Dorchester, who were got safe to Heaven before him, would
suspect him to be gone the wrong way, because he staid so long behind them. But
they are row together with a Blessed Jesus, beholding of his Glory, and
celebrating the High Praises of Him that has called them into his mavelous
light. Whether Heaven was any more Heaven to him, because of his finding there
so many Saints with whom he once had his Delicious and Celestial Intimacies,
yea, and so many Saints which had been the Seals of his own Ministry, in this
lower World, I cannot say; but it would be Heaven enough unto him, to go unto
that Jesus, whom he had loved, preached, served, and in whom he had been long
assured there does All Fullness dwell. In that Heaven I now leave him: but not
without Grynaeus's pathetical Exclamations, ( O beatum illum diem!) Blessed
will be the Day, O blessed the Day of our Arrival to the glorious Assembly of
Spirits, which this great Saint is now reioicing with!

Bereaved New England, where are thy Tears, at this Ill-boding Funeral? We had
a Tradition among us, `That the Country could never perish, `as long as Eliot
was alive. But into whose hands must this Hippo fall, now the Austin of it is
taken away? Our Elisha is gone, and now who must next year invade the Land? The
Jews have a saying, Quando Luminaria paetiuntur Eclipsin, malum signum est
mundo; but I am sure, it is a dismal Eclipse that has now befallen our
New-English World. I confess, many of the Ancients fell into the vanity of
esteeming the Relics of the Dead Saints, to be the Towers and Ramparts of the
place that enjoyed them; and the dead Bodies of two Apostles in the City, made
the Poet cry out,

A Facie Hostili duo propugnacula praesunt.
If the Dust of dead Saints could give us any protection, we are not without
i^; here is a Spot (...) American Soil that will afford a rich Crop of it, at
the Resurrection of the Just. Poor New England has been as Glastenbury of old
was called, A Buryingplace of Saints. But we cannot see a more terrible
Prognostic than Tombs filling apace with such Bones, as those of the Renowned
Eliot's; the whole Building of this Country trembles at the fa^l of such a
Pill^r.

For many Months before he dyed, he would often cheerfully tell us, That he was
shortly going to Heaven, and that he would carry a deal of good News thither
with him; he said, He would carry Tidings to the Old Founders of New England,
which were now in G^ory, that Church work was yet carried on among us: That the
number of our Churches was continua^ly increasing: And that the Churches were
still kept as big as they were, by the daily additions of those that shall be
saved. But the going of such as he from us, will apace diminish the occasions
of such happy tidings.

What shall we now say? Our Eliot himself used most affectionately to bewail
the Death of all useful Men; yet if one brought him the notice of such a t^ing,
with any Despondencie^, or said, O Sir, such a one is dead, what shall we do?
he would answer, Well, but God lives, Christ lives, the Old Savior of
New England yet lives, and he will Reign till all his Enemies are made his
Footstool. This, and only this consideration have we to relieve us; and let it
be accompanied with our addresses to the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, That
there may be Tim^thie's raised up in the room of our Departed Paul's, and that
when our Moses's are gone, the Spirit which was in those brave Men, may be put
upon the surviving Elders of our Israel. Thus died the first Preacher of the
Gospel to the Indians in New England. Aged 86.

FINIS.

