King ARTHUR: OR, The British Worthy.

ADVERTISEMENT.
FInding that several of my Friends, in Buying my Plays, etc. Bound together,
have been imposed on by the Booksellers foisting in a Play which is not mine; I
have here, to prevent this for the future, set down a Catalogue of my Plays and
Poems in Quarto, putting the Plays in the Order I wrote them.

John Dryden.

ESSAY on Dramatick Poetry. Wild Gallant. Rival Ladies. Indian Emperor. Maiden
Queen. Sir Martin Marr-all. Tempest. Evening Love. Royal Martyr. Conquest of
Granada, in two Parts. Marriage A-la-Mode. Love in a Nunnery. Amb^yna. State of
Innocence. Aurenzebe. All for Love. Limberham. Oedipus. Troylus and Cressida.
Spanish Friar. Duke of Guise. Vindication of the Duke of Guise. Don Sebastian.
Amphitryon. King Arthur. Annus Mirabilis, or, The Year of Wonders. A Poem on
the Return of King Charles II. A Panegyric on the Coronation of King Charles
II. A Poem to the Lord Chancellor Hide. Absalom and Achitophel. The Medal.
Religio Laici. Elegy on the Death of King Charles II. The Hind and Panther. A
Poem on the Birth of the Prince.
King ARTHUR: OR, The British Worthy. A Dramatick OPERA. Performed at the
QVEENS Theater By Their MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Mr. DRYDEN.

-- H^c alta Theatris
Fundamenta locant: Scenis decora alta futuris.
Virg. Aeneid. 1. Purpurea intexti toliunt aulaea Britanni. Georg. 3.10. --
Tanton' placuit concurrere motu. Aeneid. 11. Jupiter, aeterna Genteis in pace
futuras?
Et Celebrare Domestica facta.
Hor. London, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges-Head in Chancery Lane
near Fleetstreet, 1601.

To the MARQVISS of HALLIFAX.
My LORD,
THIS Poem was the last Piece of Service, which I had the Honor to do, for my
Gracious Master, King CHARLES the Second: And though he lived not to see the
Performance of it, on the Stage; yet the PROLOGUE to it, which was the Opera of
Albion and Albanius, was often practiced before Him at Whitehal, and encouraged
by His Royal Approbation. It was indeed a Time, which was proper for Triumph,
when He had overcome all those Difficulties which for some Years had perplexed
His Peaceful Reign: But when He had just restored His People to their Senses,
and made the latter End of His Government, of a Piece with the Happy Beginning
of it, He was on the sudden snatched away, from the Blessings and Acclamations
of His Subjects, who arrived so late to the Knowledge of Him, that they had but
just time enough to desire Him longer, before they were to part with Him for
ever. Peace be with the Ashes of so Good a King! Let His Hlumane Frailties be
forgotten; and His Clemency and Moderation (the inherent Virtues of His Family)
be remembered with a Grateful Veneration by Three Kingdoms, through which He
spread the Blessings of them. And, as your Lordship held a principal Place in
His Esteem, and perhaps the first in His Affection, during His latter Troubles;
the Success which accompanied those prudent Counsels, cannot but reflect an
Honor on those few who managed them; and wrought out, by their Faithfulness
and Diligence, the Public Safety. I might dilate on the Difficulties which
attended that Undertaking, the Temper of the People, the Power, Arts and
Interest of the contrary Party, but those are all of them Invidious Topics;
they are too green in our Remembrance; and he who touches on them, Incedit per
ignes, suppositos cineri doloso. But without reproaching one side to praise
another, I may justly recommend to both, those wholesome Counsels, which wisely
administered, and as well executed, were the Means of preventing a Civil War,
and of extinguishing a growing Fire which was just ready to have broken forth
among us. So many Wives, who have yet their Husbands in their Arms; so many
Parents, who have not the Number of their Children lessened; so many Villages,
Towns and Cities, whose Inhabitants are not decreased, their Property violated,
or their Wealth diminished, are yet owing to the sober Conduct, and happy
Results of your Advice. If a true Account may be expected by future Ages, from
the present, your Lordship will be delivered over to Posterity, in a fairer
Character than I have given: And be read, not in the Preface of a Play, (whose
Author is not vain enough to promise Immortality to others, or to hope it for
himself) but in many Pages of a Chronicle, filled with Praises of your
Administration. For if Writers be just to the Memory of King CHARLES the
Second, they cannot deny him to have been an exact Knower of Mankind, and a
perfect Distinguisher of their Talents. It Is true, his Necessities often forced
him to vary his Councillors and Councils, and sometimes to employ such Persons
in the Management of his Affairs, who were rather fit for his present purpose,
than satisfactory to his Judgment: But where it was Choice in him, not
Compulsion, he was Master of too much good Sense to delight in heavy
Conversation; and whatever his Favorites of State might be, yet those of his
Affection, were Men of Wit. He was easy with these; and complied only with the
former: But in the latter part of his Life, which certainly required to be most
cautiously managed, his secret Thoughts were communicated but to few; and those
selected of that sort, who were Amici omnium Horarum, able to advise him in a
serious Consult, where his Honor and Safety were concerned; and afterward
capable of entertaining him with pleasant Discourse, as well as profitable. In
this Maturest part of his Age, when he had been long seasoned with Difficulties
and Dangers, and was grown to a Niceness in his Choice, as being satisfied how
few could be trusted; and, of those who could be trusted, how few could serve
him, he confined himself to a small Number of Bosom Friends; amongst whom, the
World is much mistaken, if your Lordship was not first.

If the Rewards which you received for those Services, were only Honors, it
rather showed the Necessities of the Times, than any want of Kindness in your
Royal Master: And as the Splendor of your Fortune stood not in need of being
supported by the Crown, so likewise in being satisfied without other
Recompense, you showed your self to be above a Mercenary Interest; and
strengthened that Power, which bestowed those Titles on you: Which truly
speaking, were Marks of Acknowledgment more than Favor.

But, as a Skilful Pilot will not be tempted out to Sea, in suspected Weather,
so have you wisely chosen to withdraw your self from public Business, when the
Face of Heaven grew troubled; and the frequent shisting of the Winds foreshew'd
a Storm: There are Times and Seasons when the best Patriots are willing to
withdraw their Hands from the Commonwealth; as Phocion in his latter Days was
observed to decline the Management of Affairs: Or, as Cicero, (to draw the
Similitude more home) left the Pulpit, for Tusculum; and the praise of Oratory,
for the sweet Enjoyments of a private Life. And, in the Happiness of those
Retirements, has more obliged Posterity by his Moral Precepts, than he did the
Republic, in quelling the Couspiracy of Catiline. What pru lent Man, would not
rather follow the Example of his Retreat, than stay like Cato, with a stubborn
unseasonable Virtue, to oppose the Torrent of the People, and at last be driven
from the Marketplace by a Riot of a Multitude, incapable of Counsel, and deaf
to Eloquence? There is likewise a Portion of our Lives, which every Wise Man
may justly reserve to his own peculiar use, and that without defrauding his
Native Coutry. A Roman Soldier was allowed to plead the Merit of his Services
for his dismission at such an Age; and there was but one Exception to that
Rule, which was, an Invasion from the Gauls. How far that, may work with your
Lordship, I am not certain; but I hope it is not coming to the Trial.

In the mean time, while the Nation is secured from Foreign Attempts, by so
powerful a Fleet, and we enjoy not only the Happiness, but even the Ornaments
of Peace, in the Divertisement of the Town, I humbly offer you this Trifle,
which if it succeed upon the Stage, is like to be the chiefest Entertainment of
our Ladies and Gentlemen this Summer. When I wrote it, seven Years ago, I
employed some reading about it, to inform my self out of Beda, Bo^hartus, and
other Authors, concerning the Rites and Customs of the Heathen Saxons; as I
also used the little Skill I have in Poetry to adorn it. But not to offend the
present Times, nor a Government which has hitherto protected me, I have been
obliged so much to alter the first Design, and take away so many Beauties from
the Writing, that it is now no more what it was sormerly, than the present Ship
of the Royal Sovereign, after so often taking down, and altering, to the Vessel
it was at the first (...). There is nothing better, than what I intended, (...)
the Music; which has since arrived to a greater Perfection in England, than
ever formerly: especially passing through the Artful Hands of Mr. Purcel, who
has Composed it with so great a Genius, that he has nothing to fear but an
ignorant, ill-judging Audience. But the Numbers of Poetry and Vocal Music, are
sometimes so contrary, that in many places I have been obliged to cramp my
Verses, and make them rugged to the Reader, that they may be harmonious to the
Hearer: Of which I have no Reason to repent me, because these sorts of
Entertainment are principally designed for the Ear and Eye; and therefore in
Reason my Art on this occasion, ought to be subservient to his And besides, I
flatter my self with an Imagination that a Judicious Audience will easily
distinguish betwixt the Songs, wherein I have complied with him, and those in
which I have followed the Rules of Poetry, in the Sound and Cadence of the
Words. Notwithstanding all these Disadvantages, there is somewhat still
remaining of the first Spirit with which I wrote it: And, though I can only
speak by ghess, of what pleased my first and best Patroness the Duchess of
Monmouth in the reading, yet I will venture my Opinion, by the knowledge I have
long had of her Graces Excellent Judgment, and true taste of Poetry, that the
parts of the Airy and Earthy Spirits, and that Fairy kind of writing, which
depends only upon the Force of Imagination, were the Grounds of her liking the
Poem, and afterward of her Recommending it to the Queen. I have likewise had
the satisfaction to hear, that Her Majesty has Graciously been pleased to
peruse the Manuscript of this Opera, and given it Her Royal Approbation. Poets,
who subsist not but on the Favor of Sovereign Princes, and of great Persons,
may have leave to be a little vain, and boast of their Patronage, who encourage
the Genius that animates them. And therefore I will again presume to ghess,
that Her Majesty was not displeased to find in this Poem the Praises of Her
Native Country; and the Heroic Actions of so famous a Predecessor in the
Government of Great Britain, as King Arthur.

All this, My Lord, I must consess, looks with a kind of Insinuation, that I
present you with somewhat not unworthy your Protection: But I may easily
mistake the Favor of Her Majesty for Her Judgment: I think I cannot be
deceived in thus addressing to your Lordship, whom I have had the Honor to
know, at that distance which becomes me, for so many Years. It Is true, that
formerly I have shadowed some part of your Virtues, under another Name; but the
Character, though short and imperfect, was so true, that it broke through the
Fable, and was discovered by its Native Light. What I pretend by this
Dedication, is an Honor which I do my self to Posterity, by acquainting them
that I have been conversant with the first Persons of the Age in which I lived;
and thereby perpetuate my Prose, when my Verses may possibly be forgotten, or
obscured by the Fame of Future Poets. Which Ambition, amongst my other Faults
and Imperfections, be pleased to pardon, in

My LORD, Your Lordships most Obedient Servant, John Dryden.

Dramatis Personae.
KIng Arthur. -- Mr. Betterton. Oswald, King of Kent, a Saxon and a Heathen. --
Mr. Williams. Conon, Duke of Cornwall, Tributary to King Arthur. Mr. Hodgson.
Merlin, a famous Inchanter. -- Mr. Kynaston. Osmond, a Saxon Magician, and a
Heathen. -- Mr. Sandford. Aurelius, Friend to Arthur. -- Mr. Alexander.
Albanact, Captain of Arthur's Guards. -- Mr. Bowen. Guillamar, Friend to
Ofwald. -- Mr. Harris.
WOMEN.
Emmeline, Daughter of Conon. -- Mrs. Bracegirdle. Matilda, her Attendant. --
Mrs. Richardson. Philidel, an Airy Spirit. -- Mrs. Butler. Grimbald, an Earthy
Spirit. -- Mr. Bowman.
Officers and Soldiers, Singers and Dancers, etc.

Scene in KENT.

King ARTHUR: OR, The British Worthy.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Conon, Aurelius, Albanact. Con. THen this is the deciding Day, to fix
Great Britain's Scepter in great Arthur's Hand.

Aur. Or put it in the bold Invaders gripe.
Arthur and Oswald, and their different Fates,
Are weighing now within the Scales of Heaven.

Con. In Ten set Battles have we driven back
These Heathen Saxons, and regained our Earth.
As Earth recovers from an Ebbing Tide,
Her half-drown'd Face, and lifts it over the Waves.
From Severn's Banks, even to this Barren-Down,
Our foremost Men have pressed their fainty Rear,
And not one Saxon Face has been beheld;
But all their Backs, and Shoulders have been stuck
With foul dishonest Wounds: Now here, indeed,
Because they have no further Ground, they stand.

Aur. Well have we chose a Happy day for Fight;
For every Man, in course of time, has found
Some days are lucky, some unfortunate.

Alb. But why this day more lucky than the rest?

Con. Because this day
Is Sacred to the Patron of our Isle;
A Christian, and a Soldiers Annual Feast.

Alb. Oh, now I understand you, This is St. George of Cappadocia's Day.
Well, It may be so, but Faith I was Ignorant; we Soldiers
Seldom examine the Rubric; and now and then a Saint may
Happen to slip by us; But if he be a Gentleman Saint, he will
Forgive us.

Con. Oswald, undoubtedly will Fight it bravely.

Aur. And it behooves him well, it is his last Stake. To Alb.
But what manner of Man is this Oswald? Have ye ever seen him?

Al. Never but once; and that was to my Cost too; I followed him too close,
And to say Truth, somewhat Uncivilly, upon a Rout;
But he turned upon me, as quick and as round, as a chaft'd Boar;
And gave me two Licks across the Face, to put me
In mind of my Christianity.

Con. I know him well; he is free and open Hearted.

Aur. His Countries Character: That Speaks a German.

Con. Revengeful, rugged, violently brave; and once relolv'd is never to be
moved.

Alb. Yes, he is a valiant Dog, Pox on him.

Con. This was the Character he then maintained,
Whon in my Court, he sought my Daughters Love:
My Fair, Blind, Emmeline.

Alb. I cannot blame him for Courting the Heiress of Cornwall:
All Heiresses are Beautiful; and as Blind as she is, he would have had
No Blind Bargain of her.

Aur. For that Defeat in Love, he raised this War.
For Royal Arthur Reigned within her Heart,
Ere Oswald moved his Suit.

Con. Ay, now Aurelius, you have Named a Man;
One, whom besides the Homage that I owe,
As Cornwall's Duke, to his Imperial Crown,
I would have chosen out, from all Mankind,
To be my Sovereign Lord.

Aur. His Worth divides him from the crowd of Kings;
So Born, without Desert to be so Born;
Men, set aloft, to be the Scourge of Heaven;
And with long Arms, to lash the Under-World.

Con. Arthur is all that is Excellent in Oswald;
And void of all his Faults: In Battle brave;
But still Serene in all the Stormy War,
Like Heaven above the Clouds; and after Fight,
As Merciful and Kind, to vanquished Foes,
As a Forgiving God; but see, he is here,
And Praise is Dumb before him.

Enter King Arthur, Reading a Letter, with Attendants. Arthur Reading. Go on,
Auspicious Prince, the Stars are kind:
Unfold thy Banners to the willing Wind;
While I, with Aerie Legions, help thy Arms;
Confronting Art with Art, and Charms with Charms.
So Merlin writes; nor can we doubt the event, To Con.
With Heaven and you to Friends; Oh Noble Conon,
You taught my tender Hands the Trade of War;
And now again you Helm your hoary Head,
And under double weight of Age and Arms,
Assert your Countries Freedom, and my Crown.

Con. No more, my Son.

Arth. Most happy in that Name!
Your Emmeline, to Oswald's Vows resus'd,
You made my plighted Bride:
Your Charming Daughter, who like Love, Born Blind,
Un-aiming hits, with surest Archery,
And Innocently kills.

Con. Remember, Son,
You are a General, other Wars require you.
For see the Saxon Gross begins to move.

Arth. Their Infantry Embattel'd, square and close,
March firmly on, to fill the middle space:
Covered by their advancing Cavalry.
By Heaven, it is Beauteous Horror:
The Noble Oswald has provoked my Envy.
Enter Emmeline, led by Matilda. Ha! Now my Beauteous Emmeline appears
Anew, but Oh, a softer Flame, inspires me:
Even Rage and Vengeance, slumber at her sight.

Con. Haste your Farewell; I Will cheer my Troops, and wait ye.

Exit Conon. Em. Oh Father, Father, I am sure you're here;
Because I see your Voice.

Arth. No, thou mistak'st thy hearing for thy sight;
He Is gone, my Emmeline;
And I but stay to gaze on those fair Eyes,
Which cannot view the Conquest they have made.
Oh Star-like Night, dark only to thy self,
But full of Glory, as those Lamps of Heaven
That see not, when they shine.

Em. What is this Heaven, and Stars, and Night, and Day,
To which you thus compare my Eyes and me?
I understand you, when you say you love:
For, when my Father clasps my Hand in his,
That Is cold, and I can feel it hard and wrinkl'd;
But when you grasp it, then I sigh and pant,
And something smarts, and tickles at my Heart.

Arth. Oh Artless Love! where the Soul moves the Tongue,
And only Nature speaks what Nature thinks!
Had she but Eyes!

Em. Just now you said I had:
I see 'em, I have two.

Arth. But neither see.

Em. I Am sure they hear you then:
What can your Eyes do more?

Arth. They view your Beauties.

Em. Do not I see? You have a Face, like mine,
Two Hands, and two round, pretty, rising Breasts,
That heave like mine.

Arth. But you describe a Woman.
Nor is it sight, but touching with your Hands.

Em. Then it is my Hand that sees, and that is all one:
For is not seeing, touching with your Eyes?

Arth. No, for I see at distance, where I touch not.

Em. If you can see so far, and yet not touch,
I fear you see my Naked Legs and Feet
Quite through my Clothes; pray do not see so well.

Arth. Fear not, sweet Innocence;
I view the lovely Features of your Face;
Your Lips Carnation, your dark shaded Eyebrows,
Black Eyes, And Snow white Forehead; all the Colors
That make your Beauty, and produce my Love.

Em. Nay, then, you do not love on equal terms:
I love you dearly, without all these helps:
I cannot see your Lips Carnation,
Your shaded Eyebrows, nor your Milk-white Eyes.

Arth. You still mistake.

Em. Indeed I thought you had a Nose and Eyes,
And such a Face as mine; have not Men Faces?

Arth. Oh, none like yours, so excellently fair.

Em. Then would I had no Face; for I would be Just such a one as you.

Arth. Alas, it is vain to instruct your Innocence,
You have (...) of Light or Colors.

Emm^l. Why, is not that a Trumpet? Trumpet sound within.

Arth. Yes.

Em. I knew it.
And I can tell you how the sound on it looks:
It looks as if it had an angry fighting Face.

Arth. It Is now indeed a sharp unpleasant sound,
Because it calls me hence, from her I love,
To meet Ten thousand Foes.

Em. How does so many Men ee'r come to meet?
This Devil Trumpet vexes 'em, and then
They feel about, for one another Faces;
And so they meet, and kill.

Arth. I Will tell ye all, when we have gained the Field;
One kiss of your fair Hand, the pledge of Conquest,
And so a short farewell.

Kisses her Hand, and Exit with Aurel. Alb. and Attendants. Em. My Heart, and
Vows, go with him to the Fight:
May every Foe, be that, which they call blind,
And none of all their Swords have Eyes to find him.
But lead me nearer to the Trumpet's Face;
For that brave Sound upholds my sainting Heart;
And while I hear, methinks I sight my part.

Exit, led by (...) Enter Oswald and Osmond. The Scene represents a place of
Heathen worship; The three Saxon Gods, Woden, Thor, and Freya placed on
Pedestals. An Altar. Osmo. It Is time to hasten our mysterious Rites;
Because your Army waits you.

Oswald making three Bows before the three Images. Oswa. Thor, Freya, Woden,
all ye Saxon Powers,
Hear and revenge my Father Hengist's death.

Osmo. Father of Gods and Men, great Woden, hear.
Mount thy hot Courfer, drive amidst thy Foes;
List high thy thundering Arm, let every blow
Dash out a mis-believing Briton's Brains.

Oswa. Father of Gods and Men, great Woden hear;
Give Conquest to thy Saxon Race, and me.

Osmo. Thor, Freya, Woden, hear, and spell your Saxons,
With Sacred Runick Rhimes, from Death in Battle.
Edge their bright Swords, and blunt the Britons Darts.
No more, Great Prince, for see my trusty Fiend,
Who all the Night has winged the dusky Air.
Grimbald, a fierce earthy Spirit arises.
What news, my Grimbald?

Grim. I have played my part;
For I have Steeled the Fools that are to dye;
Six Fools, so prodigal of Life and Soul,
That, for their Country, they devote their Lives
A Sacrifice to Mother Earth, and Woden.

Osmo. It Is well; But are we sure of Victory?

Grim. Why ask'st thou me?
Inspect their Intrails, draw from thence thy Guess:
Blood we must have, without it we are dumb.

Osmo. Say, Where Is thy fellow servants, Philidel?
Why comes not he?

Grim. For, he is a puleing Sprite.
Why did thou choose a tender airy Form,
Unequal to the mighty work of Mischief;
His Make is flitting, soft, and yielding Atoms:
He trembles at the yawning gulf of Hell,
(...) dares approach the Flame, lest he should singe
(...) ^audy silken Wings.
He sighs when he should plunge a Soul in Sulphur,
As with Compassion, touched of foolish man.

Osm. What a half Devil's he?
His Errand was, to draw the Low-land damps,
And Noisome vapors, from the soggy Fens:
Then, breath the baleful stench, with all his force,
Full on the faces of our Christened Foes.

Grim. Accordingly he drein'd those Marshy-grounds;
And bagg'd 'em in a blue pestiferous Cloud;
Which when he should have blown, the frighted Else.
Espied the Red Cross Banners of their Host;
And said he durst not add to his damnation.

Osm. I Will punish him at leisure;
Call in the Victims to propitiate Hell.

Grim. That Is my kind Master, I shall break fast on 'em.

Grimbald goes to the Door, and Reenters with 6 Saxons in White, with Swords
in their hands. They range themselves 3 and 3 in opposition to each other. The
rest of the Stage is filled with Priests and Singers. WOden, first to thee,
A Milk white Steed, in Battle won;
We have Sacrificed.
Chor. We have Sacrificed.
Verse. Let our next Oblation be,
To Thor, thy thundering Son,
Of such another.
Chor. We have Sacrificed.
Verse. A third; ( of Friezeland breed was he,)
To Woden 's Wife, and to Thor 's Mother:
And now we have atton'd all three
We have Sacrificed.
Chor. We have Sacrificed.
2 Voc. The White Horse Neigh'd aloud.
To VVoden thanks we render.
To VVoden, we have vowed.
Chor. To VVoden, our Defender.
The four last Lines in CHORUS. Verse. The Lot is Cast, and Tanfan pleased:
Chor. Of Mortal Cares you shall be eased,
Brave Souls to be renowned in Story.
Honor prizing,
Death despising,
Fame acquiring
By Expiring,
Dye, and reap the fruit of Glory.
Brave Souls to be renowned in Story.
Verse. 2. I call ye all,
To VVoden 's Hall;
Your Temples round
With Ivy bound,
In Goblets Crowned,
And plenteous Bowls of burnished Gold;
Where you shall Laugh,
And dance and quaff,
The Juice, that makes the Britons bold.
The six Saxons are led off by the Priests, in Order to be Sacrificed. Ows.
Ambitious Fools we are,
And yet Ambition is a Godlike Fault:
Or rather, it is no Fault in Souls Born great,
Who dare extend their Glory by their Deeds.
Now Britany prepare to change thy State,
And from this Day begin thy Saxon date.

A Battle supposed to be given behind the Scenes, with Drums, Trumpets, and
Military Shouts and Excursions: After which, the Britons, expressing their Joy
for the Victory, sing this Song of Triumph.

COme if you dare, our Trumpets sound;
Come if you dare, the Faes rebound:
We come, we come, we come, we come,
Says the double, double, double Beat of the Thundering Drum.
Now they charge on amain,
Now they rally again:
The Gods from above the Mad Labor behold,
And pity Mankind that will perish for Gold.
The Fainting Saxons quit their Ground,
Their Trumpets Languish in the Sound;
They fly, they fly, they fly, they fly;
Victoria, Victoria, the Bold Britons cry.
Now the Victory's won,
To the Plunder we run:
We return to our Lasses like Fortunate Traders,
Triumphant with Spoils of the Vanquished Invaders.
ACT II.
Enter Philidel. Phil. ALas, for pity, of this bloody Field!
Piteous it needs must be, when I, a Spirit,
Can have so soft a sense of Humane Woes!
Ah! for so many Souls, as but this Morn'
Were clothed with Flesh, and warmed with Vital Blood,
But naked now, or shirted but with Air.

Merlin, with Spirits, descends to Philidel, on a Chariot drawn by Dragons.
Mer. What art thou, Spirit, of what Name and Order?
(For I have viewed thee in my Magic Glass,)
Making thy moan, among the Midnight Wolves,
That Bay the silent Moon: Speak, I Conjure thee,
It Is Merlin bids thee, at whose awful Wand,
The pale Ghost quivers, and the grim Fiend gasps.

Phil. An Airy Shape, the tender'st of my kind,
The last seduced, and least deformed of Hell;
Half white, and shuffl'd in the Crowd, I fell;
Desirous to repent, and loath to sin,
Awkward in Mischief, piteous of Mankind,
My Name is Philidel, my Lot in Air,
Where next beneath the Moon, and nearest Heaven,
I soar; and have a Glimpse to be received,
For which the swarthy Demons envy me.

Mer. Thy Business here?

Phil. To shun the Saxon Wizards dire Commands,
Osmend, the awful'st Name next thine below,
'Cause I refused to hurl a Noysom Fog
On Christened Heads, the Hue and Cry of Hell
Is raised against me, for a Fugitive Spright.

Mer. Osmond shall know, a greater Power protects thee;
But follow thou the Whispers of thy Soul,
That draw thee nearer Heaven.
And, as thy place is nearest to the Sky,
The Rays will reach thee first, and bleach thy Soot.

Phil. In hope of that, I spread my Azure Wings,
And wishing still, for yet I dare not pray,
I bask in Daylight, and behold with Joy
My Scum work outward, and my Rust wear off.

Mer. Why, it is my hopeful Devil; now mark me, Philidel,
I will employ thee, for thy future Good:
Thou know, in spite of Valiant Oswald's Arms,
Or Osmond's Powerful Spells, the Field is ours. --

Phil. Oh Master! hasten
Thy Dread Commands; for Grimbald is at Hand;
Osmond's fierce Fiend, I snuff his Earthy Scent:
The Conquering Britons, he misleads to Rivers,
Or dreadful Downfalls of unheeded Rocks;
Where many fall, that never shall rise again.

Mer. Be that thy care, to stand by falls of Brooks,
And trembling Bogs, that bear a Green-Sword show.
Warn off the bold Pursuers from the Chase:
No more, they come, and we divide the Task.
But lest fierce Grimbala's ponderous Bulk oppress
Thy tender flitting Air, I Will leave my Band
Of Spirits with United Strength to Aid thee,
And Force with Force repel.

Exit Merlin on his Chariot. Merlin 's Spirits stay with Philidel. Enter
Grimbald in the Habit of a Shepherd, followed by King Arthur, Conon, Aurelius,
Albanact and Soldiers, who wander at a distance in the Scenes. Grim. Here, this
way, Britons, follow Oswald's flight;
This Evening as I whistl'd out my Dog,
To drive my straggling Flock, and pitched my Fold,
I saw him dropping Sweat, over labored, stiff,
Make faintly as he could, to yonder Dell.
Tread in my Steps; long Neighborhood by Day
Has made these Fields familiar in the Night.

Arth. I thank thee, Shepherd;
Expect Reward, lead on, we follow thee.
Phil. sings. Hither this way, this way bend,
Trust not that Malicious Fiend:
Those are false deluding Lights,
Wafted far and near by Sprights.
Trust 'em not, for they will deceive ye;
And in Bogs and Marshes leave ye.
Chor. of Phil. Spirits. Hither this way, this way bend.
Chor. of Grimb. Spirits. This way, this way bend.
Phil. sings. If you step, no Danger thinking,
Down you fall, a Furlong sinking:
It Is a Fiend who has annoyed ye;
Name but Heaven, and he will avoid ye.
Chor. of Phil. Spirits. Hither this way, this way bend.
Chor. of Grimb. Spirits. This way, this way bend.
Philidels Spirits. Trust not that Malicious Fiend.
Grimbalds Spirits. Trust me, I am no Malicious Fiend.
Philidels Spirits. Hither this way, etc.

Con. Some wicked Phantom, Foe to Human kind,
Misguides our Steps.

Alba. I Will follow him no farther.

Grimbald speaks. By Hell she sings 'em back, in my despite.
I had a Voice in Heaven, ere Sulfurous Steams.
Had damped it to a hoarseness; but I Will try.
He sings. Let not a Moon-born Elf mislead ye,
From your Prey, and from your Glory.
Too far, Alas, he has betrayed ye:
Follow the Flames, that wave before ye:
Sometimes sev'n, and sometimes one;
Hurry, hurry, hurry, hurry on.
2.
See, see, the Footsteps plain appearing,
That way Oswald chose for flying:
Firm is the Turff, and fit for bearing,
Where yonder Pearly Dews are lying.
Far he cannot hence be gone;
Hurry, hurry, hurry, hurry on.

Aur. It Is true, he says; the Footsteps yet are fresh
Upon the Sod, no falling Dew-Drops have
Disturbed the Print.

All are going to follow Grimbald. Philidel sings. Hither this way.
Chor. of Phil. Spirits. Hither this way, this way bend.
Chor. of Grimb. Spirits. This way, this way bend.
Philidels Spirits. Trust not that Malicious Fiend.
Grimb. Spirits. Trust me, I am no Malicious Fiend.
Philidels Spirits. Hither this way, etc.

They all incline to Philidel. Grim. speaks. Curse on her Voice, I must my Prey
forego;
Thou, Philidel, shall answer this, below.

Grimbald sinks with a Flash. Arth. At last the Cheat is plain;
The Cloven-footed Fiend is Vanished from us;
Good Angels be our Guides, and bring us back.
Phil. singing. Come follow, follow, follow me.
Chor. Come follow, etc.
And me. And me. And me. And me.
Verse. 2 Voc. And Green-Sword all your way shall be.
Chor. Come follow, etc.
Verse. No Goblin or Elf shall dare to offend ye.
Chor. No, no, no, etc.
No Goblin or Elf shall dare to offend ye.
Verse. 3 Voc. We Brethren of Air,
You Hero 's will bear,
To the Kind and the Fair that attend ye.
Chor. We Brethren, etc.

Philidel and the Spirits go off singing, with King Arthur and the rest in the
middle of them. Enter Emmeline led by Matilda. Pavilicn Scene. Em. No News of
my Dear Love, or of my Father?

Mat. None, Madam, since the gaining of the Battle;
Great Arthur is a Royal Conqueror now,
And well deserves your Love.

Em. But now I fear
He Will be too great, to love poor silly me.
If he be dead, or never come again,
I mean to die: But there is a greater doubt,
Since I never saw him here,
How shall I meet him in another World?

Mat. I have heard something, how two Bodies meet,
But how Souls join, I know not.

Em. I should find him,
For surely I have seen him in my Sleep,
And then, methought, he put his Mouth to mine,
And eat a thousand Kisses on my Lips;
Sure by his Kissing I could find him out
Among a thousand Angels in the Sky.

Mat. But what a kind of Man do you suppose him?

Em. He must be made of the most precious things:
And I believe his Mouth, and Eyes, and Cheeks,
And Nose, and all his Face, are made of Gold.

Mat. Heaven bless us, Madam, what a Face you make him.
If it be yellow, he must have the Jaundies,
And that is a bad Disease.

Em. Why then do Lovers give a thing so bad
As Gold, to Women, whom so well they love?

Mat. Because that bad thing, Gold, buys all good things.

Em. Yet I must know him better: Of all Colors,
Tell me which is the purest, and the softest.

Mat. They say it is Black.

Em. Why then, since Gold is hard, and yet is precious,
His Face must all be made of soft, black Gold.

Mat. But, Madam --

Em. No more; I have learned enough for once.

Mat. Here are a Crew of Kentish Lads and Lasses.
Would entertain ye, till your Lord's return,
With Songs and Dances, to divert your Cares.

Em. O bring 'em in,
For though I cannot see the Songs, I love 'em;
And Love, they tell me, is a Dance of Hearts.

Enter Shepherds and Shepherdesses. 1 Shepherd sings. How blessed are Shepherds,
how happy their Lasses,
1 Shepherd sings. While Drums and Trumpets are sounding Alarms!
1 Shepherd sings. Over our Lowly Sheds all the Storm passes;
And when we die, it is in each others Arms.
All the Day on our Herds, and Flocks employing;
All the Night on our Flutes, and in enjoying.
Chor. All the Day, etc.
2.
Bright Nymphs of Britain, with Graces attended,
Let not your Days without Pleasure expire,
Honor's but empty, and when Youth is ended,
All Men will praise you, but none will desire.
Let not Youth fly away without Contenting;
Age will come time enough, for your Repenting.
Chor. Let not Youth, etc.

Here the Men offer their Flutes to the Women, which they refuse. 2
Shepherdess. Shepherd, Shepherd, leave Decoying,
2 Shepherdess. Pipes are sweet, a Summers Day;
But a little after Toying,
Women have the Shot to Pay.
2.
Here are Marriage-Vows for signing,
Set their Marks that cannot write:
After that, witghout Repining,
Play and Welcome, Day and Night.
Here the Women give the Men Contracts, which they accept. Chor. of all. Come,
Shepherds, lead up, a lively Measure;
Chor. of all. The Cares of Wedlock, are Cares of Pleasure:
But whether Marriage bring Joy, or Sorrow,
Make sure of this Day, and hang to Morrow.
The Dance after the Song, and Exeunt Shepherds and Shepherdesses. Enter on the
other side of the Stage, Oswald and Guillamar. Osw. The Night has wilder'd us;
and we are fallen
Among their foremost Tents.

Guill. Ha! What are these!
They seem of more than Vulgar Quality.

Em. What Sounds are those? They cannot far be distant:
Where are we now, Matilda?

Mat. Just before your Tent:
Fear not, they must be Friends, and they approach.

Em. My Arthur, speak, my Love; Are you returned
To bless your Emmeline?

Oswa. to Guilla. I know that Face:
It Is my Ungrateful Fair, who, scorning mine,
Accepts my Rivals Love: Heaven, you are bounteous,
Thou ow'st me nothing now.

Mat. Fear grows upon me:
Speak what you are; speak, or I call for help.

Oswa. We are your Guards.

Mat. Ah me! We are betrayed; it is Oswala's Voice.

Em. Let 'em not see our Voices, and then they cannot find us.

Osw. Passions in Men Oppressed, are doubly strong.
I take her from King Arthur; there is Revenge:
If she can love, she buoys my sinking Portunes:
Good Reasons both: I Will on. -- Fear nothing, Ladies,
You shall be safe.

Oswald and Guillamar serve Emmeline and Matilda. Em. and Matil. Help, help; a
Rape, a Rape!

Oswa. By Heaven ye injure me, tho Perce is used,
Your Honor shall be sacred.

Em. Help, help, Oh Britons. help!

Oswa. Your Britons cannot help you:
This Arm, through all their Troops, shall force my way;
Yet neither quit my Honor, nor my Prey.

Exeunt, the Women still crying. An Alarm within: Some Soldiers running over
the Stage: Follow, follow, follow. Enter Albanact Captain of the Guurds, with
Soldiers. Alb. Which way went the Alarm?

1 Sol. Here, toward the Castle.

Alb. Pox of this Victory; the whole Camp's debauched:
All Drunk or Whoring: This way, follow, follow.

Exeunt. The Alarm renews: Clashing of Swords within for a while. Re-enter
Albanact, Officer and Soldiers. Officer. How sits the Conquest on great
Arthur's Brow?

Alba. As when the Lover, with the King is mixed,
He puts the gain of Britain in a Scale,
Which weighing with the loss of Emmeline,
He thinks he is scarce a Saver.

Strumpet within. Officer. Hark! a Trumpet!
It sounds a Parley.

Alba. It Is from Oswald then,
An Echo to King Arthur's Friendly Summons,
Sent since he heard the Rape of Emmeline,
To ask an Interview.

Trumpet answering on the other side. Officer. But hark! already
Our Trumpet makes reply; and see both present.

Enter Arthur on one side attended, Oswald on the other with Attendants, and
Guillamar. They meet and salute. Arthur. Brave Oswald! We have met on
Friendlier Terms,
Companions of a War, with Common Interest
Against the Bordering Picts: But Times are changed.

Oswa. And (...)
(...)

Arth. If so we meet not now, the fault's your own;
For you have wronged me much.

Oswa. Oh you would tell me,
I called more Saxons in, to enlarge my Bounds:
If those be Wrongs, the War has well redressed ye.

Arth. Mistake me not, I count not War a Wrong:
War is the Trade of Kings, that fight for Empire;
And better be a Lion, than a Sheep.

Oswa. In what, then, have I wronged ye?

Arth. In my Love.

Oswa. Even Love's an Empire too; The Noble Soul,
Like Kings, is Covetous of single Sway.

Arth. I blame ye not, for loving Emmeline:
But since the Soul is free, and Love is choice,
You should have made a Conquest of her Mind,
And not have forced her Person by a Rape.

Oswa. Whether by Force, or Stratagem, we gain;
Still Gaining is our End, in War or Love.
Her Mind's the Jewel, in her Body locked;
If I would gain the Gem, and want the Key,
It follows I must seize the Cabinet:
But to secure your fear, her Honor is untouched.

Arth. Was Honor ever safe in Brutal Hands?
So safe are Lambs within the Lions Paw;
Ungrip'd and played with, till fierce Hunger calls,
Then Nature shows it self; the close-hid Nails
Are stretched, and opened, to the panting Prey.
But if indeed, you are so Cold a Lover --

Oswa. Not Cold, but Honorable.

Arth. Then Restore her.
That done, I shall believe you Honorable.

Oswa. Think thou I will forego a Victor's Right?

Arth. Say rather, of an Impious Ravisher.
That Castle, were it walled with Adamant,
Can hide thy Head, but till to Morrow's Dawn.

Oswa. And ere to Morrow, I may be a God,
If Emmeline be kind: But kind or cruel,
I tell thee, Arthur, but to see this Day,
That Heavenly Face, though not to have her mine,
I would give up a hundred Years of Life,
And bid Fate cut to Morrow.

Arth. It soon will come, and thou repent too late;
Which to prevent, I Will bribe thee to be honest.
Thy Noble Head, accustomed to a Crown,
Shall wear it still: Nor shall thy Hand forget
The Sceptre's use: From Medway's pleasing Stream,
To Severn's Roar, be thine.
In short, Restore my Love, and share my Kingdom.

Oswa. Not, though you spread my Sway from Thames to Tyber;
Such Gifts might bribe a King, but not a Lover.

Arth. Then prithee give me back my Kingly Word,
Passed for thy safe return; and let this Hour,
In single Combat, Hand to Hand, decide
The Fate of Empire, and of Emmeline.

Oswa. Not, that I fear, do I decline this Combat;
And not decline it neither, but defer:
When Emmeline has been my Prize as long
As she was thine, I dare thee to the Duel.

Arth. I named your utmost Term of Life; To Morrow.

Oswa. You are not Fate.

Arth. But Fate is in this Arm.
You might have made a Merit of your Theft.

Oswa. Ha! Theft! Your Guards can tell, I stole her not.

Arth. Had I been present --

Oswa. Had you been present, she had been mine more Nobly.

Arth. There lies your way.

Oswa. My way lies where I please.
Expect (for Oswald's Magic cannot fail)
A long To Morrow, ere your Arms prevail:
Or if I fall, make Room ye blessed above,
For one who was undone, and died for Love.

Exit Oswald and his Party. Arth. There may be one black Minute ere To Morrow:
For who can tell, what Power, and Lust, and Charms,
May do this Night? To Arms, with speed, to Arms.

Exit. ACT III.
Enter Arthur, Conon and Aurelius. Con. FUrle up our Colors, and Unbrace our
Drums;
Dislodge betimes; and quit this fatal Coast.

Arth. Have we forgot to Conquer?

Aurel. Cast off Hope:
The Imbattl'd Legions of Fire, Air, and Earth,
Are banded for our Foes.
For going to discover, with the Dawn,
You Southern Hill, which promised to the Sight
A Rise more easy to attack the Fort,
Scarce had we stepped on the Forbidden Ground,
When the Woods shook, the Trees stood bristling up;
A Living Trembling Nodded through the Leaves.

Arth. Poplars, and Aspen-Boughs, a Pannick Fright.

Arth. Poplars, and Aspen-Boughs, a Pannick Fright.

Conon. We thought so too, and doubled still our pace.
But strait a rumbling Sound, like bellowing Winds,
Rose and grew loud; Confused with Howls of Wolves,
And Grunts of Bears; and dreadful Hiss of Snakes;
Shreiks more than Humane; Globes of Hail poured down
An Armed Winter, and Inverted Day.

Arth. Dreadful indeed!

Aur. Count then our Labor's lost:
For otherway lies none, to mount the Cliff,
Unless we borrow Wings, and sail through Air.

Arth. Now Uperceive a Danger worthy me.
It Is Osmond's Work, a Band of Hell-hir'd Slaves;
Be mine the Hazard, mine shall be the Fame.

Arthur is going out, but is met by Merlin, Who takes him by the Hand, and
brings him back. Enter Merlin. Merl. Hold, Sir, and wait Heavens time; the
Attempts too dangerous:
There Is not a Tree in that Enchanted Grove,
But numbered out, and given by tale to Fiends;
And under every Leaf a Spirit couched.
But by what Method to dissolve these Charms,
Is yet unknown to me.

Arth. Had thou been here, (for what can what thy Skill?)
Nor Emmeline had been the boast of Oswald;
Nor I fore-warned, been wanting to her Guard.

Con. Her darkn'd Eyes had seen the Light of Heaven;
That was thy promise too, and this the time.

Mer. Nor has my Aid been absent, though unseen,
With Friendly Guides in your benighted Maze.
Nor Emmeline shall longer want the Sun.

Arth. Is there an end of Woes?

Merl. There is, and sudden.
I have employed a subtle Airy Spright
TO explore the passage, and prepare my way.
My self, mean time, will view the Magic Wood,
To learn whereon depends its Force.

Con. But Emmeline --

Mer. Fear not: This Vial shall restore her sight.

Arth. Oh might I hope (and what is impossible
To Merlin's Art) to be my self the Bearer,
That with the Light of Heaven she may discern
Her Lover first.

Mer. It Is wondrous hazardous;
Yet I foresee the Event, it is fortunate.
I Will bear ye safe, and bring ye back unharm'd:
Then lose not precious Time, but follow me.

Exeunt Omnes, Merlin leading Arthur. Enter Philidel. Scene, a Deep Wood. Phil.
I left all safe behind;
For in the hindmost quarter of the Wood,
My former Lord, Grim Osmond, walks the Round:
Calls over the Names, and Schools the tardy Sprights.
His Absence gives me more security.
At every Walk I passed, I drew a Spell,
So that if any Fiend, abhorring Heaven,
There sets his Foot, it roots him to the Ground.
Now could I but discover Emmel ne,
My Task were fairly done.

[Walking about, and Prying betwixt the Trees.] Enter Grimbald rushing out: He
seizes Philidel, and binds him in a Chain. Grimb. O Rebel, have I caught thee!

Phil. Ah me! What hard mishap!

Grimb. What just Revenge!
Thou miscreant Elf, thou Renegado Scout,
So clean, so furbish'd, so renewed in White,
The Livery of our Foes; I see thee through:
What make thou here? Thou trim Apostate, speak.
Thou shak'st for Fear, I feel thy false Heart Pant.

Phil. All mighty Grimbald,
Who would not Fear, when seized in thy strong Gripe;
But here me, Oh Renowned, Oh worthy Fiend,
The Favorite of our Chief.

Grimb. Away with fullsome Flattery,
The Food of Fools; thou know where last we met,
When but for thee, the Christians had been swallowed
In quaking Bogs, and Living sent to Hell.

Phil. Aye, then I was seduced by Merlin's Art,
And half persuaded by his soothing Tales,
To hope for Heaven; as if Eternal Doom
Could be Reversed, and undecreed for me:
But I am now set Right.

Grimb. Oh still thou think to fly a Fool to Mark.

Phil. I fled from Merlin, free as Air that bore me,
T'unfold to Osmond all his deep Designs.

Grimb. I believe nothing, Oh thou fond Impostor,
When were thou last in Hell? Is not thy Name
(...)
(...)
To Osmond sha'lt thou go; March, know thy Driver.

Phil. Kneeling. Oh spare me Grimbald, and I Will be thy Slave:
Tempt Hermits for thee, in their Holy Cells,
And Virgins in their Dreams.

Grimb. Can thou, a Devil, hope to cheat a Devil?
A Spy; why that is a Name abhorred in Hell;
Haste forward, forward, or I Will Goad thee on,
With Iron Spurrs.

Phil. But use me kindly then:
Pull not so hard, to hurt my Airy Limbs;
I Will follow thee unforced; look, there is thy way.

Grimb. Ay, there is the way indeed; but for more surety
I Will keep an Eye behind: Not one Word more,
But follow decently. Grimbald goes out, dragging Philidel.

Phil. aside. So, catch him Spell.

Grimb. within. Oh help me, help me, Philidel.

Phil. Why, What Is the matter?

Grimb. Oh, I am ensnared;
Heavens Birdlime wraps me round, and glues my Wings.
Lose me, and I will free thee;
Do, and I Will be thy Slave.

Phil. What, to a Spy, a Name abhorred in Hell?

Grimb. Do not insult, Oh, Oh, I grow to Ground;
The Fiery Net draws closer on my Limbs.

Phil. Thou shall not have the Ease to Curse in Torments:
Be Dumb for one half Hour; so long my Charm
Can keep thee Silent, and there lie
Till Osmond breaks thy Chain.

Philidel unbinds his own Fetters. Enter to him Merlin, with a Vial in his
Hand; and Arthur. Mer. Well have thou wrought thy Safety with thy Wit,
My Philidel; go Meritorious on.
Me, other Work requires, to view the Wood,
And learn to make the dire Enchantments void.
Mean time attend King Arthur in my Room;
Show him his Love, and with these Sovereign Drops,
Restore her Sight.
Exit Merlin giving a Viol to Philidel.
Phil. We must work, we must haste;
Noon-Tyde Hour, is almost past:
Sprights, that glimmer in the Sun,
Into Shades already run.
Osmond will be here, anon.

Enter Emmeline and Matilda, at the far end of the Wood. Arth. O yonder, yonder
she is already found:
My Soul directs my sight, and flies before it.
Now, Gentle Spirit, use thy utmost Art;
Unseal her Eyes; and this way lead her Steps.
Arthur withdraws behind the Scene. Emmeline and Matilda come forward to the
Front.
Philidel approaches Emmeline, sprinkling some of the Water over her Eyes, out
of the Vial. Phil. Thus, thus I infuse
These Sovereign Dews.
Fly back, ye Films, that Cloud her sight,
And you, ye Crystal Humors bright,
Your Noxious Vapors purged away,
Recover, and admit the Day.
Now cast your Eyes abroad, and see
All but me.

Em. Ha! What was that? Who spoke?

Mat. I heard the Voice; it is one of Osmond's Fiends.

Em. Some blessed Angel sure; I feel my Eyes
Unsealed, they walk abroad, and a new World
Comes rushing on, and stands all gay before me.

Mat. Oh Heavens! Oh Joy of Joys! she has her sight!

Em. I am newborn; I shall run mad for Pleasure. Staring on Mat.
Are Women such as thou? Such Glorious Creatures?

Arth. aside. Oh how I envy her, to be first seen!

Em. Stand farther; let me take my fill of sight. Looking up.
What Is that above, that weakens my new Eyes,
Makes me not see, by seeing?

Mat. It Is the Sun.

Em. The Sun, it is sure a God, if that be Heaven:
Oh, if thou art a Creature, best and fairest,
How well art thou, from Mortals so remote,
To shine, and not to burn, by near approach!
How have thou light'ned even my very Soul,
And let in Knowledge by another sense!
I gaze about, newborn, to Day and thee;
A Stranger yet, an Infant of the World!
Art thou not pleased, Matilda? Why, like me,
Do thou not look and wonder?

Mat. For these Sights
Are to my Eyes familiar.

Em. That Is my Joy,
Not to have seen before: For Nature now,
Comes all at once, confounding my Delight.
But ah! what Thing am I? Fain would I know;
Or am I blind, or do I see but half?
With all my Care, and looking round about,
I cannot view my Face.

Mat. None see themselves
But by Reslection; in this Glass you may. Gives her a Glass.

Emm. taking the Glass, and looking. What Is this?
It holds a Face within it: Oh sweet Face;
It draws the Mouth, and Smiles, and looksupon me;
And talks; but yet I cannot hear it Speak:
The pretty thing is Dumb.

Mat. The pretty thing
You see within the Glass, is you.

Emm. What, Am I two? Is this another me?
Indeed it wears my Clothes, has Hands like mine;
And Mocks what ever I do; but that I Am sure
I am a Maid, I Would swear it were my Child. Matilda looks.
Look my Matilda; We both are in the Glass,
Oh, now I know it plain; they are our Names
That peep upon us there.

Mat. Our Shadows, Madam.

Emm. Mine is a prettier Shadow far, then thine.
I Love it; let me Kiss my to'ther Self. Kissing the Glass, and hugging it.
Alas, I Have kissed it Dead; the fine Thing's gone;
Indeed it Kissed so Cold, as if 'twere Dying.
Arthur comes forward softly; showing himself behind her. It Is here again.
Oh no, this Face is neither mine nor thine;
I think the Glass has Born another Child. She turns and sees Arthur.
Ha! What art thou with a new kind of Face,
And other Clothes, a Noble Creature too;
But taller, bigger, fiercer in thy Look;
Of a Comptrolling Eye, Maiestick make?

Mat. Do you not know him, Madam?

Emm. Is It a Man?

Arth. Yes, And the most unhappy of my kind,
If you have changed your Love.

Emm. My dearest Lord!
Was my Soul Blind; and could not that look out,
To know you, e're you Spoke? Oh Counterpart
Of our soft Sex; Well are ye made our Lords,
So bold, so great, so God-like are ye formed.
How can ye Love such silly Things as Women?

Arth. Beauty like yours Commands; and Man was made
But a more boisterous; and a stronger Slave,
To you, the best Delights of human Kind.

Emm. But are ye mine? Is there an end of War
Are all those Trumpets Dead themselves, at last,
That used to kill Men with their Thundering Sounds?

Arth The Sum of War is undecided yet;
And maay a breathing Body must be Cold,
Ere you are free.

Emm. How came ye hither then?

Arth. By Merlin's Art, to snatch a short lived Bliss;
To feed my famished Love upon your Eyes,
One Moment, and depart.

Emm. O Moment, worth --
Whole Ages past, and all that are to come!
Let Lovesick Oswald, now, unpitied mourn;
Let Osmond mutter Charms to Sprights in vain,
To make me love him; all shall not change my Soul.

Arth. Ha! Does the Inchanter practice Hell upon you?
Is he my Rival too?

Emm. Yes, but I hate him;
For when he spoke, through my shut Eyes I saw him;
His Voice looked ugly, and breathed Brimstone on me:
And then I first was glad that I was Blind,
Not to behold Damnation.

Phil. This time is left me to Congratulate
Your newborn Eyes; and tell you what you gain
By sight restored, and viewing him you love.
Appear, you Airy Forms.

Airy Spirits appear in the Shapes of Men and Women. Man sings. Oh Sight, the
Mother of Desires,
What Charming Objects do thou yield!
It Is sweet, when tedious Night expires,
To see the Rosy Morning guild
The Mountain-Tops, and paint the Field!
But, when Clorinda comes in sight,
She makes the Summers Day more bright;
And when she goes away, it is Night.

Chor. When Fair Clorinda comes in sight, etc.

Wom. sings. It Is sweet the Blushing Morn to view;
And Plains adorned with Pearly Dew:
But such cheap Delights to see,
Heaven and Nature,
Give each Creature;
They have Eyes, as well as we.
This is the Joy, all Joys above,
To see, to see,
That only she,
That only she we love!

Chor. This is the Joy, all Joys above, etc.

Man sings. And, if we may discover,
What Charms both Nymph and Lover,
It Is, when the Fair at Mercy lies,
With Kind and Amorous Anguish,
To Sigh, to Look, to Languish,
On each others Eyes!

Chor. of all Men and Wom. And if we may discover, etc.

Phil. Break off your Music; for our Foes are near.

Spirits vanish. Enter Merlin. Merl. My Sovereign, we have hazarded too far;
But Love excuses you, and prescience me.
Make haste; for Osmond is even now alarmed,
And greedy of Revenge, is hasting home.

Arth. Oh take my Love with us, or leave me here.

Merl. I cannot, for she is held by Charms too strong:
Which, with the Enchanted Grove must be destroyed;
Till when, my Art is vain: But fear not, Emmeline;
The Enchanter has no Power on Innocence.

Em. to Arth. Farewell, Since we must part: When you are gone,
I Will look into my Glass, just where you looked;
To find your Face again;
If it is not there, I Will think on you so long,
My Heart shall make your Picture for my Eyes.

Arth. Wherever I go, my Soul shall stay with thee:
It Is but my Shadow that I take away;
True Love is never happy but by halves;
An April Sunshine, that by fits appears,
It smiles by Moments, but it mourns by Years.

Exeunt Arthur and Merlin at one Door. Enter Osmond at the other Door, who
gazes on Emmeline, and she on him. Emm. Matilda save me, from this ugly Thing,
This Foe to sight, Speak, do thou know him:

Matil. Too well; it is Oswala's Friend, the great Magician.

Emm. It cannot be a Man, he is so unlike the Man I Love.

Osm. aside. Death to my Eyes, she sees!

Emm. I wish I could not; but I Will close my Sight,
And shut out all I can -- It wo'not be;
Winking, I see thee still, thy odious Image
Stares full into my Soul; and there infects the Room
My Arthur should possess.

Osm. aside. I find too late,
That Merlin and her Lover have been here.
If I was sir'd before, when she was Blind,
Her Eyes dart Lightning now, she must be mine.

Emm. I prithee Dreadful Thing, tell me thy Business here;
And if thou can, Reform that odious Face;
Look not so Grim upon me.

Osm. My Name is Osmond, and my Business Love.

Emm. Thou have a griezly look; forbidding what thou asked,
If I durst tell thee so.

Osm. My Pent-House Eyebrows, and my Shaggy Beard
Offend your Sight, but these are Manly Signs;
Faint White and Red, abuse your Expectations;
Be Woman; know your Sex, and Love full Pleasures.

Emm. Love from a Monster, Fiend!

Osm. Come you must Love, or you must suffer Love;
No Coiness, None, for I am Master here.

Emm. And when did Oswald give away his Power,
That thou presum'st to Rule? Be sure I Will tell him:
For as I am his Prisoner, he is mine.

Osm. Why then thou art a Captive to a Captive.
Over labored with the Fight, oppressed with Thirst;
That Oswald whom you mentioned called for Drink:
I mixed a Sleepy Potion in his Bowl;
Which he and his Fool Friend, quaff'd greedily,
The happy Dose wrought the desired effect;
Then to a Dungeons depth, I sent both Bound:
Where stowed with Snakes and Adders now they lodge,
Two Planks their Beds; Slippery with Oose and Slime:
The Ratts brush over their Faces with their Tails;
And croaking Paddocks crawl upon their Limbs.
Since when the Garrison depen is on me;
Now know you are my Slave.

Matil. He strikes a Horror through my Blood.

Emm. I Freeze, as if his impious Art had six'd
My Feet to Earth.

Osm. But Love shall thaw ye.
I Will show his force in Countries cak'd with Ice,
Where the pale Pole Star in the North of Heaven
Sits high, and on the frory Winter broods;
Yet there Love Reigns: For proof, this Magic Wand.
Shall change the Mildness of sweet Britains Clime
To Yzeland, and the farthest Thule's Frost;
Where the proud God, disdaining Winters Bounds,
Over leaps the Fences of Eternal Snow,
And with his Warmth, supplies the distant Sun.

Osmond strikes the Ground with his Wand: The Scene changes to a Prospect of
Winter in Frozen Countries. Cupid Descends. Cup. sings. What ho, thou Genius of
the Clime, what how
Lie thou asleep beneath those Hills of Snow?
Stretch out thy Lazy Limbs; Awake, awake,
And Winter from thy Furry Mantle shake.

Genius Arises. Genius. What Power art thou, who from below,
Have made me Rise, unwillingly, and slow,
From Beds of Everlasting Snow!
See thou not how stiff, and wondrous old,
Far unfit to bear the bitter Cold,
I can scarcely move, or draw my Breath;
Let me, let me, Freeze again to Death.

Cupid. Thou Doting Fool, forbear, forbear;
What, Do thou Dream of Freezing here?
At Loves appearing, all the Sky clearing,
The Stormy Winds their Fury spare:
VVinter subduing, and Spring renewing,
My Beams create a more Glorious Year.
Thou Doting Fool, forbear, forbear;
What, Do thou Dream of Freezing here?

Genius. Great Love, I know thee now;
Eldest of the Gods art Thou:
Heaven and Earth, by Thee were made.
Humane Nature,
Is Thy Creature,
Every where Thou art obeyed.

Cupid. No part of my Dominion shall be waste,
To spread my Sway, and sing my Praise,
Even here I will a People raise,
Of kind embracing Lovers, and embraced.

Cupid waves his Wand, upon which the Scene opens, and discovers a Prospect of
Ice and Snow to the end of the Stage. Singers and Dancers, Men and Women,
appears. Man. See, see, we assemble,
Thy Revels to hold:
Though quivering with Cold,
We Chatter and Tremble.

Cupid. It Is I, it is I, it is I, that have warmed ye;
In spite of Cold Weather,
I Have brought ye together:
It Is I, it is I, it is I, that have armed ye.

Chor. It Is Love, it is Love, it is Love that has warmed us;
In spite of Cold Weather,
He brought us together:
It Is Love, it is Love, it is Love that has armed us.

Cupid. Sound a Parley, ye Fair, and surrender;
Set your selves, and your Lovers at ease;
He Is a Grateful Offender
Who Pleasure dare seize:
But the Whining Pretender
Is sure to displease.
2.
Since the Fruit of Desire is possessing,
It Is Unmanly to Sigh and Complain;
When we Kneel for Redressing,
We move your Disdain:
Love was made for a Blessing,
And not for a Pain.

A Dance; after which the Singers and Dancers depart. Emm. I could be pleased
with any one but thee,
Who entertained my sight with such Gay Shows,
As Men and Women moving here and there;
That Coursing one another in their Steps,
Have made their Feet a Tune.

Osmo. What, Coying it again!
No more; but make me happy to my Gust,
That is, without your struggling.

Emm. From my sight,
Thou all thy Devils in one, thou dare not force me.

Osmo. You teach me well, I find you would be Ravished;
I Will give you that excuse your Sex desires.

He begins to lay hold on her, and they struggle. Grimb. within. O help me,
Master, help me!

Osmo. Who Is that, my Grimbald! Come and help thou me:
For it is thy Work t'assist a Ravisher.

Grimb. within. I cannot stir; I am Spell-caught by Philidel,
And purs'd within a Net. With a huge heavy weight of Holy Words,
Laid on my Head; that keeps me down from rising

Osmo. I Will read 'em backwards, and release thy Bonds:
Mean time go in: -- To Emmeline.
Prepare your self, and ease my Drudgery:
But if you will not fairly be enjoyed,
A little honest Force, is well employed. Exit Osmond.

Emm. Heaven be my Guard, I have no other Friend!
Heaven ever present to thy Suppliants Aid,
Protect and pity Innocence betrayed.

Exeunt Emmeline and Matilda. ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Osmond Solus. NOw I am settled in my Force-full Sway;
Why then, I Will be Luxurious in my Love;
Take my full Gust, and setting Forms aside,
I Will bid the Slave, that fires my Blood, lie down.
Seems to be going off. Enter Grimbald, who meets him. Grim. Not so fast,
Master, Danger threatens thee:
There Is a black Cloud, descending from above,
Full of Heavens Venom, bursting over thy Head.

Osmo. Malicious Fiend, thou lie: For I am fenced
By Millions of thy Fellows, in my Grove:
I bad thee, when I freed thee from the Charm,
Run scouting through the Wood, from Tree to Tree,
And look if all my Devils were on Duty:
Had thou performed thy Charge, thou tardy Spright,
Thou would have known no Danger threatened me.

Grim. When did a Devil fail in Diligence?
Poor Mortal, thou thy self art overseen;
I have been there, and thence I bring this News.
Thy Fatal Foe, great Arthur, is at hand;
Merlin has taken his time while thou were absent,
TO observe thy Characters, their Force, and Nature,
And Counterwork thy Spells.

Osmo. The Devil take Merlin;
I Will cast 'em all anew, and instantly,
All of another Mould; be thou at hand.
Their Composition was, before, of Horror;
Now they shall be of Blandishment, and Love;
Seducing Hopes, soft Pity, tender Moans:
Art shall meet Art; and, when they think to win,
The Fools shall find their Labor to begin.

Exeunt Osm. and Grimb. Enter Arthur, and Merlin at another Door. Scene of the
Wood continues. Merl. Thus far it is permitted me to go;
But all beyond this Spot, is fenced with Charms;
I may no more; but only with advice.

Arth. My Sword shall do the rest.

Merl. Remember well, that all is but Illusion;
Go on; good Stars attend thee.

Arth. Doubt me not.

Merl. Yet in prevention
Of what may come, I Will leave my Philidel
To watch thy Steps, and with him leave my Wand;
The touch of which, no Earthy Fiend can bear,
In whatever Shape transformed, but must lay down
His borrowed Figure, and confess the Devil.
Once more Farewell, and prosper. Exit Merlin.

Arth. walking. No Danger yet, I see no Walls of Fire,
No City of the Fiends, with Forms obscene,
To grin from far, on Flaming Battlements.
This is indeed the Grove I should destroy;
But where is the Horror? Sure the Prophet erred.
Hark! Music, and the warbling Notes of Birds; Soft Music.
Hell entertains me, like some welcome Guest.
More Wonders yet; yet all delightful too,
A Silver Current to forbid my passage,
And yet to invite me, stands a Golden Bridge:
Perhaps a Trap, for my Unwary Feet
To sink, and whelm me underneath the Waves;
With Fire or Water, let him wage his War,
Or all the Elements at once; I Will on.

As he is going to the Bridge, two (...) Water; They show themselves (...) 1
Siren. O pass not on, but stay,
And waste the Joyous Day
With us in gentle Play:
Unbend to Love, unbend thee:
O lay thy Sword aside,
And other Arms provide;
For other Wars attend thee,
And sweeter to be tried.
Chor. For other Wars, etc.
Both sing. Two Daughters of this Aged Stream are we;
And both our Seagreen Locks have combed for thee,
Come Bathe with us an Hour or two,
Come Naked in, for we are so;
What Danger from a Naked Foe?
Come Bathe with us, come Bathe, and share,
What Pleasures in the Floods appear;
We'll beat the Waters till they bound,
And Circle, round, around, around,
And Circle round, around.

Arth. A Lazy Pleasure trickles through my Veins;
Here could I stay, and well be Cozened here.
But Honor calls; Is Honor in such haste?
Can he not Bait at such a pleasing Inn?
No; for the more I look, the more I long;
Farewell, ye Fair Illusions, I must leave ye,
While I have Power to say, that I must leave ye.
Farewell, with half my Soul I stagger off;
How dear this slying Victory has cost,
When, if I stay to struggle, I am lost.

As he is going forward, Nymphs and Sylvans come cut from behind the Trees.
Base and two Trebles sing the following Song to a Minuet. Dance with the Song,
all with Branches in their Hands. Song. How happy the Lover,
How easy his Chain,
How pleasing his Pain?
How sweet to discover!
He sighs not in vain.
For Love every Creature
Is formed by his Nature;
No Joys are above
The Pleasures of Love.

The Dance continues with the same Measure played alone. 2.
In vain are our Graces,
In vain are your Eyes,
If Love you despise;
When Age furrows Faces,
It Is time to be wise.
Then use the short Blessing,
That Flies in Possessing:
No Joys are above
The Pleasures of Love.
Arth. And what are these Fantastic Fairy Joys,
To Love like mine? False Joys, false Welcomes all.
Begone, ye Sylvan Trippers of the Green;
Fly after Night, and overtake the Moon. Here the Dancers, Singers and Sirens
vanish.
This goodly Tree seems Queen of all the Grove.
The Ringlets round her Trunk declare her guilty
Of many Midnight-Sabbaths Revell'd here.
Her will I first attempt. Arthur strikes at the Tree, and cuts it; Blood
spouts out of it, a Groan follows, then a Shreik.
Good Heavens, what Monstrous Prodigies are these!
Blood follows from my blow; the wounded Rind
Spouts on my Sword, and Sanguine dies the Plain.

He strtkes again: A Voice of Emmeline from behind. Em. from behind. Forbear,
if thou have Pity, ah, forbear!
These Groans proceed not from a Senceless Plant,
No Spouts of Blood run welling from a Tree.

Arth. Speak what thou art; I charge thee speak thy Being;
Thou that have made my curdl'd Blood run back,
My Heart heave up; my Hair to rise in Bristles,
And scarcely left a Voice to ask thy Name.

Emmeline breaks out of the Tree showing her Arm Bloody. Emm. Whom thou have
hurt, Unkind and Cruel see;
Look on this Blood, it is fatal, still, to me
To bear thy Wounds, my Heart has felt 'em first.

Arth. It Is she; Amazement roots me to the Ground!

Emm. By cruel Charms, dragged from my peaceful Bower,
Fierce Osmond closs'd me in this bleeding Bark;
And bid me stand exposed to the bleak Winds,
And Winter Storms; and Heavens Inclemency,
Bound to the Fate of this Hell-haunted Grove;
So that whatever Sword, or sounding Axe,
Shall violate this Plant, must pierce my Flesh,
And when that falls. I dye. --

Arth. If this be true,
O never, never, to be ended Charm,
At least by me; yet all my be Illusion.
Break up, ye thickning Foggs, and filmy Mists,
All that be-lye my Sight, and cheat my Serse.
For Reason still pronounces, it is not she,
And thus resolved -- Lifts up his Sword, is going to strike.

Emm. Do, strike Barbarian, strike;
And strew my mangled Limbs, with every stroke
Wound me, and double kill me, with Unkindness,
That by thy Hand I sell.

Arth. What shall I do, ye Powers?

Emm. Lay down thy Vengeful Sword; it is fatal here:
What need of Arms, where no Defense is made?
A Lovesick Virgin, panting with Desire
No Conscious Eye t'intrude on our Delights:
For this thou have the Syren's Songs despised;
For this, thy Faithful Passion I Reward;
Haste then, to take me longing to thy Arms.

Arth. O Love! O Merlin! Whom should I believe?

Emm. Believe thy Self, thy Youth, thy Love, and me;
They only, they, who please themselves are Wise:
Disarm thy Hand, that mine may meet it bare.

Arth. By thy leave, Reason, here I throw thee off,
Thou load of Life: If thou were made for Souls,
Then Souls should have been made without their Bodies.
If, falling for the first Created Fair,
Was Adam's Fault, great Grandsire I forgive thee,
Eden was lost, as all thy Sons would loose it.

Going toward Emmeline, and pulling off his Gantlet. Enter Philidel running.
Phil. Hold, poor deluded Mortal, hold thy Hand;
Which if thou giv'st, is plighted to a Feind.
For Proof, behold the Virtue of this Wand;
The Infernal Paint shall vanish from her Face,
And Hell shall stand Revealed.
Strikes Emmeline with a Wand, who straight descends: Philidel runs to the
Descent, and pulls up Grimbald, and binds him. Now see to whose Embraces thou
were falling.
Behold the Maiden Modesty of Grimbald,
The grossest, earthiest, ugliest Fiend in Hell.

Arth. Horror seizes me,
To think what Headlong Ruin I have tempted.

Phil. Haste to thy Work; a Noble stroke or two
Ends all the Charms, and disenchants the Grove.
I Will hold thy Mistress bound.

Arth. Then here is for Earnest;
Strikes twice or thrice, and the Tree falls, or sinks: A Peal of Thunder
immediately follows, with dreadful Howlings. It Is sinish'd, and the Dusk that
yet remains,
Is but the Native Horror of the Wood.
But I must lose no time; the Pass is free;
The unroosted Fiends have quitted this Abode;
On you proud Towers, before the day be done,
My glittering Banners shall be waved against the setting Sun.

Exit Arthur. Phil. Come on my surly Slave; come stalk along,
And stamp a mad-Mans pace, and drag thy Chain.

Grimb. I Will Champ and Foam upon 't, till the blue Venom
Work upward to thy Hands, and loose their hold.

Phil. Know thou this powerful Wand; it is lifted up;
A second stroke would send thee to the Center,
Benumbed and Dead, as far as Souls can Die.

Grim. I would thou would, to rid me of my Sense:
I shall be whoop'd through Hell at my return,
Inglorious from the Mischief I designed.

Phil. And therefore since thou loath'st Etherial Light,
The Morning Sun shall beat on thy black Brows;
The Breath thou draw'st shall be of opper Air,
Hostile to thee; and to thy Earthy make,
So light, so thin, that thou shall Starve, for want
Of thy gross Food, till gasping thou shall lie,
And blow it back, all Sooty to the Sky.

exit Philidel, dragging Grimbald after him. ACT V.
Enter Osmond as affrighted. Osm. GRimbald made Prisoner, and my Grove
destroyed!
Now what can save me -- Hark the Drums and Trumpets!
Drums and Trumpets within. Arthur is marching onward to the Fort,
I have but one Recourse, and that is to Oswald;
But will he Fight for me, whom I have injured?
No, not for me, but for himself he must;
I Will urge him with the last Necessity;
Better give up my Mistress than my Life.
His force is much unequal to his Rival;
True; -- But I Will help him with my utmost Art,
And try to unravel Fate.

Exit Osmond. Enter Arthur, Conon, Aurelius, Albanact, and Soldiers. Con. Now
there remains but this one Labor more;
And if we have the Hearts of true Born Britains,
The forcing of that Castle Crowns the Day.

Aurel. The Works are weak, the Garrison but thin,
Dispirited with frequent Overthrows,
Already wavering on their ill manned Walls.

Alban. They shift their places often, and sculk from War,
Sure Signs of pale Despair, and easy Rout;
It shows they place their Confidence in Magic,
And when their Devils fail, their Hearts are Dead.

Arth. Then, where you see'em clust'ring most, in Motion,
And staggering in their Ranks, there press 'em home;
For that 's a Coward heap -- How Is this, a Sally?

Enter Oswald, Guillamar, and Soldiers on the other side. Beyond my Hopes, to
meet 'em on the square.
Osw. advancing. Brave Britains hold; and thou their famous Chief
Attend what Saxon Oswald will propose.
He owns your Victory; but whether owing
To Valor, or to Fortune, that he doubts.
If Arthur dares ascribe it to the first,
And singl'd from a Crowd, will tempt a Conquest,
This Oswald Offers, let our Troops retire,
And Hand to Hand, let us decide our Strise:
This if Refused, bear Witness Earth and Heaven,
Thou steal'st a Crown and Mistress undeserved.

Arth. I Will not Usurp thy Title of a Robber,
Nor will upbraid thee, that before I proffered
This single Combat, which thou did avoid;
So glad I am, on any Terms to meet thee,
And not discourage thy Repenting shame;
As once Eneas my Famed Ancestor,
Betwixt the Trojan and Rutilian Bands,
Fought for a Crown, and bright Lavinia's Bed,
So will I meet thee, Hand to Hand opposed:
My Auguring Mind, assures the same Success.

To his Men. Hence out of view; If I am Slain, or yield,
Renounce me Britains for a Recreant Knight,
And let the Saxon peacefully enjoy
His former footing in our famous Isle.
To Ratify these Terms, I swear --

Osw. You need not;
Your Honor is of Force, without your Oath.
I only add, that if I fall, or yield,
Yours be the Crown, and Emmeline.

Arth. That Is two Crowns.
No more; we keep the looking Heavens and Sun
Too long in Expectation of our Arms.

Both Armies go clear off the Stage. They Fight with Spunges in their Hands,
dipped in Blood; after some equal Passes and Closeing, they appear both Wounded:
Arthur Stumbles among the Trees, Oswald falls over him, they both Rise; Arthur
Wounds him again, then Oswald Retreats. Enter Osmond from among the Trees, and
with his Wand, strikes Arthur 's Sword out of his Hand, and Exit. Oswald
pursues Arthur. Merlin enters, and gives Arthur his Sword, and Exit, they
close, and Arthur in the fall, disarms Oswald. Arth. Consess thy felf overcome,
and ask thy Life.

Oswa. It Is not worth asking, when it is in thy Power.

Arth. Then take it as my Gift.

Oswa. A wretched Gift.
With loss of Empire, Liberty, and Love.
A Consort of Trumpets within, proclaiming Arthur 's Victory, while they Sound,
Arthur and Oswal. seem to Confer. It Is too much Bounty to a vanquished Foe;
Yet not enough to make me Fortunate.

Arth. Thy Life, thy Liberty, thy Honor Safe,
Lead back thy Saxons to their Ancient Elb:
I would Restore thee fruitful Kent, the Gift
Of Vortigern for Hengist's ill bought aid,
But that my Britain's brook no Foreign Power,
To Lord it in a Land, Sacred to Freedom;
And of its Rights, Tenacious to the last.

Osw. Nor more then thou have offered would I take.
I would Refuse all Britain, held in Homage;
And own no other Masters but the Gods.

Enter on one side; Merlin, Emmeline, and Matilda. Conon, Aurelius, Albanact,
with British Soldiers, bearing King Arthur 's Standard displayed. On the other
side, Guillamar and Osinond, with Saxon Soldiers, dragging their Colors on the
Ground. Art. going to Emm. and embracing her At length, at length, I have thee
in my Arms,
Though our Malevolent Stars have strugled hard,
And held us long asunder*
Emm. We are so fitted for each other Hearts,
That Heaven had erred, in making of a third,
To get betwixt, and intercept our Loves.

Osw. Were there but this, this only sight to see,
The price of Britain should not buy my stay.

Merl. Take hence that Monster of Ingratitude,
Him, who betrayed his Master, bear him hence,
And in that loathsome Dungeon plunge him deep,
Where he plunged Noble Oswald.

Osm. That indeed is fittest for me,
For there I shall be near my Kindred Fiends,
And spare my Grimbald's Pains to bear me to 'em. (...) carried off.

Mer. to Arth. For this Days Palm, and for thy former Acts,
Thy Britain freed, and Foreign Force expelled,
Thou, Arthur, have acquired a future Fame,
And of three Christian Worthies, art the first:
And now at once, to treat thy Sight and Soul,
Behold what Rouling Ages shall produce:
The Wealth, the Loves, the Glories of our Isle,
Which yet like Golden Oar, Unripe in Beds,
Expect the Warm Indulgency of Heaven
To call 'em forth to Light --

To Osw. Nor thou, brave Saxon Prince, disdain our Triumphs;
Britains and Saxons shall be once one People;
One Common Tongue, one Common Faith shall bind
Our Jarring Bands, in a perpetual Peace.

Merlin waves his Wand; the Scene changes, and discovers the British Ocean in a
Storm. Aeolus in a Cloud above: Four Winds hanging, etc. Aeolus. singing. Ye
Blustering Brethren of the Skies,
Whose Breath has ruffl'd all the Watery Plain,
Retire, and let Britannia Rise,
In Triumph over the Main.
Serene and Calm, and void of fear,
The Queen of Islands must appear:
Serene and Calm, as when the Spring
The New-Created World began,
And Birds on Boughs did softly sing,
Their Peaceful Homage paid to Man,
While Eurus did his Blasts forbear,
In favor of the Tender Year.
Retreat, Rude Winds, Retreat,
To Hollow Rocks, your Stormy Seat;
There swell your Lungs, and vainly, vainly threat.
Aeolus ascends, and the four Winds fly off. The Scene opens, and discovers a
calm Sea, to the end of the House. An Island arises, to a soft Tune; Britannia
seated in the Island, with Fishermen at her Feet, etc. The Tune changes; the
Fishermen come ashore, and Dance a while; After which, Pan and a Nereide come
on the Stage, and sing. Pan and Nereide Sings.
Round thy Coasts, Fair Nymph of Britain,
For thy Guard our Waters flow:
Proteus all his Herd admitting,
On thy Greens to Graze below.
Foreign Lands thy Fishes Tasting,
Learn from thee Luxurious Fasting.
Song of three Parts.
For Folded Flocks, on Fruitful Plains,
The Shepherds and the Farmers Gains,
Fair Britain all the World outvyes;
And Pan, as in Arcadia Reigns,
Where Pleasure mixed with Profit lies.
2.
Though Jasons Office was Famed of old,
The British Wool is growing Gold;
No Mines can more of Wealth supply;
It keeps the Peasant from the Cold,
And takes for Kings the Tyrian Dye.

The last Stanza sung over again betwixt Pan and the Nereide. After which the
former Dance is varied, and goes on.

Enter Comus with three Peasants, who sing the following Song in Parts. Com.
YOur Hay it is Mowed, and your Corn is Reaped;
Your Barns will be full, and your Hovels heaped;
Come, my Boys, come;
Come, my Boys, come;
And merrily Roar out Harvest Home;
Harvest Home,
Harvest Home;
And merrily Roar out Harvest Home.

Chorus. Come, my Boys, come, etc.

1 Man. We have cheated the Parson, we'll cheat him again;
For why should a Blockhead have One in Ten?
One in Ten,
One in Ten.
For why should a Blockhead have One in Ten?

Chorus. One in Ten,
One in Ten;
For why should a Blockhead have One in Ten?

2. For Prating so long like a Book-learn'd Sot,
Till Pudding and Dumplin burn to Pot;
Burn to Pot,
Burn to Pot;
Till Fudding and Dumplin burn to Pot.

Chorus. Burn to Pot, etc.

3. We'll toss off our Ale till we canno' stand,
And Hoigh for the Honor of Old England:
Old England,
Old England;
And Hoigh for the Honor of Old England.

Chorus. Old England, etc.

The Dance varied into a round Country-Dance. Enter Venus. Venus. Fairest Isle,
all Isles Excelling,
Seat of Pleasures, and of Loves;
Venus here, will choose her Dwelling,
And forsake her Cyprian Groves.
2.
Cupid, from his Favorite Nation,
Care and Envy will Remove;
Jealousy, that poisons Passion,
And Despair that dies for Love.
3.
Gentle Murmurs, sweet Complaining,
Sighs that blow the Fire of Love;
Soft Repulses, kind Disdaining,
Shall be all the Pains you prove.
4.
Every Swain shall pay his Duty,
Grateful every Nymph shall prove;
And as these Excel in Beauty,
Those shall be Renowned for Love.

SONG by Mr. HOW.
She. 1.
YOu say, It Is Love Creates the Pain,
Of which so sadly you Complain;
And yet would fain Engage my Heart
In that uneasy cruel part:
But how, Alas! think you, that I,
Can bear the Wound of which you die.

He. 2.
It Is not my Passion makes my Care,
But your Indiff'rence gives Despair:
The Lusty Sun begets no Spring,
Till Gentle Showers Assistance bring:
So Love that Scorches, and Destroys,
Till Kindness Aids, can cause no Joys.

She. 3.
Love has a Thousand Ways to please,
But more to rob us of our Ease:
For Wakeful Nights, and Careful Days,
Some Hours of Pleasure he repays;
But Absence soon, or Jealous Fears,
Overflow the Joys with Floods of Tears.

He. 4.
By vain and senseless Forms betrayed,
Harmless Love's the Offender made;
While we no other Pains endure,
Than those, that we our selves procure:
But one soft Moment makes Amends
For all the Torment that attends.
5. Chorus of Both.
Let us love, let us love, and to Happiness haste;
Age and Wisdom come too fast:
Youth for Loving was designed.
He alone. I Will be constant, you be kind.
She alone. You be constant, I Will be kind.
Both. Heaven can give no greater Blessing
Than faithful Love, and kind Possessing.

After the Dialogue, a Warlike Consort: The Scene opens above, and discovers
the Order of the Garter. Enter Honor, Attended by Hero's. Merl. These who last
entered, are our Valiant Britains,
Who shall by Sea and Land Repel our Foes.
Now look above, and in Heavens High Abyss,
Behold what Fame attends those future Hero's.
Honor, who leads 'em to that Steepy Height,
In her Immortal Song, shall tell the rest.

(Honor sings.) Hon. 1.
St. George, the Patron of our Isle,
A Soldier, and a Saint,
On that Auspicious Order smile,
Which Love and Arms will plant.

2.
Our Natives not alone appear
To Court this Martial Prize;
But Foreign Kings, Adopted here,
Their Crowns at Home despise.
3.
Our Sovereign High, in Aweful State,
His Honors shall bestow;
And see his Sceptr'd Subjects wait
On his Commands below.
A full Chorus of the whole Song: After which the Grand Dance. Arth. to Merl.
Wisely you have, whatever will please, revealed,
What would displease, as wisely have concealed:
Triumphs of War and Peace, at full ye show,
But swiftly turn the Pages of our Woe.
Rest we contented with our present State;
It Is Anxious to enquire of future Fate.
That Race of Hero's is enough alone
For all unseen Disasters to atone.
Let us make haste betimes to Reap our share,
And not Resign them all the Praise of War.
But set the Example; and their Souls Inflame,
To Copy out their Great Forefathers Fame.

FINIS.

