Galen's Art Of PHYSIC.
Proemium. CHAP. I.
ALL the order and Method of Physic, so far as concerns Order may be reduced
to these three Heads.

1. The first consists in Notion, which is done by Resolution. 2. The Second
consists in Composition of those things which are found out by this Resolution.
And 3. The Third of the Dissolution of Definition.
This Third contains not only the Dissolution of Definition, or defining
Diseases, but also an explication, Resolution, Division, Explanation or
Exposition upon them, and this is the Basis of our Work at this time: and
indeed this lays down the Way and Order to the whole Practice of Physic, and
truly excels the other two as much as the Light of the Sun does the Light of
the Moon, and we have drawn it into a very short Compendium, that so we may
benefit your Judgment, and not burden your Memory; we have divided it into an
hundred Chapters, whereof this is the first, each of the rest contain easy
Rules of Definition, yea so easy that a Child of seven yee^s old may
understand them, and so short that they will not be burdensome to the weakest
Memory, and although some of the Chapters be very short, yet they contain very
necessary Rules distinct from the rest, and he knows nothing that knows not
this, That Order and Method help the Memory much. But put all the Chapters
together and they completely contain the Definition and Explanation of the whole
Art; for from these do all Diseases arise, and in these does the very Essence
of Physic consist. As for the Contemplative part of Physic that has been
largely pe^formed by us in many Treatises, which any that pleases may make use
of. We come now to the matter it self, only we desire you to take notice, that
these Heads are more largely discoursed of here and there in other of our
Treatises, only we drew them up here in this form to satisfy the desires and
inform the Judgments of such as intend to study Physic.

CHAP. 2. What Medicine is.
MEdicine is the Knowledge of things Healthful, not Healthful, and Neutral.

This Definition is nothing else than if you should say, Medicine is the
Knowledge of things belonging to the Sick, it is not one whit more nor less.

The Name of the Science which is [Medicine] is common, and can in no wise be
taken in a proper sense, but things healthful, unhealthful, and neutral carry
each of them a threefold signification, viz. As a Body, as a Cause, and as a
Sign. For 1. A Body which naturally is apt to live in health, and a Cause which
is able to effect this, and to preserve it being effected, and a Sign which is
able to s^ew and indicate which way this is to be done, all these the Grecians
customarily call things healthful. 2. The Body surprised and seized by a
Disease, the Cause, which causes and continues this Disease, and the
Indications or Signs which give testimony what this Disease is, they also term
things unhealthfull. 3. In things Neutral they are guided by the same Rules, of
which we shall speak more in the Third and Sixth Chapters.


And here we must also make a difference between Science and Action; or if you
will, between the Theorical and Practical part of Medicine. For 1. The Theory
regards first the Cause of things Healthful, then of things Unhealthful;
Lastly, o^ things Neutral: After this of Bodies, first Healthful, then
Unhealthful, and in the last place Neutrals; and it walks by the same Rules in
Signs or Indications. But. 2. In Actions or Practice, The knowledge of the Body
is the first thing which is minded, and this is found out by the Signs, and the
last search (in respect of time) is after the Cause.


CHAP. 3. How many several ways, A Cause may be said to effect, a Sign to give
Indication, and a Body to receive.
BUt s^eing that a Cause may be said to effect, a Sign to give Indication, and
a Body receive two ways.

1. Simply. 2. According to time.
We must know that the Art of Medicine comprehends them both: Simply they do it
two ways, viz. Always, and for the most part, both these the Art of Medicine
handles.

But as for things Neutral they are to be considered, both in respect of Body,
Cause, and Sign, and in those, both Simply, and according to time, under a
threefold Consideration, and the Reason is, because things Neutral partake of
Contraries, sometimes of one, sometimes of the other, and sometimes of both
together, and this last is twofold, for sometimes it participates of contraries
equally, sometimes of one more than another.

There is in all this Definition, if we dilligently heed the words, a certain
doubtfulness or ambiguity, which knot ought to be unloosed, that so all things
may be made clear, and we may not seem instead of teaching people to lead them
into ignorance (as the College of Physicians does) and that we may so do, we
will devide the business, and speak of them all particularly.

We told you Medicine was the exact Knowledge of things Healthful, Unhealthful,
and Neutral, and each of these to be considered as a Body, as a Sign, as a
Cause, we shall now address our selves to handle, 1. Such Bodies as are
Healthful, Unhealthful, and Neutral. 2. Such Signs as are Healthful,
Unhealthful, and Neutral. 3. Such Causes as are Healthful^ Unhealthful, and
Neutral.


In all these we shall be both as brief, and withal as plain as we can.

CHAP. 4. Of Healthful Bodies.
1. A Body is Simply said to be healthful when it is in good natural temper,
when the seven Natural things, viz. Spirits, Elements, Complexions, Humors,
Members, Virtues, Operations keep a good decorum, then is a Body Simply said to
be in Health.

2. A Body in Health according to time, is taken not according to the Natural
inclination of the Body, as the former was, but when it is in such a Natural
temper, as we showed before, only for the time being, the former is proper to
the Body, this but accidental. Thus Galen.

Culpepers Comment.
I shall here explain a little, Galens meaning in those words of his; Seven
Natural Things.

1. Spirit, Taken in a Physical sense, is an airy substance, very subtle and
quick, dispersed throughout the Body, from the Brain, Heart, and Liver, by the
Nerves, Arteries, and Veins, by which the powers of the Body are stirred up to
perform their Office and Operation. 2. An Element, is a Body pure, simple,
unmixed, from which all Natural things have their Original, they are held to be
in number four, Fire, Air, Water, Earth; their Operations are, Active as heat
and cold, Passive as dryness and moisture. 3. Complexions are the Operations of
these Elements upon Man's Body, as when the Fire prevails, the body is
Chollerick, when the Air he is Sanguine, when the Wa^er he is Phlegmatic, when
the Earth he is Melancholl^. 4. Humors are, 1. ^holler, whose Receptacle is the
Gall. 2. Blood, whose Seat is the Liver. 3. Phlegm, placed in the Lungs. 4.
Melancholy, which keeps his Court in the Spleen.


Thus you see how Elements, Complexions and Humors are subservient the one to
other, even as the Spirit, Soul, and Body are (if we may reason a minore ad
ma^u^) in the Microcosm.

5. Me^b^^s or Limbs, are Simple or Compound, Principal or Subservient.

First, Simple Members are, 1. Bones. 2. Cartilages. 3. Ligaments. 4. Veins. 5.
Arteries. 6. Nerves. 7. Tendons. 8. Panides. 9. Fat. 10. Flesh. 11. Skin.


Secondly, Compound Members are, 1. Head. 2. Heart. 3. Liver. 4. Lungs. 5.
Legs. 6. Arms. 7. Hands.


Thirdly, Principal Members are, 1. Brain. 2. Heart. 3. Liver. 4. Testicles.


Fourthly, Members Subservient are, 1. Nerves to carry the Animal Spirit. 2.
Arteries to carry the Vital Spirit. 3. Veins to carry the Natural Spirit. 4.
Spermatick Vessels to carry the Procreative Spirit.


6. Virtues, are that whereby these act the Body, and they are Vital, Natural,
and Animal, I forbear writing of them, there being a Treatise of them,
Astrologo Physically handled by me already at the latter end of my Ephemeris
for 1651. 7. Operations of these upon the Body of man are, First, The Animal
Virtue causes. 1. Imagination, Apprehension, Fancy, Opinion, Consent, etc. in
the two former Ventricles of the Brain. 2. Judgment, Esteem, Reason,
Resolution, Disposing, Discerning, in the middle Ventricle of the Brain. 3.
Calling to mind what is to come, Remembrance of what is past, in the hinder
Ventricle of the Brain.
Secondly, The Vital Virtue moves, 1. Joy, Hope, Mirth, Singing, by dilating
the Heart. 2. Sadness, Sorrow, Fear, Sighing, etc. by compressing the Heart.
Thirdly, The Natural Virtue, 1. Alters Food into Chyle, Chyle into Blood and
Humors, Blood into Flesh. 2. Joyneth, forms, ingendreth, increases, and
nourishes the Body of Man.


And now you see what Galen intends by a Healthful Body, namely, such a one
where all these keep a good and orderly decorum.

CHAP. 5. Of a Body Vnhealtbful.
1. A Body is simply unhealthful which is born mutilated by Nature, as wanting
some Members, or some Operations or senses, that is not perfect in respect of
those Seven Natural things before mentioned, as that cannot See, Hear, or Smell,
or is a Fool, etc.

2. According to time a Body is unhealthful that is at present sick in Body, or
distempered in mind, or his Body broken or bruised in any part of it, whether
internal or external, that has an accidental distemper in any of the seven
Natural things.

This is so clear it needs no Comment.

CHAP. 6. Of a Body Neutral.
THis, as we told you before, carries a threefold signification.

1. As things partake of either extremety swerving from the Rules of
Healthfulness. 2. As they partake of both of them together equally. 3. As
sometimes the one exceeds, sometimes the other in resp^ect of time.
1. Taken in the first Sense, it is an exquisite medium between healthful and
unhealthful Bodies; And that First, Naturally or Simply, as many people are
born of unhealthful or sickly Constitutions, so that the Nativity as a cause
produces such an effect in every age. Secondly, According to time, when the
Body is neither perfectly in Health, nor yet sick, such a one as the proverb
says, Is neither sick enough to lie in Bed, nor well enough to follow his
Employment.


2. Taken in the Second Sense, A Neutral Body is such a Body as partakes of
diverse contrary qualities either in one part of the Body or in diverse; when
there is an opposition between them, and this concerns either the Formation of
the Body or the Endowments of the mind, or temperature of the parts, when one
contrary appears healthful, the other unhealthful, and this also 1. As it
appears generally in all the ages of the Life. 2. As it appears but particularly
at some certain times. 3. Taken in the third Sense, it is when the ages of a
man's Life, Differ in respect of Health and Sickness as a man may be healthful
in his Childhood and unhealthful in his youth, and the contrary, viz. sickly in
his infancy and healthful in Youth etc.


Culpepers Comment.
The First of these needs no explanation, the other two are something Obscure,
as in the second Galen says a man may partake of contrary qualities in the
formation of the Body, Viz. A man may have a H^ad too big and feet as much too
little, a man may have a Nose exceeding the common bigness, and Eyes as much
less than the common proportion, and the like.

2. In the Endowments of mind, as thus, A man may have a very good
Apprehension, yet a bad Memory, a man may have very good Judgment in ordering a
Battle and yet be a Coward.

3. In the temperature of the parts, the Liver may be ^oo hot, and yet the
Brain too cold; you may understand the rest by these examples which are
sufficient to explain Galens meaning.

To the third, When the Ages of a man's Life differ in respect of health and
sickness says Galen, which is no more than thus, to give you one example, A
Child's Body or any part thereof may be too hot, by reason of sucking a
Chollerick Woman, in youth, either the whole Body or the same part of it may be
too cold, imagine the Liver, Brain, or the like, it may be too hot in Manhood,
too cold in Age or the contrary to these.

Thus much for Bodies we come now to unfold the Signs.

CHAP. 7. Of SIGNS.
OF these some indicate present health, others proclaim health to come, a third
sort put us in mind of health past.

In the same manner likewise some unhealthful Signs show present Sickness,
others give fair warning that sickness is coming, other indications call to our
remembrance the sickness past.

Imagine the like by Neutrals, some show a present Neutral condition, foreshew
it coming, call it to mind being past, and show a disposition as well healthful
as sickly.

The use of the First and Second of these is admirable, the last is not so
absolutely useful.

And thus have we showed you what Signs are, we come to treat of them
particularly.

CHAP. 8. Signs of a very good Constitution.
OF these some are deduced from the Reason or Essential Cause thereof, or from
necessary consequen which follow such operations, and cases, of which the first
are called Essential the other Accidental.

Such as are Essentially of good Constitution, are such in whose Bodies, heat,
coldness, dryness and moisture are equally tempered; the Instruments of the
Body are composed in every part of due bigness, number, place, and Formation.

Culpeper.
I shall here for the benefit of young Students intermix my Comment with the
Text.

Whereas Galen says, a good Constitution consists of heat, cold, dryness, and
moisture, equally tempered, you must not imagine they are so all over the Body,
but according to place, for the Heart is and should be hotter than the Brain,
etc. but each part exceeds not its due proportion in these, the Brain is not
hotter, colder, drier, nor moister than it should be, judge so by the Heart,
Liver, etc. and believe me such a man is a rare Bird to find, almost as rare as
a Phaenix.

Galen.
As for the exterior parts, in respect of softness and hardness they keep a
mean, as also in respect of roghness and smoothness, and as the external parts
of the Body recede not from beauty, so the Endowments of the mind differ from
Virtue and Honesty as little as may be.

Culpeper.
Usually you shall find it true that the handsommest Bodies have none of the
worst conditions, nay always if heat, cold, dryness, and moisture be any thing
equally commixed (although all the complexions are naught being corrupted by
Adams fall, yet I say) the one if they be any thing equally commixed, sets a
stop to the violent swinge of the other, but if you take Galens Virtue and
Honesty here for Grace, that is the free Gift of God, and no ways coming by
complexion, It is noted of Titus Vespasian that for Natural Endowments he was
the Paragon of his time, and as it were the darling of Nature, this was the
equality of his temper, but he was a great persecutor of the Saints, because
God denied him Grace, you by this may discern the difference between them.

Galen.
Temperature is apropriated especially to the Similar Parts, Number, Formation,
Magnitude, and Situation to the Instrumental Parts, unity and community to
them both.

Culpeper.
Similar Parts are those which before in the Fourth Chapter we called Simple,
Instrumental are those which there and then we called Compound.

Galen.
Also the Vices or Failings in Unhealthful Bodies are of the same kinds, and
the Bound or Limit which distinguishes them is a sensible hurt of the
operations; and although Bodies of the best Constitution are now and then
deficient, yet because it remains but a while, nor troubles the senses much,
they are not withstanding to be numbered amongst healthful Bodies, we must then
distinguish between the operations either much or little hurt, because Nature
is able not only to hold up its head against, but also to vanquish the one, but
it lies down to the other.

Unhealthful Bodies then are known by this, that the Operations are overcome,
and lose their vigor and activity by any cause causing a Disease.

In the middle between these two are Neutrals placed, and yet they have some
Latitude also.

The Latitude of Health is divided into three parts, and although the Zodiac
has but two sorts of Latitude, Health has three.

1. Healthful Bodies have some Latitude. 2. Vnhealthful Bodies have another. 3.
Neutral Bodies a third.
In all such as are great are easily discerned, such as are small not so easily,
the weaker the Operations are in the Hurt, the harder is the Hurt to be
discerned, as an infirmity in feeling is not so easily discerned as one in the
sight, because the Sense is less noble.

Thus have we spoken of Healthful Bodies only in the general, of the other two
we shall speak of severally, specially, and particularly, but first of all we
will devide them into parts.

CHAP. 9. How many the Differences of the Parts are.
THe Universal Differences of Parts are four, because some are Principals,
others take their Original from these Principals, some parts of the Body are
without any government at all: The Principals are such as have their Power
ingrafted in them by Nature, as the Brain, Heart, Liver, Testicles: others have
their Original and Power from these, as the Nerves from the Brain, as also the
Marrow of the Back, the Arteries from the Heart, the Veins from the Liver, the
Seminal Vessels from the Testicles; some are governed by themselves alone, as
Ligamen^s, Cartilages, Membranae etc. and some have only Generation but no
Government at all, as Hair and Nails. These are the Differences of Parts,
against which at this time the Translator is not minded to be critical.

CHAP. 10. Of the Signs of the Brain.
OF the Indications of the several Tempers of the Brain we shall speak
hereafter, but there are five several things which show the Nature of it.

1. The Disposition of the whole Head. 2. The Virtues and Vice of the sensible
Operations. 3. The Virtues and Vices of actual Operations, 4. The Virtues and
Vices of those things which hold the Principallity. 5. The alteration of such
things as are outward.
The Disposition of the whole Head is known, 1. From the Bigness of it. 2. From
the Figure of it. 3. From the Hair.


CHAP. 11. Of the Bigness and Smalness of the Head.
A Very small Head is a proper Indication of a vicious Brain, and yet a great
Head does not necessarily declare a strong Brain; If there be no^ capacity
enough in the Skull to hold the Brain, or a sufficient quantity of Brain, the
Man must needs be a Fool, but yet it no wise follows, that because the Brain is
much therefore it should be good, that is an absolute non-sequitur.

We must then distinguish it thus, 1. From the form of the Head it self. 2.
From the Parts arising from the Head.


First, From the form of the Head it self the rounder the Head is, and the more
spherical, it only being a little depressed on both sides (for of necessity the
fore and hinder part must stick out a little) gives argument of a strong and
healthful Brain.

Culpeper.
I suppose Galen means strong in respect of Health not in respect of Wit or
Understanding, he that has such a round Head as Galen talks of, is not so
subject to Diseases in the Head as another man is, but we see many sickly men
have better wits than many healthful; and so such as have long Heads to be as
wise as such as have round.

Galen.
If the hinder part of the Head that which sticks out be deminished, look upon
the Nerves, the Neck, and the Bones, for if they be according to Natnre, the
falt is in defect of Matter not of Virtue, but if they be not as they should be
also, the very principal is debilitated, the Brain it self is weak and this you
shall seldom find fail, indeed the Head neatly fashioned shows a strong Brain.

Also the part arising or sticking out on the Forehead, is to be heeded, and
their bigness and smalness, and the senses there placed, Viz. Seeing, Tasting,
Smelling, these arising from the Principal, attest the Virtue or Vice of the
Principal from which they arise, Viz. The Brain.

Culpeper.
I am not altogether of Galens opinion in this, yet will I not be Critical in it
till I have more experience in the thing, the old Proverb is, and it is a good
one, De mortuis nil nisi bonum, speak nothing but good of them that are dead.

Chap. 12. Of such Operations as have obtained the Principality.
THe Virtues and Vices of Principal Operations show the Virtues and Vices of
the Principals themselves: I call them Principal Operations which come from the
Principals alone without a Medium; as subtle wit shows a good substance of the
Brain, a dull wit shows the Brain to be too thick, a ready Apprehension, a
sound Judgment, a stable and firm Memory, shows a good Brain, dullness of
Apprehension, apish Judgment, and Forgetfulness show a bad Brain; fickleness in
Opinion shows a hot Brain, stability in Opinion, shows a cold Brain.

And yet here are two sorts of Indications which I think I have passed by,
though I promised them in the beginning; the one of which concerns Natural
Operations, the other, things without, we shall speak of them hereafter.

Culpeper.
This Chapter, although very short, yet in my Opinion very pithy, I shall but
ad a little to honest Galen in it, he tells you, That a good Judgment, a nimble
Apprehension, and a retentive Memory, argue a good Brain, they do so, yet in
few men shall you find all three of them excellent; then consider, the
Apprehension lies in the fore part of the Brain, and that is the reason rubbing
the Forehead quickens the Apprehension; Judgment lies in the middle, and Memory
in the hinder part of the Brain, then do but consider which of these three is
weakest, which strongest in you, and you may know which part of your Brain is
weakest, and which strongest.

Chap. 13. Signs of a good temper of the Brain.
IF the Brain have obtained a good temper of the four first Qualities, Viz.
Heat, Cold, Dryness, and moisture, the Operations thereof are always moderate,
and seldom exceed the golden mean, the excrements which it avoids by the mouth,
Nose, Ears, or Eyes are moderate. It is not very subject to be hurt by external
Heat, Coldness, Dryness, or Moisture, for if the temper within be good, it
keeps external distempers from harboring there. The Hair is of a dusky red
when Infants, of a dusky yellow when Youths, and yellow when Men, they curl
something but not much, neither are they easily bald, and yet the color of the
Hair does indeed belong not only to the temper of the Brain, but also to the
Region Men live in, and also to the temperature of the Humors without the Skull.

Culpeper.
I like a man that is not ashamed to call in his Errors as Galen here does, and
not daub over the old ones with a Plaster of new ones as our College did in
mending their Dispensatory, indeed Galen is in the truth, diverse Regions give
diverse colors of Hair usually, as most Welsh men have light or yellow Hair,
most Spaniards black; also the temperature of Brain alters not the Hair at all
unless by accident, as it heats or cools the adjacent parts, but the Humors
without the Skull, and that is the reason in great Surfets usually the Hair
comes off, and every one that knows any thing knows that the Liver is the
Principal part afflicted in a Surfeit.

Chap. 14. Signs of a hot Brain.
SIgns of a hot Brain besides those we named before are, the Forehead looks
reddish and feels hot, the Veins on the white of the Eyes appear plain and red,
the hair is hard and curling, they are soon bald, and the hotter the Brain is,
the sooner are they bald, the excrements which come from the Brain by the
Mouth, Nose, Ears, and Eyes, are but few, and those few argue drought, their
Head is filled (especially such as keep no regular diet) with unconcocted
excrements, hot Meats and Drinks, hot air and hot smells cause Headache, they
sleep but little; and that little is very unquiet.

Culpeper.
Such whose Brain is too hot are almost continually troubled with Headache,
Dreams of fighting and quarrelling, their Apprehension is exceeding quick, and
their smell good: when you find these Symtoms in one that is troubled with
Headache, cool the Brain.

Chap. 15. Signs of a cold Brain.
THe Indications of a Brain which is colder than it ought to be, are very many,
excrements appear in their proper places which we showed before, the hair is
black, soft, smooth, and not curling, it is a long time after the Child is born
before the Hair grow, they being evilly nourished at beginning, such are easily
offended by cold causes, and being so offended are troubled with heaviness in
the Head, and distillations from it, their Face is pale, neither is their
Forehead hot, the Veins in their Eyes are not seen in the least, they are dull
witted, and mightily given to sleep.

Chap. 16. Signs of a dry Brain
THe Indications of a dry Brain are very few superfluities, accuteness of Wit
and senses, they watch much, their Hair is hard and rugged, yet quickly grows,
it curls, yet are they soon bald.

Chap. 17. Indications of a moist Brain.
THe Signs of a Brain that is moister than it should be are plain, Hair no
ways curling, plain and soft, they never are Bald, their Wits are dull and
stupid, never able to get the Philosophers Stone, their Senses are not good,
many excrements flow from the Head, they have tears at will, much and deep
sleep.

These are the Signs of a simple distemper of the Brain.

Chap. 18. Signs of a hot and dry Brain.
OF Compound Distempers we shall first give the Indications of a hot and dry
Brain, in which Distemper but very few superfluities of the Brain are avoided,
for there are but few to avoid, they have excellent quick and nimble Wits, they
watch much, their Senses are good, their Hair grows soon in Youth, yet are they
subject to be bald, their Hair curls, their Forehead appears red in color, and
hot in feeling.

Culpeper.
I am of Opinion that simple distempers seldom distemper the Brain, not because
they are not offensive, but because they never go alone, and my reason is,
because they are Compound in every Element; as the fire is not only hot, but
also dry, the water not only cold, but also moist, and that is the reason I gave
you not any comment upon the Simple distempers; to proceed.

A hot and dry distemper of the Brain usually causes continual Headaches, and
the more it exceeds the golden Mean in heat and dryness, the greater is the
pain, as for the curling of the Hair, and baldness which Galen speaks of, I
find they do not always happen true; for Aries which is a hot Sign gives thick
Hair, and never baldness unless Sol be in it, if it do then, but for Remedies
of such a distemper of the Brain, use, Fumitory, Willow Leaves, Lettice, Hops,
Water Lillies, white Poppy Seeds, Roses, Violet Leaves and Flowers, Strawberry
Leaves, the Seeds of Endive, Succory, Musk-Millions, and Pumpions, you may use
them which way you please they are all harmless.

Also if the pain be extreme. and sleep fly from you, take two grains of
Laudanum Londinense, at night going to bed.

Chap. 19. Signs of a hot and moist Brain.
IF Moisture be joined to Heat, and both of them surpass the golden Mean, there
follows a high color of the Face, the Eyes are hot and burning, and look red,
the Veins of the Temples seem great, the excrements of the Head are many, yet
seem well concocted, all hot things whether taken inwardly or applied outwardly
cause them to have a stretching distention and heaviness in their Head, if you
moisten their Heads they avoid excrement the more, they are perpetually
troubled with pains in their Head when the wind is South, the North wind eases
them, they cannot keep themselves awake neither can they sleep quietly, but are
molested with Dreams, and troubled with foolish imaginations, so that many
times they think they see the things they see not, and hear the things they
hear not, especially if the Brain offend more in heat than it does in moisture,
only remember the Indications of a simple distemper, and so may you with ease
find out which quality most abounds, for if the heat be much, and the moisture
little most Signs of heat appear, but if the moisture abounds much, and the
heat be but little peccant, most Signs of moisture appear.

Culpeper.
Galen could not have made a more lively Description of this evil if he had
been in a Man's Head that had it with a Candle and a Lanthorn. I shall ad this,
1. This Infirmity is always accompanied with wind, which sometimes proceeds
from the Hypochondria or Region of the Spleen, and then the Imaginations are
dreadful, but no pain nor distention troubles the Head in the day time, neither
are the Veins of the Temples swollen, this usually comes by drinking, let them
take away the cause and the effect will cease; for it is not my Task to speak
of the Spleen at this time. 2. If the Disease be inherent to the Brain as here
Galen describes it, bleeding is a very good Remedy, if the season of the year
etc. permit; also because wind always accompanies it, the Roots of Parsley,
the Roots and Leaves of Fennel, Mugwort, Plantane, Vervain, and Willow Leaves
are good Medicines, they may boil them in Water and drink the Decoction.


I have very often known Plantane Roots alone being eaten as People eat Apples,
help this Infirmity when nothing else would, and therefore Gentlewomen might do
well to keep some of them candied with Sugar continually in their Houses, for
their own benefit and their poor Neighbors.

Chap. 20. Signs of a cold and dry Brain.
IF a distemper of cold and dryness afflict the Brain, the Face is cold in
feeling, livid, swarthy and discolored to the Eye, you can see no Veins in
their Eyes, and their Head is easily offlicted both by cold, and cold things;
the temper of their Brain and Head is very unequal, for some times their Heads
are light and excrem^nts flow thence moderately, sometimes they are exceedingly
troubled with heaviness of their Heads, and they are troubled with
Distillations from the Brain upon every light and slight occasion, always
remember the former rule given, regard the Signs of the Simple dis^^mp^^s, so
may you know whether coldness or dryness most super-abound.

Culpeper.
Such whose Brains are cold and dry, have admirable Memories, and are
fantastic in their actions, fearful, and think every thing they do, whether it
be Meat or Drink, or Exercise of Body, does them harm, they sleep very badly
etc.

A Cup of strong Beer with Nutmeg and Sugar is an excellent mornings draught
for such People; for although I would have such as have their Brains too hot
and moist fly from strong Beer and Wine as fast as from a Dragon, yet is it
exceeding good for these.

Medicines proper for them are Conserves of Roses, of Borrage, and Bugloss,
Confectio Alchermes.

For Simples, Borrage, Bugloss, Marsh Mallows, Mollows, Vervain, Violet Leaves
and Flowers, Strawberry Leaves, Betony, Sage, Fumitory, Hops, etc.

Chap. 21. Signs of of a cold and moist Brain.
THe Brain afflicted with cold and moist distempers, moves a man to an
inexpugnable desire of sleep, and when he is awake, his Brain is so muddy, and
his Senses so dull, that he can do nothing that will get him honor here, nor
make him famous another day, the excrements that flow from his Brain are
abundance, he seldom goes without a snotty Nose, his Head is full, though not
of Wit, and heavy, and is most afflicted in cold and moist weather.

Culpeper.
Such people are very subject to Lethargies, Coma, Carus, and other Diseases of
the Head that proceed of coldness and moisture.

For Cure, Juniper Berries are excellent to eat ten or twelve of them every
morning fasting; as also Bettony, Chamomel, Peony Roots and Seeds, Calaminth,
Fennel, sweet Marjoram, Penyroyal, Mother of Time etc.

Chap. 22. Of the SENSES.
MAny have their Senses in Vigor when they are young, and void of all blemish,
and yet in age they soon decay, as you shall see the Sight of some People decay
by that time they are twenty or twenty four years of age, and therefore it is
true enough, that the Brain first declares age is coming, as usually appears by
the Hair of the Head.

Chap. 23. Of the Eyes.
THe general mention we shall make of the Eyes is but short.

When the Eyes being touched are manifestly hot, very quick and swift in
motion; when men whose Eyes are afflicted stare nimbly about and seldom hold
their Eyes still, when the Veins in the Eyes are large and red, the Eyes are
afflicted by heat.

If the distemper of the Eyes arise from cold the Signs are contrary to these.
When they are offended by moisture they are always full of moisture, and the
party weeps against his will, but if by dryness they appear hard and dry, in
all they must be helped by a moderate use of things contrary to the Humor
offending, I say moderate because of their tenderness which endures no violent
Medicines.

Culpeper.
1. If the Eyes be afflicted by heat, it is no matter whether dryness or
moisture accompany it, as one of them always does, I commend unto you the
distilled Water of Loos-strife (you may find the Description of it and the
place where it grows, in my English Physician) to wash your Eyes with. 2. If it
come of cold, Eyebright water is better. 3. If Cataracts, Pin and Web, or the
like grow over the Sight, do not go about to eat it off with corroding
Medicines, as the Duncical practice of some Physicians is, for take notice that
the Film which offends is not of a thickness in all places, and then your
mother wit will teach you that you may eat asunder the Tunicle of the Eye in
one place before you have eat away the Film offending in another: Therefore in
such cases make an Ointment with Chelondine (otherwise called Sullendine) and
Hogs Grease, or an Oil with the same Herb and Sallet Oil, and anoint your
Diseased Eye with it.
These special Rules you shall not twice in your Age find to fail, therefore
esteem them as Jewels.

Chap. 24. Of the Greatness of the Eyes.
THe greatness of the Eyes where they are neatly composed, and the Sight
strong, show abundance of well tempered substance, whereby they are formed, but
if neatness of composure be wanting, the substance indeed is much (and so there
may be of a heap of dung) but it is not well tempered, and therefore the Sight
is weak and the Eye not commendable.

Chap. 25. Of Smalness of the Eyes.
SMalness of the Eyes, if they be neatly composed, and their Virtue operative,
shows ('it is true) little substance, or scantiness thereof, but that substance
is well tempered, whereof the Eyes are formed; But if together with smalness
they have an ill composure, and withal fail in their Operations, their
substance is but little and that little is stark naught.

Chap. 26. Of the Color of the Eyes.
AS concerning what belongs to the color of the Eyes, they are divided into
gray and Black; Gray Eyes which are clear, and abound not much with moisture,
are an argument of a strong Sight: Judge of black Eyes also by their cleerness.

Culpeper.
The black Spot in the midst of the Eye is the Christalline humor in which the
Visive Virtue resides, that round about it, being of many colors is called the
Iris, or in plain English the Rainbow, this indeed contains in it all colors,
for if we had not all colors within our Eye, we could not discern them
without, and that is the Reason shutting our Eyes a little makes us see the
better because it reflects the Beams back to the Iris, where they are
recruited, there the cleerer you perceive the Iris to be, the stronger the
Sight is, you shall never find this fail; I was once to satifie my mind, where
a Surgeon dissected the Eye of a Sheep and the Eye of a Cat, because we were
willing to see what reason might be given why the one could see better in the
night than the other; The Reasons we found were these, 1. The Christalline
Humor of the Cats Eye was far cleerer. 2. The Iris was much cleerer. 3. The
Optic Nerve also in the Cat (the difference between the bigness of the Beasts
considered) was much bigger. 4. The Optic Nerve of the Cat had two Originals
at a great distance the one from the other, the one from the Cerebrum or Brain,
the other from the Cerebellum or hinder part of the Brain.


Chap. 27. Of Grayness and Blackness of the Eyes.
THe Eye is Gray by reason of the greatness or splendour of the Christalline
Humor, or else because it sticks out, or else because of the paucity and
pureness of the Aqueal Humor; all these happening together make a very gray Eye,
and as more or fewer of them happen, so the Eye is more or less gray.

A Black Eye is caused either by the smalness of the Christalline Humor, or
because it is deeply seated, or of the abundance or thickness of the Aqueal
Humor, by all these or some of these it is more or less black.

The Aqueal Humor, the more it is in quantity and the thinner in quality, the
moister is the Eyes, the thicker it is in quality and the less in quantity the
dryer are the Eyes.

As for the Christalline Humor, the harder it is, the dryer is the Eye, but the
softer it is, the moister.

Culpeper.
I am far enough from Galens Opinion in this, I cannot believe the Sight is
stronger in Gray Eyes than in Black, but rather the contrary, neither am I of
his Judgment of the causes of the differences in color; If you look upon the
Microcosm or Body of Man, I hold the cause to be in the Iris; if you look upon
the Macrocosm or Book of the Creatures, we find fiery Signs arising at the
Nativity to give Hazel Eyes which are those he here calls black, and so does
either Luminary when they are in the Horoscope, and I hope none is so
Fool-ridden to say the Luminaries strong in the Ascendent, can or do ever give
weak Sights.

Again, I do not conceive the Aqueal Humor to be the cause of the moistness of
the Eye, the Aqueal Humor is an Excrement produced by the Vitrial or Glassy
Humor as it nourishes the Christalline, and never stirs from its plac^ to
moisten the other parts of the Eye, but rather the Glandulae or Kernel seated
in that corner of the Eye next the Nose, which hold the tears, I suppose
moistens the eye.

Chap. 28. Of the Temperature of the Heart.
WE come now to speak of the Temperature of the Heart, but before we begin
take notice of this, That in every part when we say it is Hotter or Colder, or
Dryer or Moister than it ought to be, we speak it as proper to the Part we
treat about, not comparatively with other Parts, for the coldest Temperature of
the Heart which can be in a living Man, is hotter than the hottest Temperature
the Brain is capable of suffering.

Chap. 29. Signs of the Heart overheated.
When the Heart is hotter than is fit or convenient for it to be, some
Indications are inceperable and proper, as deep breathing, swiftness of Pulse,
the man is bold and active, hot, furious, angry, and rash, the Breast and upper
part of the Belly is rough, usually the heat of the Heart heats the whole Body,
unless the Liver be very cold and withstand it; It dilates the Breast much,
which always answers to its heat, unless the coldness of the Brain, which is
deduced along the Backbone withstand it; but if the Breast be very broad and
the Head very little, then you may be sure the Heart is too hot, but if the
Head be great and the Breast narrow, you may be certain the Breast is too cold;
but if both be proportionable, it is a sign neither of heat nor coldness of the
Heart, you must look to other Signs.

Chap. 30. Signs of the Heart too cold.
IF the Heart be too cold, the Pulses are less than N^turally they ought to be,
and yet it does not necessarily follow, that they should be slower or more
ta^e, the Breast is little, and the colder the Heart is, the less is the Breast
and the weaker the Pulse, the Man moves about his actions as though he dragged
a Millstone after him, he is timorous and fearful, afraid of his own shadow,
and has no hai^s upon his Breast: the difference in degree of coldness may be
known by the greatness and smalness of these Symtoms, and this Rule will serve
throughout the Body.

Chap. 31. Signs of a dry Heart.
A Dry Heart makes a hard Pulse, the Man is not very prone to anger, but when
you have angered him, you will have much ado to please him again; finally, if
the Heart be dry so is all the Body unless the Liver be very moist.

Chap. 32. Signs of a moist Heart.
THe Indications of moistness of the Heart are softness of the Pulse, they are
soon angry and as soon pleased again, the whole Body is very moist unless the
Liver be very dry.

Thus much for the temperature of the Heart according to the first qualities
simply taken.

Chap. 33. Signs of a hot and dry Heart.
IF the Heart be oppressed with heat and dryness, the Pulses are great, hard,
and swift, they fetch their Breath swiftly, and the swifter if the breadth of
the Breast answer not equally by proportion to the heat of the Heart, their
Breast is very rugged if they be sick, but if it be natural to them, it is very
hairy, they are full of action, hasty in all things, angry and Tyrannical.

Culpeper.
Herbs Medicinal for such as labor under this Infirmity, are, Borrage, Bugloss,
Sorrel, Woodsorrel, Lettice, Purslane, etc. these and Syrups or Conserves made
of them; also let such drop four or five drops of Oil of Vitriol, or Spirit of
Salt in their Drinks and shake it up and down before they drink it.

Chap. 34. Signs of a hot and moist Heart.
IF moisture together with heat predominate at the Heart, the Man's Breast is
not so tough nor hairy, they are quick enough to anger and Action, but not so
cruel in their anger as if dryness prevail, their Pulse is great, soft, swift,
and frequent: If the Breast be large they draw their Breath very deep, if
narrow, very thick, and their experation or letting out their Breath, is done
with more swiftness than their inspiration or drawing in their Breath, such
Bodies are mighty subject to Diseases of Putrefaction of Humors.

Culpeper.
Things Medicinal for such, are Conserves of red Roses, Syrup of Violets, of
Bawm and of Citron Pills, as also of the Juice of Citrons and Lemmons, Preserved
Citron Pills etc.

As for Simples, Citron Seeds, Rue, Bawm, Angelica Roots and Leaves,
Woodsorrel, the Flowers os Roses, Borrage, Bugloss, and Violets; (above all
sweating and Bleeding may be commended in this infirmity) Hartshorn, Ivory,
Scorzonera Roots, and Roots of Butter-Bur etc.

Chap. 35. Signs of a cold and moist Heart.
INdications of the Heart when coldness with moisture abounds, are softness of
the Pulse, Fearfulness of Mind, slowness of Body, he has scarce Spirit enough
to be angry, much less to fight; as for such things as belongs to the Breast
and the rest of the Body you may distinguish them as you were taught before.

Culpeper.
Much exercise is very convenient for such Bodies, I suppose there were but few
troubled with this infirmity in the Spartan Commonwealth in Lycurgus his time,
Thrashing, and cleaving Loggs is good Physic for them.

For Medicines, Aromaticum Rosatum, and Aromaticum Caryophillatum, Confectio
Alchermes, Mithridate, etc.

For Simples, Rue, Angelica Roots, Nutmeg^ Cinnamon, Saffron, Marigold Flowers,
Bettony, Bawm, Alicampane, Rosemary Leaves and Flowers, Cum multis aliis quae
nunc praescribere longum est.

Chap. 36. Signs of a cold and dry Heart.
THe Heart being cold and dry renders the Pulse hard and small, yet
respiration, if the smalness of the Breast answer to the coldness of the Heart,
is moderate, if the Breast be very Broad it is ^are and slow, above all men
these are least prone to anger, but once anger them and they will never care
for you more, there is not one of a hundred of them that has any Hair of his
Breast.

Take this common Notion in all this we have written or shall write concerning
this Subject, That we when we speak of the Conditions of Men, speak of them
barely as they are Natural and ingrafted in Man, not as they are amended by
Philosophy or Education.

Culpeper.
Conserves of Roses, Borrage, Bugloss, and Rosemary Flowers is very good for
such; as also Marigold Flowers, Saffron, green Walnuts preserved, Juniper
Berries, Bettony, Candied Citron Pills, etc.

Chap. 37. Signs of a hot Liver.
THe Indications of a hot Liver, are, bigness of the Veins, abundance of red
Choler, viz. Choler addust, the Belly and Bowels are rough, and the Blood
hot; also the whole Body is distempered with heat unless the coolness of the
Heart hinder.

Chap. 38. Signs of a cold Liver.
THe coldness of the Liver is known by narrowness of the Veins, abundance of
Phlegm, the whole Constitution of the Body is cold, idle and lazy, unless the
Heart be all the hotter, the Bowels and Belly, Viz. The Region of them is
smooth.

Chap. 39. Signs of a dry Liver.
A Dry Liver causes thick Blood, and but a little of it; the Veins a^^ hard,
the whole Body is dry, and needs must if the Liver that makes the Blood which
nourishes it be so.

Chap. 40. Signs of a moist Liver.
A Moist Liver gives abundance of Blood, but there is much water amongst it,
the Veins are soft and so is all the Body unless the Heat of the Heart
withstand it.

Thus much for the qualities of the Liver considered as Simple by themselves
and not commixed with one another.

Chap. 41. Signs of a hot and dry Liver.
THe Indications af the Liver when it is hotter and drier than it ought to be,
are, The Bowels are rough, the Blood thick and dry, soundly pestered with
Choler, it is yellow Choler in youth, but black or addust Choler in age, the
party is subject to dry Scabs, the Veins are large and hard, and although the
Heat of the Heart may withstand the coldness of the Liver, yet cannot the
moisture of the Heart withstand the dryness of the Liver, for the dryness of
the Heart is sooner overcome by the moisture of the Liver, than the dryness of
the Liver by the moisture of the Heart.

Culpeper.
Herbs Medicinable are Liverwort, Strawberry and Violet Leaves, R^isons of the
Sun, Endive, Succory, Fumitory, Water Lillies, Lettic^, Purslain, Nightshade,
these or any of these, or others like them in operation, are excellent to boil
in clarified Whey in the Summer time.

Also the Compounds of them, Syrups or Conserves made of them: as also
Dandelyon, Scabious, Devils bit, Scurvy Grass, Groundsel, Peach Leaves, Dyers
Weed, Furs Flowers etc.

Chap. 42. Signs of a Hot and Moist Liver.
IF the Liver be hot and moist, the Bowels are not so rough as when it is hot
and dry, they abound exceedingly with Blood, their Veins are large, the habit
of their Body hot and moist, unless the heat of the Heart spoil all.

If these two Qualities surpass the Bounds of Nature and Mediocrity, presently
comes a Disease of Putrefaction, of corrupt Humors, if moisture abound more
than heat, of adustion of Blood, if heat abound more than moisture.

Culpeper.
This Temper of the Liver keeping a due decorum makes a pure Sanguine
Complexion, as the former did a Chollerick, for all Complexions, or at least
such as people call Complexion, comes from the Liver.

If the qualities of the Liver abound, Bleeding and Sweating is your Cure;
afterward if your Liver be too hot you may cool it as you were taught before,
if too cold, you may heat it as you shall be taught hereafter.

Chap. 43. Signs of a Cold and Moist Liver.
THe Indications of a Liver, colder and moister than it ought to be, gives
smooth and slick Bowels, the Veins are narrow, the color pale, and the Blood
is filled with Phlegm, the whole Body if the heat of the Heart hinder not, is
full of Phlegm, lazy, idle, dull, fat and plump.

Culpeper.
Here you have the Description of a Phlegmatic Complexion wherein if you
perceive Phlegm exceed the due limits of reason, you may thus correct the cold
and moist temper of the Liver that so it may breed better Blood.

Troches of Maudlin and Wormwood, or either of them (you may find the way to
make them in my Translation of the London Dispensatory) are very good for such
a one to carry about him, and now and then to eat a little; also to drink a
Decoction of Guajacum, with the like weight of Raisons of the Sun, especially
if a Dropsy be feared, as often is upon such a distemper. For Simples you may
use Cinnamon, Galanga, Agrimony, Hart's-tongue, Maudlin, Wormwood: A draught of
Wormwood Beer is a good Mornings Draught for such people; Water-crestes Hys^p,
Spicknard, Fennel, Origanum, Centaury, Betony, Chamomel etc.

Chap. 44. Signs of a cold and dry Liver.
IF the Liver be too cold and dry, so is the Body also, because it is nourished
by the Liver, the Veins are small, the Blood little, and the Body lean.

Culpeper.
Galen hence for a while, gives you Signs of the general Constitution of the
Body, and I shall piece in with my might with him there, I added nothing here
to his briefness for that cause.

If the Liver be colder and drier than it ought to be, the Body is Melancholy,
and consuming, you may take this Pro confesso, in such a case you must proceed
thus; ^. Eye the Spleen, for there must needs be a fault either there, or a
stopping in that Branch of the Vena Porta, which carries the Melancholy Juice
to it: you may strengthen and amend that with Calamint, Capers and Caper Bark,
Tamaris and Tamaris Bark, Bettony Wall-flowers, Wormwood, Dodder, Hartstongue,
^pithimum; If you think the Spleen be too hot, use Endive, Succory, Lettice,
and Liverwort. 2. Eye the Heart, for all Melancholy vapors afflict that
especially, the way how to do it you have in the 36. Chapter. 3. Restore the
consumed Flesh, and Snails are the best things that I know for it, for Man
being made of the slime of the Earth, all slimy things restore his Nature when
it languisheth, and therefore they play the wise men indeed, if a man may speak
by contraries, that first purge away the slime of the Snails before they use
them.


Chap. 45. Signs of a hot, cold, moist, and dry Temperature of the Testicles.
THe hotter the Testicles are, the proner is the Man to Venery, the more Boys
he gets, his Privities are soon Hairy, judge the clean contrary by a cold
temperature of those Parts; moisture of the Testicles makes much and watery
Seed, but dryness of those Parts gives but little Seed and that little is dry.

Chap. 46. Signs of a hot and dry temperature of the Testicles.
THe Seed Procreative of such people, is hot, dry, and thick, yet most
fruitful, and engenders usually the strongest Children, such people be they Men
or Women it matters not much, are very prone to Venery, they have soon Hair
about their Privities, and the Parts about them, even to their Navil upwards,
and the midst of their Thighs downward, but as they are prone to Venery, so are
they soon satisfied, and are offended with compulsion to that sport.

Culpeper.
If you perceive too much heat in those Parts, for omne nimium vertitur in
vicium, use cooling Herbs, as Endive, Succory, Housleek, Lettice, Plantane,
Purslane, these clarified in Whey are very good and wholesome; as also, Roses,
Water Lillies, Cucumers, the Seeds of Cucumers, and Melones, of Poppies both
white and black etc.

Chap. 47. Signs of a hot and moist temperature of the Testicles.
IF moisture be joined to heat of the Testicles, as it is in many People of a
Sanguine Complexion, they ^re not so full of hair about their Privities as the
former are, they abound more in Seed, yet is not their Appetite to Copulation
so great, they suffer less detriment by the often use of the Act than the
former do, for in deed and in truth they receive more detriment by abstinence
from the Act, than by operating in it.

Culpeper.
I take this to be the Temperature the Testicles should be of, and therefore it
is needless to prescribe Remedies, only I care not greatly if here I be a
little critical against the College of Physicians, it comes so pat in my way I
know not well how to avoid it, and therefore harken to me that God may hearken
to you.

Is not Seed of Man (take Man for both Sexes as the Latins take Homo, and the
Greeks (...)) Is not I say the Seed of Man hot and moist, which is the Causa
Formans of the Child? is not the Mothers Blood whereof the Child is formed,
naturally hot and moist also? is not the Cell of the Womb in which the Child is
formed, hot and moist? were your wits then a wool-gathering, or did you dream
waking, when you wrote in your Book of the Rickets that a Child newborn before
its Complexion be altered by any Medium is cold and moist of Constitution: I
pray if ever your Book deserve another Impression let that be amended, or else
defaced with a Deleatur for an Error of the first Magnitude.

Chap. 48. Signs of a cold and moist temperature of the Testicles.
THe Indications of a cold and moist temperature of the Testicles are,
smoothness and moisture about those parts, averseness to the Sports of Venus,
they care not whether ever they come to that School or not, the Seed is thin,
watery, and unfruitful, and either produces no Conception at all, or else but a
weakly, sickly puny Girl at the best.

Culpeper.
This has need enough of Remedy in whomsoever is afflicted by it, let such eat
the quantity of a Nutmeg of Diasutyrion every morning, you may have it at the
Apothecaries, or if you please to make use of my Translation of the London
Dispensatory, you have there the way how to make it your selves.

As for Simples, Rocket, Nettle Seeds, Barnet, Mugwort, Penyroyal, Lovage, the
Roots of Satyrion, Maddir, and Eringo, the Berries of Bay, and Juniper,
Nutmegs; for Herbs, Peony, Sinkfoyl, and Mother or Time, Calaminth, Featherfew
and Rue.

Chap. 49. Signs of a cold and dry temperature of the Testicles.
THe Seed is thick and very little.

Culpeper.
Such People usually love their Study better than the Sheets, you may remedy it
with such Food as are Natu^ally hot and windy, and by eating such Creatures as
are lustful and fruitful, as Crabs, Lobsters, Shrimps, Sparrows, Quails,
Partriches, Eggs, the Stones of Cocks and Lambs, you have plenty enough of them
in my Directory for Midwives.

As for Simples we advised before, Pease and Beans are good for such; as also
Parsnips and Skirrets, Figs; Pinenuts, Galanga, etc.

Chap. 50. Of the Habit of the whole Body.
WE told you before that the Habit of the whole Body usually followed the
Nature, or agreed with the Constitution of the Heart and the Liver; but of the
two it is most assimilated to that which has the strongest first quality in
it, which for that cause it is called effective.

Take then notice, That we call that, the Habit of the Body, which is presented
to the view of the Eye, viz. The Flesh and some of the Muscles, for the Vessels
which come to these, are not a part of the substance, but certain rivolets
which administer to its wants; We come now then to the Indications of this, and
we shall first of all give you the Indications of a good temper of the Habit of
the whole Body, which we state as a Basis of the rest, that so you may see how
much all distempers decline from it.

All Distempers discolor the Skin one way or other, and from thence are
Indications taken, yet if the Region be never so temperate, if the Body be
never so well in Health, and of never so good a Constitution, yet if he expose
his ^aked Body to the Sun in the Summer time, it will mar all the Indications
that can be taken from the color, and therefore you must heed custom as well
as color, and therefore Virgins which vail their faces from the Sun preserve
their Beauty by it.

All these words have been about what our intent is to do, we now come to the
matter it self.

Chap. 51. Signs of a Moderate Temperature.
THe Indications of a Moderate Temperature according to the whole Habit of the
Body are, a mixed color in the Face of red and white, as though the Lilly and
the Rose strove for Superiority, the Hair yellow, and moderately curling; the
Carnosity or Fleshiness of the Body mean in respect both of quantity and
quality, all the Parts of the Body keep the Golden Mean, and avoid excess on
either hand; excess to this are, grossness, thinness, fleshiness, leanness,
fatness, hardness, softness, roughness, smoothness, all these swerve from
meanness, but a man of a moderate or mean temper is such a one (according to
the Rule of Polydetus) that if you feel his flesh, it is neither too hard nor
too soft, too hot nor too cold; If you look upon his Body, it is neither too
gross nor too thin, too rough nor too smooth, neither has it any excess or
defect.

Culpeper.
As for the color of Hair I told you before, it is to be considered according
to the Country the man lives in, for although happily in Greece where Galen
lived, good constitutions might have yellow Hair, yet we find it not so in
England, but usually brown.

Chap. 52. Signs of a hot Temper.
THe Temper of the Body verging from mediocrity to heat, and not at all to
moisture nor dryness, the Body feels hot in touching and the more the temper
declines from Mediocrity to Heat, the hotter it feels; also the hotter it is
the rougher it is, and the more hairy, the less fat it has, the redder it
looks, the Hair curls the more.

Chap. 53. Signs of a cold Temperature.
Want of Hair is one Indication of a cold temperature, others are, fatness and
coldness which are obvious to the feeling, the color of the Hair is duskie,
the color of the Face is swarthy or of a leaden color.

Chap. 54. Signs of a dry Temperature.
THe drier the Temperature is, the slenderer is the man, and the more the Flesh
recedes from its due temper to dryness, the harder it is, so much then as you
find the Flesh harder, judge it as much dryer than it ought to be.

Chap. 55. Signs of a moist Temperature.
A Moist Temperature causes a fat, moist, and soft Body, and very smooth.

Thus much for the Indications of the Temperature offending in the first
qualities; The mixed follow.

Culpeper.
It is the opinion of some, and indeed of my self for one, that these Qualities
seldom or never offend alone, therefore I shall refer my judgment to them as
they are mixed; and first I shall give you my Authors Indications, secondly my
own.

Chap. 56. Signs of a hot and dry Temperature.
IF the Temperature be hot and dry, the Body is exceeding rough and hairy, hot
and hard in touching, thin and slender in sight, and has but little fat, the
color is black and swarthy, and the blacker, the more heat abounds, as appears
in the Indians and AEthiopians.

Chap. 57. Signs of a hot and moist Temperature.
A Hot and moist Temper is soft, warm and Fleshy, and is indeed (if it be
equally mixed) the best temper of all, and yet the Body where heat and moisture
exceed the due proportion is soon surprised with Diseases of Putrefaction, and
as readily molested with viciousness of Humors: If heat exceed moisture, the
Body is but little softer than a due Temperature, but much hotter, they are
pretty hairy, very Fleshy but not fat, and their Hair is usually blackish; but
if moisture exceed heat, they have much Flesh, a good color, their Body is
smoother and not so hot in feeling.

By the like Rules in all Compound Temperatures, you may know which of the
first qualities is most Predominate, and how much also it excels.

Chap. 58. Signs of a cold and moist Temperature.
IF the Temperature be colder and moister than it ought to be, the Body (the
Head etc. excepted) is free from Hairs, white, soft, gross, and fat.

If the first Qualities, viz. Coldness and moisture be unequally tempered, viz.
more cold than moist, or more moist th^n cold, repair to those Chapters which
treat of the Temperatures offending in the first Qualities, and ve^^ ^ay find
out by them and that with a great deal of ease which Quality offends most.

Chap. 59. Signs of a cold and dry Temperature.
IF cold together with dryness be equally increased, the Body is hard, thin,
without Hairs; If they have any fat it is dispersed amongst the Flesh, both the
Hair and color follow the proportion of the coldness; but when in process of
time a hot and dry Temperature turns into a cold and dry, such are slender,
hard, rough, hairy and black, and subject to Diseases of Addust Choler; if
coldness exceed dryness, or the contrary, repair to what you were directed to
in the last Chapter.

In whatsoever we have spoken before or shall speak hereafter, take these
common Indications.

1. If the Member easily wax cold, it is a sign of coldness or rariety, if it
wax not easily cold, it is a sign of heat or thickness. 2. If a Member be not
easily moved, and be offended by drying Medicines, it is a Sign of dryness, but
if it be offended by moistning Remedies, it is a sign of moistness. 3. Always
consider the bigness of the Bones, for ^^mtimes a Member may seem slender when
it is not so (...) respect of the Muscles, but only the Bones are small, and
sometimes a Member seems great, not because the ^o^es are so, but by reason of
the multitude of Flesh. 4. The sollid parts of the Body, can by no means be
^ade moister than they should, it is well if you can keep them from overdrying,
but those parts which are in^^^cepted between these may possibly be filled with
moisture. 5. That is the proper nourishment of the Similary ^arts which is done
by opposition, not by attraction by the Vessels, and this shall suffice; we
pass now to that remains.
Culpeper.
Although I love Brevity with all my heart, yet me^^inks Galen is a little too
concise in this, I shall therefor give my Supplement, but before I give it,
take a Caution or two.

1. Complexion, or Temperature of Body is better judged by an Argument a
priore, than by an Argument ^posteriore, from the Nativity than from Effects of
(...), for Foreign Climates and Sickness alter the color.

2. The Conditions may be altered from bad to good.

1. By Nature. 2. By the God of Nature.

By Nature when a Fortune is Lord of the Nativity.

By the God of Nature when Grace works above Nature.

3. Dreams may be altered diverse ways.

1. By inordinate studying after, or thinking of a thing, for then the
Apprehension follows the same tract even in sleep. 2. By a corrupt Humor in the
Stomach, for be the Complexion Chollerick, yet if a Melancholy Humor afflict
the Stomach, the Dreams will rather be of Frighting than of Fighting. 3. False
Dreams may happen by the Illusions of evil Spirits. 4. True Dreams may be
caused by the Revelation of good Angels. 5. Variety of Food sometimes varieth
the color of the Excrements of the Belly.

These be the Cautions, and according to these Cautions, so understand these
following Rules, which you shall find Martialled in this order; 1. Of the
Complexions Simple. 2. Of the Complexions Commixed.


In each, what Diet and Exercise is fittest for them.

Sanguine Complexion.
Description.
A Man or Woman in whose Body heat and moisture abounds, is said to be Sanguine
of Complexion, such are usually of a middle Stature, strong composed Bodies,
Fleshy but not Fat, great Veins, smooth Skins, hot and moist in feeling, their
Body is Hairy, if they be Men they have soon Beards, if they be Women it were
rediculous to expect it; there is a redness intermingled with white in their
Cheeks, their Hair is usually of a blackish brown, yet sometimes flaxed, their
Appetite is good, their Digestion quick, their Urine yellowish and thick, the
Excrements of their Bowels reddish and firm, their Pulse great and full, they
dream usually of red things and merry conceits.

Conditions.
As for their Conditions they are merry cheerful Creatures, bounteful, pitiful,
merciful, courteous, bold, trusty, given much to the games of Venus, as though
they had been an Apprentice seven years to the Trade, a little thing will make
them weep, but so soon as it is over, no further grief sticks to their Hearts.

Diet and Exercise fitting.
They need not be very scrupulous in the quality of their Diet, provided they
exceed not in quantity, because the Digestive Virtue is so strong.

Excess in small Beer engenders clammy and sweet Phlegm in such Complexions,
which by stopping the pores of the Body, engenders Quotidian Agues, the
Chollick and Stone, and pains in the Back.

Inordinate drinking of strong Beer, Ale, and Wine, breeds hot Rhewms Scabs and
Itch, St. Anthonies fire, Q^insies, Pleuresies, Inflammations, Fevers, and red
Pimples.

Violent Exercise is to be avoided because it inflames the Blood, and breeds
one-day Fevers.

Chollerick Complexion.
Description.
WE call that Man Chollerick in whose Body heat and dryness abounds or is
predominate, such persons are usually short of Stature, and not fat, it may be
because the heat and dryness of their Bodies consumes radical moisture, their
Skin rough and hot in feeling, and their Bodies very hairy, the Hair of their
Heads is yellowish, red or flaxen for the most part, and curls much, the color
of their face is tawny or Sunburnt, they have some Beards, they have little
hollow hazel Eyes, their Concoction is very strong insomuch that they are able
to digest more than they appetite, their Pulse is swift and strong, their Urine
yellow and thin, they are usually costive, they dream of fighting, quarrelling,
fire, and burning.

Conditions.
As for Conditions they are naturally quick witted, bold, no way shame-fac'd,
furious, hasty, quarrelsom, fraudulent, eloqent, corragious, stout-hearted
Creatures, not given to sleep much, but much given to jesting, mocking, and
lying.

Diet and Exercise fit.
A Chollerick man is oftener hurt by much fasting and much drinking than by much
eating, for much fasting weakens Nature in such people, and fills the Body full
of Chollerick Humors, and breeds adust Humors, let such eat meats hard of
Digestion, as Beef, Pork, etc. and leave Danties for weaker Stomachs.

Moderate drinking of small Beer does him good, for it cools the fiery heat of
his Nature, moistneth the Body which is dried by the heat of his Complexion,
and relieves radical moisture, but let a man of such a Complexion fly from Wine
and strong Beer as fast as he would fly from a Dragon, for they inflame the
Liver, and breed burning and hectic Fevers, Choler and hot Dropsies, and
bring a man to his Grave in the prime of his Age.

Much Exercise is likewise bad for Chollerick People and b^eeds Inslamation and
adustion of Blood, the yellow Jaundice, Consumptions, Fevers, Costiveness and
Agues.

Melancholy Complexion.
Description.
A Melancholy person is one whose Body cold and dryness is predominate, and
not such a one as is sad sometimes as the vulgar dream, they are usually slender
and not very tall, of swa^thy duskish color, rough Skin, cold and hard in
feeling, they have very little Hair on their Bodies and are long without
Beards, and sometimes they are Beardless in age, the Hair of their Heads is
dusky brown usually, and sometimes duskie flaxen their appetite is far better
than their concoction usually, by reason appetite is caused of a sour vapor
sent up by the Spleen which is the Seat of Melancholy, to the Stomach, their
Urine is pale, their dung of a clayish color and broken, their Pulse slow,
they dream of frightful things, black, darkness, and terrible businesses.

Conditions.
They are naturally Covetous, Self-lovers, Cowards, afraid of their own
Shadows, fearful, careful, solitary, lumpish, unsociable, delighting to be
alone, st^bborn, ambitious, Envious, of a deep cogitation, obstinate in
Opinion, mistrustful, suspicious, spiteful, sq^emish, and yet slovenly, they
retain Anger long, and aim at no small things.

Diet and Exercise fitting.
By all means let Melancholy Men avoid excess both in eating and drinking, let
them avoid all meats hard of digestion, especially such as are Students or lead
a Sedentary life; let them use meats that are light of digestion, and drink
often at meat. Excess either in meat or strong liquor, causes crudities and
rawness at the Stomach, Idle and strange imaginatious and fancies, a stinking
Breath, Headache, Toothach, forgetfulness, shortness of breath, Consumptions,
Phtisicks, third day Agues, the Chollick and Illiack passions, and Dropsies.

Much Exercise is very profitable for such, not only because it helps
digestion, but also, because it destributeth the Vital Spirit throughout the
Body, and consumes those superfluous Vapors by insensible Transpiration, which
causes those idle fancies and imaginations in men.

Phlegmatic Complexion.
Description.
SUch People in whom coldness with moisture abounds are called Phlegmatic, yet
are usually not very tall, but very fat; some you shall find almost as thick as
they are long, their Veins and Arteries are small, their Bodies without Hair,
and they have but ^^ttle Beards, their hair is usually flaxen or light brown,
their face white and pale, their Skin smooth, cold and moist in touching; both
Appetite and Digestion is very weak in them, their Pulse little and low, their
Urine pale and thick, but the excrements of their bowels usually thin, they
dream of great rains, water, and drowning.

Conditions.
As for Conditions, they are very dull, heavy and slothful, like the Scholar
that was a great while a learning a Lesson, but when Once he had it -- he had
quickly forgotten it: They are drowsy, sleepy, cowardly forgetful Creatures,
as swift in motion as a Snail, they travail (and that is but seldom) as though
they intended to go 15. miles in 14. days, yet are they shame faced and sober.

Diet and Exercise fitting.
People of this Complexion of all other ought to use a very slender Diet, for
fasting cleanses the Body of those gross and unconcocted Humors which
Phlegmatic People are usually as full of as an Egg is of Meat: What they do
eat, let it be of light digestion, a Cup of strong Beer, and now and then a cup
of Wine is no ways unwholsom for them of this Complexion that are minded to
keep their Bodies in health.

Much Meat and Drink fills their Bodies full of Indigestion, Wind, and
Stitches, Quotidian Agues and Dropsies, Falling sickness and Gouts, Rhewms and
Catharres.

Much Exercise is very healthful for them unless they love their laziness
better than their health, for by that means gross Humors are made thin and
expelled by sweat, the Memory is quickened and the Skin clarified.

Thus much for Complexions taken Simply by themselves without commixture one
with another; as for Medicinal Remedies for their superabounding, I omitted it,
considering it may be found by what has gone before, unless by such dolts that
forget one line as fast as they read another.

I come now to their Commixture, which as far as I can find within the compass
of my Pia Matter, are these that follow.

1. Chollerick-Melancholly. 2. Melancholly-Chollerick. 3. Melancholly-Sanguine.
4. Sanguine-Melancholly. 5. Sanguine-Flegmatick. 6. Flegmatick-Sanguine. 7.
Flegmatick-Chollerick. 8. Chollerick-Flegmatick.
Let none object to me, that there may be more commixtures than these, as
Chollerick-Sanguine Flegmatick-Melancholly and the like, for I can scarce
believe it, and if you do but heed how and in what order the Signs of the
Zodiac arise, you may happily be of my Opinion, and therefore of these, and
these only in order.

Of a Chollerick-Melancholly Complexion.
IT is a thing very difficult if not impossible to find a man in whom two
Complexions are equally predominant, but one will more or less excel, therefore
where Choler exceeds in chief, and next that Melancholy, that man I call
Chollerick-Melancholly.

Description.
They are higher of Stature than such as are Simply Chollerick, by reason their
radical moisture is more prevalent, yet have they little lean Bodies, rough and
hard Skin, meanly hairy, and but meanly neither, pretty temperate in feeling in
respect of Heat, swarthy color, their Hair of their Head is of a Chestnut
color or light brown, their digestion is meanly strong, their Pulse meanly
strong, yet something slow, their Urine of a pale yellow and thin, their
Excrements yellow and hard, they dream of falling from high places, Robberies,
Murders, Hurts proceeding from fire, fighting or anger.

Conditions.
Such people by natural inclination are very quick Witted, excellent Students,
yet will they begin many businesses ere they finish one, they are bold,
furious, quarrelsom, something fraudulent, prodigal and eloquent, they are not
so unconstant and scornful as Chollerick men are, but more suspicious, and
fretful, more solitary and studious after Curiosities, and retain their anger
longer than Chollerick men do.

Diet and Exercise fitting.
Let them observe great moderation in Meat and Drink, for Meats hard of
digestion engenders tough Phlegm in such Bodies, and will bring their Bodies to
an Asthma ere they are aware of it. Above all let such people avoid excess in
drinking, for much small drink breeds Fligm in them, and much strong spoils the
Brain, causes Scabs and Itch and breaking out of heat about the Body.

Moderate Exercise is not only convenient but also very profitable for such
persons.

Melancholly-Chollerick Complexion.
Description.
SUch are usually tall of stature, yet are their Bodies somewhat slender and
dry, their Skin rough, hard, and cold in feeling, they have but very little
Hair on their Bodies, and are long without Beards, they have also much
superfluities at the Nose, the Face of a dark pale color, their Hair usually
of a blackish brown color, their digestion weak and something less than their
Appetite, their Pulse slow, their Urine subcitrine and thin, their egestion
sallow colored and something thin; dreamings are of falling down from high
places, vain idle and fearful things.

Conditions.
As for Conditions they are very gentle and sober, willing to do good,
admirable students, delighting to be alone, very shamefaced and bashful,
somewhat fretful, con^tant to their Friends, and true in all their actions.

Diet and Exercise fitting.
Excess of eating, drinking, and sleeping, are as great Enemies to the Nature
of such a man as R^ts-bane, for they fill the Body full of tough and congealed
Humors, from whence proceed Morphew and other Infirmities of the Skin, and
other Infirmities that are more than Skin deep, as stoppings of the Liver,
corruptions of the Lungues, Asthma, Phtisick, Wind, Belly-ach, Chollick. If
such will be ruled by me (if they will not I cannot help it) let them eat and
drink moderately, let their care be to suffice Nature and not to stuff their
Guts with Meat, nor make a Hog-wash-tub of their Bellies with drink, I will not
deny them, but advise them now and then to drink a cup of strong Beer or Wine,
especially after meat, for excess of small Beer cools the Liver, hinders their
digestion, and bids them beware of a Dropsy, it spoils both Apprehension and
Memory, and fills the Head full of superfluites, but --

The immoderate use of strong Beer fills that Brain full of Fancies which
should be employed about better matters.

Moderate Exercise is very good for them, and helps much to destribute vital
heat, which in this Complexion seems to be but weak; above all things let them
have a care of catching wet at their feet.

Melancholly-Sanguine Complexion.
Description.
THey are tall of stature, and have big, fleshy, ^^^m, strong bodies, the
color of their Face of a darkish red, their Skin neither hard nor rough, and
as little cold, but temperate in respect of softness and warmness, their Bodies
are not usually very hairy, yet have they soon Beards, their digestion is good
and laudable, their Urine of a light Saffron color, mean in substance, neither
too thick nor too thin, the egestion or Excrements of the Belly reddish and
soft, their dreams are pleasant, and many times happen truly to come to pass

Conditions.
They are more liberal, bolder, and merrier than Melancholy persons are, as
also less cowardly, not so pensive nor solitary, neither are they troubled with
such fearful conceits, but are gentle, sober, patient, trusty, affable,
courteous, studious to do others good.

Diet and Exercise fitting.
For as much as digestion in these is good, they need not be so penurious in
Diet as the former, much fasting fill their Body full of wind, and much strong
Beer and Wine, inflames the Blood.

Moderate Exercise purifies their Blood, strengthens their Bodies, and makes
their Skin clear.

Sanguine-Melancholly Complexion.
Description.
THey are mean of Stature, but strong well compact Bodies, fleshy but not fat,
big Veins and Arteries, smooth warm Skin, something hairy but not so hairy as
Sanguine people have: Their Hair is either black or a very black brown, their
Cheeks red, something clouded with duskiness, their Pulses great and full, the
Urine yellow and mean in respect of thickness and thinness, their digestion
good, the Excrements of their Bellies reddish and something thin, they usually
dream of deep Pits and Wells and sometimes of flying in the Air.

Conditions.
Their Conditions are much like to the Conditions of a Sanguine Man, but that
they are not altogether so merry nor so liberal, a spice of a Melancholy
temper being inherent in them.

As for Diet and Exercise, that which we described under Melancholly-Sanguine
will suffice for these also, only take notice that strong Liquor and violent.
Exercise is more subject to inflame the Blood.

Sanguine-Flegmatick Complexion.
Description.
THey are higher of Stature than Sanguine, with strong well set Bodies, not
very fat, their Hair is flaxen or very light brown, their Face is of a paler
red, than Sanguine peoples is, neither are their Bodies so hairy, their Pulse
is Moderate, their Appetite good, their Digestion indifferent; their Urine
subcitrine and mean in substance, their egestion white in some places and red
in others, they dream of flying in the Air, Rain and Waters.

Conditions.
As for Conditions they are less liberal and not so much addicted to the Sports
of Venus as Sanguine are, neither are their Spirits so bold, nor their Bodies
so hairy.

Diet and Exercise fitting.
Seeing the Digestion of such People is but meanly strong, let them not eat as
much in one day as they can digest in two, let their Diet be such as is not too
hard of digestion, for their Stomachs are nothing near so hot as an Estriches;
If they love their appetite better than their health, and will take in more
food than is fitting for them, let them expect the Chollick, small Pox, Meazles,
etc.

Let not their Drink be too small, for that makes but thin and watery Blood in
such Constitutions, it dulls their Brain, and causes Dropsies and Gouts.

Moderate Exercise is very profitable to consume their Superfluities.

Flegmatick-Sanguine Complexion.
Description.
FLegmatick-Sanguine people are but mean of stature, somewhat gross and fat of
Body, smooth soft Skin, and somewhat cold in touching, they have but few hairs
upon their Bodies and are long without Beards, their hair is light yellow,
light brown or flaxen, no ways curling, their color whitely, with some very
small redness, if any; their digestion is somewhat weak and less than their
Appetites, their Pulse small and low, their Urine somewhat thick and palish, they
sometimes dream of falling down from some high place into the water.

Conditions.
Their Conditions are so-so, between Phlegmatic and Sanguine, neither very
liberal nor very covetous, neither very idle nor much employed, neither very
merry nor very sad; rather fearful of the two than valiant.

Diet and Exercise fit.
Let them beware of overfilling themselves with meat, if they love their health
but half so well as they love their ^ase so they will; much eating and drinking
fills the Stomachs of such people full of raw humors, and sour Phlegm, engenders
the small Pox and Meazles, and dulls their wit, which naturally is none of the
quickest.

Strong Beer and Wine taken in Mediocrity is not h^rtful for them, and let them
take this from me, and say I told them the truth, the more they accustom their
Bodies to exercise, the better it is for them.

Flegmatick-Chollerick Complexion.
Description.
SUch are tall of stature but not so big nor yet so fat as Phlegmatic, their
Bodies are something hairy and they pretty soon have Beards, they have usually
Hair of a Chestnut color, not curling, and soft, their Faces of a tauny red,
full of Freckles, their Appetite and Digestion is indifferent, as being pretty
well met; a moderate and pretty full Pulse, their Urine subcitrine and mean in
respect of thickness, the Excrements of their Belly of a pale yellow and thick,
they usually dream of swimming in the Water, Snow, and Rain.

Conditions.
They are not such drowsy, lazy, ^leepy Creatures as Phlegmatic folks are, but
are nimbler, bolder, and kinder, merrier, and quicker witted.

Diet and Exercise convenient.
Although they may be a little bolder with their food than Phlegmatic may, yet
is digestion in them none of the strongest, and excess in meat fills their
Bodies with Choler, and punishes their Carcasses with Chollerick Diseases.

Excess of Drink spoils their Digestion, and weakens Nature, but moderate
Exercise refreshes it.

Chollerick-Flegmatick Complexion.
Description.
SUch are but mean of stature, but stout lusty strong Bodies, strong Bones,
well set Creatures, neither fat nor lean, but in that respect they keep the
Golden Mean, they have lusty great Bones, their Skin is hairy and moderate to
feeling in respect of heat and moisture, their Hair is yellowish or sandy
flaxen, and their Face of a tawnyish yellow color, their Digestion is good,
their Pulse swift, their Urine thin and of the color of Saffron, their
egestion yellow and hard, they dream of fighting, Lightning and Rain, hot Baths
and hot Waters,

Conditions.
Their Conditions are not much different from those of Chollerick men, only the
Vices of Choler is moderated by Phlegm, therefore a Chollerick-Flegmatick man
is nothing so vicious as one purely Chollerick; neither does any Humor set a
stop to the unbridled passions of Choler, so as Phlegm does, because it is so
contrary to it, judge the like by the rest.

Diet and Exercise fitting.
A slender Diet works the same evil effects in quality though not in quantity
that it does in Chollerick.

Much excess in strong Drink inflames the Blood, and out of such Inflammation
proceeds Putrefaction, which begets a Generation of rotten Fevers,
Pestilences, small Pox etc. Pleuresies, and Apostumes.

Let their Exerc^^e be neither violent nor ex^essive.

Thus I have done what I promised you, if any think some other mixtures may be,
which here be not set down (by reason of a Planet of a contrary nature, being
in the Ascendent at the Birth; as for example, If Mars should ascend in
Gemines, you may say the Nature would be Chollerick-Sanguine) he may by these
Rules find out the Description, Condition, and requisite Diet; If he think he
cannot, let him read this over till he can, and now and then between whiles
learn to scratch his Head with a pair of wiser Nails.

Lastly, Such as have any wit in their Heads, may hereby come to all the
judgment of Urine that I as yet know of, or where it grows.

But after a long degression I return to my Author whom I left at.

Chap. 60. Signs of a dry Stomach.
THe Indications of the Stomach when it is dryer than Naturally it ought to be,
are, If the par^^ be very thirsty, and is sufficed by a little Drink, but
burdened if he drink much, he spits much, and he delights in dry Meats, Imagine
meats roasted till they are burned, burned crusts of Bread and the like.

Culpeper.
Things Medicinal for a dry Stomach, are Syrup of Violets, Violet Leaves, and
Strawberry Leaves, Barberries, Lettice, Purslane, Roses, Apples, Cherries,
Strawberries, Water Lillies, Orrenges, Lemmons, Cucumers, Prunes, Tamarinds,
with many other things which you may find in my English Physician.

Chap. 61. Of a moist Stomach.
IF the Stomach be moister than it ought to be, the man is seldom a thirst, yet
will the Stomach endure much moisture, and takes delight only in moist meats.

Culpeper.
Simples Medicinal are, Galanga, Cinnamon, Pomegranate Pills, Mastich,
Wormwood, Mints, Mother of time, Sage, Rosemary Flowers, Cloves, Nutmegs, Annis
seeds, Cardamoms, Pepper.

If the Stomach be too moist, be sure that party has little Appetite to his
Victuals; in such a case, take, Cinnamon, Galanga, Cloves, Pomegranate Pills,
of each a like quantity; beat them to Powder and let the sick take half a dram
every morning in any convenient Liquor.

Chap. 62. Signs of a hot Stomach.
IF the Stomach be hot, it digests faster than the Appetite calls for food, nay
it usually makes a better shift with Meats hard of digestion than it does with
those that are easy, because it is subject to corrupt meats lights of
Digestion; it rejoices in hot Meats and Drinks, neither is it hurt by such as
are cold if they be moderately taken.

Culpeper.
It is to be supposed, that Galen speaks here of the Stomach Naturally hot, not
distempered by heat, for then dryness must of necessity be joined with it, and
indeed the Stomach is the Cook-room of the Body, and it cannot well have too
great a fire in it, unless you ^ire the House or the Chimney, I mean cause an
Inflammation in the Stomach or the Throat.

I shall only give this Caution, Let such accustom their Bodies to meats hard
of digestion, as Beef, Pork, Cheese, Herrings, Salt-fish etc.

Chap. 63. Signs of a cold Stomach.
THe Stomach that is cold by Nature has a very quick Appetite, I suppose
because that which causes the Appetite comes from the Spleen, but alas-a-day
when it has satisfied Appetite, the digestive faculty is not at home, or else
it is so feeble it is not able to do it is Office, and yet their misery is such,
they usually desire meats not easy to be digested, and therefore they are
always troubled with sour belchings, they cannot endure cold things should
outwardly be applied to their Stomachs; neither indeed can such as have hot
Stomachs endure hot things should be applied to that Region; but those
distempers which seize the Stomach by reason of some Disease, differ from those
that are Natural, for the Stomach diseased desires its contrary inwardly, viz.
if it be hot, it desires cold things, but when the heat is Natural it desires
its like.

Culpeper.
A Stomach naturally cold (for I told you before that was Galens meaning, and I
assure you I translated him at first sight) I say if the Stomach be naturally
cold, your best way is to warm it a little, you may do it, by taking a dram of
London Treacle every morning, or a little Mithridate, or Diagalanga, Aromaticum
Cariophylatum etc. or by eating a little green Ginger.

As for Simples, you may take the Roots of Fennel, Calamus Aromaticus, Avens,
Galanga, Ginger, the Leaves of Wormwood, Fennel, Mints, Sage, mother of time,
Squinanth, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Annis Seeds, Cardamoms, Pepper, etc. the
Leaves of Bawm, and Carduus.

Chap. 64. Of ill Temperatures commixed in the Stomach.
IF you fear a Commixture of Distemperatures in your Stomach, compare them with
the Simple tempers and you may easily find out what they be, neither would I
have you mind the Stomach alone, but also other parts of the Body, for it is not
the Stomach alone which makes men thirsty, but sometimes the Heart or Lungues,
which by drawing in air that is too hot and retaining it long, cause heat in
the Breast, and such desire drink no less than such whose Stomach is too hot,
but you may distinguish it thus, If the Breast be too hot, the thirst is not
^laid by drinking, and less quenched by drinking cold drink than by drinking
hot; also the Breathing in of cold air eases such whose Breast is hot, but
does no good at all to such whose Stomach is hot, by these notes then you may
distingnish them.

Chap. 65. Signs of cold Lungs.
THis is the greatest Indication of the coldness of the Lungs, when you feel a
manifest pain, offense and coldnss at your Breast by drawing in cold air, also
a warm air is frindly to them, and causes them to cough up their Excrements
with more ease.

Culpeper.
Things which heat the Lungs, are, Alicampane, Liquoris, Juice of Liquoris,
Lohoch of Fox Lungs, Bettony, Hysop, Bawm, Scabious, maiden Hair, the Flowers
and Conserves of these, together with Compositions made of them; also Juniper
Berries, sweet Almonds, Hazel Nuts, Figs, Dates, Raisons of the Sun, Nettle
Seeds etc.

Chap. 66. Signs of dry Lungs.
WHen the Lungs are dry, they want Excrements, to wit Phlegm, Spittle, and as
moisture of the Lungs causes an obscure Voice, so dryness of the same causes
a clear voice, and when they strain to speak vehemently or acutely, then
Excrements come from the Nose or Mouth, from which soever they come, they come
from the Lungs.

Culpeper.
If you find your Lungs be too dry, you may moisten them with Medicines, but be
sure they be such Medicines as strengthen them also; be not too busy
fiddle-faddling with your own Bodies, it is an easier matter for you to make
your selves sick than well, yet I say if you manifestly find your Lungs too
dry, and find your selves withal prejudiced in health by it, thus you may
moisten them, viz. by taking Lohoch Sa^um, now and then with a Liquoris stick;
as also Syrup of Violets, Poppies, and Coltsfoot.

Simples Medicinal are, the Seeds of white Poppies, Jujubes, Sebestens,
Strawberry Leaves, Violet Leaves and Flowers, etc.

Chap. 67. Of the Voice.
YEt would I have you understand that greatness of the Voice comes not
altogether from heat, neither does smalness of it in like manner from cold, but
greatness of the Voice comes sometimes from the largeness of the Windpipe, and
smalness of Voice from its straitness; therefore if you would judge by the
voice, you ought withal to regard the natural temper.

Chap. 68. Of a clear and rough Voice.
A Clear smooth voice shows smoothness of the Windpipe, as roughness of the
Voice shows roughness of the same part; smoothness of the Windpipe shows a
moderate temper, roughness shows dryness, for roughness is caused through the
inequality of a dry Body, for the dryness of the Similarie parts whereof that
Artery is made ( viz. the Windpipe) shows either a defect or unequal
distribution of moisture to it.

Culpeper.
I would now willingly write a word or two to Musicians, whose faculty and
worthy Science I exceedingly delight in, narrowness of the Windpipe is the
cause of a shrill Voice, and that is the reason Women and Boys whose Windpipe (I
could have said Trachaea Arteria had I been minded) is narrow, sing a Trebble
best, and because the Windpipe even in some of those is narrower than in
others, some of them are able to sing higher than others, even above E-la.

On the contrary, such men in whom the Windpipe is very large, are able to sing
a deep Base, even below Gamma-ut, to double B-mi, double A-re, and some few
happily to double Gamma-ut.

Then consider that harshness of Voice proceeds from roughness of the Windpipe,
as cleerness of Voice from the smoothness thereof, something therefore to help a
harsh Voice.

1. By way of Caution, Avoid all Salt and sowt things, for they make the
Windpipe rough. 2. By way of Advice, Sweet things must needs make it smooth,
but use them moderately lest you clam up your Lungs.
Then consider whether your Lungues be too hot or too cold, the for^going Rules
will certify you, and as you find your Constitution by them, so use such sweet
things as are either hot or cold, you have them both mentioned to you before.

Chap. 69. Of an Acute Voice.
THe Voice cannot be acute by Nature, without narrowness of the Windpipe, nor
grave without Latitude of it; narrowness of the Windpipe arises from coldness
of Nature, Latitude from heat.

And thus much for the Explanation of Temperaments.

Culpeper.
In the first part of this little Chapter, Galen hit the Nail at the head, when
he says that the Voice cannot be acute by Nature unless the Windpipe be narrow
etc. this every Musician will perceive if he do but heed that he contracts his
Windpipe when he sings sharps, but dilates it when he sings flats.

But that narrowness of the Windpipe proceeds from coldness of Nature, and e
contra, is as true as Don Quixotte his Windmill was a Knight Errant; And I
disprove it thus, All Chollerick men have usually shril Voices, but Chollerick
men are hot and dry. Ergo,

Chap. 70. Indications of Natures Instruments.
Whatsoever Errors are subject to the Senses, either about greatness, or
Formation, or Number, or Situation, are very easy to be known, but such parts
as cannot be discerned by sense, the knowledge of some of them is attained with
great difficulty, of others with great ease, therefore the bigness and form
both of the Head and Brain is easy to be discerned, of which we have spoken
before, as also such things as belong to the Breast, Shoulders, Arms, Elbows,
Hands, Hips, Thighs, Legs and Feet, it is no hard matter to know them, either by
their bigness and formation, whether they be in due order or not, and according
to their number or parts of which their Composition consists, the detriment of
every operation is seen as clear as the Sun in a Summers day; but by your
leaves, those things within the Body are not so easy discerned.

Chap. 71. Of the Stomach.
THe Stomach of a certain man which I beheld was so small and round, and seated
so near the Bowels, that it manifestly appeared both to the sight and feeling.

Chap. 72. Of the Bladder.
ALso I happened to behold the Bladder of a certain Man so small and exposed to
public view, that when it was full of water, it caused a swelling manifestly
to be seen outwardly, yet could not I take any manifest Indications from any
other external part.

We ought now to endeavor to try whether in these and such things as those,
there be a virtue in Nature, or a vice when they are not subject to sense, and
of this although we cannot comprehend a certain knowledge, yet may we
artificially make a probable conjecture, As for example in the Liver.

Chap. 73. Of the Liver.
I Have seen some, and indeed very many, whose Veins were very narrow and
small, and their whole Body of a naughty color, if they had taken in a pretty
quantity of meat especially such as is windy, thick, and tenacious, some of
them felt a kind of weight as it were on the right side of their Belly, others
felt a stretching pain there in these, now it is probable that the Liver was
small, and the passages thereof very narrow.

Chap. 74. Of a Phlegmatic man vomiting Choler.
I Saw another, the whole habit of whose Body gave Indications of Phlegm, and yet
every day he vomited red Choler, I thought good to view the Excrements of his
Belly, and I could see but little Choler appear in them, wherefore I
conjectured that the passage which carried the Chollerick humor to the Bowels
was either very strait or stopped, and we know this appears by the Skin in
many, as in such as have the yellow Jaundice, and it is also found in the
dissection of many Creatures, and therefore he that desires to be expert in the
knowledge of such things, let him be much conversant at Dissections, so shall he
gain much knowledge and reap much profit by it, we wrote of these severally
before, we only make mention of some examples of it here, that so men might be
the more inflamed with a^^ earnest desire to learn. But enough of these things.

Chap. 75. How Bodies may be known to be sick.
HE that would be accounted an expert Physician, must be well acquainted with
unhealthful Indications, that so he may know when a party is sick, and of these
some are subject to sense by those things which are within them, by change of
Nature, in magnitude, color, form, or Figure, and Situation, hardness and
softness, cold and heat.

Others are not subject to sight nor sense, and they are to be known by the
hindering or hurting of the operations, pains or unnatural swelling, by all
these or some of these.

Chap. 76. Signs of an afflicted Brain.
PArticularly the Signs of such as are ill in their Brain, or have that Noble
part of the Body indisposed are subject to madness or folly, or their Senses or
Imagination is hurt, and not able to perform its Office as it should do, and
the Humor offending may be known sometimes by what humor comes out by the Mouth,
Nostrils or Ears, or by pain in some particular part of the Head.

Chap. 77. Signs of an afflicted Heart.
AFflictions of Heart are known by difficulty of Breath, and also by the
trembling and usual motion of the Heart it self, by the motion of the Pulses,
by the heat of the Body, either soon heating or soon cooling, by Fevers and
Shiverings, by change of color, fainting, and pain.

Chap. 78. Signs of an afflicted Liver.
INfirmities of the Liver are found out by either defect or superaboundance of
Humors, when the Humors are turned to places against Nature, as the Choler to
the Blood in the yellow Jaundice etc. by il color, by unnatural digestion, by
desiring to feed upon things that are not natural food, by superfluous
Excrements, by heaviness, and pain, and swellings, not only at the Region of
the Liver, but also in other parts of the Body, nay sometimes the Liver may be
the cause both of difficulty of breathing and coughing.

Chap. 79. Signs of an afflicted Stomach.
YOu may rest confident the Stomach is afflict^d when people desire food that
is either too moist or too dry, when it cannot cast up the excrements it ought
to do, when it is molested by Hiccoughs, Belchings, strainings to Vomit,
Vomitings, and what humor offends you may know by the color of what is vomited
up.

Culpeper.
If you find your Stomach nauseous, your best way is to clear it by a Vomit,
provided it be not a Woman with child, nor subject to the fits of the Mother,
and afterward strengthen it as you have been taught before.

Chap. 80. Signs of an afflicted Breast and Lungs.
Culpeper.
IT is my Opinion at present, that the Breast is never afflicted but it
afflicts the Lungs, therefore I put them both together, though my Author
mentions only the Breast.

Galen.
The Infirmities of the Breast are known by difficulty of Breathing, by
coughing and pains in the Breast, and the difference of what is spit out by
coughing gives Indication, what it is that offends the Breast.

Also the ilnesses of the Asphera Arteria or Windpipe, are known by difficulty
of breathing, pains in that place, offense in the Voice, or difficulty of
speaking, an according to the same proportion it holds true throughout the
Body, sure Indications are taken from swelling, pain, excrements, and hurt of
the Operation of the ill or afflicted part.

The Indications of excressences not natural, are taken from their hardness,
softness, color, and Inflammations, as for example, in the small Pox, for pain
what part of the Body soever it takes possession of, it shows either solution
of unity (as in Wounds etc.) or else sudden alteration.

A solution of Unity (as some Authors call it) or of continuity (as my Author
here does) is caused by cutting, eating Humors, fraction or breaking, and
stretching.

The substance of the Body is altered by heat, cold, dryness and moisture.

The operation of a part is hurt three ways.

1. When it performs it painfully. 2. When it performs it faultily. 3. When it
performs it not at all.
Culpeper.
Although this be so plain, that my Authors meaning may as conspicuously be
discerned as the nose in a man's Face, yet because some men have as little
Brains as other some have Noses, I shall explain his last words.

1. A man's Arm performs its office painfully when he can scarce lift it up to
his Head. 2. A man's Arm performs its office faultily when it has the Palsy.
3. A man's Arm performs not its office at all when he has lost the use of it.
By instancing in this one particular member you may (unless your Brains be in
Vtopia) find out all the rest.
Chap. 81. Of the difference of those things that are cast out.
OF such things as are expelled or cast out, some of them are like the parts of
the Body that are afflicted, others are excrements, or at least like
excrements, for by what is cast out from any part of the Body is Naturally
Indications given of the constitution of that part: But of this we have spoken
more fully in our Treatise of the Members of the Body which none before us
ever brought into a regular form; and indeed though the Ancients made many
beginnings, yet none drew Physic up into an entire Body before us, to that
then we refer you.

Culpeper.
Galen wrote many great Volumns in Physic it is confessed, but lest I should
either put you upon Impossibilities in this particular, for want either of
Books or learning to use them when you have them, or else set you to pick out a
grain of Gold from out of a Cart-load of dung, I shall explain his meaning in
this place.

1. He tells you some of the things expelled are like the parts of the Body
afflicted, as when such as are troubled with the Consumption of the Lungs, spit
out such filth as resembles the flesh of their Lungues, or as it was in the
last Epidemical Disease in London, when people with their excrements voided
things like the skins of their Guts. 2. Others he says are like Excrements, as
when men from their Lungues spit laudable Phlegm, or from their Bowels avoid
laudable Excrements.
Chap. 82. Signs of a Sickness to come.
INdications of a Sickness approaching steer their course in a middle path,
between those which accompany sound and sick men, for in sound men all things
are according to Nature, but quite and clean against Nature in such as are
sick, between both these lie the Indications of Neutral Bodies which is our
scope at this time.

Some of the Indications of Neutral Bodies agree with those things according to
Nature, but differ either in quantity, quality, or time; again other of them
are contrary to Nature, but less than in such as are sick, therefore the
dispositions of such people as are falling into a sickness are properly
Neutral, these are different. for, 1. Some of them show health a coming. 2.
Some show sickness is near, all show Neutrality in the present condition, for
when Indications of health appear to the sick, they may be called healthful
Signs, when Signs of sickness appear to the healthful, they may be called
unhealthful Signs, we thought good to comprehend them both under this word
N^utral, neither need any Body spend much time in admiration, that we devide
all Indications into these three Heads, Healthful Unhealthful and Neutral, if
they do but consider, that such Signs as we call healthful, relate only to
People at present in perfect health, such as we call Unhealthful, relate only
to such as are sick without so much as casting an eye to health to come, both
do it properly without calling help of much reason, but rather of sense; such
as are Neutral Indications are much judged of by reason, knowledge and Judgment.


The difference of Neutral Indications is twofold.

1. Such as differ only in quantity, quality or time, but not at all in species
from the things that Physicians call [according to Nature] as appetite to meat,
either too much increased or deminishe^, or not taken at convenient times, or
unusual meats, or superfluities of meats, which are either too few or too many,
too dry or too hard, or either want of superaboundance of moist excrements, or
excrements that differ in color, consistence or time of excreting from the
Ancient Natural custom, more or less drink in respect of quantity, hot or cold
drink in respect of quality, too frequent coming to, or too long absenting from
the School of Venus, sweating, motion, or the like, retention and immoderate
flowing of the Menstruis, or the Hemorrhoids, all these are Neutral Indications
of a sickness to come, judge the like by an unaccustomed dullness of mind, an
usual forgetfulness, troublesome sleeps, deafness of the Ears, dullness of the
sight, the bulk it self of the Body either greater or lesser than usual, or
whiter, redder, paler or blacker, oftener sneezing, belching, or breaking wind
than usual, the excrements of the Brain, purged out by the Ears, Mouth, or
Nose, altered either in Qantity, Quality, or Time; and to conclude, Whatsoever
Natural thing else in the Body of man is altered in respect of Quantity,
Quality, or Time. 2. The Second kind of Indications consist in such things as
are not natural to the Body, and yet they are not so violent neither to cause a
Disease, such are, Gnawings at the Stomach or Guts, pain, Vomiting, Headache,
Heaviness of the Head, overmuch sleeping, or watching, these show the
disposition to be either sick or Neutral, judge the like when the Senses are
burdened with any thing against Nature, so long as they are not immoderately
burdened, neither hinder a man from his usual Employments, they are but Neutral
signs of a Disease; for instance, when whatsoever is tasted, tastes salt or
bitter, though it be nothing less, when things smell stinking to the Nose,
though in themselves they have no such smell in them, noise in their Ears,
black, blew, or red things appearing before the Eyes when there is no such
thing present, numbness or soreness in feeling, stretching, compression,
gnaving or heaviness of Body, all these show a Neutral disposition at present,
and a Sickness to come
Chap. 83. Signs of a Sick Body.
WE are now come to the Indications of a Sickness present, whereof some
prognosticate health, others death, the first of these may be called healthful,
the other unhealthful in the Genus, dangerous in the Species; these are taken
from the strength and weakness of the operations in General, if you take them
in a General way, from the operations of some speceal part if you take them in
a special way.

These may partly be known by the Members of the Body afflicted, taken, 1. Per
se. 2. Per accidens. As by excrements, because in them appears signs either of
concoction or crudity, and therefore they must needs show that Nature overcomes
the offending matter, or the offending matter, Nature, or at least that they
equally contend for Dignities. If Nature overcome the offending matter, the
Indication is Healthful, the Game goes as it should do, but if the offending
matter grow too strong for Nature, the sign is Unhealthful, but if they contend
in strength, and you cannot tell which way the Scales will turn, that is a
Neutral Sign.


Again, Such as show manifest concoction are Healthful Signs, such as show
crudity are Unhealthful, such as show neither, are Neutral.

There is besides these another kind of Neutral Signs, that is, when sometimes
in the same party and same Disease, the Signs give Indication of one thing one
while, and a while after of its contrary, and these are called critical or
decretory accidents, of which we have spoken in our Treatise of the crisis of
Diseases.

Chap. 84. Of Causes Healthful, Vnhealthful, and Neutral.
Seeing therefore that of Causes some are Healthful, some Unhealthful, and
others Neutral, we shall speak first of all Healthful Causes, and of these, 1.
Some are such as preserve Health. 2. Others such as restore Health being lost.


Of these the dignity belongs to the former, they deserve to carry the Bell
away, and therefore we shall begin with them, and in so doing we must begin
with a Body of an excellent Constitution, and show the means to maintain it in
such a plight, for if God had determined man of an unalterable Body, this
Constitution must needs so have continued still, and never needed any art to
help Nature, but because the Body of man is always subject to alteration,
corruption and change, therefore it stands in continual need of help.

Chap. 85. How many ways our Bodies may be altered.
AS many ways as our Bodies may be altered, so so many remedies are required
to help, and so many Conservatives to preserve; but because all correctives
work by degrees, and all infirmities have on, Physicians usually call those
Conservatives which by strengthening Nature preserve health in vigor.

Our bodies are altered by some things necessarily, by other some not
necessarily; I say it is altered by some necessarily because they cannot be
avoided, as the Air, we must needs receive some of it in, by eating and
drinking, by sleeping and waking; but to run amongst the wild Beasts, or
against the Swords is not of necessity, therefore about the first of these this
Conservative art is requisite not, about the second; to such things then as
must of necessity alter the Body now turn we, and they are these, 1. Air. 2.
Motion and rest, both of the whole Body, and of every part thereof. 3. Sleeping
and watching. 4. Meat and Drink. 5. Excrements of the Body. 6. Affections of
the Soul.


1. The Air alters the Body, as it cools, heats, moistens or dries, or
according as these qualities are joined together, or the whole substance of the
Air altered.

2. Motion and rest offend on both hands, when they exc^ed a measure also by
drying, moistning, heating, or cooling, or by joining any of these together.

3. Sleeping and watching hurt by the same means.

6. Affections of the Soul hurt by the same means.

But as for eating and drinking and expelling Eccrements, the immoderate use of
them hurts both by themselves and by other means, or causes, but of all these
we have written in another Treatise.

All these well used are preservers of health, but ill used are destroyers of
it, for when the Body desires motion, exercise is healthful, but when it needs
(you may take the word [ desires] before under that notion [ needs] if you
please, for many men and women desire many times things which are not needful
for them, and I had translated it so before had I thought of it) I say when the
Body needs rest, idleness is better than Exercise, for that helps Nature when
the other weakens it.

The like you may say of meat and drink and all the rest, being given in due
measure and quality, when the Body needs them, they are healthful, but
necessity, measure, and quality erring, they assalt Nature to thrust her out of
her House of Clay (or slime which you will.)

If you please you may ad Time as a Companion to all these, for none but a
Blockhead will doubt, but if both quantity and quality of such things as Nature
needs, be administered at an unfitting time, the occasion of time may be the
occasion of illness to the Body, for seeing the Body of man is very subject to
change, therefore sometimes it needs one, sometimes another help.

Therefore seeing in these very intentions, some causes are Healthful, we will
make some repetition of what belongs to our purpose, when the Air is temperate
to a Body of the best Constitution, a moderate quantity both of meat and drink,
sleeping and watch, motion and rest, etc. is convenient, but when the Air is
distempered, you must vary the rest accordingly, that so the Body may neither
shake for cold, nor sweat for heat; as for motion, when your body begins to be
weary, leave off exercise; the quantity of food is known by the perfectness of
digestion, and the excrements avoided ought to be according to the quantity of
the food taken in, for a good Nature appetites no more than it concocts, and
the contrary shows a failing in Nature; also Nature when it is strong is able
to set bounds to sleep, and when the Body needs no more, the man wakes, there
is no failing in the Excrements, of Urine, Dung etc. and if you consider this
but well, you may easily see such a man is not easily moved by affections of
the mind, viz. Anger, sadness, fury, fear, envy etc. for these alter the Body
from its natural state.

Culpeper.
Although what Galen here says be plain, and as true as plain, yet for the
Benefit of young Students, I shall explain him a little, in his six things not
Natural, for indeed the right course of preserving health, consists principally
in the right use of these.

They are as we told you, 1. Air. 2. Meat and Drink. 3. Sleeping and Watching.
4. Excrements of the Body. 5. Exercise and Rest. 6. Affections of the Mind.


Of all these in Order, and that so plain that a Child may understand it, that
can but read his Paternoster.

The first part consists in Air, in which consider, 1. Its Temperature. 2. Its
Difference. 3. Its Quality. 4. Its Situation. 5. How it alters our Bodies. 6.
Its Utility or Profit.


First, Air for its Temperature.

1. Considered in it self is cold and moist, but not so moist as cold, for it
produces the coldest effects to mortals, viz. Snow and Ice, and is indeed the
coldest Element. 2. Considered by accident as it participates of the reflective
Beams of the Sun, it is hot and moist, and at some times far hotter and far
moister than at other some, and so we are here to consider it.
Secondly, The Differences of Air are two.

1. Good and Temperate. 2. Evil and Intemperate.
Thirdly, The Quality of the Air is altered two ways, and it must then you
will confess alter the Body as many.

1. By the Region as it is well or evil tempered, and that is the reason Agues
are so rife in Fenny Countries. 2. By the wind, and so, 1. The East Wind is hot
and dry, attractive blasting. 2. West Wind cold and moist expulsive. 3. South
Wind hot and moist, putrefactive. 4. The North Wind cold and dry, retentive.

Fourthly, Situation of the place alters the Air. For, 1. Stony ground is cold
and dry. 2. Sandy ground, hot and dry. 3. Fenny ground, cold and moist. 4.
Woody and fat Land, hot and moist.


Fifthly, The Body of man may be altered by the Air three ways.

1. By the Quality of the Air which alters the Body in respect of Region, Wind,
and Situation of place. 2. By the substance of the Air, which, 1. Being gross,
thick, or cloudy, makes fat Bodies and dull Wits. 2. Being pure and clear,
makes nimble Bodies and quick Wits.
3. By snddain change of Air, for when sickly people go out of a bad Air into a
good, they find themselves the worse for the present, because Nature abhors all
sudden changes.
Sixthly, The profit and operations of the Air upon the Body of man are these,
1. It helps to engender both Vital and Animal Spirit. 2. It cools the Heart by
Inspiration. 3. It is the Author of Life, Diseases, and Death to mortal men and
women.


Meat and Drink was noted to be the second part to be handled, in which
consider,
1. Their Quantity. 2. Their Quality. 3. Custom. 4. Order. 5. Time. 6. Age.
First, The Quantity of Food must be considered, 1. According to the substance
of the meat whether hard or easy of Digestion. 2. According to the Quality of
the Food, whether hot, cold, dry, or moist in temper, and in each whether they
be moderate or immoderate. 3. According to the Complexion of the Eater, of
which we showed you plentifully before.


Secondly, The Quality of the Food, is to be considered, 1. As it is good or
evil. 2. As it is hot, cold, dry, or moist in Operation, and in all these,
whether it be temperately, meanly, or extremely so. 3. As they nourish much or
little. 4. As they make Juice, thick or thin, watery or gross, mean or temperate.


Thirdly, As for Custom in eating and drinking, 1. It must be well regarded. 2.
It is like another Nature. 3. It makes bad meats to some better than good
meats. 4. Such meats as please the Pallats of the Eaters best are usually
soonest digested, but not always. 5. If Custom be bad and must be best, do it,
1. By degrees, 2. In time of health if possible.


Fourthly, In treating of the order of eating and drinking, I shall take them
apart, and so speak of them severally.

For Meat, 1. If the Body be bound, eat first such Meats as mollify, if loose,
such as are astringent. 2. Slippery meats eaten first, are subject to draw down
others indigested. 3. Restrictive meats eaten first, are subject to hinder such
from digestion as are eaten afterward, and thereby cause them to putrefie in
the Stomach. 4. If you consider the two former Aphorisms, you may easily find
the reason of the first.


For Drink, 1. Accustom your Body to drink as little as may be between Meals.
2. Drink not at all at meals before you have eaten something. 3. Drink the
smallest Beer first and the strongest afterward, and this though it be
contrary to the Opinion of all Galenists, yet it is synonimous so the truth it
self, and therefore a Cup of Wine drunk after Meals is wholesome for Ancient
People and such as are in a Consumption. 4. Drink often at Meals whether you be
a thirst or not, for that, 1. helps digestion, 2. mingles the meat in the
Stomach, 3. helps it to pass its Chyle.


Fifthly, Time of eating, regard, 1. The Time of the year, for Winter requires
more Meat though less Drink, than Summer, because the Stomach is then hottest.
2. Time of the day, and as near as you can keep the same time of eating.


Sixthly, As for Age, 1. Children should, 1. Eat meats moderately hot and
moist, because their Natural temper is so, let our Physicians in their [
Rachites] prate their pleasure. 2. Let them eat often. 3. Let them drink no
Wine.
2. Young Men, 1. May eat cool Herbs. 2. Must eat meats colder, moister, and of
grosser substance. 3. Drink but little Wine. 4. Use all things in respect of
Diet according to Complexion, Exercise and Custom.
3. Old Men must use, 1. Such meats as are hot, moist, and easy to digest. 2.
Such drinks as make the Humors thin, and purge the blood by Urine.

My third Principle consists in Excrements of the Body.

These consist in Fullness and Emptiness, which I shall devide, and speak of
both apart, and therefore,

1. Of Fullness, in which consider, 1. Its Substance. 2. Its Kinds. 3. Its
Differences. 4. Its Place. 5. Its Cause. 6. Its Signs. 7. Its Cure. 8. Its
Accidents.


First, Fullness in Substance is, 1. Of Nourishment either profitable or
unprofitable. 2. Of Spirits either gross or thick, or subtle and thin. 3. Of
Humors either good or bad. 4. Of Excrements which are diverse.


Secondly, The kinds of Fullness are either in Quantity or Quality.

1. In Quantity in respect of Nourishment or Humors.

In respect of Humors.

1 When all the Humors abound, which the Greeks call Plethora, the Latins
Plenitudo, and we properly may call [ Fulness] and this happens either in the
Veins or Arteries. 2 When only one Humor abounds, Puta, Choler, Phlegm,
Melancholy.
2. In respect of Quality, when the Humors are hotter, colder, thicker,
thinner, salter, sowrer, etc. than is fit, and this is called Carochymial.
Thirdly, Its Differences are, 1. Universal, possessing the whole Body. 2.
Particular, possessing only some part thereof.


Fourthly, The place is different according to the matter offending, be it
Nourishment, Spirits, Humors, or Excrements.

Fifthly, The Cause is either General or Particular.

1. General is, 1 Meats corrupted in digestion for want of heat, when the
Stomach is not hot enough to digest the meat. 2. Humors being either Plenitude,
or Cacochymia, which what they are you had before.
2. The Particular Cause is either of Spirits or Excrements.
Sixthly, The Signs are different, answering to the diversity of the Causes.

Seventhly, Cure must be.

1. According to the matter offending, and place offended. 2. The Evacuation of
Plenitude is by Bleeding, of Cacochymia by Purging.
Eighthly, The Accidents are diverse, according to the cause offending, and
place offended.

Having now spoken of Fullness, what remains but that in sober sadness, we speak
a word or two of Emptiness, in which consider, 1. Its Definition. 2. Its Kinds.
3. Its Differences. 4. Its Causes. 5. Its Signs. 6. Its Cure.


First. The Definition of Emptiness, consists, 1. In want of Nourishment,
Spirit, or Radical moisture. 2. In the deminishing of these either in the
General or Particular.


Secondly, Its Kinds are, 1. General, when the whole Body grows thin, weak,
slender, or empty. 2. Particular, when any part of the Body was served the same
Sauce.


Thirdly, Its Differences are, 1. Universal in the whole Body. 2. Particularly
in some part.


Fourthly, Its Causes are, 1. By Art, as Purging, Bleeding, Sweating, etc. 2.
By Accident; as, 1. By Obstruction of the Passages either of Vital heat, or the
Nutritive Faculty, or avoiding of Excrements. 2. By a Flux, which either
washes away the Natural substance, or hinders either Nourishment or Spirits
from a particular place in the Body,



Fifthly, The Signs of this is an Atrophia, which is nothing else but a wasting
or consuming of the whole Body, or some particular part.

Sixthly, The Cure is done; 1. By removing the Cause. 2. By restoring the lost
substance.


My Fourth Principle consists in sleeping and watching, which because they are
inconsistent together, we will treat of them apart, in some particulars, yet
because Nature has joined them together, so will I do also in others.

In sleep consider, 1. What it is. 2. Its Cause. 3. Its Time. 4. Its Quantity.


First, Sleep is Rest and Quietness of the Body, of the Mind, and of the
Spirits.

Secondly, The Cause of sleep is, 1. A sweet Vapor sent unto the Brain. 2. The
coldness of the Brain turns those Vapos into Humor^. 1. Stopping the Conduits
of the Nerves, thereby prohibiting motion. 2. Stopping the Sensoria or ways of
the Senses, thereby prohibiting understanding. 3. Prohibiting the Spirits, and
thereby withstanding instigation to action.



Thirdly, As for the time of sleeping; the daytime is disliked, and the night
accounted only fitting.

Fourthly, The Quantity of sleep, is six, seven, or eight Hours, according to
the Complexion of the party, of which you have plentiful information before.

The Difference of sleeping and watching are only Moderate, and Immoderate: I
shall join them together in the first, and see if I have writ enough to
separate them in the second.

Both sleeping and watching moderately used (for if you use the one
immoderately you must needs do both so.)

1. Comforts Nature much. 2. Refreshes the Memory. 3. Cheers the Spirits. 4.
Quickens the Senses. 5. Revives the Animal Virtue. 6. Strengthens the Body. 7.
Helps Digestion. 8. Expels Excrements.
The Vices of them both, are far different; and although I can close with those
that have written Ethics in this, That all Virtues are a Medium between two
Vices, yet in other of their Tenets I cannot, because some of them lead men to
Atheism.

The Immoderate use then of sleeping and watching, I shall speak of apart.

Immoderate watching.

1. Makes giddy Brains. 2. Fills the Body full of Rhewm. 3. Dries the Brain. 4.
Breeds Aposthumes. 5. Troubles the Spirits. 6. Causes Crudities. 7. Makes
Fools.
Immoderate sleep.

1. Dulls the Senses. 2. Causes superfluous Excrements. 3. Makes dull wits,
especially in old folks and Children. 4. Retains the Excrements. 5.
Overmoistens the Brain. 6. Fills the Brain full of Crudities.
I am now come to my Fifth part, which consists in Exercise and Rest, and this
I shall wholly take apart.

In Exercise consider, 1. What it is. 2. Its Difference. 3. Its Effects.


First, Exercise is, either, Of the Body, as cleaving of Logs, etc.

Or of the Mind, as Study, etc. Or of both, as the Art of Defense etc.
Secondly, The Differences of Exercise are, 1. Moderate, which is neither too
much nor too little. 2. Immoderate, which is either Vehement or Excessive.


Thirdly, The Effects of Exercise, I shall take apart; and I do not know but I
may lawfully do so, seeing neither God nor Nature have joined them together.

Moderate Exercise, 1. Stirs up Natural Heat. 2. Equally distributes the
Spirits. 3. Opens the Pores. 4. Wastes the Excrements of the third digestion. 5.
Strengthens the Body, Senses, and Spirits. 6. Comforts all the Members. 7.
Profits Nature much.


Immoderate Exercise, 1. Hurts the Body and all the Parts of it. 2. Wastes,
dries, consumes, and wearies the Body and Spirits. 3. Overthrows Natures
Actions.


Thus having done with Exercise, it is best to write a word of Idleness, or Rest.

Rest is either Moderate or Immoderate;

Moderate Rest, 1. Comfort and refreshes Nature. 2. Maintains Health in a
good Decorum. 3. Recruits a tired Brain. 4. Strengthens the Body in General;
the Senses and Members in Particular.


Excess in Rest, or extreme Idleness (which you please) 1. Dulls the Mind, the
Senses, and Principal Instruments of the Body. 2. It causes Crudities, evil
Humors, evil Excrements, cold Sicknesses, infinite Infirmities. 3. Hastens old
Age. 4. Causes Deformity.


I am now come to my last point, Affections of the Mind, and they are but two,
Content, and Discontent.

In Content, consider, 1. What it is. 2. Its Effects. 3. Its Differences.


First, By Content, I mean such affections as are pleasing to the Nature of
Man, as Hope, Joy, Love, Mirth, etc.

Secondly, By their Effects; 1. They dilate the Heart and Arteries. 2. They
distribute both Vital and Natural Spirit throughout the Body. 3. They comfort
and strengthen not only the parts of the Body, but also the Mind, and that in
all their actions.


Thirdly, Their Differences are two and no more.

1. Moderation, which comforts both Body and Mind. 2. Immoderation, which hurts
both Body and Mind.
First, By Discontent, I mean such affections as disturb the Body, as Anger,
Hatred, Fear for things to come, Care for things past, Sorrow, Grief of Mind
etc.

Secondly, The Effects of it are, 1. They devert the Vital heat from the
Circumference to the Center, thereby consuming the Vital Spirits, drying the
Body and causing Leanness. 2. They are forerunners of Evil. 3. They are
Destroyers, Overthrowers and Murderers both of Body and Mind. 4. They hasten
old Age and death by consuming Radical Moisture.


Thus much for my Comment upon this Chapter, which if it light into the Hands
of a wise man, I have written enough; if of a Fool, too much.

Chap. 86. Of Venereals.
THe Opinion of Epicurus was, that it was Unhealthful for man to come to the
School of Venus; but indeed and in truth, the Exercise is beneficial, if a due
interval of time be observed: And this you may know, if the man find himself
the better and not the worse after the Act. As for the time to such business,
Let not the Body be too full nor too empty, too hot nor too cold, too dry nor
too moist; and if you must err in in one of these, err as little as you can:
And because usually errors are in such case, let the Body be rather hot than
cold, full than empty, moist than dry: Before you come to the School of Venus,
go to the School of Mars, namely, Exercise your Body before you take council of
the under sheet, and so exercise it that you do not tire, it: If your
Constitution be good, you need not fear the Exercise of your Constitution can
be otherways: If there be deficiency in your Body, it is no wonder if you
read it in your Child. We have given you notice how you may know the
deficiencies of your own Body; and we have spoken of them severally in other
Works of ours: If the Temperature of the Body differ from Health, the effects
of the same Temperature must differ as much from the desired end; and in that
take a few Rules to help your selves.

Hot Bodies desire hot Nourishments, cold Bodies cold Nourishments, dry Bodies
dry Nourishments, and moist Bodies moist Nourishments, and the reason is
because every like is maitained by his like: Therefore Whereas Motion, want of
Nourishment, Watching, a Looseness, and Discontent, dry the Body and procure
Diseases thence coming, the contrary to these moisten the Body, for likes
rejoice in their likes, and keep the Bodies in their Temperature; and this we
speak concerning Bodies Healthful. The inequality of these is the breach of
Health in the Body of man, the way to correct which we have spoken of before,
only something we shall now ad, If the Body be offended by much Idleness, we
ought to correct it by Exercise, but this is to be done by degrees, for Nature
abhors all sudden change; Understand the like by a Body weakened by too much
Exercise, as also by other things not natural, which we spoke of in the last
Chapter.

Also it may so come to pass, that the Stomach may be colder than it ought to
be, and yet the Brain at the same time, hotter than its due temper, in such a
case, you must remedy them both with Medicines proper for them: Do the like by
other parts of the Body when they are hotter, colder, drier, or moister than
they ought to be.

Culpeper.
By what means to do this, you have before in my Comment.

Chap. 87. Of Healthful Causes of the Instrumental Parts.
AS concerning Healthful Causes of the Instrumental parts of the Body, some
consist in want of error in Formation, others in want of error in Magnitude,
Number, and Situation.

In Formation many errors happen, both in the fashion of the part, and if there
be any Cavity in it, when it differs from the Golden Mean in the Passage,
Mouth, Roughness or Smooth^ess; these if they differ but little from what
naturally they ought to be, may deserve the appellation of [Healthful] but if
much they may safely be called Unhealthful, but if the difference be so great
that the part cannot perform its operation, it may truly be said to be sick.

Also difference must be made in the Quantity of the Defect, as also in the
Number, whether one or mo^^, or how many of the parts be deficient; as also
what the Situation of the deficient part is.

The Differences then of these are four; 1. Such whose Instrumental parts are
in a due Decorum. 2. Such as differ but little from it, and therefore may also
be called Healthful. 3. Such as differ more, and therefore are Unhealthful. 4.
Such as differ most, and therefore are sick.


As for such Members as offend in Figure or fashion, viz. such as are crooked
or the like, while the Child is yet young and tender, they may be reduced to
their Natural habit, by binding or such like means, but when once the Child is
grown up and the parts hardened, it is impossible to reduce them, and indeed all
errors in the Body are easier to be amended whilst the Body grows than
afterward, for then (according to the Opinion of most Phyfitians) there is no
place left for Remedy.

As for such Members as exceed their due proportion in bigness may be reduced
by resting, and convenient binding of them; also Members may be increased by
motion, and moderate rubbing, for that calls the Blood to the place.

All defective parts which have their Original through Blood, are not
impossible to be corrected or restored; but such parts of the Body as are
Spermatical, or have their Original by Seed, are either altogether impossible
to be restored or very near the point, although a callous matter grow in their
places, which performs the same office they did.

In all these Nature is the Work-woman, and the Physician but her Servant.

Also sometimes two or three Vices may accompany one and the same Part, as in
him that we told you before, that had a small and round Stomach, and near the
Diaphragma, for in him both Magnitude, Formation, and Situation were depraved,
and the greatest Artificialness in the world could never bring this to a
natural habit, for if his Stomach were never so little full, difficulty of
breathing followed, therefore his only Remedy was to take little meat and drink
at a time, and to take it often. And he which we told you of, that had an
Obstruction in his Liver by reason of the narrowness of the Vessels, and
extenuating diet was found out for his Remedy.

Chap. 88. Of Solution of Continuity.
IT remains now that we speak a word or two of that kind of Disease which is
incident both to Similar and Instrumental parts, viz. Solution of Continuity or
Unity which you please, which although it happen many times to men in perfect
health, yet because it causes passion it may be numbered amongst Diseases, for
if a sensible hurt of Operation make not a difference between health and
sickness I know not what does.

Yet amongst these also is some difference, for some of these give Healthful
Signs, some Unhealthful, and some Neutral; as for the Cure that must be
according to the Nature of the Part hurt, and the Essence of the Disease
hurting.

Culpeper.
Me thinks Galen is very misty and hard to be understood in this, I shall give
you his meaning as well as I can, and rest confident if I do vary from the
meaning of Galen, as it may be I may not, yet I will not vary at all from the
truth.

Then consider, 1. Solution of Unity is made by Wounds or Ulcers. 2. A Wound is
a Solution of Unity, new, bloody, and without putrefaction, and it is either,
1. Simple, without accidents. 2. Compound, with accidents, as loss of
substance, Bruise, Swelling, Inflammation, Pain, Convulsion, etc. 3. Difference
according to place or part of the Body it is in, whether Principal or not
Principal, Spermatical or not Spermatical. 4. Difference in respect of end, as
great, little, hard or easy to cure, dangerous, mortal.
3. An Ulcer is a Solution of unity, with matter differing in substance from
the flesh about it. 1. Its kinds are either plain, hollow, fistulous, sanious,
virulent, cancrous, corrosive, putrefactive. 2. Its accidents are pain,
swelling, Inflammation, hardness, callus, evil flesh, hard lips, distemper,
Worms, Bones corrupted.



If any will contend that Fractures, and Dislocations are Solutions of Unity
they may, I shall pass them here, they being not things for every Child in
Physic to meddle withal, this is a Horn book to Physic, and you shall seldom
find Latin or Greek written in such a Book.

Chap. 89. Of the Common Intention of Cure.
THe Art of Curing has one common Intention, which is taking away that which
is contrary to the Cure, and all such Causes as bring Health do no more; Also
the disposition of every part to be cured is to be considered, hot distempers
are to be cuted by cold causes, cold by hot causes; for if whatsoever be
immoderate thwart Nature, and whatsoever is moderate help Nature, then of
necessity, whatsoever is immoderate one way, must be brought to Mediocrity by
its contrary immoderate, and this may be done two ways, either according to
power or according to imagination; according to power when a thing is really
so, according to imagination, when we conceit a thing to be so as it is not: Of
these things we have spoken in our Virtues of Simple Medicines.

As for the Cure of such Diseases as are already inherent to the Body, we must
regard the cause of the Disease; put case for example, a Fever arises of
putrified Humors, The Indication of Cure is, Evac^^^ion and Alteration,
Alteration is cooling the heat of the Humor by cool Medicines, this takes away
the Effects, but the Cause is taken away by Evacuation as Bleeding, Sweating,
or Clysters, or drawing the Humor to another place, as by Blisters or the like;
In this you must regard the matter offending, both in respect of Quantity and
Quality, and the manner of use of your Medicines, this we have largely showed
in our Therapeuticks, only this let us stick to in all Cures, to take away the
matter which causes the Disease by the Roots: If the Disease be Compound, use
a Composition of Simples fitting for it, if the Disease be great, let the
Medicine be the stronger, in all let the Medicine be proper for the Disease;
for example, If the Disease exceed Nature in ten parts of heat, and seven parts
of dryness, let the Medicine be ten parts colder and seven parts moister.

Also the part of the Body is to be considered, that so the coldness of the
Medicine may make the afflicted part no colder than it ought to be; if the
Disease lie in a remote part of the Body, the Medicine ought so to be formed
that it lose not its Virtue before it come to that part, let it then have not
so much heat only as the Disease requires, but somewhat more, even so much as is
necessary to penetrate to the afflicted part.

Also the matter or substance of the offending Humor must be heeded, for if it
be thick it cannot penetrate to the extreme parts of the Body, and in such
cases you must use Medicines that are of a cutting quality.

Culpeper.
It seems Galen here minded only an Antipathetical Cure, in which his Rules are
good; there is another way of Cure which we call Sympathetical, which is done
by strengthening Nature in General, and the part of the Body afflicted in
particular, of this and the reasons for it, every one that is fit to give
Physic may see in my English Physician.

Chap. 90. The Cure of Solution of continuity in a Fleshy Part.
SOlution of Unity is cured again by Unity, and this in Instrumental parts is
impossible.

Culpeper.
I think my Author means it is impossible to set a man's Arm on again when it is
cut off, if he do, I am clearly of his Opinion, but when a man has cut his
Finger, there is a Solution of Unity in an Instrumental part, and yet that is
easily cured.

Galen.
The Cure of Solution of Unity in Similary parts is not always possible, but
in fleshy parts it is, unless the loss of substance be so great that the sides
of the Wound cannot be joined together, without marring the form of the Body.

Our present task then is, 1. To join the parts of the Body together which are
separated by the Wound or Ulcer. 2. To keep them together being so joined. 3.
To cleanse the Ulcer of what hinders the Cure. 4. To preserve the part sound
being cured.


The First and Second are performed by convenient binding and stitching
together;

To the Third we must have a care, 1 That neither dust, filth, nor hairs fall
into it. 2 That no Corruption breed in it that may hinder the Cure. 3 If there
be much defluxion of Humors to it, either purge them out, or draw them back to
another place.


To the Fourth, Strengthen the part when you have cured it with convenient
drying Medicines.

Thus much of Solution of continuity in a fleshy part.

Culpeper.
Galen has done very well in this; I shall only ad an Exhortation to Artists,
which if they observe they may do well.

I desire them, 1 To work safely, without hurt. 2 Speedily without detracting
time. 3 Do as they would be done by in like case. 4 Not aim at Gain. 5 Promise
no more than they can perform. 6 Perform faithfully what they promise.


Chap. 91. Of Solution of Continuity in a Bone.
THe breaking of a Bone is a Solution of continuity in it; A Bone broken in two
cannot be made one again, but is only united by a Callous, a Callous is made of
the very same Nourishment that Nourishes the Bone, and some hold that the
Bones of a Child whilst they are young and tender will unite without a Callous.

Usually when a Bone is broken, the Muscles which lie near it suffer also,
therefore the intention of Cure is double, one which regards the Bone its self,
the other which regards the parts of the Body near the Bone which is broken,
the latter you find the way of Cure in the foregoing Chapter.

Because as we told you all Bones are united by Callus, you ought to supply
Nature with a convenient superfluity to make this, and withal to observe a
convenient Decorum both in respect of the Qantity and Quality of it, and
according as you find the fracture to abound with moisture or dryness, so to
prescribe a diet either drier or moister as you see fit.

Culpeper.
I as yet know, or can at least at present remember no better Remedy in such a
case, than a strong Decoction of Comfry Roots or Leaves if the time of the year
afford them, you may make the Decoction in Wine or Water, or a mixture of them,
according as you find the Age and Complexion of the Patient to be, and the
season of the year agree; and as Comfry is so good for a broken Bone, so
Knot-grass is as good used in the same manner for a disjuncture.

Chap. 92. Of pricking of a Nerve or Tendon.
Seeing Nerves and Tendons are of such exquisite sense, the pricking of either
of them is very subject to produce Convulsions, and the reason is, because no
expiration can come outwardly from those parts; to prevent it, then you have no
other Remedy than to open the Wound and dry it up with Medicines of such thin
substance as can penetrate even to the very bottom of the Nerve.

Culpeper.
The usual practice of the Chyrurgians of our time in such cases is to cut the
Nerve, and so suffer the Patient to lose the use of that Member; but I suppose
if you heedfully read my English Physician, you may find a safer way to the
Wood.

Chap. 93. Of Diseases according to Formation.
WE come now to Formation, the Diseases of which although they are divided
into many Differences, we will begin with that which is most evident, which is
change of Figure or Fashion, this we told you might be amended so long as the
party is growing, and the sooner the better, for when once they are grown up
it is past cure.

The Intention of this Cure is the turning the Member the contrary way; If it
come by reason the Member was formerly broken, and not rightly set, if it be
new done, your way is to break it again and set it better, but if long time be
elapsed it is past cure.

Chap. 94. Of Obstructions.
OBstructions are caused of Humors either thick or thin, the healthful causes
of the first are cutting and clensing Medicines: That which is caused by hard
dung in the Guts, remedy the hardnesss of it by moist and fat Clysters, and
then carry it quite away by such as are sharp.

The Stone in the Bladder requires cutting and bringing it away.

Immoderate fullness also causes Obstructions, and they are to be cured by
immoderate emptying, as bleeding and the like.

Superfluity of meat is corrected by purging and Vomiting.

Stoppage of the Lungs by Coughing.

In the passages of Urine by such things as provoke Urine, and Urine is
provoked by such things as vehemently extenuate or make thin.

The Stomach is cleansed by Vomiting, the Bowels by Purging.

To conclude, whatsoever is contrary to Nature in any part, is to be taken
away, and if that cannot well be done draw it to another part where it may.

Culpeper.
I do not well fancy Galens Remedy of cutting such as have the Stone, I think,
nay am confident Remedies not dangerous may be found for the Stone in some of
my Works, I think in my Translation of the London Dispensatory, look Lapis
Nephriticus there.

Chap. 95. Of Roughness and Smoothness.
What parts of the Body soever have lost their natural habit by roughness,
natural smoothness is to be restored to them, and this (be it to the Bones,
Arteries or Tongue) is to be done by mild and moistning Remedies, which have no
biting quality at al in them.

Again, Other parts of the Body have or may have a smoothness in them which is
not Natural, roughness is to be recovered to such, by Medicines which cleanse
and something bind, but if there be Obstructions and narrowness of the passages
withal, use first such Medicines as cut tough Humors.

If there be a mixture of any of these Diseases, let there be the like in the
Medicines, it is sufficient to give one Example, for that is the Rule we follow
in all our Works: Suppose a multitude of Blood flow to some particular Member,
that not only the greater but also the lesser Veins of that Member are
extended, and by reason of the cleerness of the Skin are clearly seen; it is to
be supposed, that other Vessels that cannot be seen are stretched also; now the
danger is lest that which is sweat out through the Vessels be spilled in the
void places in the midst of the Body: Now the Cure of this must be done by
Evacuation, or to write plainer English by Emptying, because the Disease
proceeds of the immoderate filling of the part, but yet this Humor thus passed
into the Cavities of the Body will never be brought out that way while the
world stands, therefore all Evacuation cannot be made at the part of the Body
offended if the whole Body be overfilled, for if we use Scarrifications or
Incisions, we shall draw the more thither by reason of the pain; if we should
attempt to scatter it by heat, the heat would draw more to it than it scatters
away; If we go about to drive it back, the Body being full admits no such
motion; in such a case then you must first evacuate the whole Body, then meddle
with the particular part afflicted afterward, first repelling the Humor and
then dispersing of it.

And this know, The less the Humor is, the sooner it is evocuated, cooling and
binding Remedies repel ^.

If you conjecture any offending Humor yet retained in the part, first search
whether it be thick or thin, that so you may expel it either with or without
cutting Medicines.

Always have a care of hot Medicines if the patient part be toward the upper
part of the Body, because they send Vapors upwards; therefore in such cases let
the heat of the Medicine be but mean, and if it be a little moist withal, it
can cause no pain, but if you would disperse any humor from the lower parts of
the Body let the Medicine be strong lest it lose its strength before it come at
the afflicted part, neither need you fear the superior parts will be afflicted
by such Medicines, seeing the cause of the affliction lies not in them, neither
are the Medicines to be apropriated to them.

Then consider, That the parts afflicted by such de^luxions, some are rare,
loose and soft by Nature, others thick and hard by Nature, the former are
easily emptied, you must use sharper Remedies to the latter.

The Indications then must be taken, both from the substance of the afflicted
part, and also, from the Formation and Situation of it: for example, if it
happen so, that the Liver be afflicted by Humors in the small Vessels thereof,
which Humors are thin viscuous, thick or superaboundant; Is it not the readiest
way, first to separate these by extenuating meats and drinks, and change them
into another substance? Then in the second place, to empty those by passages
which are large, and not by those that are narrow, whereas you cannot bring
them thither without extenuating, for there are large passages [ Meatus] in the
Liver as well as narrow, which pass to the Vena Cava, as the narrow does to the
Vena Porta: It is no such difficult matter then when Humors are thick and tough
in the Liver to evacuate them, by drawing them to the Vena Cava by such
Medicines as have a drawing quality, that so they may be cast out by Urine.

But besides these, here is another Indication to be taken from the Liver it
self; Suppose it be so weakened by moistning Medicines, or Cataplasms, that it
is unabled not only to perform its own Office, but weakens the Veins also; in
such a case you must mix some binding things with your Medicines, but seeing
the Liver lies so low, it is some Question whether the binding Medicines be not
weakened before they come at it, unless they be mixed with some things else of
more subtle parts, as Spices are, If you make up your Medicines of such Spices
as bind, Nature when she has gotten two Qualities to serve her turn in one
Medicine, will operate the stouter.

Culpeper.
I know at present none better for such a purpose than Cinnamon, and Cassia
Lignea, and if you mix a little Spodium amongst them it will not do amiss.

Galen.
Also take another Animadversion, Have a care the Natural temper of the part
afflicted be not distempered by the Humor flowing to it, if it be Phlegm that
flow to it, it may be it is too cold, if Choler, too hot, you must cure this
distemper before ever you can restore the Member to its pristine health and
strength, and this is to be cured by its contraries, namely, cold by heat, and
heat by cold, and herein also you must be well versed; namely, how hot and cold
every Member by Nature ought to be, for how can you tell else when it exceeds
its due proportion in cold or heat, or when you have cooled or heated it enough?

Chap. 96. Of Diseases according to Number.
HAving spoken enough of these things, we come now to such whose Number is not
according to Nature, and seeing their difference is twofold, one in which some
part is deficient; the Cure of which is by subministring to Nature, the other
which is superaboundant, which ought to be cut off either by Iron or Fire, or
Medicines which have a burning quality, all these may be cured it is true, but
n^w ones cannot be gotten in their rooms that are wan^^ng, some there are that
though they cannot be genera^^^ again, yet something may be made in lieu of them
^s ^ Bone being taken away, you ^ay put in some substance different from both
Bone and Flesh ^^^^e^d of it, for there is a certain Callus Flesh (...) in the
room of it, which though it seem like Flesh at first, yet in process of time it
grows to the hardness of a Bone; so also any Member being cut off, seeing we
cannot make its like in substance, we may make the like of it in show, that so
the Body may the better retain its beauty.

Culpeper.
A right Worshipful Business, and teacheeh a man thus much knowledge, That he
may make a wooden Leg.

Chap. 97. Of Diseases according to Magnitude.
AS for Diseases according to Magnitude, when the bigness of the parts of the
Body are according to nature they are as they should be, if any parts be bigger
or smaller than they should be, you should take away from those that are too
big, or if that cannot be, withdraw the matter to another place, cherrish those
that are deficient in bigness, and take away those that superabound, this was
spoken to more at large before.

Chap. 98. Of Diseases according to Situation.
WE come to that other kind of Healthful causes which amends such parts as are
out of place, as Luxations, Ruptures etc. this is done by some violent
stretching or stroke, or else by some dilation or breaking of the Continent;
Twofold then also is the way of Cure, the one is by reducing it to its proper
place, the other by strengthening the part after it is reduced.

Chap. 99. Of Preservative Causes.
THis Chapter seems to contain in it the Sum of all what has hitherto been
spoken; of Preservatives there are three Kinds; 1. Such as have respect to men
in perfect Health. 2. Such as regard men not in perfect Health. 3. Such as
belong to men that are Sick.


The first maintains Health, the other two attain it; The whole Basis of this is
chiefly busied about Humors, which ought neither to be too thick nor too thin,
neither too watery nor too many, nor too hot nor to cold, nor too biting,
neither subject to Putrefaction, nor yet of a Venomous Nature, for when any of
these are increased they engender Diseases.

The Intention of Cure of this, is Alteration and Evacuation.

They are altered when they are either concocted by the Body it self, or by
some other Faculties which have a Medicinal Force or Operation, as by such
things as expel poison, they are evacuated by Purges, Clvsters, Sweatings and
Vomitings, these are common Evacuations, proper are such as are apropriated to
certain parts and places of the Body, the Bowels are purged by Stool, the Liver
by Urine, the whole Body by Sweat, the Head by Sneezing, the Lungues by
Coughing, etc. Besides, there are some sorts of Purges which draw the Humors
from all parts of the Body, as Pills.

Chap. 100. Of that part of the Art which refreshes Old Age.
SUch Food, Diet, and Medicines as refresh and restore are most fit for Ancient
People; The Disposition of Ancient people is the best Disposition, but yet
Blood in them is but little, neither is their Vital (...) Animal Spirit much,
their sollid parts are dry, therefore is their strength weak, and their whole
Body cold.

The Healthful Causes which amend this Disposition (that I may comprehend them
all in one Chapter) are such things which give present and secure Nourishment,
if you would take them particularly, they consist in moderate Motion, Meat,
Drink, and Sleep.

As for Motion, a Coach, walking, and rubbing themselves are convenient, after
which, let them cool, and ease themselves by degrees.

As for Meats, let them first take such as are moist and easy of Digestion
(but let them avoid cold Meats as much as may be) afterward let them eat such
as are of good Nourishment; for Drink, let them drink good Beer, and now and
then a cup of Wine after Meat; as for all particulars, I shall not here recite
them, as having formerly related them in other Volumns.

Culpeper.
To this last Chapter of Galens I never intended a Comment, because I do intend
speedily my self to write a Treatise of the same, viz. A Guide for Old A^e.
Galens Wine I translated Beer, because it is better ^or our Bodies.

Thus Courteous Reader I leave thee for this time, rejoicing much, and daily
blessing God that he has been pleased to make me an Instrument of so much good
to this Nation, as the Acclamations of diverse Gentlemen, from diverse parts of
this Nation daily testify to me: It is not my desire Reader that thou
should be a Fool, but a Physician, and the Proverb says, Every man and
woman in the world is one of them. I have here given thee the first Rudiments
and Principles of the Art, or at least wise of Galens Art, which if it (...)
for nothing else, it will serve to fit thy Brain for greater matters; labor
then to digest this, it is not so big that thou can surfeit of it, and when
thou have well learned it, thou shall be fed with stronger Meat, by thy Friend,

Nich. Culpeper.
The Contents of every Chapter.
PRoemium. Chap. 1. Page 1 Chap. 2. What Medicine is. Page 2 Chap. 3. How many
several ways, a Cause may be said to effect, a Sign to give Indication, and a
Body to receive. Page 4 Chap. 4. Of Healthful Bodies. Page 5 Chap. 5. Of a Body
Unhealthful. Page 8 Chap. 6. Of a Body Neutral. Page 9 Chap. 7. Of Signs. Page
11 Chap. 8. Signs of a very good Conistitution. Page 11 Chap 9. How many the
Differences of the Parts are. Page 14 Chap. 10. Of the Signs of the Brain. Page
15 Chap. 11. Of the Bigness and Smalness of the Head. Page 15 Chap. 12. Of such
Operations as have obtained the Principality. Page 17 Chap. 13. Signs of a good
temper of the Brain. Page 18 Chap. 14. Signs of a hot Brain. Page 19 Chap. 15
Signs of a cold Brain Page 20 Chap. 16. Signs of a dry Brain. ibid Chap. 17.
Indications of a moist Brain. Page 21 Chap. 18. Signs of a hot and dry Brain.
ibid Chap. 19. Signs of a hot and moist Brain. Page 22 Chap. 20. Signs of a
cold and dry Brain. Page 24 Chap. 21. Signs of a cold and moist Brain. Page 25
Chap. 22. Of the Senses. Page 26 Chap. 23 Of the Eyes. ibid Chap. 24. Of the
Greatness of the Eyes. Page 27 Chap. 25. Of Smalness of the Eyes. Page 28 Chap.
26. Of the color of the Eyes. ibid Chap. 27. Of grayness and blackness of the
Eyes. Page 29 Chap. 28. Of the temperature of the Heart. Page 31 Chap. 29.
Signs of the Heart overheated. ibid Chap. 30. Signs of the Heart too cold. Page
32 Chap. 31. Signs of a dry Heart. ibid Chap. 32. Signs of a moist Heart. Page
33 Chap. 33. Signs of a hot and dry Heart. ibid Chap. 34. Signs of a hot and
moist Heart. Page 34 Chap. 35. Signs of a cold and moist Heart. Page 35 Chap.
36. Signs of a cold and dry Heart. ibid Chap. 37. Signs of a hot Liver. Page 36
Chap. 38. Signs of a cold Liver. ibid Chap. 39. Signs of a dry Liver. Page 37
Chap. 40. Signs of a moist Liver. ibid Chap. 41. Signs of a hot and dry Liver.
ibid Chap. 42. Signs of a hot and moist Liver. Page 38 Chap. 43. Signs of a
cold and moist Liver. Page 39 Chap. 44. Signs of a cold and dry Liver. Page 40
Chap. 45. Signs of a hot, cold, moist, and dry Temperature of the Testicles.
Page 41 Chap. 46. Signs of a hot and dry temperature of the Testicles. ib Chap.
47. Signs of a hot and moist temperature of the Testicles. Page 42 Chap. 48.
Signs of a cold and moist Temperature of the Testicles. Page 43 Chap. 49. Signs
of a cold and dry Temperature of the Testicles Page 44 Chap. 50. Of the Habit
of the whole Body. Page 45 Chap. 51. Signs of a moderate Temperature. Page 46
Chap. 52. Signs of a, hot Temper. Page 47 Chap. 53. ^^gns of cold Temperature.
ibid Chap. 54. Signs of a dry Temperature. ibid Chap. 55. Signs of a moist
Temperature. Page 48 Chap. 56. Signs of a hot and dry Temperat^re. ibid Chap.
57. Signs of a hot and moist Temperature. Page 49 Chap. 58. Signs of a cold and
moist Temperature. ibid Chap. 59. Signs of a cold and dry Temperature. Page 50
Chap. 60. Signs of a dry Stomach. Page 67 Chap. 61. Of a moist Stomach. Page 68
Chap. 62. Signs of a hot Stomach. ibid Chap. 63. Signs of a cold Stomach. Page
69 Chap. 64. Of ill temperatures commixed in the Stomach. Page 70 Chap. 65.
Signs of cold Lungs. Page 71 Chap. 66. Signs of dry Lungs. ibid Chap. 67. Of
the Voice. Page 72 Chap. 68. Of a clear and rough Voice. ibid Chap. 69. Of an
acute Voice. Page 74 Chap. 70. Indications of Natures Iustruments. Page 75
Chap. 71. Of the Stomach. ibid Chap. 72. Of the Bladder. Page 76 Chap. 73. Of
the Liver. ibid Chap. 74. Of a Phlegmatic man vomiting Choler. Page 77 Chap.
75. How Bodies may be known to be sick. ibid Chap. 76. Signs of an afflicted
Brain. Page 78 Chap. 77. Signs of an afflicted Heart. ibid Chap. 78. Signs of
an afflicted Liver. Page 79 Chap. 79. Signs of an afflicted Stomach. ibid Chap.
80. Signs of an afflicted Breast and Lungs. Page 80 Chap. 81. Of the difference
of those things that are cast out. Page 81 Chap. 82. Signs of a Sickness to
come. Page 82 Chap. 83. Signs of a Sick Body. Page 85 Chap. 84. Of Causes
Healthful, Unhealthful, and Neutral. Page 86 Chap. 85. How many ways our
Bodies may be altered. Page 87 Chap. 86. (...) Venerals. Page 101 Chap. 87. Of
Healthful Causes of the Instrumental Parts. Page 103 Chap. 88. Of Solution of
Continuity. Page 105 Chap. 89. Of the common Intention of Cure. Page 106 Chap.
90. The Cure of Solution of continuity in a Fleshy part. Page 108 Chap. 91. Of
Solution of Continuty in a Bone. Page 110 Chap. 92. Of pricking of a Nerve or
Tendon. Page 111 Chap. 93. Of Diseases according to Formation. Page 111 Chap.
94. Of Obstructions. Page 112 Chap. 95. Of Roughness and smoothness. Page 113
Chap. 96. Of Diseases according to Number. Page 116 Chap. 97. Of Diseases
according to Magnitude. Page 117 Chap. 98. Of Diseases according to Situation.
Page 118 Chap. 99. Of Preservative Causes. ibid Chap. 100. Of that part of the
Art which refreshes old Age. Page 119
FINIS.

