DIEGO REDIVIVUS: OR THE Last WILL AND TESTAMENT Of the Pretended Humphrey
Wickham, Esquire Alias WILLIAM MORREL, alias BOWYER, etc.

WITH A Full RELATION of his Notorious CHEATS and IMPOSTURES: Who dyed at Mr
Cullins House, the Third of this Instant January, in the Parish of St. Clement
Danes, etc.

LICENSED and Entered in the REGISTER-BOOK of the Company of Stationers.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Mitre near Temple Bar. 1692.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THis is to give notice, That the Fine COFFIN, mentioned in the following
Relation, is to be sold in Ship-yard, without Templebar.

The Last Will and Testament of the pretended Humphrey Wickham Esquire alias
William Morrel, alias Bowyer, etc. with Annotations thereupon.
THe Public undoubtedly cannot be better entertained, than by the following
Relation, of one of the most notorious Cheats as has been known in an Age,
which has already made a very amazing Noise in the Town; and the Particulars
whereof, may be no disacceptable Entertainment.

A Person not over-well Clad, was seen standing gazing about him in the
Streets, over against Arundel-Buildings in the Strand; but the gravity of his
Age (being a Person between 50 and 60) invited the Curiosity of Mr. Cullin the
Baker, to ask this unknown Person what he wanted? To which he replied, He
wanted a Lodging. Upon this, Mr. Cullin very courteously made answer, He should
be welcome to his House; which he very easily and readily accepted; and
accordingly was received very kindly. Now having no extraordinary Stock of
Money, viz. but Two Shillings in his Pocket, he was exposed to the necessity of
making use of some Romantic Narrative of his Quality and Condition, to make
good his Quarters with so slender a Purse, to hold out payment. Accordingly the
Curiosity of his Landlady enquiring what Countryman he was? He replied, Of
Oxfordshire; that his Name was Wickham, a Person of a good Estate near
Banbury; and that the occasion of his coming to Town, was only to avoid the
payment of 500 l. which he stood engaged for by Bond, in behalf of a Person
that was run away, and had left him to pay that Money, and which truly he had
made an Oath to himself he would never pay; not that the Sum was so
considerable to a Man of his plentiful Fortune, only he was resolved to keep
his Vow; and that had made him retire a little from being arrested for it.

The Affability and good Language of this Person of imaginary Quality, soon
found Credit with his believing Landlord and Landlady, and no Garess was
thought kind enough to a Person of his eminent Figure and Extraction. His first
entrance into this indulgent Family was about a fortnight before Christmas,
where he gained that daily ground, that no Respect could be sufficiently paid
him: His little Pocket Strength signified nothing, for his Host was not a
little exalted with the Honor of such a Guest under his Roof.

But, as Providence was pleased to order it, his Reign was ordained to be but
short; for he soon fell into a languishing Sickness, in which time neither
Doctor, Apothecary, Nurse, or any other Assistance was wanting.

Now our pretended Captain, whatever other Faults he had, was resolved not to
be guilty of Ingratitude, and accordingly made an ample Last Will and
Testament, and most* liberally gave extraordinary large Donations and Legacies
to his kind Landlord, etc.

It was very remarkable, that during his Sickness, his Landlord, being Overseer
of the Poor, had requested a kind Brother in Office, the Churchwarden, to pay
a small Office of Christian Duty to this poor languishing Gentleman; who making
him a condoling Visit, with wet Eyes and uplifted Hands, was so kind as to wish
his Worship's Soul everlasting Rest, which was seconded by manly a repeated
Sigh from the rest of the Condolers about him: And one more especially, having
heard of this great Wind-fall, lamented much his Unhappiness, in* not visiting
this Gentleman, saying, He was never born to do himself good, having lost by
his Negligence at least 1000 l Also another eminent Man of the Parish, being
dissatisfied that he did not come in for a Share with the rest of his
Neighbors, went and told them, That the Coroner ought to be sent for, and an
Enquiry made how he died.

All Care and Application signified but little, for his last Exit was drawing
on; in which time, not in the least to shrink from his Character of Quality, he
still kept up the Honorable Figure he had so long presented; and accordingly
made most prodigious Protestations of Good Will and Acknowledgments to the
Family, avowing that the few Hundreds he had bequeathed them, was nothing to
what he would do for 'em, if please God to lengthen his Life to serve them and
theirs.

And now having performed the Part of a good Patron and Friend, as his last
Legacies do sufficiently testify; he was resolved to be as good a Christian
too, and thereupon requested the taking the Sacrament: To which, being admitted
(with what Integrity you will find by the Sequel) with a grave Countenance to the
very last, he was very ready to receive the Sacrament; and upon so serious an
Undertaking, was pleased to put a Case of Conscience to the Minister, viz.
having made a Vow never to pay the 500 l. he stood engaged for, Whether he was
obliged to keep his Vow, or not* To which being answered in the Negative, That
he was obliged to pay his Debts, notwithstanding his rash Vow. He made answer,
That truly now drawing near Heaven, he considered the point, and acquiesced
with his Ghostly Monitor; and thereupon incerted the 500 l. into the Will.

This piece of extraordinary Justice being performed with a very composed and
settled mind he left this troublesome World on Sunday the Third Instant, seeming
very well contented to part with his great Riches and Lands, for the more
valuable consideration of future Happiness.

Now I must do the Family this Right, That notwithstanding the great Sums they
gained by so ample a Testament, and such bounteous Legacies, however their
sorrow for the lamented Departure of so worthy a Gentleman was very hearty and
cordial: Nay, some are of Opinion, that instead of diminishing (as Sorrow
generally wears off) theirs, on the contrary is daily increasing.

But perhaps nothing was so unkind as excluding the poor Prentice from visiting
the sick Gentleman. For, alas, the poor Boy has been heard most dolefully to
bewail the unkindness of his Master; for undoubtedly the worthy Gentleman would
have left him enough to have set him up, had he been amongst the Throng of
Visitants, who all tasted so highly of his extravagant Liberality.

Now to assure you that the Kindness of his Executors continued beyond his
Death, they thought themselves so far indebted to his Memory, that not only the
Embalmer was sent for, but likewise a Coffin, price ^^ l. was made, and all
little enough for so generous a Patron, so much as Mourning, and Rings, and
what else bespoken, etc.

But before these Honorable Exequies could be performed, an unhappy Letter
from the True Humphrey Wickham Esquire a Person of a great Estate and Reputation,
detected the whole Fraud and Delusion, and the Remains of our Quandam Person of
Honor is to be committed to Earth, in a Coffin, price 4 s. with Shroud and
other Funeral Materials accordingly.

You are hereby informed, That this grand Impostor, whose true Name was
William Morrell alias Bowyer, formerly a Surgeon in Banbury, had been two
Months a Guest at Mr. Wickham's, and thereby so acquainted with his Family as
enabled him to personate the Cheat so artificially, and so we leave him.

His WILL.
IN the Name of God, Amen, I Humphrey Wickham of Swaclift, in the County of
Oxon Esquire being sick and weak in Body, but of sound Mind and Memory, do make
this my last WILL and TESTAMENT, revoking all Wills by me formerly made: And as
touching such Worldly Estate as God has been pleased to bless me withal, I do
hereby give and bequeath the same in manner following:

Imprimis, I do give, devise, and bequeath to my Kinsman William Wickham, Son
of George Wickham, of Gazington in the County of Oxon, all that my
Mansion House of Swaclift aforesaid; and all the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments thereunto belonging, to hold unto him the said William Wickham,
and his Heirs for ever.

Item, I give and bequeath unto John Cullin, Son of Thomas Cullin, of the
Parish of St. Clement Danes, in the County of Middlesex, Baker, all that my
impropriated Parsonage of Sowgrate, in the County of Northampton, with the
Rents, Issues, and Profits thereof.

Item, I give unto Anne Cullin, Sister of the said John Cullin, the Sum of Two
hundred and fifty Pounds.

Item, I give unto Thomas Cullin, Son of the said Thomas Cullin, the Sum of
Three hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Dorothy Halford, Daughter of Thomas Halford of Halford, in
the County of Warwick, the Sum of Two hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Richard Davis, Son of William Davis of the said Parish of
St. Clement Danes, the Sum of Four hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto William Davis, Son of the said William Davis, the Sum of
Two hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Anne Fowkes, for her Care and Diligence in Looking after me
in my Sickness, the Sum of One hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Robert Croker, Son of William Croker of Sanford, in the
said County of Oxon (being my God-son) the Sum of Five hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto the said William Croker, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Robert Penniston, Son of Sir Thomas Penniston, and younger
Brother to Sir Farmalis Penniston of Cornhill, in the said County of Oxon the
Sum of Three hundred Pounds.

Item, I give unto Mrs. Jane Penniston, Sister of the said Mr. Robert
Penniston, the Sum of Two hundred Pounds.

Item, I do hereby give, devise, and bequeath, all my Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, called by the Name of Apple Tree Ducy, in Cropridee,
in the County of Northampton, unto John Brooking of Rashly, in the County of
Devon, Esquire, and the said William Davis Senior, and Thomas Cullin Senior,
and the Survivor of them, and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them upon Trust
and Confidence: Nevertheless, that they the said John Brooking William Davis,
and Thomas Cullin, shall sell and dispose of the same; and out of the Money
thereby raised, pay, or cause to be paid, the respective Legacies herein before
bequeathed unto the said Anne Cullin, Thomas Cullin Jun. Dorothy Halford,
Richard Davis, William Davis Jun. and Anne Fowkes. And whereas I have herein
before bequeathed unto my Kinsman William Wickham, and his Heirs, all my
Mansion House at Swaclift aforesaid, with the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments thereunto belonging; (...)y true Will and Meaning is, That the
same Devise is upon this special Trust and Confidence, That the said William
Wickham shall pay, or cause to be paid, the several Legacies herein before
bequeathed unto the said Rob Croker, and Will Croker, Robert Penniston, and
Jane Penniston; and also pay and discharge one Bond for the Principal Sum of
five hundred Pounds, with Interest, which I became bound for and with Thomas
Walker, to one Thomas Irons, any thing herein before-contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding; and also that he the said William
Wickham, shall out of his Legacy, and Lands, and Premises aforesaid, to him
devised, pay, or cause to be paid unto my Executors hereafter named, the Sum of
Five hundred Pounds, to be by them bestowed distributed, or employed for the
use and benefit of the Poor of the Parish of Swaclift aforesaid, in such manner
as they, or the major part of them shall think sit and convenient.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the said John Brooking out of the Moneys that
shall be raised of the Sale of the said Lands and Tenements, called Apple Tree
Ducy aforesaid, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds: And all the rest and residue
of the Moneys that shall be thereby raised. I do hereby give and bequeath unto
the said William Davies Senior, and Thomas Cullin Senior, to be equally divided
between them and the Survivor of them.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Alice Cullin, Wise of the said Thomas Cullin
Senior, the Sum of Six hundred Pounds to her own proper Use and Disposal.

Item, I give and bequeath in like manner the Sum of Six hundred Pounds unto
Jane Davis, the Wife of the said William Davis.

Item, I give unto the said Robert Croker and Will Croker, the Sum of Ten
Pounds a-piece to buy them Mourning: and also to each of them a Ring of Twelve
Shillings.

Item, I give unto Jane Croker and Mary Croker; and also to the said Robert
Peniston, and Jane Peniston, and all other my Legatees herein before mentioned,
and to every of them the Sum of Ten Pounds a-piece to buy them Mourning, and a
Ring of Twelve Shillings.

Item, Whereas I have the Sum of Seven hundred Pounds, lying at Interest in the
hands of Mr. Ambrose Holbitch, in the name of Oliver Charles, my Servant, I do
hereby give and bequeath the same to and amongst my Four Servants, Oliver
Charles, John Harbert, Sarah VVinn, and Margery Smith, and the Survivor of
them, to be equally divided amongst them, share and share alike.

Item, I give and bequeath my Three Geldings, and all my Accoutrements
belonging to them unto the said John Brookcing, William Davis Senior, and
Thomas Cullin, Sen. viz. my Bright Bay Gelding to the said Thomas Cullin, and
my Black Gelding to the said William Davis, and my Dapple-grey Gelding to the
said John Brooking. All the Arrears of Rent in my Tenants Hands at the time of
my Decease I do hereby freely acquit and discharge. And all the rest and
Residue of my Personal Estate, not herein before devised, after my Debts,
Legacies and Funeral Expenses, paid and discharged, I do hereby give and
bequeath unto my said Kinsman William Wickham.

And, lastly, I do hereby nominate, constitute and appoint the said William
Wickham, John Brooking, William Davis Senior, and Thomas Cullin Senior,
Executors of this my Will; hereby revoking and making void all other, and
former Will or Wills by me made.

In Witness whereof I the said Humphrey Wickham have to this my last Will,
containing one side of a Sheet of Paper, and almost half the back thereof, set
my Hand and Seal this Twenty seventh day of December. Anno Dom. 1691. Humphrey
Wickham.
Signed, Sealed, Published and Declared in the presence of us, with the Words (
Will. Wickham) being first interlined,

Rob. Smith, Jo. Chapman, Rich. Chapman, Mart. Pinckard.




I, the above named Humphrey Wickham, having omitted out of my Will
abovementioned, the Disposition of my Estate in Huntingtonshire, do hereby
make this Addition to, and part of my said Will, in manner following. I give
and bequeath all my Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, called Pryor's Farm,
and all other my Estate in Hollywell and Needingworth, or else where, in the
said County of Huntington, unto the above named John Brooking, William Davis
Senior, and Tho. Cullin Sen. and the Survivor of them, and their Heirs, and the
Heirs of the Survivor of them, under this special Trust and Confidence, that
the said Jo. Brooking, William Davis, and Thomas Cullen, shall sell and dispose
of the same; and out of the Moneys thereby raised, pay, or Cause to be paid the
respective Legacies hereafter named, viz. I give and bequeath, to Humphrey
Longford the sum of six hundred pounds, and to his Sister Mary Longford the
like sum of six hundred pounds.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the said Tho. Cullin Sen. the further Sum of
800 l. and all the Remainder of the Moneys thereby raised, I give and bequeath
unto the said Will. Davis Sen. and Jane his Wife, and the Survivor of them.

Item, Whereas I have by Will abovesaid, given unto John Cullin, Son of the
said Thomas Cullin, the impropriated Parsonage of Sowgrave; my true meaning is,
That I do give and devise the same to the said John Cullin, and his Heirs for
ever.

In Witness whereof, I the said Humphrey Wickham have to this Condicil
Addition, or further part of my said Will, set my Hand and Seal, this Twenty
eighth Day of December, Anno Dom. 1691. Humphrey Wickham.
Signed, Sealed, Published, and Declared, in the Presence of us,

Robert Smith, John Chapman, Rich. Chapman, Martin Pinkard,




Probatum fuit hum. Testium. cum Codicillo eidem annex. eoram Venerab. Vir.
Henrico. Fauconberge Legum Doctore, Surr. Venerab. and Egregii Viri Dom.
Richardi Raines Militis, Legem etiam Doctoris Curiae Praerogativae Cantuar.
Magist. etc. Quarto die Mersis Januarii, Anno Dom. (Stilo Angliae, 1691.
Juramentis Willielmi Davis, and Thomae Cullen, duorum ex Executor. etc. Quibus,
etc. de been and fidel. Administrand. eadem ad Sancta Dei Evangelia Jurat.
Reservata potestate similem Com. faciendi Willielmo Wickham and Johanni
Brooking, alteris Executor. cum venerint seu eorum after venerit cand. petitur.

FINIS.

