A PROLOGUE spoken at MITHRIDATES King of PONTUS, the First Play Acted at the
THEATER ROYAL this Year, 1681.
AFter a four Months Fast we hope at length
Your queasie Stomachs have recovered strength
That You can taste a Play (your old coarse Mess)
As honest and as plain as an Address.
And therefore Welcome from your several Parts,
You that have gained kind Country Wenches Hearts:
Have watched returning Milk-maids in the Dark,
And sinned against the Pales of every Park.
Welcome fair Ladies of unblemished Faith,
That left Town Bagnio's for the fruitful Bath;
For when the Season's Hot, and Lover's there,
The Waters never fail to get an Heir.
Welcome kind Men that did your Wives attend,
And Welcome He that was the Husbands Friend,
Who holding Chat did silently Encroach,
With Treacherous Hand to grabble in the Coach.
Hail you New Market Brothers of the Switch,
That leap left Strumpets, full of Pox and Itch,
A leap more dangerous than the Devil's Ditch.
Last Welcome you who never did appear;
Gave out in the Country, but lay fluxing here.
Now Crawl abroad with Stick, lean-chapt and thin,
And Fair as Lady that has new lain in;
This Winter let us reckon you our own,
For all Wise Men will let the State alone:
The Plot's removed, a Witness of Renown
Has lodged it safe, at to other End of the Town,
And that it never may fail, some pious Whore
Has cast her Mite, and fairly at his Door
Laid two small squalling Evidences more;
Which well instructed, if we take their words,
In time may grow to hang two Popish Lords;
Heaven Grant the Babes may Live, for Faith there is need,
Swearers fall off so fast, if none succeed
The Land's in danger quite to loose the breed.
Unless you break an Act, which were a Sin,
And for recruit let Irish Cattle in.
Well; after all 'twere better to Compound,
Then let the foolish Frolic still go round,
Both sides have lost and by my Computation
None but Jack Ketch has gained in the Nation.
EPILOGUE.
POX on this Playhouse, it is an old tired Jade,
'Twill do no longer, we must force a Trade;
What if we all turn Witness of the Plot?
That Is overstockt, there is nothing to be got.
Shall we take Orders? That will Parts require,
And Colleges give no Degrees for Hire,
Would Salamancha was a little nigher.
Will nothing do? Oh now it is found I hope;
Have not you seen the Dancing of the Rope?
When Andrew's Wit was clean run off the Score,
And Jacob's Cap'ring Tricks could do no more,
A Damsel does to the Ladders Top advance
And with two heavy Buckets drags a Dance;
The Yawning Crowd pearch't up to see the sight,
And slav'r'd at the Mouth for vast Delight:
Oh Friends there is nothing to Enchant the Mind,
Nothing like that sweet Sex to draw Mankind:
The Foundred Horse that switching will not stir,
Trots to the Mare, before without a Spur.
Faith I Will go scour the Scene-room and Engage
Some Toy within to save the falling Stage.
Exit. Reenters with Mrs. Cox. Who have we here again, what Nymphsi'th' Stocks?
Your most Obedient Servant, sweet Madam Cox.
You Would best be Coy, and Blush for a pretense,
For Shame say something in your own Defense.
Mrs. Cox, What shall I say? I have been hence so long
I Have e'ne almost forgot my Mother Tongue;
If I can Act I wish I were ten Fathom
Beneath --

M. Goodman. -- Oh Lord, Pray, no swearing, Madam;

Mrs. Cox, Why Sir, If I had sworn, to lay the Nation
I could find out some Mental Reservation.
Well in plain Terms, Gallants, without a Shamm,
Will you be pleased to take me as I am.
Quite out of Countenance, with a down cast look,
Just like a Truant that returns to Book:
Yet I Am not old, but if I were this place
Never wanted Art to piece a ruined Face.
When Grey-Beards Governed I forsook the Stage,
You know it is piteous work to Act with Age;
Though there is no sex amongst these Beardless Boys,
There Is what we Women love, that is Mirth and Noise,
These young Beginners may grow up in time,
And the Devil's in it if I Am past my Prime.

London, Printed for J. Sturton.


