Licensed,

Jan. 16. 1694/5.
The Scrivener's Guide.

BEING Choice and Approved Forms OF PRESIDENTS, OF All Sorts of Business now in
use and practice, in a much better Method than any yet Printed; being useful
for all Gentlemen, but chiefly for those who practice the Law, viz.
Assignments, Articles of Agreement, Acquittances, Bargains and Sale, Bills,
Conditions, Copartnerships, Covenants, Deeds, Defeazances, Grants, Joyntures,
Indentures, Letters of Attorney, Licenses, Obligations, Provisoes, Presidents
for Parish Business, Releases, Revocations, Wills, Warrants of Attorney, etc.


By Nicholas Covert, one of the Attorneys of the Court of Common Pleas.

The Second Edition, corrected by the Author, with many Additions made by him.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins Esquires, for
Charles Harper at the Flower de Luce over against St. Dunstans-Church in
Fleetstreet, 1700.

TO THE READER.
THAT a New Book of this kind should come forth after so many already extant,
some may wonder, who do not consider, that Presidents grow Obsolete, and New
ones are made according to new Laws, or as the Notions of Men become more
refined.

Of the First Sort, is a Bargain and Sale of Goods distrained for Rent, page
329. which with the Notes thereupon are a good direction how to proceed upon
the late Act, impowring Landlords to sell Distresses for Rent, etc.

Of the Second Sort, are many never before Extant, and whereof every one is
manifold more worth than the Price of the whole Book.

These Presidents being collected only for private Use, without any design of
being made public, have most of them been lately executed, and undergone the
Inspection and Perusal of Counsel learned in the Law. They are not all placed
in Alphabetical Order, there being no need of such placing of them; because
there is put before them an exact Table of what is contained in the Book.

The first Impression hereof having met with so kind a Reception, and been so
well approved of by the Ingenious, that it was sold in a short time, has
encouraged the Author, for the public Good, to make an Addition of several
very useful Presidents of both sorts to this second Edition, never before
Published, whereby the said Book is rendered much more useful and beneficial to
the Candid and Ingenious Reader, which is the sole end and design of the Author.

N. C.

THE TABLE.
Agreements, Articles and Indentures of Covenants.
ARticles upon Purchase of Lands in Fee-simple, Page 1 Covenants to make
Assurance of Lands, 240 The like with Covenants to pay the Charges, which the
Bargainee shall be at in ejecting the Tenant in possession, 30 Covenants
between a Mortgagee and a Purchaser of the Redemption, That the Mortgagee shall
assign upon payment of the Mortgage Money, 26 Covenants to convey Land in
Consideration of Five shillings in hand, and residue to be paid at a day to
come, without obliging the Buyer to pay; So that if he fails in payment, he may
not pretend to have any Equity afterward, 431 Indenture of Covenants upon
Contract for purchase of a Copyhold, where part of the Purchase Money is paid,
and the Purchaser is to be at liberty to proceed in the Purchase, or not, 34
Covenants upon purchasing the Equity of Redemption of Copyhold-Lands mortgaged,
36 A Declaration of Trust upon admitting two Lives into a Copyhold, with
necessary Covenants, 28 Articles for securing 1000 l. and paying Interest to
two persons, until Lands can be purchased to the same uses, 19 Articles of
Agreement on a Marriage, concerning Settlement of Lands, 16 Articles for
dividing the Rent, and avoiding Survivorship between Jointenants of Lease Land,
3 Articles between a Country Trader and a London Factor, 10 Articles of
Agreement between Creditors and the Widow of a Debtor, concerning
Administration and paying Debts, 12 Articles for dividing some Corn between two
Partners in Husbandry, 39 Articles between Jointenants, concerning cutting
Corn, and dividing it in the Field, 41 For Building a new House, and taking
down an old one there, 6 Covenants for Repairing the Steeple of a Church, 44
Articles between a Merchant and his Apprentice's Father, etc. 7 Agreement of
Tenants of a Manor, about ploughing a Common Field, 32 Covenants for saving
harmless a Bishop, in refusing to admit an unfit person to a Vicarage, 37
Covenants for delivery of Wheat (sold) by two Bushels weekly, 43 Such necessary
Articles of Agreement between four Joint-Executors, as ought to be made between
them, for the better execution of the Testator's Will, 23 An Agreement of
Copartnership between two Sales-men, with necessary Covenants, 46 Covenants
about assigning a Stock in the East India Company, 22 An Agreement of
Composition for Debts, 24 An Agreement of Creditors to accept their Debts at
Four payments, abating Interest, 364 For Covenants to levy Fines and suffer
Recoveries. See Fines and Recoveries. An Indenture of Copartnership between
Four, for Affairs domestic and foreign, with necessary Covenants, 293 An
Indenture on Separation of Copartners, 313 An Indenture where two Apprentices
having taken their Master's Shop, Covenant with his Executors to gather in his
Debts, 317 See Bonds with Conditions, which may easily be turned into Covenants.
Acquittances and Releases of Personal things and to bar and extinguish Rights
in Lands.
A General Release of all Demands, 62 Mutual General Releases by Indenture, 68
A Release of Errors in a Judgment, 63 A General Release of Errors, 63 A Release
of an Annuity, 65 A Release of Title to Lands, 64 An Acquittance and Release of
an Extent by an Administratrix, 66 A Release to a Sheriff, for discharging a
Prisoner, 67 The like in a better Form, 67 A short Release of the Equity of
Redemption in a Term for years, mortgaged, 68 An Acquittance in part of
Purchase Money, 168 A Release of Dower, with Covenants not to sue for Dower, 245
A Release from the Overseers of the Poor, to one who paid 20 l. to be freed
from the keeping a Bastard Child, 286
Apprentiship. Writings relating thereunto.
Articles between a Merchant and his Apprentice's Father, 7 An Indenture where
two Apprentices having taken their Master's Shop, Covenant with his Executors
to gather in his Debts, 317 Assigment of an Apprentice, 160 Indenture of an
Apprentice, put out by the Parish, 287 A Discharge of an Apprentice, with a
General Release to him, 362
Annuities granted and assigned, with Grants of a next Avoidance of a
Parsonage, etc.
A short Assignment of an Annuity, 162 A Grant of an Annuity or Rent for years,
383 A Grant of the Moiety of an Annuity during Life, 145 A Grant of a next
Avoidance of a Rectory, 149 The like of a Vicarage, with necessary Covenants,
150
Assignments of Leases or Terms for years.
An Assignment of several Leases to two Assignees, made Tenants, in Common, and
not Joint-tenants, 414 An Assignment of a Mortgagee by a Term for years, 157 An
Assignment of a Lease for years, 161 A Covenant to produce Writings for defense
of the Title, 242
Assignment of uncertain Terms, as Lands extended upon Judgments,
Recognizances, etc.
An Assignment, or Bargain and Sale of Lands, extended upon a Recognizance, 135
An Assignment, or Bargain and Sale of a Term for years, taken in Execution by a
Sheriffs Bailiff upon a Fieri facias, 133
Assignments of Debts on Judgments, Statutes, Bonds, etc.
An Assignment of a Judgment, 153 A Letter of Attorney to receive Money due from
several persons. 156 A short Assignment of a Bond, 159 An Assignment of an
Annuity, 162 An Assignment of certain Debts by an Administratrix to Creditors,
163 An Assignment of a Statute by an Administrator to two Creditors, 165 An
Assignment of several Bonds to a Trustee for a Widow, with consent of her
intended Husband, that the Money may be at her dispose after Marriage, 141 An
Assignment made by a Vicar of all Money owing to him for Tithes, 151 Assignment
of Dower, 140
Letters of Attorney.
A Letter of Attorney, or Proxy, appointing a Proctor in an Ecclesiastical
Court, to procure a Guardian to be appointed for an Infant to sue an
Administrator there for a Dividend, 69 A Letter of Attorney to surrender
Copyhold Land to the use of a Will, 70 A Letter of Attorney to enter upon Land,
and to Sue for the Recovery thereof, or compound, 71 Letter of Attorney to
appoint a Steward and Bailiff of a Manor, and to keep Courts, 73 A Letter of
Attorney to take Possession of Land newly purchased, 73 A Letter of Attorney
from two Executors of a Bond Sued to a Judgment, 74 A Letter of Attorney or
Assignment of a Man's whole Estate, in consideration of several Debts and
Engagements, 75 A Letter of Attorney to receive Money which is not yet become
due upon a Bond, 76 A General Letter of Attorney, 77 A Letter of Attorney, to
Enter on Land and deliver a Lease, 78 A Letter of Attorney to take Possession
of a Message, extended by the Sheriff upon a Statute, 80 A Letter of Attorney
to receive Debts, 81 A Revocation of a Letter of Attorney, 82 A Letter of
Attorney of several sums of Money due from one person, 82 A Letter of Attorney
to Sue an Action of Covenant, 83 A Letter of Attorney to demand Rent, and in
default of payment to Re-enter according to a Proviso for such Re-entry
contained in the Lease, 84 The like Letter of Attorney from a Corporation 86
The like Letter of Attorney where two several Rents are reserved on the Lease,
87 A fit Endorsement to be made on such Letter of Attorney, for a Memorial of
the Execution thereof, with Notes, how such Letter of Attorney is to be
executed, 88 Letter of Attorney to take admittance to Copyhold Lands, and after
admittance to surrender, 88 Letter of Attorney to appear at the Assizes, and
Traverse an Indictment, and enter into Recognizance to prosecute, with
Covenants for saving harmless, 91 Letter of Attorney to submit to an
Indictment, 92 A Revocation of a Suit, and all Letters of Attorney to Sue, 362
A Letter or Warrant of Attorney to acknowledge satisfaction of a Judgment, 363
A Letter or Warrant of Attorney to confess a Judgment in Debt, 72 A Letter of
Attorney to confess Judgment upon a Bond 72
Attornment of Tenants.
Attornment of the Tenant in Possession Indorsed on a Bargain and Sale, 411
Another Form, 412 The like, 412 A Covenant for the Attornment of Tenants, 242
Attornment by a Collateral Deed, 412 Attornment and Livery together, 413 A
Grant of the next Avoidance of a Rectory, 149 The like of a Vicarage with
necessary Covenants, 150 An Award for payment of Money and giving mutual
Releases, 170
Bargain and Sale.
BArgain and Sale to make a Tenant to the Precipe in order to suffer a Common
Recovery, 232 In a Bargain and Sale, a Covenant for Attornment of Tenants, 242
Bargain and Sale of uncertain Terms, Lands Extended, and Lands taken in
Execution on Judgment, Recognizances, etc.
A Bargain and Sale of Lands extended on a Recognizance, 135 A Bargain and Sale
by a Sheriffs Bailiff, of a Term for years taken in Execution upon a Fieri
facias. 133
Bargain and Sale of Goods.
A Bargain and Sale of Household stuff; 175 Bargain and Sale of all Goods and
Chattles, real and personal to save harmless a Surety, 171 Bargain and Sale of
Goods distrained for Rent, with necessary Notes, 329
Bargain and Sale of Woods and Trees.
A short Bargain and Sale of Coppice-wood, where the price is partly paid, and
agreed to be, 319 Bargain and Sale of Trees and Coppise-woods, with Covenants
to be saved harmless from Tithes, and other special Covenants 321 A Lease for
Years, of Tithes, 326 Bargain and Sale of Under-woods, 180 A Bill of Credit, 160
Bills and Bonds with Conditions.
A Single Bill for payment of Money, 184 A Penal Bill for payment of Money, 167 A
Bond from one to one for payment of Money, 92 A Bond from two to one for payment
of Money on Demand, 93 A Bond from one to two with Condition for payment of Money
at two several days, 94 A Condition to save harmless from a Bond for payment of
Money, 95 Condition to perform Covenants, ibid. Condition of a Bail Bond to the
Sheriff upon Capias out of the Common Pleas, 96 Conditions to perform the Award
of Arbitrators, ibid. Condition to one to Diet by the year, 97 Condition to
save harmless for paying Rent where the Title is in question, ibid. Condition
to save harmless the Bail in an inferior Court, 98 A better form, 116 Condition
to leave a Wife worth 100 l. 98 Condition to pay Money at day of Marriage or
Death, 99 Condition to deliver Hay and Oats, ibid. Condition to justify all
Actions commenced by virtue of a Letter of Attorney, 100 Condition for a hired
Servants truth, ibid. Condition to pay Rent, 101 Condition to re-deliver a
Bond, or pay the Money thereon due, 102 Condition to gather Rent and give
account thereof, 103 Condition for a Wife to make a Will, ibid. Condition to
save harmless in being bound for appearance against the Obligor in the
Common Pleas, 104 A Condition to save harmless for being bound in a Sheriffs
Bond, 105 Another Condition to save harmless for being bound in a Sheriffs
Bond, 106 Condition not to become Surety without License, ibid. Condition not
to sell his Interest in a Shop before J. F. have refused to buy it, 107
Condition to leath two parts in three of Land and Goods to his Wife, ibid.
Condition where two Executors be, that each shall bear a part of what shall be
recovered, for any Act done by the Testator, ibid. Condition that the Husband
shall not sell a House and Goods, (whereof the Wife was seized before Marriage)
during the Coverture, and to leave the same discharged of Encumbrances, if the
Wife survive, 108 Condition to make one free, 109 Condition to become bound
with another to the Obligee, who has passed his word for the Debt of the
Obligor, ibid. Condition that a Father having received a Legacy given to his
Child, shall save the Executor harmless, 110 Condition to pay back part of a
Legacy, if any Debt of the Testator shall appear to be unpaid, 111 Condition to
make satisfaction if any mistake be found in an account made up, ibid.
Condition to pay Money during Life for Maintenance, 101 Condition to save
harmless the Bail, for the Defendant in the Common Pleas, and for the
Defendants paying the Condemnation Money, or rendering himself to Prison if
Judgment be against him, 112 Condition for saving harmless a Bail without a
Clause of the Defendants rendering himself to Prison, 113 Condition for saving
harmless the Plaintiffs Bail to prosecute in an inferior Court, 117 Condition
to save harmless the Bail for the Defendant in an inferior Court 116 Condition
to save harmless the Bail in the Common Pleas, and pay the Charges which the
Bail shall expend in defense, of the Suit, 114 A Condition to save harmless for
being Bail, in an Inferior, Court, 115 Condition for saving harmless a Surety
for a Person in the First Fruits Office, 118 Condition to pay a further Sum for
a Fine upon renewing a Lease for Lives, in case one of the Lives in a former
Lease be now dead and not living as is affirmed, 119 Condition to give account
and render the Stock delivered, to one who is to carry on a Trade at half
profit, 120 Condition to pay proportionable shares of the Charges of a Suit
concerning a Common, 121 A Parson presented to a Living gives Bond to resign
upon request, 123 A Condition to procure an Infant to convey Lands, when he
comes of Age, 124 Condition to Surrender Copyhold Lands, whereunto the Obligor
is admitted in Trust for the Obligee, 124 Condition for payment of Rent, and
performance of other Agreements in a Lease Parol, 125 Condition that the
Obligor shall convey all his Estate unto the Obligee, 126 Condition to pay 40
s. more for a Fine on admittance to a Copyhold, if the Lord have not another
Fine for admittance to the same Land within three years, 127 Condition to stand
to Award of all Differences, except certain Special Matters, ibid. Bond upon
Marriage with Condition to permit the Wife to dispose of 50 l. and the Obligor
to pay the rest of her Estate to her two Cildren at full Age, 129 Condition
that the Obligor shall never Sue out Execution upon any Statute or Judgment
against the Obligee, 130 Condition upon an Adventure of Bottomree, 131 A Bond
with Condition to observe the Orders of a House of Chancery, 132 A Bond to the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, to save a Parish harmless upon
inhabiting there, 285 A Bond with Condition, that the Author of a Book shall
take of the Booseller, undertaking to Print a certain Number at a price, 133
See Agreements, which may be turned into Conditions of Bonds, as also many
Conditions of Bonds into Articles of Agreement.
Covenants about Building and Repairing.
COvenants for taking down an Old House and Building a New one, 6 For repairing
the Steeple of a Church, 44 Certificate into the Exchequer, where neither the
person nor any distress can be found for levying the Tex on his Office
according to the Act of 4 s. per pound, 4 W. and M. 61 Certificate of a Man's
Honesty, 289
Conveyances of Lands-in Fee simple.
In Consideration of Money partly paid and partly secured, 337 A Bargain and
Sale for six Months, to make a Privity where the Inheritance is to be purchased
by a Release of the Reversion, 349 Release and Grant of the Reversion, 350 A
Conveyance by Release, and Recovery of one parcel to one Purchaser, and another
parcel to another Purchaser, with necessary Covenants, 367 A Bargain, Sale or
Feoffment of House and Lands with some Covenants general and some special, 377
A Conveyance by Fine, A Conveyance of Lands in Exchange, 209 Two Jointenants in
Fee, that they may be Tenants in Common, make a Feoffment by Lease and Release
of one Moiety to the use of one, and of the other Moiety to the use of the
other, 375
Several Covenants in such Conveyances in Fee.
Covenant, that the Grantor has made no Encumbrance, 377 That the Grantor is
seized and has power to fell, 379 Covenant for quiet Enjoyment against the
Grantor and all claiming under him, except a Lessee for years at a rack Rent,
whereof the Purchasor is to receive parcel by Apportionment, 368, 371 Covenant
for quiet Enjoiment free from Encumbrances of the Grantor, 380 Covenant for
further Assurance, 369, 372, 381 That the Purchaser shall pay a portion of the
Quit-Rent to the chief Lord, 374 That Under-Tenants shall attorn, 242 That the
Grantor will produce Writings for defense of the Title to the Lands sold, ibid.
To pay back the Purchase Money at the end of two years, if the Purchaser
dislike; and the Purchaser to pay a further Sum, if he like the Bargain, 244 To
pay back the Purchase Money if the Land sold, or any part thereof be evicted in
ten years, 243
Provisoes in such Conveyances.
That the Estate shall be void in default of payment of the Purchase Money at a
time limited, 248 See more in Feoffments. The Form of a Covenant for two
Persons, or more severally, with a Provisoe, that one shall not be charged with
the breach of another, 247
Indentures of Covenants and Agreements, vide Agreements.
Copartnership vide Partnership.
A Bill of Credit, 169
Deeds concerning Copyholds.
INdenture of Covenants upon Contract for purchase of a Copyhold, where part of
the Purchase Money is paid, and the Purchaser is to be at liberty to proceed in
the Purchase or not, 34 Covenants upon purchasing the Equity of Redemption of
Copyhold Lands mortgaged, 36 A Declaration of Trust upon admitting two Lives
into a Copyhold, with necessary Covenants, 28 A Letter of Attorney to surrender
Copyhold Land to the use of a Will, 70 A Letter of Attorney to take admittance
to Copyhold Lands, and after admittance to surrender, 89 A Bond to surrender
Copyhold Lands, whereunto the Obligor is admitted in Trust for the Obligee, 124
A Bond to pay 40 s. more for a Fine on admittance to a Copyhold, if the Lord
have not another Fine for admittance to the same Lands within three years, 127
A Warrant to summon a Copyhold Court, 168
Deeds of Declaration.
A Declaration by a Wife, concerning a Sum of Money, according to a Power
reserved before Marriage, 176 A Declaration of a Trust upon admitting two Lives
into a Copyhold, with necessary Covenants, 28 A Deed of Free Gift of all Goods
and Chattles, 173
Deeds of Revocation of Uses, and Limitation of other Uses.
A Deed to revoke Uses in a Settlement, according to the Proviso for that
purpose, 174 A Revocation of Uses in a Feoffment, and a Limitation in Fee, 267
A Revocation of Uses, with the recital of the Proviso and a Limitation of other
new Uses, 268
Defeazances.
A Defeazance of a Statute-Staple, 211 A Defeazance of a Judgment, 212 A
Defeazance on a forfeited Mortgage, giving further time of payment, 213 Dower
assigned by the Heir, 140 A Release of Dower, 245
Examinations, Hue and Cry, and Warrants upon Robberies and Felonies.
THe Examination of a Person robbed on the Highway, 289 The Examination of a
Person robbed by Three Men, one of whom he knew, 290 A Warrant for a Hue and
Cry after a Felon, 291 A Warrant to Search for one who has stolen a Gelding,
292
Exchange.
A Deed of Exchange between a Vicar and another for Land of the Vicarage Glebe,
209
Deed of Covenant for levying Fines, and declaring Uses thereof.
A Covenant for a Fine, to be levied by Husband and Wife, 221 For levying a
Fine; a Covenant in a shorter Form, 222 Covenant to levy a Fine by several
persons, having separate Interests, 223 Covenant to levy a Fine in a Court of
ancient Demesne, 224 Covenant to levy a Fine, with a render of an Estate for
years, 225 Covenant to levy a Fine, with a render of Rent, 226 Covenant to levy
a Fine, Sur concessit, for years, 227 Covenant to levy a Fine, and suffer a
Recovery with double Voucher, 228 The Introduction of the uses of a Fine to be
levied, 341 The Introduction of the uses of a Fine levied 343 The Introduction
of the uses in a Feoffment, 349 The like in a Release, 350
Gift.
A Deed of Free Gift of all Goods and Chattels, 173
Grants of Annuities, Rents, Reversions, Stewardship, Next Avoidance.
A Grant of an Annuity or Rent for years, 383 A Grant of a Rent reserved by
Lease, 136 A Grant of a Rentcharge, 137 A Grant of a Reversion, 139 A Grant of
the Moiety of an Annuity during life, 145 A Grant of a Stewardship of a Manor
during pleasure, 148 A Grant of Next avoidance of a Rectory, 149 A Grant of
Next avoidance of a Vicarge, with necessary Covenants, 150 Hue and Cry 291 A
Warrant to Search for one who has Stolen, a Gelding, 292
Ioyntures.
A Jointure before Marriage, and Settlement of several parcels to several uses,
with Proviso for Daughters and younger Sons, and that the Tenant for Life may
make Leases for 21 years at rack Rents, 184 A Jointure by Covenant, to stand
seized with Covenants to Marry, and for payment of Marriage Portions, and other
Special Covenants, 271 A Settlement by Lease and Release in Consideration of a
Marriage intended of Lands (which the Husband has in Reversion after a Tenant
for Life) to the Wife for her Jointure, with an Entail to the Sons and
Daughters between them, 331 A Proviso to make void the Use limited to the Wife,
if she go about to depart with her Estate, 250 Proviso for preserving the
Estate to Children en Ventre sa Mere, 252 Proviso That the Husband being Tenant
for Life, may make a Jointure to any other Wife, if the present should die, 253
Proviso, That a Tenant for Life may make a Jointure if he should Marry, 254,
390 Another, To settle a Rent for a Jointure, 255
Several Provisoes which may be in Ioyntures See in Voluntary Settlements of
Estates.
Proviso, That an Estate for years limited to Trustees, shall be void after
Daughters Portions paid, 261 Proviso, That if other Lands be conveyed in lieu
of those limited, then the Use in them to be to another, 262 Proviso, To make
void an Estate, if the Son marry without the Father's Consent, 263 Proviso,
That the Jointure shall be void, if the Wife claim Dower, 336 Limitation to the
Husband for Life, and after to the Wife for a Jointure, 352, 355 Jointure after
Marriage, 392 Provision for a Separate Maintenance, 195
Leases.
A Leases for Years by Fine, Sur Concessit, 218 A Lease of diverse Houses,
Lands, etc. with several Exceptions, Reservations of Rent, Proviso and
Covenants, by which any Lease (as occasion is) may be drawn, 417
Licenses.
A License to let Lands, though prohibited by Lease, 198 A License to hawk,
hunt and fish, 199 A Letter of License from a Creditor to a Debtor, 200 An
Agreement or Letter of Composition for Debts, 201 A Letter of License from
Creditors to an Administrator, and Composition made, 202 A License for a Debtor
to come from beyond Sea into England, and stay six Months, 205 A License for a
Petty Chapman, 206 A License or Pass for a Poor Man, to go to his Friends, 206
A License to Travel by Water on the Lordsday, 207 A License to Travel on the
Lords day, 208 A License for a Badger of Corn, 208
Limitation of Uses.
Limitation of Estates to the Husband and Wife for their Lives, without
impeachment of Waste during life of the Husband, 351 To the Husband for Life,
and after to the Wife for Jointure, 352 A Limitation of an Estate for years,
determinable upon a Life, 353 Limitation in Tail to the Brothers of the
Feoffee, 354 Limitation of a Use in Fee, determinable upon the Marriage, and
then to other Uses, 355 Limitation of Uses, with direction for disposing the
Profits during the Heirs Minority, 355 Limitation after an Estate for Life
determined to the use of the Feoffee for 16 year, for assuring payment of
Portions to younger Children, 357 Limitation of Use to such as Cestuy que use
for Life shall Devise the Premises, 360 How to dispose of Portions, if
Daughters dye, ibid. Use for for Maintenance until Portions shall be paid, 361
See Uses of Fines and Recoveries, and Settlements of Estates.
Livery, etc.
Livery and Seisin by Feoffor to Feoffee in person, 410 Livery by Attorney,
named in the Deed, ibid. Another of the like, ibid. Another when the Letter of
Attorney is in a several Deed, 411 Livery and Attornment together, 413
Marriage Agreements, and Writings in pursuance thereof.
A Bond to leave a Wife worth an Hundred pounds, 98 A Bond to pay Money at
Marriage or Death, 99 A Bond, that a Wife may make a Will, 103 A Bond to leave
two parts in three of Lands and Goods to a Wife, 107 A Bond that the Husband
shall not sell a House and Goods of the Wife before Marriage, during the
Coverture, and to leave the same discharged of Encumbrances, if the Wife
(...) Miscellanies.
Assignment of an Apprentice, 160 Agreement of Composition for Debts, 24 A Deed
to revoke Uses in a Settlement, according to a Power reserved, 174 A
Declaration by a Wife, concerning the disposing a Sum of Money, according to a
Power reserved before Marriage, 176 A Protection by a Member of Parliament, 183
A Warrant to Summon a Copyhold Court, 168 A Bill of Credit, 169 A Revoation of
a Suit, 362 A Discharge of an Apprentice, with a General Release to him, ibid.
A Certificate into the Exchequer, where neither the Person nor any Distress can
be found for levying the Tax on his Office, according to the Act of 4 s per
Pound, 4 W. and M. 61 Scriptum admissionis Capellani Proceris, 330 Several
Forms of expressing the Considerations of a Conveyance or settling of Estates,
337, 338 339, 340 Preservation of Contingent Uses, in case the particular
Estate determine before they come in Esse, 188 The Form of Covenants severally,
and not jointly, 247, 248
Mortgages.
A Mortgage by Bargain and Sale of all Goods and Chattels real and personal, to
save harmless a Surety, 171 Proviso of a Mortgage, to save harmless a Surety
from all Engagements for the Mortgagor, 249 A Mortgage by Demise partly for
Money lent, and partly for Security of the Mortgagee, being Surety for other
Debts of the Mortgagor, 364
Deeds relating to Mortgages.
Covenants between a Mortgagee and a Purchaser of the Redemption, that that
Mortgagee shall assign upon payment of the Mortgage Money, 26 Covenants upon
purchasing the Equity of Redemption of Copyhold Lands, mortgaged, 36 An
assignment of a Mortgage of a Term for years, 157
Parish Business.
A Warrant for the Overseers of the Poor, to name other fit Persons, 277 A
Warrant for making new Overseers of the Poor, ibid. A Warrant to make Overseers
of the Poor, impowering them and the Churchwardens to collect and distrain for
the Poor Tax, 278 A Confirmation of the Poor Tax, with Warrant to levy it on
Defaulters, 279 A Warrant to levy the Arrears due to the Parish by the former
Overseers account, ibid. A Warrant to distrain for the Poor Tax, 280 A Mittimus
of one attached by his Body for want of a Distress, for a Poor Tax, 281 A
Warrant to remove out of a Parish, one lately come thither, and likely to be
chargable, 282 A Warrant to send a Wife and Child to her Husband, 283 A Warrant
for apprehending one for returning to the Parish from whence he was removed,
284 A Warrant to pay Arrears and continue weekly Relief to Poor persons, 285 A
Bond and Condition to the Churchwardens and Overseers, to save a Parish
harmless upon inhabiting there, ibid. An Indenture of an Apprentice put out by
the Parish, 287 A Release to one who paid 20 l. to be freed from keeping a
Bastard Child, 286
Partition,
AN Indenture of Partition of Lands between Tenants in Common, who have several
Interests in diverse respects, 214 An Agreement of Tenants of a Manor about
their proportions in a Common Field. 32
About Partnership.
Articles for dividing the Rent, and avoiding between Joint-tenants of Lease
Lands, 3 Articles for dividing Corn between two Partners in Husbandry, 39
Articles between Joint-tenants, concerning cutting Corn and dividing it in the
Field, 41 An Agreement of Partnership between two Salesmen, with necessary
Covenants, 46 Necessary Covenants between Joint Executors, 23 An Indenture of
Partnership between four for affairs Domestic and Foreign, with necessary
Covenants, 293 An Indenture on separation of Copartnership, 313 A Proxy,
appointing a Proctor in an Ecclesiastical Court, to procure a Guardian to be
admitted for an Infant, to Sue an Administrator for a Dividend. 69 Protection
by Member a of Parliament, 183 A Revocation of a Protection, 184
Purchases, Articles and Covenants thereof.
Articles upon Purchase of Lands in Fee-simple, 1 Covenants to make Assurance
of Lands, 240 The like with Covenants to pay the Charges which the Bargainee
shall be at in Ejecting the Tenant in Possession, 30 Covenants between a
Mortgagee and a Purchaser of the Redemption, that the Mortgagee shall assign
upon payment of the Mortgage Money, 26 Covenants to convey Lands in
consideration of 5 s. in Hand, and residue to be paid at a day to come, without
obliging the Buyer to pay, 431 Indenture of Covenants upon contract for
Purchase of a Copyhold, where part of the purchase Money is paid, and the
Purchaser is to be at liberty to proceed in the purchase or not, 34 Covenants
upon purchasing the equity of redemption of Copyhold Lands mortgaged, 36
Articles for securing 1000 l. and paying Interest to two persons, until Lands,
can be purchased to the same uses, 19 Covenants to make Assurance of Lands by
Recovery or otherwise, 240
Deeds of Covenant to suffer Recoveries, and declaring uses thereof.
TO Levy a Fine and suffer Recovery with double Voucher, 228 To suffer a
Recovery with double Voucher, The Tenant to the Precipe being already made by
Deed, 230 A Bargain and Sale to make a Tenant to the Precipe for a Common
Recovery, 232 A Covenant to suffer a Recovery with a Recital of the Bargain and
Sale, whereby a Tenant to the Precipe was made, 232 A Covenant to suffer a
Recovery with double Voucher by several Writs, of Lands in several Counties,
233 Covenant to suffer Recovery with single Voucher, 235 Another for the like,
shorter, 236 Covenant that a Husband and his Wife being Tenants for Life, of
the Wife, and he in Reversion shall suffer a Recovery in London, 237 Covenant
to make a Tenant to the Precipe and suffer a Recovery with double Voucher
London, ibid. Covenant to suffer a Recovery in a Court Baron, 239 Covenant to
make assurance of Lands by recovery or otherwise, 240 The Introduction of the
Uses of a Recovery to be had with double Voucher, 343 The like of a Recovery
with single Voucher, 347 The like of a Recovery already suffered, 346 The like
of a Recovery with single Voucher already had, 348 Releases, vide Acquittances,
A Grant of the Stewardship of a Manor during Pleasure, 148
Settlements of Estates.
A Conveyance or Settlement of Lands to the Feoffor for Life, with Remainder to
his Heirs, and appointment of the profits during Minority to pay Debts, 385
Settlement by Fine to the use the Cognizor, his Wife and Children, 388 A
Settlement by Fine and Recovery to the use of the Cognizor and his Wife for
Life in lieu of a Jointure, with Remainder to Trustees for ten years, to pay
Debts and Legacies, and afterward to the right Heirs of Cognizor, 392
Settlement to Feoffor for Life, Remainder to Feoffee for 16 years, to assure
Portions to younger Children, 357 Tenant by Courtesy of part, and of other
part in Fee with the Son Reversioner in Fee, by Fine and Recovery settle to the
Father for Life, Remainder to Son, with diverse Limitations in Tail, and a power
to make Leases for raising Daughters Portions, and 1500 l. for a second Son,
396 A way to preserve contingent Uses in case the particular Estate determine
before they come in Esse, 404 A Conveyance or Settlement whereby a Man settles
an Estate on himself, and diverse Estates for Life, and in Tail by Covenant to
stand seized, 408 Forms of expressing the consideration of Settlements, 337,
338, 339, 349 Settlement be Lease and Release to uses, 349, 350 Limitations of
Estates for Life, 351 Limitation of an Estate for years determinable upon a
Life, 353 Limitation in tail to the Brothers of the Feoffor, 354 Limitation of
uses and direction of the profits during the Heirs Minority, 355 Proviso to
revoke and limt new uses, 264, 265 Another with exception of Leases made, 266 A
Proviso to make void an Estate, if the Son Marry without the Fathers consent,
263 A Proviso to make void the use limited to the Wife, if she go about to
depart with her Estate, 250 A Proviso for preserving the Estate to Children in
Ventre sa Mere, 252 A Proviso that the Husband being Tenant for Life may make a
Jointure to any other Wife, if the present should die, 253 A Proxiso that a
Tenants for Life may make a Jointure if he Marry, 254, 390 Another to Settle a
Rent for a Jointure, 255 Proviso that Tenant for Life and his Issue may make
Leases and Jointures by Deed or Will 257 Proviso, that Tenant for Life may make
Leases for what Terms and Rents he pleases, 259 Proviso that an Estate limited
to Daughters shall cease, on payment of their Portions, by the Heir, 260 A Deed
to revoke uses in a Settlement according to a power reserved, 174
Survivorship. See Partnership. Voluntary Settlements, See in Settlements.
Limitation of uses, See Fines, Recoveries. Sttlements and Limitation.
A Warrant.
A Warrant to acknowledge satisfaction on a Judgment 363 A Warrant to confess a
Judgment in Debt, 72 A Warrant to confess a Judgment upon a Bond ibid. A
Warrant to keep Court, A Warrant to summon a Copyhold Court, 168
Wills.
The Form of the beginning of a Will, 182 A Clause in a Will to enable the
Executor to sell Lands, 169
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Charles Harper at the Flower-de-Luce
over against St. Dunstan 's Church in Fleet Street.
Law Books.
THE Reports of Sir Peyton Ventris, Knight, late one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, in two Parts. The first containing select Cases adjudged in the
King's Bench, in the Reign of King Charles II. The Second Part, containing
choice Cases, adjudged in the Common Pleas, in the Reign of King Charles II.
and King James II. and in the three first years of his now Majesty, King
William and the late Queen Mary, while he was a Judge in the said Court, with
the Pleadings to the same; with the allowance and Approbation of the Lord
Keeper and all the Judges. Two Volumes. Folio. Pr. 1 l. 14 s.

The Second Part of Modern Reports, being a Collection of several special
Cases, most of them adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas in the 26, 27 28, 29,
and 30 Years of the Reign of King Charles II. when Sir Francis North was Chief
Justice of the said Court: To which are added several select Cases in the
Courts of Chancery, King's Bench, and Exchequer; Carefully collected by a
Learned Hand. Printed School. Price 12 s.

The Third Part of Modern Reports being a Collection of several special Cases
in the Court of King's Bench; in the last years of the Reign of King Charles
II. in the Reign of King James II. and in the two first years of his present
Majesty: Together with the Resolutions and Judgments thereupon; None of these
Cases ever printed before: Carefully collected by a Learned Hand. Price 14 s.

The Lord Coke's Reports in English. Folio.

Judge Crook's Reports in three Volumes, the third Edition, with Reference to
all the Late Reports,

The Lord Coke's Commentary on Littleton. Folio.

-- His Commentary on Magna Charta. Folio.

-- His Pleas of the Crown, or the third part of the Institutes. Folio.

-- His Jurisdiction of Courts, or fourth Part of the Institutes.

-- His Eleven Reports in French. Folio

Bulstrode's Reports, with new References. Folio

Leonard's Reports in Four Parts, with New References. Folio.

The Year-Books in ten Volumes, the last Edition, with new Notes and Tables to
them all. Folio.

The Reports of the Lord Keeper Littleton, in the time of King Charles the
First. Folio.

The Reports of the Learned Judge, Sir Henry Hobert, the Fourth Edition
corrected and amended. Folio.

Reports in the Court of King's Bench at Westminster, from the 12th to the
thirtieth Year of King Charles the Second: By Joseph Keble of Gray's Inn, Esquire;
In three Volumes. Folio.

Kelway's Reports, with new References to all the late Reports; By Joseph
Washington, Esquire;

Reports of several especial Cases in the Court of Common Pleas, in the Reign
of King Charles the II. By S. Carter of the Inner Temple, Esquire; Folio.

An Assistance to Justices of the Peace, for the easier performance of their
Duty: the first part containing the particular Clauses, of all such Statutes,
from Magna Charta, until the first of King James II. that do any ways concern a
Justice of Peace; in the other part, the whole Office of a Justice of Peace is
methodically digested, with the most approved Presidents under proper Heads; to
which is now added a Table for the ready finding out the Presidents, with a
large Table of the Matters never before Printed: By Jos. Keble of Gray's Inn,
Esquire.

An exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower of London, being of great Use
for all that are concerned in Parliamentary Affairs, and Professors of the Laws
of this Realm: Collected by Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet. Folio.

The Commentary of Edward Plowden, Esquire; with References: whereunto is added his
Quaeries. Fol.

The Laws in Jamaica in II. Parts, in Fol. with a large Map of the Island.

An exact Abridgment of the Statutes of King William and Queen Mary, and of
King William III. in Force and use. Begun by Joseph Washington of the
Middle Temple Esquire; and since his Death revised and continued to the End of the
last Sessions of Parliament, April 27. 1696. And thence continued to the 5th of
July, School. 8vo. Price 6. s. 6 d.

The Scrivener's Guide; being choice and approved Forms of Precedents of all
sorts of Business now in Use and Practice, in a much better Method then any yet
Printed: being useful for all Gentlemen, but chiefly those who Practice the
Law. 8vo.

Styles's Practical Register begun in the Reign of King Charles the First,
Consisting of Rules, Orders, and principal Observations concerning the Practice
of the Common Law in the Courts of Westminster, particularly, the King's Bench,
as well in Matters Criminal as Civil: Carefully continued down to this time.
The third Edition. 8vo. Price 6 s.

An exact Abridgment of all the Statutes in Form and Use, from the beginning of
Magna Charta; begun by Edmund Wingate, and since continued by J. Washington, to
the Year 1689. In this Impression many hundred of false References are
corrected, Price, 7 s.

Two Dialogues in English between a Doctor of Divinity, and a Student of the
Laws of England, of the Grounds of the said Laws, etc. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The New Natura Brevium of the most Reverend Judge Mr. Anthony Fitzherbert,
Corrected and revised.

The Laws against Bankrupts, or a Treatise wherein the Statutes against
Bankrupts are explained: By T. Gooding, Sergeant at Law, 8vo.

The Entering Clerk's Vade Mecum; being an Exact Collection of Presidents, in
8vo. By W. Brown.

Divinity and Miscellanies.
THE Life of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Chirst. An Heroic Poem:
Dedicated to Her most Sacred Majesty, in Ten Books, Attempted by Samuel Wesley,
M. A. each Book illustrated by necessary Notes, explaining all the more
difficult Matters in the whole History. Also a Prefatory Discourse concerning
Heroic Poetry. The second Edition revised by the Author, and improved with the
Addition of a large Map of the Holy Land; and a Table of the Principal Matters;
with 60 Copper Plates, by the celebrated Hand of W. Faithorn. Fol.

An Epistle to a Friend concerning Poetry. By Samuel Wesley, A. M. Author of
the Life of Christ.

The Pious Communicant rightly prepared; Or a Discourse concerning the Blessed
Sacrament; where the Nature of it is described, our Obligation to frequent
Communion enforced, and Directions given for due Preparation for it, Behavior
at, and after it, and profiting by it. With Prayers and Hymns suited to the
several parts of that Holy Office. To which is added a short Discourse of
Baptism. With a Letter concerning Religious Societies. In Twelves. By Samuel
Wesley, A. M. Chaplain to the most Honorable John Lord Marquess of Normanby,
and Rector of Epworth in the Diocese of Lincoln: Author of the Life or our
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The Second and third part of the Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley. The second
containing what was written and published by himself in his younger Years,
Reprinted together: The sixth Edition. The third Part containing his six Books
of Plants, viz. The first and second of Herbs, the third and fourth of Flowers,
the fifth and sixth of Trees: Now made English by several Hands, with necessary
Tables to both Parts, and diver Poems in praise of the Author. Folio.

The Lives of the Roman Emperors from Domitian where Suetonius ends, to
Constantine the Great. Containing those of Nerva and Trajan, from Dion Cassius:
A Translation of the Six Writers of the Augustean History. And those of
Dioclesian and his Associates, from Eusebius and others; with the Heads of the
Emperors in Copper Plates: Dedicated to His most Sacred Majesty; in two
Volumes. By J. Bernard, A.M.

Resolves: Divine, Moral, Political. With several New Additions, in Prose and
Verse. In this Eleventh Edition, References are made to the Poetical Citations
heretofore much wanted. By Owen Felltham, Esquire. Folio, Price 12 s.

The Works of the Famous Nicholas Machiavel, Citizen and Secretary of Florence.
Newly and faithfully Translated into English. Folio. Price 15 s.

The Whole Duty of Man, according to the Law of Nature, by that Famous
Civilian, Sam. Puffendorf. Now made English. 8vo. Price 3 s. 6 d.

Dr. Willis's Practice of Physic, being the whole Works of that Famous
Physician, rendered into English: The Second Edition, with forty Copper Plates.
Fol.

The Historical and Miscellanious Tracts of the Reverend and Learned Peter
Heylin, D.D. now collected into one Volume. And an Account of the Life of the
Author, never before published. Folio.

The Religion of Protestants, a Safe way to Salvation; with a Discouse of the
Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy. By W. Chillingworth, M. A. To which in
this Edition is added his Letter, showing the Reason why he left Popery. Folio.

The History of Queen Elizabeth, by W. Cambden, King at Arms. Fourth Edition.
Folio.

An Impartial Collection of the great Affairs of State, from the beginning of
the Scotch Rebellion in the Year 1639. to the Murder of King Charles the First.
Fol. In two Volumes. By Dr. Nalson.

Dugdale's Monasticon Anglicanum. Folio. In three Volumes.

The History of King Edward II. King of England, and Lord of Ireland, Folio.

Dr Willis's Practice of Physic 8vo. With his Treatise of the Plague. Price 7
s.

Arithmetic; Or, the Ground of Arts: Teaching the Science, both in whole
Numbers and Fractions, Theorically and Practically. Originally Composed by Dr.
Record, and others: And now Perused, Corrected, new Methodized, much Improved:
And thereunto added a New Treatise of Decimals, with the Demonstration of each
Rule, and the relation it has to Vulgar Fractions; Also why Decimals are
wrought as whole Numbers, etc. By Edw. Hatton, Philomercat. Price 5. s.

Bishop Usher's Power of the Prince, and the Obedience required of the Subject,
with a large Preface by Bishop Sanderson. 8vo.

Animadversions on a Book, Entitled The Theory of the Earth. By Herbert Lord
Bishop of Hereford.

School-Books.
LInguae Romanae Dictionarium Luculentum Novum: A New Dictionary in five
Alphabets; representing, 1st. The English Words and Phrases before the Latin.
2. The Latin Classic before the English. 3. The Latin Proper Names of Persons,
Counties, etc. 4. The Latin barbarous. 5. The Law Latin. The whole completed
and improved from the several Works of Stevens, Cooper, Gouldman, Holyoke, Dr.
Littleton; A Large Manuscript in three Volumes of Mr. John Milton, etc. In the
use of all which, for greater Fxactness, recourse has always been had to the
Authors themselves, in 4to.

Cole's Dictionary in 8vo, English and Latin, and Latin and English.

The Pantheon. Representing the Fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods, and
most Illustrious Heroes, in a short plain, and familiar Method; by way of
Dialogue: Written by F. Pomey for the use of Schools: The second Edition.
Wherein the whole Translation is Revised and much amended, and the Work is
Illustrated and Adorned with Elegant Copper-Cuts of the several Deities. 8vo,
Price 3 s.

English Examples to Lily's Grammar Rules for Childrens Latin Exercises, with
an Explanation to each Rule. For the Use of Eaton-School.

-- Shorter Examples to Lily's Grammar Rules for Childrens Latin Exercises;
with an Explanation to each Rule; for the use of Eaton School, by the same
Author.

Gratii Falisci Cynegeticon, cum Poematio Cognomine M. A. Olympii Nemesiani
Carthaginensis: Notis perpetuis, variisque Lectionibus adornavit Thomas Johnson
M. A. Accedunt Hier. Fracastorii Alcon, Carmen Pastoritium: Jo Caii, Angli, de
Canibus Libellus: Ut and Opusculum vetus (...) dict. seu, de Cura canum,
Incerto Auctore. In Usum Illiustrissimi Ducis Glocestriae.

THE Scrivener's Guide.
Articles upon purchase of Lands in Fee simple.
Articles of Agreement, indented, made, concluded and agreed unto upon the 10th
day of December, etc. Between W. C. of London, Gent. of the one part, and T. C.
of, etc. of the other part, viz.
IMprimis, The said W. C. for the consideration of 5 l. to him by the said T.
C. before the sealing hereof, well and truly in hand paid, and 930 l. more to
be paid as is after herein mentioned, for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with
the said T. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by
these presents, That he the said W. C. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, shall and will at the proper costs and charges in the Law of the said
T. C. his Heirs and Assigns, on or before the 10th day of March, next ensuing
the date hereof, make, seal, deliver, do, execute and acknowledge all and every
such Act and Acts, Deed and Deeds, Fine and Fines, Assurances or other
Conveyances in the Law whatsoever, as he the said T. C. his Heirs, Executors or
Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the Law shall reasonably devise,
advise or require for the sure conveying, settling and assuring unto the said T.
C. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns all those Lands, etc. now
in the occupation of C. D. or Assigns: In consideration whereof he the said T.
C. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators does covenant, promise
and grant to and with the said W.C. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns by these presents, That he the said T.C. his, etc. or some of them,
shall and will well and truly satisfy, content and pay, or cause to be
satisfied, contented and paid unto the said W. C. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns the aforesaid 935 l. immediately after he the said
W. C. his Heirs or Assigns, shall have levied and acknowledged a Fine of the
premises aforesaid, to the sole and proper use of the said T. C. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever.

Item, It is agreed between the said parties to these presents, That all
Assurances and Conveyances, and any and all Fine and Fines hereafter to be had,
levied and acknowledged of the premises beforementioned, shall be and enure,
and shall be deemed and taken to be and enure to the only proper use, benefit
and behoof of him the said T. C. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to no
other use, intent or purpose whatsoever.

Lastly, It is agreed, That if the said W. C. does not travel in person to
London or Westminster, to levy and acknowledge such Fine for the sure settling
of the premises unto the said T. C. then he the said W. C. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall pay and allow unto the said T. C. his Heirs or
Assigns, at the acknowledging of such Fine, the Sum of 12 s. and 1 d. for and
toward his charges in procuring of a Writ of Dedimus potestatem to enable him
the said W.C. to acknowledge the said Fine in the Country.

In witness, etc.
Articles for dividing the Rent and avoiding Survivorship, between Jointenants
of Lease-Lands.
Articles, etc. Between J. F. of, etc. of the one part, and R. C. of the other
part, viz.
IMprimis, Whereas J.V. of, etc. by his Indenture of Lease bearing date, etc.
for the consideration therein mentioned did demise, grant and to farm let unto
A.V. of, etc. all that Message, etc. with the Appurtenances, situate, lying
and being in, etc. To have and to hold the said Message, etc. unto the said A.
V. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns from the Feast of St. Michael then
last past, unto the full end and term of seven years from thence next ensuing,
fully to be complete and ended, yielding and paying therefore the Sum of 20 l.
of lawful Money of England, as in and by the said recited Lease it does more at
large appear. And whereas the said A. V. by his Indenture of Lease bearing
date, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned, did demise, grant and to
farm-let unto F. J. of, etc. two Chambers and a Cellar, being part of the
Message or Tenement wherein the said A. V. did then live, with all
conveniences and appurtenances to the said Chambers and Cellar belonging; To
have and to hold the said two Chambers and Cellar unto the said F. J. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns from the day of the date of the last
mentioned Indenture of Lease, unto the full end and term of five years from
thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, Yiedling and paying
therefore yearly and every year during the said term, the sum of 8 l. of lawful
Money of England, as in and by the said last recited Lease it does more at large
appear. And whereas the Estate, Right, Title, Interest and Term of years to
come of him the said J. V. of, in, and to the above-recited premises, and
every part thereof, is lawfully come to and vested in the abovenamed J. F. and
R. C. by force and virtue of one Indenture of Assignment, bearing date, etc.
made by the said J. V. unto the said J. F. and R. C. as in and by the said
Indenture of Assignment it does more at large appear. And whereas also the said
J. F. and R. C. by their Indenture of Lease, bearing date the, etc. for the
consideration therein mentioned, did demise, grant and to farm-let unto D. C.
of, etc. one Chamber and a Shop, being part of the premises first
above-recited; To have and to hold the said Chamber and Shop, with the
appurtenances unto the said D. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
from, etc. next ensuing the said last mentioned Indenture of Lease, until the
full end and term of three years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended, Yielding and paying therefore yearly and every year, the
Sum of 14 l. of lawful Money of England, as in and by the said last recited
Indenture of Lease it does more fully appear. Now it is covenanted, concluded
and agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents; and the true
intent and meaning of either of them is, That forasmuch as either of them the
parties abovenamed, have disbursed and paid equally their shares of Money
toward and for the purchasing of the premises beforementioned, that the
several aforesaid Rents of Twenty pounds, Eight pounds and Fourteen pounds, in
and by the said several recited Leases reserved shall be equally divided and
shared between the said parties to these presents. And if either of the said
parties to these presents shall happen to die before the end and expiration of
the term and terms of years in the said several Indentures of Lease
before-recited contained, that then and from thenceforth it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Executors, Administrators and Assigns of the party
deceased, to have, occupy, receive, take and enjoy the full and entire moiety
or half part of all the Rents, Issues and Profits of all and singular the
before-recited premises with the appurtenances, in as large and ample man ner
and form, to all intents and purposes as the party so dying should or ought to
have done, if he were then living, any Restraint, Provision or Statute to the
contrary notwithstanding; and that neither of the said Parties, nor the
Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them, or either of them, shall or will
at any time hereafter take, demand or receive any of the Rents above-reserved,
or make or give any discharge or acquittance, of or for the same, or any part
thereof, without the assent and privity of the other party, his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, first had and given under their hand.

Item, It is farther covenanted, concluded and agreed unto by and between the
said parties to these presents, That neither of the said Parties, nor the
Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them or of either of them, shall or
will at any time or times hereafter, grant bargain, sell, assign, surrender or
convey his or their Estate or Estates, right, title, interest, term or terms of
years to come, of, in or to all or any part of the before-recited premises, to
any person or persons whatsoever, without the knowledge, consent or refusal of
the other party first had, or of his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, he
or they paying as much as any other shall and will give and pay for the same.

Lastly, It is covenanted, concluded and fully agreed upon, by and between the
said Parties to these presents, That all and every the several Deeds and
Writings before-recited shall be reputed, deemed and taken to be and enure to
the joint use and uses, benefit and commodity of both the said parties, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to no other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever: And that the party so keeping the said writings, his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall and will upon the reasonable request of the
other party his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at all times hereafter,
produce and bring forth all and every, or so many of the same Writings as shall
be required, either for the maintenance of their Title to the premises, or for
the selling and conveying of his and their Estate and Interest, of and in the
moiety of all or any part of the said recited premises.

In Witness, etc.
Articles for building a new House, and taking down the old one there.
Articles, etc. Between J. F. and R. C. viz.
IMprimis, The said R. C. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said J. F. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents, in manner and form
following; That is to say, That he the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, or some of them, for the Consideration hereafter mentioned, shall
and will forthwith take down the now Dwelling House of the said J. F. situate,
etc. and in the room thereof shall make, erect, build and set up one new
Tenement or Dwelling House, to be 40 Foot wide and 50 Foot long together with a
Cellar of the same length and breadth, and shall also make four Rooms on each
Floor, and shall find and provide at his own proper costs and charges, all and
all manner of Tyles, Bricks, Laths, Nails, Lead, Iron, Sand and Lime, and all
other Materials whatsoever, which shall be fit and necessary to be used in or
about the said Building, and shall carry away all Rubbish whatsoever, which
shall arise by reason of the said Building, and shall and will in all things
well and workman-like frame, erect, set up and finish the said Building at or
before the 10th day of March, next ensuing the date hereof.

In Consideration of which said Building, so to be done and finished in manner
and form aforesaid, the said J. F. for himself, his Executors and
Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with the said R. C. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, in manner and form
following; That is to say, That the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, or some of them, shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns the sum of
250 l. of lawful Money of England, at three several payments, in manner and form
following; That is to say, Fifty pounds thereof in hand, at and before the
ensealing and delivery hereof, the receipt whereof the said R. C. does hereby
acknowledge, and thereof does acquit and discharge the said J. F. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents, One hundred pounds
more when the Roof of the said Bulding is framed and tiled, and One hundred
pounds more residue, in full payment of the said sum of Two hundred and fifty
pounds, when the whole Building is fully completed and finished.

In witness, etc.
Articles between a Merchant and his Apprentice's Father, etc.
Articles, etc. between J.F. and R.C. and D. C. viz.
WHereas the said J. F. the day of the date hereof, in consideration of the
Affection which he the said J. F. bears to the said R. C. is contented and
agreed to take the said R. C. to be his Servant in merchandising Affairs, and
accordingly to employ him therein, as well in parts beyond the Seas, as in
England, where the said J. F. shall or may hereafter, or now has Trading and
Dealings for the space of seven years, to commence from the day of the date of
these presents. And hereupon the said D. C. Father to the said R. C. does
covenant and grant for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to
and with the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, That he the
said R. C. his Son shall, during the said Term, (if he so long live) well,
diligently and faithfully, to the utmost of his power and skill, serve him the
said J. F. in his Trade of Merchandising, and other his Affairs, in such place
and places as he the said J. F. shall think fit and appoint: And that he the
said R. C. at all times hereafter, during the said Term, shall receive and take
into his charge and custody all such Goods and Merchandises whatsoever, as by
or for the use or account of the said J. F. shall be consigned or sent to him
the said R. C. and also sell, utter and dispose of the same Goods or
Merchandises to the best profit he can for the said J. F. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns; and shall also at all times during the said Term,
follow and perform the advice, directions and orders of him the said J. F.
which shall by Letters or otherwise be sent, given or made known to him the
said R. C. about or concerning the Factory or Merchandising aforesaid; and
also, that he the said R. C. shall at the charges of the said J. F. his, etc.
provide and keep in due order Books of account, concerning his said Employment
as aforesaid, according to the custom of Merchants in such cases; and shall
deal justly, truly and faithfully, to and with the said J. F. his, etc. in all
and every his Accounts, Reckonings, Bargains and Dealings, relating to and
concerning his said Employment; and shall constantly once in six Months, during
the Term aforesaid, transmit and send unto the said J. F. his, etc. true
Accounts of all the Businesses and Dealings of the said R. C. in the premises,
and shall also send Letters of Advice to the said J. F. his, etc. as often as
conveniently he can, of such Matters and Occurrences wherewith it shall be
proper and expedient, that the said J. F. his, etc. be acquainted: And shall
also return and come into England, and bring all his Books of Accounts with
him, whenever he shall be required so to do by the said J. F. his, etc. And
that the said R. C. shall from time to time, upon reasonable Request made, show
forth all his Books of Accounts concerning all his dealings, as aforesaid, and
make and give unto the said J. F. his, etc. a just, true and perfect Account in
Writing, of, for and concerning all and every such Goods, Wares, Money, Debts
and Merchandises, whatsoever, as well of the said J.F. for his own proper use,
as jointly with any other, which shall hereafter come to the hands, charge or
factory of him the said R. C. or for which he the said R. C. should or ought to
be accountable unto the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns.
And moreover, That he the said R. C. shall within one Month next after such
Account made and given in, well and truly satisfy, pay and deliver unto the
said J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, all and every such Wares,
Money, Goods, Debts and Merchandises and other things whatsoever, as by or upon
the foot of the said Account shall appear to be, and be found due unto him the
said J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by or from the said R. C.

Note. Bonds must be given for performance.

Articles of Agreement between a Country Trader, and a London Factor.
Articles of Agreement made, indented, concluded and agreed upon, the, etc.
Between R. C. of, etc. and J. F. of, etc.
WHereas the said R. C. has contracted and agreed with the said J. F. to
employ him as a Factor in London for him the said R. C. for the vending,
selling and uttering of all such Wares and Merchandises as he the said R. C.
shall consign and send unto the said J. F. in his now Dwelling House in
Clements-Lane, for and during the term and space of four years, to commence
from the day of the date of these presents.

Whereupon it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between the
said R. C. and J. F. And they the said R. C. and J. F. for themselves, their
Executors and Administrators, do covenant and grant to and with each other
reciprocally, and either of their Executors and Administrators in manner and
form following:

Imprimis, That he the said J. F. shall and will accept and take into his
trust, charge and custody, all such Wares and Merchandises as he the said R. C.
shall send and consign to him the said J. F. And also shall do his best
endeavor to vend and sell the same for the best profit and advantage of the
said R.C. for and during the said Term of four years, to commence from the day
of the date of these presents, as aforesaid.

Item, That he the said J. F. shall keep or cause to be kept just and true
Books of Account in Writing of all such Wares and Merchandises as the said R.
C. shall from time to time, during the said Term, consign unto the said J. F.
and shall come into his charge and custody; that is to say, to whom, and at
what price, and when they shall be sold and vended by him the said J. F. And
shall also make true payment and delivery unto the said R. C. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, of all such Moneys, Specialties and other things as
shall come to the hands of, and be received by the said J. F. for the said
Wares and Merchandises, during the Term aforesaid, together with all such Wares
and Merchandises as shall remain unsold in the custody of the said J. F. at the
expiration of the said Term.

Item, That he the said J. F. shall be true and faithful unto the said R. C. in
the selling and vending of all Wares and Merchandises of the said R. C. during
the said Term, and not defraud or cheat the said R. C. wilfully or with his
knowledge in the premises; but shall endeavor to vend the said Kerseys to
able Men, for the best Prizes, and soonest day or time of payment he can.

Item, That the said J. F. shall not, during the said four years, deal or trade
as Factor for any other person or persons, for the buying or selling of any
Wares or Merchandises whatsoever, save only for him the said R. C. as aforesaid.

Item, The said R. C. for and in consideration of the said Factorship, does
covenant and agree, for himself, his Executors and Administrators, to pay unto
the said J. F. his Executors or Administrators the Sum of 30 l. per Ann. of
lawful Money of England.

In witness, etc.
Articles of Agreement between Creditors, and the Widow of a Debtor, concerning
Administration and paying Debts.
Articles of Agreement Tripartite, Indented, made the, etc. Between the
Creditors of R. C. late of, etc. deceased (whose Names, together with the Debts
severally to them owing, are specified in a Schedule to these presents annexed)
on the first part, C. R. of, etc. Creditor also of the said R. C. of the second
part, and J. C. of, etc. Widow of the said R. C. of the third part, viz.
IMprimis, The said Creditors, and every of them, have agreed, and by these
presents do agree with the said C. R. and J. C. That the said C. R. shall and
may have and take the Administration of all the Goods and Chattels which were
of the said R. C. deceased, according to the Laws of this Realm, to dispose of
and Administer the same according to the tenure of these present Articles, and
not otherwise.

Item, That in consideration of such pains as the said C. R. shall take and be
at in and about the said Administration, the said C. R. upon his true and
reasonable account thereof made before such Auditors as the said Creditors, or
the greater part of them, shall assign to take the said Account, shall have
allowance of all his reasonable costs and charges as well in Suits at Law as
otherwise, by him to be expended about the said Administration; and also that
the said C. R. at every dividend making shall and may retain for and toward
his own Debt owing by the said J. C. so much as shall be an equal portion with
what he shall divide and pay to the other Creditors, according to the quantity
of their several and respective Debts.

Item, That the said C. R. shall before any dividend made, pay or cause to be
paid unto the said J. C. for satisfaction of her Title of Dower in the late
Mansion house of the said R. C. situate, etc. the Sum of 50 l. of lawful Money
of England, or shall deliver unto her so much of her said late Husband's Goods
as shall amount to that value, according to a reasonable estimation; and
likewise for the Funeral-charges of the said R. C. 15 l. of etc. and also shall
deliver to her the said J. C. to her own use, or suffer her to detain and keep
to her own use and behoof all her Apparel and Ornaments belonging to her Body,
and such other things as she and the Creditors have agreed, as may appear by
Writing under their hands.

Item, That the said C. R. so soon as reasonably may be, after the said Letters
of Administration granted, shall with and by the consent, and in the presence
of, etc. or three of them, cause all the Goods, Chattels and Debts within the
Realm of England which were belonging to the said R. C. at the time of his
decease, to be viewed and appraised by indifferent Persons, and a true
Inventory thereof to be made, according to the Custom used in such cases within
the City of London.

Item, That the said J. C. for her part shall and will use her best endeavor
to discover and make known all and singular the Goods, Chattels and Debts of
the said R. C. to the said C. R. and the other persons beforementioned,
without concealment or delay.

Item, That after the Goods, Chattels and Credits of the said R.C. shall be so
viewed and praised, and an Inventory thereof made and taken as aforesaid; That
then as well for the satisfying and payment of what is to be first satisfied
and paid in manner and form aforesaid, as toward the equal payment of the said
Creditors, the said C. R. shall by the consent and oversight of the said, etc.
or any two of them, make such speedy Sale at the best Rates he can of all the
Goods and Chattels which were of the said R. C. within the Realm of England,
other than such as be appointed for the said J. C. as aforesaid, and make such
speed to gather in and obtain such Debts as were owing unto the said R. C. at
the time of his decease, as he reasonably can or may: And then after the
satisfaction and payment beforementioned to be first satisfied and paid, being
first had and made, shall from time to time proportion and divide all the
residue of the Estate of the said R. C. as shall come to his hands unto every
of his said Creditors, share and share alike, according to the quantities of
their several Debts, from time to time, and as often as he the said C. R. shall
have any thing whereof such dividend can be made, until all the said Creditors
shall be paid and satisfied their said Debts, if the Goods and Chattels of the
said R. C. shall be sufficient so to do.

Item, That F. J. one of the Creditors in the said Schedule mentioned, shall
enjoy all such Goods and Debts which were of the said R. C. and which the said
F. J. has now attached beyond the Seas, toward the payment of such Debts as
the said R. C. did owe there to him; and thereof the said F. J. so soon, as
conveniently may be to show the Account to the said C. R. and four, or three of
the said Creditors at the least. And if more be recovered beyond the Seas by
the said F. J. of the Goods and Debts late of the said R. C. than the Debts so
owing by the said R. C. at the time of his decease, to the said F. J. there,
That then he the said F. J. shall accept of the overplus toward payment of his
Debt owing here in England.

Item, That none of the parties aforesaid shall or will do or procure any thing
to be done by any Suit or Action against the said C. R. or any other person,
whereby the performance of these present Agreements or any of them, shall or
may in any wise be impeached, troubled or hindered; and that every of them shall
revoke and discharge all and every Suit and Suits commenced theretofore, which
shall or may be any impediment or hindrance of the true performance of the
Articles and Agreement herein contained.

Item, The said C. R. does hereby agree to take upon him the said
Administration, and to administer truly and faithfully, according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents; and if there shall be more than is
sufficient to satisfy and pay all the said Creditors their several Debts, That
then upon reasonable Request to him made, and a Discharge for the same to him
given by the said J.C. her Executors or Administrators, he the said C. R. shall
and will well and truly pay or cause to be paid the remainder thereof unto the
said J. C. her Executors or Administrators, she or they giving good Security to
the said C. R. by her or their Bond to repay the same, or so much thereof as
shall be lawfully and truly recovered by any other Creditor of the said R. C.

Item, If any Creditor or Creditors of the said R. C. not party to these
presents, do at any time commence any Action or Suit against the said C. R. as
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of the said R. C. and the said Creditor
or Creditors shall lawfully without fraud or covin recover their said Debt or
Debts against the said Administrator: In such case it is agreed by and between
all the said Parties to these presents, That all the Creditors, Parties to
these presents, whose Debts shall be paid in part or in all, according to this
Agreement, shall out of their several Dividends allow, satisfy and pay part
and part alike unto the said C. R. as will satisfy and discharge the said Debt
or Debts, and damages and costs of Suit for the same, the said C. R. likewise
allowing his proportionable share toward the same.

Item, It is further agreed, That if any Creditor or Creditors of the said R.
C. not being parties to these presents, shall or do commence any Suit or Suits
against the said C. R. as Administrator of the said R. C. Then the said C. R.
shall thereof give Notice unto all the said Creditors, Parties to these
presents, or to three of them at the least, to the end they may join with the
said C. R. in defense of the said Suit.

All and every which Agreements aforesaid, and every Article and Clause
therein, every one of the said parties on their several behalves, and for their
several Executors and Administrators, do covenant, promise and grant, to and
with all and each other of the Parties, their several Executors and
Administrators, well and truly to perform and keep, without fraud or deceit.

In witness, etc.
Articles of Agreement on a Marriage, concerning Settlement of Lands.
Articles of Agreement indented, made, concluded and agreed upon the, etc.
Between R. C. C. R. J. F. and F. J. of the one part, and A. B. of the other
part, of, for and concerning a Marriage to be solemnized and had between the
said A. B. and B. A. one of the Daughters of C. A. late etc. deceased, viz.
IMprimis, The said A. B. does covenant, promise and agree with the said R. C.
C. R. J. F. and F. J. That he the said A. B. shall and will before the 10th day
of March, etc. next coming, take to Wife the said B. A. if she will thereunto
consent and agree.

Item, The said A. B. does covenant and promise That he shall and will, before
the end of next Hillary Term, together with F. B. and S. B. levy a Fine unto
such persons as shall be named by the said R. C. C. R. J. F. and F. J. the
which Fine shall be Sur conusance de droit come ceo, etc. of Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments in the County of S. of the clear yearly value of 50 l. of,
etc. The which Cognizees in the said Fine so to be acknowledged, and their
Heirs, shall be seized of the said Lands, etc. comprised in the said Fine from
the time of the Celebration of the said Marriage between the said A. and B. to
the use and behoof of the said A. B. and B. and of the heirs Male of the Body
of the said A. B. to be begotten on the Body of the said B. And for lack of
such Issue, then to the use the said A. B. and of the heirs Male of his Body
lawfully to be begotten; and for want of such Issue, to the uses in an Entail
thereof made by one E. B. deceased, Father of the said A. B. mentioned, limited
and declared.

Item, The said A. B. does covenant, promise and agree, in manner and form
abovesaid, That he shall and will within the time and space of two years next
ensuing the date hereof, purchase, obtain and procure Lands and Tenements of
the clear and yearly value of 50 l. to be lawfully assured and conveyed unto
him the said A. and to the said B. and to the Heirs Males, etc. upon the Body
of the said B. to be begotten, with the Remainder of the said Lands, etc. to
the said A. B. and his Heirs for ever. And if the said A. B. do happen to
depart this life within the said two years now next ensuing, as aforesaid; and
before he has purchased, obtained and procured Lands, etc. of the yearly value
of 50 l. in manner and form aforesaid, Then shall the said A. B. leave, give
and bequeath unto the said B. by his last Will and Testament, or otherwise, the
full sum of 500 l. of lawfuy Money of England, over and above such part and
portion as she the said B. may justly and lawfully claim and challenge by the
Custom of the City of London.

Item, The said A. B. does covenant and agree, That if the said B. shall happen
to decease before him the said A. B. that then it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said B. by her last Will and Testament, to give and bequeath the
full Sum of 100 l. of, etc. to any persons or persons whatsoever. And the said
A. B. does by these presents firmly covenant and agree, to content and pay the
said Sum of 100 l. to such person, or persons to whom the said B. shall Will
and Bequeath the same, or any part thereof, within three Months next after her
decease; any Law or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding,

Item, The said A. B. does by these presents, for himself his Executors and
Administrators, covenant, promise and agree to and with the said R. C. C. R. J.
F. and F. J. their Executors and Administrators, That if after the full Portion
or Legacy due to her him the said B.A. be fully contented and paid unto the
said A. B. there shall appear any Debt or Sum of Money, to be lawfully due and
unpaid to any person or persons, from and by the late Father of the said B. and
which his Executors shall be compellable and liable to pay; That then he the
said A. B. his Executors and Administrators, shall contribute and allow one
half toward the satisfaction and payment of such Debt.

In witness, etc.
Articles for securing 1000 l. and paying Interest to two Persons, until Lands
can be purchased to the same uses.
THis Indenture Tripartite, made, etc. Between M. B. of etc. of the first part;
C. B. of, etc. of the second part; and J. P. and W. T. of, etc. of the third
part. Whereas the said M. B. was lately seized of Freehold for term of her
Life, of and in diverse Messuages, Lands and Tenements in T. in the County of O.
the Reversion thereof belonging to the said C. B. and his Heirs, upon the death
of the said M. And the said M. and C. being so seized, did bargain, sell and
convey all the said Messuages, Lands and Tenements unto J. S. of T. aforesaid
Gent. and his Heirs, for and in Consideration of the entire Sum of 1000 l. for
the purchase of the several Interests of the said M. and C. in the premises,
by the said J. S. paid into the hands of the said J. P. and W. T. for the use
of the said M. and C. To the intent and purpose, and upon agreement, that by
and out of the said Sum of 1000 l. or the Interest and profit thereof, the
yearly Sum of 40 l. might be paid and secured unto the said M. during her Life;
and all the rest of the said 1000 l. and the benefit thereof, to be for the
only use of the said C. and be disposed as is herein after mentioned. Now this
Indenture witnesses, That in pursuance of the Agreement aforesaid, the said J.
P. and W. T. do jointly and severally, for them and either of themselves, their
and either of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant to
and with the said C. B. his Executors and Administrators by these presents,
That the said J. P. and W. T. their Executors or Administrators (some or one of
them having Notice by the space of three Months before) shall and will at the
now Dwelling House of the said J. P. and W. T. in L. aforesaid, well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid, the said Sum of 1000 l. to such person or persons,
and in such manner and form as the said C. B. his Executors or Administrators
shall direct or appoint, upon the sealing and executing a good and sufficient
Conveyance and Assurance in the Law, for the payment of one Annuity or yearly
Sum of 40 l. (to be issuing and going out of Lands or Tenements of Freehold in
Fee-simple, or for Term of three Lives, or holden by a Lease for a Term of 50
years, at the least, unexpired, of the clear yearly value of 50 l. above
Reprisals, and free from Encumbrances, to be approved by the said M. B.) to be
paid unto the said M. B. and her Assigns, yearly and every year, during her
Natural Life, at the Feasts of the Birth of our Lord, the Annunciation of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, the Nativity of St. John the Baptist, and St. Michael the
Archangel, by equal portions: The first payment thereof to begin and be made
at such of the said Feasts as shall first and next happen after the sealing and
executing such Conveyance and Assurance, as aforesaid. And also, That they the
said J. P. and W. T. their Executors or Administrators, yearly and every year,
during the Life of the said M. B. or until the Sealing and Executing such
Conveyance and Assurance as aforesaid, at the place aforesaid, shall and will
well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C. B. his Executors or
Administrators 20 l. of lawful Money of England at the four Feasts aforesaid, by
equal portions, the first payment thereof to begin and be made at the Feast of
the Birth of our Lord next coming. And also, That if default shall be made of
Sealing and Executing such Conveyance and Assurance, as aforesaid, for payment
of the said 40 l. per Annum unto the said M. B. during her Life; Then the said
J. P. and W. T. their Executors or Administrators, shall and will within three
Months next after such the death of the said M.B. at the place aforesaid, well
and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said C. B his Executors or
Administrators, the said 1000 l. together with so much Money as shall or may be
grown due for the Interest or Forbearance of the said 1000 l. after the rate by
Law allowed, from such of the said four Feasts aforesaid, as shall happen next
before the death of the said M. B. until such payment of the said 1000 l. And
the said J. P. and W. T. do jointly and severally, for them and either of
themselves, their and either of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
covenant and grant to and with the said M. B. her Executors and Administrators
by these presents, That they the said J. P. and W. T. their Executors or
Administrators, yearly and every year, during the Life of the said M. B. or
until the Sealing and Executing such conveyance and Assurance, as aforesaid,
shall and will at the Place aforesaid, well and truly pay or cause to be paid
unto the said M. B. or her Assigns, 40 l. of lawful Money of England at the four
Feasts aforesaid by equal portions, the first payment to begin and be made at
the Feast of the Birth of our Lord next coming. Provided always, That if the
said J. P. and W. T. their Executors or Administrators, (the said C. B. his
Executors or Administrators, and the said M. B. having Notice by the space of
three months before) do or shall at any time during the Life of the said M. B.
at the place aforesaid, pay or cause to be paid unto the said C.B. his
Executors or Administrators, and the said M.B. the said Sum of 1000 l. by such
part, shares and proportions as they shall by Writing under their Hands and
Seals direct and appoint, with so much of the said yearly Sums of twenty pounds
and Forty pounds, as shall be then respectively unpaid unto the said C. B. and
M. B. ratably and proportionably for the time the same shall be arrear; That
then and from thenceforth, and at all times after this present Indenture, and
all and every Covenant, Clause and Article therein contained, shall cease and
become void. Any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
Covenants about assigning a Stock in the East India Company.
THis Indenture, etc. made between A. B. of the one part, and C. D. of the
other part, Witnesses, That in consideration of three Guinea's to the said A.
B. by the said C. D. in hand paid, at and before the sealing and delivery
hereof, the Receipt whereof the said A. B. does hereby acknowledge. The said A.
B. does hereby covenant, promise and agree, to and with the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, That if the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns shall transfer, or cause to be transferred, One
hundred pounds Credit of the General Joint Stock of the Governor and Company
of the Merchants of London, Trading to the East Indies, to the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at any time, on or before the 19th day of
September now next following: And thereof shall give Notice or Warning in
Writing at the now Dwelling House of the said A.B. situate in Cheapside,
London, three days at the least before such Transfer of the said One hundred
pounds Credit, That then the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, shall and will accept the, said One hundred pounds Credit, and also
shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns for the same, at the time of such
Transferring thereof, as aforesaid, the full Sum of Seventy five pounds of
lawful money of England; together with all such Sum and Sums of money as shall
after the date hereof, and before such Transfer, become due or payable into the
said Joint Stock, on account of the said One hundred pounds Credit, by virtue
of any Order of a General Court, or Court of Committee, that shall hereafter be
made, Then and in such case all Dividends and Profits that shall after the date
hereof, and before such Transfer, be Voted, Ordered, made, arise or happen, on
or in respect of the said One hundred pounds Credit, shall be and remain to the
said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and be deducted out of
the said Seventy five pounds, so as aforesaid to be paid to the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns. But, if the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall not Transfer or cause to be Transferred unto
the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said One hundred
pounds Credit, as aforesaid, within the time aforesaid, then this Indenture to
be void and of none effect; and the said three Guinea's to remain to the said
A. B. his Executors and Administrators for ever.

In witness, etc.
Such Necessary Articles of Agreement between four Joint-Executors, as ought to
be made between them for the better Execution of the Will.
Articles of Agreement quadripartite, indented, had, made, concluded and agreed
upon, etc. between W. C. of, etc. of the first part, A. C. of, etc. of the
second part. W. L. of, etc. of the third part, and T.D. of, etc. of the fourth
part, as follows.
WHereas R. P. late of W. in the County of S. Yeoman, the 20th day of May last
past before the date of these Presents, made his last Will and Testament in
writting, and thereby did make and appoint the said W.C. A. G. W.L, and T. D.
Executors of his last Will; and shortly after the making thereof died, as by
the said Will may appear.

Now for the better Execution of the said Will it is covenanted and agreed
between the said Executors in manner and form following (that is to say) First,
the said W. C. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators
covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with the said A. C. W. L. and T. D.
their Executors and Administrators by these presents, that the said W. C. shall
not, nor will not acquit, release or discharge any Debt, Duty or sum of money
due unto the said R. P. in his Life time, nor any Debt, Duty or Sum of Money due
unto the said W. C. A. C. W. L. and T. D. by reason or means of the Execution
of the last Will and Testament of the said R. P. nor acquit, release, discharge
discontinue or otherwise adnul any Suit, Action, Cause, Plaint, or other Legal
Proceeding to be by them brought prosecuted or commenced for any matter, cause
or thing whatsoever touching the execution of the last Will and Testament of
the said R. P. without the special license and consent of the said A. C. W. L.
and T. D. the survivors and survivor of them, therein or thereto first had and
obtained: And also that he the said W. C. his Executors and Administrators
shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, at and upon every
reasonable request of the said A. C. W. L. and T. D. and the survivors and
survivor of them give and deliver upon unto them, and the survivors and
survivor of them, a true, exact and just particular of all and singular sum and
sums of Money, as well such as have been received, as such as have been
disbursed by the said W. C. in, about or concerning the execution of the last
Will and Testament of the said R. P. and shall and will acquit and discharge
the said A. C. W. L. and T. D. their Executors and Administrators, of, and from
all sum and sums of Money received, or to be received by the said W. C. in and
about the execution of the last Will and Testament of the said R. P. of, from
and against all and every person and persons, to whom such sum and sums of Money
does, shall or may of right belong and appertain; and such sum and sums of Money
so by him received, or to be received, shall and will pay, dispose and employ,
as by the said last Will and Testament of the said R. P. is directed, limited
and appointed: And also that he the said W. C. his Executors and Administrators
shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, sustain, bear,
pay, and discharge the fourth part, or one part in four parts to be divided, of
all costs, charges and expenses, which they the said W. C. A. C. W. L. and T.
D. and the survivors and survivor of them shall any way sustain, bear, pay or
be put unto by prosecuting or defending of any suit in Law or Equity, or
otherwise, by occasion, means or reason of the execution of the last will and
Testament of the said R. P. without fraud or guile. And also that he the said
W. C. shall and will assist and concur with the said A. C. W. L. and T. D. the
survivors and survivor of them, in and about the payment of the Debts of the
said Testator R. P. and of the Legacies given and disposed by the said R. P. in
his said last Will, and in the selling and disposing of the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments of the said R. P. by the said Will of the said R. P.
appointed to be sold, and in all other things tending to the due Execution of
the said last Will and Testament of the said R. P. without fraud or guile: And
the said A. C. does Covenant, etc. mutatis mutandis, and so of the rest.

In witness whereof to one part of these present Articles to be remaining, with
the said W. C. the said A. C. W. L. and T. D. have set their Hands and Seals,
and to another part, etc.
Covenants between a Mortgagee and a Purchaser of the Redemption, That the
Mortgagee shall assign upon payment of the Mortgage Money.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. S. of, etc. of the one part, and W. B.
of, etc. Merchant, of the other part. Whereas T. F. of L. Jeweller, and S. his
Wife, late called S.C. by their Indenture of Release bearing date, etc. for and
in Consideration of 100 l. to them in hand paid, did grant release and confirm
unto the said R. S. and W. S. of, etc. aforesaid, Victualler, their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, All that Massuage or Tenement, with the appurtenances, late
in the occupation of G. S. Doctor in Divinity, situate lying and being on, etc.
aforesaid, between a Message or Tenement in the occupation of R. T. Gent. on
the North, and a Message called W. in the occupation of T. P. on the South;
and upon a certain Proviso or Condition in the same Indenture contained for
making void thereof, If the said T. F. should Pay unto the said R. S. 106 l. at
several days then to come, and yet not past. And whereas the said W. B. has
contracted and agreed with the said T. F. to purchase of and from the said T.
F. the redemption and benefit of redemption of the premises. Now this
Indenture witnesses, That it is covenanced and agreed between the said parties
to this Indenture; and the said R. S. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, covenant and grant to and with the said W. B. his Heirs and
Assigns by these presents, That if the said W. B. or his Heirs, do or shall
before the, etc. next coming, purchase of and from the said T. F. the
Redemption of the premises. And also, If the said W. B. his Heirs or Assigns,
do or shall upon the said, etc. next coming, well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the said R. S. etc. of lawful Money of England, being the Principal
Money lent upon Security of the premises, and the Interest which will then be
due for the forbearance thereof; Then they the said R. S. and W. S. or their
Heirs, shall and will by good and sufficient conveyance and assurance in the
Law, well and sufficiently to be executed at the request, and at the costs and
charges of the said W. B. his Heirs or Assigns, well and sufficiently convey
and assure unto the said W. B. his Heirs and Assigns, or to such person or
persons as he or they shall direct or appoint; all the said Message or
Tenement, with the appurtenances, before herein mentioned, with Covenants in
such Conveyance to be comprised, for their enjoying all the said Message or
Tenement, with the appurtenances, without any let or interruption, of or by the
said R. S. and W. S. or either of them, their or either of their Heirs or
Assigns, or any other person or persons whatsoever, claiming or which shall
claim by, from or under them, or any of them, free, clear and discharged from
all Encumbrances, by them or any of them, done or to be done or suffered. And
the said W. B. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
covenant and grant to and with the said R. S. his Executors and Administrators
by these presents, That he the said W. B. his Heirs or Assigns, shall and will
well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said R. S. his Executors or
Administrators, the, etc. upon the said, etc. next coming, without fraud or
delay.

In witness, etc.
Note, On all Purchases where there is a present Mortgage not presently taken
in, it is best to have such Covenants for avoiding Suits in Chancery about the
Redemption and other Inconveniences.

A Declaration of a Trust upon admitting two Lives into a Copyhold, with
necessary Covenants.
THis Indenture Tripartite, made, etc. Between H. E. of, etc. of the first
part, T. B. of, etc. of the second part, and G. S. of, etc. of the third part.
Whereas the said G. S. etc. has this present day granted unto the said H. E.
and T. B. one Message and 16 Acres of Land, with the appurtenances, in the
Parish of B. within the Manor aforesaid; To have and to hold unto the said H.
E. and his Assigns, for term of his Life, (immediately after the death or other
forfeiture of the Estate of J. P who holds the premises, for the term of his
Life;) and after the death of them the said J. P. and H.E. To have and to hold
the premises aforesaid, with the appurtenances, unto the said T. and his
Assigns, for and during the term of his Natural Life, by Copy of Court-Roll, at
the Will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the Manor aforesaid in Trust,
to surrender the same Premises at the request of the said G. S. and to such
uses as he shall direct. Now this Indenture witnesses, that the said H. E.
does for himself, his Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant to and
with the said G. S. his Executors and Administrators by these presents, That he
the said H. E. shall and will upon the request, and at the cost and charges of
the said G. S. his Executors or Administrators, surrender into the hands of the
Lord of the Manor aforesaid, the said Message and Premises, with the
appurtenances, and all his Estate and Interest therein, in such manner and to
such use and uses as the said G. S. his Executors or Administrators shall
direct or appoint: And in the mean time, until such Surrender as aforesaid,
shall and will permit and suffer the said G. S. his Executors and
Administrators peaceably and quietly to have, hold and enjoy the said Message
and Premises, with the appurtenances, and the Rents, Issues and Profits
thereof to receive and take up to and for his and their own use, without any
let or interruption of or by the said H. E. his Executors, Admistrators or
Assigns. And the said T. B. does for himself, his Executors and Administrators,
covenant and grant to and with the said G. S. his Executors and Administrators
by these presents, That he the said T. B. shall and will upon the request and
at the costs and charges of the said G. S his Executors or Administrators,
surrender into the hands of the Lord of the Manor aforesaid, the said Message
and Premises, with the appurtenances, and all his Estate and Interest therein,
in such manner and to such use and uses as the said G. S. his Executors or
Administrators shall direct or appoint: And in the mean time, until such
Surrender as aforesaid, shall and will permit and suffer the said G. S. his
Executors and Administrators peaceably and quietly to have hold and enjoy the
said Message and Premises, with the appurtenances, and the Rents, Issues and
Profits thereof to receive and take up, to and for his and their own use,
without any let or interruption, of or by the said T. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns. And because it is uncertain whether the said
Premises be Heriotable or not, The said G. S. does for himself his Executors
and Administrators, covenant and grant to and with the said H. E. his Executors
and Administrators by these presents, That he the said G. S. his Executors or
Administrators, shall and will upon the request of the Executors or
Administrators of the said H. E. well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto
the said Executors or Administrators of the said H. so much money as any Beast
which shall be taken or seized for, or in the Name of a Heriot for the said
Premises, upon the death of the said H. E shall be worth at the time of such
taking. And the said G. S. does for himself, his Executors and Administrators
covenant and grant to and with the said T. B. his Executors and Administrators
by these presents, That he the said G. S. his Executors or Administrators,
shall and will upon the request of the Executors or Administrators of the said
T. B. well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said Executors or
Administrators of the said T. so much Money as any Beast which shall be taken or
seized for or in the Name of a Heriot for the said Premises, upon the death of
the said T. B. shall be worth at the time of such taking.

In witness, etc.
Articles for purchasing of a Message, with a Covenant, That the Grantor shall
pay the Charge which the Grantee shall expend in ejecting the Tenant in
possession.
Articles of Agreement Indented, had, made concluded and agreed upon, etc.
Between A. P. of etc. in the County of S. Widow, of the one part, and T. A. of,
etc. Gent. of the other part, viz.
FIrst, The said A. P. for and in consideration of 5 s. of lawful Money of
England, to her in hand paid by the said T. A. and of 270 l. and 15 s. of like
lawful Money, to be paid in such manner as is after herein mentioned, does
covenant, promise, grant and agree for her self, her Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, to and with the said T. A. his Heirs and Assigns, by these
presents, That she the said A. P. or her Heirs, shall and will before the 25th
day of December next ensuing the date hereof, at the costs and charges in the
Law of the said T. A. his Heirs or Assigns, by good and sufficient conveyance
and assurance in the Law, well and sufficiently executed, convey and assure, or
cause to be conveyed and assured unto the said T. A. and his Heirs aforesaid,
all that Message or Tenement, etc. with their appurtenances situate, lying and
being in, etc. now in the occupation of R. P Gent. with Covenants and Warranty
in such conveyance and assurance to be comprised, That the said T. A. his Heirs
and Assigns, shall hold and enjoy for ever the said Message, or Tenement and
Premises, with the appurtenances, against the said A.P. and her Heirs, and
without any let, trouble, interruption, or contradiction of or by the said A.
P. or T. G. or G. G. Son of J. G. Father of the said A. P their Heirs or
Assigns, or any of them, or any other person or persons claiming in, by, from
or under her, them, or any of them. And for being discharged or saved harmless
of and from all Jointures, Dowers and Titles of Dower, Charges, Titles,
Troubles, Burdens and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, committed, done or
suffered, or to be had committed, or done by the said A.P. T.G. J.G. G.G. or
either of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns. And for making any
further lawful and reasonable assurance in the Law at the costs and charges of
the said T. A. as shall be reasonably advised or devised by the said T. A. his
Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the Laws, during the
space of, etc. next ensuing the date of such Conveyance so to be made, with all
other fit and reasonable Covenants to be comprised in such Conveyance and
Assurance.

Item, The said A. P. does further Covenant, etc. That she the said A. P. her
Heirs, Executors or Administrators, shall and will within 40 days next after
Notice and Request made, well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said
T. A. his Heirs or Assigns all such Sum and Sums of Money, as he or they shall
at any time hereafter necessarily expend, lay out or disburse in ejecting or
putting out the said R. P. out of the possession of the said Message or
Tenement, and premises, with the appurtenances, and recovering the possession
thereof unto the said T. A. his Heirs and Assigns, by due course of Law.

Item, The said T. A. does covenant, etc. That he the said T. A. his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the said A. P. her Executors, Admistrators or Assigns, the said Sum
of 270 l. and 15 s. on, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, at or in the now
dwelling House of, etc. without fraud or delay, etc.

In witness, etc.
Agreement of the Tenants of a Manor about ploughing a Common Field.
KNow all men by these presents, That a parcel of Pasture Ground called, etc.
does belong to several Lands and Tenements in, etc. aforesaid, and in the
several possessions of us whose Names are hereunder written, by such portions
and alloments thereof as were enjoyed and occupied with our said several Lands
and Tenements, by the respective Owners thereof, about 30 years ago, when the
said Down was ploughed and sown with Corn and Grain; and since that time the
said Down has been used by us in Common for feeding Sheep, by every of us,
after the rate of 50 Sheep for every Yard-Land in, etc. aforesaid. and
proportionably for a greater or less quantity: And it is agreed between us,
that from henceforth yearly, so long as the major part of us shall think fit,
the said Down shall be ploughed and sown with Corn and Grain, and used and
enjoyed for that purpose separately by us, according to the said former
portions and allotments, to our said respective Lands and Tenements, and every
of us shall in the last year of Sowing the said Down, sow on his several
allotment so much Trefoil-Seed as the major part of us, shall think fit. And it
is further agreed between us, That none of us shall permit or suffer any Cattle
to depasture or be kept upon the said Down at any time, in any year after some
Corn shall be sown in the said Down, until all the Corn and Grain there growing
shall be cut and mowed, and carried away. And at such times in the year when
the said Down shall be convenient for pasturing, Then none of us shall
depasture or keep there more or other Cattle than according to the proportion
of 35 Sheep for every Yard-Land. And it is further agreed, That every of us,
according to the proportion of his allotment aforesaid shall bear, and pay the
charge of making and maintaining of such Hedges as the major part of us shall
think necessary to be made upon the said Down; and shall bear such
proportionable part of all charges which the major part of us shall think fit
to expend about the enforcing the due performance of the mutual Agreements
herein contained, and securing the enjoyment of the aforesaid portions and
allotments of the said Down. And every one of us by himself does promise unto
every other of us to perform the Agreement aforesaid on his part to be
performed.

In witness, etc.
Note, Such Agreement of numerous Parties seems best to be made by Writing
unsealed, and may be attested thus:

Signed and agreed by A. B. etc. and so of the rest as they severally sign.
Indenture of Covenants upon a Contract for Purchase of a Copyhold, where part
of the Purchase money is paid, and the Purchaser is to be at liberty to proceed
in the Purchase or not.
THis Indenture made, etc. between J. S. of, etc. of the one part, and W.R. of
etc. of the other part; whereas the said J. S. in consideration of 75. l. of
lawful Money of England, to him by the said W. R. in hand paid, 60 l. more to be
paid in such manner and as is herein after mentioned, has this present day
bargained and sold, or agreed to bargain and sell unto the said W. R. all that
Message and Yard-land called, etc. which the said J. S. now holds to him and
his Heirs by Copy of Court Roll of the Manor of, etc. Now this Indenture
witnesses, That the said J. S. does for himself his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, covenant and grant to and with the said W.R. is Executors and
Administrators by these presents, that the said J. S. upon request to him made,
shall and will at the costs and charges of the said W. R. well and truly, and
according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, surrender into the hands of
the Lord of the said Manor, the said Message, Lands and Premises with the
appurtenances, to the use and behoof of the said W. R. and his Heirs for ever:
And also that he the said W. R. and his Heirs shall, or lawfully may from time
to time, and at all times from henceforth during the life of the said J. S.
peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy the said Message, Lands and
Premises with the appurtenances; and the rents and profits thereof receive,
have and take to his and their own use, without any account thereof to be
rendered, and without any let or interruption of or by the said J. S. Provided
always and upon this condition, nevertheless that if the said W. R. or his
Heirs at the time of the request unto the said J. S. for making such surrender
as aforesaid, do not or shall not well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto
the said J. S. the said 60 l. before mentioned, and do not also in the mean
time upon every request thereof to be made by the said J. S. pay unto him
Interest for the forbearance of the said 60 l. after the rate of 5 l. per Cent.
for a year, that then and from thenceforth, and at all times after all the
agreements and covenants of the said J. S. before herein mentioned shall cease
and be utterly void and of none effect. And the said J. S. does further for
himself his Heirs, Executors and Administrators covenant and grant to and with
the said W. R. his Executors and Administrators by these presents, that if the
said J. S. do not in his life make such surrender as aforesaid, then the Heirs,
Executors or Administrators of the said J. S. shall and will within 20 day
after his decease, repay unto the said W. R. the said 75 l. by him paid to the
said J. S. as aforesaid.

In witness, etc. interchangeably set their Hands and Seals the day and year
first above written.
Covenants upon purchasing the equity of Redemption of Copyhold-lands Mortgaged.
THis Indenture made, etc. between H.W. of, etc. of the one party, and J. P.
of, etc. of the other party, witnesses, That the said H. W. for and in
consideration of the sum of 550 l. of lawful Money of England, to him agreed to
be paid in manner and form herein after expressed, has granted, bargained and
sold, and by these presents does grant, bargain and sell unto the said J. P.
his Heirs and Assigns, all and singular the Copyhold-lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments of him the said H. W. situate, etc. and all redemption and
benefit of redemption, condition, benefit of condition, claim and demand of him
the said H. W. of, in or to all and every the Copyhold-lands and Tenements
which are or were of the said H. W. situate, etc. aforesaid. And the said H. W.
does covenant, promise and grant for himself his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns to and with the said J. P. his Heirs and Assigns by
these presents, that he the said H. W. his Heirs and Assigns shall and will at
or before the 29 day of September next ensuing the date hereof, by good and
sufficient surrender, well and sufficiently executed, surrender into the hands
of, etc. all and every the Copyhold-lands and Tements which he the said H.W.
has within the said Manor, and which do to him of right belong or appertain
in possession or reversion, whereof and wherein he has any power or
possibility of redemption, and the said J. P. his Heirs and Assigns shall and
may thereunto be admitted, and shall and may from time to time, and at all
times hereafter enjoy and possess the same without fraud or guile: And also
that W. S. of, etc. shall at or before the 29 day of September next ensuing the
dath hereof, by good and sufficient surrender, well and sufficiently to be
executed, surrender into the hands of, etc. all and every the Copyhold-lands
and Tenements which he the said W. S. now has, or shall or may claim by virtue
or color of any surrender from the said H W. And the said J. P. shall and may
upon such surrender made, have and take admittance of and to the said
Copyhold-lands and Tenements, and the same shall and may possess, hold and
enjoy without fraud or guile. And it is agreed by and between the said parties
to these presents, that the said J. P. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns shall
out of the said 550 l. pay unto the said W. S. within 28 days after such
surrender made by him the said W. S. as aforesaid, so much Money as is now due
unto the said W. S. from the said H. W. and the residue of the said 550 l. he
the said J. P. shall within 28 days after such surrender made as aforesaid, pay
unto the said H. W. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns.

In witness, etc. the day and year first above written.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of (...)
Covenants for saving harmless a Bishop, in refusing to admit an unfit person
to a Vicaridge.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A. B. of, etc. and C. D. of, etc. of the one
part, and the Right Reverend Father in God, G. Lord Bishop of C. of the other
part. Whereas T. W. Clerk Rector of the Parish Church of H. within the Diocese
of C. aforesaid, did present unto the Vicaridge of the said Parish Church,
being vacant, F. S. Clerk, whom the said A. B. and C. D. did alledg to be a
very unfit person; and did undertake to prove him a man so criminous, that he
ought not to be admitted into the said Vicaridge; whereupon the said Lord
Bishop at the request of the said A. B. and C. D. did refuse to admit or
institute the said F. S. into the said Vicaridge. Now this Indenture
witnesses, that the said A. B. and C. D. in consideration of the Premises, do
jointly and severally for them and either of themselves, their and either of
their Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant to and with the said
Lord Bishop his Executors and Administrators by these presents, that they the
said A. B, and C. D. their Executors and Administrators shall and will from
time to time, upon every reasonable request, well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the said Lord Bishop his Executors or Administrators, all such sum
and sums of Money, Costs Charges and Damages which he or they have at any time
heretofore, or shall at any time hereafter bear, pay or suffer for or by reason
of the said Lord Bishops former refusing to admit and institute the said F. S.
into the Vicaridge aforesaid, or for or by reason of any other future refusing
such admission or institution, until the said A. B. and C. D. their Executors
or Administrators shall request the said Lord Bishop to give such Admission and
Institution.

In witness, etc.
Articles for dividing some Corn between two Partners in Husbandry.
Articles of Agreement indented, had, made, concluded and agreed upon, etc.
between. T. H. of, etc. of the one part, and T. S. of, etc. of the other part,
as follows.
WHereas the said T. H. and T. S. are jointly possessed of a certain quantity
of Barley in the Straw lately grown upon eight Acres of Land in the Parish of
N. in the County aforesaid; and also of a certain quantity of Oats, lately
grown upon twenty Acres of Land, in the same Parish of N. which said Barley and
Oats are now in the Barn of the said T. H. under the Northwalls of the City of
C. aforesaid, and in a Reek near the said Barn; Wherefore for the better
dividing the said Barley and Oats, as is herein after mentioned, It is
covenanted and agreed between the said parties in manner and form following,
(that is to say): First, The said T. H. does for himself, his Executors and
Administrators, covenant, grant and agree to and with the said T. S. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, That he the said T. S. his
Executors and Administrators, and any other person or persons to be by him or
them appointed, shall or lawfully may from time to time and at all times
seasonable before the (...) day of next (...) ensuing the date hereof, enter
into and upon the Barn of the said T. H. before mentioned, and the Close
thereunto adjoining, and thresh out the winnow all the said Barley and Oats
there; and also have, take and carry away to and for the use and behoof of the
said T. S. his Executors and Administrators, three fifth parts, or three parts
in five parts to be divided of all the Straw, arising and coming of the said
Barley and Oats, being threshed from time to time, as the same shall be
threshed, without any let, trouble, interruption or contradiction, of or by
the said T. H. his Executors or Administrators,: And also that he the said T.
S. his Executors and Administrators, and any other person or persons to be by
him or them appointed, upon reasonable notice to be given to the said T. H. his
Executors or Administrators, shall or lawfully may from time to time, and at
all times seasonable, after the Barley and Oats aforesaid shall be threshed and
winnowed, enter into and upon the Barn aforesaid, and the said Barley and Oats
equally divide by the Bushel; and the moiety or one half of the said Barley and
Oats so divided, shall or may have, take and carry away, to and for the sole
and proper use of the said T. S. his Executors and Administrators, without any
let, interruption or contradiction of or by the said T. H. his Executors or
Administrators, without fraud or delay.

Item, The said T. H. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does
further covenant, grant and gree to and with the said T. S. his Executors and
Administrators by these presents, That he the said T. H. his Executors or
Administrators, shall not at any time before said Barley and Oats shall be
equally divided according to the true intent hereof, have, take or carry away
from the Barn or Close aforesaid, any part of the Barley and Oats aforesaid.

Item, The said T. S. does for himself, his Executors and Administrators,
covenant, grant and agree to and with the said T. H. his Executors and
Admininstrators by these presents, That he the said T. S. his Executors or
Administrators shall, and will at his and their only and proper costs and
charges thresh out and winnow all the Barley and Oats aforesaid, or cause the
same to be threshed out and winnowed before the said (...) day of (...) next
coming; and also that he the said T.S. his Executors and Administrators, shall
and will permit and suffer the said T. H. his Executors and Administrators
peaceably and quietly to have, take and enjoy two fifth parts of all the Straw
arising and coming of the Barley and Oats aforesaid, the said Straw to be
divided by the daily threshing (to wit) the said T. H. to have two days
threshings, and the said T. S. three days threshings thereof alternis vicibus.
And also that the said T. S. his Executors and Administrators, shall and will
permit and suffer the said T. H. his Executors and Administrators peaceably and
quietly to have, take and enjoy to and for his and their only and proper use
and behoof the moiety or one half of all the Barley and Oats aforesaid, being
equally divided by the Bushel as aforesaid.

In witness whereof the Parties abovenamed have to these present Articles
interchangeably set their Hands and Seals, the day and year first above
written.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of (...)
Articles between Joynt-Tenants for cutting Corn and dividing it in the Field.
Articles of Agreement, Indented and made, concluded and agreed upon the, etc.
between R. F. of, etc. of the one part, and J. M. of, etc. aforesaid, of the
other part as follows.
WHereas the said J. M. and R. F. have a joint right, property and interest of,
in and to all the Corn and Grain standing, growing, and being upon several
parcels of Land, whereof J. M. Father of the said M. party to these presents
lately dead, possessed, lying etc. Now for the better dividing the said Corn
and Grain between them the said R. F. and J. M. it is covenanted and agreed
between the said Parties in manner and form following, (that is to say:) First,
The said R. F. does for himself, his Executors and Administrators, covenant,
grant and agree to and with the said J. M. party to these presents, his
Executors and Administrators by these presents; That when and as soon as the
said Corn and Grain shall be reaped, mowed or cut down, he the said R. F. his
Executors or Administrators shall or will divide, or cause the same to be
divided into equal parts: And shall and will permit and suffer the said J. M.
party to these presents, his Executors and Administrators, and his and their
Servants, Laborers and Workmen, with necessary Carts and Carriages, peaceably
and quietly to enter into and upon all the several parcels of Land before
mentioned, and the moity or one half of all the Corn and Grain aforesaid, to
load, have, take, carry away and enjoy to, and for the only and proper use and
behoof of the said J. M. his Executors and Administrators, without any let,
trouble, interruption or contradiction of or by the said R. F. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, without fraud or delay.

Item, The said J. M. does for himself, his Executors and Administrators,
covenant, grant and agree to and with the said R. F. his Executors and
Administrators by these presents: That he the said R. F. his Executors or
Administrators, shall or lawfully may load, have, take, carry away and enjoy
the other moiety, or one half of the Corn-and Grain aforesaid, to and for his
and their own proper use and behoof, without any let, trouble, interruption or
contradiction of or by the said J. M. his Executors or Administrators, without
fraud or delay: And also that he the said J. M. his Executors and
Administrators, shall and will from time to time, upon notice and request to
him or them made, well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said R. F.
his Executors and Administrators, all such Sum or Sums of Money as he or they
shall expend, lay out or disburse for or about the reaping, mowing cutting down
or otherwise harvesting the Corn and Grain aforesaid, without fraud or delay.

In witness, etc.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of.
Covenants for delivery of Wheat sold by two Bushels Weekly.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R. H. of, etc. of the one part, and W. C.
of, etc. of the other part, Witnesses that the said R. H. has sold unto the
said W. C. thirteen Quarters of Wheat, at the price of 1 l. 12 s. for every
Quarter, to be delivered and paid in such manner and form as is herein after
mentioned: And the said R. H. does for himself, his Executors and
Administrators, covenant and grant to and with the said W. C. his Executors and
Administrators by these presents, That the said R. H. his Executors or
Administrators, at the place called, etc. shall and will deliver or cause to be
delivered unto the said W. C. his Executors or Administrators, the said
thirteen Quarters of Wheat in manner following, (that it to say,) Two Bushels
thereof Weekly upon Saturday in every Week, until the said thirteen Quarters
shall be fully delivered; The first delivery thereof to begin and be made on
Saturday, the third day of October next ensuing the date hereof. And that the
said two Bushels of Wheat so Weekly upon every Saturday to be delivered, shall
be good, sweet, clean and merchantable Wheat, and not worse by more than three
pence in every Bushel, than so much of the best Wheat which on such Saturday
shall be sold in the said Market-house. And the said W. C. does for himself,
his Executors and Admistrators, covenant and grant to and with the said R. H.
his Executors and Administrators, by these presents, That he the said W. C. his
Executors or Administrators, for the said Wheat so to be delivered as
aforesaid, shall and will at the Corn Market-house aforesaid, well and truly
pay or cause to be paid unto the said R. H. his Executors or Administrators, 20
l. 16 s. of lawful Money of England, in manner and form following, (that is to
say,) eight shillings Weekly upon Saturday in every Week, until the said 20 l.
16 s. shall be fully satisfied and paid, The first payment thereof to begin and
be made upon the aforesaid third day of October next coming.

In witness, etc.
Covenants for Repairing the Steeple of a Cathedral Church.
THis Indenture made, etc. between H. R. of, etc. of the one part, and H. E.
of, etc. of the other part. Whereas the Steeple of the said Cathedral Church
aforesaid, is much decayed, and many cracks and clefts are therein, and much of
the Mortar and diverse of the Stones and iron-work thereof are moltered, wasted
and consumed by Age and Tempest. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said
H. R. for and in consideration of 23 l. to be paid in such manner as is herein
after mentioned, does for himself, his Executors and Administrators, convenant
and grant to and with the said H. E. his Executors and Administrators, by these
presents, That he the said H. R. before the first day of August next coming,
will repair the said Steeple as follows, viz. That he the said H. R. shall
and will take down the Weathercock being upon the top of the said Steeple, and
amend, repair and make sufficient all the iron-work, which is or has been
about the top of the said Steeple, for the bearing the said Cock. And also
shall and will well, sufficiently and artificially put, hang up and fasten
perpendicularly and geometrically and aptly to be turned with every Wind, upon
such repaired iron-Work on the top of the said Steeple, the said Weathercock or
some other Cock or Fan as the said H. E. or his Assigns shall appoint: And also
that he the said H. R. shall and will, well, sufficiently and artificially
scrape off and do away all the Moss growing or being upon the said Steeple, And
shall and will take out all Stones in the said Steeple, being loose, broken,
cracked or decayed, and in the places thereof, shall well and artificially set
and put in other good and sound Stones, and them shall strongly clamp in with
Iron and Lead and shall also with fit Stones and other materials well,
sufficiently and perfectly fill up all the rifts, cracks, clefts and holes in
the said Steeple, and new clamp them with Iron and Lead; And shall also with
good, fit, strong and durable Mortar, well, substantially and prefectly new
point all the outside of the said Steeple with the Garlands thereof: And
likewise new point the inside of the said Steeple where any need requires. And
when the said Steeple shall so be repaired as aforesaid, he the said H. R.
shall and will remove and take down into the Churchyard near the said Church
all the Scaffolds, Ladders and other implements used about the work aforesaid:
And the said H. E. does for himself, his Executors and Administrators, covenant
and grant to and with the said H. R. his Executors and Administrators, by these
presents, That he the said H. E. his Executors or Administrators, shall and
will well and truly pay or cause to paid unto the said H. R. or his Assigns,
for the repairing of the said Steeple as aforesaid to be done and performed,
the aforesaid 23. l. in manner following, (that is so say,) 2 l. thereof when
the Weathercock aforesaid shall be taken down, 10 l. more thereof when the
Four of the squares or sides of the said Steeple shall be so repaired and
amended as aforesaid, from the top to the bottom, and 11 l. residue thereof
when all the said reparations and works shall be wholly done and finished, in
all things according to the true intent and meaning of these presents: And also
that he the said H. E. or his Assigns, at the costs of the said H. E. shall and
will from time to time upon reasonable warning, at the costs of the said H. E.
find and provide near the Cathedral Church aforesaid, such Lime, Sand, Stones,
Iron, Lead and other Materials as shall be needful and necessary to be used and
employed in or about the repairing the said Steeple as aforesaid, except
Scaffolds and the materials thereof. And also that the said H. R. and his
Servants and Laborers shall and may in and about the work aforesaid, have the
use of all or any the Ladders belonging to the Cathedral Church aforesaid.

An Agreement of Copartnership between two Salesmen with necessary Covenants.
THis Indenture made etc. between R. C. of the one part, and C. R. of the other
part. Whereas the said C. R. is possessed by Lease for diverse years yet to
come, of and in all that Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, called or
known by the name of the Queen's Head, situate and being in, etc. now in the
occupation of the said R. C. And whereas the said Parties are agreed to be
Copartners in the Art or Trade of a Salesman, and in buying and selling of
Apparel and other things belonging to the said Trade.

Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said R.C. for himself, his Executors,
Administrators and Assings does covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with
the said C. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents,
That he the said C. R. shall have, hold and enjoy the several Rooms hereafter
mentioned, being part and parcel of the said Message, that is to say, etc. and
also free liberty of ingress, egress and regress to and from the said Rooms and
Premises, at all convenient and seasonable times, for the term of five years,
to commence from the Feast day of, etc. next ensuing the date of these
Presents, yielding and paying therefore yearly unto the said R.C. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns the yearly Rent or sum of 13 l. of lawful
Money of England at the four most usual Feasts or Terms of the year, that is to
say, etc. by even and equal portions. And the said C. R. for himself, his
Executors and Administrators does covenant and grant to and with the said R. C.
his Executors and Administrators by these presents, that he the said C. R.
shall and will from time to time, during the said term of five years, permit
and suffer the said R. C. and all those of whom he holds the said Message,
their Heirs, Executors and Assigns with Workmen to enter and come into and upon
the several Rooms aforesaid, to view, search and see the estate of the same.

And this Indenture further witnesses, That the said R. C. and C. R. for the
good liking and opinion, and special trust and confidence which each of them
has and reposeth of and in the other of them, and for the advancing of their
Estate are contented agreed; and do by these presents covenant, grant and
agree, each of them to and with the other of them, his Executors and
Administraters, That they the said Parties shall be and continue Copartners
together, and Joint-dealers in the Art and Mystrey of a Salesman, and the
making and selling of all sorts of Apparel for Men and Women, and in buying and
selling of all things thereunto incident and belonging, from the Feast day of,
etc. next ensuing the date of these Presents, until the end and term of five
years from thence next ensuing and fully to be complete and ended (if both the
said Parties shall so long live) the said Copartnership to be kept and used in
the Shop and Warehouse beloning to the above named Message.

And for the better managing of the said Joint-trade, they the said Parties to
these Presents have agreed to make up, bring in and put together the sum of Six
Hundred Pounds of lawful Money of England. And the said R. C. is agreed to bring
in to the said Stock for his part, the sum of Three Hundred pounds of lawful
Money of England. And the said C. R. is agreed to bring into the said Stock for
his part and share of the said Joint Stock, the like Sum of Three Hundred
Pounds of like lawful Money of England, being the residue of the said six
Hundred Pounds. And they the said Parties shall and may bring and put into the
said Joint-stock-trade, such further addition of Stock, as they the said
Parties shall think fit.

It is now therefore covenanted granted and agreed by and between the said
Parties to these Presents, and each of them by and for himself his Executors
and Administrators, does covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with the
other of them by these Presents in manner and form following, that is to say,
That each of them the said Parties shall and will on or before the 10th day of
March now next ensuing, bring and put into the said Joint Stock and Trade, each
the sum of 300 l. as aforesaid, being his said respective part and share of the
said Joint Stock.

And that the said Joint Stock of 600 l. and such further addition of Stock, as
they the said Parties shall bring and put into the said Joint-trade, and all
the proceed, gains and increase which shall be acquired or gotten by reason or
means of the employment of the said Joint Stock, and Additional-stock in the
said Joint-trade, (Except a weekly allowance of 20 s. to each of them the said
Parties, for their particular expenses, to be taken out of the said gains,)
shall be from time to time during the said Copartnership, continued, used and
employed in the said Copartnership and Joint trade, to and for the use, benefit
and behoof of both the said Parties to these Presents, as is here under
mentioned; and shall not be taken out, converted, used or employed by either of
the said Parties, to or for any other use, intention or purpose whatsoever.

And that each of them the said Parties shall from time to time during the said
Copartnership diligently employ and endeavor himself in the managing of the
said Joint-trade, and to advance the same and the gains and increase thereof
for the equal benefit and advantage of both the said Parties.

And that neither of them the said Parties shall use the said Trade in any
other places, but only in the said Message during the said term, nor shall use
or exercise the said Trade with any other Stock but only for the benefit of
both the said Parties. And that each of the said Parties shall be true, just
and and faithful to the other in all his buyings, sellings, dealings, doings
and employments in and about the said Joint-trade, and that each of the said
Parties shall and lawfully may take out of the said Joint Stock and Gains, the
Sum of 20 s. for his particular charges and expenses.

And that the said Joint-trade shall be managed and driven, and all buyings,
sales, receipts, payments, bills, bonds, specialties and other assurances to be
had, made or taken for any matter or thing touching the said Joint-trade, shall
be from time to time during the said Copartnership, entered, had, and made,
taken in the Joint-names of both the said Parties to these Presents. And that
neither of them the said Parties shall at any time during the said
Copartnership, become bound, or bail, or surety, or otherwise engage himself
with or for any person or persons, for any debt or duty, matter or thing not
concerning this Copartnership, without the license and consent of the other
Party first had in writing under his hand in that behalf, nor shall at any time
during the said Copartnership, compound, release or discharge any Debt or Duty
which shall be due or owing to the said Joint-trade, without the consent of the
other of the said Parties first had in that behalf, other than so much thereof
as shall be brought into the said Joint Stock within seven days next after such
release made or given for the same. And that the Joint or Additional-stock
aforesaid, or any of the gains or increase thereof, shall not at any time
during the said Copartnership be attached, seized, extended or taken in
Execution, for or in respect of the private or particular debt or debts, duty
or duties of either of the said Parties, not concerning this Copartnership: But
that such private and particular debt and debts, duty and duties, shall be
paid and satisfied by him or them the said Parties whose debt or duty the same
is, or shall be out of his own particular Estate, not included in the said
Copartnership.

And that neither of the said Parties shall at any time during the said
Copartnership, retain or keep any Servant or Apprentice to be employed in the
said Joint-trade, without the consent of the other of them the said Parties
first had and obtained in that behalf.

And that if either of the said Parties shall at any time hereafter, sell or
deliver upon trust or credit, any Wares or Commodities of or belonging to the
said Joint-trade, without the consent of the other of the said Parties, then
such of them the said Parties which shall deliver the said Goods or Wares,
shall within three Months next after such sale or delivery made, pay into the
said Joint Stock so much lawful Money of England as each and every such parcel
of Wares shall be sold for, if the person or persons to whom such sale or
delivery shall be made, shall not in the mean time pay and satisfy for the
same.

And further it is agreed by the said R. C. That he the said R. C. shall and
will from time to time during the said Copartnership, at his own costs and
charges, bear, pay and discharge all Tithes and other Duties due and payable to
the Parson for the aforesaid Message, and all Assessments for relief of the
Poor of the Parish, so that the same Assessments exceed not what the said R. C.
now pays, and is assessed for the same.

And moreover it is mutually condescended and agreed by and between the said
Parties to these Presents, and each of them for himself his Executors and
Administrators, does covenant and agree to and with the other of them, his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, That each of them the said
Copartners shall and will from time to time during the said Copartnership, have
a several and equal part, right, title and interest in and to the said
Joint Stock and proceed of the same And in and to all and every the gains and
increase which shall be made, raised or gotten in by reason or by means of the
said Joint-trade, that is to say, the said R. C. in and to the moiety, or one
half part thereof. And the said C. R. in and to the other moiety, or one half
part thereof: And that each of them the said Parties, his Executors and
Administrators shall and may, at and upon the dissolution of the said
Copartnership, have, receive and take his said respective share and part of all
the said Premises to his and their proper use and behoof for ever, in such
manner as hereafter in these Presents is mentioned and set down, without any
let or interruption of or by the other of them the said Parties, his Executors
or Administrators, and without any benefit or advantage to be taken by
survivorship, or by any of the said Parties surviving the other of them, any
Law, Usage or Custom of Survivorship to the contrary notwithstanding. And that
all debts and duties which shall be owing by them the said Parties, touching
the said Joint-trade; and all losses by bad Debtors (other than such as shall
be trusted by either of them, without the consent of the other of them the said
Parties) decay in Wares, or any other inevitable accident, and all charges and
expenses for repairing of the said House and Shop, and all other charges
necessarily arising for any matter or thing touching the said Joint-trade,
shall be from time to time during the said Copartnership, born, sustained and
paid by and between the said Parties to these Presents, equally out of their
said Joint Stock and Gains.

And moreover, that they the said Parties shall from time to time during the
said Copartnership, at their own charge provide, have and keep sufficient and
competent Books of Account and Reckning in writing, to be always remaining in
the said Shop, wherein they the said Parties shall from time to time write down
and enter, or cause to be written down and entered the true particulars of all
such Goods, Wares and Merchandises that shall be bought or sold, brought in or
delivered out, in or touching the said Joint-trade; and of all sum or sums of
Money that shall be received or paid, together with the Names of all Persons
unto, or of whom any such Goods, Wares or Moneys shall be paid or received; and
all other circumstances of time and place, any ways conducing to the
manifestation of the state and proceeding of the said Joint-trade; and that
each of them the said Parties, shall and may from time to time during the said
Copartnership, have free access and recourse unto the said Books of Account, to
read, peruse, examine and copy out the same at his will and pleasure.

And further, That they the said Parties shall yearly, and every year during
the said Copartnership, in the Month of December, join in account to gether at
the said Shop, and then and there to make, cast up and fully finish a true,
just, plain and perfect account and reckning in writing, of, for and concerning
the said Joint-trade, and of and for all Moneys, Wares, Goods, Debts and other
Estate whatsoever, which shall then be in Copartnership between the said
Parties, or jointly owing and belonging to them. And upon the finishing of
every such yearly account, they the said Parties shall write and enter, or
cause to be written down and entered into the several Books of Account the true
particulars of every such account and shall subscribe their Names in the said
Books at the foot of every such account entered therein; and upon the
subscription of their Names as aforesaid, each of the said Parties shall and
may have and take to his own use, one of the said Books subscribed as aforesaid.

And furthermore, that at the end of the said Term of five years, if they the
said parties shall be both then living, the said parties shall join together in
account at the Shop aforesaid, and shall then and there make, cast up, and
fully finish between them a true, plain, perfect and final account and
reckoning in Writing, of, for and concerning the said joint Trade: And of and
for Money, Wares, Goods, Debts and other Estate whatsoever, which shall be then
in Copartnership between the said parties, or jointly owing or belonging to
them by reason or means of the said Joint-trade, and of all Debts and Duties
which they the said Parties shall then owe to any person or persons. And upon
finishing the said account, they the said parties shall forthwith satisfy, or
take order for the speedy satisfying all and every the said Debts and Duties so
by them owing, and shall also thereupon make a just and equal partition,
allotment, assignment and division between them the said parties, of all the
then residue and remainder of their said partible and Joint Stock and Estate
and increase thereof; That is to say, one moiety or half part thereof unto the
said R. C. to his own proper use, and the other moiety or half part thereof
unto the said C. R. to his own proper use.

And after such Partition, Division, Assignment and Allotment so made neither
of the said parties, his Executors or Administrators, shall without the consent
of the other of them, receive, release, compound or discharge any Debt or Duty
which is, or shall be assigned or allotted to the other of them respectively,
but that each of the said parties, his Executors and Administrators, shall from
time to time sufficiently Authorize the other of them the said parties, his
Executors and Administrators upon his or their request to Sue for, recover,
receive and take to his and their own proper use, all and every the Debts and
Duties which shall be allotted to him or them the said parties, his Executors
and Administrators respectively making such request. And further, that if
either of the said parties shall happen to decease before the end of the said
five years, and after any yearly account shall be made between them the said
parties touching the said joint-Trade, That then the Survivor of them the said
parties shall have and take to his own proper use all the Moneys, Goods and
Wares which shall be belonging to the said joint Trade and Copartnership, at
the same rate and price the same Goods and Wares did cost, and also all Debts
and Duties which shall be then due and owing to the said joint Trade, (except
such of them as were trusted by the said deceased party, without the consent of
the party surviving:) And in consideration thereof, the said Survivor his
Executors or Administrators, shall pay or cause to be paid to the Executors, or
Administrators of the person so first dying at the Shop aforesaid, so much
lawful Money of England, as the part and share of the party deceasing, of, and
in all the said Debts that shall be then owing to the said joint Trade, that
were accounted good and recoverable Debts and of and in all the Goods, Moneys
and Wares of the said joint Trade, did or shall clearly come and amount unto,
by and upon the said yearly account made between the said parties next before
such decease, (the Debts owing by the said Joint Stock being allowed for, and
deducted out of the said whole Estate,) the same Moneys to be paid to the
Executors or Administrators of the deceased party as follows, That is to say,
one third part thereof at the end of four Months next after such decease, one
other third part thereof at the end of six Months next after such decease, and
the remaining third part thereof at the end of eight Months next afuer such
decease.

And that the said Survivor his Executors or Administrators, shall and will
within fourteen days next after such decease of the other of them the said
parties, become bound in one Bond or Obligation with sufficient Sureties to the
Executors or Administrators of the person so first dying, as well for the true
payment of the said three several Sums in manner and form aforesaid, as also
for the saving harmless and keeping indempnified the Executors and
Administrators, Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels of the said first
deceasing party, of and from all and every the Debts and Duties which were
jointly owing by them the said parties at the time of such decease, of, for and
concerning the said joint Trade, and of, and from all Accounts, Suits,
Judgments and Demands, for, touching or concerning the same.

In consideration whereof the Executors or Administrators of the said deceased
party, shall upon receipts of the said security sufficiently and in due form of
Law, release unto the said Survivor his Executors and Administrators, all the
part, share, right, title, interest, claim and demand whatsoever, which they
the said Executors and Administrators of the said deceased party, and every, or
any of them have or has, or may, can, might, should or ought to have, in, to
or out of all and every, or any of the Stock, Estate, Money, Goods, Wares and
Debts, which were in or belonging to the said Joint-trade or Copartnership at
the decease of the Party so first dying, or at any time before, except such
Debts as were accounted desperate, which by the Agreement of both the said
Parties to these Presents, for them their Excutors and Administrators, are to
be equally divided between the Suvivor and the Executors and Administrators of
the deceased party, as they or any of them shall be recived or gotten in.

And it is further covenanted and agreed by and between the said Parties to
these presents, That if either of the said Parties shall happen to depart this
life, before any yearly Accounts shall happen to be made between the said
Parties touching the said Joint-trade; That then the surviving Party his
Executors and Administrators shall have and take to his and their own use and
behoof all the Goods, Wares, Moneys, Debts and other Estate whatsoever, in or
belonging to the said Joint-trade at the time of such decease, and shall
satisfy the Debts jointly owing by the said Parties as aforesaid at the time
of such decease, and shall truly pay unto the Executors or Administrators of
the first deceased Party within one year then next ensuing, so much lawful
English Money, as the Stock that then shall be brought into the said Joint-trade
by the party so deceasing did come and amount unto, and that such Security
shall be given for the same, and for the saving harmless of the Executors and
Administrators of the deceased Party, of and from the Debts and Duties jointly
owing by the said Parties as aforesaid, as is above mentioned to be given for
the like purposes, in case the decease of the party so first dying shall happen
after the making a yearly Account as aforesaid: And that then also the like
Release shall be made and given by the Execuctors or Administrators of the
first deceasing Party, to the Surving Party, his Executors or Administrators,
as is above mentioned.

And the said R. C. for himself, his Executors and Administrators does covenant
and grant to and with the said C. R. his Executors and Administrators by these
presents, That if he the said R. C. shall happen to decease within the said
Term of four years, that then the Executors or Administrators of the said R. C.
shall within fourteen days next after his decease, demise and grant unto the
said C. R. if he shall then be living, his Executors and Administrators, all
the said Message or Tenement above mentioned, for and during the then residue
of the said Term of five years, at, for and under the yearly Rent of 30 l. of
lawful Money of England, to be by the said demise reserved quarterly to be paid,
and with such Covenants on the part and behalf of the said C. R. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to be parformed and kept in the said Demise, to be
inserted as are contained in the Lease whereby the said R. C. holds the same,
so that the said C. R. do upon the Sealing and Delivery of the said Lease, seal
and deliver the Counterpart thereof, as his Act and Deed unto the Lessor or
Lessors therein named.

And it is covenanted concluded and agreed by and between the said Parties to
these presents, for them their Executors and Administrators, That if any
variance, strife, difference or controvesie, shall at any time hereafter during
the said Copartnership, or at the end thereof, happen to grow, arise or be
between the said Parties to these presents, their Executors or Administrators,
or any of them, upon, touching or concerning their said Joint-trade, or any
their Buyings, Sellings, Accounts, matters or things relating thereupon, or for
or touching any Covenant, matter or thing in these presents contained, That
then and so often, they the said parties to these presents, their Executors and
Administrators, shall upon reasonable request made by either or any of them,
unto the other of them, before any Suit shall be commenced, for or touching the
same, elect, name and choose two indifferent persons to hear and determine the
same differences and matters of difference, one of which Arbitrators the said
R. C. his Executors or Administrators shall choose and name, And the other of
the said Arbitrators, the said C. R. his Executors, or Administrators shall
choose and name, And that each of the said parties, his Executors and
Administrators shall respectively stand to and abide, perform and keep such
award, order, determination and Judgment, which the said two Arbitrators shall
make and give in Writing under their Hands and Seals, unto the parties by these
presents submitting thereunto, upon and touching the said differences and
matters in difference, so that the said Award be made and given as aforesaid in
Writing, within fourteen days next after the choice and nomination of the said
Arbitrators in that behalf; And in case the said Arbitrators shall not make and
give forth their award as aforesaid, within the time before limited for the
doing thereof, then each of the said parties his Executors and Administrators
shall and will stand to, abide, perform, and keep such award, order and
umpirage, as such one person umpire to be elected, and chosen by the said
Arbitrators shall make, and give forth in writing as aforesaid, under his Hand
and Seal, upon and touching the sad differences and matters in difference
within ten days next after the end of the said fourteen days; And in case the
said Umpire shall not make and give forth as aforesaid, his said award and
umpirage within the time above limited for the doing thereof, That then, each
and every of them the said parties, his Executors and Administrators, shall and
will for his and their parts, stand to, abide, perform and keep such award,
order, determination and Judgment as the Master and Wardens of the Company of
Merchant Tailors in London, or the major part of them shall make and give forth
as aforesaid, in writing under the Hands and Seals, upon and touching the said
differences and matters in difference within one Month next after the end of
the said ten days.

Provided nevertheless, and it is covenanted, concluded and agreed by and
between the said Parties to these presents, for them their Executors and
Administrators, That if either of the said Parties shall be untrue, unjust or
unfaithful unto the other of them, in any Buyings, Sales, Receipts or Payment,
belonging to, or concerning the said Copartnership; That then or at any time
afterward upon notice of dislike given thereof, by either of them, to the
other of them the said Parties, and desire thereupon signified that the said
Copartnership shall determine, The said Copartnership and Joint trade shall
cease, determine and be dissolved, And that the like account, partition and
division shall be made between the said Parties to these presents, their
Executors and Administrators of the said Joint Stock and proceed thereof, and
shall do all other things concerning the said Joint-trade in such manner and
form, to all intents and purposes in every respect, as they are to do at the
end of the said five years; And that from and after the end and dissolution of
the said Copartnership in manner and form aforesaid, the said term and interest
granted unto the said C. R. of and in part of the said Dwelling House and Shop
in manner aforesaid, shall likewise cease, determine and be void.

In witness, etc.
A Certificate into the Exchequer, where neither the person nor any distress
can be found for levying the Tax on his Office, according to the Act of 4 s.
per Pound, 4 W. and M.
To the Right Honorable R. H. Esquire; Chancellor and Under-Treasurer of Their
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, Sir R. A. Knight of the Bath, Lord Chief Baron of
the said Court, and to the rest of the Barons there.
Suss. ss.
WE R. F. and J. M. Esquires, and N. C. T. W. W. W. R. T. G. O. and F. P. eight
of the Commissioners for putting in execution within the said County of S. an
Act of Parliament made in the 4th year of Their now Majesty's Reign, Entitled,
An Act for Granting an Aid of 4 s. in the Pound for one Year, for carrying on a
Vigorous War against France; do hereby certify unto your Lordships, That in
pursuance of the said Act we do appoint N. F. R. G. T. S. T. N. R. F. D. D. E.
C. and N. A. to be Assessors (within the City of C. in the said County of S.)
of all and every the Rates and Duties by the said Act imposed; which said
Assessors on the 28th day of February, in the year of our Lord, 1692. we did
make and return unto us a Rate and Assessment wherein was certified, That F. H.
of the City of C. aforesaid, Doctor in Divinity, did then hold a public Office
and Employment of Residentiary, and one of the Managers of the Revenue,
belonging to the Cathedral Church of C. aforesaid: By the Fees and Profits of
which Office he received yearly 100 l. the rate whereof, according to the said
Act, did amount unto 5 l. for the fourth part and first Quarterly payment in
the said Act expressed. And the said Rate and Assessment being by us approved
in further pursuance of the said Act, We did issue out Warrants and Estreats
under our Hands and Seals to T. A. J. R. W. E. R. P. and T. A. Sub-Collectors,
by us appointed for levying the said Fourth part and first Quarterly payment
aforesaid; which by the said Sub-Collectors being duly demanded, was not paid:
But on the part of the said F. H. was made unto us an Appeal, complaining, that
the said Rate was excessive. Whereupon we the said Commissioners did hear and
examine the said Matter, and upon knowledge, and deliberation thereof did
adjudge and determine, and do adjudge and determine, That the said Rate of 5 l.
for the Fourth part and first Quarterly payment aforesaid, was rightly and duly
taxed and assessed according to the said Act. And now at this day the said
Sub-Collectors have complained unto us, That the said F. H. is not found in the
said County, and that he has no Goods or Chattels there, whereby the said Five
pounds may be levied; and therefore we humbly pray, That your Lordships, (as in
the said Act is directed) will issue out Process of the said Court of
Exchequer, against the Body, Goods and Lands of the said F. H. until the Five
pounds so assessed, as aforesaid be fully and actually levied and paid to Their
Majesty's.

In witness whereof. We the said Commissioners and Sub-Collectors have hereunto
set our Hands and Seals, etc. in the fifth year of the Reign, etc.
A General Release.
KNow all men by these presents, That I F. J. of, etc. have remised, released
and quit-claimed, and by these presents do remise, release and for ever
quit-clain unto R. C. of, etc. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all
and all manner of Actions and Suits, Cause and Causes of Action, Bills, Bonds,
Writings, Obligations, Accounts, Debts, Duties, Reckonings, Sum and Sums of
Money, Controversies, Judgments, Executions, Claims and Demands whatsoever,
which I the said F. J. ever had, or which my Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them in time to come, can or may have, to, for or against
the said R. C. his, etc. for or by reason of any matter, cause or thing
whatsoever, from the beginning of the World until the day of the date hereof.

In witness, etc.
A Release of Errors in a Judgment.
BY these presents, I J. D. of, etc. in the County of, etc. Yeoman, do remise,
release and for ever quit-claim unto T. H. of D. in the said County of S. all
and all manner of Errors, Misprisions and Misentries whatsoever, in one
Judgment for 20 l. Debt, and 30 s. Costs of Suit, obtained by the said T. H.
against me the said J. D. in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster in the
Term of St. Hillary last past, and also all Writ and Writs of Error and Errors
whatsoever.

In witness, etc.
A general Release of Errors.
BE it known, etc. That I R. C of, etc. for diverse good Causes and
Considerations me hereunto moving, have remised, released and quit, claimed,
and by these presents, for me, my Heirs Executors and Administrators, do
remise, release and for ever quit-claim unto J. F. his, etc. and every of them,
all and all manner of Error and Errors, and the benefit and advantage thereof,
and all Misprisions of Error and Errors, Defects and wrongful Pleadings and
Proceedings whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered, omitted and done at any
time before the date of these presents in any Action or Actions prosecuted or
sued by the said J. F. against me the said R. C. in any Court of Record, or
otherwise; and all Error or Errors in the Judgment or Judgments thereof, so
that I the said R. C. my, etc. shall be for ever hereafter debarred and
excluded to sue forth any Writ or Writs of Error or Errors concerning the same.

In witness, etc.
A Release of Title to Lands.
TO all, etc.
Know ye, That R. C. of, etc. for diverse good Causes and Considerations him
moving, has remised, released, and for ever quit-claimed; and by these
presents, for himself and his Heirs, does fully, clearly and absolutely remise,
release and for ever quit-claim unto J. F. of, etc. in his full and peaceable
possession and Seisin, and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all such Right,
Estate, Title, Interest and Demand whatsoever, as he the said R. C. had or
ought to have, of, in, or to all, etc. and, etc. by any ways or means
whatsoever; To have and to hold all the said, etc. unto the said J. F. his
Heirs and Assigns, to the only use and behoof of the said J. F. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever; so that neither he the said R. C. nor his Heirs, nor any
other person or persons, for him or them, or in his or their names, or in the
name, right or stead of any of them, shall or will by any way or means
hereafter have, claim, challenge or demand any Estate, Right, Title or
Interest, of, in or to the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof. But from
all and every Action, Right, Estate, Title, Interest or Demand, of, in or to
the premises, or any part thereof, they and every of them shall be utterly
excluded and barred for ever by these presents. And also the said R. C. and his
Heirs, the said Manor, etc. to the said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns, to his
and their own proper use and uses, in manner and form aforesaid, against their
Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, shall and will warrant and for ever
defend by these presents, etc.

A Release of an Annuity
TO all Christian People, etc.
We R. C. and C. R. of, etc. send Greeting. Whereas J. F. of, etc. by his Deed
Indented bearing Date, etc. [recite the Grant here] for the Consideration
therein mentioned, did give and grant unto us the said R. C. and C. R. one
Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc. to be issuing and going out of all and singular
the Manors, Messuages, Lands and Tenements called A and B. within the Parish
of, etc. To have, hold, receive and enjoy all the said Annuity or yearly Rent
of, etc. to us the said R. C. and C. R. our Executors or Assigns, for and
during the Natural life of the said J. F. to be payable and paid to us the said
R. C. and C. R. our Executors or Assigns, during the Life of the said J. F. at
the Feast of, etc. and of st. Michael the Archangel, as by the said Deed it
does appear. Now know ye, That we the said R. C. and C. R. for and in
Consideration of a certain Sum of lawful Money of England to us in hand paid, at
and before the, etc. Have remised, released and for ever quit-claimed, and by
these presents, for us and either of us our and either of our Executors and
Assigns, do fully, clearly and absolutely remise, release and for ever
quit-claim unto the said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns, the said Annuity or
yearly Rent of, etc. and every part and parcel thereof; and all Rents,
arrearages of Rents, Penalties, Forfeitures and Distresses whatsoever, at any
time or times heretofore due or forfeited, by reason of the Non-payment of the
said Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc. or any part thereof; To have and to hold
the said Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc. and all the Estate, Right, Title,
Interest and demand whatsoever, of us the said R. C. and C. R. our Executors or
Assigns, in or unto the said Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc. unto the said J.
F. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, so as neither we the said R. C. and C. R. or
either of us, nor our or either of our Executors or Assigns shall, may or can
at any time hereafter, ask, claim challenge or demand any Estate Right Title or
Interest, in or to the said Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc. or any part
thereof: But thereof and therefrom shall be utterly secluded and barred by
these presents.

In witness, etc.
An Acquittance and Release of an Extent by an Administratrix.
REceived by me J. F. Widow, Administratrix of the Goods and Chattles of R. F.
Gent. deceased, of and from R. C. the Sum of, etc. of lawful Money of England,
being the Consideration Money which the said R. C. pays to me, for the
vacating and discharging of an Extent on a Statute-Staple, heretofore
acknowledged and entered into by the said R. C. unto the said R. F. and also for
the buying in and compounding of the said Extent, by virtue or color of the
said Statute; and also, for all my interest and demand in the same Statute and
Extent, of which said Sum of, etc. I do hereby acknowledge the Receipt, and by
these presents do for me, my Executors and Administrators, remise, release and
for ever quit-claim unto the said R. C. the said Statute and Extent, and all
manner of Process and Proceedings whatsoever, occasioned by reason of the said
Statute.

In witness, etc.
A Release to a Sheriff, for discharging a Rescue.
KNow all Men by these presents, That I J. F. of, etc. have remised, released
and quitclaimed, and by these presents do remise, release and quit claim unto
R. R. Esquire; now Sheriff of the said County of S. all and all manner of Actions,
Suits, Troubles and Encumbrances which I have, may, might or ought to have
against him, for or by reason of the discharging or setting at liberty of R. C.
of, etc. in the said County Yeoman, being arrested and imprisoned on a Ca. sa.
out of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster for 60 l. Debt, and 5 s. Costs,
at my Suit, Returnable a die Paschae in quindecim dies last past.

In witness, etc.
The like in a better form.
TO G. L. Esquire; Sheriff of the County of S. and to the Keeper of the Common Gaol
within the said County, J. L. of, etc.
sends Greeting.
Whereas T. D. of, etc. is now in your Custody by virtue of a Writ of Capias ad
satisfaciendum, issued out of the Common Pleas at Westminster at the Suit of me
the said J. for certain damages in the said Writ mentioned; of which Damages I
have received satisfaction. Now therefore these are to will and authorize you
and either of you, That you immediately discharge and release the said T. D. of
and from the Execution aforesaid, and of and from all Writs and Process
whatsoever, at my Suit, and of and from all Restraint and Imprisonment, by
occasion of any Execution, Writ or Process heretofore charged against him by me
the said J. and for so doing this shall be your Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal the, etc. day of, etc. in the year, etc.
Mutual General Releases by Indenture.
THis Indenture, made, etc. Between A. B. of the one part, and C. D. of the
other part Witnesses, That the said A. B. has remised, released and for ever
quit-claimed, and by these presents does remise, release, and for ever,
quit-claim unto the said C. D. all Actions and Causes of Actions, Trespasses,
Obligations, Accounts, Promises, Debts, Judgments, Executions, Damages, Claims
and Demands whatsoever, from the beginning of the World, unto the day of the
date of these presents. And this Indenture further witnesses, That the said C.
D. has remised, released and for ever quit-claimed, and by these presents does
remise, release and for ever quit-claim unto the said A. B. all Actions and
causes of Actions, Trespasses, Obligations Accounts, Promises, Debts,
Judgments, Executions, Damages, Claims and Demands whatsoever, from the
beginning of the World unto the day of the date of these presents.

In witness, etc.
A short Release of the Equity of Redemption in a Term for years, mortgaged.
BY these presents, I D. C. for diverse good Causes and Considerations me
hereunto moving, do grant, remise release and for ever quitclaim unto J. P. his
Executors, Administrator, and Assigns, all that Message, etc. and all the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Term and Terms for years, Possession,
Reversion, Redemption, Benefit of Redemption, Equity, Claim and Demand
whatsoever, of me the said D. C. of, in or to the Mesuage, etc. So as neither I
the said D. C. nor my Executors, Administrators or Assigns, any Estate, Right,
Title, Interest, Term or Terms, for years, Possession, Reversion, Redemption,
Equity, Claim or Demand, of, in or to the same, shall or may from henceforth
claim or challenge. But of and from all Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Term
and Terms for years, Possession, Reversion, Redemption, Claim and Demand
whatsoever, of, in and to the same Premises, shall and will for ever hereafter
be secluded and debarred by these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney or Proxy, appointing a Proctor in an Ecclesiastical Court
to procure a Guardian to be appointed for an Infant, to sue an Adminstrator
there for a Dividend.
KNow all men by these presents, That I J. A. the Natural and Lawful Son, and
next of kin of E. A. deceased, while he lived the Natural and Lawful Kinsman,
of J.A. late of B. in the County of S. also intestate, deceased without any
Will by him made, for diverse good Causes and Considerations me hereunto
especially moving, being in my minority, viz. abut the age of 14 years, and
under the age of 21 years, and so incapable in my own name and person to sue,
prosecute or call W. W. Administrator of the Goods, Chattels and Credits of J.
A. late of B. in the County of S. deceased, to bring in and exhibit a true,
full, just and perfect Inventory, and an Account of all the Goods, Chattels and
Credits of the said J. A. deceased, which since his death have come to his
hands, possession or knowledge, and to make a distribution thereof according to
the Tenor of the Statute for settling of Intestatets Estates, or any other
Statute or Act of Parliament in that behalf made and provided. Therefore by
these Presents I do constitute and appoint A. B. Notary Public, one of the
Procurators General of the Consistory Court of C. my true, certain and lawful
Procurator, for me and in my name, place and stead to appear before the
worshipful T. B. Doctor of Laws, Vicar General to the Reverend Father in God R.
by Divine Permission Lord Bishop of C. or his lawful Surrogate, or any other
competent Judge in that behalf, and for me and in my name, place and stead, to
desire and procure J. A. of London Merchan-Taylor, to be assigned my Curator in
order to call the said W. W. to exhibit a true, perfect and particular
Inventory and Account of all the Goods, Chattels and Credits of the said J. A.
which since his death, as Administrator thereof, have come to his hands,
possession or knowledge, by virtue of his Oath, and to see and hear a
distribution thereof made persuant to the Act of Parliament for settling of
Intestates Estates, or any other Act of Parliament in that behalf made or
provided, and to all other effects and purposes in Law, and generally to do and
perform all other matters necessary in and about the premises.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal the 11th day of
February Anno Dom. 1699. Juxta, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to surrender Copyhold-lands to the use of a Will.
BY these presents I S. C. of the Middle Temple London, Gent. Son and Heir of
J. C. Clerk do make, ordain and appoint T. C. of the City of C. in the County
of S. and J. L. of the same City Gent. my true and lawful Attorneys, jointly
and severally for me and in my name, stead and place, to surrender into the
hands of the Lord of the Manor of B. in the said County of S. according to the
custom of the said Manor, all and singular the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with the appurtenances of me the said S. C. within the Manor
aforesaid; and all such Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments with the
appurtenances holden by Copy of Court Roll of the Manor aforesaid, whereof the
said J. C. my Father lately died seized, to the use and behoof of such person
and persons, and for such Estate and Estates as I the said S. C. by my last
Will and Testament in writing shall direct and appoint.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal the 19th day of
February, in the year of Our Lord 1699.
A Letter of Attorney to enter on Land, and to sue for the recovery thereof, or
compound.
BY these presents, I E. C. etc. do nominate, constitute, ordain and appoint C.
A. of L. Gent. my true and lawful Attorney, for me and in my name, stead and
Place, to enter into and take possession of all that Message, etc. and also
for me and in my name to sue forth and prosecute against any person or persons
whatsoever, any Writ or Writs, Action or Actions as to him shall seem meet, for
the recovering or obtaining the possession or seisin of the Premises or any
part thereof. And further, to do and execute all and every such Act and thing
tending to the recovery of my Estate and Right in the said Message and Lands
or any part thereof. And further, I do hereby give and grant unto my said
Attorney full and whole Power and Authority for me, and in my name, stead and
place, to make and conclude with any person or persons any agreement whatsoever
touching the Premises, in as full and ample manner as I my self could do in my
own person And I will ratify and comfirm whatsoever my said Attorney shall
lawfully do in pursuance of these presents.

In witness, etc.
To N. C. W. P. and J. L. Gent. Attorneys of his Majesty's Court of Common
pleas at Westminster, I T. S. send greeting.
THese are to will and authorize you, or any one of you to appear for me the
said T. S. the next Michaelmas Term in the Court aforesaid, at the suit of J.
V. and of the same Term to confess one Judgment for 40 l. debt besides costs of
suit, in any Action of Debt brought or to be brought by the said J. V. against
me the said T.S. upon one Obligation, bearing date the 10th day of March, in
the fourth year of the Reign of our Lord, etc. Whereby I the said T. S. did
become bound unto the said J. V. in the penal sum of 80 l. with condition to be
void upon payment of 40 l. at a day long since past; and for so doing this
shall be your and every of your sufficient Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal the 10th day of August, in the sixth year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord, etc.
To N. C. W. P. and J. L. Gent. Attorneys of their Majesty's Court of Common
Pleas at Westminster, I D. S. send greeting.
THese are to will and authorize you, or any of you to appear for me the said
J. F. the next Michaelmas Term in the Court aforesaid, at the suit of R. C. to
confess one Judgment for 20 l. debt, besides costs of Suit in any Action of
Debt by him brought or to be brought against me the said J. F. and for so doing
this shall be your Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal the 20th day of August, in the Year of Our Lord,
1699.
A Letter of Attorney to appoint a Steward and Bailiff of a Manor to keep
Courts.
KNow all men by these presents, That we R. C. and C. R. of, etc. do hereby
authorize, constitute and appoint A. B. of, etc. our lawful Deputy and
Attorney, for us, and in our names to appoint a Steward and Bailiff of and for
our Manor of C. and by himself or his sufficient Deputy, to and for our use to
keep Courts within the said Manor, and to give admittance upon alienation or
death, and to take and receive Atturnments of all and every the Tenants
thereof. And to and for our use to assess Fines upon such admittances, and for
us and in our names and for our use to receive the said Fines: And also all
such Heriots as shall be due upon the death or alienation of any Tenant or
Tenants: And likewise to receive all Rents and Arrearages of Rent, and also all
Amercements, Perquisites and Profits that shall arise and grow due to us, for
out of the said Court. And we do also hereby authorize the said A. B. to
gather, take up and seize to our use all Wayfs, Strays, Deodands, Outlaws and
Felons Goods which shall happen to arise, be due or fall within the said
Manor.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to take possession of Land newly purchased.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I R. C. of, etc. have made, ordained,
constituted, authorized and appointed, and by these presents, do make, ordain,
constitute, authorize, appoint, and in my stead and place put C. R. of, etc. my
true, sufficient and lawful Attorney for me, and in my name and to my use, to
take and receive peaceable and quiet possession and seizin of and in all that
Message or Tenement, and all and singular the Lands, etc. with the
appurtenances, situate, lying and being in, etc. lately bargained and sold by
F. J. unto me the said R. C. And the same possession so had and taken, to
detain and keep to the only use and behoof of me the said R. C. my Heirs and
Assigns, according to the tenor and true meaning of the Indenture, whereby the
said Premises are conveyed unto me, Ratifying, allowing and confirming all and
whatsoever my said Attorney shall do or cause to be done in or about the
Premises by these Presents.

It witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney from two Executors of a Bond sued to a Judgment.
KNow all men by these Presents, etc. That we R. C. and C. R. Gent. Executors
of the last Will and Testament of A. B. late of, etc. in the County of S. Esquire;
deceased have made, constituted, ordained, and in our places and steads have
put, and by these presents do make, ordain and put in our places and steads,
our wellbeloved Friend J. F. of etc. our true and lawful Attorney for us, and
in our names, but to his own use and behoof, to ask, demand, receive and take
of F. J. of, etc. the sum of 15 l. of lawful Moneys of England, due and payable
to the said A. B. in his life time by virtue of one Obligation, bearing date,
etc. wherein the said F. J. is, and stands bound to the said A. B. in the
penal sum of One Hundred Pounds, conditioned for the payment of the aforesaid
Sum of fifty pounds, as by the said Obligation and Condition does more fully
appear: And whereas the said A. B. in his life time did obtain one Judgment
upon the said Bond or Obligation for the said Sum of One Hundred Pounds besides
costs of Suit, Know ye further, That we the said R. C. and C. R. have
authorized and appointed, and by these presents do authorize and appoint the
said J. F. in our names, but to his own use, to sue and take out any Execution
or Executions, or other Process upon the said Judgment against the said F. J.
his Heirs Executors or Administrators or any of them, or against his, their or
any of their Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels, and with him, them or any of
them to compound or agree at his will and pleasure for the same, and the
benefit and profit thereof to his own use to take, and him the the said F. J.
to sue arrest, implead and imprison, and out of Prison to discharge and release
at his will and pleasure; and all and every other thing and things which in or
about the obtaining and getting of the said debt and damages, or any part or
parcel thereof, shall be needful and necessary to be done, to execute, and do
in as large, ample and beneficial manner and form, to all intents and purposes
as we the said R. C. and C. R. may, can, might, could, should, or ought to do
by virtue, force or reason of the said recited Obligation or the Condition
thereof, or by virtue, force or reason of the said Judgment thereupon had.

In witness whereof we have hereunto set our Hands and Seals this 10th day of
December, etc.
A Letter of Attorney or Assignment of a man's whole Estate, in consideration
of several Debts and Engagements.
TO all, to whom these presents shall come I. R. C. of, etc.
send greeting.
Whereas I am indebted unto J. F. in the Sum of 50 l. of lawful Moneys of
England. And the said J. F. and one F. J. of, etc. stand jointly and severally
engaged for me the said R. C. in several Bonds or Obligations for several Sums
of Money, Now know ye, That I the said R. C. for and toward the payment and
satisfaction of the said Moneys, and for diverse other good considerations me
thereunto moving, have granted, assigned, bargained and sold, and by these
presents do freely and absolutely grant, assign, bargain and sell unto the said
J. F. and F. J. All and all manner of Goods, Chattels, Debts, Moneys and all
other things of me the said R. C. whatsoever, as well real as personal, of what
kind, nature or quality soever; To have and to hold the same, and every part
and parcel thereof unto them the said J. F. and F. J. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns for ever, to the only proper use of them the said J.
F. and F. J. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns for ever in, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive Money which is not yet become due upon a Bond.
TO all Christian People to whom this present writing shall come I R. C. of C.
in the County of S.
send greeting,
Whereas J. V. of, etc and V. J. of, etc. by their Obligation bearing date.
the, etc. last past are and stand bound unto the said R. C. in the Sum of, etc.
with Condition for the payment of, etc. on the, etc. now next coming, as by the
said Obligation it does more fully appear, Now know ye that I the said R. C.
have hereby, made, ordained, constituted and authorized my loving friend J. F.
of, etc. to be my lawful Attorney and Assignee for me, and in my name to demand
and receive the said Sum of, etc. at the time limited for the payment of the
same, And if the same shall not be then paid, to sue for and recover the Sum
of, etc. being the penalty of the said Obligation, And I the said R. C. shall
and will allow and maintain all and every Action, Plea and Process which he the
said J. F. shall in my name, bring or sue for the obtaining and recovery
thereof,

In witness whereof I have hereunto sent my hand and Seal this tenth day of
March in the first year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King William, etc.
Annoque Dom. etc.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of (...)
A General Letter of Attorney.
TO all, etc. I R. C. etc.
send greeting,
Know ye that I the said R. C. for diverse good reasons and considerations me
hereunto moving have appointed, constituted and authorized, and in my stead and
place deputed, and by these presents do appoint, constitute and authorize, and
in my stead and place depute my loving Friend J. F. to be my true and lawful
Attorney, irrevocable, for me, and in my name, and to my own proper use and
behoof to ask, demand and require, sue for, recover and receive all such Debts,
Duties, Sum and Sums of Money, Rents, yearly Payments, Merchandises, Goods,
Chattels, Legacies and Moneys due or to be due on any Bill or Bills of Exchange
or otherwise, and all other demands whatsoever, which now are or hereafter
shall be due, payable or any way belonging unto me, by or from any Person or
Persons or Bodies Corporate or Politic whatsoever or howsoever; And for
default of payment of any Rent or Rents which now is, or hereafter may become
due unto me, to enter into all or any of my Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments or any of them or any part thereof, and to distrain for the same
Rent or Rents, and for default of payment thereof to enter in the name of the
whole, and possession thereof to take, and to make, seal and deliver in my name
any Lease or Leases of Ejectment thereupon for any Term or number of years as
in such case is usual, and to use all lawful ways and means for recovery of the
Premises: And to pay any Sum or Sums of Money lawfully due from me to any
person or persons whatsoever, And to contract for, let, set, bargain and sell
all or any of my Messuages and Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, Goods or
Cattels whatsoever, for Term of years or otherwise as he shall think fit: And
to sue, implead, or make answer, prosecute or defend in any Court, of Law or
Equity, and before any Judges or Justices, or other person or persons in any
Suit, Action, Matter or Cause with me, for me, or against me as the Case shall
require: And to deal and intermeddle in any Action, Suits, Affairs and Business
any way concerning me, as my Factor or Agent, or otherwise, Giving and granting
by these presents to my said Attorney, my full and lawful Power and Authority,
in the Execution and performance of all and singular the Premises, and to make
any Composition or Agreement, for or concerning the Premises, And to make,
seal and deliver any Discharge or Acquittance for me, and in my name as shall
be requisite; And Attorney or Attorneys under him to make, and at his pleasure
to revoke, and generally to do, determine and execute all and every such
further, and other lawful and reasonable Act and Acts Device and Devices
whatsoever, which in and about the Premises shall to my said Attorney seem fit
to be done, as fully and amply as I my self might or could do if personally
present, ratifying, allowing and confirming whatsoever my said Attorney shall
lawfully do, or cause to be done in my name by force hereof.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to enter on Land and deliver a Lease.
KNow all Men, etc. That I R. C. of, etc. have made, ordained, constituted and
appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute and appoint J. F.
of, etc. my true and lawful Attorney for me, and in my stead to enter and come
in my name into and upon the Farm and Lands of T. in the P. of, etc. in the
County of, etc. now in the Tenure or Occupation of J. U. or his Assigns, and
upon any part thereof, then and there for me, and in my name and stead to
deliver as my Act and Deed unto R. R. of, etc. or to his Assigns one Indenture
which I have already Sealed bearing date, etc. made between me the said R. C.
of the one part, and the said R. R. of the other part, purporting a Lease of
the said Farm and Lands unto the said R. R. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, for the Term of ten years next ensuing, as in and by the said
Indenture more at large appears; which Indenture after the same shall be so
delivered by my said Attorney, I the said R. C. do promise by these presents,
shall be as effectual a Deed in Law, to all intents and purposes, as if I the
said R. C. had sealed and delivered the same then and there in person. In, etc.

Note, Such Letter of Attorney may be better put in the same Lease or Deed, in
form as follows.

And this Indenture further witnesses, that the said R. C. for the better
execution of these presents, does hereby nominate, constitute, ordain and
appoint J. F. of, etc. his true and lawful Attorney, for him, and in his name,
stead and place to enter into and upon the said Message, etc. and thereof to
take full possession, and seizin, and such possession and seizin, so had and
taken to deliver unto the said R. R. in and upon the said Premises this
present Indenture as the Act and Deed of the said R. C. so that this Indenture
may be duly executed, and the said R. R. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns may be possessed of the said Premises, and may enjoy the same
according to the form and effect of this Indenture; And further to do and
execute all and every other matter and thing for the better and more perfect
execution of these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to take Possession of a Message, extended by the Sheriff
upon a Statute.
TO all etc. I R. C. of, etc.
send greeting,
Know ye that I the said R. C. have made, ordained, constituted and appointed,
and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute and appoint J. F. and A B. or
either of them my true and lawful Attorneys or Attorney, jointly or severally
for me, and in my name to take and receive of the now Sheriff of the County of
S. peaceable and quiet Possession, as well of and in one capital Message, etc.
as of and in, etc. all and singular which said Lands and Premises were lately
belonging unto R. R. Gent. and which the said Sheriff has Extended by virtue
of a Writ of Extent to him directed on a Statute for 200 l. acknowledged and
entered into by the said R. R. unto me the said R. C. giving and by these
presents granting unto my said Attorneys, or either of them, full Power and
Authority for me, and in my name to do, execute and accomplish all and
whatsoever shall be needful and necessary to be done, in or about the Premises
by these presents: And I shall and will ratify, allow and confirm all, and
whatsoever my said Attorneys or either of them shall do, or cause to be done in
or about the Premises by these presents, as if I my self were then and there
presonally present.

In witness, etc.
A General Letter of Attorney to receive Debts.
KNow all men, etc. That I R. C. of, etc. have constituted and authorized, and
in my stead and place by these presents put J. F. of, etc. to be my true and
lawful Attorney for me, and in my name, and to my use to ask, sue for, levy and
receive of J. A. of, etc. all and every such Debts and Sums of Money, which are
now due unto me from any person or persons, or any way howsoever, giving and
granting unto my said Attorney my full Power and Authority in and about the
Premises, And on the receipt of any such Debt or Sums of Money, Acquittances or
other discharges for me and in my name to make seal and deliver, and all and
every such Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Device and Devices in the Law, for
the recovery of all and every such Debts or Sums of Money as aforesaid for me
and in my name to do, execute and perform as fully, largely and amply in every
respect, to all intents, as I my self might or could do if personally present,
ratifying, allowing and confirming whatsoever my said Attorney shall lawfully
do, in or about the Execution of the Premises, by virtue of these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Revocation of a Letter of Attorney.
TO all, etc. I R. C. of, etc.

Whereas I the said R. C. on trust and confidence which I had and did place in
P. P. of, etc. did by my Letter of Attorney constitute and make the said P. P.
my Attorney, for recovery of all Debts and Sums of Money whatsoever due to me
the said R. C. as by the said Letter of Attorney more fully appears, Now know
ye that I the said R. C. for that the said P. P. has by color of the said
Authority to him given, behaved himself greatly to my hindrance, contrary to
the trust and confidence I reposed in him, have revoked, countermanded and made
void, and be these presents do revoke, countermand and make void the said
Letter of Attorney, and all power and Authority thereby given to the said P. P.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney of several Sums of Money due from one persons.
KNow all men by these presents, that I R. C. of, etc. for diverse good and
valuable considerations m hereunto moving, have made, constituted and ordained,
And do by these presents make, constitute and ordain J. F. of, etc. my true and
lawful Attorney in my name, but to the only proper use of him the said J. F.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to demand and receive all such Sum
and Sums of Money as are due or owing to me from A. B. of, etc. any manner of
way howsoever, And for default of payment to Sue, Arrest, Attach, Implead and
Imprison him the said A. B. and his Body, Goods and Chattels in Execution to
take, and out of Execution to deliver and discharge, on satisfaction,
composition or otherwise, at the will and pleasure of my said Attorney;
Acquittances or other discharges in my name to Seal and Deliver; Attorney or
Attorneys one or more under him the said J. F. to make and substitute or
revoke; And generally to do, execute, prosecute and determine all and every
other Act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, which in and about the
Premises shall be needful and expedient, as fully and effectually, and in as
large and ample manner, to all intents and purposes as I the said R. C. might
or could do, without any account thereof to be given to me, my Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, And whatsoever my said Attorney shall do, in, about
or concerning the Premises, I do by these presents, ratify, confirm and
allow.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to Sue an Action of Covenant.
TO all Christian People, etc. I R. C. of, etc. Executor of C. R. etc.
send greeting,
Whereas in one Indenture bearing date, etc. made between the said C. R. by the
name of, etc. of the one part, and J. F. of, etc. of the other part, there are
diverse Covenants contained on the part and behalf of the said J. F. his
Executors and Administrators to be kept and observed, touching a Lease granted
to the said C. R. by A. Lord R. of of a certain Message situate, etc. and
covenanted to be transferred over by the said C. R. to the said J. E. as by the
said Indenture it does more at large appear, Now Know ye that I the said R. C.
for diverse Good causes and considerations me moving and especially for that it
appears by the said Indenture, that the name of the said C. R. was only used
in trust for the benefit of R. F. Wife of the said J. F. and their Issue, have
made, ordained, constituted, and in my stead and place, put and appointed my
beloved Friend F. J. of etc. to be my true and lawful Attorney, for me, and in
my name to Sue, Implead and Prosecute the said J. F. his Executors or
Adminstrators, for or upon the breach or nonperformance of all, or any the
Covenants in the said Indenture contained; And to have, receive and take to,
and for the only use and benefit of him the said F. J. his, etc. all such Sum
and Sums of Money, profit, commodity and advantage whatsoever, which shall be
recovered or gotten by means of any such Suit, Action or proceeding concerning
the same; And to do, execute, and perform all and every other Act and Acts,
thing and things whatsoever, which shall be needful and necessary to be done in
and about the Premises, in as large and ample manner and form to all intents
and purposes, as I my self might or could do, And all such lawful Actions and
Suits, as the said F. J. shall bring or sue concerning the premises, against
the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, I promise to allow,
maintain, justify and confirm by these presents,

In Witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to demand Rent, and on default of payment to re-enter
according to a Proviso for such re-entry contained in the Lease.
KNow all Men by these presents, that I F. B. of the Parish of St. P. in the
County of S. Widow, Executrix of the Testament of A. B. late of M. N. in the
County of D. Clerk, have made constituted and appointed, and by these presents,
do make constitute and appoint, R. C. of S. in the Isle of P. in the said
County of D. Gent. my true and lawful Attorney, for me and in my name, stead
and place, on the Eight and Twentieth day next after the Feast of the
Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary next coming, at the Capital Message,
Mansion or dwelling House commonly called or known by the names or name of
Forthill, otherwise Forsell, or Furzhill, situate lying and being within the
Parish of C. or C. H. in the said County of D. to demand and receive of and
from J. L. of D. in the said County of D. Bookseller R. S. of D. aforesaid
Woollendraper, and J. S. of B. in the said County of D. Clerk, Twenty pounds of
lawful Money of England, which will become due unto me the said F. from the
said J. L. R. and J. S. at the said Feast of the Annunciation of the Blessed
Virgin Mary next coming, for one half Years Rent for the said Mussuage, Mansion
or dwelling House, and diverse Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances
thereunto belonging, which by one Indenture of Lease, bearing date the
Twentieth day of February, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand six hundred
fifty five, were by the said A. B. demised unto the said I L. R. and J. S. for
a certain Term of Years yet unexpired; And for default of payment of the said
Twenty pounds, I give and grant unto my said Attorney, full power and Authority
to enter into and upon the said Message, Mansion House and premises, by the
before mentioned Indenture of Lease demised, and thereof for me and in my name
stead and place to take Possession, to the intent the said Indenture of Lease
may become void, according to a certain Proviso in the said Indenture
contained; And further to do and perform all things requisite and necessary to
be done in and about the execution of these presents, according to the true
intent and meaning thereof.

In Witness, etc.
The like Letter of Attorney from a Corporation.
TEnore presentium Nos C. S. Sacre Theology Professor Decanus Ecclesie
Cathedralis Sancte Trinitatis Cicest' and ejusde^ Eccie Caplm^ fecimus
constituimus and ordinavimus dicm^ nobis in Xp^o B. C. Generosum nostrum
Cap^larem nostrum verum and legitimum Attorn^ pro nobis and vice and nomine
nostris a die Sci^ Michaelis ult^ preterit^ in unum mensem scit vicesimo
septimo die Octobris instan^ in Claustro Australi Eccie Catlis predict^ ad
petend demandand and recipiend de W. S. etc. tres libras duodecim solidos and
sex dena' qui fue' nobis debit^ per predict^ W. S. de reddit^ pro dimid unius
anni finit^ ad Festum Sci^ Micis Archi^ predict^ pro Rectoria de F. cum pertin^
and aliis in Com^ S. que per quandam Indenturam geren^ dat^ quarto die Augusti
Anno Regni Dn^i Caroli primi nuper Regis Anglie etc. primo fuerunt per Decanum
and Capu^ Eccie Catis predict^ dimis^ prefat^ W. S. Et pro defectu solutionis
predictarum trium librarum duodecim solidorum and sex denariorum damus and
concedimus dicto Attorn^ nostro plenam potestatem and authoritatem nostram ad
intrand in and super dict^ Rectoria and premissis predictis and de eisdem pro
nobis and vice and nomine nostris capere possessionem ea intention quoth
Indentura predict^ foret vacua scdm^ formam cujusdam provis. sive conditionis
in eadem Indentura content^ Necnon ad faciend exequend and expediend omnia alia
and singula que necessaria fue' aut opportuna in vel circa executionem
presentium scdm^ tenorem and veram intentionem earundem

In cujus rei testimoniu^ etc.
The like Letter of Attorney, where two several Rents are reserved on the Lease.
TEnore presentiu^ Nos C. S. Sacre Theology Professor Decanus Eccie Catis Sce^
Trinitatis Cicestr' and ejusdem Eccie Capm^ faciamus constituimus and ordinamus
dilcm^ nobis in Xp^o N. C. Gen^ Cicum nostrum Caparem nostrum verum and
legittimum Attorn^ pro nobis and vice and nomine nostris super vicesimo die
prox. ventur' post Festum Natalis Salvatoris nostri Christi ult^ preterit^ in
Porticu Occidentali Eccie Catis predict^ ad petend demandand and recipiendd de
W. W. Executoribus Administratoribus sive Assign^ suis sex solidos qui fuer'
nobis debit^ de reddit^ pro dimid unius anni finit^ ad predict^ Festum Natalis
Salvatoris nostri Christi pro uno Mesuagio sive Tenemento cum Gardino adinde
adjacen^ situat^ and existen^ ex Occidentali Latere Borealis Pallant^ infra
Civitat^ Cicestr' in Com^ S. and pro uno Gardino jacen^ in Orientali Pallant^
infra eandem Civitatem in quodam loco ib^m vocat^ Sickless (videt) pro predict^
Mesuagio and Gardino adinde adjacen^ quinque solidos and pro predict^ Gardino
jacen^ in Sickless predict^ unum solidum que quidem Mesuagium and Gardinum per
quandam Indenturam geren^ dat^ ultimo die Ianuarii Anno Regni Dn^i Caroli
secundi nuper Regis Anglie etc. vicesimo fuerunt per Decanum and Capum Eccie
Catis predict^ dimiss^ prefat^ W. W. and pro defectu solutionis predictarum
seperalium summarum denar' respective damus and concedimus dict^ Attorn^ nostro
plenam potestatem and authoritatem nostram ad intrand in and super Tenementa
predict^ respective and de eisdem respective pro nobis and vice and nomine
nostris capere possessionem ea intention quoth Indentura predicta foret vacua
secundum formam cujusdam provis^ sive Conditionis in eadem Indentura content^
Necnon ad faciend and exequend and expediend omnia alia and singula que
necessaria sunt aut opportuna in vel circa executionem presentium secundum
tenorem and veram intentionem earundem

In cujus rei testimonium etc.
A fit Indorsment to be made on such Letter of Attorney, for a Memorial of the
Execution thereof.
14 Ianuarii Anno Domini 1682.
Ante Occasum Solis and dum satis fuit lucis ad pecunias numerand in Porticu
Occidentali Eccie Catlis Sce^ Trinitatis Cicestr' ego N. C. vigore istius
scripti demand^vi seperales reddit^ in eode scripto mentionat^ secundum forma^
and effectum scripti illius and ib^m sic continue demandavi quousque propter
appropinquantem noctem nummos numerare aut distinguere non potui Duran^ quo
quidem tempore ad solvend reddit^ predictos seu eorum alterum nemo venit nec
solvit seu solvere obtulit quapropter postea scit decimo quinto die Ianuarii
Anno Dom^ 1682. secundum tenorem scripti predict^ ego idem N. vice and nomine
Decani and Capi in scripto isto nominat^ intravi tam in and super Mesuagium and
Gardinum in Boreali Pallanc quam Gardinu^ in Orientali Pallanc in eodem scripto
mencionat^ and de eisdem cepi possessionem ad intentionem in scripto predict^
specisicat^.

Note, Because the Law does not favor Forfeitures, and a Proviso of Re-entry
must be prosecuted strictly, it is advisable, that the Attorney, when the Rent
is by him demanded, holding the Letter of Attorney in his hand, to avoid all
doubtfulness of the form and manner of the Demand, do cause it to be written
ready before his Demand; and then speak it verbatim, thus,

By virtue of this Letter of Attorney to me made by the Dean and Chapter of the
Cathedral Church of the Holy Trinity of C. in their name and for their use, I
do demand of W. W. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, five shillings
which were due unto the said Dean and Chapter at Christmas last for half a
years Rent, for one Mesuage, etc. and also one shilling for half a years Rent
due at Christmas last, for one Garden, etc. which Message and Garden, by
Indenture of Lease, dated, etc. were demised by the said Dean and Chapter to
the said W. W. Underneath may be subscribed a Memorial of it under the Hands of
the Attorney and Witnesses present, thus:

14 January 1682. In the West Porch of the Cathedral Church abovementioned N.
C. did make such Demand as above, before night, and while it was light enough
to tell so much Money, and continued there so demanding until it was so dark as
that Money could not be distinguished, and had all that time in his hand such
Letter of Attorney as abovementioned; but none offered to pay the Rent
abovementioned.

Afterward, to wit, the (...) day of (...) 1682. the said N. C. in the name
and stead of the said Dean and Chapter did enter into the said Message, etc.
And thereof did take possession to the intent the said Lease should determine
and be void.

A Letter of Attorney to take Admittance to Copyhold Lands, and after
Admittance to surrender.
TO all Christian People to whom these Presents shall come, I A. T. Gent. Cousin
and Heir of L. T. Doctor in Divinity, to wit, the Son of R. T. Gent. who was
the Brother of the said L.
send Greeting.
Whereas R. C. and E. his Wife, on the, etc. which was in the year of our Lord,
etc. did surrender into the hands of the Lord of the Manor of B. in the County
of S. one Close of Land called Breeches, alias, Newels, containing by
Estimation Ten Acres (being parcel of one Yard of Bordland, called
Fairmanners;) and one other Close of Land called Breeches, containing by
estimation Six Acres; and one Close of Land called Downcroft, containing by
estimation Five acres, lying in W. in the said County and holden by Copy of
Court-Roll of the said Manor, by the yearly Rent of 7 s. 2 d. to the use and
behoof of the said L. T. and of his Heirs for ever, according to the Custom of
the Manor aforesaid, upon a Condition for making void thereof, if the said R.
C. and E. his Wife should pay unto the said L. T. 106 l. at several days long
since past. And whereas the said Surrender was made unto the said L. T. in
Trust, for the Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral Church of, etc. and the Moneys
thereupon lent were the proper Moneys of the said Dean and Chapter, and the
Condition of the said Surrender is not yet performed. Now know ye, That I the
said A. T. in discharge and performance of the Trust in the said L. reposed, as
aforesaid, at the request and by the direction of the said Dean and Chapter, do
by these presents make, authorize, appoint and put N. C. of the City of, etc.
in the County aforesaid, Gent. my true and lawful Attorney, for me and in my
name, stead and place, and to my use, to receive, have and take admittance of
and from the Lord of the Manor of B. aforesaid, or his Steward of his Court
there, of, in and to the said several Closes of Land and Premises
beforementioned, with the appurtenances, according to the Custom of the Manor
aforesaid. And at any time after such admittance so had and taken, to surrender
into the hands of the Lord of the said Manor, all the said several Closes of
Land and Premises, with the appurtenances, to the use and behoof of such person
or persons, and their Heirs, as the said Dean and Chapter shall appoint. And
further, to do and execute all and every act and thing necessary or expedient
to be done, in or about such Admittance and Surrender, as aforesaid, as fully
and amply as I the said A. T. might or could do in my own person.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to traverse an Indictment, and enter into Recognizance to
Prosecute.
BY these presents, I G. S. of the City of C. in the County of S. Merchant, do
make, appoint and put N. C. Gent. my Attorney, for me and in my name and stead
to appear before the Judges of Assize and General Jail-deliver, at the next
Assizes to beholden for the County of S. And to traverse and plead, That Iam
not guilty of the Riot, Rout or Unlawful Assembly, whereof before the said
Judges I am Indicted. And further, for me, and on my behalf, to enter into
Recognizance for my appearance at the following Assizes, to prosecute such
Traverse with effect; and I the said G. S. do hereby covenant with the said N.
C. That I will appear at the next Summer Assizes to be holden for the said
County, and prosecute such Traverse (as aforesaid) with effect; and discharge
and save harmless the said N. C. from such Recognizance on my behalf to be
entered into, as aforesaid.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney for appearance before a Judge, and submitting to an
Indictment for a forceable Entry.
KNow all Men by these Presents, That I S. S. of C. in the County of S. Gent.
do hereby nominate, constitute and appoint N. C. Gent. my true and lawful
Attorney, for me and in my name, stead and place, before any competent Judge in
this behalf, or in any Court of our Lord the King, to appear, and under
Protestation, that I am not guilty; and because I will not plead with our said
Lord the King, to submit to the Grace of our said Lord the King, or of such
Court, upon one Indictment against me for a forceable Entry into a Message,
with the Appurtenances in C. aforesaid, or the Parish of, etc. in the said
County, or any other Indictment or Presentment whatsoever. And further, to do
and perform all and every act and thing necessary to be done in or about the
Premises; and I will allow and hold for sure and good whatsoever my said
Attorney shall do in the Premises, as fully and absolutely as done by me in my
own person.

In witness, etc.
Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of (...)
An Obligation from One to One for payment of Money.
NOverint universi per presents me B. R. de D. in Com^ S. Generosum teneri and
firmiter obligari S. M. de N. in Com^ predict^ Yeom^ in viginti libris bone and
legalis Monete Anglie solvend eidem S. M. aut suo certo Attorn^ Executor'
Administrator' vel Assign^ suis Ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter
faciend obligo me Heredes Executores and Administratores meos firmiter per
presents sigillo meo sigillat^ dat^ decimo die Martii Anno Regni Domini
Gulielmi tertii Dei Gratia Anglie Scotie Francie and Hibernie Regis Fidei
Defens^ etc. undecimo Annoque Dom^ 1699.

The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bound B. R. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns do or shall well and truly pay or cause to
be paid unto the said S. M. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the Sum
of Ten Pounds of lawful Money of England, on or before the tenth day of June
next ensuing the date hereof, then this Obligation shall be void, otherwise to
remain in full force.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of (...)



An Obligation from Two to One, for payment of Money on Demand.
NOverint universi per presents nos C. A. de B. in Com^ S. Gen^ and R. C. de
C. in Com^ predict^ Yeom^ teneri and firmiter Obligari I. F. Armiger' in
ducentis libris bone and legalis Monete Anglie solvend eidem I. F. aut suo
certo Attorn^ Executor' Adminitor' vel Assign^ suis Ad quam quidem solutionem
been and fideliter faciend obligamus nos and utrumque nostrum conjuctim and
divisim Heredes Executores and Adnistratores nostros firmiter per presents
sigillis nostris sigillat^ Dat^ etc.

The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bound C. A. and R.
C. or either of them, their or either of their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, do and shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said J.
E. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred Pounds of
lawful Money of England on demand, then this Obligation shall be void, otherwise
to continue in full force.



An Obligation from One to Two, with Condition for payment of Money at two
several days.
NOverint universi per presents me R. C. de C. in Com^ S. Gen^ teneri and
firmiter obligari I. F. Armiger' and F. I. Gen^ in sexdecem libris bone and
legalis Monete Anglie solvend eisdem I. F. and F. F. seu eorum alteri vel eorum
aut alicujus eorum certo Attorn^ Executor' Administrator' vel Assign^ Ad quam
quidem solutionem been and fideliter faciend obligo me Heredes Executores and
Administratores meos firmiter p pres;entes sigillo meo sigillat^ Dat^ etc.

The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bound R. C. do and
shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said J. F. and F. J. or
to either of them, or to their or either of their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the Sum of Four Pounds of lawful Money of England, on
or before the tenth day of June next ensuing the date hereof, and Four Pounds
more of like lawful English Money on the thirtieth of March, which shall be in
the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred ninety and four, then this
Obligation and all herein contained to be void, otherwise to stand and be in
full force and virtue.



A Condition to save harmless from a Bond, for payment of Money.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas J. F. of C. in the
County of S. at the instance and request of R. C. aforesaid, did become Bound
for the proper Debt of the said R. C. to F. J. of L. in the said County of S.
Esquire; in one Bond or Writing Obligatory, under the penalty of 100 l. dated with
these presents, as by the same Obligation and Condition does more fully appear.
If therefore the said R. C. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, do and shall at
all times hereafter save and keep harmless and indempnified the said J. F. from
all manner of Arrests, Actions, Charges and Damages whatsoever, which shall or
may arise or accrue by reason of the said recited Obligation, or any thing
relating to or concerning the same; Then this Obligation to be void, or else to
be in full force and virtue.

A Condition to perform Covenants.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bound R. C. his
Executors, etc. do and shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
well and truly observe, fulfill, perform and keep all and singular the
Covenants, Grants, Articles, Payments, Promises and Agreements, which on the
part and behalf of the said R. C. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, are and ought to be performed, fulfilled, observed and kept, contained
and specified in one pair of Indentures bearing date the 10th day of March, in
the year of our Lord etc. made between the said R. C. of the one part, and the
said J. F. of the other part, according to the true intent and meaning of the
said Indentures; Then this Obligation to be void, otherwise, etc.

The Condition of a Bail Bond to the Sheriff, upon a Capias out of the
Common Pleas.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bound R. C. do
appear before the Justices of our Sovereign Lord the King in the Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, in Crast. Animar' to answer to J. F. of a Plea of
Debt; Then this Bond to be of no effect, or else to stand in full force.

A Condition to perform an Award of Arbitrators.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bound R. C. his
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, for his and their part, do in
all things well and truly stand to, observe, perform, fulfill and keep the
Award, Arbitrament, Determination and Judgment of A. B. of, etc. and D. C. of,
etc. Arbitrators indifferently chosen, elected and named, as well on the part
and behalf of the said R.C. as on the part and behalf of the said J. F. to
arbitrate, award, order, judge and determine, and a final agreement make, of
and concerning all and every Action, Suit, Variance, Sum of Money, claim and
demand whatsoever, had, moved or depending between the said parties, so as the
same Award of the said Arbitrators be made and put in Writing under their Hands
and Seals, ready to be delivered to the said parties, on or before the 10th day
of March next ensuing the date hereof, That then, otherwise, etc.

A Condition to find one Diet by the Year.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bound R. C. his Executors or Assigns, do
and shall at his and their own proper costs and charges, find, provide and
allow unto J. F. or any Servant of his in his stead, good wholesome and
sufficient Diet, and Victuals of Meat and Drink, in such sort and manner as is
now allowed by the above-bound R. C. for the time and space of one whole year
from the 10th of March next coming. And if at any time the said J. F. or any
Servant of his so to be Diered, shall be absent from the said Commons for the
space of six Weeks or more together at any time or times during the said Term;
If the said R. C. shall at the end of the said term allow him the said J. F. or
his Servant Diet for as long time as he was absent, Then this Obligation shall
be void, otherwise shall remain in full force

A Condition to save harmless for paying Rent, where the Title is in question.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas there is a Suit depending between the
above-bound R. C. and others, touching their Right and Interest in the now
Dwelling House of the abovenamed J. F. situate, etc. and whereas the said J.
F. has agreed to pay the Rent of the said House to the said R. C. which is 50
l. per Annum, as the same shall grow due. If therefore the said R. C. his, etc.
do and shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said J. F. his
Executors or Assigns, all such Rent Sum and Sums of Money, Charges and Damages
whatsoever, as shall by due proceedings in Law be adjudged or decreed against
him the said J. F. his, etc. and all other Costs and Damages whatsoever, which
he the said J. F. shall sustain or be at, by reason of any Action, Suits or
Forfeitures whatsoever, which shall or may happen or be to the said J. F. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by reason of paying the said Rent, or any
part thereof, to the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns; That
then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless the Bail in an Inferior Court.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named J.F. at the special instance
and request of the above-bound R. C. has bailed the said R. C. in the Sheriffs
Court, holden in the Counter in Woodstreet, London, in an Action of Trespass,
at the Suit of E. G. etc. as by the Records of the same Court it does appear.
If therefore the said R. C. his, etc. and every of them do at all times
hereafter clearly acquit and discharge, and save and keep harmless and
indempnified the said J. F. his, etc. and every of them, against all persons
whatsoever, from all Actions, Suits or Damages which may arise or accrue to the
said J. F. his, etc. by reason of his being Bail for the said R. C. as
aforesaid; Then, etc.

A Condition to leave a Wife worth a Hundred Pounds.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas there is a Marriage intended shortly to be
solemnized, between the above-bound R. C. and C. B. Daughter of W. B. late of
C. in the County of S. deceased: If after the said Marriage is solemnized it
happen that the said R. C. do die, and the said C. shall survive him, then if
the said R. C. shall at the time of his death leave unto the said C. the Sum of
100 l. or the value thereof, in Goods and Chattels, to be freely taken, had
used and disposed of by her the said C. her, etc. at her and their own wills
and pleasures, without any claim trouble, suit or demand, of in or to the same,
or any part thereof, from or by the Executors, etc. of the said R. C. or of any
other person whatsoever; That then, etc.

A Condition to pay Money at day of Marriage, or Death.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bound R. C. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do and shall well and truly pay, or cause
to be paid unto the abovenamed J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
the Sum of 10 l. within six Months after the Marriage of him the said R. C. or
within six Months after the day of the death of J. V. of, etc. Gent. which
shall first happen after the date hereof, without delay; Then, etc.

A Condition to deliver Hay and Oats.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bound R. C. his Executors,
Administrators or Affigns, do and shall well and truly deliver, or cause to be
delivered unto the abovenamed J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
at, etc. five Loads of good sweet well-made and well-dry'd Hay, every Load
containing, etc. and twenty Quarters of sound wholesome and sweet Oats, good and
Merchantable Ware, every Quarter to contain, etc. between the Feast Day of St.
John the Baptist and St. James the Apostle, next ensuing the date of these
presents, without any thing therefore to be paid, Then, etc.

A Condition to justify all Actions commenced by virtue of a Letter of
Attorney.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the abovebound R. C. by his Deed or Letter of
Attorney bearing date, etc. has made and constituted the aforesaid J. F. his
true and lawful Attorney, to ask, recover and receive, for him and in his Name,
to the only proper use and behoof of the said J. F. his Executors and
Administrators, 200 l. of, etc. for which J.V. of, etc. stands bound to the
said R. C. by his Obligation bearing date, etc. as by the said Letter of
Attorney does more at large appear: If therefore the said R. C. his Executors
and Administrators, and every of them, do at all times hereafter avow, justify
and maintain all and every such lawful Action and Actions, Plaints, Process,
Suits, Judgments and Executions, as the said J. F. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall commence and pursue in the Name of the said R.
C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, against the said J.V. his, etc. or
any of them, upon or by by reason of the beforementioned Obligation; Then, etc.

A Condition for a hired Servant's Truth.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the abovenamed J. F. has taken and received
into his Service the above-bound R. R. If therefore the said R. R. do and shall
during so long time as he the said R. R. shall dwell with the said J. F. well
and truly serve the said J. F. his Master, without consuming or imbezeling,
wasting, losing or unlawfully making away any of the Moneys, Plate, Goods or
Chattels of the said J. F. his Master, or of any other person or persons
whatsoever, which shall or may be committed to his custody, by reason of his
said Service. And if the said R. R. shall by negligence or otherwise consume,
waste or unlawfully make away any Money, Plate, Goods or Chattels of the said J.
F. his Master, or of any other person committed to his care and custody, as
aforesaid: Then if the said R. R. the above-bound R. C. and C. R. or any of
them, their or any of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of
them, do or shall within three Months next after due Proof thereof, and Notice
given in Writing to the said R. C. and C. R. or either of them, make sufficient
recompense and satisfaction unto the said J. F. his, etc. for any and all
damage sustained by means of the said R. R. as aforesaid; Then, etc.

A Condition to pay Rent.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bound R. C. his, etc. or some of them,
do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed J. F. his, etc.
the yerly Rent reserved and payable upon and by virtue of a pair of Indentures
of Lease bearing date with these Presents, made Between the said J. F. of the
one part, and the said R. C. of the other part, at such days and times as are
therein limited and appointed, during the term thereby granted, without fraud
or delay: Then, etc.

A Condition to pay Money during Life, for Maintenance.
THe Condition, etc. That if, etc. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
any of them, do or shall for and during the Natural Life of J. F. etc. well and
truly pay or cause to be paid unto the within named A. W. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, for and toward the Maintenance of the said J. F.
the Sum of, etc. on four days Quarterly every Year; That is to say, on the,
etc. by even and equal portions, the first payment thereof to be made and begin
on the, etc. next ensuing the date above-written; he the said A. W. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, on every such payment, delivering unto
the said R. C. his, etc. an Acquittance or Discharge in Writing for the Money so
paid and received from time to time; That then, etc.

A Condition to re-deliver a Bond, or the Money due thereon.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas, the abovebound R. C. the day of the date
hereof, has received, and had of the above named J. F. one Bond, or Obligation
bearing date, etc. as by the said Bond and Condition it does more fully appear,
which said Bond or Obligation together with a Letter of Attorney, of the date
within Written, the said J. F. has delivered to the said R. C. in trust only
for the recovering and receiving the said Debt of, etc. mentioned in the
Condition of the said Obligation, together with Costs, Damages, and reasonable
Interest, if any shall be due, of, and from the said, etc. his Executors or
Administrators; If therefore the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, do at any time hereafter within the space of one whole Year next
coming after the date hereof, either well and truly pay or cause to be paid to
the said J. F. his, etc. the full sum of, etc or re-deliver, or cause to be
redelivered to the said J. F. his, etc. the said Obligation and Letter of
Attorney, whole and uncancelled within the time before limited, Then, etc.

A Condition to gather Rents, and give an Account thereof.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above bound R. C. or his sufficient Deputy, do
from henceforth during his natural life, well truly and entirely levy, collect
and gather all and singular the Rents, Revenues, Perquisites of Courts, Issues
and Profits whatsoever, of, or belonging to the Lordship or Manor of L. etc.
and of all the Members and parcels of the same, at the Feasts of, etc. yearly
during the said Term, and all the same Rents, etc. and all Money thereof coming
or to come, for the same or any part thereof, do well and truly content and pay
to the said J. F. his Heirs Executors, or Assigns, at the Feasts of, etc.
yearly, And shall also at all times when required by the said J. F. his, etc.
make render and deliver to the said J. F. his Heirs or Assigns, a just true and
perfect Account of all the same Rents, Revenues, and other the premises, and
of all the Arrearages thereof (if any be) due, And do at the end of every such
Account made, make just and true payment to the said J. F. his Heirs or
Assigns; And further do well and truly adminster, serve and execute all Process
to him to be directed from the Steward and Officers of the said J. F. his Heirs
or Assigns, concering the Premises, or any part thereof, and moreover do during
all the said Term, demean and behave himself as an honest and true Bailiff
ought to do, that then, etc.

A Condition for a Wife to make a Will.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas, the abovebound R. C. has appointed and
agreed to marry and take to Wife A. B. late Wife of D. C. deceased, by reason
of which Marriage he the said R. C. will be much advanced in Substance and
Riches; In consideration whereof if the said R. C. after the said Marriage had
and solemnized, do quietly permit and suffer the said A. B. if she happen to
depart this Life before the said R. C. to declare and make her Will in Writting
or otherwise, and thereby to dispose of 100 l. at her free will and pleasure;
And further if the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any
of them on reasonable request to be made to him, them or any of them, by such
person or persons, to whom any sum of Money not exceeding the Sum aforesaid,
shall be bequeathed, do well and truly pay or cause to paid such Sum or Sums of
Money so bequeathed and given by the said A. B. Then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless for being bound for Appearance.
THE Condition, etc. That whereas, the above named J. F. at the special
instance and request of the above bound R. C. by one Obligation bearing date,
etc. stands bound jointly and severally with the said R. C. and the within
bound M. A. unto C. B. and B. C. Sheriffs of the City of London, in the Sum of,
etc. with a Condition thereunder written for the appearance of the said R. C.
before the Justices of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, on
the, etc. next, etc. to answer to J. V. of a Plea of Trespass, as by the said
Obligation and Condition thereof more at large appears, If therefore the said
R. C. his Executors, and Adminstrators and every of them, do from time to time,
and at all times hereafter save and keep harmless the said J. F. his Heirs,
etc. and the Goods and Chattles of him, them and every of them, against the
Sheriffs of the City of London, and against all other Persons whatsoever, of
and from all Actions, Suits, Judgments, Executions and Damages whatsoever,
which may arise or come, for or by reason of the said Obligation and Condition,
Then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless for being bound in a Sheriff's Bond.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed N. C.
at the special instance and request of the above-bounden G. S. and H. F.
together with them in and by one Obligation, bearing date with these Presents,
is become bound unto J. B. Esquire; Sheriff of the County of Sussex, in the penal
Sum of forty pounds, conditioned to be void, if the said G. S. shall appear
before the Justices of our Lord the King at Westminster from the day of St.
Martin in fifteen days, to answer H. S. of a Plea of Trespass, and also to
answer the said H. according to the Custom of the Court of Common Pleas in a
certain Plea of Debt upon demand of ten pounds. If therefore the said G. S.
shall appear before the said Justices of our Lord the King at Westminster, from
the said day of St. Martin in fifteen days, to answer the said H. S. of the
said Plea of Trespass. And also to answer the said H. according to the said
Custom of the Court of Common Pleas in the said certain Plea of Debt upon
demand of ten Pounds. And also if the said G. S. his Executors and
Administrators shall, well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto the said N.
C. his Executors or Administrators all such Sum and Sums of Money as shall
become due unto the said N. C. for Fees and Expenses in and about the defense
of the said Suit, Then this Obligation to be void, or else to stand and be in
full force.

Another Condition to save harmless for being bound in a Sheriffs Bond.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed N. C.
at the special instance and request of the above-bound J. P. together with the
said J. in and by one Obligation bearing date with these Presents, is become
bound unto W. G. Baronet, Sheriff of the County aforesaid, in the penal Sum of
fourscore Pounds with Condition to be void, if the said J. P. shall appear
before the Justices of our Lord the King at Westminster, from the day of St.
Martin in fifteen days, to answer J. F. Esquire; in a Plea of Debt of forty Pounds,
as by the said Obligation and Condition more at large appears. If therefore
the said J.P. shall appear before the said Justices of our Lord the King at
Westminster, at the day aforesaid, to answer the said J. F. in the Plea
aforesaid, in discharge of the said Obligation. And also if the said J. P.
shall within two Months next coming cause the said recited Obligation to be
redelivered up to the said N. C. Then this Obligation to be void, or else to
stand and be in full force.

A Condition not to become Surety without License.
THE Condition, etc. That if the above-bound R. C. do not at any time hereafter
engage or bind himself in, by or with any Bond, Bill, Specialty or Contract or
otherwise, to or for the payment of any other Debt or Debts, or Sum or Sums of
Money, than such Debts and Sums of Money only as now are or hereafter shall be
contracted and owing by the said R. C. in respect or by reason of his own Trade
or Business, without the consent and agreement of the above named J. F. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, That then, etc.

A Condition not to sell his interest in a Shop before J. F. has refused to buy
it.
THE Condition, etc. That whereas the above bound R. C. has and is possessed
of one Shop situate, etc. for the Term of twelve years, as yet to come and
unexpired, as by a Lease thereof made to the said R. C. by one A. B. by
Indenture dated, etc. it does more fully appear. If therefore the said R. C. do
not at any time hereafter grant, bargain, sell or assign his said interest and
Term of years yet to come in the said Shop, to any person or persons, without
first having the refusal of the said J. F. in writing, to buy or purchase the
same; Then, etc.

A Condition to leave two parts in three of Land and Goods to a Wife.
THE Condition, etc. That if a Marriage intended to be solemnized between the
above bound R. C. and R. C. Daughter, etc. shall take effect; And if after the
said Marriage it does happen that the said R. C. does survive him the said R.
C. And if he the said R. C. shall before his decease convey and assure to her
the said R. C. two full parts of all such Goods and Chattels, as he now has or
hereafter shall have during the Coverture, the same into three parts to be
divided; And shall also assure and convey two full parts of all such Lands and
Tenements as he the said R. C. shall be or is now possessed of in his own right
of any Estate whatsoever, the same into three parts to be divided, so that the
said two parts of all such Lands and Tenements be conveyed and assured to them
the said R. C. and R. C. and the Heirs of their two Bodies, and for lack of
such Issue, to the Heirs of her the said R. C. for ever, and not otherwise;
That then, etc.

A Condition that the Husband shall not sell a House and Goods nor any part
thereof, (whereof the Wife was seized before Marriage,) during the Coverture,
and to leave the same discharged of Encumbrances, if the Wife-survive.
THE Condition, etc. That whereas there is an Agreement made between the above
bound R. C. and C. R. of, etc. Widow, for a Marriage to be had and solemnized
between them two, And whereas the said C. by virtue of one Indenture of Lease
bearing date, etc. made by one J. F. to her the said C. is possessed of one
Message, etc. with the Appurtenances in A. for all the residue of the Term of
21 years, etc. to come in the said Indenture mentioned, And is also possessed
of certain Plate, Jewels and House-holdstuff in the said Message now being: If
therefore at any time after the said Marriage, and during the Natural Life of
the said C. the said R. C. does not alien, sell, bargain, grant, forfeit,
mortgage or incumber the said Message, etc. nor do remove, convey or carry
away, or cause to be conveyed, removed or carried away any of the Plate, etc.
from or out of the said Message, nor bargain, sell, change or alter the
property of any part thereof, without the consent of the said C. And if it
happen that the said C. do survive him, the said R. C. if then also he the said
R. C. do leave the Interest in the said Lease of the said Message, etc. and
all the Plate, etc. which shall then remain unsold or unaliened by the consent
of the said C. free from all bargains, sales or encumbrance by him done, made
or procured to her the said C. her Executors and Assigns, so that she and they
may lawfully, peaceably and quietly, have, hold, possess and enjoy the same
without any let, suit, trouble, claim or demand from any person or persons
whatsoever, from and immediately after the decease of the said R. C. That then,
etc.

A Condition to make one Free.
THE Condition, etc. That if the above bound R. C. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, do and shall within one year next ensuing the date
hereof upon reasonable request to him or them to be made by the above named C.
R. cause and procure the said C. to be lawfully and orderly according to the
Custom of the City of L. admitted into the Liberty and Freedom of the same
City, without any manner of fraud or covin at the only costs and charges of him
the said C. R. so always, that the said C. R. shall not be lawfully hindered
thereof, by reason of any Act or thing to be done hereafter by the said C. R.
That then, etc.

A Condition to become Bound with another to the Obligee, who has passed his
word for the Debt of the Obligor.
THE Condition, etc. That whereas the above named J. F. at the request, and for
the proper Debt of the above bound R. C. has agreed and undertaken for the
payment of 50 l. of lawful Money of England, to be paid by him the said J. F.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, to F. J. of, etc. his, etc. according
to the tenor and effect of one Pair of Indentures dated and made, etc. If
therefore the said R. C. do together with one C. R. of, etc. become bound unto
him the said J. F. his, etc. in and by one Bond or Obligation, at or before the
tenth day of March next ensuing the date hereof wherein the said R. C. and C.
R. shall be jointly and severally bound unto the said J. F. his Heirs
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in the Sum of 100 l. of lawful Money of
England, with Condition for the saving and keeping harmless him the said J. F.
his Heirs, etc. from all charge and damage which may arise, happen or come to
him the said J. F. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for or by
reason of his engaging, promising or undertaking to pay the said 50 l. to the
said F. J. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns as aforesaid, Then, etc.

A Condition that a Father having received a Legacy given to a Child, shall
save the Executor harmless.
THE Condition, etc. That whereas the above mentioned R. C. did by his last
Will and Testament give and bequeath to S. C. one of the Sons of the above
bound A. C. the Sum of 50 l. of lawful Money of England, to be paid unto him the
said S. C. or his Assigns, when he should attain to his full age of one and
twenty years, As by the said Will it does more fully appear: And whereas the
above named J. F. and F. J. at the special instance and request of the said A.
C. at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, have paid and
delivered the said 50 l. to the said A. C. to and for the use of the said S. C.
his Son, if therefore the said A. C. and the abovebound C. A. their or either
or any of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do well and truly pay or
cause to be paid the said 50 l. unto the said C.S. when he shall be of the age
of one and twenty years, And do also at all times hereafter acquit, exonerate
and discharge, or well and sufficiently save and keep harmless them the said J.
F. and F. J. and either of them, their and either of their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, of, and from all Actions, Damages, Trouble, Claims
and Demands, of or from the said S. C. or any other Person or Persons
whatsoever, for or by reason of the payment of the said 50 l. to the said A. C.
That then, etc.

A Condition to pay back part of a Legacy, if any Debt of the Testator shall
appear after to be unpaid.
THE Condition, etc. That whereas the above bound R.C. has had and received of
the above named C. R. Executor of the last Will and Testament of one A. B. of,
etc. deceased, the Sum of 50 l. of, etc. a Legacy given and bequeathed by the
said A. B. to the said C. R. If therefore any Debt hereafter of the said A. B.
shall happen to be demanded or received and paid by the said C. R. his
Executors or Administrators, and the said R. C. his Executors or
Administrators, shall within one Month after notice thereof, well and truly pay
or cause to be paid to the said C. R. his Executors or Assigns, a ratable part
and proportion back again toward the satisfaction of the said Debt; That then,
etc.

A Condition to make satisfaction if any mistake be found in an Account made up.
THE Condition, etc. That whereas the above bound R. C. having been Apprentice
unto the said J. F. is now about to leave the Service of the said J. F. and in
order thereto has given an account in writing of all dealings and businesses
of the said J. F. transacted by the said R. C. during his said Apprenticeship,
If therefore the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do and
shall well and truly account for, satisfy and pay any Sum or Sums of Money,
which on a more exact and strict Examination of the said account shall appear
not to have been accounted, and to be due to the said J. F. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, Then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless one Bail for a Defendant in the Common Pleas, and
for the Defendants paying the Condemnation Money, or rendering himself to Prison,
if Judgment be against him.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above named R. C.
at the request of the above bound E. A. has agreed to become Bail or
Manucaptor of the said E. in his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, at the Suit of J. M. Gent. one of the Attorneys of the same Court,
in an Action of Covenant broken, If therefore within five days next after
Judgment shall happen to be given against the said E. in the Action aforesaid,
the said E. do or shall pay the condemnation Money, or render himself a Prisoner
to the Prison of the Fleet in discharge of the Bail or Manucaption aforesaid,
And also if the said E. A. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, do or shall
from time to time and at all times hereafter, save, defend and keep harmless
the said R. C. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, of and from all Writs,
Actions, Suits, Bills, Costs, Charges and Damages, which shall or may be
brought or prosecuted against the said R. C. his Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, or which he or they shall or may bear, pay or suffer for or by
occasion that the said R. C. has or shall become Bail or Manucaptor of the
said E. A. as aforesaid, then this Obligation to be void, or else to stand and
be in full force.

Note, If the Defendant be of that quality that there is no fear of his
insolvency, then the clause of rendering himself to the Fleet may be left out:
But if otherwise, then it is best to put that clause, whereby you will be
sooner entitled to put the Bond in Suit.

A Condition for saving a Bail harmless, without a Clause of the Defendants
rendering himself to Prison.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above named A. B.
at the instance of the above bound S. B. has agreed to become Bail or
Manucaptor of R. M. in their Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, at
the Suit of R. H. Gent. in an Action of Trespass upon the Case, to the damage
of the said R. H. 1500 l. as it is said, If therefore the said S. B. her Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, do and shall from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, save, defend and keep harmless the said A. B. his Heirs Executors
and Administrators, of, and from all Writs, Actions Suits, Bills, Costs,
Charges and Damages whatsoever, which shall or may be brought or prosecuted
against the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or which he or
they shall or may bear, pay or suffer, for or by occasion, that the said A. B.
shall become Bail or Manucaptor of the said R. M. as aforesaid, Then, etc.

A Condition to save the Bail harmless, and pay the Charges which he shall
expend in defense of the Suit.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above named A. B.
at the request of the above bound C. D. has agreed to become Bail or
Manucaptor of the said C. D. in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, in an
Action there brought or to be borught against him by J. M. If therefore the
said C. D. E. L. and M. N. or any of them do and shall from time to time, and
at all times hereafter save, defend and keep harmless the said A. B. his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, of and from all Actions, Suits, Bills, Costs,
Charges and Damages whatsoever, which shall or may be brought or presented
against the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or which he or
they shall or may bear, pay or suffer, for or by occasion that the said A. B.
has or shall become Bail or Manucaptor of the said C. D. as aforesaid, And
also, If the said C. D. E. L. and M. N. or any of them shall from time to time
and at all times hereafter upon reasonable request, pay unto the said A. B. all
such Sum and Sums of Money as he shall expend, disburse or deserve to have, for
or about defending the said Action, Then, etc.

Note, A Bond with such Condition is necessary where the Defendants Attorney is
the Bail.

A Condition to save harmless for being Bail in an inferior Court.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas E. S. late in his
Majesty's Court of Record, held before the Mayor of the City of Chichester
abovesaid, has levied a certain Plaint against the above-bound W.T. in a Plea
of Trespass upon the Case. And whereas E. C. one of the Sergeants of the Mace
within the said City by Precept of the Court aforesaid, has arrested the said
W. T. upon the Plaint aforesaid, And whereas the abovenamed N. C. at the
special instance and request of the said W. T. for the enlargement of the same
W. T. has undertaken to become Pledge or Manucaptor of the said W. T. in the
Plea aforesaid, according to the Custom of the said Court: If therefore the
said W. T. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators do or shall within ten days
next after Judgment shall happen to be given against the said W. T. upon the
said Plaint in the Court aforesaid, well and truly pay, or cause to be paid
unto the said E. S. all such Sum and Sums of Money as by such Judgment shall
happen to be recovered against the said W. T. And do and shall also within the
same ten days cause and procure satisfaction to be acknowledged and entered of
Record upon such Judgment so happening to be given as aforesaid, And also if
the said W. T. his, Heirs, Executors or Administrators, do or shall upon notice
and request made, well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said N. C.
his Executors or Administrators all such Sum and Sums of Money, as he or they
shall expend or disburse in defense of the Suit so brought against the said W.
T. as aforesaid, or in defense of any Writ, Plaint, Suit or Action to be
brought against the said N. C. for or by reason of his becoming Pledge or
Manucaptor of the said W. T. as aforesaid, or in obtaining or prosecuting any
Writ or Writs of Error upon any Judgment to be obtained against the said W. T.
in the Plea aforesaid, or against the said N. C. as Pledge and Manucaptor of
the said W. T. And also if the said W. T. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators shall from time to time and at all times hereafter save, defend
and keep harmless the said N. C. his Executors and Administrators of and from
all Costs, Charges, Damages, Lets and Troubles whatsoever, which he the said N.
C. his Executors or Administrators shall at any time hereafter sustain, bear,
pay or suffer for or by reason of becoming Pledge or Manucaptor of the said W.
T. as aforesaid without fraud or delay, Then this Obligation to be void and of
none effect, or else to stand and be in full force and virtue.

A Condition to save harmless the Bail for the Defendant in an inferior Court.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas R. S. late in the
King's Majesty's Court of Record, held before the Mayor of the City of C. did
levy a Plaint against the above bound J. W. in a Plea of Trespass upon the
Case: By virtue of which Plaint, and by precept of the Court aforesaid, the
said J. W. was arrested by one of the Sergeants of the Mace of the said City,
to answer the said R. S. of the Plea aforesaid; And the said J. W. so being
arrested, the above named N. C. at the special instance and request of the said
J. W. and for his enlargement did undertake to become Bail or Manucaptor of the
said J. W. in the Plea aforesaid, at the Suit of the said R. S. according to
the Custom of the said Court: If therefore the said J. W. his Executors or
Administrators do or shall within eight days next after Judgment shall happen
to be given against the said J. W. in the Plea aforesaid, at the Suit of the
said R. S. procure and cause satisfaction to be acknowledged and entered upon
the Record of such Judgment so happening to be given against the said J. W. as
aforesaid, whereby such Judgment shall be made void, And also if the said J. W.
his Executors and Administrators, shall from time to time, and at all times
hereafter save, defend and keep harmless the said N.C. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, of and from all Costs, Charges and Damages whatsoever, for or
by reason that the said N. C. has or shall become Bail or Manucaptor of the
said J. W. at the Suit of the said R. S. upon the Plaint aforesaid; And also if
the said J. W. shall within six months next ensuing, the date hereof clearly
and absolutely acquit and discharge the said N. C. his Executors and
Administrators, of and from the Bail and Manucaption aforesaid; Then, etc.

A Condition for saving harmless the Plaintiffs Bail, to prosecute in an
inferior Court.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above bound R. D.
late in the King's Majesty's Court of Record, hold before the Major of the City
of C. above said, did levy a Plaint against one A. C. in a Plea of Trespass
upon the Case, And the above named J. V. at the special instance and request of
the said R. D. has undertaken to become pledge of the said R. D. for the
prosecuting the said Plaint, If therefore Judgment shall happen to be given,
against the said R. D. in the Plea aforesaid, upon discontinuance Nonsuit,
Verdict for the Defendant, or otherwise howsoever, Then if the said R. D. do or
shall within eight days next after such Judgment shall happen to be given,
procure and cause satisfaction to be acknowledged upon the Record of such
Judgment, whereby the said Judgment shall be made void; And also if the said R.
D. his Executors and Administrators, shall from time to time, and at all times
hereafter save, defend and keep harmless the said J. V. his Heirs Executors and
Administrators of and from all Costs, Charges and Damages whatsoever, for or by
occasion that the said J. V. has or shall become Pledge of the said R. D. upon
the Plaint aforesaid; And also if the said R. D. shall within six Months next
ensuing the date hereof clearly and absolutely acquit and discharge the said J.
V. his Executors and Administrators, of and from the being or continuing Pledge
of the said R. D. as aforesaid; Then, etc.

Consideration for saving harmless a Surety for a Parson in the First Fruits
Office.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed N. C.
at the request, and for the Debt of the above-bound J. B. in and by four
several Obligations, bearing date with these presents, is become bound unto our
Lord the King in four several Sums of 11 l. with Condition of the first
Obligation to be void, if the said J. B. his Executors or Assigns on the first
day of May next, shall pay unto our Lord the King, at the receipt of his
Exchequer at Westminster 5 l. 3 s. 6 d. in part of 20 l. 14 s. for the
First Fruits of the Rectory of F. abovesaid, And with Condition of the second
Obligation to be void, on the like payment of 5 l. 3 s. 6 d. upon the first day
of November next; And with Condition of the third Obligation to be void, on the
like payment of 5 l. 3 s. 6 d. upon the first day of May, which shall be in the
year of our Lord 1680. And with Condition of the fourth Obligation to be void,
on the like payment of 5 l. 3 s. 6 d. upon the first day of November, which
shall be in the said year of our Lord 1689. If therefore the said J. B. his
Executors or Assigns, do or shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto
our said Lord the King, the said four several sums of 5 l. 3 s. 6 d. according
to the respective Conditions of the said four several Obligations; And also, if
the said J. B. his Executors or Assigns, do or shall within six weeks next
after the respective day mentioned in the Condition of every of the said
several Obligations, procure every of the said several Obligations,
respectively to be cancelled and delivered unto the said N. C. his Executors or
Administrators without fraud or delay; Then, etc.

A Condition to pay a further sum, for a Fine upon renewing a Lease for Lives,
in case one of the Lives in the former Lease be not now living, as is affirmed.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above-bound C. F.
lately held of the abovenamed Dean and Chapter certain Lands and Tenements in
the Parish B. in the County of S. for the life of one J. A. now, or sometime
the Wife of W. L. of A. in the County of N. Clerk. And whereas the said Dean
and Chapter at the request of the said C. F. and upon his affirmation that the
said J. A. is now living, have accepted a Surrender of the Estate of the said
C. F. in the Premises: And by their Indenture of Lease, under their Common and
Chapter Seal, bearing date with these presents, have demised and granted the
same premises unto the said C. F. to hold during the natural lives of the said
J. A. and the said C. F. and one J. F. Son of J. F. deceased, and during the
natural life of the longest liver of them. If therefore the said J. A. on the
day of the date hereof is dead, then if the said C. F. do and shall on the
second day of February next coming, well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto
the said Dean and Chapter or their Successors, the full sum of threescore and
ten pounds of lawful Money of England, being the sum agreed upon between them
the said C. F. and the said Dean and Chapter, in such case to be paid, Then
this Obligation, etc.

A Condition to give account and render the Stock delivered to one who is to
carry on a Trade at half profit.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed T. C.
at the request of the above-bound J. C. has entrusted and committed into the
hands of the said J. C. diverse Goods, Working-tools, Plate, Money and Wares,
being in the whole of the value of for the furnishing of the said J. C. with a
necessary Stock to exercise the Trade of a Goldsmith. And whereas it is agreed
between the said J. C. and T. C. that the said J. C. shall work upon and
improve the said Stock in buying and selling, and for his labor and pains
therein, shall receive and have to his own use the one half of the benefit
thereof to be made, keeping the Stock entire, and paying unto the said T. C.
the other half of the benefit thereof to be made. If therefore the said J. C.
his Executors or Administrators do and shall within six months next after
notice to him given, or left in writing at the place of his usual abode; pay or
deliver unto the said T. C. his Executors or Administrators of lawful Money of
England for the Stock aforesaid, or the value thereof in Goods, Working-tools,
Plate and Goldsmiths Wares. But if the said J. C. shall happen to die before
such notice given or left in writing as aforesaid; then if the Heirs, Executors
or Administrators of the said J. C. shall within twenty pay next after such the
death of the said J. C. pay and deliver unto the said T. C. his Executors or
Administrators the said (...) or the value thereof as aforesaid: And also if
the said J. C. do and shall from time to time yearly, and every year at the
Feasts, etc. until the said (...) or the value thereof as aforesaid shall be
paid and delivered unto the said T. C. his Executors or Administrators, pay or
cause to be paid unto the said T. C. his Executors or Administrators the moiety
or one half of all such sum and sums of money as he the said J. C. shall have
received or gained by working in the Trades of a Goldsmith or Silversmith, or
by buying and selling any Wares belonging to either of the said Trades; the
first payment thereof to be made at the Feast of the Annunciation of the
Blessed Virgin Mary next ensuing the date hereof, Then this Obligation to be
void, etc

A Condition to pay proportionable shares of the charges of a Suit concerning a
Common.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas there is within the
Parish of W. in the County aforesaid, a certain parcel of Pasture ground,
containing by estimation sixty Acres, called Eastside Common: And whereas every
of the above-bound T. C. J. H. P. W. and W. F. respectively, are seized of
several Lands and Tenements in the said Parish of W. to which Lands and
Tenements respectively, there does belong Common of Pasture for Sheep upon the
said Eastside Common, at certain times in the year. And whereas J. C. of W.
aforesaid, Gent. does claim Common of Pasture for Sheep in the said East side
Common at such times as he ought not to have such Common of Pasture there. And
thereupon the said T. C. J. H. and P. W. and one R. T. of W aforesaid, and
Undertenant of the said W. F. or some of them did lately distrain and impound
the Sheep of the said J. C. depasturing in the said Eastside Common, whereupon
the said J. C. has brought against them several Actions of Replevin: And the
said T. C. J. H. P. W. and R. T. have jointly and severally retained the
abovenamed N. C. to defend for them the said Actions of Replevin, and to
prosecute and defend other Actions concerning the said Common. If therefore
every of them the said T. C. J. H. P. W. and R. T. respectively, by parts and
portions ratable and proportionable to the respective quantities of Land by
every of them respectively occupied or possessed, and whereunto Common of
Pasture for Sheep on the said Eastside Common does appertain, do and shall from
time to time upon every request made, well and truly pay or cause to be paid
unto the said N. C. all such sum and sums of Money as the said N. C. shall
expend, lay out or reasonably deserve to have, for or in the prosecuting or
defending the several Actions of Replevin beforementioned, or any other Action
or Actions, for or in the names of the said T. C. J. H. P. P. and R. T. or any
of them, for, about or concerning the said Common called Eastside Common. And
also if every of them the said T. C. J. H. P. W. and R. T. respectively, by
such parts and portions as aforesaid, upon every request made, do or shall pay
and bear mutually to and amongst each other, all such costs, charges and
damages as they or any of them shall expend, pay or suffer for or by occasion
of the Actions of Replevin beforementioned, or any other Actions or Suits
brought or to be brought by, for or against them or any of them touching or
concerning the said Eastside Common. And also if any of them the said T. C. J.
H. P. W. and R. T. shall not at any time acquit, release or discharge the
several Actions of Replevin beforementioned, or any Judgment, Execution, Costs
or Damages to be thereupon had or obtained, or any other Action, Suit,
Judgment, Execution, Costs or Damages touching or concerning the said Eastside
Common, by, for or in the names of any of them to be prosecuted, had or
obtained without the license or consent of three of them the said T. C. J. H.
P. W. and R. T. thereunto first had and obtained in writing, Then this
Obligation, etc.

Note, The Bond was made to the Attorney of the Obligors, a Trustee indifferent
between them.

A Parson presented to a Living, gives Bond to resign upon request.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the Vicaridge of N. in
the County of S is now void, and it belongs to R. M. Esquire; and T. M. Esquire; as
Trustees of the abovenamed N. C. to present thereunto; and they have this
present day presented unto the said Vicaridge the above bound T. C. intending
hereafter to present one R. C. now at the University of C. when he shall be
capable thereof, or some other Friend of the said N. If therefore the said T.
C. shall procure himself to be admitted, instituted and inducted into the said
Vicaridge upon the said presentation: And also if the said T. C. within six
Months after request made, shall absolutely and in due form of Law resign the
said Vicaridge, and thereof give notice to the said N. C. his Executors or
Administrators, and procure such Relignation to be accepted, so that the said
Vicaridge may then again be void without fraud or delay, Then, etc.

A Condition to procure an Infant to convey Lands when he comes of Age.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bound J. B. his
Heirs, Executors or Administrators at their own costs do or shall procure or
cause S. T. one of the Daughters of J. T. deceased, after the said S. shall
have attained her Age of one and twenty years, or the Heirs of the said S. in
case of her death upon reasonable request by good and sufficient Conveyance and
Assurance in the Law to grant, convey and assure unto the above named K. A. and
her Heirs and Assigns for ever all that Message, etc. with Covenants on the
part of the said S. and her Heirs in such Conveyance to be comprised, that the
said K. A. and her Heirs shall and may from thenceforth hold and enjoy all the
said Messuages and Premises now in the Occupation of the said K. without any,
let or interruption of the said S. her Heirs or Assigns, and free from all
encumbrances done or suffered by her or them; Then this Obligation to be void,
etc.

A Condition to surrender Copyhold-Lands, whereunto the Obligor is admitted in
Trust for the Obligee.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above-bound W. R.
at the costs and charges, and in trust for the only benefit of the said J. F.
has had and taken admittance according to the Custom of the Manor of N. in
the County of S. of and to the reversion of one Message, one Barn and certain
Lands thereunto belonging with the appurtenances in L. holden by Copy of
Court-Roll of the said Manor, To have and to hold unto the said W. R. for and
during the term of his natural life, from and after the decease of A Wife of
the said J. F. lately called Ann Jelley, and the said J. F. and from and after
the decease of the Survivor of them. If therefore the said W. R. do and shall
upon the request, and at the costs and charges of the said J F. his Executors
or Administrators, well and truly and according to the Custom of the Manor
aforesaid, surrender into the hands of the Lord of the Manor aforesaid, the
said Message and premises with the appurtenances, in such manner and to such
use and uses as the said W. R. his Executors and Administrators shall direct or
appoint. And also if the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
shall or lawfully may from time to time, and at all times until such Surrender
shall be so made by the said W. R. as aforesaid, peaceably and quietly have,
hold, use, occupy, possess, enjoy and keep the said Message and premises with
the appurtenances, and every part thereof, without any let, trouble,
interruption or contradiction of or by the said W. R. or any claiming under
him, or by his Act or Deed, then, etc.

A Condition for payment of Rent, and performance of other Agreements on a
Lease Parol.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed N. C.
has this present day demised unto the above W. A. all that his Message with
the Curtilage and Garden thereunto belonging, situate in S. and now in the
occupation of the said W. A. except Trees growing on the said premises, to
hold from Michaelmas last for one year, and so from year to year, as long as
both the said Parties shall agree, under the Rent of 35 s. If therefore the
said W. A. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators do or shall yearly so long
time as the said W. A. shall enjoy the said Message and premises, well and
truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said N. C. his Executors or
Administrators, as well the said yearly Rent of 35 s. at the Feasts of the
Annunciation of the Blessed V Mary and St. Michael the Archangel by equal
portions; as also discharge, bear, and pay all Quit-rents and Taxes issuing out
of the said Message and premises: And also if the said W. A. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns do and shall from time to time, well and sufficiently
repair the said Message and premises; and at the end of the said term leave
the said Message and premises sufficiently repaired, unto the said N. C. his
Heirs or Assigns. And also if the said W. C. his Executors or Administrators do
or shall within forty days next ensuing the date hereof, pay unto the said N.
C. 22 s. 6 d. for the Rent formerly due unto the said N. C. for the said
premises without fraud or delay, Then, etc.

Condition that the Obligor shall convey all his Estate unto the Obligee.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the said J. E. his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators upon every request to be made unto him by the said
H. E. do and shall by good Conveyances and Assurances in the Law, well and
sufficiently to be executed, grant, bargain, sell, convey and assure unto the
said H. E. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, all the Lands, Tenements, Goods
and Chattels which the said J. E. now has within the County of E. and all his
Estate, Right, Title and Interest therein, as it is agreed on between them in
consideration of a Settlement covenanted to be made by the said H. E. unto the
said J. E. upon his intended marriage with J. A. Then etc.

A Condition to pay forty shillings more for a Fine, on admittance to a
Copyhold, if the Lord have not another Fine for admittance in the same Lands
within threee years.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed N. C.
has this day admitted the abovenamed W. O. Tenant to one Customary Message,
one Garden and three Acres of Land with the appurtenances, in the Manor of N.
for the Fine of 40 s. If therefore the said W. O. his Heirs or Assigns, within
three years next coming shall pay unto the said N. C. his Executors or Assigns
40 s. more, in case he or they shall not in the mean time have another Fine for
the admittance of some other to the said premises, Then, etc.

A Condition to stand to an Award of all differences, except certain special
matters.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas there now are diverse
Suits, Differences and Demands being and depending between the said F. H. and
T. W. and the said F. H. and T. W. for the ending and determining of all Suits,
Differences and Demands now being and depending between them (except the
pretended Right, Title and Interest of him the said T. W. of and unto the
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments called D. lying in the Parishes of Kirdford,
Wisborugh-Green and Petworth, in the said County of S. and all Rents, Issues
and Profits thereof, and all Suits, Actions and Demands for the same; And also
except the Rents Issues and Profits of the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
called D. lying in F. in the County of S. due at Michaelmas last past or
before, and all Suits, Actions and Demands for the same: And also except one
Lease made by the said T.W. unto the said F. H. of the Message and Lands
called D. the aforesaid, and Rents thereupon due, and the Covenants and
Agreements therein contained: And except all Legacies, Sum or Sums of Money, and
other Duties pretended to be due to the said T. W. upon or by vitue of any last
Will and Testament of A. W. deceased, Father of the said T. W. And also except
all Deeds, Writings, Court Rolls and Evidences whatsoever concerning the said
T. W. (or his Estate whatsoever) have mutually agreed to stand to and perform
such Award as Sir H. P. of the City of C. in the said County, Knight, A. C. of
the said City and County Esquire, J. K. of the said City and County Esquire,
and R. S. of the said County Gent. shall make and declare, of and upon the
said, Suits, Differences and Demands, (except before excepted:) If therefore
the said, T. W. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, do and shall
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, well and truly hold, observe,
perform, fulfill and keep such Award, Arbitrament and Judgment, as the said Sir
H. P. J. C. A. C. and R. S. shall make and declare, of, upon and concerning the
said Suits, Differences and Demands, (except before excepted) so as the same
Award, Arbitrament and Judgment be made in Writing by the said Arbitrators, at
or before the first day of February instant, without fraud or delay; Then, etc.

Bond of Marriage, with Condition to permit the Wife to dispose of 50 l. and
the Obligor to pay the rest of her Estate to her two Children at full Age,
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas there is a Marriage
already agreed upon, and by Gods, permission shortly to be had and solemnized
between the above-bounden J. B. and S. B. of S. in the County of S. Widow,
Relict and Administratrix of all and singular the Goods and Chattels which were
of R. B. late of S. aforesaid, Gent. deceased. And whereas it is agreed between
the said J. B. and S. B. That in Consideration of the Sum of 100 l. given to
the said J. B. by the said S. B. as her Marriage Portion; That the said S. B.
after the said Marriage shall be had between them, shall have liberty to
dispose of ^0 l. in such manner as she shall think fit: And ^^at he the said J.
B. shall dispose all and singular the Goods and Chattels which were of the said
R. B. deceased, which shall at any time hereafter come to the hands of the said
J. B (except the said Sums of One hundred pounds, and Fifty pounds, and one
third part of the Household Stuff) to the use and benefit of D. B. and E. B. Son
and Daughter of the said R. B. deceased. If therefore the said J. B. his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators, do or shall well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid, the full Sum of 50 l. of lawful Money of England, to such person and
persons, and to such use or uses, and at such days and times, and in such
manner and form as the said S. B. shall at any time or times hereafter, by
Writing under her Hand and Seal, or otherwise, or by her last Will and
Testament in Writing, or by Word of Mouth, direct, limit or appoint the same to
be paid. And also, If the said J. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, do and shall well and truly pay and deliver, or cause to be paid and
delivered, all and singular the Goods, Chattels, Household Stuff, Money, Plate
and other personal Estate whatsoever, which was of the said R. B. deceased, at
the time of his death and now are in the custody or possession of the said S.
B. or which at any time hereather shall come or be in the hands, custody or
possession of the said J. B. his Heirs Executors, Administrators or Assigns;
(Except the said several Sums of One hundred pounds, and Fifty Pounds, and the
said third part of the said Household Stuff beforementioned, and all such Money
as by Law shall be recovered against the said J. B. his Executors or
Administrators, for the Debts of the said R. B. deceased) unto the said D. B.
and E. B. Children of the said R. B. deceased, to be equally divided between
them the said D. B. and E. B. at several and respective Ages of One and twenty
years, or day of Marriage, which shall first happen. And if either of them the
said D. B. and E. B. happen to dye before his or her age of One and twenty
years, or day of Marriage, then all and singular the said Goods, Chattels and
Moneys, (Except before excepted) to be paid unto the Survivor of them the said
D. B. and E. B. at his or her age of One and twenty years, or day of Marriage,
which shall first happen, as aforesaid; Then, etc.

A Condition, That the Obligor shall never sue out Execution upon any Statute
or Judgment against the Obligee.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bound T. W. his
Heirs Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall not at any time hereafter
sue, implead, prosecute, molest or trouble the abovenamed T. P. his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators nor seize, levy, extend or take his or their Goods,
Chattels, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, of, for or by reason of any
Judgment or Statute which the said T. W. now has against the said T. P. or for
or by reason of any Judgment or Statute which are or is at this present
remaining upon Record in any Court of Record, or elsewhere within the Kingdom
of England, against the said T. P. for any Sum or Sums of Money due, or
pretended to be due to the said T. W. And also, If the said T. W. his Executors
or Administrators, shall and do from time to time, and at all times for ever
hereafter, save, defend and keep harmless the said T. P. his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, and his and their Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, of and from all Statutes and Judgments, and of and from all and
all manner of Executions, Extents, Troubles, Costs, Charges and Damages
whatsoever, which shall or may happen to or against the said T. P. his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators, or any of them, for or by reason of any such
Judgment or Statute without fraud or delay; Then this Obligation to be void,
etc.

A Condition upon an Adventure of Bottom-ree.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bound C. M. and O.
R. their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, or either of them, do or shall
cause to be paid unto the abovenamed R. P. or to his certain Attorney, his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the Sum of 65 l. and 13 s. of lawful Money
of England, at or before the end of 20 days next after the first Return and
safe Arrival of the Ship Mary of S. (Burden 140 Tuns, or thereabouts, Mr. A.
P. Master for the time being) for her present intended Voyage from S. aforesaid
unto Virginia, and from thence back again unto her Port of delivery in England.
But if the said Ship by Order or any contingency shall give over the said
Voyage and not proceed thereon; and that if then the said C. M. and O. R. or
either of them, their Executors or Administrators, do and shall re-pay unto the
said R. P. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the Sum of 50 l. and 10
s. Principal Adventure, at or before the end of 10 days next after, giving over
the said Voyage, as aforesaid; Then, etc.

A Bond with Condition to observe the Orders of an House of Chancery.
NOverint universi per presents nos N. C. de Hospicio Sci^ Clementis Dacorum
in Com^ Midd Generosum and I. G. de eodem Hospicio Generosum teneri and
firmiter obligari E. G. Generoso Principali Hospicii predict^ december libris bone
and legalis Monete Anglie solvend eidem E. aut suo certo Attornato Executoribus
Administratoribus sive Assign^ suis Ad quam quidem solutionem been ac fideliter
faciend^ Obligamus nos and utrumque nostrum ac Heredes Executores and
Administratores nostros and utriusque nostri firter per presents sigillis
nostris sigillat^

Dat^ vicesimo quinto die Novembris Anno Regni Dornini Caroli secundi Dei
Gratia Anglie Scotie Francie and Hibernie Regis Fidei Defensoris etc. decimo
quinto. The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden N.
C. shall from time to time satisfy and pay unto the Principal of St.
Clements-Inn abovesaid, for the time being, all such Sum and Sums of Money, as
shall be due for Pensions, Commons, Essoins, Battles, Castings into Commons
Fines, Amerciaments and all other Duties whatsoever, conforming himself to the
Orders now made or hereafter to be made, by the Principal and Ancients of the
same Society, Then this Obligation to be void or else to stand and be in full
force.



A Bond with Condition That the Author of a Book shall take (of the Bookseller,
undertaking to print it) a certain number at a price.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed R. C.
at the request of the abovenamed J. A. has undertaken to cause to be printed
a certain Book now in Manuscripit, Entitled, etc. and to deliver unto the said
J.A. 400 of the same Books, printed on or before the first day of November next
nesuing, at the Shop of the said R. C. in Fleet Street; if therefore the said
J. A. do or shall on or before the first day of February next following, well
and truly pay unto the sand R. C. 20 l. for the price of the said 400 Books
printed, so as the said R. C. be on the said first day of November at his Shop
aforesaid, ready to deliver to the aforesaid J. A. the same Books in sheets,
without fraud or delay; Then this Obligation to be void, or else to remain in
full force and virtue.

A Bargain and Sale of a Term for years, taken in Execution upon a Fieri facias.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between W. S. one of Bailiffs of J. G. Esquire; Sheriff
of the County, etc. of the one part, and D. C. etc. of the other part. Whereas
W. P. etc. at the time of making the Warrant herein after-mentioned, was
possessed for a Term of years yet to come, of and in all that Close of Land,
etc. And whereas N. C. in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, did recover
against the said W. P. One Judgment for 40 l. Debt and 30 s. Costs of Suit:
Upon which said Judgment in the Term of St. Michael last past, a Writ of Fieri
facias, Returnable in Octabis S. Hillarii, issued out of the said Court, and
was directed and delivered unto the said Sheriff in form of Law, to be
executed. Which said Sheriff on the second day of December last, made his
Warrant unto the said W. S. and others, jointly and severally, for the
Execution of the said Writ. And the said W. S. by Virtue of the said Writ, and
the said Warrant to him made as aforesaid, has entered into and upon the said
Close of Land, and seized and taken the same, together with the Estate, Term
and Interest of the said W. P. therein Now this Indenture Witnesses, That the
said W. S. in pursuance of the said Writ and Warrant, and for and in
consideration of Five pounds to him by the said D. C. before the sealing and
delivery hereof, well and truly in hand paid, Has bargained and sold, and by
these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely bargain and sell unto the
said D. C. all the said Close of Land, and all the Estate, Right, Title and
Interest of the said W. P. in his own right, and in the Right of M. his Wife,
of and in the said Close of Land; To have and to hold unto the said D. C. for
and during all the remainder of such term and terms of years as the said W. P.
in his own right, or in the right of his Wife, had in the said Close of Land,
in as large and ample manner as the said W. P. and M. his Wife, or either of
them, their or either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, may might,
should or ought to have held or enjoyed the same.

In Witness, etc.
A Bargain and Sale, or Assignment of Lands Extended upon a Recognizance.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of, etc. of the one part, and R. C.
and C. R. of etc. of the other part witnesses, that whereas R. R. by the name
of, etc. by one Recognizance bearing date, etc. taken, acknowledged and sealed
before Sir J. H. Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England, acording to the form of
the Statute for recovery of Debts in that case provided, stands bound unto
the said J. F. in the Sum of 100 l. payable etc. as by the same Recognizance,
etc. And whereas also the same J. F. has extended, and to him is delivered in
Execution, the Manor of A. with the appurtenances in the C. of S. at he yearly
Rent of, etc. for the non-payment of the said Sum of 100 l. Now the said J. F.
for diverse good Causes and Considerations him hereunto especially moveing, has
bargained, sold, assigned and set over and by these presents does bargain,
sell, assign, and set over unto the said R. C. and C. R. All the said Manor of
A. with the Appurtenances, and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest and
Demand whatsoever which he the said J. F. has by reason of the said Extent, of
in and to the said Manor, and of in and to every part and parcel thereof, and
in and to all and singular the Messuages, Lands and Tenements so extended and
delivered in Execution as aforesaid; And the said J. F. for himself, etc. that
he the said J. F. his, etc. at any time or times hereafter, shall not do any
Act or Acts, thing or things, whereby the said extent or extents or the Estate,
Title or Interest of the said R. C. and C. R. or either of them, or of the
Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them, or either of them by reason of
the said Extent may any wise be hurt, hindered or impeached, discharged, undone
or made void: And further, that he the said J. F. his Executors and
Administrators shall and will at the reasonable request, costs and charges in
the Law of the said R. C. and C. R. or either of them, do and suffer to be
done, made and acknowledged all and every such lawful and reasonable Act and
Acts, thing and things, device and devices in the Law whatsoever for the
further assurance, surety and conveying of the Premises, for and during all
the time and term of the said Extent and Execution unto the sand R. C. and C.
R. as by their or either of their Counsel learned in the Law shall be
reasonably devised, advised or required.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of a Rent reserved by Lease.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of. etc. And R. C of, etc. of the
other part witnesses, That whereas the said J. F. by his Indenture of Lease
bearing date, etc. (reciting the Lease) as in by the said recited Lease it does
more at large appear. Now this Indenture further witnesses; That the said J.
F. for and in consideration of a competent Sum of Money, Has demised, granted,
bargained, and to farm letten, and by these presents does demise, grant, and to
farm, let unto the said R. C. the reversion and remainder of the said Shop,
etc. and other the Premises by the said Indenture of Lease demised, together
with the said yearly Rent thereby reserved, and the Counter-part of the said
Indenture of Lease, under the Hand and Seal of the said, etc. To have, hold,
possess and enjoy the said reversion and Rent of, etc. and every part thereof
unto the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the day of
the date of these presents, for and during all the residue of the aforesaid
Term of, etc. yet to come and unexpired, yiedling and paying therefore yearly,
and every year during the said Term unto the said J. F. his Executors or
Assigns at the feast of, etc. one Pepper-corn if the same shall be lawfully
demanded; And the said J. F. for himself, etc. that he the said J. F. at the
time of the sealing and delivery of these presents, is the true, perfect and
Lawful owner, and possesser of the said demised reversion and Rent; And is at
the ensealing and delivery of these presents lawfully and absolutely possessed
thereof. And that he the said J. F. has full power and authority to demise and
grant the said Reversion and Rents of, etc. unto the said R. C. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, for and during all the rest and residue of the said
Term of, etc. in manner and form aforesaid, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents; And further, that the said J. F. his, etc. shall and
will from time to time and at all times hereafter, during the said Term, fully
and clearly, acquit, discharge, save and keep harmless the said R. C. his, etc.
of and from all former or other bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases,
forfeitures, claim and demand whatsoever; And the said J. F. for himself, etc.
that the said yearly Rent of, etc. shall continue, remain, and be from
henceforth during the residue of the said Term, due and payable unto the said
R. C. his, etc. according to the true intent and and meaning of these presents

in witness, etc.
A Grant of a Rent Charge.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of, etc. of the one part, and R. C.
of, etc. of the other part witnesses, That the said J. F. for and in
consideration of the sum of, etc. to him in Hand paid before the ensealing and
delivery hereof, by the said R. C. the receipt whereof he the said J. F. does
acknowledge, and thereof, and of every part thereof, does acquit and for ever
discharge the said R. C. his, etc. Has given, granted and confirmed and by
these presents does give, grant and confirm unto the said R. C. one Annuity or
yearly Rent Charge of, etc. to be had, taken and received, out of all and
singular the Messuages, etc. of the said J. F. within the Kingdom of England,
to be paid at the four most usual Feasts or Terms in the year, that is to say,
etc. the first payment thereof to be made and to begin on, etc. To have, hold,
receive, take and enjoy the said Annuity or yearly Rent Charge, of, etc. unto
the said R. C. his, etc. from the day of the date of these presents, until the
full end and term of, etc. And if the said Annuity or yearly Rent Charge of,
etc. shall happen to be behind and unpaid in part or in all after any of the
said Feast days above limited for the payment of the same, the said J. F. for
himself, etc. that then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. C.
his, etc. into all and singular the said Messuages, etc. or into any part
thereof to enter and distrain both for the Annuity aforesaid and the arrearages
thereof, (if any be) and the distress and distresses then and there found and
taken, to keep and detain until the said Annuity and all Arrerages thereof,
shall be fully satisfied, contented and paid unto the said R. C. his, etc. And
the said J. F. for himself, etc. that the said J. F. his, etc. shall and will
from time to time, and at all times during the said Term of, etc. well and
truly pay or cause to be paid to the said R. C. his, etc. or some of them the
said Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc. in manner and form aforesaid, according to
the true intent and meaning of these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of a Reversion.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of, etc. of the one part, and R. C.
of, etc. of the other part witnesses, That the said J. F. for and in
consideration of the Sum of, etc. has granted, bargained, sold, and by these
presents does fully, clearly and absolutely, grant, bargain and sell unto the
said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that his right, title, use,
interest, reversion and remainder of, and in all and singular, etc. now or late
in the tenure, or occupation of, etc. which said Message and other the
Premises with the appurtenances, J. F. has, should or ought to have by and
after the decease of A. B. Brother of the said J. F. which said Message, etc.
R. B. Father of the said A. B. deceased by his last Will and Testament.
Devised, willed and bequeathed unto the said A. B. for and during the natural
life of the said A. B. and the immediate reversion or remainder thereof, to the
said J. F. and his Heirs for ever, Together with all Deeds, Evidences,
Charters, Rescripts, Writings and Minuments which he the said J. F. or any
other to his use, or by his consent or delivery, have or has, touching or
concerning the said Message, etc. or any part thereof: All and singular which
said Deeds, Evidences, Charters, etc the said J. F. has already delivered unto
the said R. C. at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents; To
have and to hold the said reversion and remainder, and all Estate, Right,
Title, Interest, etc. of the said J. F. of in and to the said Message, etc.
before by these presents, bargained and sold, or meant, mentioned or intended
to be hereby granted, bargained and sold, and every part thereof immmediatly
from and after the decease of the said A. B. unto the said R. C. his Heirs and
Assigns for, etc. And the said J. F. for himself, etc. That the said J. F. at
the day of the date of these presents, is lawfully and solely seized of and in
the reversion and remainder of the said Message, etc. immediately from and
after the decease of the said A. B. of a true and perfect Estate of Inheritance
in the Law in Fee to his own use, without any manner of Condition, Mortgage or
Redemption: And further, that the said reversion or remainder of the said
Message, etc. from by and after the decease of the said A. B. and at the day
of the date hereof are and be, and so at all times from henceforth shall be and
continue free, clear and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged and saved
harmless by the said J. F. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, of and from
all and every former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases Statutes
Merchant and of the Staple, Recognisances, Jointures, Dowers, Wills and Rents,
and of, and from all and all manner of encumbrance or demand whatsoever, had,
made, committed or done by him the said J. F. or by any other person or
persons, by his authority or procurement.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of Dower.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. L. Son and Heir of C. L. late of S. in
the County of S. of the one part, and N. C. and J. his Wife, who was the relict
of the said O. L. of the other part, Whereas the said O. L. in his life, and at
the time of death was seized in his demesne as of Fee, of and in diverse Lands
and Tenements in Y. and W. in the County aforesaid, which upon the decease of
the said O. L. descended unto the said R. L. Now this Indenture witnesses,
that the said R. L. has endowed and assigned and by these presents, does endow
and assign unto the said N. C. and J. his Wife the third part of all the said
Lands and Tenements (to wit, etc.) All that Message, To have and to hold unto
the said N. C. and J. his Wife, for and during the natural life of the said J.
in severalty by Meets and Bounds, in the name of Dower, and in recompense and
satisfaction of all the Dower, which the said J. ought to have of or in the
said Lands and Tenements which were of the said O. L. in Y. and W. aforesaid.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of several Bonds to a Trustee for a Widow, with consent of her
intended Husband, that the Money be at her dispose after Marriage.
THIS Indenture Tripartite, made, etc. Between J. D. of, etc. of the first
part, S. G. of, etc. of the second part, and O. W. of, etc. of the third part.
Whereas J. T. of, etc. did heretofore by one Writing Obligatory (become bound
unto the said S. G. in the penal sum of 40 l.) bearing date the 29th day of
October 1601. with Condition to be void upon payment of 20 l. 10 s. on the
first day of April then next following. And also by one other Obligation,
bearing date the 18th day of October 1690. is and stands bound unto the said
S. G. in the penal sum 240 l. with condition to be void upon Payment of 123 l.
of lawful Money on the 19th day of April then next following. And whereas A. T.
of, etc. is likewise by one Obligation, bearing date the 7th day of June, bound
unto the said S. G. in the penal sum of 10 l. conditioned for the payment of 51
l. on the 13th day of November then next following. And also by one other
Obligation, is and stands bound unto the said S. G. (bearing date the 10th
day of February 1689) in the penal sum of 20 l. with condition to be void upon
payment of 10 l. 5 s. upon the 11th day of August then next following. Which
several Principal Moneys in the several Conditions of the above-recited
Obligations, amount unto the sum of 200 l. relation to which said recited
Obligations and the Conditions thereof being had may more fully appear, and are
yet due and owing unto the said S. G. Now this Indenture witnesses, That a
Marriage being intended, by the grace of God, shortly to be had and solemnized
between the said J. D. and S. G. in consideration whereof, amongst other
things, it is agreed the said sum of 200 l. Principal Money, in the Conditions
of the recited Obligations mentioned, and the Interest thereof, shall be
disposed in such manner as herein after is expressed. And in pursuance of the
said Agreement, the said S. G. with the consent of the said J. D. has granted
and Assigned, and by these presents does grant and Assign unto the said O. W.
the several Writings Obligatory before recited, and all and every the sum and
sums of Money upon them due or to be due. And the said J. D. and S. G. do hereby
constitute, make, appoint and in their place and stead put the said O. W. their
true and lawful Attorney for them and their names or in the name of one of
them, and to the uses, intents and purposes herein after mentioned, to receive,
have and take of and from the several Persons, Debtos before named, their
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, all and every sum and sums of Money due or
to be due as aforesaid; and also in the name, stead and place of the said J. D.
and S. G. to give and deliver Acquittances (unto the said several Persons,
their Heirs, Executors and Administrators) or other legal discharges for the
said several sum and sums of Money, or any part thereof so to be received, or
otherwise deliver up the said several Writings Obligatory to be cancelled. And
for default of payment of the said several sums of Money, the said several
persons or either of them, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators
respectively, in the names of the said J. D. and S. G. to Arrest, Implead,
Imprison and Condemn; and out of Prison them or any or either of them to
Release and Discharge. And the said J. D. and S. G. do covenant and grant for
themselves their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, to and with the said O.
W. his Executors and Administrators by these presents, That they the said J. D.
and S. G. their Executors and Administrators shall and will allow, ratify and
confirm all whatsoever the said O. W. shall lawfully do or cause to be done in
and about the Premises. And also that they the said J. D. and S. G. their
Executors and Administrators, or any or either of them, shall not or will not
at any time hereafter annihilate, acquit, release or otherwise discharge or
make void the writings Obligatory beforementioned, or any of them, or any sum
or sums of Money thereupon due, or any Action, Suit, Bill, Plaint, Judgment or
Execution thereupon, or for the same or any part thereof to be had, brought,
prosecuted or obtained, without the special license and consent of the said O.
W. his Executors or Administrators therein or thereunto first had and obtained
in writing, or the Rule, Order or Decree of some Court of Law or Equity. And
also that they the said J. D. and S. G. their Executors and Administrators
shall and will from time to time and at all tines here after upon every
reasonable request, well and truly do and execute all and every such further
lawful and reasonable Act and Acts, Thing and Things for confirmation of these
presents; and for the further, better and more perfect authorizing and
impowring the said O. W. his Executors and Administrators, to receive, have and
take up all and every the sum and sums of Money now due, or which shall be due
upon the several Writings Obligatory aforesaid, to the uses herein after
mentioned. Provided always, and upon the special Trust and Confidence, and to
this intent and purpose, That the said O. W. his Executors and Administrators
shall pay unto the said S. G. so much Money as the said O. W. shall receive for
the interest or proceed of the said 200 l. during so long time as the said J.
D. and S. G. shall live and cohabit together. And the said J. D. for himself
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators does hereby further covenant and grant
to and with the said O. W. in manner following (viz.) That the whole Interest,
Product or proceed of the said 200 l. which the said O. W. his Executors or
Administrators shall as aforesaid, from time to time, and at all times accept,
receive and take, he the said O. W. his Executors or Administrators shall pay
to the said S. G. as a Feme sole. And the said S. G. is hereby authorized and
empowered to receive and take the same, and fully to discharge the said O. W.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every or either of them by her
Acquittance or otherwise, with or without the consent of the said J. D. as if
she were a Feme sole, and all the residue of the Interest or Proceed of the
said 200 l. together with the said principal sum, to such person or persons as
the said S. G. by any writing under her Hand and Seal, with or without her said
intended Husband, or by her last Will and Testament in writing shall appoint or
direct; and for want of such direction and appointment, to the Executors or
Administrators of the said S. G. Provided also, and it is, agreed between all
the Parties hereunto That if the said O. W. his Executors or Administrators
shall receive any part of the said principal sum of 200 l. Then he or they
shall lend out the same again at Interest to such person or persons, and on
such Security as the said S. G. by any writing under her Hand and Seal, with or
without the said J. D. shall direct. And that the said O. W. his Executors or
Administrators shall not be chargeable to answer any Interest or Profit of the
said 200 l. or so much thereof as shall remain in his or their hands unlent in
default of such direction. And also, That notwithstanding any thing before in
these presents contained, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said O. W.
his Executors and Administrators out of any Interest Money by him or them to be
received by virtue of these Presents, to reimburse and retain to him and
themselves all such sum and sums of Money as he or they shall encessarily expend
or lay out by reason of any Suit or Suits in Law touching the Premises, not
occasioned by any breach of trust by the said O. W. his Executors or
Administrators.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of the moiety of an Annuity during Life.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of, etc. F. J. of, etc. of the one
part, and R. C. of, etc. of the other part witnesses, That the said J. F. and
F. J. for and in consideration of the sum of 800 l. of lawful Money of England,
to them in hand paid by the said R. C. at or before the ensealing and delivery
of these Presents, the receipt whereof and themselves therewith fully satisfied
and paid, they the said J. F. and F. J. do hereby acknowledge, and thereof do
release, acquit and for ever discharge the said R. C. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators by these Presents, Have granted, bargained, sold and confirmed,
and by these Presents do fully and absolutely grant, bargain, sell and confirm
unto the said R. C. one Annuity or Annual Rent of 100 l. by the year, being the
moiety or half part of one entire Annuity or Annual Rent of 200 l. by the year,
arising, due and payable unto the said J. F. and F. J. out of the Manor of A.
or out of any part or parcel thereof, To have and to hold the said Annuity or
annual Rent of 100 l. herein beforementioned to be bargained and sold unto the
said R. C. and his Assigns, from the, etc. last past before the date of these
Presents, for and during the term of fourscore years, if he the said R. C.
shall happen so long to live, in as large, ample and beneficial manner to all
intents and purposes as they the said J. F. and F. J. or either of them now
has, ever had, or could, or might, or can, or may in any wise grant, bargain
or sell the same to the only use and behoof of the said R. C. and his Assigns.
And the said J. F. and F. J. the said annual Rent of 100 l. herein
beforementioned, to be bargained and sold by the year, against themselves and
all other persons lawfully claiming or to claim the same or any part thereof,
by, from or under them, or either of them, unto the said R. C. and him Assigns,
shall and will warrant and defend by these Presents. And the said J. F. and F.
J. do for themselves, and either of them does for himself, their and his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them covenant, promise and grant to
and with the said R. C. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every of them by
these Presents in manner following, (that is to say) That they the said J. F.
and F. J. or one of them, for and notwithstanding any Act or thing by them or
either of them heretofore done or suffered to the contrary, have or has in
themselves, or one of them at the time of their sealing of these Presents, good
right and lawful authority to grant, bargain and sell unto the said R. C. and
his Assigns, the said annual Rent of 100 l. by the year, in such manner and
form as is herein beforementioned. And further, That the said R. C. and his
Assigns shall and lawfully may, during the natural life of the said R. C. or
the term of, etc. if the said R. C. shall so long live, peaceably and quietly
have, hold, enjoy and receive, retain and keep the said annual Rent or sum of
100 l. by the year before granted, without the lawful let, suit, trouble,
denial or disturbance of or by the said J. F. and F. J. or either of them, any
other person or persons lawfully claiming, by, from or under them or either of
them, their or either of their Estate, Right or Title. And further, That the
said bargained Premises were, are and be, and so shall remain and continue to
the said R. C. and his Assigns, during the natural life of the said R. C. shall
so long live, free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted and discharged,
or else by the said J. F. and F. J. or one of them, their or one of their
Heirs, Executors or Administrators sufficiently saved harmless and indempnified
of and from all former and other gifts, grants, bargains, sales, leases,
jointures, dowers, sttatutes, judgments, recognizances, titles, troubles and
encumbrances whatsoever at any time heretofore had, made committed or suffered,
or hereafter to be had, made committed or suffered by them the said J. F. and
F. J. or either of them. And the said J. F. and F. J. do for themselves, their
Heirs, Executors and Admininistrators and every of them, covenant and promise
to and with the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every
of them by these Presents, That they the said J. F. and F. J. and all and every
other person and persons now having or lawfully claiming, or which shall or may
hereafter have or claim any lawful Estate, Right or Title in or unto the said
bargained Premises or any part thereof, by, from or under them the said J. F.
and F. J. shall and will at any times during the space of five years next after
the date of these Presents, if the said R. C. shall so long live, at and upon
the reasonable request, and at the proper costs and charges in the law of the
said R. C. and his Assigns make, acknowledge and Execute to the said R. C. and
his Assigns, all and every such further and other lawful and reasonable Act and
Acts, device, conveyance and assurance in Law whatsoever, for the better
holding and enjoying of the said 100 l. herein before granted according to the
true meaning of these Presents, as by the said R. C. and his Assigns, or any of
them, his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be devised, advised or
required, so that such person or persons who are to make such further assurance
as aforesaid, be not therefore compelled to travel farthe than to the Cities of
London or Westminster, which said other assurances so to be had and made as
aforesaid, shall be and enure, and shall be judged and taken to be and enure,
and by the said parties is hereby so declared to the only use and behoof of the
said R. C. and of his Assigns, and to no other use and purposes whatsoever.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of a Stewardship of a Manor during Pleasure.
TO all Christian People, to whom, etc. I J. F. of, etc.
send Greeting.
Know ye that I the said J. F. have given and granted, and do by these Presents
give and grant unto R. C. of, etc. the Office of Steward and Stewardship of the
Manor of A. in the County of S. and also the custody and keeping of all Courts
within the said Manor, together with all Fees and Profits thereunto belonging,
to have, hold and enjoy the same, to him the said R. C. by himself or his
sufficient Deputy, for and during my Will and Pleasure.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of the next Avoidance of a Rectory.
OMmnibus Xp^i Fidelibus ad quos hoc scriptum pervenerit M. B. de London' Vid
vera and indubitata Patrona Rectorie Ecce Parochialis de I. cum C. in Com^ S.
salutem in Dn^o sempiternam
Noveritis me M. B. predict^ pro diversis bonis Causis and Considerationibus me
in hac part specialiter moventibus dedisse concessisse ac per presents
confirmasse T. B. de S. in Com^ S. Clerico Executoribus Administratoribus and
Assignatis suis primam and proximam Advocationem Donationem Collationem
Nominationem Presentationem liberamque dispositionem predict^ Rectorie Ecclesie
Paroclis de I. cum C. predict^ volens and hoc presenti scripto meo concedens
quod been liceat and licebit dict^ T. B. Execut^ Administrat^ and Assignat^
suis ad dictam Ecclesiam de I. cum C. predict^ quandocunque quomodocunque
qualitercunque per mortem resignationem privationem cessionem permutationem
dimissionem sive quocunque alio modo primo and proxime vacari contigerit
aliquem unum virum honestum habilem and literatum loci illius Ordinario sive
Diocesano vel alii cuicunque potestatem in ea part habenti sive habituro pro
proxima and prima Vacatione tantum in debita juris forma nominare and
presentare hujusmodique personam per eundem T. B. Executores Administratores
vel Assignatos suos sic presentat^ ad dictam Rectoriam Ecce Paroclis de I. cum
C. predict^ admitti ac in eandem cum suis juribus membris and pertinentiis
universis instituti and investiri ceteraque omnia and singula in hac perte que
ad Patroni munus vel officium spectant exequi and perficere pro hujusmodi prima
and proxima Vacatione tantum adeo plene integre and libere prout ego prefat^ M.
B. prout facere aut expedire possem vel deberem si hec presens donatio and
concessio mea facta non fuisset

In cujus rei testimonium sigillum meum presentibus apposui dat^ octavo die
Iunii Anno Regni Regis Caroli Secundi nunc Anglie Scotie Francie and Hibernie
Fidei Defensor' Tricesimo Annoque Dn^i 1678.
A Grant of the next Avoydance of a Vicaridge, with necessary Covenants.
THIS Indenture, etc. Between N. C. of, etc. of the one part, and G. G. of,
etc. and G. S. of, etc. of the other part, Witnesses, that the said N. C. for
and in consideration of 25 l. of lawful Money of England, to him by the said G.
G. and G. S. before the sealing and delivery hereof, well and truly in hand
paid, Has granted, bargained and sold, and by these Presents does grant,
bargain and sell unto the said G. G. and G. S. the first and next Advowson,
Nomination, Presentation and free Disposition of and to the Vicaridge of the
Parish Church of H. in the County of S. To have and to hold the said next
Advowson, Presentation, Nomination and free Disposition of and to the said
Vicaridge of H. unto the said G. G. and G. S. their Executors Administrators
and Assigns for the next avoidance only: So that it shall be lawful to and for
the said G. G. and G. S. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns by force
and virtue of these Presents, any fit person to present to the said Vicaridge
when it shall next become void, either by the death, resignation or cession of
the present Incumbent, or otherwise howsoever. And the said N. C. does for
himself his Heirs Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant to and with
the said G. G. and G. S. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these
Presents, That no person or persons whatsoever (other than the said N. C.) have
or has any Right, Ritle or Interest to grant, bargain or sell the said next
Advowson and Presentation to the Vicaridge of H. aforesaid. And that such
person as by the said G. G. and G.S. their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, in pursuance of these presents, shall be presented to the said
Vicarage, and thereunto have Institution and Induction, shall or may have, hold
and enjoy the same without the lawful let or interruption, of or by any person
or persons, having right or title to the Advowson or Patronage of the Vicarage
aforesaid.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment made by a Vicar, of all Money owing to him for Tithes.
THis Indenture, made, etc. Between F. D. Clerk, Vicar of the Vicarage of St.
Peter the Great, alias the Subdeanry within the City of C. in the County of S.
of the one part, and E. B. of the City of C. aforesaid, Tailor, of the other
part, Witnesses, That the said F. D. has made, ordained and appointed, and by
these presents does make, ordain and appoint the said E. B. his true and lawful
Attorney, for him and in his name, stead and place, and to and for the only use
and behoof of the said E. B. to ask, levy, recover, have and take up, of and
from all and every person and persons whatsoever, Debtors unto the said F. D.
all and every sum and sums of Money due and owing to him for Tithes, Offerings,
or other Duties whatsoever, belonging to the Vicarage aforesaid. And the said
F. D. does hereby give and grant unto the said E. B. full power and authority
for him the said F. D. and in his name, stead and place, to give and deliver
unto all and every the said Debtors, their Executors and Administrators,
Acquittances or other legal Discharges for the several sums of Money by them due
and owing, as aforesaid. And in default of payment thereof, for him the said F.
D. and in his name, stead, and place, to arrest, implead, imprison and condemn
all and every the said Debtors, their Executors and Administrators, for the
said Tithes, Offerings and other Duties by them respectively owing, as
aforesaid. And out of Prison them and every of them to release and discharge,
and to take all the benefit and advantage of the said Tithes, Offerings, and
other Duties, and of all and every Sentence, Decree and Judgment for the same
to be obtained, and to appoint one or more Attorney or Attorneys under him, and
to do all and every lawful Act and thing tending to the recovery of the said
Tithes, Offerings and other Duties, as fully as the said F. D. his Executors or
Administrators may or can do. And the said F. D. does for himself, his
Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant to and with the said E. B. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, That he the said F.
D. his Executors and Administrators, shall and will allow, ratify and hold for
sure and good, whatsoever the said E. B. his Executors and Administrators,
shall lawfully do, or cause to be done, in or about the Premises. And also
that the said F. D. his Executors or Administrators, shall not at any time
hereafter do any act or thing whereby the said E.B. his Executors or
Administrators may be barred in Law, or obstructed or hindered from the
recovering and receiving all the said Tithes, Offerings, and other Duties, with
Costs of Suit. And also that the said F. D. his Executors and Administrators,
shall and will upon every reasonable request made, and at the costs and charges
of the said E. B. his Executors and Administrators, well and truly do and
execute, or cause to be done and executed, all and every further or other
lawful and reasonable Act or thing, for the better or more full authorizing and
impowring the said E. B. his Executors and Administrators, to recover and
receive the said Tithes, Offerings, and other Duties. And the said E. B. does
for himself, his Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant to and with
the said F. D. his Executors and Administrators by these presents, That he the
said E. B. his Executors and Administrators, shall and will from time to time,
and at all times hereafter, save, defend and keep harmless the said F. D. his
Executors and Administrators, of and from all costs, charges, damages and
expenses, by occasion of any Bill, Suit or Plaint, to be brought or prosecuted
by the said E. B. his Executors or Administrators, in the name of the said F.
D. his Executors or Administrators, for the said Tithes, Offerings, and other
Duties, or any part thereof.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of a Judgment.
TO all, etc. I F. J. of, etc.
send Greeting.
Whereas there is a Judgment for 400 l. on Record in the Court of Common Pleas
at Westminster against R. C. of, etc. at the Suit of me the said J. F. as by
the Records of the said Court, remaining in the Treasury at Westminster it does
more at large appear, upon which Judgment Execution has been lately sued
forth. Now know ye, That I the said J. F. for diverse good Causes and
Considerations me hereunto moving, have granted, transferred, assigned and set
over; and by these presents do clearly and absolutely grant transfer, Assign
and set over unto J. F. of, etc. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as
well the said Judgment for the said, etc. aforesaid, as also all benefit,
profit, sum and sums of Money and advantage whatsoever, that now is, or
hereafter shall or may be obtained by reason or means of the same, or of any
Execution or Extent thereupon to be had sued, executed or obtained, and all the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest and Demand whatsoever, which I the said J. F.
have or ought to have or claim, of, in or to the said Judgment, or any sum of
Money, Lands or Tenements, which by virtue thereof, or of any Process or
Execution thereupon sued or to be sued, is or which shall be recovered,
obtained or gotten. And further, I the said J. F. do by these Presents make,
ordain, constitute, authorize and appoint the said F. J. to be my true and
lawful Attorney, for me and in my name to sue and prosecute the Execution upon
the said Judgment, and upon Composition or Agreement made concerning the
premises, to acknowledge satisfaction, or to make and do any other Release or
Discharge for the same; and all and every other act and acts, thing or things
whatsoever, as shall be requisite in or about the Premises, I covenant,
promise and agree, to allow, establish and confirm by these presents. And I the
said J. F. for my self, my Executors and Administrators, do covenant, promise
and agree to and with the said F. J. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
by these Presents, in manner and form following; That is to say, That I the
said J. F. have never made, done or committed any Release or other discharge of
the said Judgment, or of any Extent or Execution, which has been thereupon
sued or executed, neither will or shall I the said J. F. my Executors or
Administrators, at any time hereafter make, commit or do any release, act or
thing whatsoever, whereby the said Judgment, or any Extent or Execution which
has been thereupon sued or executed, or which shall be thereupon sued or
executed at any time hereafter by the said F. J. or his Assigns, shall be in
any manner or wise hurt hindered, disabled, debarred or extinguished, without
the consent of the said F. J. his Executors or Assigns, thereunto first had in
Writing, under their Hands and Seals. And farther, That I the said J. F. my
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will at all times hereafter,
on request made, and at the costs and charges of the said F. J. and his
Assigns, maintain justify, allow and confirm all such lawful Actions, Suits,
Process, Extents, Executions and Proceedings whatsoever, as have been, or
hereafter shall be brought, sued forth or prosecuted against the said R. C. his
Executors or Administrators, his, their or any of their Tenements, Lands and
Goods, upon or by reason of the said Judgment. And that he the said F. J. his
Executors and Administrators, shall and may peaceably and quietly have and
hold, receive and enjoy, to his and their own proper use and behoof, all such
benefit, sum and sums of Money, Lands and Tenements, which by virtue of the said
Judgment, or of any Extents, Executions or Proceedings thereon, shall be
recovered, obtained or gotten, without the let, suit, trouble, eviction or
disturbance of me the said J. F. my Executors or Administrators, and without
any account to me or them, or any of them therefore to be made or given.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to receive Moneys due from several Persons.
TO all Christian People to whom these Presents shall come, I J. O. of Kingsham
in the County of Sussex, Gent.
send Greeting,
Whereas upon an account made between me and N. C. Gent. I am in arrear and
indebted unto him in one and twenty Pounds and ten Shillings. Now know ye, That
for the more speedy re-imbursing and paying unto the said N. C. the said one
and twenty Pounds and ten Shillings, I do hereby grant and assign unto him five
Pounds and ten Shillings due unto me from R. L. of Farnham, upon a Bill
Obligatory, dated the 14th day of March in the Year of our Lord 1676. And I do
hereby also grant and assign unto the said N. C. all Sum and Sums of Money due
or payable unto me by R. L. Clerk for Costs and Charges, Taxes or Assesses, or
to be taxed or assessed by his Majesty's Court of Exchequer. And farther I do
make and appoint the said N. C. my true and lawful Attorney for me and in my
name, stead and place to receive, have and take up all and every the Sum and
Sums of Money before mentioned, and to do and execute all and every matter and
thing necessary to be done for the receiving or recovering the said Moneys. And
I do hereby covenant with the said N. C. That he the said N. shall or lawfully
may receive, have and take up of and from the said R. L. and R. L. respectively
all and every the said several Sum and Sums of Money, and the same may retain
and keep to his own use notwithstanding any Act or thing by me done or to be
done to the contrary, and without any Account hereof to me to be rendered.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal the 3d. day of April,
in the Year of our Lord, 1678.
A Memorial of Submission to an Arbritation according to the new Statute.
1 May 1699. A. B. and C. D. being desirous to end diverse Controversies and
Quarrels between them (for which there is no other Remedy but by personal
Action or Suit in Equity) did agree to submit, and did submit and refer all the
said Controversies, Suits and Quarrels to the Award of E. F. and C. H.
(Arbitrators indifferently chosen between them) to be made in Writing under the
Hands and Seals of the said Arbitrators before the (...) day of (...) next
ensuing. And the said Parties did mutually promise and oblige themselves
respectively, That they will perform and execute such Award as the said
Arbitrators shall make in the Premises. And the said Parties did farther agree,
That their said Submission should be made a Rule in his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, and that they will finally be concluded by the
Arbitration which shall be made concerning them by the said Arbitrators
pursuant to such Submission.

An Assignment by a Mortgagee of a Term for Years.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of the one part, and R. C. of, etc. of
the other part Witnesses; That whereas, F. J. by his Indenture bearing date,
etc. (and so go on with the recital) And whereas, in the said recited Indenture
of Assignment, There is a Proviso or Condition contained for redemption of the
Premises upon payment of One hundred pounds of, etc. on the 10th day of March
which then should be, and since has been in the Year of our Lord, etc. as in
and by the said Proviso or Condition, relation being thereunto had, does more
fully appear; Which said Sum of One hundred pounds or any part thereof, was not
paid or tendered to or for the said J. F. at the day in the Proviso of
Redemption limited for the payment thereof, and yet remains unpaid, by reason
whereof, the said Message and other the premises, and the whole Estate,
Right, Title and Interest of the said F. J. in and to the same became forfeited
unto the said J. F. and he thereby was and now is, and shall lawfully be
interested and possessed, in and of the said premises, and of and in every
Part thereof; during the residue and term of years which then were and now are
to come and unexpired, of the Term granted to the said F. J. in and by the said
Indenture of Demise abovementioned. Now this Indenture further Witnesses,
That the said J. F. for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to him in hand
paid by the said F. J. at and before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, whereof and wherewith the said J. F. does, etc. Has granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and setover, and by these Presents does fully,
clearly and absolutely grant, bargain, sell, assign and set-over unto the said
R. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as well the said Message,
Tenement, etc. and all other the Premises with the appurtenances whatsoever,
in and by the said Indenture of Demise granted to the said J. F. as aforesaid;
as also all the Estate, right, title, interest, property, possession, term of
years, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said J. F. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns now has, may or ought to have or claim, in or to the
said Message and Premises, or any part thereof, by force and virtue of the
said Indenture of Mortgage or Assignment above-recited, or of any thing therein
mentioned or contained; Together with the said Indenture of Mortgage or Demise
aforesaid, and all there Writings relating to or concerning the same; To have
and to hold the said, etc. unto the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, to his and their own proper use and behoof, in as large, ample and
beneficial manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as he the said J. F.
now has, or might or ought to have and enjoy the same, by force and virtue of
the said Indenture of Lease, or the said Indenture of Mortgage aforesaid, or
either of them or any thing therein mentioned or expressed, or otherwise
howsoever. (A Covenant for discharge of Encumbrances.)

In witness, etc.
Note, If the Assignor be not in possession nothing will pass unless such
Assignment be sealed and executed on the Premises.

An Assignment of a Bond
TO all, etc.
Whereas R. C. of, etc. in and by one Obligation or Writing Obligatory bearing
date, etc. stands bound to the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, in the penal Sum of Twenty pounds with a Condition thereunto anexed
for the payment of Ten pounds of, etc. on the 10th day of March next ensuing
the date of the said Obligation, as by the said Obligation and Condition it
does more fully appear. Now know ye, That I the said J. F. for diverse good
Causes and Considerations me hereunto moving, Have bargained, sold, assigned
and set-over, and by these Presents do fully, clearly and absolutely bargain,
sell, assign and set-over unto F. J. of, etc. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, as well the said Obligation, as the said sum of Money therein
mentioned, to the proper use and behoof of the said F. J. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and without any account therefore to be given unto
me the said J. F. my Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of an Apprentice.
TO all, etc. I R. C. of, etc.
send Greeting.
Whereas my Apprentice A. B. has certain years yet to come and unexpired of his
Apprenticeship, viz. three whole years from the Feast of St. Michael last past,
as by his Indenture to me sealed it does appear. Now know ye, That I the said
R. C for diverse good Causes and Considerations me hereunto moving, Have
granted, assigned and set over, and by these presents do fully and absolutely
give, grant, assign and set over unto my well beloved Friend F. J. all such
right, title, duty, term of years to come, service and demand whatsoever, which
I the said R. C. have in or to the said A. B. or which I may or ought to have
in him by force and virtue of the said Indenture of Apprenticeship: And
moreover I the said R. C. do by these presents covenant, promise and agree to
and with the said F. J. his Executors and Assigns, that notwithstanding any
thing by the said R. C. to be done to the contrary, the said A. B. shall during
the said Term of three years well and truly serve the said R. C. as his Master,
and his Commandments lawful and honest shall do and from his Service shall not
absent himself day or night during the Term aforesaid; Provided that the said
R. C. shall well entreat and use the said A. B. finding for him Meat, Drink,
Linen, Woollen, Hose, Shoos and Bedding, and all other necessaries during the
said Term.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of a Lease.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of, etc. of the one part, and R. C.
of, etc. of the other part witnesses, that C. R. of, etc. in and by one
Indenture of Lease bearing date, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned
did demise, grant and to farm let unto the said J. F. (recite the Lease) as in
and by the said recited Indenture of Lease it does more fully and at large
appear: And this Indenture further witnesses, that the said J. F. for and in
consideration of, etc. to him paid before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, by the said R. C. the receipt whereof he the said J. F. does hereby
acknowledge, and thereof, and of every part thereof does hereby, fully, acquit,
exonerate and discharge the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, Has granted, bargrained, sold, assigned and set over, And by these
presents does grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said R. C. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all that, etc. and all the Estate,
Right, Title, Interest, Possession, Term of years to come, claim and demand
whatsoever, which he the said J. F. now has, or may, ought or should have or
claim in or to the Message and Premises with the Appurtenances aforesaid, by
force and virtue of the said recited Indenture of Lease, To have and to hold
the said, etc. And also the said recited Indenture of Lease, and all the
Estate, Right, Ritle, Interest and Term of years, before in and by these
presents, bargained, sold, assigned and set over unto the said R. C. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to his and their proper use and behoof,
during the residue of the said Term, by the Indenture of Lease granted and yet
to come, and unexpired, in as large, ample and beneficial manner to all intents
and purposes, as he the said J. F. now has or might, should or ought to have,
and enjoy the same by force and virtue of the said recited Indenture of Lease
or otherwise howsoever; And the said J. F. for himself, his etc. does covenant
and agree to and with the said R. C. his, etc. that notwithstanding any act or
thing by the said J. F. done to the contrary, the said recited Indenture of
Lease is a good, sure, perfect and indefeazable Lease in the Law, at the time
of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, and so shall stand remain,
continue and be unto the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
for and during the remainder of the term of years thereby granted, under the
Rents and Covenants therein mentioned and contained; And also that the said R.
C. his Executors, etc. paying the Rent reserved, and performing the Covenants,
Conditions and Agreements in the above recited Lease contained, shall and may
peaceably and quietly have, hold occupy, possess and enjoy the said, etc. for
and during the residue of the Term aforesaid, without the let, suit, trouble
or interruption of him the said J. F. his, etc. or of any other person or
persons, lawfully, claiming or to claim any right or interest in the Premises,
by, from or under him, them or any of them.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of an Annuity.
TO All, etc. I R. C. of, etc.
send greeting,
Whereas J. F. of, etc. by his Deed indented bearing date, etc. for the
considerations therein mentioned, did give, grant and confirm unto me the said
R. C. one annuity or yearly rent of, etc. to be issuing and going out of all
and singular the Messuages and Tenements, Lands and Premises of the said J. F.
situate and being in, etc. for the term of the natural life of me the said R.
C. as in and by the said Deed indented it does more fully and at large appear:
Now know ye that I the said R. C. for diverse good considerations me hereunto
moving, have assigned and set over, and by these presents do assign and set
over unto F. J. of, etc. the said Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc. To have and
to hold the said Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc. aforesaid, unto the said F. J.
and his Assigns in as large and ample manner and form as I the said R. C. may
or ought to have and enjoy the same by virtue of the said Deed Indented or any
thing therein contained, together with the said Deed Indented.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of certain Debts by an Administratrix to Creditors.
TO All, etc. R. C. of, etc. Administratrix of all and singular the Goods,
Chattels and Debts of B. C. my late Husband deceased
sends greeting,
Whereas the said B. C. my late Husband in his life time stood indebted unto,
etc. and to every of them severally in certain several Sums of Money; Know ye
therefore, that I the said R. C. intending as much as in me lies to give
content and satisfaction to them and every of them, Have given, granted,
bargained, assigned and set over, and by these Presents do fully, clearly and
absolutely, etc. unto the said, etc. Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all
and every the Book Debts, Specialties, Obligations mentioned in a Schedule
hereunto annexed, which are due and owing unto me the said R. as
Administratrix, by one T. A. of, etc. and one A. T. of etc. and by such their
Sureties, as in the said Writings and Obligations are named as in and by the
said, etc. it does more at large appear, together with all and every Sum and
Sums of Money, profits and advantage that shall or may arise, come or be had of
or by the said Book Debts, Obligations and Writings, and every of them, and all
my right, title, interest, property, claim and demand in and to the same or any
part thereof; And I the said R. C. do for my self, my Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, Covenant and Promise to and with the said, etc. and every of them,
their, and every of their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that I the
said R. C. have not released or any way discharged the said Book Debts,
Obligations or Writings, or any of them, or any Sum or Sums of Money in them or
any of them mentioned; And I the said R. C. do Covenant and Promise for my
self, my Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that neither I nor they or any
of them, shall or will at any time hereafter release or discharge the said Book
Debts, Obligations, etc. or any Sum or Sums of Money in any of them mentioned,
without the consent of, etc. First, thereunto had and obtained; And that I the
said R. C. my, etc. shall and will permit and suffer the said, etc. jointly and
severally at their costs and charges to commence and prosecute, all and every
such lawful Actions and Suits, as shall by them or any of them, their or any of
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, be thought requisite and necessary
for the receving of the said Debts or any of them, and the said Actions will
now aver, justify and maintain, And that the said, etc. their etc. shall and
may quietly, have, possess and enjoy to their own proper use, all and every
such Sum and Sums of Money, which shall be recovered and obtained by reason of
the same, and shall have full power and authority in my name, to acquit,
release and discharge upon the payment of any of the said Debts so due as
aforesaid.

In witness, etc.
Note, This would be better by Indenture.

An Assignment of a Statute be an Administrator to two Creditors.
THis Indenture, etc. Between R. C. of, etc. Administrator of the Goods and
Chattels of C. R. late of, etc. of the one part, And J. F. of, etc. and F. J.
of, etc. of the other part, Whereas the said C. R. at the time of his death
stood indebted unto the said J. F. in the Sum of 200 l. Principal Money, and to
the said F. J. in the Sum of 400 l. Principal Money besides Interest for each of
the said Debts; And whereas J. V. of, etc. in and by one Recognizance or
Statute, in the nature of a Stature Staple, bearing date the tenth day of
March, in the first year of the Reign of, etc. and taken and acknowledged
before Sir H. B. Knight, then Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, is and stands bound unto the said C. R. in the
Sum of, etc. of lawful Money of England, payable at the Feast of St. Michael,
the Archangel then next ensuing, as by the said Statute more at large
appears, Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said R. C. for and toward
the payment and satisfaction of the said Debts due to the said J. F. and F. J.
Has given, granted, assigned and set over unto the said J. F. and F. J. their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the said Recognizance or Statute, and
all his right and interest therein, and all Actions Extents and Executions to
be had or prosecuted upon the same, in as large and ample manner and form as he
the said R. C. has, or at any time hereafter may or might have by force of the
said Statute: And further, the said R. C. does by these presents constittute,
authorize and make the said J. F. and F. J. his true, irrevocabl lawful
Attorney and Attorneys, jointly and severally to sue, and prosecute all manner
of Actions, Suits, Demands and Executions, in and upon the said Statute or
Recognizance, in the name of the said R. C. his Executors or Administrators,
and to receive and recover the said Sum of, etc. in the said Statute mentioned,
and all other Sum and Sums of Money, benefit and advantage, which shall or may
lawfully be had or gotten upon the said Statute or Recognizance, Authorizing
them and every of them by these presents, to retain such Counselors and
Attorneys for the executing of the said Suits, Extents and Executions as shall
be requisite and necessary; And to Execute all and every other lawful Act and
Acts whatsoever, which shall be meet and expedient in and about the Premises;
And the said R. C. does for himself, his Executors and Administrators,
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said J. F. and F. J. their and
every of their Executors and Administrators, that he the said R. C. his
Executors and Administrators, shall and will permit, suffer, justify, allow
and maintain all such lawful Actions, Suits, Extents and Executions as the said
J. F. and F. J. or any of them, their Executors Administrators or assigns,
shall and will, sue or prosecute for the levying, taking and receiving of the
said Sum of, etc. contained in the said Statute in the name of the said R. C.
his Executors or Administrators, And that all Sums of Money, Recoveries and
Executions to be had and obtained upon the same by any Suit, Action or
Execution, or otherwise shall be to the only use of the said J. F. and F. J.
their etc. to be divided between them proportionably according to their several
Debts, in as large and ample manner and form as the said R. C. might have had
the same; And that he the said R. C. has not, neither shall or will he, his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at any time hereafter release or
discharge the said Debt contained in the said Statute, nor any Action, Extent
or Execution to be had upon the same, nor do any other Act in prejudice of the
same: And further, that he the said R. C. his Executors and Administrators,
shall at any time during the space of three years next after such time, as the
said Statute shall be executed by way of Extent, make or cause to be made to
the said J. F. and F. J. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, to the
only use and be hoof of them the said J. F. and F. J. on request to be made, by
and at the costs and charges in the Law of them the said J. F. and F. J. their
Executors Administrators and Assigns, such assurance and conveyance of the Land
which shall be extended and put in Execution upon the said Statute, as shall be
reasonably devised by the said J. F. and F. J. or either of them, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or their or any of their Counsel learned
in the Law, discharged of all Encumbrances by the said R. C. his, etc.

In witness, etc.
A Penal Bill for payment of Money.
KNow all men by these presents, That I R. C. of, etc. do owe unto J. F. of D.
aforesaid Gent. ten pounds of lawful Money of England, to be paid unto the said
J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns on the tenth day of March next
ensuing the date hereof, to which payment well and truly to be made, I bind my
self, my Heirs, Executors and Administrators in 20 l. of like lawful Money
firmly by these Presents,

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal, this twenty eighth
day of November, Annoque Domini 1699.
An Acquittance for part of Purchase Money.
REceived by me J. F. the day and year above written, the Sum of 130 l. of
lawful Money of England, in part of the 500 l. of like Money of England, agreed
to be paid for the Purchase of certain Lands in C. in the County S. according
to certain Articles of Agreement Indented bearing date, etc. made between, etc.

In witness, etc.
A Warrant to Summon a Copyhold Court, of the Manor of N.
WHereas I have received directions from Sr. R. C. Knight, to hold a Court
Baron for his Manor of N. within, etc. These are to let you know that I have
appointed the tenth day of March next, being Thursday, for the holding of the
said Court at the House of T. B. Yeoman: And therefore do hereby require you to
give notice of the same, unto all Suitors and Tenants of the said Manor, and
to warn and require them and every of them to be there, and then present, by
nine of the clock in the Morning; And that also at the time and place
aforesaid, you return a Jury of the Suitors and Tenants of the said Manor, to
enquire of such Matters as shall by me be given them in charge,

And hereof, etc. given under my Hand and Seal, etc.
A Bill of Credit.
THis present Writing witnesses, That I R. C. of London Merchant, do undertake
to and with J. F. of the City of C. Merchant, his Executors and Administrators,
that if he deliver unto Sir C. R. Knight, or any of his Assigns, to his use,
any Sum or Sums of Money amounting to the Sum of 1000 l. of lawful Money of
England or under, And shall take a Bill under the Hand and Seal of the said R.
C. confessing and showing the certainty thereof, That then I my Executors or
Administrators having the same Bill delivered to me or them shall immediately
upon the receipt of the same, pay or cause to be paid unto the said J. F. his
Executors or Assigns, all such Sums of Money as shall be contained in the said
Bill, which payment in manner and form aforesaid, well and truly to make, I
bind my self, my Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Clause in a Will to enable the Executors to Sell Lands.
ITem, I Will and Ordain that the Executor of this my last Will and Testament
or his Executor or Executors, Administrator or Administrators, for and toward
the performanee of my said Testament, shall with all convenient speed after my
decease, bargain, sell and alien in Feesimple all those Lands, etc. for the
doing, executing and perfect finishing whereof, I do by these presents give,
grant, will and transfer to my said Executor, and to his Executors and
Administrators full Power and Authority, to grant, alien, bargain, sell, convey
and assure All, etc. to any person or persons and their Heirs for ever in
Feesimple, by all and every such lawful ways and means in the Law as to my said
Executors, or his, etc. or to his or their Counsel learned in the Law, shall
seem fit.

A Form of an Award.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, J. F. and R.
C. of, etc.
send Greeting.
Whereas diverse controversies and debates have been and yet are depending
between R. D. and M. C. for the appeasing and determining whereof the said
parties have submitted themselves, and are become bound each to other by their
several Obligations dated, etc. in the sum of, etc. with Conditions unto the
said Obligations for performance of the Award, Arbitrament, Determination and
Judgment of us the said J. F. and R. C. Arbitrators indifferently elected and
chosen, as well on the part and behalf of the said R. D. as on the part and
behalf of the said M. C. to Award, Arbitrate, Determine and Judge, of and
concerning all and all manner of Actions, Suits, Judgments, Executions,
Accounts, Recknings, Trespasses, Controversies and Demands whatsoever, had,
made, moved, stirred and depending between the said R. D. and M. C. from the
beginning of the World until the day of the date of these Presents; so always
as the said Award, etc. of us the said J. F. and R. C. for and concerning the
Premises, be made and put in writing under our Hands and Seals, on or before
the, etc. as by the said Obligations and Conditions it does more fully appear.
Now know ye, That we said J. F. and R. C. Arbitrators as aforesaid taking upon
us the charge of the said Award and Arbitrament, and having heard and
understood the Sayings and Allegations of both the said Parties concerning the
Premises, and being minded to settle unity and friendship between them
concerning the same, do thereupon make and put in writing this our Award,
Arbitration and Judgment between the said Parties for and concerning the
premises, in manner and form following: That is to say, First, we do Award,
Arbitrate and Determine by these Presents, That the said R. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns shall well and truly pay, etc. And we the said
Arbitrators do also award, etc. That he the said R. D. shall on the, etc. Seal,
and as his absolute Deed deliver to the said M. C. or to her use, a Release of
all and all manner of Actions, etc. from the beginning of the World to the day
of the date of the Obligations aforesaid. And further, we do award, Arbitrate
and Determine, that the said M. C. shall well and truly pay, etc. and seal,
release, etc.

In witness, etc.
A Bargain and Seal of all Goods and Chattels real and personal, to save
harmless from all Bonds.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, I R. C. of,
etc.
send Greeting.
Know yet that J. the said R. C. as well for the indempnifying and saving
harmless of J. F. of, etc. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
and every of them of and from all manner of Bonds and Writings obligatory
whatsoever, wherein the said J. F. is and stands bound for me the said R. C.
in any sum or sums of Money to any person or persons whatsoever, as also for
diverse other good Causes and Considerations me hereunto especially moving, Have
given, granted, bargained, sold and confirmed, and by these Presents do give,
grant, bargain, sell and confirm unto to the said J. F. all and singular my
Leases, Goods and Chattels whatsoever, as well real as personal of what kind,
nature, quality or condition soever the same are or be, and in what place or
places soever the same shall or may be found, as well in my own custody and
possession, as in the hands, custody and possession, of any other person or
persons whatsoever; To have and to hold all and singular the said Leases, Goods
and Chattels, and all other the Premises, with the appurtenances, to the said
J. F. his Heirs, etc. to his and their own proper use and behoof for ever. And
I the said R. C. and my Heirs, etc. all and singular the said Goods and
Chattels and other the Premises, unto the said J. F. his, etc. to his and
their own proper use as aforesaid, shall and will warrant and for ever defend
by these Presents, Provided always that if I the said R. C. my Executors etc.
or any of us do or shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter clearly
acquit and discharge or otherwise sufficiently save and keep harmless the said
J. F. his, etc. and all his and their Goods, Chatels, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments and every of them, of and from all and singular Bonds, Writings
Obligatory whatsoever, wherein and whereby the said J. F. at the request or for
the debt of me the said R. C. is and stands bound to any person or persons
whatsoever in any sum or sums of Money, and of and from all and all manner of
Actions, Suits, Charges, Troubles, Expenses and Demands whatsoever, which shall
or may in any wise hereafter happen, come, grow or be, to or against the said
J. F. his, etc. or any of them, for or by reason of the said Obligations,
Writings obligatory or any of them, or any thing in them or any of them
mentioned or contained, that then this present Deed or Grant, and every thing
herein contained shall be utterly void and of none effect, any thing before
mentioned herein to the contrary notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
A Deed of Free Gift of all Goods and Chattels.
To all, etc. I J. F. of. etc.
send Greeting.
Know ye, That I the said J. F. as well for and in consideration of the natural
love and affection which I bear to my well-beloved Cousin R. C. of, etc. as also
for diverse other good Causes and Considerations me hereunto moving, have given
and granted, and by these presents do give, grant and confirm unto the said R.
C. all and singular my Goods, Chattels, Leases, Debts, Ready Money,
Housholdstuff and all other my Substance whatsoever, moveable and immovable,
quick and dead, of what kind or nature soever the same are, and in what place
or places soever the same be, either in my possession or in the custody of any
other person or persons whatsoever, To have and to hold all and singular the
said Goods, etc. and all other the aforesaid Premises, unto the said R. C.
his, etc. to his and their own proper use and behoof for ever, without any
manner of challenge, claim or demand from me the said J. F. or from any other
person or persons whatsoever for me, or authorized or procured by me, and
without any Money or other thing to be yielded therefore unto me the said J. F.
my, etc. And I the said J. F. all and singular the aforesaid Goods, etc. to the
said R. C. his, etc. to the use aforesaid, against all people do and will
warrant and for ever defend by these Presents. And further know ye, that I the
said J. F. have put the said R. C. in possession of all and singular the
Premises aforesaid, by the delivery of the sum of 5 s. unto him the said R. C.

In witness, etc.
A Deed to revoke uses in a Settlement, according to a power reserved.
TO all, etc. J. F. of, etc.
sends Greeting.
Whereas in and by one Indenture, bearing date, etc. and made between the said
J. F. of the one part, and R. C. of, etc. of the other part. There is (amongst
other things) one Proviso, contained in these or the like words, (that is to
say) Provided likewise, and it is hereby further declared and agreed by and
between the said Parties to these Presents, that if the said J. F. shall at any
time hereafter, during his natural life, be minded to alter, revoke, or make
void all or any of the Use or Uses, Estate or Estates, Trust or Trusts herein
mentioned, limited and appointed, and shall by any Deed or Writing by him the
said J. F. Sealed and Subscribed in the presence of two credible Witnesses,
declare and publish his Mind, intent and meaning to be to revoke, alter and
make void the said several Uses, Estates and Trusts herein beforementioned,
declared and appointed, or any of them; That then, and immediately after such
Revocation so made as aforesaid, the same Uses, Estate, and Trusts in and by
these Premises limited, expressed and declared, of, for and concerning which
any such Revocation shall be made, shall cease and become void and of none
effect: And that then and at all times after the said R. C. and his Heirs, and
all other person and persons standing and being seized of the said, etc. shall
stand and be seized of the same or such part thereof concerning the which such
Revocation or Declaration shall be made as aforesaid, to such uses and purposes
as the said J. F. in or by any such Deed or writing shall declare, limit and
express, and in default of such limitation or appointment, to the only use and
behoof of the said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns forever, as in and by the said
Indenture it does more fully and at large appear. Now know ye, That I the said
J. F. do by this present Deed, Sealed and Subscribed by me the said J. F. in
the presence of two credible Witnesses declare and publish my Mind and Meaning
to be to revoke, alter and make void all and every the Uses, Estates, Trusts
and Limitations in and by the said Indenture expressed and limited, of, for and
concerning all and every the, etc. and all other Hereditaments specified and
mentioned in the said Indenture, with their and every of their appurtenances,
and of, for and concerning every part thereof. And I do hereby further declare,
limit and appoint that the said, etc. with the appurtenances shall remain and
be, and the said R. C. and his Heirs, and all and every other person and
persons standing by, and being seized of and in the same, shall stand and be
seized thereof to the use and behoof of me the said J. F. my Heirs and Assigns
forever, and to and for no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever.

In witness, etc.
A Bargain and Sale of Housholdstuff.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I R. C. of, etc. for and in consideration
of the sum of 50 l. of lawful Money of England to me in hand paid, at and before
the sealing and delivery of these Presents by J. F. of, etc. wherewith I
acknowledge my self fully satisfied and paid, and thereof and of every part
thereof do hereby acquit, exonerate and discharge the said J. F. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns; have granted, bargained and sold, and by these
Presents do fully, clearly and absolutely grant, bargain and sell unto the said
J. F. all such Goods and Housholdstuff and all other, things as are mentioned
and contained in a Schedule hereunto annexed, now remaining and being in one
Message and the Garden and Yard thereunto belonging, called C. situate, lying
and being in C. in W. and now in the tenure or occupation of the said J. F. or
his Assigns, To have and to hold all and singular the said Goods, etc. before,
by these Presents bargained and sold unto the said J. F. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns for ever. And the said R. C. for himself, his
Executors Administrators and Assigns does covenant, promise and grant to and
with the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these
Presents, That he the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns and
every of them, all and singular the said Goods, etc. before bargained and sold,
and every of them unto the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, against all persons shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by
these Presents.

In witness, etc.
A Declaration by a Wife concerning the disposing of a Sum of Money, according
to a power reserved before Marriage.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing indented shall come, I R.
R. Wise of J. B. of, etc.
send Greeting
Whereas by an Indenture tripartite, made the 10th day of March in the first
year, etc. Between the said R. R. by the name, etc. of the first part, and me
the said R. R. by the name of, etc. of the second part, and B. C. of, etc. and
A. B. C. D. and E. F. of, etc. of the third part, in consideration of a
Marriage then shortly after to take effect between him the said J. R. and me
the said R. it appears, that at the time of the making of the said Indenture,
it was intended, concluded and agreed beetween him the laid J. R. and me the
said R. that I the said R. or any other person or persons whom I should
nominate and appoint (notwithstanding the said Marriage should take effect)
should and might have full power and Authority to dispose of the sum of 500 l.
of lawful Money of England, and all benefit and profit thereof at all times
ensuing the said Marriage; and to that end, intent and purpose he the said J.
R. by the said Indenture did for himself his Executors and Administrators
covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with the said R. C. A. B. C. D. and
E. F. and every of them, and with their and every of their Executors, and
Administrators, that he the said J. R. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or some or one of them should well and truly satisfy, pay and
deliver, or cause to be satisfied paid and delivered unto the R. C. A. B. C. D.
and E. F. or to the Survivor or Survivors of them, or to the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of such Survivor or Survivors the full sum of 500 l.
of lawful Money of England, upon or before the 10th day of March, etc. if I the
said R. R. should be living, or the said 10th day of March, or within six
Months next after the decease of me the said R. R. or within one year next
after the death of the said J. R. either of which shall first happen next after
the date of the said Indenture, to be employed and disposed of to such person
and persons, and to such uses, intent and purpose as I the said R. should at
any times then following, during my life, order, appoint, give or dispose of
the same. And it was thereby further covenanted, concluded and agreed on by and
between all the said Parties to the said Indenture, and the said J. R. did
thereby for himself his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of
them covenans, promise and grant to and with the said R. C. A. B. C. D. and E.
F. and every of them, and to and with their and every of their Executors and
Administrators, that the said sum of 500 l. and every part thereof should and
might from time to time be quietly, had, taken, received and enjoyed unto and
by such person or persons whom I the said R. should at any time, during my
life, constitute, order and appoint to dispose of the said 500 l. or any part
thereof, either by my last Will and Testament in writing, or by any writing to
be signed by me the said R. or to which my Mark should be put in the presence
of two or more Credible Witnesses, as in and by the said Indenture, amongst
other Covenants, at large appears; which Marriage since the making of the
said Indenture was solemnized, and no declaration has been yet made by me the
said R. R. concerning the disposing of the said 500 l. or any part thereof. Now
this present Writing witnesses and declares, that the intent and meaning of
me the said R. R. concerning the said 500 l. when it shall become due and be
paid, is as follows, that is to say, If my said Husband J. R. be then living,
and will become bound for himself his Heirs, Executors and Administrators by
three several Obligations of 200 l. apiece unto them the said R. C. A. B. C. D.
and E. F. or the Survivor or Survivors of any of them, or the Executors or
Administrators of such Survivor or Survivors respectively and severally
conditioned for the payment unto them of three several equal parts of the said
500 l. at the three such several and respective times or days, as my three
Children by my former Husband shall attain to the Ages next hereafter mentioned
(that is to say) C. A. unto the age of twenty years, and B. and C. A. shall
attain or come their several ages of twenty one years, That then the said R. C.
A. B. C. D. and E. F. and the Survivor and Survivors of them shall upon such
Obligations entered into as aforesaid, quietly suffer him the said J. R. to keep
in his hands the said 500 l. and every part thereof, until such several days
and times, as the same shall be payable by the several Conditions of the said
Obligations so to be entered into by him as before said, without paying any
Interest or consideration for the same; and the said 500 l. so payable by the
said Obligations or Conditions of them and by me dispensed withal as
aforesaid, otherwise sooner payble by the said Indenture, if my said Husband
shall die, viz. within one year after his death (in which case of the death of
my Husband I do give no manner of dispensation for the payment thereof) I do
hereby also concerning the same express, declare and appoint, if I shall not
otherwise hereafter peclare and appoint (that is to say) that the said 500 l.
and the whole proceed thereof not disposed of, as aforesaid, shall be to and
for the use of my said three Children, to be had and received by them
severally, when they shall have attained to their several Ages abovementioned
by such third parts, as aforesaid. Provided always, and my meaning and intent
is, That if any of my said Children shall happen to die before they have
attained to the Age abovementioned, then I do appoint that such third part of
the said Five hundred pounds as was to have been paid to such Child at the Age
aforesaid, shall be paid and divided equally between the Survivors; and if one
only happen to survive, then the two third parts allotted for the deceased, to
be paid to the Survivor. And if all my said Children shall happen to die, not
having attained to their several Ages abovesaid, then my last Will and meaning
is, That the said Five hundred pounds shall come and be paid to my Loving
Husband aforesaid, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns if I shall not
otherwise hereafter dispose of the same, according to the power and authority
to me reserved in and by the said recited Indenture.

In witness, etc.
A Bargain and Sale of Under-wood.
THis Indenture, made etc. Between J. F. of etc. and R. C. of, etc. Witnesses,
That the said J.F. for and in Consideration of the Sum of 100 l. of lawful Money
of England wherewith he the said J.F. does acknowledge himself to be fully
satisfied and paid, and thereof does hereby acquit and discharge the said R. C.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, Has bargained and sold, and by
these presents does bargain and sell unto the said R.C. all and singular Woods
and Underwoods, growing and being within the Wood called Broyl Wood and the
Hedges of the same, containing by estimation One hundred Acres, be it more or
less, lying and being in the Parish of St. Peter's the Great, in the County of
Sussex, and also all Lops and Shreds of all such Trees being within the said
Wood, called Broyle Wood, as have been usually lopped at the felling of the
Underwood growing within the said Wood; Except and always out of this present
Sale reserved unto the said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns, the Bodies and Trunks
of all manner of Trees whatsoever (other than Underwood, the Lops and Shreds of
such Trees as have been usually lopped) growing or being in or upon the same
Wood, or any parcel thereof; To have and to hold the said Underwoods, Lops and
Shreds, before by these presents bargained and sold, (Except before excepted)
unto the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to his and their
own proper use and behoof for ever. And the said J. F. does convenant, promise
and agree to and with the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
that it shall and may be lawful to and for him, them or any of them, peaceably
and quietly to have, hold, take and enjoy the said Underwoods, and to enter
into the said Wood, and every part thereof, there to fell, hew and cut down all
and singular the said Woods, Underwoods and Hedge-rows at seasonable times in
the year, from the day of the date hereof, until the, etc. and the same so
felled, hewed and cut down, with his and their, or any of their Carts and
Carriages, to carry and convey from thence, to any other place or places, at
his and their liberty and pleasure at all times, during the space of three
years, by all convenient ways thereto now used and accustomed, without any let
or hindrance, of or from him the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns. And the said R. C. for himself, his Executors and Assigns, does
covenant agree to and with the said J. F. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, That he the said R. C. his Executors and Assigns, shall and will at
every felling which he or they shall make of the said Woods, Underwoods and
Trees, leave standing and growing in and upon the premises, so many competent
and sufficient Standards, Staddels and Stories, as by the Statute is and ought
to be left; and also shall and will at his and their own proper costs and
charges make good all the Hedges and Fences about the young Sprigs of the said
Wood, for the safe keeping thereof from the hurt and spoil of Beasts and
Cattle, according to the custom of the Country there.

In witness, etc.
A Devise of Lands for Life with a Remainder in Tail, And also a Bequest of a
Term for years, with a Trust to assign to an Infant.
IN the Name of God, Amen, I W. B. of the Parish of St. Bartholemew near the
City of Chichester in the County of Sussex, Yeoman, do make and declare this my
last Will and Testament in manner and form following, that is to say, First, I
bequeath my Soul into the Hands of Almighty God, believing Remission of Sins
and Everlasting Life by the Merits, Death and Passion of Jesus Christ my Lord
and only Savior. Item, I give and devise unto my Son J. B. all that my
Freehold Land lying in a Field called Scutteriefield, near the said City, to
hold unto the said J. for Term of his Life, and after his decease to A.
Daughter of the said J. and the Heirs of the said A. for ever. Item, I give and
devise unto the said J. B. all other my Freeholds, Lands and Tenements
whatsoever, To hold unto the said J. for Term of his Life, and after his
decease to J. B. my Grandfor, and the Heirs of the said J. my Grandson for
ever. Item, I give and bequeath unto the said J. B. my Son, all that my Land
(lying in the said Scutteriefield) which I hold by Lease of the Dean and
Chapter of Chichester, together with the said Lease, and all my Estate and Term
therein upon this Trust and Confidence, that with the Rents and Profits thereof
my said Son shall from time to time every 7 years during his Life, renew the
said Lease; and the residue of the said Profits shall have and take to his own
use; And that after his decease the said A. his Daughter, shall have and enjoy
the said Lands and the Lease thereof; And that the Executors or Administrators
of the said J. my Son, immediately after the death of my said Son shall assign
over the said Land, holden of the said Dean and Chapter; And all their Term
therein unto the said A. her Executors, Administrators and Assigns. Item, I
give and bequeath unto E. and M. Daughters of the said J. my Son, Twenty Pounds
a piece. Item, I give and bequeath unto J. my now Wife, sufficient Meat, Drink,
Washing and Lodging to be provided and allowed to her by my Executors, for the
space of half a year next after my decease, or in lieu thereof Five Pounds in
Money at the Election of my said Wife. Item, I nominate and appoint the said J.
my Son, to be Executor of this my Will, to whom I give all the rest of my Goods
and Chattels, after my Debts, Funeral Expenses and other Legacies first paid
and discharged.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal the 26th of March, in
the year of our Lord 1677.
Signed, sealed and published in the presence of (...)
A Protection by a Member of Parliament.
FOrasmuch as I have special occasion to employ the Bearer hereof R.C. my
Servant in and about my Business and Occasions during this present Session of
Parliament. These are therefore to will and require you to forbear to arrest,
attach or imprison him the said R. C. but to permit and suffer him peaceably
and quietly to go about his Business at his will and pleasure during this
present Session, without any Suit, Arrest or disturbance, as you will answer
the contrary at your peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal, etc.
A Revocation of a Protection.
WHereas I F. J. have granted a Protection under my Hand and Seal unto R. C.
bearing date on or about the, etc. last past, to endure for the time of this
present Parliament. Now these presents witness That for diverse good Causes and
Considerations me moving, I do hereby revoke, annul and make void the said
Protection to all intents and purposes whatsoever, so as the said R. C. shall
not from henceforth have any benefit, privilege or advantage thereby, but be
therefrom utterly debarred and excluded for ever by these presents.

In witness, etc.
A short single Bill for payment of Money.
KKow all Men by these Presents, That I R. C. of, etc. do own unto J. F. of,
etc. 10 l. of lawful Money of England, to be paid unto the said J. F. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, on the 10th day of March next ensuing the
date hereof: To which payment well and truly to make I bind my self my Heirs
and Executors, firmly, by these Presents.

In witness whereof, etc.
Jointure before Marriage, and Settlement of several parcels to several uses,
with provision for Daughters and younger Sons, and that the Tenants for Life
may make Leases for 21 years at rack Rent.
THis Indenture Quinquipartite, made the, etc. Between Sir M. G. of T. in the
County of S. Baronet, and Dame A. his Wife, of the first part; E. T. of R. in
the County of S. Esquire; J. D. of L. in the said County Esquire; of the second part;
Sir J. M. of the Parish of, etc. in the County of M. Knight, one of His
Majesty's Sergeants at the Law, of the third part; E. G. Esquire; Son and Heir
apparent of the said Sir M. G. and M. M. the youngest Daughter of the said Sir
J. M. of the fourth part; and J. M. of G. in the County of M. Esquire; and D. C. of
W. in the County of G. Esquire; on the fifth part. Whereas a Marriage by God's
Grace is intended to be had and solemnized between the said E. G. and M. M. and
thereupon the said Sir J. M. has agreed to pay unto the said Sir M. G. the sum
of 5000 l. as the Marriage Portion of the said M. M. to the sole use and behoof
of the said Sir M. G. Now this Indenture Witnesses, That the said Sir M. G.
for and in Consideration of the said Marriage and Portion of 5000 l. as also
for a Settlement to be made of the Manors, Lands and Tenements, herein after
mentioned, upon the said E. G. and M. M. for their maintenance, and for the
Jointure of the said M. M. in case the said Marriage shall take effect, and she
shall survive and over-live the said Sir E. G. as also for a Settlement to be
made of the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments hereafter mentioned,
and for other good Causes and Considerations him the said Sir M. G. thereunto
specially moving, Has granted, bargained, sold, remised, released and
confirmed, and by these presents does grant, bargain, sell, remise, release and
confirm unto the said E. T. and J. D. and their Heirs, all that the Manor of
W. in the County of K. with all Rents, Perquisites, Profits and Casualties
whatsoever to the same belonging: As also the Rectory of W. aforesaid, and
Advowson of the said Parish Church of W. with all Tithes, Profits and
Emoluments to the said Rectory belonging and appeartaining: And also all
Messuages, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Woodlands, Tenements and Hereditaments
whatsoever of him the said Sir M. G. situate, lying and being in the said
Parish of W. being in the several tenures and occupations of E. W. J. M. J. P.
J. S. T. K. E. C. R. W. T. W. and T. C. or their Assigns: And also all that the
Manor of L. in the County of S. with all Rents, Perquisites, Profits and
Casualties whatsoever, to the same belonging and appertaining: As also the
Advowson of the said Parish Church of L. and also the Mansion House called N.
and the Park called L. Park, together with all Messuages, Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Woodlands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever of him the said Sir
M. G. situate, lying and being in the said Parish of L. being in the several
tenures and occupations of D. B. M. J. G. Gent. E. G. Gent. W. T. J. L. J. L.
T. M. T. H. M. M. C. L. the said M. G. and T. W. And also all that the Manor
of T. in the County of S. with all the Rents, Perquisites, Profits and
Casualties whatsoever to the Manor belonging and appertaining: As also the
Advowson of the Parish Church of T. and also the Chief Mansionhouse and Seat
there to the said Manor of T. belonging, together with all Messuages,
Tenements, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Woodlands and Hereditaments whatsoever of
him the said Sir M. G. situate, lying and being in the said Parish of T. being
in the several tenures and occupations of A. G. Widow, J. G. Widow. E. D. T. H.
H. M. W. J. B. T. A. T. W. R. W. Jun. J. G. J. M. J. M. and C. L. And also the
reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders of the said hereby granted
Manors, Rectories, Advowsons, Messuages, Tenements, Lands, Hereditaments and
Premises aforesaid, with the Appurtenances: Which said Manors, Rectories,
Advowsons, Messuages, Tenements, Lands, Hereditaments and Premises, with the
Appurtenances, were by Indenture bearing date before the date of these
presents, bargained and sold by him the said Sir M. G. unto the said E. T. and
J. D. for the time and term of one year, to commence and begin from the last
day of, etc. last past, before the date hereof, under the Rent of one
Pepper-corn, payable unto the said Sir M. G. his Heirs and Assigns, in or upon
the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel next ensuing the date hereof, if the same
shall be lawfully demanded, as by the said recited Indenture of Bargain and
Sale, relation being thereunto had, it does and may more at large appear, that
so by virtue thereof, and of the Statute for transferring of Uses into
possession, they the said E. T. and J. D. might be legally possessed of the
Premises, and thereby enabled to take a Grant and Release of the Inheritance,
and of all and singular the Premises, unto them the said E. T. and A. D. and
their Heirs, To have and to hold all and singular the said Manors, Rectories,
Advowsons, Messuages, Tenements, Lands, Hereditaments and Premises, with all
and singular the Appurtenances, unto them the said E. T. and J. D. and their
Heirs, To and for the uses, intents and purposes herein after limited,
expressed and declared, under the provisions, trusts, limitations and
agreements hereafter mentioned, and to and for no other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever; (That is to say) As for and concerning the said Manor of W. with
all Rents, Perquisites and Profits to the same belonging; as also the Rectory
of W. and Advowson of the said Parish Church of W. with all Tithes, Profits and
Emoluments to the said Rectory belonging: And also all Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Premises aforesaid in the said Parish of W. And also as for and
concerning all that the Mansion House, called N. with the Barns, Stables,
Outhouses, Orchards, Gardens and Yards thereunto belonging in the said Parish
of L. which are now in the possession of the said Sir M. G. being of the yearly
value of 24 l. and also the several Farms and Lands, lying and being in the
said Parish of L. hereafter following, (videlicet) One Farm and Lands of the
yearly Rent or value of 24 l. being now in the tenure or occupation of M. M. or
his Assigns; one other Farm and Lands being of the yearly Rent or value of 25
l. 6 s. being now in the tenure of J. G. Gent. or his Assigns; one other Farm
and Lands of the yearly Rent or value of 31 l. being now in the tenure of J. H.
or his Assigns; one other Farm and Lands of the yearly Rent or value of 50 l.
being now in the tenure of C. L. or his Assigns; one other Farm or Lands of the
yearly Rent or value of 6 l. being now in the tenure of T. H. or his Assigns;
one other Farm and Lands of the yearly Rent or value of 18 l. being now in the
tenure of T. W. or his Assigns; and one other Farm and Lands, being parcel of
certain Lands, called the C. Lands of the yearly Rent or value of 16 l. being
now in the tenure of T. R. or his Assigns, To the use of the said Sir M. G. and
his Heirs, until the said Marriage shall take effect; and after the said
Marriage shall take effect, then to the use of the said E. G. for and during
the term of 99 years, if he shall so long live, without impeachment of Waste.
And after the end or determination of the said term of 99 years, then to the
use of the said J. M. and D. C. and their Heirs, for and during the Natural
life of the said E. G. and no longer, upon trust to preserve the contingent
Uses herein after limited and expressed: And to that end and purpose, to make
Entries, or bring Actions or otherwise, as there shall be occasion; and after
the decease of the said E. G, to the use of the said M. M. for her life for her
Jointure, in full satisfaction of her Dower and Thirds; and after the decease
of the said E. G. and M. M. to the use of the first Son of the said E. G. on
the Body of the said M. M. lawfully to be begotten, and to the Heirs males of
the Body of such first Son to be begotten; and for want of such Issue to the
use of the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth,
and every other Sons of the said E. G. on the, Body of the said M. M. lawfully
to be begotten and of the Heirs males of the Bodies of such second, third,
fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth, and every other the
said Sons of the said E. G. severally and respectively, successively one after
another, according to their Priority in Birth and Seniority in years, the elder
Son and the Heirs males of his Body, being always to be preferred, and to take
before the younger Son and the Heirs males of his Body. And for wantof such
Issue Male of all and every the said Sons of the said E. G. to the use of the
said E. T. J. D. J. M. and D. C. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
for and during the term of 500 l. years from thence next ensuing, fully to be
complete and ended, without impeachment of waste, upon and under the trust and
agreements hereafter mentioned and expressed; and after the determination of
the said Lease for 500 years, then to the use of the said Sir M. G. and his
Heirs for ever. And as for and concerning the Manor of T. and Advowson of the
said Parish Church of T. with all the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
Premises of him the said Sir M. G. within the said Parish of T. to the use of
him the said Sir M. G. and his Heirs, until the said Marriage shall take
effect; and after the said Marriage shall take effect, then to the use of the
said Sir M. G. for his Life, without impeachment of or for any manner of waste;
and after his decease to the use of Dame A. his Wife for her life, for her
Jointure, and in recompense and full satisfaction of her Dower and Thirds; and
after the deceases of the said Sir M. G. and Dame A. his Wife; Then to the use
of the said E. G. for and during the term of 99 years, if he shall so long
live, without impeachment of waste; and after the end or other determination of
the said term of 99 years, then to the use of the said J. M. and D. C. and of
their Heirs, for and during the Natural lives of the said E. G. and Sir M. G.
and for and during the Natural life of the survivor of them and no longer, upon
Trust to preserve the contingent Uses herein after limited and expressed, by
Entry, or Action, or otherwise, as there shall be occasion: And after the
decease of the said E. G. then to the use of the first Son of the said E. G. on
the Body of the said M. M. lawfully to be begotten, and of the Heirs males of
the Body of such first Son to be begotten: And for want of such Issue, then to
the use of the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth,
tenth, and every other of the Sons of the said E. G. on the Body of the said M.
M. lawfully to be begotten, and of the respective Heirs males of the Body of
such Sons to be begotten, severally, respectively and successively one after
another, according to their priority in birth and seniority in years, the elder
of such Sons and the Heirs males of his Body being always to be preferred and
to take before the younger Son and the Heirs males of his Body; and for want of
such Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the said Sir M. G. for ever. And
as for and concerning the Manor of L. and the Park of L. with all the Profits,
Casualties and Perquisites thereof, and Advowson of the said Parish Church of
L. in the County of S. with all the rest of the Lands of him the said Sir M. G.
within the said Parish of L. whereof no use is herein before limited to the use
of him the said Sir M. G. and his Heirs, until the said Marriage shall take
effect; and after the said Marriage shall take effect, then to the use of the
said E. G. for and during the term of 99 years, if he shall so long live,
without impeachment of Wast: And after the end, or other determination of the
said term of 99 years, then to the use of the said J. M. and D. C. and of their
Heirs, for and during the Natural lives of the said E. G. and Sir M. G. and the
Survivor of them, and no longer, upon Trust, to preserve the contingent Uses
herein after limited and expressed, by Entry or Action, or otherwise, as there
shall be occasion: And after the decease of the said E. G. then to the use of
the first Son of the said E. G. on the Body of the said M. M. lawfully to be
begotten, and of the Heirs males of the Body of such first Son to be begotten;
and for want of such Issue, to the use of the second, third, fourth, fifth,
sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and every other of the Sons of the said
E. G. on the Body of the said M. M. lawfully to be begotten, and of the several
and respective Heirs males of the Bodies of such Sons to be begotten
successively one after another, according to their priority in birth and
seniority in years, the elder Son, and the Heirs males of his Body to be
begotten being always to be preferred and take before the younger Son and the
Heirs males of his Body; and for want of such Issue, to the use of the right
Heirs of the said Sir M. G. for ever. Provided always nevertheless, and upon
this special trust and confidence that they the said E. T. J. D. J. M. and D.
C. shall and will out of the Rents, Issues and Profits of the said Lands and
Premises, so limited and settled to and upon them the said E. T. J. D. J. M.
and D. C. for Five hundred years as aforesaid or by sale of some part thereof
to raise the Sum, of 5000 l. for a Portion or Portions of such Daughter or
Daughters between the said E. G. and M. M. to be begotten, in manner hereafter
expressed; (That is to say) If there shall be but one Daughter begotten by the
said E. G. on the Body of the said M. M. then the said Portion of 5000 l. shall
be satisfied and paid unto such Daughter at her Age of 21 years or day of
Marriage of such Daughter, which shall first happen. And if there shall be two
or more Daughters of the Body of the said E. G. and M. M. then the said 5000 l.
shall be equally divided between the said Daughters, and shall be paid unto
them at their several and respective Ages of 21 years or days of Marriage
respectively, which shall first happen; and in case any such Daughter shall
happen to dye before her said Age of 21 years or day of Marriage; that then the
share, portion and part of the said 5000 l. so belonging and appointed unto
such Daughter so dying, as aforesaid, shall go unto and be equally divided
amongst the surviving Daughters of the said E. G. and M. M. And after the said
5000 l. shall be so raised for the Portion or Portions of such Daughter or
Daughters of them the said E. G. and M. M. as aforesaid, out of the Rents,
Issues and Profits of the Premises, or by sale of some part of the Premises;
Then upon this further trust and confidence, that the Estate and Interest
granted unto the said E. T. J. D. J. M. and D. C. and of and in the said Lands
and Premises for 500 years, as aforesaid, shall as to such of the said Lands,
Tenements and Premises as shall not be sold, aliened or disposed of, and for
the raising of the Portion or Portions according to the Trust aforesaid, shall
after the said E. T. J. D. J. M. and D. C. shall be satisfied, paid and
discharged such Charges as they the said E. T. J. D. J. M. and D. C. their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall be put unto or sustain in the
execution of the said Trust, shall remain and be unto such person or persons
unto whom the next remainder expectant upon the said Lease of 500 years shall
belong or appertain; any thing in these presents contained to the contrary
notwithstanding. And also, Provided always nevertheless, And it is hereby
further declared to be the true intent and meaning of these Presents, That the
said E. G. during his Natural life, shall and may by and with the joint
Consents of the said Sir J. M. and Sir M. G. signified and declared in Writing
under their Hands and Seals, or the said Sir J. M. and Sir M. G. jointly, or
the said Sir M. G. after the death of the said Sir J. M. in case he shall
survive and outlive the said J. M. by and with the consent of the said E. G.
shall and may with or without the consent of the said E. G. during the joint
Lives of them the said Sir J. M. and Sir M. G. have liberty and power to sell
some or any part of the said Lands, Tenements and Premises so limited unto him
the said E. G. as aforesaid, for the raising and making of Portions for the
younger Sons of the said E. G. as they shall think fit, so as during the lives
of the said Dame A. and M. M. respectively, no charge, alteration or diminution
shall be thereby either made or put upon either of the Estates or Joyntures
limited to them as aforesaid respectively, without the respective consent of
them the said Dame A. and M. M. respectively first had and obtained; but that
the Reversion of any of the Lands and Premises Respectively limited to them
for their Jointures, as aforesaid, shall and may after the decease of them the
said Dame A. and M. M. respectively by and with the joint consent of the said
Sir J. M. and Sir M. G. be also liable and subject to, and for the raising of
Portions for the younger Sons as aforesaid; And that in case such sale shall be
made of some or any part of the said Lands and Premises in manner as
aforesaid, for the raising of Portions for the younger Sons of the said E. G.
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, That then the said
E. T. and J. D. and their Heirs shall stand and be seized, and so shall be
adjudged and deemed, and are hereby expressed and declared to stand and be
seized of, and in such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, so to be bargained
and sold for the raising of Portions for the younger Sons of the said E. G. in
manner as aforesaid, to the only use and behoof of such person or persons, and
their Heirs that shall so purchase such Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, that
shall be sold for the raising of Portions for the younger Sons, according to
the true intent and meaning of these presents as aforesaid, any thing before in
these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding:
And also provided always nevertheless, And it is hereby agreed, expressed and
declared by and between all the said Parties to these presents, that the said
Sir M. G. during his natural life, and after his decease the said Dame A.
during her natural life, And also the said E. G. during his natural life, and
after his decease the said M. M. his intended Wife during her natural life,
shall and may make Leases in Possession of all or any the Lands, Tenements and
Premises to them severally and respectively limited as foresaid, for any Term
not exceeding 21 years, and reserving the utmost Rent that can be got for the
same, with usual Covenants, Provisions and Conditions in such Leases to be
contained. And it is expressed and declared by and between the said Sir M. G.
E. G. and Sir J. M. and the said E. G. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, Covenant and Grant to and with the said Sir J. M. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, That after the said Marriage
between the said E. G. and M. M. shall take effect, he the said Sir J. M. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall have and receive out of the Rents
of the said Lands and Premises so limited to them the said E. G. and M. M. as
aforesaid 100 l. per annum, in trust for the separate use and maintenance of
her the said M. M. to be disposed of, solely to her the said M. M. during the
life of the said E. G. at her own sole will and pleasure without any consent,
direction or intermedling of the said E. G. which said Sum of 100 l. per annum,
the said Sir J. M. does hereby for himself, his Executors and Administrators,
covenant and agree to and with the said Sir M. G. and E. G. and either of them,
their and either of their Executors and Administrators accordingly to pay unto
the said M. M. or her Assigns yearly from time to time; And the said Sir M. G.
does for himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, Covenant and Grant to
and with the said Sir J. M. and his Heirs by these presents, That the aforesaid
Manor and Rectory of W. and the Messuages, Tenements, Lands and Premises in
W. and L. aforesaid, so settled upon the said E. G. and M. M. for the respective
Estate aforesaid, are now bone fide of the yearly value and Rent of 700 l.
charge; Nevertheless subject to the several yearly Rents, or yearly payments
hereafter mentioned, (That is to say,) the Sum or yearly Rent of 40 l. per
annum, to J. G. Gent. for his Life, and to M. G. J. G. E. G. L. G. S. G. the
several yearly Sums of 10 l. apeice for their several and respective Lives, in
all amounting to the yearly Sum of 100 l. And that the said Manor and Rectory
of W. and the Messuages, Tenements, Lands and Premises in W. aforesaid, so
settled upon the said E. G. and M. M. as aforesaid, shall during the life of the
said M. M. continue to the said M. M. in case the said Marriage shall take
effect, and she shall survive the said E. G. of the said yearly Rent or value
of 700 l. she the said M. letting and demising the same without taking any
Fines, Charged nevertheless with the said several Annuities or Payments
amounting in all to 100 l. per annum as aforesaid, and no more, And also that
the rest of the Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments mentioned and limited
to the said E. G. in manner as aforesaid, are altogether now bona fide of the
yearly value of 800 l. And it is hereby agreed, expressed and declared, by and
between the said Sir M. G. and Dame A. his wife, and the said E. G. and M. M.
and their Heirs, that the benefit and advantage by the cessation and
determination of the said several and respective Annuities or yearly payment
aforesaid, or any of them shall be and shall accrue to the said E. G. and M. M.
and to no other, And the said Sir M. G. does further for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, Covenant and Grant to and with the said Sir J. M.
and his Heirs, That the aforesaid Manors, Rectory, Advowsons, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, with the Appurtenances now are
and so shall forever hereafter remain, continue and be to the uses aforesaid,
free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise
well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless by him the said Sir M. G. and his
Heirs, of and from all former and other Gifts, Grants, Bargains, Sales,
Mortgages, Leases, Jointures, Dowers, Estates, Statutes-Merchant, and of the
Staple, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Rents-Charge, Rents Seck
and all Arrearages of Rent, and of and from all other Titles, Troubles Charges,
and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed suffered or done by him the
said Sir M. G. or by any other person whatsoever, lawfully claiming or to
claim, by from or under the said M. M. (the aforesaid Annuities or yearly
payments herein before expressed, and the Quit-rents yearly due for the
Premises, and also the Leases made of the Premises to these present Tenants,
for and under several yearly Rents, Covenants, Conditions and Agreements,
respectively, in the Schedule unto these presents annexed, contained only
excepted and foreprised;) And also that he the said Sir M. G. and Dame A. his
Wife, and the Heirs of the said Sir M. G. shall and will in his Majesty's Court
of Common Pleas at Westminster, at or before the end of Trinity Term next
ensuing the date hereof upon request, but at the Costs and Charges of the said
Sir N. G. and his Heirs, levy and acknowledge in due form of Law unto the said
E. T. and J. D. and the Heirs of the said E. T. several Fines, Sur Conusance de
droit come ceo que ils de lour Done, of all and singular the aforesaid Manors,
Rectories, Advowsons, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises,
with the Appurtenances, by such names, descriptions, contents, qualities and
numbers of Acres as by the said Sir J, M. and his Heirs shall be thought fit
and advised, the which said Fines so to be had and levied, and all, and every
other Fine and Fines to be had and levied between the said Parties, shall be,
and shall enure, and shall be construed, deemed, judged, to and for ever to the
only uses, intents and purposes, and under the provisoes, trusts, conditions
and agreements before in these presents expressed and declared, and to or for
no other use or uses, intents and purposes whatsoever; and it is likewise
hereby further declared, and the said E. G. does for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant to and with the said Sir M. G.
and his Assigns by these presents, That it shall and may be lawful for the said
Sir M. G. and his Assigns, during the life of the said Sir M. yearly and every
year or oftener if he or they shall think fit, to keep his Court for the said
Manor of L. at the aforesaid Mansion House called N. H. situate and being in
L. aforesaid, As it has been formerly used and accustomed, without the let,
hindrance, trouble, contradiction of himself the said E. G. and M. M. his
intended Wife, or the Heirs or Assigns of the said E. G. or of any other person
or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming or to claim, by, from or under him the
said E.G. or by his means, assent, consent, privity or procurement; The said
Sir M. G. and his Assigns, bearing all the Charges and Expenses as to
Entertainments, and Provisions of Victuals to be expended at such Courts.

In witness, etc.
A License to let Lands though prohibited by Lease.
WHereas my Tenant R. C. holds of me one Message, etc. with the
Appurtenances for the Term of twenty one years by an Indenture of Lease bearing
date, etc. wherein he the said R. C. has covenanted with me, not to set or let
out any part or parcel of the Premises so demised, without my special License
and Consent thereunto to be given in Writing, as by the said Lease it does more
at large appear, Now be it known that I F. J. do by these presents License and
allow the said R. C. to let or demise three Acres of Pasture, being part of the
abovementioned to be demised premises, for the Term of three years, Provided
that he the said R. C. do well and truly pay and perform the Rents and
Covenants contained in the above recited Indenture of Lease, which are and
ought to be paid and performed by the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns.

In witness, etc.
A License to Hawk, Hunt and Fish.
TO All, etc. I J. F.
send Greeting:
Know ye that I the said J. F. for diverse good Causes and Considerations me
hereunto moving, have given and granted, and by these presents do give and
grant unto R. C. and his Assigns, full, free and absolute power, License and
Authority to Hawk, Hunt, Fish and Fowl from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, at the will and pleasure of him the said R. C. and his Assigns, for
and during the natural life of me the said J. F. in, upon and within my several
Manors or Lordships of A. B. and C. and in and upon all the Land and Ground
thereof, in as large and ample manner and form, as I my self might or could do,
without any manner of let, denial or contradiction of me the said J. F. or of
any other person or persons whatsoever, in by or through my consent, act or
procurement; And I the said J. F. do covenant, promise, grant and agree, to and
with the said R. C. and his Assigns by these presents, that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said R. C. and his Assigns at all times hereafter, during
my natural life as occasion is offered, to have and take as well all and every
the the Nets, and other Engines and Instruments of what kind soever, as also all
the Dogs and Spaniels of all and any person or persons that shall at any time
hereafter Hawk, Hunt, Fish or Fowl within, or upon the said Lordships or
Manors of A. B. and C. aforesaid, or within, or upon any part or parcel
thereof, without the License and consent of the said R. C. thereunto first had
and obtained.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of License from Creditors to a Debtor.
TO All Christian People to whom these presents shall come, we J. F. of, etc.
and F. J. of, etc.
send Greeting:
Whereas R. C. of, etc. stands and is indebted unto us the said J. F. and F.
J. severally in diverse great Sums of Money, as by several Obligations and
Writings under his Hand and Seal unto us severally made, and otherwise does and
may appear; Now know ye that we the said J. F. and F. J. for diverse goods
Causes and Considerations us hereunto moving, Have given and granted, and by
these persents do give and grant full License and Liberty unto the said R. C.
quietly and freely to go about, attend and negotiate as well his own private
affairs, as also all other matters or business which he has or may have to do,
for any other person or persons whatsoever, from the day of the date hereof,
for and during the Term of six Months, without any let, hinderance or
interruption to him his Goods or Chattels from or by us the said J. F. and F.
J. or by, or from our or any of our Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
within the time hereby given: And further, we the said J. F. and F. J. do
covenant and agree for our selves, our, etc. that if he the said R. C. shall
during the said space of six Months, be molested or troubled in his Body, Goods
or Chattels by us, or either of us, our or either, or any of our, etc. contrary
to the true intent of these presents, That from thenceforth the said R. C. his,
etc. shall be and remain clearly discharged from the Debt or Debts owing to
such of us as shall so molest or sue, or whose Executors or Assigns shall so
molest or sue the said R. C. in his Person, Goods or Chattels.

In witness, etc.
An Agreement or Letter of Composition for Debts.
TO All, etc. we J. F. and F. J. Creditors of R. C. and C. R.
send Greeting:
Whereas the said R. C. and C. R. are and do stand jointly in debted, and do
owe unto us the said Creditors diverse Sums of Money which they are willing to
satisfy and pay as far as they are able; Neverthetheless we the said
Creditors, who have hereunto sealed and subscribed finding they the said R. C.
and C. R. are by losses and otherwise disabled to pay our full Debts, do
severally and respectively agree, and bind our selves our Heirs, etc. to the
said R. C. and C. R. by these presents, to accept and take of them the said R.
and C. their, etc. after the Rate of 10 s. in the pound in full satisfaction of
all such Debts and Sums of Money, as they do jointly owe unto us, and every of
us respectively, the same to be paid at four equal payments, The first payment,
etc. (recite the days) so as the said R. and C. for the more sure and better
payment of the several Sums aforesaid, in recompense and satisfaction of our
and every of our said several Debts, after the Rate of 10 s. in the pound as
aforesaid, their Executors or Administrators do before the, etc. become jointly
and severally bound with sufficient Sureties unto us, and every of us
respectively, by Obligations with double penalties in due form of Law, to be
made sealed and delivered unto us, and either of us, or to our and either of
our uses, by the appointment of us and either of us, provided always that
neither these presents, nor any thing herein contained shall bind us or either
of us, who have hereunto sealed and subscribed, until all and every of the
Creditors before mentioned, shall have Sealed and subscribed the same, or
before the, etc. next ensuing.

In witnss, etc.
A Letter of License from Creditors to an Administratrix, and Conposition made.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. F. J. and R. C. Creditors of C. R.
late, etc. of the one part, and R. R. Widow of the other part, Whereas the said
C. R. at and before the time of his decease was indebted unto the said
Creditors, in diverse and several Sums of Money, All which they the said
Creditors have hitherto patiently forborne; And whereas the said R. R. has
since her said Husbands death, perused and examined the Estate of her Husband,
And finding through diverse losses and hindrances, whereby the Estate of her
said Husband has been impaired and lessened, that the same is far short of
giving the said Creditors a full satisfaction of their just Debts, has
hitherto forborne to take forth Letters of Administration of the Goods, Chattels
and Estate of her said Husband, as to her properly did belong, according to the
form and due course of the Laws of this Realm: And the said R. R. having called
the Creditors together, and acquainted them with the Premises, and with the
weakness of her said Husbands Estate, They the said Creditors by and with one
assent and consent, were and are willing, contented and pleased to accept of
Ten shillings in the pound for their said Debts, upon Security of the said R.
R. and to be paid at such days and times, and in such manner and form as
hereafter is limited, expressed and declared: And thereupon have given, and do
by these presents give their full leave, consents and approbations, that she
the said R. R. shall and may have and take out in her own name Letters of
Administration of the Goods, Chattels and personal state of her said deceased
Husband, without any interruption or disturbance from them or either of them.
Now this Indenture witnesses, that they the said Creditors before named, do
for themselves severally and respectively; That is to say, every of them for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, and not jointly nor one of them for
the other, covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said R. R. her
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, That if the said R. R. her Exocutors or
Administrators, do or shall, on or before the, etc. next ensuing the date of
these presents, become bound in several Obligations, good and sufficient in the
Law, in several reasonable penalties, unto the said several Creditors, before
named, severally to be conditioned for the payment unto them, the said
Creditors, their several Executors, Administrators or Assigns, of the Sum of 10
s. of lawful Money of England, for every pound, or 20 s. of their due and
principal Debts by the said C. R. owing respectively as aforesaid, not
accompting any interest for the same or any part thereof; That is to say, on
the, etc. And shall and will also at the costs and charges of the said R. R.
her Executors or Administrators, severally Seal, and as their several Acts and
Deeds deliver unto, or for the use of the said R. R. several acquittances or
discharges in Writing, sufficient in Law, thereby acquitting and releasing, as
well the said C. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as also the said
R. R. her Executors and Administrators of all Debts, Bonds, Bills, Claims and
Demands whatsoever, from the beginning of the world until the day of the date
of these presents; and the said Creditors severally and respectively every one,
by and for himself, his Executors and Administrators, and not jointly nor the
one for the other, do covenant and grant, to and with the said R. R. her
Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these presents, That if
either the said R. R. her Executors or Administrators, or her, or their Goods
or Chattels, or the Goods and Chattels of her late Husbands, or any of them
shall at any time or times hereafter, until or before the said day of, etc. be
arrested, attached, molested or troubled by the above named Creditor or any of
them, or by any other person or persons, by their or any of their means or
procurement, or in their or any of their right or rights, for or by reason of
any debt or debts, so to them or any of them owing by the said C. R. at the
time of his decease, That then and from thenceforth, she the said R. R. her
Executors and Administrators, shall be acquitted, released and discharged
against him or them, by whom she the said R. R. her Executors or
Administrators, her, their or any of their Goods or Chattels, shall be so
arrested, attached, molested or troubled of, and from all debts, actions,
claims and demands whatsoever, from the beginning of the World until the day of
the date of these presents, and that these presents to be pleaded, shall be a
sufficient discharge in that behalf against him or them of the said Creditors,
his or their Executors or Administrators, by whom or by whose means or
procurement, or in whose right she the said R. R. her Executors or
Administrators her or their Goods, or Chattels, or any of them shall be so
arrested, attached, molested or troubled, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of these Presents. Provided always, That if all the said Creditors
abovenamed, do not or shall not at or before the, etc. Sign, Seal, and as their
Act and Deed deliver in due form of Law one part of these Presents unto, or to
the use of the said R. R. That then these Presents and every matter and thing
therein contained shall be void and of no effect. And the said R. R. for her
life her Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with the
said Creditors and every of them, their, and every of their Executors, and
Administrators, That in case all the said Creditors shall in due form of Law
Sign, Seal and Execute one part of these Presents as aforesaid, unto or to the
use of the said R. R. on or before the, etc. That then she the said R. R. her
Executors or Administrators shall and will in due form of law make or cause to
be made, and duly Seal and execute the said several Obligation, and deliver the
same to or for the use of the said Creditors, upon or before the, etc.

In witness, etc.
A License to come into, and abide six Months in England.
TO all, etc. We or such of us who have Signed and Sealed these Presents, being
Creditors of R. C. an English Merchant now residing, etc.
do send Greeting.
Whereas the said R. C. is indebted to us his said Creditors severally, in
diverse sums of Money, for which by reason of bad Debts and Losses as well by Sea
as Land, he is unable to give unto us present satisfaction, and having desired
as well by his own Letters as by mediation of his Friend here in England, to
have time without our or any of our Molestations, Arrests, Suits or
Interruptions, to come over and reside here in England, as well to gather in
and recover the Debts to him due, as to make his true Estate known unto us, and
as much as in him lies, to give us and every of us satisfaction for the said
Debts by him to us particularly owing: Unto which request and desire of the
said R. C. we do hereby condescend, and are content that he shall come over
into England, and stay or abide in London or elsewhere within the said Kingdom,
in peace and quiet, and without the Arrest, Suit, Trouble or Molestation of us
or any of us, for and during the space of six Months from the day of the date
hereof.

In witness, etc.
A License for a Petty-Chapman.
To the Bailiffs, Constables and other his Majesty's Officers of the same
County, and to every of them. Greeting.
Sussex ss.
KNow ye, That we R. C. and C. R. Esquires, two of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace within the County aforesaid, have licensed, and by these Presents do
license A. B. of C. in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, to be a Petty Chapman to
wander and go from Town to Town, Village to Village, and Place to Place to sell
Pins, Points, Tapes, Laces, Knives, Gloves, Purses, etc. and such other kind of
Small Wares, and also to gather and buy Cony-Skins, and such kind of Small
Wares within the County aforesaid, and not elsewhere. Provided that this our
License shall continue good only for the Term of one whole Year next ensuing
the date hereof, and no longer.

In witness, etc.
A License or Pass for a Poor Man to go to his Friends.
To all Constables, Bursholders, Bailiffs and other his Majesty's Officers of
the same County, and to every of them.
Sussex ss.
R C. and C. R. Esquires, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
same County, Greeting. Forasmuch as A. B. of E. the Bearer hereof, being
reduced to great Poverty and Necessity, has desired a Testimonial or License
for his safe travel unto the City of L. in the County of M. where he says he
was born, and has some Friends yet living, by whose means and Friendship he
hops to be fully relieved and helped. In consideration whereof Know ye that
we the said R. C. and C. R. as far as in us lies, have licensed the said A. B.
to travel the direct way from E. unto the City of L. so that his Journey be not
for longer or further continuance than thirty days next after the date hereof,
praying you and every of you not to molest or trouble the said Poor Man in his
Travel, but to permit and suffer him to pass, so that he show himself in no
respect offensive to his Majesty's Laws.

In witness, etc.
A License to Travel by Water on the Lord's Day.
WHereas by an Act of Parliament made, etc. It was Enacted, That no person or
persons shall use, employ or travel upon the Lord's Day with any Boat, Wherry,
Lighter or Barge, except it be upon extraordinary occasions, to be allowed by
some Justice of Peace of the County, or some Head Officer, or some Justice of
Peace of the City, Borough or Town Corporate, where the Fact shall be
committed, upon pain that every person so offending shall forfeit and lose the
Sum of five shillings for every such Offense, as by the said Act, amongst other
things, it does and may appear. And forasmuch as R. C. of, etc. having
extraordinary occasion to travel on the next Lord's Day to C. in the County of
K. and to use and employ a Boat, Wherry or Barge in his said Journey, has
desired my allowance thereof: These are therefore in pursuance of the said Act
to will and require all Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, and
all other Officers whom these Presents may concern, to permit and suffer the
said R. C. quietly and peaceably to perform his said Journey on the next Lord's
Day, as aforesaid, and to use and employ any Boat, Wherry or Barge at his
discretion, without any molestation or disturbance whatsoever at their peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal, etc.
A License to Travel on the Lord's Day.
To all Constables, etc.
THese are to certify that R. C. of C. etc. where he now dwells, having
informed me that he has a Kinsman living at A. in the County of K. who lies
now very sick, and he has a desire to see him: Know ye, That for this Cause I
do license him to travel upon the next Lord's Day the direct way to his
Kinsman, willing and requiring you not to molest or hinder him in his said
Journey, so that he behave himself orderly in his Travel.

Given, etc.
A License for a Badger of Corn.
6 E. 6. c. 14. 13 E. 25. 5 E. 5. 31 E. 5. 21 Jac. 22. 2 Inst. 1 Quorum, not
for above a year.

Sussx ss
AT the General Sessions of the Peace, holden at C. in the County aforesaid,
this present day J. W. of C. in the County aforesaid, is admitted, licensed and
appointed by the Justices of the Peace of the said County, to be a Common
Badger, Lader, Kedder, Carrier, Buyer, or Transporter of all manner of Corn or
Grain in any Market or Fair within the Realm of England, and the same so bought
to convert to Meal, and the same to carry to the City of L. or the Suburbs of
the same, or to any other Market or Fair; so that he use the same according to
the Tenor and true Meaning of the Statute in that case made and provided
against Forestallers, Regraters and Ingrossers, and not otherwise. The same
License to have continuance from the day of the date hereof, until the next
General Sessions of the Peace after the Feast of, etc. next coming, to be
holden at C. aforesaid.

In witness whereof we have hereunto set our Hands and Seals, this, etc. A. B.
C. D. E. F.


A Deed of Exchange between a Vicar and another, for Land of the Vicaridge
Glebe.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. D. Clerk Vicar of the Vicaridge of C. in
the County of S. of the one part, and W. G. of F. in the County aforesaid, Esquire;
of the other part, witnesses, That the said R. D. has given, granted and
confirmed, and by these Presents does fully, clearly and absolutely give, gant
and confirm unto the said W. G. and his Heirs for ever, in exchange all that
one Close and Pasture lying in C. aforesaid, called the Great Carryers,
containing by estimation two Acres, adjoining to a Field called the Inland
Close, now in the occupation of T. P. on the North West, to the River on the
East, and to the Brook Lands, now in the occupation of the said W G. on the
South, and also all that Close of Pasture called Little Carryers, containing by
estimation one Acre, lying in C. aforesaid, and adjoining to a Field called the
Hoe, now in the occupation of the said T. P. on the West, to a Field called
Clymping Mead on the South, and to the Brook Lands now in the occupation of the
said W. G. on the East, To have and to hold the said two Closes of Pasture with
the appurtenances, before in these Presents given granted and confirmed unto
the said W. G. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only sole and proper use and
behoof of the said W. G. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And this
Indenture further witnesses, That the said W. G. has given, granted and
confirmed, and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely give, grant
and confirm unto the said R. D. and his Successors Vicars of C. aforesaid, in
exchange for the two Closes of Pasture beforementioned, all that parcel of
Land in, etc. containing by estimation twelve Acres, adjoining to a Wall called
New Wall, on the North, to a Close of Land called by the name of Garson, now in
the occupation of J. P. on the West, and to the Brook Lands, now in the
occupation of the said W. G. on the South and West, To have and to hold the
said Close of Land with the appurtenances last before in these Presents given,
granted and confirmed unto the said R. D. and his Successors, Vicars of C.
aforesaid, to the only sole and proper use and behoof of the said R. D. and his
Successors for ever. Provided always That if the said W. G. his Heirs or
Assigns shall at any time be ejected out of the said several parcels of Land to
him before herein mentioned, to be granted; Or if the said R. D. or his
Successors shall a^ any time enter into, take, claim or challenge the said
several parcels of Land, or any part thereof, then it shall and may be good and
lawful to and for the said W. G. his Heirs and Assigns into the said parcel of
Land by the said W. G. before herein mentioned to be granted, to reenter, and
the same to have again, repossess and enjoy, as in his and their former Estate,
any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
Note, Although this Deed will not bind the Vicars Successors, yet it makes a
good Title against all others; and it was not doubted but all Successors would
agree to it, because the Vicaridge Land is of much less value than the other.

A Defeazance of a Statute Staple.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of, etc. and R. C. of, etc.
witnesses, That the said R. C. by a certain Recognizance of the nature of a
Statute Staple, made and provided for the recovery of Debts taken and sealed
before Sir J. H. Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England, bearing date, etc.
stands and is bound unto the said J. F. in the sum of 300 l. of lawful Money
of England, payable as by the said Recognizance more at large appears;
nevertheless the said J. F. is contented and agreed, and does covenant, promise
and grant for himself his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to and
with the said R. C. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to
and with every of them by these presents, That if the said R. C. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them do pay or cause to be paid
unto the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns or any of them,
the sum of 160 l. of lawful Money of England on the 10th day of May next ensuing
the date hereof without fraud, That then the said Recognisance shall be utterly
void and of none effect, or else to remain in full force and virtue.

In witness, etc.
A Defeazance on a Judgment.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. and R. C. witnesses, That whereas the
said R. C. by one Obligation, bearing date, etc. became bound unto the said J.
F. in the sum of, etc. with a Condition thereupon made for the payment of, etc.
as by the said Obligation and Condition it does more at large appear; which
said sum of, etc. or any part thereof, or any thing in satisfaction of the same
has not been paid to the said J. F. in the said Obligation named: By reason
whereof the said Obligation became forfeited. And whereas the said J. F. has
brought an Action of Debt in their Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster against the said R. C. upon the said Obligation, in which Action a
Judgment is obtained against the said R. C. Yet nevertheless the said J. F. is
contented, and does covenant, that neither he the said J. F. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, nor any of them shall at any time before, etc. Take
out any Execution or Executions on the said Judgment. And further, the said J.
F. for himself his Executors, Administrators and Assigns does covenant and
agree to and with the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
that if he the said R. C. do well and truly pay, etc. That then the said J. F.
his Executors or Administrators upon request made, and at the charges of the
said R. C. shall acknowledge satisfaction on record of, and for the said
Judgment, and shall also deliver unto him the said R. C. his, etc. the said
Obligation to be cancelled, and the said R. C. to be thereof, and of and from
the said Judgment fully discharged.

In witness, etc.
A Defeazance on Lands forfeited.
THIS Indenture made, etc. between J. F. of the one part, and R. C. of the
other part, witnesses, That whereas the said R. C. by his Indenture, bearing
date, etc. for the considerations therein mentioned, did give, grant, bargain,
sell and confirm unto the said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns all these Lands,
etc. with the appurtenances in the County of S. in which said Indenture there
is a Condition or Proviso to this Effect, That if the said R. C. his Heirs,
Executors, or Assigns or any of them do truly pay or cause to be paid unto the
said J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns the full sum of, etc. that
then said from thenceforth the said recited Indenture, and every Covenant, etc.
therein contained, shall be utterly void and of none effect, as by the said
Indenture it does more at large appear: Which said sum of, etc. was not paid at
the day and time above limited for the payment thereof according to the effect
of the said Proviso: By reason whereof the said Lands, etc. in the said
Indenture mentioned, are absolutely vested and settled in the said J. F. yet
nevertheless the said J. F. is contented and pleased, and does covenant and
grant to and with the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
That if he the said R. C. his Executors Administrators and Assigns or any of
them do well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said J. F. Executors,
Administrators or Assigns the full sum of, etc. That then and from thenceforth
the said recited Indenture shall be utterly void and of none effect, the breach
made by nonpayment of the said sum of, etc. in the aforementioned, Proviso
contained, or any other thing therein to the contrary notwithstanding. And also
on full payment of the said sum of, etc. at any time within five years next
following he, the said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns shall and will at the
reasonable request, cost and charges, in the Law of the said J. C. his Heirs
and Assigns, convey and assure unto the said R. C. for ever, the said Lands,
etc. with the appurtenances in the said recited Indendure mentioned, in such
manner and form as shall by the said R. C. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or
their Counsel learned in the Law, be reasonably devised, advised or required.
And also that he the said J. F. his Heirs or Assigns shall deliver, or cause to
be delivered unto the said R. C. his Heirs or Assigns within two Months next
after payment made, all Deeds, Evidences and Writings which the said J. F. has
touching or concerning the Premises, safe, whole, uncancelled and undefaced.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture of Partition of Lands between Tenants in Common, who have several
Interests in diverse respects.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between J. B. sen. of, etc. in the County of S.
Gent. J. B. jun. Son and Heir apparent of the said J. B. sen. And R. G. of,
etc. Gent. of the one part, and J. D. of; etc. in the County of S. Gent. Son
and Heir of B. D. late of the City of C. in the said County of S. Doctor in
Physic, G. D. Widow and Relict of the said B. D. and R. F. of the City of C.
aforesaid, Esquire; of the other part. Whereas the said Parties or some of them are
Tenants in Common of and in all that Message called the, etc. of B. with the
appurtenances, and all the Lands, Woods, Tenements and Hereditaments, situate,
lying and being in B. U and S. in the said County of S. to the said Message or
Mannor-House belonging or reputed to belong, or therewith used, occupied or
enjoyed with their and every of their appurtenances, heretofore in the
occupation of P. F. Esquire; and C. Widow, or one of them, or their or one of their
Assigns Farmers or Under-tenants, containing be estimation 248 Acres of Land,
Meadow and Pasture, and 103 Acres of Wood-Land, be the same more or less, which
said Message, Lands, Woods, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises are in the
several possessions or occupations of A. F. and of the said J. B. sen. and of
G. D. or their Assigns, and are now called the, etc. alias, etc. or by
whatsoever name or names the same are called or known. And of and in all those
sixteen parcels of F. containing by estimation 168 Acres: And also all those
Saltmarshes to the said Freshmarsh, belonging or near adjoining to several
parcels, of which the said Freshmarsh and Saltmarsh are parcel or reputed
parcel of the Lands called, etc. and are situate, lying and being in the Parish
of I. in the said County of S. and were heretofore in the occupation of J. E.
Gent. and -- I. or one of them, or their or one of their Assigns, Farmers or
Under-tenants: And of and in all ways, easments and appurtenances to the said
Freshmarsh and Satlmarshes in any wise appertaining: Of which said Message,
Lands, Woods, Tenements and Hereditaments and Premises, two third parts do
belong to the said J. B. sen. and J. B. jun. and R.G. or some of them, and to
the Heirs of the said J. B. jun. and of the said R. G. respectively, according
to their respective Estates, Rights and Interests therein: And the other third
part of the same Message, Lands, Woods Tenementts, Hereditaments and Premises
do belong to the said J. D. G. D. and R. F. or some of them, and to the Heirs
of the said J. D. according to their respective Estates, Rights, Titles and
Interests therein. And whereas the said J. B. sen. J. B. jun. R. G. J. D. G. D.
and R. F. have agreed to make partition between them in such manner as herein
after mentioned. Now this Indenture witnesses, That in pursuance of the
Agreement aforesaid (respect being had to the true value of all the said
Message, Lands, Woods, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises,) the said
Parties have divided the same into three equal parts. And that the said J. B.
sen. and J. B. jun. and R. G. have assigned and delivered, and by these
Presents do assign and deliver unto the said J. D. G. D. and R. F. one third
part of the said Message, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises with
the Appurtenances (to wit) All that piece or parcel of Marshland, called the,
etc. containing by estimation six Acres, two Roods and one and twenty Perches;
all that piece or parcel of Marshland called the, etc. containing by estimation
fourteen Acres; all that piece or parcel of Marshland called the, etc.
containing by estimation three and twenty Acres, two Roods and five and thirty
Perches; all that parcel of Marshground, called the, etc. containing by
estimation fifteen Acres and one Rood; all that piece or parcel of Marshland
called the, etc. containing by estimation one and twenty Acres and six Perches;
all that piece or parcel of Marshland, called the, etc. containing by
estimation two Roods and five Perches; all that piece or parcel of Marshland,
called the, etc. containing by estimation four Acres, one Rood and four and
thirty Perches; all that other piece or parcel of Marshland called also the,
etc. containing by estimation four Acres and thirty Perches; and also all that
piece or parcel of Marshland called the, etc. containing by estimation
seventeen Acres, two Roods and six Perches: And also so much of the said
Saltmarshes as lies between the Channel and the said last-mentioned Premises,
and adjoins thereto: And also a way and passage as well on Horseback as on
Foot, and for Carts, Wains, Carriages, and all manner of Cattle to go, pass and
repass in and through one piece or pacel of Marshland herein after mentioned,
to be called the, etc. containing by estimation four Acres and eight and twenty
Perches, and in and through one other piece or parcel of Marshland called also
the, etc. containing by estimation one Acre, one Rood and eighteen Perches,
unto and from all and every the several parcels of Marshland herein before
mentioned, to be assigned unto the said J. D. G. D. and R. F. at the Will and
pleasure of the said J. D. G. D. and R. F. and their Assigns, To have and to
hold the said several pieces of Marshland and Premises herein before
mentioned, to be assigned unto the said J. D. G. D. and R. F. in severalty for
their proportion, and in lieu of their third part aforesaid, according to the
respective Interests and Estates which the said J. D. G. D. and R. F.
respectively had in the said third part, before the making of these Presents.
And this Indenture further witnesses, That the said J. D. G. D. and R. F. have
assigned and delivered, and by these Presents do assign and deliver unto the
said J. B. sen. J. B. jun. and R. G. two third parts of all the said Message,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises with the Appurtenances (to wit)
All that Message called the, etc. and all the said Woods, Lands, Tenements and
Premises herein before mentioned, to be lying and being in the Parishes of,
etc. aforesaid. And also all that piece or parcel of Marshland called the, etc.
alias the, etc. containing by estimation nineteen Acres and twelve Perches; and
all that piece or parcel of Marshland called the, etc. containing by estimation
seven Acres, two Roods and two Perches; and all that piece or parcel of
Marshland called the, etc. containing by estimation four Acres and eight and
twenty Perches; and also all that piece or parcel of Marshland called also the,
etc. containing by estimation one Acre, one Rood and eighteen Perches; and also
all that piece or parcel of Marshland called the, etc. containing by estimation
two Acres, one Rood and twelve Perches; and also all that piece or parcel of
Marshland called the, etc. containing by estimation five Acres, one Rood and
nineteen Perches: And also so much of the said Saltmarshes as lies between the
Channel and the said last mentioned Premises and adjoins thereto; and also a
way and passage as well on Horseback as on Foot, and for Carts, Wayns,
Carriages, and all manner of Cattle to go, pass and repass in and through the
aforesaid piece or parcel of Marshground called the, etc. containing by
estimation seventeen Acres, two Roods and six Perches, unto and from the said
piece or parcel of Marshground called the, etc. and in and through the same
piece or parcel of Marshland called the, etc. and the aforesaid piece or parcel
of Marshland called the, etc. unto and from the aforesaid piece or parcel of
Marshland called the, etc. alias, the, etc. at the will and pleasure of the
said J. B. sen. J. B. jun. and R. G. and their Assigns, and the Heirs and
Assigns of the said R. G. and J. B. jun. To have and to hold the said Message,
Lands, Tenements, Woods, Marshes and Premises herein before last mentioned, to
be assigned unto the said J. B. the elder, J. B. the younger, and R. G. and to
the Heirs of the said J. B. the younger, and R. G. in severalty for their
proportion, and in lieu of their two third parts aforesaid, according to the
respective Interests and Estates which the said J. B. the elder, J. B. the
younger, and R. G. respectively had in the said two third parts before the
making of these Presents. And the said J. B. the elder does for himself, his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant to and with the said J.
D. G. D. and R. F. their Heirs and Assigns by these Presents, That he the said
J. B. the elder has not at any time done, committed or willingly suffered, any
act or thing whatsoever, whereby or wherewith the Premises to the said J. D.
G. D. and R. F. assigned in partition, as aforesaid; or any part thereof, are,
or is, or shall or may be impeached or incumbered in Estate, Title, Charge or
otherwise howsoever. And also, That he the said J. B. the elder, and his Heirs,
and all and every other person and persons, having and lawfully claiming, or
which shall or may have or lawfully claim any Estate, Right, Title or Interest,
of, in or to any part of the said Premises herein before mentioned, to be
assigned to the said J. D. G. D. and R. F. in partition, as aforesaid, by, from
or under him the said J. B. the elder, shall and will from time to time, and at
all times during the space of Ten years next ensuing the day of the date of
these Presents, upon the reasonable request and at the Costs and Charges in the
Law of the said J. D. G. D. and R. F. make, do, acknowledge, levy, execute and
suffer all and every such further and other reasonable Act and Acts, Thing and
Things, Conveyance and Assurance in the Law whatsoever, for the confirmation of
the partition aforesaid; and for the further, better and more perfect
conveying, assigning and assuring unto the said J. D. G. D. and R. F. in form
aforesaid, all the said Lands and Premises herein before mentioned to be
assigned and delivered unto the said J. D. G. D. and R. F. in partition, as
aforesaid, as by the said J.D. G.D. and R.F. or any of their Council learned in
the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised or required, [ Like Covenants
from J. C. Jun. and the like from R. G.] And the said J. D. does for himself,
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant, to and with the
said J. B. the elder, J. B. the younger, and R. G. their Heirs and Assigns by
these Presents, That he the said J. D. has not at any time done, committed or
wittingly and willingly suffered any act or thing whatsoever, whereby or
wherewith the Premises to the said J. B. the elder, J. B. the younger, and R.
G. assigned in partition, as aforesaid, or any part thereof, are or is, or
shall or may be impeached or encumbered in Estate, Title, Charge or otherwise
howsoever. And also, That he the said J. D. and his Heirs, and all and every
other person and persons, having or lawfully claiming, or which shall or may
have or lawfully claim any Estate, Right, Title or Interest, of, in or to any
part of the Message, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises herein
before mentioned, to be assigned to the said J. B. the elder, J. B. the
younger, and R. G. in partition, as aforesaid, in, by, from or under him the
said J. D. shall and will from time to time, and at all times during the space
of Ten years next ensuing the date of these Presents, upon the reasonable
request and at the Costs and Charges in the Law of the said J. B. the elder, J.
B. the younger, and R. G. and the Heirs and Assigns of the said J. B. the
younger, and of the said R. G. make, do, acknowledge, levy, execute and suffer
all and every such further and other reasonable Act and Acts, Thing and Things,
Conveyance and Assurance in the Law whatsoever, for confirmation of the
partition aforesaid: And for the further, better and more perfect conveying,
assigning and assuring unto the said J. B. the elder, J. B. the younger, and R.
G. and unto the Heirs and Assigns of the said J. B. the younger, and of the
said R. G. all the said Message, Lands, Tenements and Premises herein before
mentioned, to be assigned and delivered unto the said J. B. the elder, J. B.
the younger, and R. G. in partition, as aforesaid: As by the said J. B. the
elder, J. B. the younger, and R. G. or their Assigns, or the Heirs or Assigns
of the said J. B. the younger and R. G. or any of them, their or any of their
Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised or required. [
Like Covenants from G. G. and the like from R. F.]

In witness, etc.
Covenants for levying Fines and Recoveries, etc.
A Covenant by Husband and Wife, to levy a Fine.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. and C. his Wife on the one part, and
J. F. and F. J. of the other part, Witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted,
concluded and agreed, by and between the said parties to these Presents: And
the said R. C. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for
the said C. his Wife, does covenant, grant and agree to and with the said J. F.
and F. J. their Heirs, Executors and Administrators by these Presents, That
they the said R. C. and C. his Wife, shall and will before the end of the Term
of St. Hillary next ensuing the date hereof, by one Fine with Proclamation in
due form of Law, to be levied before the Justices of our Sovereign Lord the
King, of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, or before any
other person or persons sufficiently and lawfully authorized in that behalf,
between the said J. F. and F. J. Plaintiffs, and the said R. C. and C. his
Wife, Deforceants, recognize and acknowledge all that, etc. situate, lying and
being, etc. in which the said R. C. and C. his Wife, or either of them, have or
heretofore had any Estate of Inheritance in Possession, Reversion or Remainder,
with all and singular the Appurtenances thereof, by some Name or Names, or
Contents and Numbers of Acres in the said Fine to be contained, to be the Right
of the said J. F. as those which the said J. F. and F. J. have of the Gift of
the said R. C. and C. his Wife. And the same shall thereby remise and
quit-claim from them the said R. C. and C. his Wife, and their Heirs, to the
said J. F. and F. J. and the Heirs of the said J. F. for ever. And moreover
shall by the said Fine warrant the said, etc. unto the said J. F. and F. J. and
the Heirs of the said J. F. for ever.

See a Declaration of the Uses, with such other Covenants as the Case requires.

A Covenant to levy a Fine more brief.
THis Indenture, made, etc. Between R. C. and C. his Wife, of the one part, and
J. F. of the other part, Witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted, concluded
and agreed by and between the said parties to these Presents; and the said R.
C. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for the said C.
his Wife, does covenant and grant to and with the said J. F. his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, That he the said R. C. and C. his Wife, shall and
will before the end of next Hillary Term, before the Justices of his Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, acknowledge and levy one Fine Sur
Cognizance de droit come ceo que il ad de lour done, etc. with Proclamations,
according to the form of the Statute in such case had and provided, to the said
J. F. of all, etc. by such Name and Names, Quantities and Numbers of Acres, as
by the said J. F. or his Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised, advised or required.

A Covenant to levy a Fine by several persons, having separate Interests.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the first part; C. R. of the second
part; J. F. of the third part, and F. J. of the fourth part. Whereas the said
R. C. is seized in his demesne, as of Fee, of and in one parcel, etc. And
whereas the said C. R. is likewise seized in his demesne, as of Fee, of and in
one Message, etc. which he lately purchased of one A. B. And whereas the said
J. F. is likewise seized in his demesne as of Fee, of and in ten Acres of
arable Land, etc. which he the said J. F. lately purchased of one B. A. And
they the said R. C. C. R. and J. F. being severally so seized of the Premises
aforesaid. Now this Indenture witnesses, That it is covenanted, concluded and
agreed by and between all the said parties to these presents, That they the
said R. C. C. R. and J. F. shall before the end of Hillary Term ensuing the
date of these Presents, in due form of Law, levy and acknowledge one Fine Sur
Cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. with Proclamations, according to the Statute
in that case made and provided, before the Justices of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, to the said F. J. and his Heirs, of all and
singular the Premises, with the Appurtenances, by such Name or Names, etc. And
that the said Fine so to be levied, shall be and enure, and shall be deemed,
construed and taken so to be and enure. And the said F. J. and his Heirs, shall
by virtue thereof stand and be seized, of and in all and singular the said
Premises, with their and every of their Appurtenances, to the several uses
hereafter mentioned and declared in manner and form following; That is to say,
of and in the said parcel, etc. called or known by the name of S. with the
Appurtenances, to the only use and behoof of the said R. C. and his Heirs. And
of and in the said Message, etc. to the use and behoof of the said C. R. and
his Heirs.

[And so for the rest.]

A Covenant to levy a Fine in a Court of Ancient Demesne.
THis Indenture, made, etc. Between R. C. of the one part, and C. R. of the
other part. Whereas the said R. C. is the day of the date of these Presents
lawfully seized of an Estate of Inheritance to him and the Heirs Males of his
Body, of and in diverse Lands, etc. within the Liberty of R. in the County of S.
hereafter in these presents particularly mentioned. Now this Indenture
witnesses, That the said R. C. for diverse Causes and Considerations him
hereunto moving: And for the settling, etc. does for himself and his Heirs,
covenant, grant and agree, to and with the said C. R. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators by these Presents, That he the said R. C. at his own proper
Costs and Charges, shall and will in due form of Law, before, etc. next ensuing
the date of these Presents, acknowledge and levy one Fine in the Court of
Ancient Demesne within the said Liberty of R. according to the Course and
Common usage for levying of Fines for Lands and Hereditaments within the said
Liberty, unto the said C. R. of all, etc. by the Name of, etc. or by such other
Name or Names as shall be thought meet, etc.

A Covenant to levy a Fine, with a render of an Estate for years.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. and C. his Wife, of the one part, and
J. F. of the other part, Witnesses, That for diverse good Causes and
Considerations, it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, by and between
the said parties to these presents, for them, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, that before the end of Hillary Term next ensuing the date
hereof, at the costs and charges of the said J. F. his Executors and
Administrators, one Fine with Proclamations, in due form of Law, shall be
levied and acknowledged between the said parties to these presents, in manner
and form following; of one Message, etc. in and by which Fine the said J. F.
shall remise, release and quit-claim from the said J. F. and his Heirs unto the
said R. C. and C. his Wife, and the Heirs of the said R. C. all his Right,
Title, Estate and Interest, of in and to the aforesaid, etc. with the
appurtenances, from which remise, release and quit-claim the said R. C. and C.
his Wife shall by the said Fine Render the said Message, etc. with the
appurtenances, unto the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
To have and to hold the same unto the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, now last past, for
and during and until the full end and term of One and twenty years from thence
next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended; Yielding and paying therefore
yearly and every year, during the said term, unto the said R. C. and C. his
Wife, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively, the yearly Rent
or Sum of Eight pounds of lawful Money of England, at the four must usual Feasts
in the year; That is to say, etc. or within 30 days next after any of the said
Feasts.

[With the usual Covenants in Leases to be added.]

A Covenant to levy a Fine, with a render of Rent.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. and C. his Wife, of the one part, and
C. R. of the other part, Witnesses, That for diverse good Causes and
Considerations, it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between
the said parties to these Presents, for them, their Heirs Executors and
Administrators, that before the end of Hillary Term next, at the costs and
charges of the said C. R. his Executors or Administrators, one Fine with
Proclamations, in due form of Law shall be levied and acknowledged by and
between the said parties to these presents, by the names of, etc. in and by
which said Fine the said C. R. shall remise, release and quitclaim from the
said C. R. and his Heirs, unto the said R. C. and C. his Wife, and the Heirs of
the said R. C. all his Right, Title, Estate and Interest, of, in and to the
aforesaid Messuages, etc. with the appurtenances, For which remise, release and
quit-claim the said R. C. and C. his Wife, shall by the said Fine, grant and
render unto the said C. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, one
Annuity or yearly Rent of Fifty pounds of good and lawful Money of England, to
be issuing and going out of the aforesaid, etc. with the appurtenances; To
have, hold, receive and enjoy the said Annuity of Fifty pounds per Ann. and
every part and parcel thereof unto the said C. R. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, from the Feast of, etc. next ensuing the date of these presents,
until the full end and term of 21 years from thence next ensuing, and fully to
be complete and ended, at the Feast of St Michael the Archangel, and the
Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, by even and equal portions, yearly to
be paid during the term aforesaid. And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent
of Fifty pounds, or any part thereof to be behind or unpaid, in part or in all,
by the space of 20 days after either of the said Feast-days, or days of
payment, being lawfully demanded, That then and from thenceforth it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said C. R. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, into the said, etc. and every part and parcel thereof to enter and
distrain: And the Distress and Distresses there to be found and taken, lawfully
to lead, bear, drive and carry away, and the same to detain and keep, until he
the said C. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall be fully paid
and satisfied the said Annuity or yearly Rent, and all and every the Arrears
thereof, etc.

A Covenant to levy a Fine sur concessit for years.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. and C. his Wife on the one part, and
C. R. on the other part witnesses, that the said R. C. for diverse good causes
and considerations him hereunto moving, does for himself, his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, and for the said C. his Wife covenant and grant, to and
with the said C. R. his Executors and Administrators by these presents, That he
the said R. C. and C. his Wife, shall and will before the end of next Hillary
Term levy one Fine sur concessit with Proclamations in due form of Law, before
his Majesty's Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, unto the
said C. R. of all, etc. and the reversion and reversions, remainder and
remainders of all and singular the Premises, and of every part and parcel
thereof; And all Rent and Rents and yearly services, and other profits
whatsoever reserved, and payable upon every demise and demises, leases, grants
and conveyances whatsoever made and granted of the Premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, by such name or names, quantity and quality of Acres, as shall
be thought meet and requisite; And shall thereby grant the said, etc. with the
Appurtenances unto the said R. C. To have and to hold the same unto the said C.
R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast, etc. next ensuing
the date hereof unto the full end and Term of, etc. from thence next ensuing,
and fully to be complete and ended, rendering therefore yearly unto the said R.
C. and his Heirs the yearly Rent of one Pepper-corn at, etc. if the same shall
be lawfully demanded.

A Covenant to levy a Fine, and suffer a Recovery with double Voucher.
THis Indenture made, Between R. C. and C. his Wife of the first part J. F. and
F. J. of the second part, and C. R. of the third part witnesses That it is
mutually and respectively, covenanted and concluded by and between the said
parties to these presents; And the said R. C. does by these presents for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for the said C. his Wife,
covenant and agree to and with the said C. R. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, That he the said R. C. and C. his Wife, shall and will on this
side and before the Feast of, etc. now next ensuing, levy and acknowledge one
Fine sur cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. in due form of Law, with
Proclamations to be had and made, according to the form of the Statute in that
Case made and provided, before the Justices of his Majesty's Court of Common
Pleas at Westminster, or before some other person or persons thereunto lawfully
authorized, to the said J. F. and F. J. and the Heirs of the said J. F. of all
that the, etc. by such name or names, quantities, quality and numbers of Acres,
and in such manner and form as by the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns, or his
or their Counsel learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised or
required, which said Fine so or in any other manner to be levied and
acknowledged between the said parties, shall be, and shall be construed,
reputed and taken to be, to and for the use of the said J. F. and F. J. and
their Heirs, To the only end, intent and purpose, that the said J. F. and F. J.
shall and may stand, and be full and perfect Tenants of the Freehold of the
said, etc. with the Appurtenances, and of every part thereof, whereof the said
Fine is agreed to be levied as aforesaid,, until a perfect, Common Recovery
shall and may be lawfully had, suffered and executed, of the said, etc. against
the said J. F. and F. J. and their Heirs, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, and the parties thereunto: And it is further
covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between all the said parties to these
presents, and every of them for themselves, and their and every of their Heirs,
Executors and Assigns, That they the said J. F. and F. J. shall and will permit
and suffer the said C. B. before the, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, by
Writ or Writs of Entry sur disseizin in le post, to be sued forth and obtained
out of his Majesty's High Court of Chancery, and returnable before his
Majesty's Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, in the name of the said C. R.
Demandant against the said J.F. and F. J. being Tenants, to recover to him and
his Heirs in due form of Law, according to the course of Common Recoveries for
assuring of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments against the said J. F. and F. J.
and the Survivor of them, then Tenant or Tenants of the Premises, all and
every the said, etc. with the Appurtenances by some name or names in the said
Writ and Recovery to be mentioned; (Or thus) by such name or names, and under
such number and contents of Acres, and in such manner and form as shall be be
advised by the Counsel of the said C. R. unto which said Writ of Entry so to be
brought as aforesaid, the said J. F. and F. J. shall appear gratis; And then
and there immediately after appearance and defense made, shall and will in the
said Action, Vouch to Warranty the said R. C. and C. his Wife, who shall
likewise appear gratis, and vouch to warranty the Common Vouchee, who shall
also appear, imparle and make defalu^, whereby a perfect Judgment may be had
and given against the said J. F. and F. J. and for the said J. F. and F. J. to
recover against the said R. C. and C. his Wife, And for the said R. C. and C.
his Wife, to recover in value against the Common Vouchee, so that a good and
perfect Recovery with double Voucher may be had, and Execution be had and made
thereof, etc.

A Covenant to suffer a Recovery with double Voucher, the Tenant to the Precipe
being already made by Deed.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the first part, C. R. of the second
part, and, J. F. of the third Part witnesses, That for diverse good causes and
considerations it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between
all the said parties to these presents in manner and form following; That the
said J. F. shall before the end of next Hillary Term, purchase and sue forth
out of the High Court of Chancery, one original Writ of Entry sur disseizin in
le post against the said C. R. returnable before the Justices of his Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, at a day certain in the said Writ to be
mentioned; And by the said Writ shall demand against the said C. R. all that,
etc. (setting forth the particulars, and where situate,) By such names,
qualities and numbers of Acres as by the said J. F. and his Counsel learned in
the Law shall be devised, advised or required, unto which said Writ the said C.
R. shall appear gratis, and take upon him the tenancy of all and every the
said, etc. and other the Premises with the Appurtenances, And shall vouch to
warranty the said R. C. who shall appear gratis, and vouch to warranty the
Common Vouchee, who shall likewise appear gratis and enter into the warranty,
and after imparlance make default in contempt of the Court, so that Judgment
shall be given, that the said J.F. shall recover the said, etc. in the said
Writ to be contained against the said C. R. And that the said C. R. shall
recover over in value against the common Vouchee, And that Execution of the
said Recovery so to be had, shall be made according to the form of Common
Recoveries in such cases used and accustomed; And that the said J. F. C. R. and
R. C. and every of them shall and will, do, execute, perform and suffer all and
every such Act and Acts, thing and things whatsoever, as shall be necessary and
expedient for the prosecution of the said Recovery, and the Execution thereof
according to the form and order of Common Recoveries with double Voucher in
such cases used.

A Bargain a Sale to make a Tenant to the Praecipe.
THis Indenture made the, etc. Between R. C. of the one part, and C. R. of the
other part witnesses, that the said R. C. for and in consideration of five
shillings of lawful Money of England, to him in hand paid before the sealing and
delivery hereof by the said C. R. the receipt, whereof the said R. C. does
acknowledge; And to the end and purpose that the said C. R. may become and be
made a perfect Tenant to a Praecipe, against whom a Common Recovery may be had
of the Manor and Lands hereafter mentioned, Has granted, bargained and sold;
And by these Presents does for him and his Heirs; grant, bargain and sell unto
the said C. R. and his Heirs all, etc. To have and to hold the said, etc. and
every part and parcel thereof unto him the said C. R. and his Heirs for ever,
to the only use and behoof of the said C. R. his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

A Covenant to suffer a Recovery with a Recital of the Bargain and Sale,
whereby a Tenant to the Praecipe was made.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the first part, C. R. of the second
part, and J. F. of the third part witnesses, Whereas the said R. C. has by
his Indenture of Bargain and Sale bearing date the, etc. last past, before the
date hereof, for the consideration therein mentioned, granted, bargained and
sold unto the said C. R. and his Heirs, All that, etc. [recite to the end of
the Habend.] Which said Bargain and Sale was made to him the said C. R. and his
Heirs, to and for the only use, intent and purpose, that the said C. R. should
be sole Tenant of the Premises to a Praecipe against whom the Recovery
hereafter mentioned might be had in manner and form following: Now this
Indenture further witnesses, And it is covenanted, concluded and agreed by and
between all the said parties to these Presents for themselves respectively, and
their Heirs, that before the end of Hillary Term next ensuing the date of these
Presents there shall be at the Costs and Charges of the said J. F. one Recovery
in the nature of a Common Recovery for Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in
such Cases used and accustomed, had and executed of the said, etc. in his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, by and in the name of the said
J. F. Demandant against the said C. R. Tenant of the said, etc. with the
Appurtenances, who shall vouch to warranty the said R. C. who being vouched
shall appear gratis, and vouch to warranty the Common Vouchee, who shall appear
gratis and enter into the warranty, and afterward make default, to the end
that a perfect Common Recovery shall and may be had of the said, etc. with the
Appurtenances in all things according to the usual order and form of Common
Recoveries for assurance of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in such Cases
used and accustomed.

A Covenant to suffer a Recovery with double Voucher, by several Writs, of
Lands in several Counties.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R. C. of the first part, C. R. of the second
part, and J. F. of the third part witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted
and concluded by and between the said parties to these Presents in manner and
form following; That is to say, That the said C. R. shall before the end of the
Term of St. Hillary next ensuing the date hereof, suffer the said J. F. to
pursue three of the King's Majesty's Writs of Entry, Tenant to the Praecipe is
made before by Deed.
Sur disseisin in le post, against the said C. R. before the Justices of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, By one of which said Writs of
Entry, the said J. F. shall demand against the said C. R. all that, etc. in the
County of S. with the Appurtenances, And by one other of the said Writs, the
said J. F. shall demand against the said C. R. one Message, etc. with the
Appurtenances, lying and being in A. in the County of S. And by the third Writ
of Entry the said J. F. shall demand against the said C. R. all that, etc.
situate, lying and being in D. in the County of C. By which three several Writs
the said, etc. with the Appurtenances in them respectively to be contained,
shall be demanded as aforesaid, by such Name and Names, Quantities, Qualities
and Numbers of Acres as by the said J. F. or his Council learned in the Law
shall be thought fit, unto which said several Writs the said C. R. shall appear
gratis; And after such appearance and defense by him made thereto, shall vouch
to warranty the said R. C. who shall likewise appear gratis, and vouch over to
waranty the Common Vouchee, who shall likewise appear gratis and enter into the
Warranty, and after imparl and make default, whereupon the said J. F. shall
have Judgment to recover the said several, etc. before mentioned against the
said C. R. And that the said C. R. shall recover over in value against the said
R. C. And that the said R. C. shall have Judgment to recover over in value
against the Common Vouchee. And it is likewise concluded and fully agreed by
and between the said parties to these Presents, That the said C. R. shall
likewise suffer the said J. F. to pursue the King's Majesty's Writ of Right
Patent against the said C. R. to be returnable and returned before the Mayor
and Sheriffs of the City of London, in the Court of the Hustings of the said
City, by which Writ of Right the said J. F. shall demand against the said C. R.
all those, etc. within the said City; And at the day of the Return of the said
Writ, the said C. R. shall appear thereunto and after defense made shall vouch
to warranty the said R. C. who shall likewise appear and enter into the
warranty, and shall vouch to warranty the Common Vouchee, who shall likewise
appear, imparle and make default, and depart in contempt of the Court, whereby
the said J. F. shall have Judgment according to the Laws and Customs of the
said City to recover the said, etc. against the said C. R. And for the said C.
R. to recover in value against the said R. C. And for the said R. C. to recover
in value against the Common Vouchee.

A Covenant to suffer a Recovery with single Voucher.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the one part, and C. R. of the
other part witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by
and between the said parties to these presents, That the said C. R. shall
before the end of next Hillary Term, purchase and sue forth against him the
said R. C. at the proper Costs and Charges of the said C. R. one original Writ
of Entry Sur disseisin en le post, returnable before the Justices of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster; And shall thereby demand
against the said R. C. all, etc. by such Name or Names, Quantities and Numbers
of Acres as the said C. R. or his Counsel shall advise or require, unto which
said Writ to be purchased the said R. C. shall appear gratis, and shall vouch
to warranty the Common Vouchee, who shall likewise appear gratis, and enter
into the warranty, and imparle and make default, that thereupon Judgment may be
given, that the said C. R. shall recover the said Message, etc. with the
Appurtenances against the said R. C. and that the said R. C. shall recover in
value against the Common Vouchee, so that a perfect Recovery may be thereupon
had; And that the said parties to these presents and the said Common Vouchee
shall at Costs and Charges in the Law of the said C. R. make, do, suffer and
execute all and every matter and thing whatsoever, meet, necessary and
convenient for the prosecution of the said Recovery, according to the case of
Common Recoveries with single Voucher, etc.

Another more brief with single Voucher.
THis Indenture, etc. Between R. C. of the one part, and C. R. of the other
part witnesses, That it is covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between the
said parties to these presents, for them and their Heirs, that before the end
of next Hillary Term, there shall be at the only Costs and Charges of the said
C. R. one Recovery with single Voucher in the nature of Common Recoveries for
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in such cases used and accustomed, had and
executed in his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster of all that,
etc. against the said R. C. Tenant of the said, etc. with the Appurtenances,
who therein shall vouch to warranty the Common Vouchee, who thereupon shall
appear gratis and enter into the warranty, and afterward make default, to the
end that one perfect Recovery of the said, etc. shall and may be had and
prosecuted, according to the usual order and form of Recoveries for assurance
of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in such cases used and accustomed, etc.

A Covenant that Husband and Wife being Tenants for Life of the Wife, and he in
Reversion shall suffer a Recovery.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. and C. his Wife, and C. R. of the one
part, and J. F. on the other part, Whereas the said R. C. and C. his Wife, in
Right of the said C. do now hold and are lawfully entitled to hold and enjoy,
for and during the natural Life of the said C. all that, etc. the Reversion
whereof and of every part thereof from and after the decease of the said C.
does lawfully belong unto the said C. R. and the Heirs of his Body: Now this
Indenture witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by
and between the said parties, for themselves and their Heirs, That the said R.
C. and C. his Wife, and the said C. R. shall before the Feast of, etc. now next
coming permit and suffer the said J. F. in and by a Writ of Right Patent,
according to the Custom of the City of London, in due form of Law, with single
or double Voucher or Vouchers, to recover against them the said R. C. and C.
his Wife, and the said C. R. the said, etc. with the Appurtenances in such
manner and form, as by the Counsel of the said J. F. learned in the Law, shall
be reasonably devised, advised or required, etc.

A Covenant to make a Tenant to the Praecipe, and suffer a Recovery with double
Voucher in London.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the first part, and F. J. and A. B.
of the second part, and C. R. and J. F. of the third part witnesses, That it
is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by, and between all the said
Parties to these Presents, And the said R. C. for himself, his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with the said F. J. and A.
B. and either of them, their and either of their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators by these Presents, That he the said R. C. shall and will within
one Month next ensuing, the date of these Presents, make and execute or cause
to be made and executed unto the said F. J. and A. B. a good, perfect and
absolute Estate in the Law in Fee-simple, of and in all, etc. lying and being
in, etc. London. And also of and in the Reversion and Reversions of all and
singular the Premises, to the end, intent and purposes, that the said F. J.
and A. B. and their Heirs, may stand and be seized of the said Premises, and
become perfect Tenants of the Freehold thereof, so that within one Month next
after executing and making of the said Estate to them the said J. F. and A. B.
as aforesaid, The said C. R. and J. F. or the Survivor of them, shall and may
bring and pursue his Majesty's Writ of Right patent out of the High Court of
Chancery, against the said F. J. and A. B. or the Survivor of them, to be
directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs of the City of London, By which Writ of
Right Patent the said C. R. and J. F. or the Survivor of them, in the
Guild Hall of the said City, before the said Mayor and Sheriffs in the Court of
Hustings, according to the Custom of the said City, shall demand against the
said F. J. and A. B. or the Survivor of them, the said, etc. and all and
singular other the Premises with the Appurtenances, by such Names or
Quantities as shall be reasonably devised or advised by the Counsel of the said
C. R. and J. F. or the Survivor of them, unto which said Writ the said F. J.
and A. B. or the Survivor of them shall appear gratis, and after Declaration
and Defense made thereupon, shall vouch to warranty the said R. C. who shall
appear gratis and enter into the warranty, and vouch over to warranty the
Common Vouchee, who shall appear gratis and imparle, and after make default in
contempt of the Court, whereby Judgment shall be given in the said Writ for the
said C. R. and J. F. the said F. J. and A. B. and for the said C. R. and J. F.
to recover over in value against the said R. C. And for the said R. C. to
recover over in value against the Common Vouchee, And Execution thereof shall
be had and sued in such sort, that a perfect Recovery with double Vouchers
shall be had and duly executed of all and singular the Premises, etc.

To suffer a Recovery in a Court Baron.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of, the one part, and C. R. of the
other part witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by
and between the parties to these Presents, That the said. C. before the, etc.
next ensuing the date hereof, shall permit and suffer the said C. R. to affirm
and pursue against the said R. C. in the Court Baron of the Manor of R. in the
County of S. one Plaint in the nature of a Writ of Entry sur disseisin in le
post of all and singular, etc. with the Appurtenances, situate, lying and being
within the said Manor of R. which said Message the said R. C. late had in
Remainder of the Surrender of A. C. his Father, by the Name of (as in the Copy)
as by the Court Roll of the General Court of the said Manor holden at A. on
the 10th day, etc. last past before the date hereof, amongst other things it
does more fully appear: And that the said Plaint shall be affirmed, entered and
persued of all and every the Premises, with the Appurtenances in R. within the
Jurisdiction of the Court of the said Manor of A. To and upon which Plaint to
be entered and affirmed as aforesaid, he the said R. C. shall appear in his own
proper person, or by his Attorney lawfully authorized in that behalf, and shall
make his defense thereunto according to Law, and vouch to warranty of and for
the said Premises, one B. A. who shall appear and enter into the warranty, and
after make default according to the manner and form of Common Recoveries or
Writs of Entry sur disseisin en le post, whereby the said C. R. shall have
Judgment to recover the said Message, etc. against the said R. C. and the said
R. C. to recover over in value against the said B. A. according to the manner
and form of Common Recoveries for Lands and Tenements; which said Recovery the
said R. C. shall suffer to be executed by Precept or Warrant out of the said
Court in the nature of a Writ of Habere Facias Seisinam, according to the order
and form of the Common Law. And it is further covenanted, granted, concluded
and agreed by and between the said Parties, That the said Recovery, and the
Estate of the Premises to be had, obtained and recovered thereby, or by reason
thereof shall be to the use of the said C. R. his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
according to the Custom of the said Manor, and to no other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever.

In witness, etc.
A Covenant to make Assurance of Lands.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the one part, and C. R. of the
other part witnesses, That the said R. C. for and in consideration of the Sum
of, etc. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators covenant and
grant to and with the said C. R. his Heirs and Assigns by these Presents, That
he the said R.C. his Heirs or Assigns shall and will on this side and before
the Feast of, etc. next ensuing the date of these Presents, at and upon the
reasonable request, Costs and Charges in the Law of the said C. R. his Heirs or
Assigns, by Fine or Fines, with Proclamation in due form of Law to be levied,
Feoffment or Feoffments, Recovery or Recoveries, with single or double Voucher
or Vouchers, or by any such good and sufficient means, Conveyance or Assurance
in the Law, as by the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their Counsel
learned in the Law shall be lawfully and reasonably devised, advised or
required, convey and assure, or cause to be conveyed and assured unto the said
C. R. his Heirs and Assigns, all that, etc. and the Reversion and Reversions,
Remainder and Remainders thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof with the
Appurtenances; as also all and singular Deeds, Evidences, Escripts, Muniments
and Writings whatsoever, touching or concerning the said, etc. and Premises
with the Appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof, To have and to hold the
said, etc. and other the Premises with the Appurtenances, unto the said C.R.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And that the said Fine and Fines, Recovery and
Recoveries and the Execution thereof, as likewise all Conveyances and
Assurances whatsoever, to be had and made according to the tenor, effect and
true meaning of these Presents, shall be and enure, and shall be continued,
reputed and taken to be and enure to the only use and behoof of the said C. R.
his Heirs and Assigns, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever (with
Covenants that he is lawfully seized, and has power to sell, and that C. R.
shall enjoy free from Encumbrances, and for further Assurance as is usual.)

In witness, etc.
A Covenant for the Attornment of Tenants.
AND the said R. C. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators does
covenant and grant to and with the said C. R. his Heirs and Assigns by these
Presents, That all and every the now Holders and Occupiers of the Premises
aforesaid, shall and will before the Feast of, etc. now next coming, attorn and
become Tenants unto the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns, of and for their
several and respective Tenements, whereof or wherein they or any of them have
or has any particular Estate or Estates in being, and which are parcel of the
Premises before mentioned to be granted.

A Covenant to produce Writings, for defense of the Title to the Lands sold.
AND the said R. C. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators does
covenant, grant and agree to and with the said C. R. his Heirs and Assigns by
these Presents, That if the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns shall at any time
or times hereafter, have need or occasion to plead, show forth or give in
Evidence, any Letters-Patent, Deeds, Evidences or Writings (whereof the said R.
C. has covenanted to deliver Copies as aforesaid, and which are not hereby
bargained and sold) of him the said R. C. touching or concerning the Premises
or any part thereof, for the maintenance and defense of the Title of the said
C. R. of, in and to the Premises or any part thereof, or for any other just
and reasonable occasion in any wise touching or concerning the Premises or any
part thereof, That then and so often the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns upon
request, in that behalf to be made by the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns, and
at the Costs and Charges of the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns shall and will
produce and show forth, or cause to be produced and showed forth, all and
singular the said Letters Patent, Deeds, Evidences and Writings, or so many of
them as shall be thought needful by the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns in any
Court or Courts of Record or elsewhere, for the maintenance and defense of the
Title of the said C. R. of, in and to the bargained Premises, or any part or
parcel thereof or for any other just and reasonable Cause as aforesaid, and
shall and will permit and suffer the same there to remain so long as the said
C. R. his Heirs or Assigns shall use or have occasion for the same.

A Covenant to pay back Purchase-Mony of the Lands sold, or any part thereof
evicted within ten years.
AND it is covenanted, granted, concluded and fully agreed by and between all
the said parties to these Presents; And the said R. C. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators and for every of them does covenant, grant and
agree to and with the said C. R. his Heirs and Assigns by these Presents, That
if it shall happen at any time or times hereafter within the space of ten
years, to be computed from the day of the date hereof, the said Message or
Tenement, etc. and other the Tenements herein before mentioned to be bargained
and sold, or any part or parcel thereof, upon any prior or former Title to be
by any person or persons whatsoever recovered or otherwise lawfully evicted
from the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns by due course of Law, or that any
Decree in or upon any Bill of Complaint in a Court of Equity shall pass or be
made, or that any Judgment in any Suit or Action real or personal shall be
given against him the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns, whereby his or their
Title of and in the said Premises or any part thereof may be in any wise
avoided, adnulled or defeated, That then and in such case he the said R. C. his
Executors or Administrators shall within three Months next after notice given
of such Recovery, Eviction, Decree or Judgment so had and given by the said C.
R. and upon reasonable request in that behalf to be made unto him the said R.
C. his Executors or Administrators well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto
the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns, so much lawful Money of England as the said
Premises or any part thereof so happening to be evicted or recovered, or
whereunto the Title of the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns shall be so avoided,
adnulled or defeated as aforesaid, shall amount unto at the rate of eighteen
years purchase for the value thereof, according to the rate the same was valued
at the time of the purchase thereof by the said C. R. as aforesaid.

A Covenant to pay back the Purchase-Mony at the end of two years, if the
Purchaser dislike; and if he likes, then to pay a further Sum of Money.
AND the said R. C. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators does
covenant and grant to and with the said C. R. his Heirs and Assigns by these
Presents, That if the said C. R. shall at any time within the space of two
years next ensuing the date hereof, dislike of the purchase of the said, etc.
And thereof within the time aforesaid, shall give notice in Writing unto the
said R. C. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, That then he the said R. C.
his Heirs, Executors or Administrators shall and will within three Months after
such Notice given, and after a Reconveyance made thereof by the said C. R. his
Heirs or Assigns unto the said R. C. his Heirs or Assigns, free from all
Estates, Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever had, made or suffered by the said
C. R. his Heirs or Assigns, at the Costs and Charges of the said C. R. his
Heirs or Assigns, in such manner and form as the said R. C. his Heirs or
Assigns, or his or their Counsel learned in the Law shall advise, well and
truly pay or cause to paid unto the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns for their
Purchase of the Premises, the Sum of 800 l. of lawful Money of England.
Provided always, that if the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns shall not within
the space of two years signify as aforesaid his dislike of the said Purchase,
That then he the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns shall and will pay or cause to
be paid unto the said R. C. his Heirs or Assigns the further Sum of 50 l. of
lawful Money of England, over and above the Money by him already paid, for the
clear and absolute purchase of the said, etc. within one Month after the end or
determination of the said two years.

A Covenant not to claim Dower with a Release thereof.
TO all, etc. Know ye that the said R. C. for and in consideration of the Sum
of 100 l. of lawful Money of England to her in hand paid, before the sealing and
delivery hereof by C. R. of, etc. who lately purchased of A. C. deceased, late
Husband of the said R. C. a Message, etc. lying and being, etc. whereof he the
said A. C. was seized of some Estate of Inheritance during the Coverture
between him the said A. C. and the said R. C. the Receipt whereof the said R. C.
does hereby acknowledge, has covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, and
does by these presents covenant, grant, conclude and agree to and with the said
C. R. his Heirs and Assigns, that the said R. C. or her Assigns shall not at
any time hereafter sue for, challenge or demand by Writ of Dower or otherwise,
any Dower or Title of Dower out of the said Message, etc. or any part thereof;
but that the said C. R. shall and may lawfully and quietly enjoy the said
Message, etc. without the let or interruption of the said R. C. or of any
person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under the said R.
C. And the said R. C. for the consideration aforesaid, has remised, released
and for ever quit claimed, and by these Presents does remise, release and for
ever quit claim unto the said C. R. his Heirs and Assigns, all and all manner
of Dower and Right, and Title of Dower whatsoever which she the said R. C. now
has, may, might, should or of right ought to have of, in and to the said, etc.
and of, in or to any part or parcel thereof; so that neither she the said R. C.
nor any other for her or in her name, any manner of Dower or Writ, or Action of
Dower, or any manner of Right or Title of Dower of or in the said, etc. or any
part or parcel thereof at any time hereafter shall or may have or claim or
prosecute against the said C. R. his Heirs or Assigns or any of them; but of
and from the same shall be utterly barred, and for ever excluded by these
Presents.

In witness, etc.
The form of a Covenant of two Persons severally.
AND the said R. C. and C. R. severally and not jointly, nor one of them for
the other, and for their several and respective Heirs, Executors and
Administrators and for every of them respectively do covenant, etc. -- Or thus,
And the said R. C. and R. C. for themselves severally and respectively, that is
is to say, each of them for himself, and for his several Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and for so much as concerns or may concern his own Act or
Acts only, and not one of them for the other, nor for the Act or Acts of the
other, or of the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of the other, does
severally and not jointly covenant, etc. -- Or thus, And the said R. C. and C.
R. severally and respectively each one for himself only, and for his respective
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and not jointly, nor one of them
for the other, nor for the act, or acts, Deed or Deeds, Matter, or Thing of the
other does covenant, etc. -- Or thus, And the said R. C. C. R. and J. F. for
themselves, severally and not jointly, nor one of them for the other, and for
their and every of their several and respective Heirs, Executors and
Administrators do Covenant, etc.

A Covenant by one, and two Husbands and their Wives.
AND the said R. C. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and
for the said C. his Wife does covenant, etc. If two Men and their Wives
covenant severally -- Thus, And the said R. C. himself, and for the said C. his
Wife; and the said J. F. for himself, and for the said R. his Wife do severally
and respectively, and for their several and respective Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and not one for the other, nor for the Wife of the other, nor
for the Heirs, Executors or Administrators of the other Covenant, etc. -- Or
thus, And the said R. C. and C. R. for themselves and for their said Wives
respectively, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators do severally and
respectively covenant, etc, to and with the said J. F. and R. his Wife, and
either of them, their and either of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators
by these Presents, etc.

Note, That notwithstanding the appearance of Severalty in these Covenants, yet
the matter of the Covenant after, whether in affirmation or negation being
entire, it seems that any of the Covenants may be charged with the breach of
another of them, unless there be after in the Deed added such a Proviso as
follows.

Provided always, that the said A. B. C. D. and E. F. their Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, or any of them shall not at any time be impeached or charged
with the breach of any Covenant herein contained, otherwise than for the proper
Act and Deed of the person so charged, or by him or them represented as Heir,
Executor or Administrator. A Proviso that the Estate shall he void in default
of payment of the Purchase-mony at the days limited.
PRovided nevertheless, and upon this Condition, That if the said J. F. his
Heirs, Executors or Administrators shall not and do not well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns
or some or one of them, the said sum of 500 l. of lawful Money of England, being
the remainder or residue of the said sum of 1500 l. before specified on the
several days of payment hereafter mentioned, and in manner and form following,
viz. the sum of 100 l. of lawful Money of England, on or before the 10th day of
December next ensuing the date of these Presents, and the sum of 200 l. of like
Money, on or upon the 10th day of June, which shall be in year of our Lord 1694.
and the further sum of 200 l. on or before the, etc. being the residue of the
said sum of 500 l. That then and from thenceforth this present Deed of Bargain
and Sale, and every Matter and Thing therein contained shall be void and of
none effect; and that then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said R. C. his Heirs or Assigns into the said Premises with the
appurtenances to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain, repossess and
enjoy, as in his or their former Estate, any thing herein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding. A Proviso that an Estate shall be void in discharge
of a Surety.
PRovided always and upon condition, That if the said R. C. his Executors or
Administrators shall and do well and truly content, satisfy and pay, or cause
to be contented, satisfied and paid all and every such sum and sums of Money
which the said C. R. as Surety, and together with and for the said R. C. is and
stands bound to pay to any person or persons whatsoever, either by
Obligation, Bill, Specialty, Promise or otherwise howsoever according to the
intent and true meaning of such Specialties and Engagements; and shall and do
at all times hereafter well and sufficiently discharge, and save, and keep
harmless and indempnified the said C. R. his Executors and Administrators, and
his and their Bodies, Goods, Chattels, Lands and Tenements, and every of them
of and from the said Suretiship, That then and from thenceforth this present
Deed and every Matter and Thing therein contained shall be void and of none
effect. And that then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said R. C. his Heirs or Assigns, into the said Premises with the
appurtenances wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, re-possess and
enjoy, as in his or their former Estate, any thing herein to the contrary
notwithstanding. A Proviso to make void the use limited to the Wife, if she go
about depart with her Estate.
PRovided always nevertheless, and it is agreed by and between the said
Parties, That if it shall fortune that the said R. C. shall at any time
hereafter during the life of the said A. C. be fully resolved and determined
jointly with the said A. C. or otherwise by any ways or means, directly or
indirectly to levy any Fine, or suffer any Recovery, or do or assent to do any
act or thing by matter of Record or otherwise, whereby the Estate before
limited of and in the Premises, to her the said R. C. for term of life, or any
lesser Estate derived out of her said Estate of and in the said Capital
Message, etc. or any part or parcel thereof, shall or may pass or be altered,
taken away, charged, encumbered or divested out of or from the said R. C. And
shall attempt or go about to put in use any such perfect and full resolution
and determination, That then and immediately after such attempt or going about,
the said Use and Estate for Life, of and in the Premises before limited and
appointed to the said R. C. as touching all the said Premises, or such part or
parcel thereof, touching which such attempt or going about shall be had or
made, shall cease and be void as touching and concerning the said R. C. And
that then and from thenceforth the said Fine and Recovery, Conveyance and
Conveyances to be had and made to the said J. F. and F. J. and to their Heirs,
or the Heirs of the Survivor of them, after the said Estate for Life so limited
and appointed to the said R. C. ended and determined, shall be, and the said J.
F. and F. J. and their Heirs, and the Heirs of either of them shall stand and
be seized of and in all the said Premises, or such part or parcel thereof,
touching which such attempt or going about shall be had or made, To the use and
behoof of C. C. Son and Heir Apparent of the said A. C. and of D. C. second Son
of the said A. C. and their Heirs, for and during the natural life of the said
R. C. to the end, intent and purpose that they the said C. C. and D. C. and the
Survivor of them, or the Heirs of the Survivor of them, after the decease of
the said A. C. (in case the said R. C. shall happen to over-live the said A.C.)
shall or may grant over their Estates to the said R. C. in the Premises,
within two Months after the decease of the said A. C. And that after the
decease of the said A. C. and the said R. C. Then the said Fine and Recovery
and other Assurances shall be and remain as to the said Message, etc. to the
uses and behoofs before, in and by these Presents limited and appointed, to
begin and take place after the decease of the said A. C. and R. his wife. A
Proviso for preserving the Estate to Children, en ventre sa mere.
PRovided always, and it is fully concluded, condescended unto, granted and
agreed by and between all the said parties to these Presents, for them and
every of them, and for their and every of their Heirs, and the true intent and
meaning of these Presents is, notwithstanding any limitation of the use and
uses aforesaid, That if it shall hereafter happen the said J. F. C. F. B. F. E.
F. and D. F. Sons of the said R. F. or any of them, or any of the Issue Male of
the several Bodies of them, or any of them inheritable, or which shall be
inheritable of or to the Premises beforementioned by force of these Presents,
and of the uses before limited and expressed, or of or to any part or parcel
thereof, to die and depart this Life, the Wife of them or any of them being
with Child or conceived with Child at or before the time of his or their death,
or with any such Son or Sons, or Issue Male, as by the true intent and meaning
of these Presents, or of any the limitations or declarations of the use or uses
aforesaid, should or ought after the decease of his or their Father, to have
had any Estate or use of or in the Premises or any part thereof, if such Son
or Sons or Issue Male had been born in the lifetime of his or their Father,
That then, and from and after the birth of every such Son or Sons or Issue
Male, the said several Fines and Recoveries, etc. covenanted or mentioned to be
had, levied acknowledged or suffered of the said Premises as aforesaid, shall
be, and shall be adjudged, construed and taken to be; and also that they the
said R. C. and C. R. (the Recoverors, Conizees or Feoffees) and their Heirs,
and the Heirs of the Survivor of them, shall stand, continue and be seized of
all and singular the, etc. or of or in so much of the said, etc. whereof or
wherein every or any such Son or Sons or Issue Male so to be born, should or
ought by the true intent and meaning of the limitations or declarations of the
use and uses aforesaid, or any of them after the death of his or their Father,
to have had any Estate or use in the same; if such Son or Sons or Issue Male
had been born in the lifetime of his or their said Father, to and for the use
of every such Son or Sons or Issue Male so to be born as aforesaid: And that of
and under every such Estate, Degree, Order, Course, Quality, Condition and
Limitation in all and every respect, and to all intents and purposes, as if
every such Son or Sons or Issues Male had been born in the lifetime or lives of
his or their said Father, and with such Remainders and Limitations ever in use
as is before, in or by these Presents expressed. A Proviso that the Husband
being Tenant for life, may make a Jointure to any other Wife, if the present
should die.
PRovided always, and it is concluded and agreed by and between the said
Parties to these Presents, for them and their Heirs, That if the said R. C.
(having an Estate for life with remainders over) shall happen to overlive the
said B. C. his now Wife, and do after intend to marry again, That then and from
thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. C. at all times
during his natural life, to assign, limit and appoint such, and so much of the
said Lands, etc. with the appurtenances, as he the said R. C. shall think fit
(so that the same exceed not in the clear yearly Value the sum of 200 l. to and
for the use of any Woman who shall fortune to be his lawful Wife at the time of
his decease, for and during the term of the natural life of such Wife, for and
in the name of her Jointure, And that from and after such use and Limitation or
appointment so to be made to or for any such Wife; All and every said
Assurances and Conveyances of the Premises aforesaid, so to be had made and
executed as is aforesaid, concerning such and so much thereof only, whereof any
such appointment or Limitation by virtue of this Proviso, shall be so had or
made, shall be and enure, And the said J. F. and F. J. (Conusees or Feoffees)
and their Heirs, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, and his and their
Heirs shall stand and be seized thereof to the use of such Wife, for and during
the term of the natural life, according to the true intent and meaning of such
Limitation and appointment, any thing in these presents contained, to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And after such Use or Estate
ended or determined, then to the use of every such person or persons, and in
such manner and form, and with such Remainders over, uses and limitations, and
under all and every such Conditions and Provisoes, as the same should have
been, if no such Limitation or appointment had been made. -- Or thus, And after
the end or determination of such Estate, to the use of such person or persons
to whom the same ought to remain by the true intent and meaning of these
Presents. A Proviso for a Tenant for life to make a Jointure, if he should
marry.
PRovided always, and it is hereby declared and agreed by and between all and
every the Parties to these Presents; And the true intent and meaning of them
and these Presents is, That for the better advancement and Preferment in
Marriage of the said A. C. It shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. C.
at any time or times during the term of his natural life, by Indenture or by
any Deed or Deeds, Writing or Writings to be by him the said A. C. sealed and
subscribed in the presence of two or more Credible Witnesses, to declare, limit
or appoint all or any the said Manors, etc. with the appurtenances, to or for
the Jointure of any Wife or Wives with whom the said A. C. shall hereafter
intermarry, for the life or lives of such Wife or Wives, or for any number of
years determinable upon her or their life or lives, the same to take effect
from and after the death of the said A. C. And then and so often and from
thenceforth the said Recovery and Recoveries shall be and enure, and the
Recoveror and Recoverors therein named, his and their Heirs of and in the said
Manors, etc. or of or in so much thereof, of, for or concerning which such
Indenture, Deed or Deeds, Writing or Writings shall be made by the said A. C.
as aforesaid, for the Jointure of such Wife or Wives, shall stand and be seized
to the use of such Wife or Wives, for and during the life of such Wife or
Wives, according to the intent and meaning of the said Indenture, Deed or
Writing, and according to the true intent and meaning of these Presents. And
after, etc. Another to settle a Rent for a Jointure.
PRovided always, and it is the true intent and meaning of these presents, and
of all and every the parties hereunto, That it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said R. C. by Writing or Writings, sealed with his Seal, and subscribed
by him and duly Executed in the presence of three Witnesses at the least, to
give, grant, limit or appoint, to or for the use of every or any Woman that is
or shall be hereafter his lawful Wife, one annual or yearly Rent, not exceeding
the sum of 200 l. to be issuing and going out of the said Manor, Lands, etc.
or any part of them, or either of them so to be conveyed and assured as
aforesaid, To have and to hold the said annual or yearly Rent to any or every
such Woman for term of her natural life, for and in the name of her Jointure,
the same to be paid at the Feast of, etc. yearly, by even and equal portions;
The first payment thereof to begin at such of the said Feasts as shall next
happen after the decease of the said R. C. And that then and from thenceforth,
the said Fine or Fines shall be and enure, and the said J. F. and F. J. and
their Heirs shall stand and be seized of and in the said etc. so to be charged
as aforesaid, to the use, intent and purpose as aforesaid. And that every such
Wife or Wives, to whom or to whose use any such grant or Limitation should be
made, and her Assigns shall and may from time to time, for non-payment of the
said Rent, enter into and upon the said Lands and Tenements so to be charged
for the same Rent and Arrearages thereof, and as in case of a Rentcharge, to
distrain, and the distress and distresses so had and taken, to lead, drive,
bear, carry away, detain and keep until she or they shall be of the said Rent
and Arrears thereof, (if any shall be) fully satisfied, contented and paid. A
Proviso for R. C. being Tenant for Life, and for his Issue to make Leases and
Jointures by Deed or Will.
PRovided always, and it is fully concluded, condescended unto, granted and
agreed by and between all and every the said Parties to these Presents, for
them and every of them, and for their and every of their Heirs, And the true
intent and meaning of these Presents is, notwithstanding any Limitation of the
use or uses aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R.
C. and also to and for the said A. C. his Son; And to and for all and every the
Issues Male or Female of the Body of the said A. C. being seized of the
Premises or any part thereof in his, her or their Demesne, as of Freehold or
Fee tail, by force of any the uses or Limitations herein before expressed by
his, her, their or any of their Deed or Deeds indented to be sealed and
executed in the presence of two or three credible Witnesses, or by his, her,
their or any of their last Will and Testament in Writing to be sealed and
subscribed with his, her, their or any of their hand or hands, and pronounced
and affirmed in the presence of three or more lawful Winesses, to be his, her
or their last Will, to make any Demise or Demises, Lease or Leases, Devise or
Devises of such of the said Premises or of such part thereof, whereof the said
R. C. and A. C. or any Issue, Male or Female of the Body of the said A. C.
shall be then seized in actual and real possession, (the capital Message
called B. etc. before in and by these Presents, mentioned, limited and
appointed for the said B. C. only excepted) to any person or persons
whatsoever; To have and to hold the same from and after the time of the making
of such Deed or Deeds, Lease or Leases, Devise or Devises, or any of them to
any person or persons, for and during the Term of eighty years or any lesser
Term of years, so as the same Lease or Leases, Devise or Devises be not made
without impeachment of Wast, by any special Covenant, Clause or Matter for that
purpose to be contained within any such Deed or Deeds or last Will and
Testament, and so as the same be made in such sort, as that the same do or
shall determine and expire, by or upon the Death or Deaths of any one person, or
of two persons, or of three at the most, or otherwise, from and after the time
of the making of such Deed or Deeds or last Will and Testament, for and during
the Term or Terms of one and twenty years at the most, or for any lesser Term
of years, from the time of the making of such Deed or Deeds, or last Will and
Testament; And so that in or upon every such Demise or Demises, Lease or
Leases, Devise or Devises to be made for the Term of one and twenty years, or
under or for the Term of eighty years or under, determinably upon the Death or
Deaths of one, two or three persons as is aforesaid, there be reserved and
limited to be paid yearly, during such Term or Terms to such persons or persons
for the time being, to whom the immediate Freehold of the things so to be
demised, Letten or devised by the intent and true meaning of these Presents,
shall from time to time during the continuance of such Term or Terms,
appertain, such yearly Rent or Rents, Customs and Services, or more as are at
this present yearly answered, paid or done for the said Premises by the new
Tenants, Farmers or Occupiers thereof. A Proviso, That R. C. shall make Leases
for as long, and for what Rents he please.
PRovided always, and it is the intent and meaning of these Presents, That if
the said R. C. shall at any time hereafter during his life time Demise, Grant
or Lease the said Messuages, etc. and other the Premises before in these
Presents mentioned, or any part or parcel of them by his Deed indented, under
his Hand and Seal for any Term or Terms of years, Life or Lives, and under such
Rents and Covenants as he shall think fit; That then and immediately from and
after every such Demise, Lease or grant so to be made by the said R. C. the
said J. F. and F. J. and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them and his Heirs,
shall stand and be seized of such leased Premises, to the use and behoof of
the said Lessee and Lessees, Grantee and Grantees, and every of them and of
their several Executors, Administrators and Assigns, during the term and space
to be mentioned in the said several Leases, Grants and Demises respectively, so
that the yearly Rent or Rents mentioned or reserved by the said R. C. in faith
Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises, Grant or Grants be yearly paid unto the
said R. C. during his Natural life, And after his decease to such person or
persons, as by the purport and true meaning of these Presents, ought to have
the reversion or remainder, reversions or remainders of the, etc. so to be
leased or granted at the several days in every such Lease or Grant, to be
expressed or set down for payment thereof, or within twenty days after every
such day or days, and request made for payment thereof by the said R. C. or by
the said person or persons in reversion or Remainder. And so that the said
Lessees and Grantees, their respective Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
do well and truly perform the Conditions to be comprised in their said Lease or
Leases, Demises or Grants, according to the true intent and meaning of them.
And that the said J. F. and F. J. etc. and their Heirs shall stand and be
seized of the reversion and remainder, reversions and remainders of the said,
etc. so to be leased or granted as aforesaid, and after the end or
determination of such Lease or Leases, then of the said Messuages, etc. so to
be leased or granted to such uses and intents as the said J. F. and F. J. etc.
should have stood or been thereof seized by the purport, intent and true
meaning of these Presents, if no such Lease or Grant had been thereof made. A
Proviso, that an Estate limited to Daughters shall cease on payment of their
Portions by the Heirs.
PRovided always, That in case the said R. C. shall happen to depart this Life,
without Issue Male of his Body lawfully begotten on the Body of the said B. C.
If then the said F. C. (Father to R. C.) or any Heir Male of his Body, shall
pay or cause to be paid unto the Daughter or Daughters, of the said R. C. on
the Body of the said B. C. begotten these several Sums following; That is to
say, unto such Daughter of the said R. C. if he shall have but one, the full
Sum of two Thousand Pounds of good and lawful Money of England; And in case he
shall have more Daughters than one by the said B. living at the time of his
death, the Sum of five thousand Pounds of like lawful Moneys among and between
them, equally to be divided, the said payment and payments to be made at their
respective Age of Eighteen years, or Marriage which of them shall first happen,
or if the said F. C. or any Heir Male of his Body, shall at any time or times,
by such Security as the said J. F. and F. J. or the Survivor of them shall
direct in writing under the hand or hands of them, or the Survivor of them,
sufficiently secure the payment of the said Sums in manner aforesaid; That then
and from thenceforth, the Estate, Use and Limitation of the Premises to the
Heirs Female of the said R. C. on the Body of the said B. C. begotten and to be
begotten, shall cease and determine, And the said fine and fines shall be and
enure, And the said Cognizees and their Heirs shall stand and be seized of all
and singular the Premises, from and after the decease of the said R. C. and B.
C. and payment made, or Security given as aforesaid, to the use and behoof of
the Heirs Male of the Body of the said F. C. And for want of such Issue, to the
use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said F. C. for ever. Proviso, that an
Estate for years limited to the Trustees shall be void after Portions paid.
PRovided also; That from and immediately after such time as the said J. F. and
F. J. or the Executors, or Administrators of them or the Survivor of them,
should and might have raised and paid the said several Portions and maintenance
for such Daughter or Daughters as aforesaid; That then the said Estate for
years limited in Trust as aforesaid, to them the said J. F. and F. J. shall
cease, determine and be utterly void; And the said Messuages, Lands Tenements
and Premises so to them limited in Trust as aforesaid, shall immediately to
and be to such Person or Persons, to whom the Reversion or Remainder of the
said Messuages Lands and Premises shall belong, and appertain. A Proviso, that
if other Lands be conveyed in lieu of those limited, then the use in them to be
to another.
THe uses on a Fine to be acknowledged are these; To the use and behoof of the
said R. C. (Son of the said Feoffor) for life, and after his death to R. C. his
Wife for Life, and after the death of the Survivor, etc. Provided always, and
it is covenanted, granted concluded and agreed, by and between all the said
parties to these presents; And it is the true intent and meaning of these
presents, and of the said parties hereunto, That if the said F. C. or the said
R. C. his Son or either of them shall at any time hereafter during the natural
Life of the said B. C. convey and settle, or cause or procure to be conveyed
and settled, a good perfect, and indefeasable Estate in the Law in and to the
said B. C. or to her use and behoof, of, in or to any other Manor or Lands,
etc. within the Kingdom of England, of the clear yearly value of four hundred
Pounds per annum, of lawful Money of England, or more, over and above all
Charges and Reprises for Term of the natural Life of the said B. C. and to, and
for her only use and behoof, to begin and take effect in Possession immediately
upon the decease of the said R. C. in lieu and Recompense of such Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments in C. aforesaid, as are before in and by these
presents intended and agreed to be conveyed and assured unto the said B. C. for
and during the Term of her natural Life in such manner and form as is
aforesaid; That then the said Estate for Life hereby limited and appointed to
or for the said B. C. of, in and to the said Lands, etc. in C. aforesaid, shall
cease, determine, be void and of none effect; And that then and from
thenceforth, the said Recovery and Recoveries, etc. shall be, and shall be
adjudged deemed and taken to be, And the said Recoverors and every of them,
their and every of their Heirs, shall and will stand and be seized, and shall
be judged, deemed, and taken to stand and be seized from and after the decease
of the said R. C. of, and in such and so much of the said Lands and Tenements
and other the premises in C. aforesaid, as is limited and appointed before in
and by these presents, to or for the said B. C. for Term of her life as
aforesaid, to the only use and behoof of the Heirs Male of the Body of the said
R. C. on the Body of the said B. C. lawfully begotten or to be begotten; And
for default of such Issue, then to such further use and uses, behoofs Issue and
purposes, as be thereof before in and by these presents expressed and declared,
and to no other use or uses, intents or purposes whatsoever: Any thing before
in these presents contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. A Proviso
to make void an Estate, if the Son Marry without the Fathers consent.
PRovided always, That if the said R. C. or any of the Sons of the said A. C.
lawfully begotten or to be begotten, which shall fortune to be Heir apparent of
the said A. C. shall in the life time of the said A. C. Marry or take to Wife
any Woman, or contract Marriage with any Woman without the consent of the said
A. C. first had and obtained in Writing thereunto; That then the Estate, Use,
Remainder and Possession of every such Person and Persons so Marrying, or
contracting shall cease, determine and be void; And that yet nevertheless all
other the Estate, Uses and Remainders by these presents limited and expressed,
of and for the said Messuages, etc. shall stand, remain and continue in full
force and effect; And the said Fine so to be had and levied as aforesaid, shall
be and enure, and the said Cognizees therein to be named and the Survivor of
them and his Heirs shall stand and be seized of the said, etc. in the said Fine
to be contained to the use and behoof of such other person or persons, as
should or ought to have had the same, by the true intent and meaning of these
Presents, next after the determination of the Estate of the same person or
persons, so marrying or contracting in such manner and form, and of such Estate
and Estates as is herein before limited, any thing herein contained to the
contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding. A Proviso to revoke and limit
new Uses.
PRovided always, That if the said R. C. shall at any time during his Natural
Life, intend or be minded to alter, change, repeal, revoke or make void all the
said Estates, Uses, Remainders and Limitations before in these Presents
mentioned or any of them, of or in the Premises or any part thereof; And shall
by any Deed or Deeds in Writing, under his Hand and Seal to be attested by two
or more credible Witnesses, subscribing their Names thereunto, signify and
declare that his mind and intent is to alter, change, repeal, revoke or make
void the said Estates, Uses, Remainders and Limitations before in the Presents
specified and declared, or such, or so many of them as shall be mentioned in
the said Writing or Writings, of Revocation to be repealed, revoked or made
void, of or in the said Premises or any part thereof, shall from thenceforth
cease, determine and be repealed, revoked and utterly void for ever; And that
then and from thenceforth the said J. F. and F. J. and the Survivor of them,
their and his Heirs and all and every other person and persons whatsoever,
which shall be then seized of the said Premises, with the Appurtenances, or of
any part or parcel thereof, shall stand and be seized thereof, or of so much
thereof as shall be mentioned and contained in the said Writing or Writings of
Revocation to be therein and thereby revoked, repealed and made void as
aforesaid, to the only use and behoof of him the said R. C. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, or to such other use or uses, intents and purposes as in and
by the said Deed or Deeds, Writing or Writings of Revocation, shall be limited,
declared and appointed, and to no other use, intent and purpose whatsoever, any
thing before specified to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.
Another, where the Uses were raised by a Covenant to stand seized.
PRovided always nevertheless, And it is covenanted, concluded and fully
agreed, by and between all the said Parties to these Presents, That if the said
R. C. shall be minded at any time hereafter, to alter or revoke the said uses
or any of them, and the Estate or Estates that shall or may be vested or settled
by virtue, force or reason of these Presents, and of the transferring uses into
possession, It shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. C. at his own
will and pleasure during his natural Life, in or by his Deed in Writing, to be
testified by two or more credible Witnesses, or by the last Will and Testament
of him the said R. C. to be testified by three credible Witnesses, To alter,
change, revoke, determine, annul, make void and frustrate any of the said Uses,
Estates or Limitations in these presents before mentioned, of all or any part
or parcel of the said, etc. And also by his said Deed in Writing, or by his
last Will in Writing to be testified as before to limit, declare and appoint the
Uses of the said, etc. or any of them, or of any part or parcel of them, to any
of the persons before named, or to any other person or persons whatsoever; And
that upon such new Declaration, Limitation and Appointment of any other Use or
Uses, Estate or Estates, of or in the Premises or any part or parcel thereof
as aforesaid, The Use or Uses, Estate and Estates of such and so much of the
Premises, whereof any such new Declaration, Limitation and Appointment shall
be so had and made, shall be, and the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns, and all
and every other person and persons, and his and their Heirs and Assigns, which
at any time hereafter shall stand and be seized of such and so much of the
Premises, whereof any such new Declaration, Limitation and Appointment shall
be so had and made, shall stand and be seized thereof, to the use of such
person and persons, and of such Estate and Estates as shall be mentioned and
expressed in the said Deed or last Will, any thing in these Presents contained
to the contrary hereof, in any wise notwithstanding. An Exception of Leases in
a Proviso to revoke.
BUT it is, and always was the intent of all the Parties to these Presents,
That no Revocation or new Limitation, should or shall any way frustrate or make
void any Lease, Estate, Rent in charge made, granted or charged of or upon the
Premises, or any part or parcel thereof by the said R. C. for valuable
consideration or otherwise, by virtue or force of any former Proviso in these
Presents expressed; But that the same and every of them shall stand good,
according to the purport and true meaning of them, and every of them,
notwithstanding such Revocation or new Limitation hereafter to be made. A
Revocation of Uses in a Feoffment and a Limitation in Fee.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come R. C. of, etc.
sends Greeting:
Know ye that I the said R. C. do by this my present Writing, under my Hand and
Seal in the presence of A. B. C. D. and E. F. three credible Witnesses, whose
Names are hereunder subscribed, revoke, determine and make void, and frustrate
all and every Uses and Estates mentioned, raised, created and limited in and by
one Indenture of Feoffment bearing date, etc. made between me the said R. C. of
the one part, and C. R. J. F. and F. J. of the other part, of and for the, etc.
with the Appurtenances in the said Indenture mentioned, and of, and for every
part and parcel thereof; And I do by these presents absolutely determine, limit
and appoint, That all and singular the Feoffees Parties and Persons in the said
Indenture mentioned, and their Heirs and Assigns shall immediately and from
henceforth stand and be seized of the said, etc. in the said Indenture
mentioned, and of, and in every part and parcel thereof, to the only use and
behoof of me the said R. C. my Heirs and Assigns for ever, in a pure and
absolute Estate of Fee-simple;

In witness whereof, I the said R. C. have to this my Writing set my Hand and
Seal in the presence of the said C. R. J. F. and F. J. this 20th day of March,
in the 5th year of the Reign of, etc.
A Revocation of Uses, with the recital of the Proviso, and a Limitation of new
Uses, viz. To R. C. for Life, and then to his Daughter and her Issue, and in
default of Issue to his right Heirs in Fee.
TO all Christian People, etc. I R. C. of, etc.
send Greeting:
Whereas by one Indenture bearing date, etc. made by me the said R. C. by the
name of R. C. of, etc. of the one part, and C. R. J. F. and F. J. of the other
part, for the Consideration therein mentioned, I did covenant, promise and
grant, etc. [recite the Covenant to levy a Fine] which said Fine so to be
acknowledged and levied as aforesaid, of all and singular the, etc. was in and
by the said Indenture covenanted, granted, concluded and declared to be to such
several uses and behoofs, and of such Estate and Estates, as are particulary in
the said Indenture mentioned and set forth; And whereas in the said Indenture
there is a Proviso contained as follows, (That is to say,) Provided always,
and it is the true intent and meaning of this present Indenture, and of all the
Parties hereunto, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. C. at
any time during his Life by any Deed or Deeds, Writing or Writings, or by his
last Will and Testament in Writing, by him sealed and subscribed in the
presence of three credible Witnesses to alter, change, enlarge, revoke,
frustrate and make void all and every or any the Use and Uses, Estate and
Estates herein before expressed, limited, mentioned, declared or appointed to
any person or persons, of and in the said, etc. or in any of them, or in any
part or parcel thereof; And thereof, or of any part thereof to create, declare,
limit or appoint any other Use or Uses, Estate or Estates to any Person or
Persons whatsoever, in such sort, manner and form as the said R. C. shall think
meet and convenient, and that at all times, and from time to time immediately,
from and after such alteration, change, enlargement, revocation or making void,
of all or any the said Use or Uses, Estate or Estates, Declaration, Limitation
or Appointment of any other Use or Uses, Estate or Estates, All and every those
Use and Uses, Estate and Estates of and in the said, etc. or of, or in any part
or parcel thereof, or such of them as shall be so revoked and declared to be
made void as aforesaid, shall cease, determine and be utterly void and
frustrate; And that then, and from thenceforth the said Fine, and all and every
other Conveyance and Conveyances, Assurance and Assurances, whatsoever had or
at any time hereafter to be had or made between the said Parties, or any of
them of the said, etc. or of such part thereof, whereof such other Use or Uses,
Estate or Estates, shall be so limited or declared as aforesaid, shall be
adjudged, deemed, construed and taken to be, and enure, and the said Cognizees
of the said Fine, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, and the Heirs of the
Survivor of them, shall immediately from thenceforth stand and be seized
thereof, and of every part thereof, to and for such Use and Uses, Estate and
Estates, Intents and purposes, and of such person and persons, and in such
sort, manner and form as the said R. C. in or by such Deed or Deeds in Writing,
or last Will and Testament in Writing to be sealed, subscribed and testified as
is aforesaid, shall create and declare, limit, express and appoint, and to no
other use, intent or purpose whatsoeever; And whereas, afterward in
performance of the Covenants, Grants and Agreements in the said recited
Indenture mentioned one Fine, Sur Cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. was had,
levied, acknowledged and executed, of and for, etc. in the Court of Common
Pleas at Westminster, before his Majesty's Justices of the said Court, by me
the said R. C. unto the said C. R. J. F. and F. J. which said Fine was had,
levied and acknowledged to the Uses, Intents and Purposes, and with and under
the several Provisoes, Conditions and Limitations in the said recited Indenture
mentioned: Now know ye that I the said R. C. for diverse good Causes and
Considerations me moving, and by virtue of the said Proviso before mentioned,
and Liberty, Power and Authority thereby to me given and reserved, have
altered, changed, determined, revoked and made void; And by this present
Writing, by me signed and sealed in the presence of the Persons under named, do
alter, change, determine, revoke and make void, all and every the said Use and
Uses, Estate and Estates, created, raised, declared, limited and appointed by
the said recited Indenture and Fine, and either of them, And by force of the
Statute of transferring Uses into possession of and in the the said, etc. and
of or in any part or parcel thereof; And I the said R. C. out of the Fatherly
love and affection, that I do bear unto M. C. my only Daughter and Heir
apparent, now Wife to F. C. of, etc. and to the Heirs of her Body lawfully
begotten, do by these presents, by virtue of the said Proviso, in the said
recited Indenture contained, and the Liberty, Power and Authority therein and
thereby to me given and reserved as aforesaid, create, declare, limit and
appoint, That the said Fine so had, levied and acknowledged as aforesaid, of
the said, etc. herein before mentioned, shall be and enure, And that the said
Cognizees and their Heirs, shall stand and be seized of, and in the said, etc.
and of and in every part and parcel thereof, to the use and behoof of me the
said R. C. for and during the Term of my natural Life without Impeachment of
Wast; And immediately from and after my decease, to the use and behoof of M. C.
and F. C. her Husband, and of the Heirs of the Body of the said M. C. And in
default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of me the said
R. C. for ever,

(here may be a Proviso for Revocation of these Uses.)

A Jointure with all Covenants usual therein.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of the one part, and R. C. and M. his
Daughter of the other part witnesses, That the said J. F. does by these
Presents, covenant and grant to and with the said R. C. his Executors and
Administrators by these Presents, That he the said J. F. shall and will before
the Feast of, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, marry and take to Wife the
said M. C. Daughter of the said R. C. if the Laws of the Church will permit the
same, and the said M. C. shall thereunto consent and agree. And the said R. C.
for himself, his Executors and Administrators does covenant and grant to and
with the said J. F. that the said M. C. shall likewise before the said Feast,
etc. marry and take to Husband the said J. F. if the Laws of the Church will
permit the same, and the said J. F. shall thereunto consent and agree. And the
said J. F. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators by these
presents, in consideration of the said Marriage so to be had and solemnized,
and for the full and entire Jointure of the said M. C. in case she shall happen
to outlive the said J. F. And in full recompense and satisfaction of all the
Dower, and Title of Dower which she the said M. C. by or after the death of the
said J. F. shall or may have in any the, etc. whereof the said J. F. shall
during the Coverture between him the said M. C. be seized of any Estate of
Inheritance and for the advancement of the said M. C. and of the Heirs Males of
the Body of the said J. F. upon the Body of the said M. C. lawfully to be
begotten: And for diverse other good Causes and Considerations him the said J.
F. thereunto moving, does for him and his Heirs covenant and grant to and with
the said R. C. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators in manner and form
following, that is to say, That he the said J. F. and his Heirs, and all and
every person and persons, and his and their Heirs which now stand and be seized
of and in all that, etc. and of and in every part and parcel thereof, shall
from and after the said Intermarriage, stand and be seized of all and singular
the said, etc. with the Appurtenances, to the only uses and intents hereafter
in and by these presents expressed, limited and declared, and to no other use,
intent or purpose whatsoever, that is to say, To the only use and behoof of the
said J. F. and his Heirs until the said Marriage. And from and after the said
Marriage had, then to the use and behoof of the said J. F. and M. for and
during the terms of the natural Lives of them the said J. F. and M. and of the
longer Liver of them. And from and after the decease of the Survivor of the
said J. F. and M. to the use and behoof of the Heirs Male of the Body of the
said J. F. upon the Body of the said M. lawfully to be begotten* And for
default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said J.
F. for ever.

And the said R. C. does for himself, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, covenant, grant and agree to and with the said J. F. his Executors and
Administrators by these presents, That in case the said Marriage between the
said J. F. and the said M. C. Daughter of the said R. C. do take effect, and be
solemnized at or before the said Feast of, etc. herein beforementioned, he
the said R. C. his Executors or Adminstrators shall and will within six Months
after the said Marriage had and solemnized, pay or cause to be paid unto the
said J. F. his Executors or Administrators, as the Marriage Portion of the said
M. the sum of 2000 l. of lawful Money of England, at or in the now dwelling
House of the said J. F. situate, etc. And the said R. C. also for himself does
covenant and grant to and with the said J. F. his Executors and Administrators
by these presents, That in case the said Marriage shall take effect according
to the true meaning of these presents, That then the said R. C. shall and will
well and sufficiently maintain, provide for, find keep and sustain the said J.
F. and M. his Wife, and all the Issue of their two Bodies begotten from time to
time, and at all times immediately from and after the said Marriage between the
said J. F. and M. so to be had and solemnized as aforesaid, during the natural
life of him the said R. C. with sufficient and convenient Meat, Drink, Lodging
and Houseroom according and suitable to their Quality and Degree.

And farther, That the said R. C. shall and will either in the lifetime of the
said R. C. or by his last Will and Testament, leave, give, devise and assure,
or cause to be well and truly contented and paid unto the said J. F. or to the
said M. in case she shall survive the said J. F. or to the Children or Child to
be begotten between them, in case the said J. F. and M. shall both happen to
die in the life time of the said R. C. to be Equally divided between them the
sum of 1000 l. of lawful Money of England (over and beside the sum of 2000 l.
herein beforementioned to be paid to the said J.F. as and for a Marriage
Portion with the said M. to be paid within two years after the decease of the
said R. C. in case the same shall not be paid or satisfied in his lifetime.

And the said J. F. does for himself, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, covenant, promise, grant, conclude and agree to and with the said R.
C. his Executors and Assigns by these presents, That if the Marriage between
him the said J. F. and the said M. shall take effect, and be had as aforesaid;
and if the said M. shall happen to survive and outlive him the said J. F. and
shall at any time after the decease of the said J. F. be lawfully evicted or
put out, of or from the said, etc. limited to her as aforesaid for her
Jointure, or any part or parcel thereof, That then the Executors or
Administrators of the said J. F. shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid
unto the said M. so much lawful Money of England for the said premises or part
thereof, being so evicted from the said M. as aforesaid, as the same shall
Amount unto at Rate of seven years purchase, for and according to the yearly
Value of the same, within six Months after such eviction.

And the said J. F. further for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does
covenant and grant to and with said R. C. his Executors and Administrators by
these presents, That in case the said M. shall happen to depart this life
within two years after the said Marriage had and solemnized as aforesaid,
without having any Issue of her Body, lawfully begotten by the said J. F. then
living, That then and in such case the said J. F. his Executors or
Administrators shall and will, for and in respect of the said sum of 2000 l. of
lawful Money of England by him received as aforesaid, as the Marriage Portion of
the said M. repay and satissfie, or cause to be repaid and satisfied unto the
said R. C. the sum of 1000 l. of lawful Money of England at one entire payment,
within four Months next after the decease of the said M.

And it it is further covenanted, granted concluded and agreed by the said J.
F. for himself his Executors and Administrators, That if the said Marriage
shall take effect, and if the said M. shall outlive the said J. F. and after
his decease shall agree to and refuse to accept of the said, etc. hereby settled
on her as aforesaid, for and in the name of her Jointure, and shall commence or
sue any Action at law for any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, which are the
Inheritance of the said J. F. during the covertue between them for her Dower,
or upon her Title of Dower, That then and from thenceforth, from and after the
commencement of such Action or Actions, Suit or Suits, the Uses and Estates
herein before limited shall cease, determine and be utterly void, and then and
from thenceforth the said [these must be Trustees when this Covenant issued] H.
J. and K. L. shall stand and be seized of all and every the premises
aforesaid, to the use and behoof of the said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding

And the said J. F. for himself, his, etc. does covenant and grant to and with
the said R. C. his etc. That if the said M. after the said Marriage had and
solemnized, do happen to die in the lifetime of the said J. F. that it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said M. at her free will and pleasure to make,
publish and declare one Will and Testament in writing, under her Hand and Seal,
and thereby to dispose, will, give and bequeath to any her Children, Servants
or Friends, for their preferment and advancement, any sum or sums of Money
whatsoever, not exceeding in the whole, the sum of 400 l. of the Goods and
Chattels of him the said J. F. without any Let disturbance or contradiction of
the said J. E. and in as large and ample manner as if the said M. were then a
Feme-sole and unmarried.

And lastly, the said J. F. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them does by these Presents, covenant, promise and
grant to and with the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns and every of them, that
the said, etc. And all and singular other the premises with the appurtenances
herein beforementioned, now are and be, and so at all times hereafter, and from
time to time shall be, remain and continue unto the uses, intents and purposes,
before, in and by these presents, limited, expressed and declared, free and
clear, and freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or
otherwise upon every reasonable request in that behalf to be made, well and
sufficiently saved, defended and kept harmless, of and from all manner of
former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Jointures, Dowers,
Uses, Wills, Intails, Fines, Feoffments, Recoveries, Statutes-Merchant and of
the Staple, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions, and of and from all other
Charges, Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed or
done, or to be had, made, committed or done by the said J. F. or by any other
person or persons whatsoever by his means or procurement (all such Leases,
particular Estates and Interests as he the said J. F. has heretofore made to
any person or persons whatsoever, of or upon the said, etc. and other the
premises, or of or upon any part or parcel thereof; upon which Leases and
Estates there is reserved the old and accustomed yearly Rent or Rents, or more,
which shall continue yearly due and payable during the several Terms, Estates
and Interests as aforesaid) only excepted and foreprized.

A Warrant for the Overseers of the Poor to name other fit Persons.
To the Constable and Borsholders of D. in the Hundred of F. and to every of
them. 43 E. c. 2
Sussex ss.
These are in his Majesty's Name to command you to give notice to the
Churchwardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of D. That they are by us
required personally to appear before us at the House of R. C. in A. etc. upon
Wednesday the 10th day of March, at eight of the Clock in the Forenoon of the
same day, to make and yield up unto as a true and perfect account in Writing of
all Sums of Money by them received, or rated or assessed, and not received for
and toward the relief of the Poor of D. and also of such Stock to set the Poor
at work, as is in their hands, or in the hands of any of their said Poor to
work, and of all other things concerning their said Office: And that hereof
they fail not at their Perils. And you are farther hereby commanded to signify
unto them, That they do then and there also certify unto us the Names of such
other substantial Householders of D. as are thought meet to be Overseers of the
Poor there for the year ensuing. Fail not at your Perils,

Given under our Hands and Seals at the, etc.
A Warrant for making new Overseers of the Poor. 43 E. 2.
Sussex. ss.
ACcording to the Form of the Statute in such case made and provided, We whose,
Names are hereunto subscribed (his Majesty's Justices of the said County, do
nominate and appoint you whose Names are underwirtten) to be together with the
Churchwardens of the Parish of R. in the County aforesaid, Overseers of the
Poor of the said Parish for the year ensuing; and to be and do and perform all
such things, in and touching the said Office, as by Law is required, whereof
you are not to fail at your Perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals at A. in the County aforesaid, the 10th day of
December, etc. W.M. R.F. etc.

A Warrant to make Overseers of the Poor, impowring them and the Churchwardens
to Collect and Distrain for the Poors Tax. 43 E. 2.
Sussex ss.
WHereas by virtue of an Act of Parliament, entitled An Act for Relief or the
Poor, in the forty third year of, etc. We whose Names are subscribed, his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the said County of S. and one of Us of the
Quorum, dwelling in or near the Parish of B. in the said County of S. Have
nominated and appointed R. C. and C. R. together with F. J. Churchwardens for
time being, according to the said Act of Parliament, to be Overseers for the
Poor of the said Parish; and to receive the several Sums of Money taxed and
assessed by them, on the several persons, on the 10th day of December instant.
These are therefore, according to the said Act of Parliament, to authorize you
the said Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor, or any of you, to collect
and receive all such Sums of Money as aforesaid, and the same respectively to
levy of such persons as shall refuse to pay the aforesaid Assessment, by way of
Distress, and Sale of their Goods, for so much, rendering the overplus, if any
be, to the party or parties distrained; and for default of distress, We require
all Constables and other Officers, to bring before Us or some other his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County, the Bodies of all such persons,
where no distress can be had, that further course may be taken with them
according to Law.

Dated the 10th day of December, in the fifth year, etc.
A Confirmation of the Poors Tax. 43 E. 2.
Sussex ss.
SEen, ratified and allowed by Us whose Names are hereunder written, two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the County aforesaid: And We do hereby
authorize the present Churchwardens and Overseers for the Poor within the
Parish of B. and every of them, to levy by way or distress and sale of the
Goods of all such persons as shall refuse or neglect to pay the several
Taxations aforesaid, upon him imposed, rendering to the Owners the overplus
which remain upon the said sale, according to the Statute in that case made and
provided.

Given under our Hands and Seals, etc.
A Warrant to levy the Arrears (due to the Parish by) the former Overseers
Account.
To the Churchwardens, and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of B.
in the said County, and to every of them. 43. E. 2.
Sussex ss.
Forasmuch as upon your complaint, it appears unto Us, that R. C. and C. R.
Churchwardens of the Parish aforesaid, and J. F. and F. J. Overseers of the
Poor of the said Parish, in the year of our Lord, etc. upon their account by
them made and yielded, of and for the Moneys by them received and disbursed,
for and in Execution of their Office, according to the Form of the Statute in
that case made and provided, were in arrear and behind to the said Parish, Ten
pounds, and have not yet paid the same over to you; These are therefore in his
Majesty's Name to command you, that you or some of you do levy the said Ten
pounds by distress and sale of the Goods of the said R. C. and C. R. J. F. and
F. J. rendering to them the Overplus; And in default of such Distress, That then
you do forthwith certify the same unto us, to the end we may further do
therein, as to Justice does appertain. Hereof fail not.

Given, etc.
A Warrant to distrain for the Poors Tax.
To the Churchwardens, and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of B.
in the said County, and to every of them. 43 E. 2.
Sussex ss.
FOrasmuch as Complaint has been made by you, unto us, That the several
persons here under-named, have refused to pay unto you the several Sums of Money
adjoining to their several names, being assessed upon them severally, for and
toward the necessary relief of the Poor of the said Parish according to the
Form of the Statute in that case made and provided. These are therefore in his
Majesty's Name to command you, that you, some or one of you do forthwith levy
the said several and respective Sums of Money, by distress and sale of the
several and respective Goods of the said several and respective Offenders,
rendering to the Parties the Overplus; and in defect of such Distress, that then
you, some or one of you do certify the same unto us, to the end that there may
be such further proceeding touching the premises, as to Justice does appertain.

Given under our Hands, etc. R. C. 1 l. 5 s. 6 d. C. R. 6 l. 5 s. 1 d.




A Mittimus where no Distress can be had.
To the Keeper of his Majesty's Gaol for the said County at H. in the County
aforesaid.
Sussex ss.
FOrasmuch as is appears unto us, That R. C. of, etc. was assessed and rated
at the Sum of 25 s. 6 d. for and toward the necessary Relief of the Poor of
the said Parish, according to the Form of the Statute in that case made and
provided; and that for his refusal of payment of the same, a Warrant was,
according to the Form of the Statute, directed to the Churchwardens, and other
the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid, under the Hands and Seals of
W. M. R. F. etc. his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County aforesaid:
And for that it now appears unto us, That the said R. C. has no Goods or
Chattels, by Distress and Sale whereof the said Money can be levied, nor will he
yet pay the Moneys aforesaid; We therefore do send you herewithal the Body of
the said R. C. commanding you to receive him into the said Gaol, there to
remain without Bail or Mainprise, until he shall pay the Moneys aforesaid.
Hereof fail not at your Peril.

Given, etc.
Upon the Statute of 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. A Warrant to remove out of the Parish,
one lately come thither, and likely to be chargeable.
To the Churchwardens, and others the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of
B. in the said County, and to every of them.
Sussex ss.
WE whose Hands and Seals are hereunto set, two of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace of the said County, whereof one is of the Quorum, have heard the
Complaint by you made unto us, That R. C. has within forty days before the
said Complaint, come into your said Parish to settle there in a Tenement under
the yearly value of 10 l. and that he is likely to be chargeable to the Parish
aforesaid, and was last legally settled at R. in, etc. by the space of forty
days at the least, as Native, Householder, Sojourner, Apprentice or Servant
there: These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, and according to the Form of
the Statute in that case made and provided, to require and authorize you and
every of you, that you, some or one of you do remove and convey the said R. C.
to R. aforesaid, where he was so last legally settled, unless he give sufficient
Security for the discharge of your said Parish, to be allowed by us.

Given under our Hands and Seals, etc.
A Warrant to send a Wife and Child to her Husband.
To the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of B. in the said County, and to
every of them. 2 Justices.
Sussex ss.
FOrasmuch as Complaint has been by you made unto us, That C. the Wife of R.
C. an Inhabitant of the Parish of B. in the County aforesaid, is lately come
into your said Parish of B. and has brought with her thither a Male Child of
the said R. and C. of the Age of, etc. or thereabouts; And that both the said
C. and Child are likely to be chargeable to your said Parish, and you have
thereupon craved from us such Relief, touching the Premises, as is by Law
appointed: These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to authorize and appoint
you, that you, some or one of you do convey the said C. and Child to the said
Parish of B. and there to deliver them to the said R. in case you can there
find him, to be with him settled according to Law; and in case you cannot find
him there, then to deliver the said C. and Child to the Overseers of the Poor
of the said Parish of B. to be disposed of according to Law.

Given under, etc.
A Warrant for apprehending one for returning to the Parish from which he was
removed.
To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundred of in the said County, and to
every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction, for the said
County at A. in the County aforesaid. 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Justice.
Sussex ss.
WHereas R. C. in July last, legally settled as a, etc. in the Parish of F. came
into the Parish of C. to settle in a Tenement there, under the yearly value of
10 l. and likely to be chargeable to the said Parish, was upon Complaint
thereof made by the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor for the said
Parish, according to the Form of the Statute in that behalf made, by Warrant to
the said Churchwardens and Overseers, according to the Statute aforesaid,
directed, by them removed and conveyed to the aforesaid Parish of F. there to
remain according to the said Statute: Since which, the said R. C. did return of
his own accord to the said Parish of C. from whence he was so removed: These
are therefore in his Majesty's Name to command you, that you, some or one of
you, do cause the said R. C. to come before us, some or one of us, at the House
of, etc. called, etc. in the said County, the 10th day of January next ensuing,
at nine of the Clock in the Forenoon of the same day, to show the cause why he
returned to the said Parish of C. and further to do and receive as to Justice
does appertain. Hereof fail not at your perils.

Given, etc.
A Warrant to pay Arrears, and continue weekly Relief to the Poor.
To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor for the Parish of B. and to
every of them.
Sussex ss.
WHereas Complaint has been made unto me by A. C. of your said Town, That you
R.C. and C. R. the now Overseers of the Poor of your said Parish, formerly paid
unto the said A. C. the Sum of two Shillings per Week, for and toward the
maintenance of her self and Children, and that you do now suspend the payment
thereof, whereby the said A. C. is utterly disabled to provide for her self and
Children: These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to charge and command you
the said Overseers, that presently upon sight hereof, you, or some or one of
you, pay unto the said R. C. all such Arrears as are become due, since your
forbearing the payment thereof, and that you continue to pay her the former
Allowances of two Shillings weekly for the future, or forthwith to show cause
why you refuse to do so. And hereof, etc.

A Bond and Condition to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, to save a
Parish harmless upon inhabiting there.
Noverint universi, etc. A. and B. teneri, etc. C. and D. in sexaginta libris,
etc. (ut in all.)

THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas one R. C. is now lately
come to inhabit and dwell within the said Parish of B. and likely to be
chargeable to the same; If therefore the said A. and B. or either of them,
their or either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or every, or any
of them, do and shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter fully and
clearly acquit, discharge, save harmless and indempnifie, as well the within
named C. and D. Churchwardens of the Parish Church of B. aforesaid, and the
now Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish and their Successors, as also all
the Inhabitants and Parishioners of the said Parish, which now are or at any
time hereafter shall be there resident, and every of them, of and from all, and
all manner of Costs and Charges, Payments, Taxes and Expenses whatsoever, which
shall or may at any time hereafter in any manner arise, happen, come, grow due
or be imposed upon them or any of them, for or by reason or means of the said
R. C. his Wife or Children, or any of them, which shall be so residing, living
or inhabiting in the said Parish of B. and of, and from all Troubles, Charges
and Demands whatsoever concerning the same, That then this Obligation shall be
void, or else shall stand and be in full force and virtue.


Sealed and delivered in the presence of (...)
A Release to one that paid 20 l. to be freed from keeping a Bastard Child.
TO all Christian People to whom these Presents shall come, We A. B. of, etc.
and C. D. of, etc. the now Overseers of the Poor, for the said Parish of B.
send Greeting:
Whereas there was a Bastard Child born within the said Parish of B. begotten
on the Body of one H. E. And whereas R. C. of, etc. is adjudged the reputed
Father thereof, And whereas it is agreed by and between the said A. B. and C.
D. and the rest of the Inhabitants of the said Parish of B. and the said R. C.
That for and in consideration of the Sum of 20 l. of lawful Money of England, to
be paid to us the Overseers for the Poor by the said R. C. We the said
Overseers and our Successors, and the rest of the Inhabitants of the said
Parish of B. should provide for, take care of and maintain the said Child, and
save harmless, and indempnifie the said R. C. of and from the keeping and
maintaining it, and of and from all Taxes, Charges and Payments, now already or
hereafter to be taxed or charged upon the said R. C. for or in respect thereof:
Now know ye that we the said A. B. and C. D. have according to, and in full of
the said Agreement had and received of the said R. C. the Sum of 20 l. and do
by and with the consent and direction, and for and on the behalf of our selves,
and the rest of the Inhabitants of the said Parish of B. acquit, release and
for ever discharge him the said R. C. from the said Sum of 20 l. and from the
keeping or maintaining the said Child, and of, and from all Charges, Taxes and
Payments, now or hereafter to be charged or taxed upon him the said R. C. for
or concerning the same.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture of an Apprentice put out by the Parish.
THis Indenture made the, etc. Between R. C. and C. R. Churcwardens of the
Parish of B. in the County of S. and J. F. and F. J. Overseers of the Poor of
the same Parish of B. of the one part, and R. R. of, etc. of the other part
witnesses, That the said Churchwardens and Overseers, by the assent of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County, whoses Names are hereunto
written, according to the Form of the Statute, made in the 23 d. year of the
Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act for the Relief of the
Poor, Have put out and bound L. A. a poor Child of the said Parish of B.
Apprentice to the said R. R. till the said L. A. shall come to the Age of four
and twenty years, during which time the said Apprentice, his said Master well
and faithfully shall serve, his Secrets keep, his Commandments lawful and
honest every where, willingly shall do; He shall do no hurt nor damage to his
said Master, nor consent to be done by others, but to his power shall let the
same, or give notice thereof to his said Master; He shall not waste the Goods
of his said Master, nor lend them to any person without his consent; He shall
not frequent Taverns, Inns or Alehouses, except it be in doing his said Masters
Business there; He shall not during the said Term play at Cards, Dice or other
unlawful Games; He shall not either by day or night absent himself from his
said Masters Service; But in all things as a good and faithful Servant shall
demean himself toward his said Master and all his: And the said R. R. his said
Apprentice shall during the Term aforesaid, educate and bring up, or cause to
be educated and brought up in his Trade, with due and reasonable chastisement,
and find and allow unto him during the said Term sufficient, wholesome and
competent Meat, Drink Lodging, Washing, Apparel, and all other necessaries meet
for such an Apprentice; And in the end of the said Term shall find, provice for
and deliver unto his said Apprentice double Apparel; That is to say, Apparel
meet for him to have and wear, as well on the Lord's Day as on the
Working-Days, both of Linen and Woollen, Hose, Shoes and all other necesseries,
meet for such an Apprentice to have and wear;

In witness whereof the Parties above said to these present Indentures, have
hereunto interchangably set their Hands and Seals, the Day and Year above
written.
A Certificate of a Man's Honesty.
Sussex ss.
WERE. C. Minister of the word of God, in the Parish of B. in the said County of
S. C. R. of B. aforesaid, Constable of the Hundred of B. A. B. and C. D. Church
wardens of the said Parish, etc. B. A. D. A. E.A. and A. E. of the said Parish,
and most of us Freeholders within the same, do hereby certify to all whom it
may concern, That F. R. one of the Inhabitants of the said Parish, of B. is,
and by the space of five years last past, has been a Householder within the
said Parish, and by all that time has behaved himself, and lived in good sort,
and reputed a Man of honest Conversation, and has paid according to his degree
all manner of Taxes and Assessments, as other the Inhabitants of the said
Parish have done.

In witness whereof we have hereunto set out Hands, the tenth day of December,
Anno Dom. 1699.
The Examination of a Person Robbed on the Highway.
The Examination of R. C. of A. in the County of S. Gent. Taken before F. J.
Esquire; one of the Justices of Peace for the County of M. on the 10th day of
December, Anno Dom. 1699. Oath.
Mid. ss.
THIS Examinat deposes and says, That as he was Riding on Monday the 9th day
of December last past from the Town of L. in the County of M. to W. in the same
County he was Assaulted in the Common Highway, leading from one of the said
Towns to the other, at or near a place there called B. at about nine of the
Clock in the Forenoon of the same day by two Horse men, who there seized upon
this Examinat, and presenting each of them a Pistol at him Bid him stand and
deliver his Money, which this Examinat for the saving of his Life was forced to
do; And this Examinat further says, That he is since informed that the said
place is in the Parish of C. and within the Hundred of E. in the said County;
And this Examinat further says and deposes, that the said Thieves did then
and there Feloniously take from him, and Rob him of 20 l. in Money, and four
gold Watches, in all to the value of 138 l. And this Examinat further says,
that he then did not nor yet does know the Parties that committed the said
Robbery, or either of them.

R. F.

The Examination of a Person Robbed by three Men, one of whom he knew.
The Examination as before.
R. C. of C. in the County of S. Gent. did on the present 10th day of December
in the 5th year of the Reign of, etc. personally come before me S. M. Esquire; one
of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the said County of S. Inhabiting,
etc. and upon his Corporal Oath then taken before me did say, That about a
Month since he was Riding from C. aforesaid, toward H. in the said County of
S. and in the Highway within the Parish of B. in the said County of S. he was
set upon by three persons and by them Robbed, and they took from him, etc. And
he says and deposes, that he does know one of these persons, and says that
his name is V. W. a Kentish Man, Born in, etc. and of the Age as he judges him
of thirty years or thereabout, and the other he says he knows not.

A Warrant for a Hue and Cry after a Felen.
Sir W. M. Knight, One of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said
County, To all Constables, Borsholders and other his Majesty's Officers, within
the said County or elsewhere, within the Realm of England, whom the Execution
hereof may concern, Greeting. 1 Just. 28 Ed. 3. cap. 11.
Sussex ss.
Whereas I have received information and charge against C. R. who is a person
of Evil Fame, (describing his Personage, Age and Apparel,) who is charged
before me to have Assaulted, and taken from the person of J. F. on the 10th day
of October last at, etc. One hundred, etc. (as in the Information) and he the
said C. R. is very much suspected to have committed several other Felonies, and
notwithstanding several endeavors for the apprehension of him he has not as
yet been apprehended, but has withdrawn himself and is fled; These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to command you, and every of you to make
diligent search within your several Precincts for the said C. R. and to make
Huy and Cry after him from Town to Town, and from County to County, and that as
well by Horsemen as Footmen according to Law; And if you shall find the said
C. R. That then you do carry him before some one of his Majesty Justices of
the Peace, within the County or Place where he shall be taken, to be dealt with
according to Law.

Given under my Hand and Seal, etc.
A Warrant to Search for one who has Stolen a Gelding.
R. C. Esquire; etc. (as in the next before.)
Sussex. ss.
WHereas I have received information that a Gray Gelding about fourteen hands
high, with a long tail and four white feet, aged about five years, being the
Gelding of J. F. of, etc. was in the night of the 10th day of this Instant
December, Stolen out of his Land in C. aforesaid, and that he suspecteth a
person whose name he knows not, being very Tall of Stature aged about five
and twenty years, and in saddish colored Clothes lined with blew, to have
Stolen this Gelding as aforesaid; These are therefore in his Majesty's name to
command you and every of you to make diligent Search within your several
Precincts, for the Gelding and person aforesaid, And to make Huy and Cry after
the said person from Town to Town, and from County to County according to Law;
And if upon your search or otherwise, you shall find the said Person or the
Gelding aforesaid, or other just cause of suspicion, That then you carry the
said person, or other persons suspected before some one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace of the County, or place where he or they shall be taken,
to be dealt with according to Law. Hereof fail not at your perils;

Given under etc.
An Indenture of a Copartnership between four, for Affairs Domestic and
Foreign.
THIS Indenture Quadripartite made the, etc. between R. C. of, etc. of the
first part, C. R. of the second part, J. F. of the third part, and F. J. of the
fourth part witnesses, That the said Parties for the affiance, trust, and
confidence which each of them has, and does repose in the other, Have
concluded and agreed to become Copartners and Joint-traders together, in such
Trades and Merchandising, as well within the Kingdom of England, as also in
Holland and elsewhere in Parts beyond Sea, where the said Parties shall think
fit to Trade and Merchandise for their most benefit, advantage and profit; And
that for and during the space of five years, to be computed from the day of the
date hereof, from thence next ensuing and fully to be complete and ended.

And to that end and purpose, the said Parties have added and put together a
Joint Stock, to be implied in and about the said Joint-trade; That is to say,
the Sum of 10000 l. of lawful Money of England, viz. the said R. C. for his part
2500 l. the said. C. R. for his part, other 2500 l. The said J. F. for his part
2500 l. and the said F. J. 2500 l. more, being the Remainder of the said 10000
l.

Which said Stock shall be occupied and employed together, upon an account of
fourths both in profit and loss, The whole in four equal parts to be divided,
whereof the said R. C. his Executors and Administrators, is and are to have,
and bear for his and their parts one fourth part thereof, both in profit and
loss, The said C. R. his Executors and Administrators, one other fourth part
thereof, for his and their part both in profit and loss, The said J. F. his
Executors and Administrators, another part thereof both in profit and loss, And
the said F. J. his Executors and Administrators, the other fourth part thereof,
both in profit and loss, for his and their parts, according to the true intent
and meaning hereof.

Which said Transaction, Trade and Business for the consideration hereafter
named, is to be done and performed as follows; That is to say, The said J. F.
during the said Copartnership, to have the sole receiving, keeping and charge
of all the Cash and Money, and of all the Clothes, Bays and Stuffs, and of all
the Bonds, Bills and Specialties belonging to the Joint account here in
England; And of all Goods and Wares to be received from beyond the Seas, for
and upon the said Joint account; And also the charge of the Writing, true
keeping and custody of the Books to be kept here in England, touching the said
Joint account and business in Copartnership, within the Dwelling House of the
said J. F. in London, for the time being, And the puying of the said Clothes,
Bays and Stuffs, and the selling of all Goods to be received from beyond the
Seas, and the receiving of Moneys, and the ordering and disposing of them, and
the other joint business is to be equally acted and performed by the said J. F.
and C. R. And that the said F. J. shall have the management and transaction of
the Affairs relating to the said Copartnership and Joint-trade, which are to be
managed, done and transacted in the Parts beyond the Seas.

Whereupon it is concluded and agreed, by and between the said Parties to these
Presents, And each and every of the said Parties, by and for himself, his
Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with each and
every other of them, his Executors and Administrators by these presents, as
hereafter in manner and form follows. First, That the said Copartnership
shall continue without ceasing, in form hereunder declared, from the day of the
date hereof, until the full end and term of five years, from thence next
ensuing and fully to be complete and ended; And that every of the said
Copartners in the several businesses before mentioned, to be by them severally
done and performed, and all other matters and things touching the said
Copartnership, shall and will from time to time to time during the said five
years, perform and do his and their best endeavor, care and diligence, for the
most and best profit, commodity and advantage of them the said Copartners, And
that each and every of them the said Copartners shall be faithful, just and
true unto the other of them therein.

And that all Gains and Increases, happening or coming of, or by the said
Joynt-trade and Copartnership, shall be indifferently and equally parted and
shared, by and between the said parties, their Executors and Administrators as
is before prescribed and set down; And that all Debts, Charges and Losses
likewise arising, happening and growing to be paid and born for or by reason of
the said Joint-trade and Copartnership, shall be in like manner paid, born and
sustained by and between the said Parties, their Executors and Administrators
in four equal parts, as is before mentioned, and according to the true intent
and meaning of these Presents.

And that every of the said parties shall from time to time hereafter, perform
and do his and their best endeavor, diligence and travel as need or occasion
shall require, to recover and obtain such Debts, Duties, and Sum and Sums of
Money, as by reason or means of the said Trade or Copartnership, shall be due or
owing unto them, from any person or persons so speedily as may be from time to
time, And shall not at any time hereafter without consent of the rest, do or
procure, or cause to be done or procured, any act, device or thing, to
prejudice, hinder or retard the Recovery, obtaining or getting in of the said
Debts, or any of them.

And if it shall happen that the said Parties or any of them shall trust or
deliver out upon credit or confidence, any of the Goods, Wares, Money or
Merchandises belonging to the said Joint-account, to any person or persons,
whom any other of the said Partners shall pray, warn or admonish not to trust,
that then, and so often such of them the said Partners which shall so trust,
and deliver out upon Credit any of the said Goods, Wares, Moneys or
Merchandises to any such person or persons, shall and will within three Months
next ensuing, answer and satifie unto the said Joint Stock, so much lawful Money
of England, as the Goods, Wares, Money or Merchandise so to be trusted or
delivered out as aforesaid shall amount unto, (in case, in the mean time full
satisfaction shall not be made for the same, by the person or persons which
shall be so trusted, aforesaid;) And that in such case, such of the said
parties so making satisfaction therefore, shall and may have and enjoy the sole
benefit of the said Goods, Wares, Moneys and Merchandises, or things so by him
entrusted, and for which he shall have made satisfaction as aforesaid.

And that every of them the said Parties, (if necessity require and
conveniently it may be) in all his and their buying and selling, dealings and
doings, touching and concerning the said Joint-trade, shall desire and take the
advice and direction of the rest of the said Parties, or some or one of them.

And that all such Detriments and Losses, as shall without fraudulent practice
of any of the said Copartners, happen or come to the said partible account by
the falsehood, absence or negligence of any Servant or Servants, Apprentice or
Apprentices, or which shall serve or dwell with any of the said Parties, shall
be born and answered by the Master of such Servant or Servants, by whom the
same shall be done or committed.

And further, that none of them the said Parties shall or will at any time or
times hereafter, charge the account of the said Copartnership, with any other
or more Debts, than only such as shall be pertinent to the same; and with such
charge only as shall be necessarily and justly disbursed, for and about such
Goods, Wares, Commodities and Merchandises, as shall be occupied and employed
in or about the said Joint-trade or Copartnership, and for and about the
getting in, recovery and obtaining of such Debts, as shall be due and owing
unto them by reason thereof; nor at any time hereafter during the said space or
time of five years, shall withdraw or take from the said Joint Stock and
Account any Sum or Sums of Money or other things, other than such as shall be
disbursed for the recovery and getting in of such Debts, as are incident to the
same, as is before expressed and mentioned, and that without Fraud or Covin.

Saving that it shall and may be lawful to and for every of them the said
Parties yearly, during the said Copartnership, to have and take out of the said
Stock belonging to their Joint-trade and Copartnership, for every of their
particular and private Expenses, and occasions as follows; (That is to say,)
to the said R. C. the Sum of 100 l. of lawful Money of England, to the said C.
R. the like Sum of 100 l. To the said J. F. the like Sum of 100 l. And to the
said F. J. the like Sum of 100 l. of like lawful Money of England, And saving
also that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said J. F. during the said
Copartnership in respect of his House-Rent, wherein it is agreed one part of
the business of the said Copartnership, shall be acted and performed here in
England, and for the extraordinary pains of him and his Servants, to be taken
and performed in and about the said Joint-trade, and for his Expenses upon and
Entertainment of Clothiers yearly, to charge upon the said partible account,
and to be allowed yearly out of the same, the Sum of 80 l. of lawful Money of
England, over and besides the said 100 l. a year allowed unto him as aforesaid.

Saving also for the said C. R. in respect of the extraordinary pains of him
and his Servants, to be taken in and about the said Joint-trade, and his
Expenses upon and Entertainment of Clothiers as aforesaid, and for his
House-Rent, wherein it is agreed also, that one part of the Joint-business
aforesaid, shall be acted and performed to charge to the said partible account,
and be allowed upon the same the like Sum of 80 l. yearly, of like lawful Money
of England, during the said Copartnership, over and besides the said 100 l.
yearly to him allowed as aforesaid.

And saving that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said F. J. in
respect of his extraordinary pains to be taken in and about the said
Joint-business, and for his dwelling in the parts beyond the Sea, where it is
agreed he shall be employed in and about the said Joint-trade and business,
during the said Copartnership there to charge to the said partible account, and
to be allowed the same here in England, the Sum of 50 l. yearly of like lawful
Money of England, during the said Copartnership, over and above the said 100 l.
a year to him allowed sa aforesaid.

Also the Wages and Allowance, to or for any Servant or Servants to be sent
over, or to, or for any Apprentice or Apprentices, where any shall be sent over
and employed in the said business into the parts beyond Sea, (an equal number
of Apprentices of each of them, the said R. C. C. R. J. F. and F. J. being
employed in the said Joint-business;) And also the charge of any Warehouse or
Warehouses, to be taken or used beyond the Seas for the said Joint-business;
And the Wages and Allowance of one Servant, agreed to be hired by the said J.
F. and C. R. for the managing and writing of the Books of Account, to be kept
here in England, concerning the said Joint trade and business, is hereby agreed
by and between the said Parties to these Presents, to be paid and allowed out
of the Joint Stock of this Copartnership.

And the said F. J. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, and for
every of them does covenant and grant, to and with the said R. C. C. R. and J.
F. and every of them, their and every of their Executors and Administrators, by
these Presents in manner and form following; That is to say, That he the said
F. J. shall not nor will at any time or times during this Copartnership, leave,
transfer or commit the Business, Trade or Employment, of or concerning the said
Joint-trade or Copartnership, in any place or places beyond the Seas, where he
shall have full charge and disposing, nor any Bills or Specialties concerning
the same, to any person or persons whatsoever, other than such as shall be
thought fit by the said R. C. C. R. and J. F. or the Survivors or Survivor of
them, and their special consent and agreement in Writing under their Hands in
that behalf first had and obtained.

And further, that he the said F. J. shall from time to time hereafter, during
the said Copartnership, keep or cause to be kept in such place or places beyond
the Seas, where he shall continue to be employed, just and true, Book and Books
of Account and Reckonings, of all and every his dealings, doings, buyings and
sellings, and employments touching and concerning the Premises, in such ample
manner and form in every respect, as Merchants of the same Trade commonly use
to do.

And shall not only send and consign weekly, (if it conveniently may be) unto
the said J. F. and C. R. true Copies of his weekly Journal, and particulars of
all Clothes and Wares received and sold, Goods sent, and Moneys paid and sent
by Exchange and other his dealings whatsoever, touching the said Joint-account,
but also at the end of every six Months next ensuing each other to be reckonned
and accounted from the day of the date of these presents during the said
Copartnership, consign and send over unto them the said J. F. and C. R. a true,
plain, perfect and general account in Writing, under his Hand of all his
Receipts, Payments, Buyings, Sellings, Dealings, Doings and Employments
whatsoever by him passed or done, touching or concerning the said Joint-account
and Copartnership, particularizing therein all Expenses, and all Clothes, Wares
and other things then remaining in his Hands.

And shall and will during the continuance of this Joint-trade, at his own
Costs and Charges, (for the consideration aforesaid,) pay for Diet, Lodging and
Entertainments in the parts beyond Sea.

And further, that it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said R. C. C. R.
and J. F. or any of them, or any of their Executors, Administrators, Servants
or Assigns, at his and their will and pleasure, to have Liberty, Ingress,
Egress and Regress into, out of and from the Counting House, or Name of the
said F. J. for the time being in the parts beyond the Seas; And shall, and may
freely as occasion shall require, as well view and peruse the said Books of
Account, and all Bonds, Bills and Specialties, whatsoever, as also all Wares,
Goods and Merchandises, and other things whatsoever in the parts beyond Sea,
relating to the said Joint-trade, in the Hands, Custody or Possession of the
said F. J.

And moreover that he the said F. J. shall and will with all convenient speed,
from time to time hereafter during the said Joint-trade, consign, remit and
send over to the said R. C. C. R. and J. F. from the said parts beyond the
Seas, in Money by Exchange, or in Wares and Merchandises, the proceeds of all
Wares, Clothes and other things, that shall be by him received, and in his
disposing, touching and belonging to the said Joint-account.

And further, that he the said F. J. shall and will from time to time hereafter
during the said Copartnership, endeavor what he may the taking up such Moneys
in the parts beyond the Seas, for the said Joint-account as shall be needful,
and otherwise advance and benefit the same what he may.

And also it is agreed by and between all the said parties, That if the said F.
J. shall at any time or times hereafter take up or borrow at Interest or
otherwise, any Sum or Sums of Money for the said Joint-account, that then the
said R. C. C. R. and J. F. and every of them, their and every of their
Executors, and Administrators, shall by these Presents, be liable to the
payment of the said Sum and Sums of Money, and every of them as fully in every
respect as the said F. J. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns. And also if
in case the said R. C. C. R. and J. F. or any of them shall at any time or
times hereafter, take up or borrow at Interest or otherwise, any Sum or Sums of
Money for the said Joint-account, that then the said F. J. his Executors and
Administrators shall be by these Presents liable and engaged together with the
said R. C. C. R. and J. F. for the repayment of the Sum and Sums of Money, and
every of them, as fully in every respect as the said R. C. C. R. and J. F. or
any of them, their or any of their Executors or Administrators.

And the said F. J. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, and every of
them does covenant and grant to and with the said R. C. C. R. and F. J. and
every of them, their and every of their Executors and Administrators by these
presents, in manner and form following, (that is to say) That he the said J. F.
shall and will from time to time and all times hereafter, during the
Copartnership, manage and keep, or cause to be managed and kept by such
Servant or Book-keeper, to be hired or entertained as aforesaid, just and true
Book and Books of Account and Reckoning, Journal and Leiger of all and every
the Receipts, Dealings, Payments, Buyings, Sellings and Employments of the said
J. F. and the said C. R. concerning the premises here in England, in such
ample manner and sort in every respect, as other Merchants of the same Trade
commonly use to do. And at the end of every six Months, that is to say, on the
last day of June and the last day of December yearly, during the said
Copartnership, perfect the said Books, and give to each of the Partners a true
balance thereof.

And further, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. C. C. R.
and F. J. and every of them, their and every of their Executors,
Administrators, Servants and Assigns, at convenient times, at their and every
of their free will and pleasure to have free Liberty of Ingress, Egress and
Regress into, out of and from the Dwelling House of he said J. F. and his
Counting House and Warehouse there, and shall and lawfully may as occasion
shall require, view and peruse all Books of Account, and all Bonds, Bills,
Writings and Specialties, Goods, Wares and Things whatsoever, there in the
hands, custody and charge of the said J. F. touching the said Joint-account.

And the said C. R. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, and for
every of them does covenant and grant to and with the said R. C. J. F. and F.
J. and every of them, their and every of their Executors, Administrators,
Servants and Assigns by these Presents, in manner and form following, (that is
to say) That he the said C. R. shall and will during the said Copartnership,
keep or cause to be kept true Accounts in writing of all his receipts,
payments, buyings, sellings, dealings and doings touching and concerning the
said Joint-Account; and shall from time to time produce and show forth the same
unto the said J. F. and his Servants, and the said Servant to be hired as
aforesaid, whereby the said J. F. or the said Servant or one of them may be
enabled to keep the said Books and Accounts, Journal and Leiger of all business
whatsoever touching the said Joint-trade or Account there in England, in manner
and form aforesaid. And further, That he the said C. R. shall and will during
the said Copartnership, be equally aiding and assisting in all the managing and
keeping the said Books and Accounts to be managed and kept as aforesaid, for
the Joint Stock here in England, within the said Dwelling House of the said J.
F. aforesaid.

And also that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. C. J. F. and
F. J. and every of them their and every of their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, at their and every of their free will and pleasure, at convenient
times, to have free liberty of ingress, egress and regress into and out of the
Dwelling House, Contuing House and Warehouse of the said C. R. for the time
being: And shall and may freely as occasion shall require, view and peruse all
Books of Account, and all Goods, Wares, Merchandises and all other Things
appertaining to the said Joint-trade in his custody and charge.

And the said R. C. C. R. and J. F. do covenant and grant each of them for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, to and with the other of them his
Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these presents, That they
the said R. C. C. R. and J. F. shall and will respectively, during the said
Joint-trade, for the consideration aforesaid, bear and defray their own private
and particular charges and expenses, both for themselves, Servants and Familes.

And that the said J. F. and C. R. shall and will make, or cause to be made,
all Bonds, Bills, Specialties and Contracts whatsoever by them respectively to
be taken and made concerning the said Joint-account here in England, in the
Joint-names of them the said C. R. and J. F. for the use of them the said R. C.
and J. F. and of the said R. C. and F. J. And that the said R. C. and F. J.
their Executors and Administrators shall by force of these presents be jointly
interested in and engaged for and concerning the same.

And further it is covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended and agreed by
and between all the said parties to these presents, and each of them by and for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with
the other of them his Executors and Administrators, in manner and form
following, (that is to say) That if any or either of them the said R. C. C. R.
J. F. and F. J. shall at any time or times hereafter, during the said
Copartnership, lend unto the said Joint-account any sum or sums of Money (over
and above their present Stock put in as aforesaid) into Stock to be used and
employed, and for the use of the said Copartnership and Joint-trade, during the
continuance thereof, or for so long time thereof as he or they so lending the
same, or his or their respective Executors or Administrators shall think good,
that then it shall and may be lawful to and for such of them the said
Copartners, their Executors or Administrators upon three Months warning, to
have, receive and take forth out of the said Joint-account, Stock and Gains in
ready Money, such principal sums of Money, by them the said Copartners
respectively lent to the said Joint-account, or such part thereof as he or they
lending the same shall think fit: And also that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said R. C. C. R. J F. and F. J. or any of them respectively lending
any sum or sums of Money as aforesaid, for and during so long time as the said
sum or sums of Money or any part thereof shall remain and continue in the
Account of this Copartnership, to take out of the said Account, Stock and Gains
of this Copartnership, and be allowed the same according to the Rate of 6 l.
per Cent. Yearly for the Interest and Use of every hundred pound to be lent as
aforesaid, and after the same Rate for a longer or shorter time, or lesser or
greater sums of Money, the same to be taken half yearly, without any let or
hindrance whatsoever.

And further, That none of them the said Copartners shall at any time
hereafter, during this Copartnership, without the special license and agreement
of the others first had and obtained in Wriing, enter into Bond or become Bail
or Surety to or for any person or persons whatsoever, for any matter, cause or
thing whatsoever, not being for the proper use, and on account of this
Copartnership, in above the sum of one hundred pound; nor that any of them the
said Copartners shall at any time or times hereafter, during the said term,
covertly or apparently, directly or indirectly use any kind of Merchandise or
Trade whatsoever, with any person or persons whatsoever the gains thereof shall
not or may not redound to the said Copartners, their Executors or
Administrators, or the Survivor or Survivors of them in case any of them shall
happen to decease before the expiration of the same Term of five years, ratably
and proportionably, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.

And further, That none of the said parties, shall or will at any time or
times, during the said Copartnership, consign or send over any Goods, Wares or
Merchandises whatsoever beyond Sea belonging to the said Joint-account, to any
place or places there whatsoever, other than what the greater number of the
said Copartners shall conclude or agree upon.

And that all differences arising in, about or concerning the said Joint-trade
and the managing thereof, shall be decided and concluded by the direction and
will of the major part of them the said Copartners.

And the said R. C. for himself, his Executors and Administrators and for every
of them, does covenant and grant to and with the said C. R. J. F. and F. J. and
every of them, their and every of their Executors and Administrators by these
presents in manner and form following, (that is to say) That he the said R. C.
shall and will from time to time on request during this Copartnership, be
aiding and assisting what he may unto the said C. R. and J. F. in and for the
taking, borrowing and advancing of any sum and sums and of Money for the said
Joint-account, by Bond or otherwise*

And also that he said R. C. in consideration that the said Joint-business is
to be wholly acted and performed here in England by the said C. R. and J. E.
and by the said F. J. beyond Seas, and by such other person or persons, as for
the time being shall be hired and employed by the said Copartners in the said
parts beyond the Seas, where none of the said Copartners except the said F. J.
is to reside, shall and will out of his own proper, private and particular
Estate, and not out of the said Account over and above the payments and
allowances by hi^ to be paid and allowed as aforesaid, well and truly pay and
allow yearly during the said Copartnership, unto the said Joint-account, the
sum of, etc. of lawful Money of England, to be paid all together, at the end of
this Copartnership, or at the decease of the said R. C. in case he shall happen
to decease before the end thereof.

Provided always, and it is further covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed
by and between the said parties to these presents, and every of them by and for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, covenanteth, and grants to and
with each of the others his Executors and Administrators by these presents
severally and respectively, that in case any of the said Copartners shall
happen to decease before the expiration of the said term of five years, and
within three Months next after the Account shall be agreed upon and balanced
between the said Copartners or Survivors of them; that then the Survivor or
Survivors of them the said parties in full of the part and proportion of him or
them so dying, in the said Stock of 10000 l. and the gains, benefit and
increase thereby then gotten and arisen (Moneys lent to the Joint-account
excepted) shall and will only be liable to pay, and shall and will pay unto the
Executors or Administrators of the party so deceasing within the said term of
five years, and within three Months after balance of the said Account (the
said Executors or Administrators first making good to the said Joint account
the charge of him so deceased) so much lawful Money of England, as by the said
last balance of Account (then before made up and agreed upon between the said
Copartners) shall be due and coming to such of them the said Copartners
respectively, dying as aforesoid, within six Month^ after such decease (the
said Executors or Administrators respectively, thereout allowing and abatin^ to
the surviving Copartners for and toward the losses that may happen to the said
surviving Copartners by desperate and bad Debts due to the sai^ Joint-account,
so many times thirty pounds o^ lawful Money of England, as half Years or six
Months of the aforesaid term of five Years shall remain unexpired at the time
of such decease.)

And further, That in case any of the said Copartners shall decease before the
end or expiration of the said term of five Years, and full thre^ Months after
balance of Accounts as aforesaid That then the part of him or them so dying,
shall run on upon Account, and be employed by the surviving Copartners in the
said Joint-trade, until the next ensuing time agreed by these presents for the
ballancing of the said Account. And that the surviving Copartners in full of
the portion, part an^ share of him or them so dying, of, in and to the said
Joint Stock of 10000 l. and the benefit (...) increase thereby then gotten and
arisen (M^lent to the said Joint-account excepted) shall a^ will only be liable
to pay, and shall pay upon suc^ decease within six Months after the Account
ba^lanced and made up, unto the Executors or Adm^nistrators of such of them the
said Copartners ^^^ing within the said term of five years, and (...) three
Months after balance of Account (the sam^ Executors or Administrators first
making good to (...) said Joint-account, the charge of him or them respectively
deceased) so much lawful Money of England, as by the said next balance of
Account to be made up by the survivors of them the said Copartners, shall
justly and truly appear to be ^^^e and coming to such of them the said
Copartners so deceasing, as fully as if the parties were living: The said
Executors and Administrators respectively thereout allowing unto the said
survi^^ Copartners, for and toward the losses that (...) happen to the said
surviving Copartners by desperate and bad Debts due to the said Joint-account,
so many times thirty pounds of lawful Money of England, as half Years or six
Months of the said term of five Years, shall remain unexpired at the time of
such decease.

And also that such of them the said Copartners as shall survive, shall and
will save and keep harmless and indempnified the Executors or Administrators of
such of the said parties as shall so decease, of and from all Bonds, Bills,
Debts and Engagements, wherein and for which the parties so deceasing, at the
time of his decease stood bound or engaged by virtue of this Copartnership.

And it is further covenanted, concluded and a^^eed by and between all the said
parties to these presents, and each and every of them by and for himself, his
Executors and Administrators covenanteth and agrees to and with the other of
(...), his Executors and Administrators respective^y by these presents, in
manner and form following, (that is to say) That if any of them the said
parties shall decease as aforesaid, within the said ^^rm of five years
satisfaction for his Stock, Part and Share, being made as a foresaid) that then
the ^emaining Stock with all other the Joint-trade and Account shall run on and
continue during the residue of the said term of five years, by and between the
Survivors of them the said Copartners, and each of them to have a rateable part
and proportion of the same, and of all gain and loss thereby arising.

And further, that at the end and expiration of the said Copartnership and term
of five Years, or within three Months next ensuing, the said Copartners being
all living, or the Survivors, in case any of them shall be deceased, shall and
will meet and come together, and adjust and make a true and perfect Account, at
or in the dwelling House of the said J. F. for the time being, or where for the
time being the said Joint-trade shall be chiefly used here in England, by and
between all the said parties or the Sureties of them, as well for and
concerning all their several dealings and charges for and about the said
Joint-trade and Account of all such Moneys, Wares, Goods, Merchandises and
Debts that then shall be due, owing or appertaining to the said Joint-trade and
account, and unto them the said parties by reason thereof, as of, for and
concerning all and every the gains, losses, profits or charges of or by the
said Joint-trade, arising, growing, happened or sustained, in such particular
manner, as it may appear what the true state of the same then shall be; and
what proportion, and how much to every of them the said parties shall be then
due, belonging or appertaining: And shall and will also within the said time or
space of three Months, next ensuing the expiration of this Copartnership, by
equal Lots or other Dividends divide all Clothes, Wares and Merchandises
between them, then Remaining unsold or disposed of

And that immediately and with all convenient speed then afterward, all and
every Debts and sums of Money due by the said Joint-account, or by them the said
parties by reason thereof shall be duly paid satisfied and discharged, or
otherwise equally secured by the Bonds of them the said Copartners or Survivors
of them, in case the said Debts cannot conveniently be paid within the time
aforesaid.

And as for and concerning the remainder of the said Stock of 10000 l. and all
gains profit and advantage by the Stock accruing whether the same shall consist
in Debts or Ready Money, or both, (the Moneys lent and added to the said Stock
by any of the said Copartners, with the Interest thereof then due being first
paid and satisfied) the said Remaining Moneys or Debts being divided into equal
parts and portions, according to the number of the said Copartners then living,
the same shall by Lots cast, or some other way as they shall agree upon, be
distributed to the said Copartners, or to such of them as shall be then living,
whereby each may have an equal part or share of the said Stock, and of all gain
and profit thereby obtained.

And also that every of the said parties, his Executors and Administrators for
the better recovery of such Debts and Sums of Money, as at the end and
determination of the said Term of five Years shall be due and owing by reason
or means of the said Copartnership, and as shall happen or fortune to be
allotted and divided for and toward the parts and portions of each of them,
shall and will at any time upon reasonable request, and at the costs and
charges of such of them to whom such Debts shall be allotted as aforesaid, make
or cause to be made unto him or them such sufficient Letter and Letters of
Attorney for any touching the recovery and receipt of the said Debt or Debts,
and every part thereof, to and for the only use and behoof of him or them to
whom the same shall be so allotted and divided as aforesaid, as shall by the
said parties to whom such Debts are allotted, or their Executors or
Administrators, or their Counsel learned in the Law be reasonably devised,
advised or required.

And it is expressly condescended and granted by and between all the said
parties to these presents, and each of them by and for himself, his Executors
and Administrators does covenant and grant to and with each and every of the
other of them, his Executors and Administrators by these Presents, in manner
and form following, (that is to say) That no Right of Survivorship shall take
place or effect, or be put in use in or for any matter or thing touching or
concerning this Joint-trade against any of them, or any of their Executors or
Administrators, but that it shall and may be lawful to and for any of the said
parties, to leave, devise and bequeath in and by his last Will and Testament,
all his said part, portion and share of and in the said Stock and Gains
according to such dividend as is aforesaid, and the true intent and meaning of
these presents.

And moreover, That if any ambiguity, doubt, question or controversy at any
time hereafter shall happen, arise or grow between the said parties, his or
their Executors or Administrators or any of them, for, touching or concerning
the said Copartnership, or any matter or thing in these Presents contained, or
otherwise howsoever touching the same, then and so often each and every of the
said parties, his Executors and Administrators for his and their parts upon
request to each of them, his and their Executors or Administrators to be made
by the party or parties grieved, shall and will from time to time commit the
hearing and deciding of such ambiguity, doubt, question or controversy, to
such indifferent Men being Merchant Adventurers, as shall be named by the said
parties, (that is to say) each of them to name one, and shall and will stand to
and abide such Order and Determination therein, as by such Men shall be made
and set down in Writing under their Hands and Seals, within one Month next
after any such doubt, or controversy so to them made known and referred.

And further it is concluded and agreed by and between the said parties to
those Presents, and their true intent and meaning is, That none of the said
parties, nor the Executors or Administrators of any of them shall at any time
or times be charged or chargeable by virtue of these Presents, further than for
his own proper Offense or breach of Covenant, and not for the Offense or breach
of Covenant of any other of the said parties, his Executors or Administrators,
any thing before mentioned notwithstanding.

And lastly it is agreed, That none of them the said parties, nor any of their
Executors or Administrators shall or will at any time or times hereafter make,
do, commit or omit to do any Act, Deed (...) Device whatsoever, with an intent
to defeat or make void in part or in all, the true intent and meaning of these
presents.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture on Separation of Copartners.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the one part, and J. F. of the
other part: Whereas the said parties to these presents have been of late
Copartners together in the Trade of, etc. and by reason of the said Joint-trade
and Dealing, diverse Debts have become, and are due and owing unto the said R.
C. and J. F. for diverse Goods and Wares. And also the said R. C. and J. F. are
and stand engaged for diverse Sums of Money. And whereas also the said Parties,
for diverse good Reasons them moving, have concluded and agreed to put an end to
their Joint-trade and Copartnership; and the said R. C. is contented and has
agreed for the consideration hereafter mentioned, to assign unto the said J. F.
all the Debts and Sums of Money which are due and owing unto them the said R. C.
and J. F. jointly. And the said J. F. has likewise agreed and undertaken to
discharge and pay all Debts and Sums of Money which they the said R. C. and J.
F. do jointly owe to any person or persons, for or by reason of their said
Joint trade or Copartnership.

Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said R. C. for the consideration
hereafter in these presents mentioned, does grant, assign and set over unto the
said J. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all and singular such
Debts and Sums of Money as are owing to him the said R. C. severally or jointly
with the said J. F. for or concerning their Joint trade aforesaid, and all his
Right, Title, Interest, Property, Claim and Demand whatsoever in and to the
said Debts or any of them: And also all and singular Bills, Bonds, Specialties
and Writings whatsoever, for and concerning the said Debts and the late
Copartnership between them; All which said Debts are mentioned and expressed in
a certain Schedule hereunto annexed, To have, hold and enjoy all and every the
said Debts, Specialties and Writings unto the said J. F. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper use and behoof, without
any manner of account therefore to be given to him the said R. C. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns.

And the said R. C. does by these presents give and grant to the said J. F. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, full power and authority to ask, levy,
recover and receive in the name of the said R. C. by all such lawful ways and
means as shall be thought requisite by the said J. F. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, all and singular the said Debts and Sums of Money
expressed in the said Schedule, for and to the only use and behoof of the said
J. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, without any account to be
made, had or given for the same or any part thereof.

And further, That if he the said R. C. or his Assigns, or any person or
persons by virtue of any power or authority derived from him or them, have at
any time heretofore received, released or discharged any of the said Debts or
Sums of Money mentioned in the Schedule (other than such Sums of Money as have
been released by the consent of the said J. F.) That then upon notice given by
the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns to the said R. C. his,
etc. he the said R. C. his Executors or Administrators shall within twenty days
next after such notice given to the said R. C. or his, etc. satisfy and
recompense the said J. F. or his, etc. for the same, without Fraud or Covin.

And that he the said R. C. his Executors or Administrators shall not at any
time or times hereafter willingly do or suffer any Act or Thing to hinder, let
or disturb him the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns in the
Recovery, getting in or obtaining the said Debts or any of them.

And moreover, That he the said R. C. his Executors and Administrators shall
and will upon reasonable request to him or them made by the said J. F. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, make, seal and deliver to him or them
such other sufficient Letter or Letters of Attorney for the recovery and
getting in of the said Debts and Sums of Money, as by the said J. F. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or his or their Counsel learned in the
Law shall be reasonably devised, advised or required.

In consideration whereof the said J. F. for himself his Executors and
Administrators does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said R. C. his
Executors and Administrators in manner and form following, (that is to say)
That he the said J. F. his Executors or Administrators shall and will, at or
before the, etc. procure and obtain to and for the said R.C. his Executors, or
Administrators sufficient general Releases and other Discharges in Law from all
Creditors, whose Names are in the Schedule hereunto annexed.

And also that he the said J. F. his Executors or Administrators shall and will
at all times for ever hereafter, save and keep harmless and indempnified the
said R. C. his Executors and Administrators, against all and every person and
persons whatsoever, to whom they the said R. C. and J. F. or either of them are
indebted touching or concerning their said Copartnership; and of and from all
Actions, Suits, Costs, Damages, Charges, Judgments, Executions and Demands
whatsoever, which shall at any time hereafter arise and come against the said
R. C. his Executors or Administrators, or any of his or their Lands, Tenements,
Goods or Chatels or any part thereof, for or by reason of any Debts or Sums of
Money owing, or for or by reason of any Bill, Bond, Specialty, Promise or
Contract touching the said Copartnership.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture where two Apprentices having taken their Master's Shop, covenant
with his Executors to gather in his Debts.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. and C. R. Executors of A. B. etc. and
J. F, and F. J. of the other part witnesses, That the said R. C. and C. R. in
part of the performance of the last Will and Testament of the said A. B. and
for diverse other good Causes and Considerations them hereunto moving, have
demised, granted and to farm let, and do by these presents demise, grant and to
farm let unto the said J. F. and F. J. all that the Dwelling House and Shop of
the said A. B. To have and to hold the said, etc. with all and every the
Appurtenances to them the said J. F. and F. J. their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, from the Feast Day of St. Michael last past, for, during and until
the full end and term of five years, fully to be complete and ended, Yielding
and paying therefore yearly and every year during the said Term unto the said
R. C. and C. R. their, etc. the Sum of forty pounds of lawful Money of England,
at the four most usual Feasts or Terms of the year, (that is to say, etc.) by
even and equal portions. And the said J. F. and F. J. for themselves jointly
and severally, and for their and every of their Executors and Administrators do
by these presents covenant, promise and agree to and with the said R. C. and C.
R. and either of them, their and either of their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns in manner and form following, (that is to say) That they the said J. F.
and F. J. and either of them shall endeavor by all lawful means, without Suit
at Law, to the utmost of their power, to obtain, get in and come by all such
Debt and Debts as were and are still owing from or by any person or persons
whatsoever, to the said A. B. at the time of his decease, for any Wares or
Merchandises which did belong to the said A. B. or any otherwise howsoever. And
that they the said J. F. and F. J. or one of them, their or one of their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall once in a Month give a true Account
of any Sum or Sums of Money by them, or either, or any of them received in part
or in full of any of the said Debts to them the said R. C. and C. R. their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns: And thereof shall forthwith make payment
to them the said R. C. and C. R. or one of them, or one of their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns without Fraud or Covin.

And also that neither they the said J. F. and F. J. nor either of them, nor
their or either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall take or
receive satisfaction or payment for any Goods or Wares by them or any of them
sold to any Chapman or Customer of the said A. B. deceased, before such Chapman
or Customer shall have fully satisfied and paid all such Debts as were owing
from him or them at the time of his decease to the said A. B. (all Chapmen and
Customers of the said A. B. dwelling within the City of London and Suburbs
thereof only excepted.)

In witness, etc.
(Covenant to re-enter on Non-payment.)

A short Bargain and Sale of Coppice-Woods, where the price is partly paid in
hand, and the residue to be paid after.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between N. C. of the City of C. in the County of S.
Gent. of the one part, and I. C. of E. A. in the same County Yeoman, of the
other part witnesses; That the said N. C. for and in consideration of, etc.
lawful Money of England, to him by the said I. C. before the sealing and
delivery hereof, well and truly in hand paid, and five pound and ten shillings
more to be paid in such manner as is therein after mentioned, has granted,
bargained and sold, and by these presents does grant, bargain and sell unto the
said I. C. all those Coppice-Woods and Under-woods, standing and growing, or
being upon a parcel of Coppice-Ground called Z. containing by estimation three
Acres in W. A. in the said County of S. Except, and always reserved out of this
Grant all Timber Trees, and other Trees standing, growing, or being in the said
Coppice-Ground, and all young Sellows there left at the last Felling of the
said Coppice, about eleven years ago, And except the Wood, Boughs and Loppings
of such Trees and Sellows, And also except and reserved out of this Grant all
the Hedges about the said Coppice-Ground, and all Wood-Frith and Stuff therein
growing or being; And all Coppice-Woods, Under-woods, Frith and Stuff growing
or being within four foot of any the Inward Standards of the said Hedge, round
about the said Coppice Ground; And the said N. C. for the consideration
aforesaid, does hereby give and grant unto the said I. C. his Assigns and
Servants full Liberty of Ingress, Egress and Regress, by the usual way and
passage into and from the said Coppice-Ground, to fell and cut down the said
Coppice-Woods, and Under-woods, hereby bargained and fold before the (...) day
of (...) next coming, and the same to have take and carry away with Carts and
Carriages, before the four and twentieth day of June next coming; And the said
J. C. does hereby covenant with the said N. C. That he the said J. C. or his
Assigns, Servants, Agents or Workmen, shall not and will not fell, cut or lop
any of the said Trees, or Sellows in the said Coppice Grounds, nor any of the
Hedges aforesaid, or the Wood, Frith or Stuff therein growing or being, nor any
of the Coppice Wood, Under-wood, Frith or Stuff growing or being within four
foot of any of the Inward Standards of the said Hedges; And that he or they
shall not permit, or suffer any of the Horses, or Beasts of the Carts or
Carriages aforesaid, to eat, crop, or bite any of the Sprouts or young Germins
in the said Coppice-Ground, And the said J. F. does hereby further covenant
with the said N. C. That he the said J. C. his Executors or Administrators,
shall and will, well and truly pay unto the said N. C. his Executors or
Administrators the aforesaid 5 l. and 10 s. on the Nine and twentieth Day of
September next coming; And also that it may and shall be lawful to and for the
said N. C. and his Assigns, to have and take to and for his and their own use
all such of the Coppice-Woods, and Underwoods, hereby bargained or sold, and of
the Poles, Fagots and Stuff thereof coming which shall be, or remain on the
Coppice-Ground aforesaid, on the said 24th Day of June.

In Witness, etc.
A Bargain and Sale of Trees and Coppice-Woods, with Covenant to be saved
harmless from Tithes, and other special Covenants.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between Sir J. R. Knight, etc. of the one part, and
W. F. etc. of, the other part, Witnesses, That the said Sir J.R. for and in
consideration of 380 l. of lawful Money of England, to him by the said W. F.
before the ensealing and delivery hereof, well and truly in hand paid, Has
granted, bargained and sold, and by these Presents does grant, bargain and sell
unto the said W. F. All the Woods, Under-woods and Trees now standing growing,
and being in or upon All that parcel of Wood-Land called the East part of, etc.
as it is now set out to be sold, containing One hundred and fifteen Acres more
or less, now or late in the Occupation of R. K. or his Assigns, and lying and
being in the Parish of E. in the County of S. Except, and always reserved out
of this present Grant unto the said Sir J. F. and his Assigns, fifteen hundred
of the best Trees of Oak, Ash, Beech, now growing and being upon the aforesaid
Wood-Land, to be marked and signed out by F. P. and W. C. or either of them,
for and on the behalf of the said Sir J. R. And the said Sir J. R. for the
consideration aforesaid, has given and granted, and by these presents does
give and grant unto the said W. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
for his and their Servants, Laborers and Workmen, with all Carts, Wains,
Carriages, Working-Tools and Implements, free and quiet Liberty of Ingress,
Egress, and Regress, in by and through all usual or reasonable Ways or Passages
for and duing the Term of three Years next ensuing the Date hereof, to fell,
cut down, hue, cut out, convert, load, have take and carry away, to and for
their own use, All the said Woods, Under-woods and Trees, before in these
presents mentioned, to be bargained and sold, and all the Wood and Stuff
thereof, or of any part thereof, concerning, ariseing, or increasing; And the
said Sir J. R. has also for the consideration aforesaid, given and granted and
by these presents does give and grant unto the said W. F. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, one Lime-Kill, and one Chalk-Pit, to be made, used
and enjoyed by the said W. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, upon
the said parcel of Wood-Land before mentioned, for and during the aforesaid
Term of Three Years next ensuing the Date hereof; And that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said W. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for
and during the said three years to build and make the said Lime-Kill upon the
Land aforesaid, in such convenient place as by the said F. P. and W. C. or
either of them shall be Assigned, upon request, And in default of such
Assignment, then in such convenient place upon the Land aforesaid, as to the
said W. F. or his Assigns shall seem meet; And also during those three years to
Dig Chalk in the said Chalk-pit, and the same Chalk to burn and make into Lime
in the said Lime-Kill; And the said Lime-Kill to convert and dispose to the
proper use of the said W. F. And the said Sir J. R. does for himself, his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators covenant and grant to, and with the said W.
F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents; That he the
said Sir J. R. now has at the time of making, sealing and delivering of these
presents, good right, full power, lawful and rightful Authority, Title and
Interest to grant, bargain and seil the said Woods, Under-woods and Trees
before in these presents mentioned unto the said W. F. in manner and form
aforesaid; And Also, That he the said W. F. his Executors, Administratoas and
Assigns, shall or lawfully may during the aforesaid three years, peaceably and
quietly Fell, cut down, have, hold, take and convert the said Woods,
Under-woods and Trees before in these presents mentioned, to be bargained and
sold, and also the liberty of Ingress Egress and Regress, before in these
presents granted concerning the same, without any Let, Trouble, Interruption or
Contradiction, of or by the said Sir J. R. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, and without any lawful let, trouble interruption or contradiction, of,
or by any other Person or Persons whatsoever; And also that the said Woods,
Underwoods and Trees before in these presents mentioned to be Bargained and
sold, and every part thereof, are and shall be Exempted privileged and
Discharged of, and from the payment of Tithes thereof, upon the Felling or
converting the same; And also, That he the said Sir J. R. his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter acquit discharge and save harmless the said W. F. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, of, and from the payment of Tithes for the said
Woods, Under-woods, and Trees or any part thereof, and of and from all
Expenses, Costs, Charges and Damages, for, or by occasion of any Action or
Suit, to be brought against him, for or concerning the said Tithes; And the
said W. F. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does covenant
and grant, to and with the said Sir J. R. his Executors and Administrators by
these presents; That the said W. F. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, or
any of them, shall not fell or cut down any of the Woods, Underwoods or Trees
before in these presents, bargained or sold, between the first day of May, and
the twentieth day of September, in any of the said three years next coming; And
also that he the said W. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall
and will before the first Day of July, in every of the faid three years, avoid
and carry away from the Woody part of the aforesaid Wood-Land, into the Plaits
there, all the Under-woods and Trees, which shall before such first day of
July, be Felled or cut down in the said Woody parts; And also, That he the said
W. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall not during the said
three years commit or do any wilful hurt, spoil or damage, to the young Germins
arising or growing, up in the said Wood-Lands, after the Felling the Woods,
Under-woods and Trees, there now growing or being, or any part thereof; And
also, That the said Sir J. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall
or lawfully may at any time or times during the said three years, cut and take
upon the said Wood-lands sufficient Stakes, and sufficient of the best Bushes
there to be had, for the new making, repairing, and enclosing the outer Hedges
and Fences belonging to the said Wood-land, and for the making any other new
Fences, or Enclosures in the said Wood-land, and between such parcel thereof,
where the Woods and Trees shall in any year be felled and cut down, and such
parcel thereof, where the Woods or Trees shall then yet be standing, which last
mentioned partition Fences, the said Sir, J. R. does hereby covenant, that it
shall be lawful for the said W. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
after the first two years of the said three year, to pull up, take and convert
to their own use; And the said W. F. does further for himself, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, covenant and grant to and with the said Sir J. R.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents, that he the said
W. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will from time to
time, give notice unto the said F. P. and W. C. or one of them, of such
particular Plot or parcel of the Woods, Underwoods and Trees before mentioned,
as the said W. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall from time to
time then next intend to fell or cut down; To the intent the said F. P. and W.
C. may mark and sign out so many of the Trees in such Plot or parcel growing as
they shall see most fit, of the aforesaid Fifteen hundred Trees excepted out of
this present bargain and sale; And also, that if any Action or Suit shall at
any time hereafter be brought against the said W. F. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, for not setting out of Tithes of the aforesaid
Woods, and if the said Sir J. R. or his Assigns, shall from time to time,
discharge and save harmless the said W. F. from the payment of all and every
expenses, costs and charges, for or by occasion of any such Action or Suit,
That then the said W. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and
will permit and suffer the said Sir J. R. and his Assigns, to make defense in
such Actions or Suits, in such manner as he and they shall think fit, and that
the said W. F. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall not fraudulently
or willingly permit, or suffer any Judgment, or Decree to be had or given
against them in such Actions or Suits, nor make any Composition or Agreements,
with the Plaintiff in such Actions or Suits.

In witness, etc.
A Lease for years of Tithes.
THIS Indenture made the (...) day of (...) in the (...) year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord William by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Between H. E. of Chidham in the
County of Sussex Gent. of the one part, and T. B. of the City of Chichester in
the said County, Baker, of the other part, witnesses, That the said H. E. has
demised, granted and to farm let unto the said T. B. all the Tithes both great
and small, of whatsoever nature, kind or quality which shall, during the Term
hereby granted, arise, come, grow, renew, increase or happen in, upon or out of
all those several Closes or parcels of Land containing together about sixty
Acres, sometimes the Lands of J. L. Gent. and now in the Occupation of the said
T. B. in the Tithing of Old Fishborn within the Parish of Bosham, To have and
to hold all and singular the Tithes before herein mentioned to be demised unto
the said T. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns from the Feast of St.
Michael the Archangel last past, before the date hereof, for, during and until
the full end and term of ten years from thenceforth next ensuing, fully to be
complete or ended: If (...) or either of them shall so long live, Yielding and
paying therefore yearly and every year during the said Term hereby granted unto
the said H. E. his Heirs and Assigns two shillings for every Acre of the said
Land in such years, wherein it shall be sown with Corn or Grain, and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity than one Acre as shall be so
sown. And also yielding and paying one shilling and six pence for every Acre of
the said Land in the next two years after which it shall be sown with Clover,
St. Foin, Hop-grass or other like Grass-Seed, and so proportionably for a
greater or less quantity than one Acre as shall be so sown. And also yielding
and paying one shilling for every Acre of the said Land in such years wherein
it shall be unsown or otherwise laid up for Pasture or feeding, and so
proportionably for greater or less quantity than one Acre unsown, or otherwise
laid up for Pasture or Feeding, at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel
yearly to be paid, except such Land as shall be Summer fallowed for Wheat, for
which nothing shall be paid in such year of Summer fallowing. And the said T.
B. does for himself his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns covenant
and grant to and with the said H. E. his Heirs and Assigns by these Presents,
That he the said T. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns shall and will
yearly and every year during the continuance of the Term hereby granted, well
and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said H. E. his Heirs and Assigns,
all and every the yearly Rent and Rents before in these Presents reserved to be
paid at the days and times before herein limited for payment thereof, according
to the true intent and meaning of these Presents without Fraud or delay. And
also that he the said H. E. his Heirs and Assigns, and his and their Servants
shall or lawfully may from time to time and at all times seasonable, during the
Term hereby granted, enter into and upon the several Closes or parcels of Land
before mentioned, to admeasure the same, and to view and see what Corn, Grain
and Grass shall be there growing. Provided always, and it is agreed between the
parties to this Indenture by these Presents, That if the said H. F his Heirs or
Assigns shall be minded at any time, during the Term hereby granted, to renew
the Lease whereby the Tithes aforesaid are holden of the Dean and Chapter of
the Cathedral Church of the Holy Trinity of Chichester, And for the better
doing thereof shall be minded that this present Indenture of Lease, and the
Term hereby granted, shall cease and be void: Then if the said H. E. his Heirs
or Assigns shall make and give unto the said T. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns good and sufficient Security, That the said H. E.
his Heirs or Assigns within forty days next after such new Lease shall be had
and taken of and from the said Dean and Chapter shall and will sign, seal and
as their Act and Deed deliver unto the said T. B. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns a new Lease of the Tithes hereby demised, for and during the
residue of the time and Term of years hereby granted, as shall be then to come
and unexpired, under and upon the same Rents, Covenants, Conditions, Provisoes
and Agreements in this present Indenture of Lease comprised, And that the said
T. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, until such new Lease
shall be made, sealed and delivered unto them as aforesaid, shall hold and
enjoy the said Tithes under the same Rents, Covenants and Agreements, as are
herein contained, That then and from thence forth, and at all times after this
present Indenture of Lease and the Term of years hereby granted, shall cease,
determine and be utterly void and of none effect, any thing herein contained to
the contrary notwithstanding. And it is further agreed, that the said T. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall upon request seal and execute the
Counterpart of such new Lease to them made as aforesaid.

In witness whereof the Parties first above named have to these present
Indentures interchangeably set their Hands and Seals the day and year first
above written.
A Bargain and Sale of Goods distrained for Rent.
THIS Indenture, etc. Between N. C. of, etc. J. R. Constable of the Hundred of,
etc. D. C. of, etc. J. F. etc. and H. R. of, etc. of the one part, and J. S.
of, etc. T. S. etc. of the other part witnesses, That it is affirmed by the
said N. C. and testified by the said D. C. upon his Oath sworn before the said
Constable, that on the 29th day of September last past, before the date hereof,
the said N. C. in the presence of the said D. C. did enter into a Message and
Lands called S. Farm in H. within the Hundred aforesaid, and for 155 l. of Rent
at the Feast of the Annunciation of the Blessed Mary last past, due unto him as
he said from S. F. upon a Demise, whereby the said S. F. held the said Farm of
the said N. C. did distrain there found the Goods and Chattels following, (to
wit) [recite the particulars]: And it is further testified by the said D. C.
and also by the said J. F. and H. R. upon their Oaths sworn before the said
Constable, that after such Distress taken, (to wit) on the 29th day of December
last past, the said N. C. did at the chief Mansion House of the said Farm, give
public notice of the said Distress, and the Cause thereof, and a Note thereof
in Writing, expressing the particulars of the said Goods and Chattels
distrained, and of the said Rent for which the same were distrained, did then
and there deliver unto E. Daughter of the said S. F. And the said D. C. J. F.
and H. R. upon their Oath aforesaid, have truly appraised all the said Goods
and Chattels distrained at 90 l. and say upon their said Oaths, that all the
said Goods and Chattels according to the best of their Undestandings, are not
worth more than 90 l. And this Indenture further witnesses, That the said
Goods and Chattels being yet unreplevied, the said N. C. with the Constable
aforesaid, for and in consideration of 90 l. being the best price can be gotten
for the said Goods and Chattels by the said J. S. and T. S. paid to the said N.
C. toward satisfaction of the said Rent of 155 l. for which the said Goods and
Chattels were distrained, Have bargained and sold, and by these Presents do
bargain and sell unto the said J. S. and T. S. all the said Goods and Chattels
before herein mentioned to be distrained as aforesaid; To hold unto the said J.
S. and T. S. as their only proper Goods and Chattels for ever.

In witness, etc.
Note, It is best to make so many Parties, for the more easy proving
afterward, (if occasion should be) the regularity of the Proceedings.

Scriptum admissionis Capellani Proceris.
Omnibus Xpi^ fidelibus ad quos hoc Scriptum pervenerit prenobilis Franciscus
Vicecomes Montague
salutem in Domino sempiterriam
Sciatis me prefatum Vicecomitem dicum mihi in Xp^o Peregrinum Peryham Clericum
in Artibus Magistrum and Verbum Dei predictatorem ob ejus vite and morum
integritatem sanamque suam Doctrinam at alia virtutu^ Dona quibus eum Deus
optimus maximus insignavit in Capellanum meum Domesticum and Familiar'
admisisse ac ipsum in numer' meorum Capellanorum Domesticorum and Familiar'
aggregasse nominasse and constituisse habend tenend and gaudend omnes and
singulas Immunitates Privilegia and Libertates Capellanis Procerum and Magnac
ex Statut^ Parliament^ hujus Regni Anglie elargit^ and concess^ Quorirea hec
Vniversitat^ vestre attestatum and declaratum esse volo sicque attestator and
declaro per presents

sub Sigillo meo dat^ secundo die Ianuarii Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli
secundi Dei Gratia Anglie Scotie Francie and Hibernie Regis Fidei Defensor'
etc. Tricesimo Quarto Annoque Domini 1682.
A Settlement by Lease and Release, on consideration of a Marriage intended of
Lands, (which the Husband has in Reversion after a Tenant for Life) to the
Wife for her Jointure, with an Entail to the Issue between them.
THIS Indenture made the 7th day of August, 1656. Between W. P. of the City of,
etc. in the County of S. Gent. of the one part, and J. F. of C. in the said
County of S. Gent. and J. C. of E. in the said County of S. Gent. of the other
part; Whereas a Marriage is intended by the Grace of God, to be shortly
hereafter had and solemnized between the said W. P. and E. C. of C. aforesaid
Widow, Sister of the said I. F. Now this Indenture witnesses; That in
consideration of the said Marriage so to be had, and for the settling of a
competent Jointure and provision for the said E. C. out of the Lands and
Hereditaments of the said W. P. in case she shall survive him, in Bar of her
Dower, and Thirds at the Common Law, And for other considerations him moving,
he the said W. P. has granted, released and confirmed; And by these Presents
for him and his Heirs, does clearly and absolutely grant, release and confirm
unto the said J. F. and J. C. their Heir and Assigns, all that Farm, and all
the Lands and Tenements, situate lying and being in the Parishes, Fields,
Villages and Hamlets of C. and I. in the said County of S. now or late in the
Tenure or Occupation of M. D. Widow, or of G. C. her Under-Tenant, or either of
them; And all Woods, Under-Woods, Ways, Waters, Commons, Heaths, Wastes, Moors,
Marshes, and Profits and Commodities whatsoever, to the said Farm and Premises
belonging or in any wise appertaining And the Reversion and Reversions,
Remainder and Remainders of all and singular the Premises, and of every part
and parcel thereof; And all Rents Services and Profits thereunto incident and
belonging of all which Premises hereby granted, or mentioned to be granted,
the said J. F. and J. C. are now in full Possession by force and virtue of a
Bargain and Sale thereof, to them made by the said W. P. for the Term of a year
from the first day of this instant August, by Indenture bearing date the day
next before the day of the date hereof, and by force and virtue of the Statute
for transferring Uses into Possession; And the said W. P. does further by these
Presents, for the consideration aforesaid, grant, release and confirm unto the
said J. F. and J. C. their Heirs and Assigns, All the Estate, Right, Title,
Interest, Claim and Demand whatsoever, of him the said W. P. of, in and to the
Premises, and every part and parcel thereof: To have and to hold the said
Farm, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all and singular other the Premises
hereby granted and released, or mentioned to be granted and released with their
and every of their Appurtenances unto the said J. F. and J. C. their Heirs and
Assigns, to the several uses, behoofs, intents and purposes herein after
mentioned, expressed and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever; That it is say, to the use and behoof of the faid W. P. and his
Heirs, until the said Marriage, and from and after the said Marriage had, then
to the use and behoof of the said W. P. for and during the Term of his natural
Life, without Impeachment, of, or for any manner of Wast, and from and
immediately after his decease, To the use and behoof of the said E. C. for and
during all the Term of her natural Life for, and in the Name of her Jointure,
and in full recompense, lieu and satisfaction of all the Dower which she may,
or otherwise might have, claim or challenge in all or any the Lands, Tenements,
or Hereditaments of the said W. P. her intended Husband, And from, and
immediately after the decease of the Survivor of them, the said W, and E. To
the use and behoof of the first Son of the said W. P. on the Body of the said
E. to be begotten, and the Heirs of the Body of such first Son lawfully to be
begotten; And for default of such Issue, To the use and behoof of the second
Son of the said W. P. on the Body of the said E. to be begotten, and the Heirs
of the Body of such second Son lawfully to be begotten; And for default of such
Issue, To the use and behoof of the third Son of the said W. P. on the Body of
the said E. to be begotten, and the Heirs of the Body of such third Son
lawfully to be begotten; And for default of such Issue, To the use and behoof
of the foruth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and all and every other the Son and Sons
of the said W. P. on the Body of the said E. to be begotten, severally and
successively one after another, in order and course as they shall be in order
and Seniority of Age, and Priority of Birth, and the several Heirs of their
several and respective Bodies lawfully to be begotten, the Elder of the said
Sons and the Heirs of his Body being always preferred before the Younger, and
the Heirs of their Bodies; And for default of such Issue, To the use and behoof
of all the Daughters of the said W. P. on the Body of the said E. to be
begotten, as Tenants in Common, and not as Joint Tenants, and the Heirs of
their several and respective Bodies lawfully to be begotten; And for default of
Issue, To the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said W. P. for ever; And
the said W. P. for himself, his Heirs, Executors Administrators and Assigns,
and for evrry of them, does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said
J. F. and J. C. their Heirs and Assigns, by these presents, in manner and form
following; That is to say, That he the said W. P. at and immediately before the
Sealing and delivery of this present Indenture, is solely, lawfully rightfully
and absolutely seized of all and singular the said Farm, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, of a good,
pure, absolute and Indefeizable Estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple in
Reversion or Remainder expectant immediately upon the determination of the
Estate which M. D. Widow, has therein, for and during the time of her natural
Life only, without Impeachment of any manner of Condition, Contingent Proviso,
Limitation of use or uses, or other restraint, matter or thing to determine,
alter, or change the same; And that he shall continue so seized thereof, and
and every part and parcel thereof, until, a good, C. prefect and absolute
Estate in Fee-simple, shall be thereof vested in the said J. F. and J. their
Heirs and Assigns, to the uses, intents, and purposes herein before mentioned,
and according to the true intent and meaing of these presents; And also that he
the said W. P. now has good Right, lawful and absolute Power and Authority in
himself, to Grant, assign, convey, settle and assure the said Farm, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and Premises hereby granted or mentioned to be
granted as aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances
unto the said J. F. and J. C. their Heirs and Assigns, to the uses before
mentioned, and in manner and form aforesaid; And also that the same Premises
and every part and parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances now are, and from
thenceforth forever hereafter shall remain, continue, and be to the uses,
intents, and purposes herein before mentioned, free and clear, and freely,
clearly, and absolutely acquitted, freed, and discharged of, and from all, and
all manner of former, and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Joyntures,
Dowers, Entails, Estates, Leases, Rights, Titles, Rents, Arreareges of Rents,
Issues Fines, Amerciaments, Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances, Charges,
Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, the Estate and Interest of the said M. D.
in the said Farm and Premises, for and during the Term of her natural Life
only excepted, And that he the said W. P. shall not do, or willingly suffer any
Act or thing which may destroy or otherwise disturb or hinder the rising of the
Contingent uses herein before limited, or any of them. And the the W. P. for
himself his Heirs, Executors Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them,
does further Covenant, promise and grant to and with the said J. F. and J. C.
their Heirs and Assigns, by these presents, That he the said W P. and all, and
every other person and persons whatsoever, having or lawfully claiming, or
which shall or may at any time or times hereafter, have, or lawfully claim, any
Estate, Right, Title or interest, of, in or to the premises hereby granted or
mentioned to be granted, or of, in or to any part or parcel thereof other than
the said M. D. and her Assigns, for and in respect only of her Estate for her
life therein, shall and will from time to time, and at all and every time and
times hereafter, within the space of Seven Years next ensuing the Date of this
present Indenture, at and upon the reasonable request of the said J. F. and J.
C. their Heirs, Executors or Administrators, but at the proper Costs and
Charges of the said W. P. his Heirs Executors or Administrators, do, make,
levy, execu^ acknowledge and suffer, and cause to be done made, levied,
executed, acknowledged and suffered all and every such further and other
reasonable Act and Acts, thing and things, Assurances an^ Conveyances in the
Law whatsoever, for the further, better, and more perfect assuring, surety
suremaking, settling, establishing, and confirmation of the said Farm, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and premises whatsoever, hereby granted or mentioned
to be granted, with the Appurtenances unto the said J. F. and J. C. their Heirs
and Assigns, unto, and for such and the same uses intents and purposes, as the
same premises are in and by these presents mentioned to be granted, conveyed,
limited or settled, as by the said J. F. and J. C. their Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, or their or any of their Council Learned in the Law, shall be
reasonably devised, or advised, and required; Provided always, and it is hereby
covenanted granted, concluded and agreed unto, by and between all and every the
said parties to these presents, That if the said E. C. shall at any time after
the death of the said W. P. Claim, demand, or sue for any Dower, or thirds, of,
in or out of any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments of the said W. P. or
whereof he shall be seized at any time during the said intended Coverture; That
then and from thenceforth the Use and Estate herein before limited to the said
E. C. shall cease, determine, and be utterly void to all intents and purposes,
any thing herein before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

In Witness. etc.
^everal forms of expressing the Considerations of a Conveyance, or Settling
Estates.
For the Consideration of Money, part paid, and part secured.
Witnesses, That the said R. C. as well for and in Consideration of the Sum of
2000 l. lawful Money of England to him in hand paid; before the Ensealing and
Delivery hereof by the ^^d C. R. the Receipt whereof he the said R. C. ^^h
hereby acknowledge, and thereof, and of ^ry part and parcel thereof, does
acquit and charge the said C. R. his Heirs, Executors and ^dministrators by
these presents, As also for and (...) Consideration of the Sum of 2000 l. more
of (...) lawful Money of England, by the said C. R.^^^dred to be paid unto the
said R C. his Execu^^^^^^ and Administrators in manner and form fol^^wing; That
is to say, the Sum of 500 l. part ^^^reof on the 10th day of December next
ensuing, (...) the Sum of 1000 l. on the 10th day of Febru^^^ next ensuing the
date hereof, and the Sum of ^0 l. l. residue thereof, on or before the 10th day
of ^^rch next ensuing the date of these Presents.

For the Consideration of barring an Estate Tail.
WHereas the said R. C. at the Ensealing and Delivery of these Presents is and
and ^andeth seized of an Estate Tail to him, and the Heirs Males of his Body,
with diverse Remainders over, of and in all, etc. hereafter in these Presents
mentioned: Now this Indenture witnesses, That for and in Consideration of the
barring of the said Estate Tail and all the Remainders thereupon depending, and
for the settling of an absolute Estate of Inheritance in Feesimple in the said
R. C. whereby he may be enabled to make a good and perfect assurance to such
person or persons, and their Heirs as have agreed, or hereafter shall agree
with him the said R. C. to Purchase the said, etc. (A Covenant that R. C. shall
suffer a Recovery).

For the Consideration of Love and Affection, and preferment of Children.
Witnesses, That the said R. C. in Consideration of the natural love and
affection, which he bears unto A. C. his Son and Heir apparent, and for his
advancement and present maintenance; And to the end that the Daughters of the
said R. C. may have convenient Portions to maintain and prefer them in
Marriage, and for the Establishing of the Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments hereafter mentioned, to such uses, intents and purposes as are
hereafter limited and appointed; And for other good Causes and Considerations,
etc. Or thus, In Consideration, of the great love and natural affection, which
he the said R. C. bears unto A. C. Son and Heir apparent of the said R. C.
and to the Heirs Male of the Body of the said A. C. and to the end intent and
purpose, that the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments hereafter
mentioned, shall and may continue in the stock, blood and kindred of the said
R. C. etc. -- Or thus, As well for the advancement and preferment of the Heirs
Male of the Body of the said R.C. lawfully to be begotten, and for the better
advancement and preferment of A. B. C. D. and E. F. the natural Brothers of the
said R. C. And to the end that the Manors, etc. hereafter mentioned, may
continue in the Names Blood and Kindred of the said R. C. so long as it shall
please God, as also for diverse other good Causes and Considerations, etc.

For the consideration of want of Issue and continuance of the Estate in the
name.
Witnesses, That for diverse good Causes and Considerations him the said R. C.
hereunto moving, And especially for that the said R. C. and A. his Wife, have
been married these many years, and have had no Issue of their Bodies; And to
the end that in case the said R. C. should die without Issue of his Body
lawfully begotten, the capital Message, etc. hereafter mentioned, shall and
may so long as it shall please God, remain and continue in the Blood and Stock
and Kindred of the said R. C. And for the natural love which he bears unto,
etc. and fore diverse other good Causes and Considerations, etc.

In Consideration of a Marriage, and of the Marriage Portion.
WHereas there is a Marriage by the Grace of God to be shortly had and
solemnized between the said A. C. Son and Heir apparent of the said R. C. and
B. A. Daughter of the said F. J. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said
R. C. in Consideration of the said Marriage, and of the Sum of 3000 l. of good
and lawful Money of England, to him in hand paid as the Marriage Portion of the
said B. A. by the said F. A. her Father, and for the natural love and affection
which the said R. C. bears unto the said A. C. and to the end, intent and
purpose, that a competent Jointure may be had and made unto the said B. A. for
the better maintenance, livelihood and advancement of the said B. A. in case
she shall happen. to survive and outlive the said A. C. And in full recompense
and satisfaction of all the Dower which she the said B. A. by or after the
Death of the said A. C. should or ought to have in any the Manors, Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, whereof the said A. C. shall during the Coverture
between him and the said B. A. be seized of any Estate of Inheritance; And for
the advancement of the Name and Blood of the said A. C. and for and toward a
provision of maintenance to and for the said A. C. and B. A. during the natural
Lives of the said A.C. and B. A. etc.

In Consideration of a Marriage and former Agreements.
Witnesses, That in Consideration of a Marriage heretofore had between the
said R. C. and A. C. his Wife, and of the good will and affection which the
said R. C. bears unto the said R. C. his Son, and for the true performance of
such Premises and Agreements, had and made by the said R. C. upon the Marriage
between the said R. C. and the said A. C. had as a foresaid, and for a
Jointure, etc. and to the end, intent and purpose, That the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments of the said R. C. hereafter mentioned may come and continue
to and in the Issue of the said R. C. and A. in such sort and manner as
hereafter is in these Presents expressed, mentioned and declared, and for other
good Causes, etc.

In Consideration of being in Debt.
WHereas the said R. C. is now lawfully seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of and
in all that, etc. with the appurtenances, situate, lying and being, etc. of the
yearly value of 500 l. of lawful Money of England: And whereas the said R. C. is
indebted and does owe unto diverse persons several Sums of Money, amounting in
the whole to 2000 l. of like Moneys, being particularly mentioned in a Schedule
hereunto annexed, which Sums the said R. C. is not at present able to pay, and
yet being minded and intending to make payment thereof, with all convenient
speed, in consideration thereof, and forasmuch as the said J. F. has
undertaken out of the Rents, Issues and Profits of the said, etc. To pay and
satisfy the Debts owing by the said R. C. Rateably to his Creditors, according
to their several Debts, as the same, shall be yearly raised out of the said
yearly Rents Issues and Profits. Now this, etc.

Forms of introducing the Uses on Fines and Recoveries, etc.
The Introduction of the Uses on a Fine to be levied.
THIS Indenture, etc. Between R. C. and A. his Wife of the one part, and C. R.
and J. F. of the other part witnesses, That for the conveying, assuring and
sure making of all and singular the Massuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments hereafter in these Presents mentioned, to the uses, intents and
purposes hereafter, in and by these Presents expressed, limited and declared,
It is agreed and concluded by and between the said Parties to these Presents,
And the said R. C. for, himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators does
Covenant, Grant and Agree, to and with the said C. R. and J. F. their Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these Presents, That he the
said R. C. and A. his Wife, shall and will at the proper costs and charges of
the said R. C. before the end of Hillary Term next ensuing the date hereof, in
due form of Law, etc. (insert the Covenant to levy a Fine,) by certain name or
names, and quantities of Acres in the said Fine to be contained; And that the
said Fine so to be had and levied as aforesaid, or in what manner soever the
same shall be had and levied, shall be and enure, And the said C. R. and J. F.
shall by force thereof stand and be seized of the said Message, etc. with the
appurtenances, to the uses, intents and purposes, and upon the Conditions and
Limitations hereafter in these Presents limited, expressed and declared and to
no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever; That is to say, etc. -- Or thus,
And it is covenanted, concluded and fully agreed, by and between all the said
Parties to these Presents, And they and every of them do hereby express,
signify and declare, That the said Fine so to be levied as aforesaid, And all
and every other Fine and Fines hereafter to be had and levied of the Premises,
or any part thereof, between the said Parties or any of them, before the end of
etc. shall be and enure, and the said C. R. and J. F. and their or one of their
Heirs, shall immediately from and after the said Fine, or any other Fine
thereof to be levied as aforesaid, shall stand and be seized of the premises,
to the only uses, intents and purposes hereafter mentioned; That is to say, as
to the said Message, etc. with the appurtenances now in the occupation of,
etc. To the use and behoof of, etc. And as to the said Lands, etc. now in the
occupation of, etc. To the use and behoof of, etc.

The Introduction of the Uses on a Fine levied.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. and E. his Wife of the one part, And
J. F. and F. J. of the other part, Whereas the said R. C. and E. his Wife, have
in the Term of St. Michael last past, before the date of these Presents levied
a Fine in due form of Law, unto the said, J. F. and F. J. of all, etc. The
which Fine was levied by such Names, number of Acres and other particulars, as
are in the Fine contained, as by the said Fine, Relation being thereunto had
does more fully appear: Now this Indenture witnesses, And it is hereby
declared by and between all the Parties hereunto, That the true intent and
meaning of the levying of the said Fine at the time of the levying thereof was,
and is to be taken to be to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter following;
That is to say, to the use of, etc.

The Introduction of the Uses on a Recovery, to be had, with double Voucher.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. of the first part, R.C. and C. R. of
the second part, and J. F. and F. J. of the third part; Whereas the said A. B.
by one Indenture of Bargain and Sale, dated the first day of this Instant
December, and enrolled in their Majesty's High Court of Chancery the tenth day
of the same Month, made between the said A. B. of the one part, and the said R.
C. and C.R. of the other part, Has granted, bargained and sold to the said R.
C. and C. R. all that, etc. and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder or
Remainders thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, To have and to hold
the said, etc. and all and every the said premises with the appurtenances unto
the said R. C. and C. R. their Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only proper
and absolute use and behoof of the said R. C. and C. R. their Heirs and Assigns
for ever; To the end intent and purpose that the said R. C. and C. R. might
thereby, and by force of the Statute of transferring Uses into Possession,
become Tenants of the Freehold of all and every the Premises; That a good and
perfect Common Recovery, with double Vouchers may be thereof had and executed.
Now this Indenture witnesses, And it is covenanted, concluded and fully agreed
by and between all the said parties to these presents, for them and every of
them, their and every of their Heirs, That they the said R. C. and C. R. shall
and will permit and suffer the said J.F. and F. J. before the end of, etc. next
ensuing the date of these presents, by Writ or Writs of Entry sur disseisin en
le post to be sued forth and obtained out of Their Majesty's High Court of
Chancery and returnable before the Justices of Their Majesty's Court of Common
Pleas at Westminster in the names of the said J. F. and F. J. Demandants
against the said R. C. and C. R. Tenants, or the Survivor of them, to recover
to them the said J. F. and F. J. and their Heirs in due form of Law, according
to the usual form of Common Recoveries for assurances of Lands, Tenement and
Hereditaments against the said R. C. and C. R. the said, etc. with their and
every of their appurtenances, by some name or names in the said Writ and
Recovery to be contained; In and to which said Writ the said R. C. and C. R.
shall appear gratis in their proper persons, and after defense made, shall
vouch to Warranty the said A. B. who shall likewise thereupon appear and enter
into the Warranty, and after defense made, shall vouch to warranty the Common
Vouchee, who shall likewise appear and enter into Warranty, and after make
default in contempt of the Court, to the end that a perfect Common Recovery may
be had and executed according to the course of Common Recoveries of the, etc.
and all and singular other the premises with the appurtenances, Which Recovery
so as aforesaid, or in any other form to be had suffered and executed by and
between the said parties, or any of them the said, etc. before the, etc. and
the Recoverors in the said Recovery or Recoveries, shall immediately from and
after the suffering and executing thereof stand and be seized of the said, etc.
to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter specified, expressed and declared,
and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. -- Or thus, And it is
covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between all the said parties
to these Presents, That the said Recovery so to be had and executed as
aforesaid, and every other common Recovery with Vouchers, to be suffered by the
said R. C. and C. R. or the Survivor of them before the end, etc. of the said,
etc. and of every or any part thereof, by what names or additions soever the
same shall be had or suffered immediately from and after the execution thereof,
shall be; And the person or persons who shall thereby recover the premises or
any part thereof, and his and their Heirs after Execution shall stand and be
seized of the said, etc. or of such part thereof as shall be recovered as
aforesaid, to the use of, etc.

The Introduction of the uses on a Recovery with double Voucher suffered.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. R. of the first part, R. C. and C. R. of
the second part, and J.F. and F. J. of the third part; Whereas the said R. R.
by one Indenture of Bargain and Sale, etc. [reciting to the end of the Habend']
And whereas afterward, (that is to say) in the Term of St. Michael then next
following, the said J. F. and F. J. did pursue out of the said Court of
Chancery one Writ of Entry Sur Disseizin en le post against the said R. C. and
C. R. returnable before the Justices of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, where the said J. F. and F. J. did demand against the said R. C.
and C. R. the said Manors, etc. to which Writ the said R. C. and C. R. did
appear in proper person, and after defense made did vouch to warranty the said
R. R. who did likewise appear in person, and entered into the warranty, and
vouched over the common Vouchee, who did likewise appear in person, and entered
into warranty, and after made default, whereby several Judgments were had
according to the Course of Common Recoveries used in the Court of Common Pleas.
Now this Indenture witnesses, and it is hereby declared and expressed, That
the true intent and meaning of all the said parties to these presents, before
and at the time of suffering the said Recovery was and ever since has been and
yet is, that the said Recovery and the whole execution thereof should, and for
ever hereafter shall be and enure, And the said Recoverors and their Heirs
shall for ever hereafter stand and be seized of and in the, etc. and all and
every the premises beforementioned, with the appurtenances, to the use, etc.

The Introduction of the Uses of a Recovery, with single Voucher to be had.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the one part, and J. F. and F. J.
of the other part witnesses, That it is covenanted, concluded and agreed by
and between the said parties to these presents; And the said R. C. for himself,
the Heirs, Executors and Administrators does covenant, grant and agree to and
with the said J. F. and F. J. and their Heirs by these presents, That he the
said R. C. shall permit and suffer the said J. F. and F. J. to prosecut one
Writ of Entry sur disseizin en le post against the said R. C. of and for all
that etc. with all and every the appurtenances, by such name and names,
quantities and numbers of Acres, and in such manner and form as shall be
thought fit and expedient, unto and in which Writ the said R. C. shall apear
gratis and vouch over to warranty the Common Vouchee, who shall likewise appear
gratis and enter into the warranty, and make default in contempt of the Court,
whereby one Recovery shall or may be had or suffered against the said R. C. of
the said, etc. according to the usual course of Common Recoveries for the
assurance of Lands and Tenements. And it is further concluded and agreed by and
between the said parties to these presents, That the said Recovery shall be had
and suffered as aforesaid, before the end of Hillary Term next ensuing the date
hereof: And that the said Recovery and the execution thereof, and the full
force and effect of the same shall be and enure, And that the said Recoverors
and their Heirs, immediately after the same, and the Execution thereof had and
made, shall stand and be seized of the said Manor, Messuages, Lands and
Premises, to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter-mentioned, (that is to
say) To the use of, etc.

The Introduction of the Uses on a Recovery, with single Voucher already had.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the one part, and J. F. and F. J.
of the other part, Whereas the said J. F. and F. J. did on Michaelmas Term last
past, before the date hereof upon a Writ of Entry sur disseisin en le post,
before the Justices of Their Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster,
recover by Common Recovery against the said R. C. one Message, etc. [setting
down the particulars] and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remainders of all and singular the premises, and of all and every part and
parcel thereof by the name of, etc. (as in the Recovery) in which Recovery the
said R. C. did vouch to Warranty the Common Vouchee, whereby a good and perfect
Common Recovery with single Voucher of the said, etc. according to the usual
form of Common Recoveries, was had and executed against the said R. C. and his
Heirs, as by the Record thereof remaining in the said Court of Common Pleas it
does more at large appear. Now this Indenture witnesses, and it is hereby
declared, That the true intent and meaning of all the parties to the said
Recovery and to these Presents, was before and at the time of the said
Recovery, and yet is, for, touching and concerning the said, etc. and every
part thereof whereof the said Recovery was had and executed as aforesaid, That
the said Recovery and the execution thereof should and shall be and enure, and
be construed, judged and taken to be and enure, That the said Recoverors and
their Heirs should and shall stand and be seized of the said, etc. and of every
part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, to the uses, intents and
purposes hereafter in these presents set down, expressed and declared, and to
no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, (that is to say) to the use of, etc.

The Introduction of the Uses on a Feoffment.
THIS Indenture, etc. Between R.C. of the one part, and J. F. and F. J. of the
other part witnesses, That the said R. C. for and in consideration of a
Marriage, etc. and for settlement in the name, etc. Has granted, aliened,
enfeoffed, released and confirmed, and does by these presents grant, alien,
enfeoff, release and confirm unto the said J. F. and F. J. their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, all that, etc. and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder
and Remainders thereof, and of every part thereof, and all and every the Rent
or Rents thereupon reserved, due or payable or upon any part thereof, To have
and to hold the said, etc. unto the said J. F. and F. J. their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, to the several uses, intents and purposes, and under the
several Proviso's, Conditions and Limitations hereafter in and by these
presents expressed, limited and declared, and to or for no other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever, that is to say, etc.

A Bargain and Sale for six Months, to ground a Release of the Reversion.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the one part, and J. F. and F. J.
of the other part witnesses, That the said R. C. for and in consideration of
five shillings of lawful Money of England to him in hand paid before the sealing
and delivery hereof, the receipt whereof he the said R. C. does hereby
acknowledge, and thereof and of every part thereof does acquit and discharge
them the said J. F. and F. J. their Executors and Administrators by these
presents, Has granted, bargained and sold, and by these presents does grant
bargain and sell unto the said J. F. and F. J. their Executors and Assigns, all
that, etc. and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders thereof,
and of every part and parcel thereof, together with all Rents and Services
reserved upon all or any Lease or Leases of the premises or any part or parcel
thereof, To have and to hold the said, etc. and all and singular other the
premises herein beforementioned, and intented to be hereby granted, bargained
and sold, with their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said J. F. and
F. J. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns from the day of the date
hereof, for and during the full end and term of six Months from thence next
ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended; To the end that by virtue of these
presents and of the Statute of transferring uses into possession, the said J.
F. and F. J. may be in the actual possession, of the Premises, and be enabled
to take and accept of a Grant and Release of the same to them the said J. F.
and F. J. their Heirs and Assigns for ever.

In witness, etc.

The Release and Grant of the Reversion, and the Introduction of the Uses.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the one part, and J. F. and F. J.
of the other part; Whereas the said R. C. by Indenture, bearing date, etc.
[this must be dated a day or two after the Lease) for the Consideration therein
mentioned did grant, bargain and sell unto the said J. F. and F. J. all that
Message, etc. and the Reversion, etc. (recite the Bargain and Sale next
before) as by the said recited Indenture more fully and at large it does
appear. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said R. C. for and in
consideration of the sum of, etc. and for diverse good causes and considerations
him hereunto moving, has granted, released and confirmed, and does by these
presents grant, release and confirm unto the said J. F. and F. J. their Heirs
and Assigns, all the aforesaid Message, etc. with the appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Claim and
Demand whatsoever of him the said R. C. of, in and to the premises, and every
or any part or parcel thereof; and all Rent and Rents, and other Services
reserved and payable upon any Demise or Demises, Lease or Leases of the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof, To have and to hold the said Message,
etc. and every part thereof with the appurtenances, mentioned or intended to be
hereby granted released and confirmed unto the said J. F. and F. J. their Heirs
and Assigns for ever, to the several uses, intents and purposes hereafter in
these presents mentioned and declared, and to no other use and purpose
whatsoever, (that is to say) to the use, etc.

Limitations of Estates for Life.
AND it is convenanted, granted, concluded, condescended and fully agreed by
and between all the said parties to these presents, for themselves and their
Heirs respectively, That the said Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries,
Conveyances and Assurances to be had, made and executed according to the
purport and true meaning of these presents, of and in the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises and every of them, and the execution
thereof, shall be, and for ever shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be; And
also that the said J. F. and F. J. and their Heirs, and the Survivor of them
and his Heirs stand and be seized of and in all and singular the Manors, etc.
and premises, and of and in every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, to and for the several and only uses, behoofs, intents and
purposes, and upon and under the Limitations, Proviso's Conditions and
Agreements hereafter-mentioned, (that is to say) of, in and to all the Capital
Message, etc. with the appurtenances, being parcel of the premises, commonly
called or known by the name of, etc. situate, etc. now or late in the tenure or
occupation of, etc. and of, in and to all and singular the Houses, Edifices,
Buildings, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings and Hereditaments whatsoever with
the appurtenances to the said Capital Message or Tenement belonging or
appertaining, or therewith now or heretofore used, occupied or enjoyed, or
accepted, reputed or taken as part parcel or member thereof, and the Reversion
and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders thereof to the use of the said A. C.
Son and Heir of the said R. C. and of B. C. Wife of the said A. C. for and
during the term of their natural lives, and of the life of the longer liver of
them, without impeachment of waste, during the natural life of the said A. C.

To the use of the Husband for life, and after to the Wife for a Jointure.
TO the use of the said R. C. for and during the term of his natural life,
without impeachment of or for any manner of waste, and with full power to do or
commit waste. -- Or thus Without impeachment of waste only in and for Woods,
Under-woods and Timber Trees standing growing or being, or which at any time
hereafter shall stand, grow or be in or upon the premises beforementioned, or
any part or parcel thereof: And from and ofter the decease of the said R. C.
then to the use and behoof of the said B. his Wife, for and during the term of
her natural life, in name of her Jointure, and in full recompense and
satisfaction of her Dower, which she the said B. should or ought to have in or
out the Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of the said R. C. in case she shall
happen to survive the said R. C. -- Or thus, In full recompense of her Dower
and Title of Dower to or out of all the Manor, etc. whereof the said R. C.
had, now has or hereafter shall have during the Coverture between him and the
said B. any Estate of Inheritance.

A Limitation of an Estate for Years, determinable upon a Life.
TO the use of the said R. C. for the term of his natural life; And from and
after his decease to the use and behoof of the said S. C. one of the younger
Sons of the said R. C. for the term of fifty years, to commence immediately
from and after the decease of the said R. C. if he the said S. C. shall and do
so long live, and from and after the end and determination of the said Estate
or Interest before limited to the said S. C. Then to the use of, etc. (if the
use be but of part, then say) To the use of the said R. C. for the term of his
natural life, and from and after his decease, as to, etc. being parcel of the
premises before limited to the said R. C. for the term of his life, to the use
and behoof of the said S. C. one of the younger Sons of the said R. C. for the
term of fifty years, to commence immediately from and after the decease of the
said R. C. if he the said S. C. shall and do so long live; and from and after
the end and determination of the said Estate or Interest before limited to the
said S. C. then to the use of, etc. And as for, touching and concerning the
remainder of the premises before limited to the said R. C. for the term of his
life, being, etc. (set down the particulars) to the use and behoof of B. C. for
the term of one and twenty years, to commence immediately from and after the
decease of the said R. C. And from and after the end and determination of the
said Estate or Interest limited, to the said B. C. to the use, etc.

Limitations in Tail to the Brothers of the Feoffor.
TO the use and behoof of the said R. C. and of the Heirs Males of his Body
lawfully begotten and to be begotten; And for default of such Issue, then to
the use and behoof of A. C. Brother of the said R. C. and of the Heirs Males of
his Body lawfully begotten and to be begotten: And for default of such Issue,
then to the use and behoof of B. C. one other of the Brothers of the said R. C.
and of the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten and to be begotten: And
for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of C. C. one other of the
Brothers of the said R. C. and of the Heirs Males of the Body of the said C. C.
lawfully begotten and to be begotten: And for default of such Issue, then to
the use and behoof of the Right Heirs of the said R. C. for ever.

A Limitation of a use in Fee determinable upon a Marriage.
TO the use of the said R. C. and his Heirs, until the said Marriage intended
shall be had and solemnized between him and the said B. C. And from and after
the Marriage had and solemnized between him the said R. C. and the said B. C.
Then to the use of the said R. and B. for and during the Term of their natural
Lives, and the natural life of the longer liver of them, and from and after
their decease, to to use of the Heirs of the Bodies of the said R. and B.
between them two lawfully begotten; and for lack of such Issue, to the use of
the right Heirs of the said R. C. for ever.

A Limitation of uses, and direction for disposing of the Profits during the
Heirs Minority.
TO the use and behoof of the said R. C. for and during the Term of his natural
life, without Impeachment, of, or for any manner of Wast, And from, and after
the decease of the said R. C. and during the time that the said A. C. Son and
now Heir Apparent of the said R. C. or any other being Heir Apparent of the
said R. C. shall be under the Age of one and twenty years, and until some Heir
of the said R. C. shall accomplish the Age of one and twenty years; To the use
of the said J. F. and F. J. (the Cognizees or Feoffees) and the Survivor of
them, And of the Heirs of the Survivor of them, To the intent and purpose, That
the said J. F. and F. J. and the Survivor of them, shall and may take,
perceive, levy, possess and enjoy the Rents, Issues, Profits, Revenues,
Commodities and Emoluments of all and singular the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and other the premises, with the Appurtenances; And them to employ
during such Minority or Minorities as aforesaid, for and toward the
performance, payment and Satisfaction of all the Bequests, and Legacies to be
mentioned in the last Will and Testament of the said R. C. according to the
tenor purport and true meaning of the said R. C. in and by his said last Will
and Testament, to be declared; And to the end intent and purpose, That the said
J. F. and F. J. or the Survivor of them, and the Heirs of the Survivor of them
shall and may likewise with the Rents, etc. coming, growing and arising, of and
out of all and singular the said Messuages, Tenements, Lands and Premises,
bestow and disburse from time to time, the necessary and competent Charges in
the Law and otherwise, for the defense and maintenance of the Title and
Possession of all and singular the Premises, and of every or any part thereof;
And for the Reparation and Preservation of the Edifice; and Buildings in and
upon all and every the Premises or any part thereof, meet and fit to be
disbursed and expended until some Heir of the said R. C. shall have
Accomplished the Age of one and twenty years; And for the Surplusage that shall
be and remain of all or any the said Rents, Issues, Profits, Revenues and
Commodities over and above the said Legacies, Disbursments and Expenses, so to
be devised and made as aforesaid; That the same shall and may remain and come
to the use, profit, and benefit of the said A. C. or any other Heir of the said
R. C. that shall accomplish the full Age of 21 years; And after the said A. C.
or other Heir of the said R. C. shall have accomplished the said Age of one and
twenty years, That then the said J. F. and F. J. and their Heirs and the Heirs
of the Survivor of them, shall stand and be seized of, and in all and singular
the said Message, etc. to the use of the said A. C. or such other Heirs of the
said R. C. as shall so accomplish the said Age, and of the Heirs Males of the
Body of the said A. C. or such other Heir, and for want of such Issue, To the
use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said R. C. for ever.

A Limitation after an Estate for Life determined, to the use of the Feoffee
for sixteen years, for assuring the payment of Portions to younger Children.
TO the use and behoof of the said R. C. for and during the Term of his natural
Life, without Impeachment of or for any manner of Wast; And from and after the
decease of the said R.C. then to the use and behoof of the said J. F. and F. J.
(Cognizees or Feoffees) their Executors Administrators and Assigns, for and
during the Term of sixteen years, to commence immediately from and after the
decease of the said R. C. upon the trust and confidence hereafter mentioned;
And from and after the death of the said R. C. and determination of the said
Term or Interest to the use and behoof of A. C. Eldest Son and Heir Apparent of
the said R. C. and of the Heirs of the Body of the said A.C. lawfully begotten;
And for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the
said R. C. for ever; And it is further by these presents covenanted, concluded
and declared by and between all the said Parties to these Presents; And the
intents and meaning of these presents, and of the Parties hereunto is, That all
and every the younger Sons, and all and every the Daughters of the said R. C.
which he shall have at the time of his decease, and shall leave unadvanced, and
unpreferred by the said R. C. shall have and receive every of them five hundred
pounds apiece of lawful Money of England, so that it exceed not the Sum of two
thousand pounds in the whole And if the same exceed the said Sum of two
thousand pounds in the whole; Then every of the said Sons and Daughters to have
a proportionable part of the said Sum of two thousand pounds which is to be
paid, and share and share alike equally to be divided between them; And that
the said several Sums of five hundred pounds apiece, or Sum of two thousand
pounds (which of them shall become payable, by the intent and true meaning of
these presents) shall be all paid to the Sons and Daughters respectively within
four years next after the decease of the said R. C. by such person or persons
which for the time being shall have the next, and immediate Inheritance of the
premises, depending and expectant upon the determination of the said Term of
Sixteen years limited to the said J. F. and F. J. And that until default shall
be made of any of the said payments, which by the intent and true meaning of
these presents, are and ought to be made as aforesaid, to all and every the
said Children They the said J. F. and F. J. their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, (according to the trust aforesaid, in them and every of them reposed)
shall permit and suffer the said person and persons, which for the time being,
shall have the next and immediate Inheritance of the Premises, from and after
the determination of the said Term of sixteen years as aforesaid, quietly and
peaceably, from and after the decease of the said R. C. to have and keep the
possession of all and every the beforementioned Premises, and to receive and
take the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof; And that in default of payment of
the said Sum or Sums, or any part thereof it is meant and intended by all and
every the parties to these presents; That the said J. F. and F. J. and the
Survivor of them, their or his Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall enter
and take the Possession of the Premises, and of every part and parcel thereof
according to the limitation herein before expressed; And the Rents, Issues, and
Profits thereof, shall employ and convert, wholly for and toward the payment
of the said several Sums of five hundred pounds apiece to the said younger Sons
and Daughters, or the Sum of two thousand pounds to be equally divided between
them (which of them shall become payable, according to the true intent of these
presents, together with the Interest, for all and every such Sum or Sums, after
the Rate of six pounds per Cent. for every year that the same shall be unpaid,
to be accounted, from the end of the four years before mentioned,) for the
forbearance of the said Sums or Sum, or such part thereof as shall be unpaid as
aforesaid; And it is likewise meant, intended and agreed; That after the said
Sums or Sum of Money with Interest for the forbearance thereof, shall be fully
and truly paid unto the said younger Sons and Daughters; They the said J. F.
and F. J. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall yield and deliver
up the Premises, and all their Estate, and Interest therein to such person and
persons to whom the same next, and immediately after the expiration of the said
Term, by the true intent and meaning of these presents shall appertain,
persuant to the trust in them and every of them, herein and hereby reposed.

A Limitation of an use, to such Persons to whom Cestuy que use for Life shall
demise the Premises.
TO the use of the said R. C. for and during the Term of his natural Life, and
from and after the decease of the said R. C. as to such part of the premises
as shall be by the said R. C. by any Deed or Deeds by him duly executed during
his Life, demised or leased to any person or persons whatsoever, for and during
the Term of one and twenty years or under, or for and during the Term of one
two or three Lives; To the use of such Farmers or Tenants respectively, for and
during their said several and respective Terms and Interests, under the
Reservations, Covenants, Provisoes and Conditions in such Demise or Lease,
Demises or Leases, to be continued; and from and after the end and
determination of the said several Terms and Interests, as the same shall
severally and respectively end and determine, to the use and behoof of the
Heirs of the Body of the said R. C. and for want of such Issue, to the use and
behoof of the right Heirs of said R. C. for ever; And as to such part of the
Premises as shall not be so demised or leased by the said R. C. at the time of
his death, to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the Body of the said R. C. and
for want of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said R.
C. for ever.

How to dispose of Portions, if the Daughters die.
AND upon this further trust and confidence And to the intent and purpose, That
if it, shall happen the said R. C. to die, having one only Daughter of his Body,
on the Body of the said B. begotten, then living or afterward to be born as
aforesaid, and that the said only Daughter shall happen to depart this life,
before she shall accomplish the Age of 18 years, or be married, or if there
happen to be two or more Daughters of the Body of the said R. C. on the Body of
the said B. begotten then living; Then if both or all the said Daughters shall
happen to die or depart this life, before either or any of them accomplish
their several Ages of 18 years, or be married as aforesaid, That then the
several Sum or Sums of Money intended for their portions, and advancement of
such Daughter or Daughters as aforesaid, or so much thereof as shall be raised
or levied out of the Rents, Issues and Profits of all or any the Premises,
(all charges and expenses defraied, wherein a full and liberal allowance shall
be made and given,) shall be satisfied and paid to such person or persons, as
the said R. C. by any Writing under his Hand and Seal subscribed by two or more
credible Witnesses, or by his last Will and Testament to be subscribed as
aforesaid, shall limit and appoint. And in default of any such limitation or
appointment, to the Executors or Administrators of the said R. C.

For Maintenance till Portions shall be paid.
AND upon further trust and confidence, And to the end, intent and purpose,
That the said J. F. and F. J. and the Survivor of them, their and his Executors
and Assigns, shall and may out of the Rents, Issues and Profits of the said
Lands, etc. so to them limited for the raising of Portions as aforesaid, with
all and every the appurtenances, levy and pay, or cause to be levied and paid,
to and for the maintenance of such Daughter or Daughters as aforesaid, If there
be but one Daughter the Sum of 30 l. per annum, and if there be two or more
Daughters, the Sum of 20 l. per annum apiece, until such Daughter or Daughters
respectively shall attain to her or their Age of 18 years, or shall be married,
and her or their Portions be paid as aforesaid.

A Revocation of a Suit.
TO All, etc. I F. J.
send Greeting:
Whereas an Action has been brought in my name at the Common Law against R. C.
or a Bond wherein the said R. C. became bound unto me in the Sum of 20 l. on
the, etc. as by the said Bond or Obligation, etc. Now know ye that I the said
F. J. of hereby revoke and withdraw the said Action and Suit brought against
the said R. C. upon the said Obligation, and all Proceedings thereupon had in
my name; And do also countermand all Letters of Atturny, and other Authorities
whatsoever by me heretofore made, or given to any person or persons for the
Prosecution of any Action or Suit upon the said Bond, And, do also signify and
declare, that my intent and will is, that no Action shall at any time hereafter
be brought or commenced against the said R. C. his Heirs, Executors
Administrators or Assigns upon the said Obligation.

In witness, etc.
A discharge to an Apprentice.
TO all, etc. I. R. C. of, etc.
send Greeting:
Whereas C. R. by his Indenture bearing date, etc. did put himself Apprentice
to me for the Term of 7 years, commencing, etc. As by the said Indenture it
does appear: Now know ye, that I the said R. C. for diverse good Causes and
Considerations me hereunto moving, do by these Presents clearly and absolutely
discharge and set free the said C. R. of and from my Service, so as neither I
nor any for me, shall or may at any time hereafter ask, claim or demand any
Service of the said C. R. by virtue of the said Indenture; And also I do hereby
Remise and Release unto the said C. R. all Actions, and all Causes of Action,
Service and Demands whatsoever, which I now have against him, by reason of any
Act whatsoever, from the beginning of the Would until the day of the date
hereof.

In witness, etc.
A Warrant to acknowledge Satisfaction on a Judgment.
To A. B. C. D. and E. F. Attorneys of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, or to any of them, or to any other Attorney of the said Court.
WHereas I F. J. of, etc. in Trinity Term last, did obtain a Judgment in the
said Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, against R. C. for 50 l. debt and 40
s. costs, as by the Record thereof Remaining in the said Court it does at large
appear, of and for which said Judgment, I the said F. J. do hereby acknowledge
my self to be fully satisfied and paid, These are therefore to authorize you,
or any you to acknowledge satisfaction of the said debt and costs, on the
Record of the said Judgment in the said Court aforesaid, and for so doing this
shall be your sufficient Warrant.

In Witness, etc.
An greement of Creditors to take their Debts at four payments, abating
Interest.
WE A. B. C. D. and E. F. Creditors of R. C. of, etc. do by these Presents
consent and agree for our selves, and for every of us severally, to take and
accept of such Debts as are owing and due to us, by and from the said R. C. by
four payments to be made on the days here mentioned for the payment thereof, by
even and equal portions,; That is to say, one fourth part of our said several
Debts on or before the 10th day of March next ensuing the date hereof, one
other fourth part, etc. and upon the said R. C. his making the first payment,
and giving security for the other three, we and every one of us, shall and will
deliver up the old Security and discharge him thereof; And we and every one of
us, do hereby consent and agree to forgive and abate to the said R. C. all and
all manner of interest due to us or any of us, for the forbearance of our said
several Debts.

In witness, etc.
A Mortgage of Lands for years, partly for Money lent and partly for security of
the Mortgagees being Sureties for other Debts of Mortgagor.
THIS Indenture Tripartite made, etc. Between R. C. of the first part, and C.
R. of the second part, and J. F. of the third part witnesses, that the said R.
C. for and to the intent that the said C. R. and J. F. and either of them, and
the Heirs, Executors and Administrators or either of them, shall and may be
well and truly satisfied, recompensed, contented, paid and saved harmless, of
and for all and singular such Sums and Sums of Money, as they the said C. R. and
J. F. or either of them, have heretofore lent or delivered to the said R. C. of
to any other Person or Persons, to or for his use, by his consent, request or
agreement, or which they the said C. R. and J. F. shall at any time hereafter
lend or deliver to and for the use of the said R. C. by or at his request,
consent or agreement, And also of and for and all singular such Bills,
Obligations and Debts, which they the said C. R. and J. F. or either of them
heretofore have made, or hereafter shall make Jointly with the said R. C. for
his Debt, or at his request, Has demised, granted and to farm letten, And by
these Presents does demise, grant and to farm let to them the said C. R. and
J. F. all that, etc. with the appurtenances; To have and to hold the said, etc.
to the said R. C. and J. F. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns from
the Feast, etc. for and during and until the full end and Term of 99 years from
thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, Yielding and paying
therefore yearly, during the said Term unto the said R. C. his Heirs and
Assigns, the Sum of 10 l. of lawful Money of England, at the Feast of St.
Michael the Archangel, and of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin by ever
and equal Portions, Provided always, That if he the said R. C. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of any of them do and shall well and truly
pay or cause to be paid to them, the said C. R. and J. F. their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or to any of them all, and singular such Sum and
Sums of Money as they the said C. R. and J. F. or either of them heretofore have
lent or delivered to the said R. C. or to any other person or persons, to or
for his use by his consent and agreement, or at any time hereafter shall lend
or deliver, to or for the use of the said R. C. at his request, or by his
consent or agreement; And also all and singular such Sum and Sums of Money as be
or shall be mentioned in any Bill, Bond or Obligation, or any other Wirting
whatsoever, which they the said C. R. and J. F. or either of them heretofore
have made, or hereafter shall make Jointly with the said R. C. for his Debt or
at his request, Together with all such costs, charges, losses and damages
whatsoever, which they the said C. R. and J. F. or either of them, their or
either of their Executors or Administrators, shall bear or sustain, for or by
reason of any Sum or Sums of Money, Bills, Bonds or Obligations aforesaid, or
any of them, Provided also that if they the said C. R. and J. F. their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall be fully satisfied, contented and
paid all Sum and Sums of Money to them owing, by and from the said R. C. either
with the Rents, Issues and Profits of the Premises hereby demised, or by him
the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns or any of them, or any
other way howsoever; That then and from thenceforth this present Lease, Grant
and Demise, and every Matter, Clause and Covenant herein contained shall cease,
determine and be utterly void and of no effect, And that then and from
thenceforth he the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, into
the said demised Premises with the Appurtenances, shall and may lawfully
enter, and the same have again retain, repossess and enjoy, any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
H. and his Wife seized of Land, by Lease and Release and Recovery with single
Voucher, convey part to J. S. and other part to T. S.
THIS Indenture, etc. made, etc. Between T. H. of, etc. and M. his Wife of the
one part, J. S. Son of, etc. of the second part, and T. S. etc. of, the third
part witnesses, That the said T. H. and M. his Wife, for and in consideration
of 100 l. of lawful Money of England to them before the sealing and delivery
hereof, well and truly in hand paid, Have granted, released and confirmed, and
by these Presents do for them and their Heirs fully, clearly and absolutely
grant, release and confirm unto the said J.S. his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
all those 18 Acres of Land, etc. called M. and the reversion and reversions,
remainder and remainders thereof, and all rents, services and profits to the
said Premises or any part thereof incident or belonging, And all the Estate,
right, title, use, interest, inheritance, possession, reversion, claim and
demand whatsoever of them the said T. H. and M. his Wife, of in or to the said
Lands with the appurtenances thereof, of all which Premises hereby granted or
mentioned to be granted, the said J. S. is now in full Possession, by force and
virtue of a bargain and sale thereof to him made by the said T. H. and M. his
Wife for the term of any year, to commence from the (...) day of this instant
(...) by Indenture bearing date the day next before the day of the date hereof,
and by force and virtue of the Statute for transferring Uses, into Possession:
To have and to hold all the said Lands and Premises with the Appurtenances,
hereby granted and released, or mentioned to be granted and released unto the
said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns, To the only sole and proper use and be hoof
of the said J. S. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever: To be holden of the
Lord of the Manor of A. by the yearly Rent of 9 s. parcel of the yearly Rent
of 10 s. And the said T. H. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, covenant and grant to and with the said J. S. his Heirs and
Assigns, by these Presents, that he the said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns, shall
or or lawfully may from time to time, and at all times for ever, hereafter,
peaceably and quietly have hold, use, occupy, possess, enjoy and keep all the
said Lands and Premises with the Appurtenance; And the rents, issues and
profits thereof receive, have and take up, to and for his and their own proper
use and behoof, without any let, trouble, interruption or contradiction, of or
by the said T. H. and M. his Wife or either of them, their or either of their
Heirs or Assigns, And without any lawful let, trouble, interruption or
contradiction, of or by any other person or persons, having or lawfully
claiming, or which shall or may have, or lawfully claim any Estate, right,
title or interest, of, in or to the said Lands and Premises with the
Appurtenances or any part thereof, in, by, from or under the said T. H. and M.
his Wife or either of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns, And that
free, clear and clearly acquitted and discharged of and from all former and
other gifts, grants, bargains, sales, wills, entails, jointures, dowers and
titles of dower, leases, rents, rent charges, arrearages of rents, statutes,
recognizances, Judgments, debts, executions, extents, intrusions, issues, fees,
fines, post-fines, amercements, charges, titles, troubles, burdens, and
encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, done or suffered, or to be had,
made, committed or done by the said T. H. and M. his Wife, their Heirs or
Assigns, except one Indenture of Lease made the 4th day of October, in the 4th
year of the Reign of the King and Queen that now are whereby the said T. H. did
demise the Premises (with the other Lands herein after mentioned to be granted
to the said T. H.) unto R. F. from the Feast of St Michael the Archangel, last
past, for the term of 7 years, under the yearly rent of 6 l. 10 s. of which
rent it is agreed, that the said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns, shall or may from
time to time hereafter receive 5 l. 10 s. And the said T. H. does for himself,
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, further covenant and grant to and with
the said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns by these Presents, that he the said T. H.
and M. his Wife, and all and every other person and persons whatsoever, having
or lawfully claiming, or which shall or may have, or lawfully claim any Estate,
Right, Title or Interest, of, in or to the said Lands and Premises, or any
part thereof, in, by for, from or under the said T. H. and M. his Wife, or
either of them, shall and will from time to time, and at all times during the
space of 10 years next ensuing the date hereof, at the costs and charges of the
said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns, well and truly, further do, acknowledge,
suffer and execute, or cause to be done and executed, all and every such
further lawful and reasonable Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Device and
Devices, Conveyance and Assurance in the Law whatsoever, for the further,
better and more perfect assurance, surety and more sure making and conveying of
the said Lands and Premises, with the Appurtenances unto the said J. S. his
Heirs and Assigns, To the only sole and proper use and behoof of the said J. S.
and of his Heirs and Assigns forever, as by the said J. S. his Heirs or
Assigns, or by his or their Counsel learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
advised or devised and required: And this Indenture further witnesses, That
the said T. H. and M. his Wife, for and in consideration of 29 l. of lawful
Money of England, to them by the said T. S. before the sealing and delivery
hereof, well and truly in hand paid, Have granted, released and confirmed, and
by these Presents do for them and their Heirs, fully, clearly and absolutely
grant, release and confirm unto the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, all that
Toft or Ground on which a decayed House now stands or lately stood, and all
that Toft or Ground where a decayed Barn now stands or lately stood, with a
Gate-room thereunto adjoining; And also all those several parcels, containing
together by estimation two Acres in A. in the County of S. And also all ways,
easments and appurtenances thereof; Which said two Acres of Land are belonging
and adjoining, or near to the Tofts and Gate-room aforesaid, in the occupation
of the said R. F. and lying between A. on the South, the Lands heretofore of H.
B. and afterward of F. B. Widow, on the North, and are parcel of the aforesaid
Lands called M. and the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders
thereof, and all Rents, Services and Profits to the said Premises, or any part
thereof incident or belonging; and all the Estate, Right, Title, Use, Interest,
Inheritance, Possession, Reversion, Claim and Demand whatsoever, of them the
said T. H. and M. his Wife, of, in or to the said Tofts, Gate-room and two
Acres of Land with the appurtenances: Of all which premises hereby granted, or
mentioned to be granted, the said T. S. is now in full possession by force and
virtue of a Bargain and Sale thereof to him made by the said T. H. and M. his
Wife for the term of one year, to commence from the (...) day of this Instant
(...) by Indenture, bearing date the day next before the day of the date
hereof, and by force and virtue of the Statute for transferring Uses into
Possession, to have and to hold all the said Tofts, Gate-room and two Acres of
Land with the appurtenances hereby granted and released, or mentioned to be
granted and released, unto the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only
sole and proper use and behoof the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns for ever;
To be holden of the Lord of the Manor of A. by the yearly Rent of one
shilling, parcel of the yearly Rent of ten shillings. And the said T. H. does
for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators covenant and grant to and
with the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents, That he the said
T. S. his Heirs and Assigns shall or lawfully may from to time, tims, and at
all times for ever hereafter peaceably and quietly have hold, use, occupy,
possess, enjoy and keep all the said Tofts, Gate-room, two Acres of Land and
Premises with the Appurtenances thereof, and the Rents, Issues and Profits
thereof receive, have and use, to and for their own proper use and behoof,
without any let trouble, interruption or contradiction of, or by the said T.
H. and M. his Wife, or either of them, their or either of their Heirs or
Assigns; And without any lawful let, trouble, incorruption or contradiction of,
or by any other person or persons having or lawfully claiming, or which shall
or may have, or lawfully claim any Estate, Right, Title or Interest, of, in or
to the said Tofts, Gate-room and two Acres of Land with the appurtenances, or
any part thereof, in, by, for, from or under the said T. H. and M. his Wife or
either of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns; And that free, clear
and clearly acquitted and discharged of and from all former and other Gifts,
Grants, Bargains, Sales, Wills, Entails, Jointures, Dowers, and Titles of
Dower, Leases, Rents, Rent-charges, Arrearages of Rent, Statutes,
Recognizances, Judgments, Debts, Executions, Extents, Intrusions, Issues, Fees,
Fines, Post-fines, Amerceaments, Charges, Titles, Troubles Burdens and
Encumbrances whatsoever had, made, committed or done, or suffered, or to be
had, made, committed or done by the said T. H. and M. his Wife their Heirs and
Assigns, except the beforementioned Indenture of Lease made unto the said R. F.
under the said yearly Rent of 6 l. 10 s. of which it is agreed that the said T.
S. his Heirs and Assigns shall and may from time to time receive twenty
shillings for the proportionable Rent of the said premises conveyed to the
said T. S. And the said T. H. does further for himself, his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators covenant and grant to and with the said T. S. his Heirs and
Assigns by these presents, That he the said T. H. and M. his Wife, and all and
every other person and persons whatsoever, having or lawfully claiming, or
which shall or may claim any Estate, Right, Title or Interest of, in or to the
said Tofts, Gate-room and Premises, or any part thereof, in, for, from or
under the said T. H. and M. his Wife or either of them, shall and will from
time to time, and at all times during the space of ten years next ensuing the
date hereof, at the costs and charges of the said T. S. his Heirs or Assigns,
well and truly further do, or cause to be done and executed all and every such
further lawful and reasonable Act and Acts, Thing or Things, Devise and
Devises, Conveyance and Assurance in the Law whatsoever; for the further,
better and more perfect assurance, surety and more sure making and conveying of
the said Tofts, Gate-room and Premises with the appurtenances, unto the said
T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, To the only sole and proper use and behoof of the
said T. S. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever; As by the said T. S. his
Heirs and Assigns, or by his or their Counsel learned in the Law shall be
reasonably advised or devised and required. And this Indenture further
witnesses, That the said J. S. did pursue out of the Court of Chancery one
Writ of Entry sur disseisin en le post against the said T. H. and M. his Wife,
then Tenants of and to the Freehold of all the said Lands and Premises before
herein mentioned to be granted and released, returnable before the Justices of
the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, in the Term of St. Michael last past,
and thereby did demand against the said T. H. and M. all the aforesaid Lands
and Premises by the name of 20 Acres of Land with the appurtenances in A. Unto
which Writ the said T. A. and M. did appear gratis and vouch to Warranty
thereof the Common Vouchee of the said Court, who in like sort appeared and
imparled, and after made default, whereby a Common Recovery used for assurance
of Lands was thereupon recovered, executed and recorded. And this Indenture
further witnesses, and it is agreed and declared by all the parties to this
Indenture by these presents, That the said Recovery so as aforesaid, or in any
other Form had and executed, and the full force and execution thereof, and all
proceedings thereupon had, as for and concerning the said Lands and premises
before herein mentioned to be granted and released unto the said J. S. shall be
and enure, and shall for ever hereafter be deemed, esteemed, expounded,
construed, judged, reputed and taken to be and enure, to the only sole and
proper use and behoof of the said J. S. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever.
And this Indenture further witnesses, and it is further agreed and declared by
all the parties to this Indenture by these presents, That the said Recovery so
as aforesaid, or in any other Form had and executed, and the full force and
executi on thereof, and all proceedings thereupon had, as for and concerning
the said Tofts, Land and Premises before herein mentioned, to be granted and
released unto the said T. S. shall be and enure and shall for ever hereafter be
deemed, esteemed, expounded, construed, adjudged, reputed and taken to be and
enure to the only sole and proper use and behoof of the said T. S. and of his
Heirs and Assigns for ever. And the said J. S. does for himself, his Heirs and
Assigns covenant and grant to and with the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns by
these presents, That he the said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns shall and will
from time to time yearly for ever hereafter well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the Lord of the Manor of A. for the time being or his Assigns, the
aforesaid nine shillings, parcel of the aforesaid yearly Rent of ten shillings,
at such days and times as the said yearly Rent of ten shillings to the Lord of
the said Manor of A. for the time being or his Assigns ought to be paid: Or of
and from such nine shillings, parcel of the said yearly Rent of ten shillings,
shall at all times save and keep harmless the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns,
and the said Tofts and Premises to the said T. S. granted and released as
aforesaid. And the said T. S. does for himself, his Heirs and Assigns covenant
and grant to and with the said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents,
That he the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns shall and will from time to time
yearly for ever hereafter well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the Lord
of the Manor of A. for the time being or his Assigns, the aforesaid one
shilling, parcel of the said yearly Rent of ten shillings, at such days and
times as the said yearly Rent of ten shillings to the Lord of the said Manor
of A. for the time being or his Assigns ought to be paid; or of or from such
one shilling, parcel of the said yearly Rent of ten shillings, shall at all
times save and keep harmless the said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns, and the said
Lands and Premises to the said J. S. granted and released as aforesaid.

Two Joint-tenants in Fee, that they may be Tenants in Common, make a Feoffment
by Lease and Release of one Moiety to the use of the one, and of the other
Moiety to the use of the other.
THIS Indenture, etc. Between A. W. etc. and M. F. etc. of the one part, and J.
W. of, etc. of the other part witnesses, That the said A. and M. being
Joint-tenants in Feesimple of the Lands and Tenements herein after mentioned,
have agreed to become Tenants thereof in Common; and therefore for settling the
said Lands and Tenements in such manner as is herein after expressed, and for
and in consideration of five shillings of lawful Money of England to them by the
said J. W. before the ensealing and delivery hereof well and truly in hand
paid, and for diverse other good Causes and Considerations, the said A. and M.
have granted, released and confirmed, and by these presents do for them and
their Heirs, fully, clearly and absolutely grant, release and confirm unto the
said J. W. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all those Lands and Tenements,
commonly called or known by the name of, etc. or by whatsoever other name or
names the same or any part thereof is called or known, containing by
estimation, 28 Acres of Land, be it more or less, with the appurtenances (that
is to say) one Coppice or parcel of Wood-lands, containing by estimation 20
Acres, more or less, and also one parcel of Pastureland to the said Coppice
adjoining and belonging, containing by estimation 8 Acres, be it more or less,
together with all Woods, Underwoods, Timber and Trees standing and growing on
the said Lands and Premises; All which said Lands and Premises are situate,
lying and being in the Parish of G. in the said County of S. and adjoining to,
etc. and also all ways, passages, easments, waters, profits, commodities,
advantages, hereditaments and appurtenances whatsoever to the said Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, or any part or parcel thereof,
belonging or in any wise appertaining, and the reversion and reversions,
remainder and Remainders thereof, and all Rents, Services and Profits to the
said Premises, or any part thereof incident or belonging, and all the Estate,
Right, Title, Use, Interest, Inheritance, Possession, Reversion, Claim and
demand of them the said A. W. and M. F. of, in or to the said Premises: Of all
which Premises hereby granted or mentioned to be granted, the said J. W. is
now in full possession by force and virtue of a Bargain and Sale thereof to him
made by the said A. W. and M. F. for term of one year, to commence from the
11th day of this Instant July by Indenture, bearing date the day next before
the day of the date hereof, by force and virtue of the Statute for transferring
Uses into Possession, To have and to hold the Moiety or one half of the said
Lands, Tenements and Premises with the appurtenances hereby granted and
released, or mentioned to be granted and released unto the said J. W. his Heirs
and Assigns, to the only sole and proper use and behoof of the said A. W. and
of his Heirs and Assigns for ever: And also to have and to hold the other
Moiety or one half of all the said Lands, Tenements and Premises with the
appurtenances hereby granted and released, or mentioned to be granted and
released unto the said J. W. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only sole and proper
use and behoofof the said M. F. and of her Heirs and Assignsor ever. And the
said A. W. does for himself, his Heirs and Assigns covenant and grant to and
with the said J. W. his Heirs and Assigns by these Presents, That he the said
A. W. has not at any time wittingly or willingly committed, done or suffered
any Act or Thing whereby or wherewith the premises or any part thereof are or
is, or shall or may be impeached or imcumbred, in title, charge, estate or
otherwise howsoever. And the said M. F. does for her self, her Heirs and
Assigns covenant and grant to and with the said J. W. his Heirs and Assigns by
these presents, That she the said M. F. has not at any time wittingly or
willingly committed, done or suffered any Act or Thing, whereby or wherewith
the premises, or any part thereof are or is, or shall or may be impeached or
encumbered in Title, Charge, Estate, or otherwise whatsoever.

In witness, etc.
A Bargain and Sale of House and Land.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of the one part, and R. C. of the
other part witnesses, That the said J. F. for and in consideration of the sum
of, etc. to him in hand paid at and before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents by the said R. C. the receipt whereof he does hereby acknowledge, and
thereof by these presents does acquit and discharge the said R. C. his
Executors and Assigns, Has Given, Granted, Aliened, Bargained, Sold, Enfeoffed
and Confirmed: And by these Presents does fully, clearly and absolutely Give,
Grant, Bargain, Sell, Alien, Enfeoff and Confirm unto the said R. C. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, all that, etc. with all its rights, members and
appurtenances, together with all Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables,
Orchards, Gardens, Yards, Back-sides, Easments, Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Feedings, Pastures, Woods, Under-woods, Ways, Profits, Common of Pasture,
Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever to the said Message or Tenement and
Premises, or to any part or parcel thereof belonging, or in any wise
appertaining; All which said Message, Lands, etc. and every of their Rights,
Members and Appurtenances, before, in and by these Presents, mentioned, or
intended to be granted, are situate, lying and being within the Parish of B. in
the County of S. And now or late in the tenure or occupation of the said R. C.
or his Assigns; and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of
all and singular the beforementioned premises, and all Rent and Rents
reserved upon any grant or grants, demise or demises, made of the premises, or
of any part or parcel thereof; and also all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest,
Use, Possession, Property, Claim and Demand whatsoever of him the said J. F.
of, in or to the same; and all Deeds, Writings, Evidences, Charters,
transcripts of Fines, Court-rolls and Minuments whatsoever, touching or
concerning the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, To have and to hold
the said, etc. and all and singular other the premises hereby granted,
bargained and sold or mentioned or intended to be hereby bargained and sold,
with their and every of their Rights, Members and Appurtenances whatsoever,
unto the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of
the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And the said J. F. for himself
and his Heirs, the said Message, etc. and all and singular other premises,
before granted, bargained and sold with the appurtenances unto the saip R. C.
and his Heirs, to the only proper use and behoof of the said R. C. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, against him the said J. F. and all other person or
persons whatsoever lawfully claiming, by from or under him, them or any of them
shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by these presents. And the said J.
F. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators does covenant, promise,
grant and agree to and with the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of
them by these presents, in manner and form following, (that is to say) That he
the said J. F. at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents is
and until a good, pure, perfect and absolute Estate of Inheritance of all and
singular the before granted premises and every part thereof, shall be fully
rested, settled and executed in and upon the said R. C. and his Heirs, according
to the true meaning of these presents, shall remain, continue and be seized of,
and in the said Message, etc. and all and singular other the premises, in and
by these presents granted, bargained and sold, with all and every their Rights,
Members and appurtenances, of a good, pure, perfect and absolute Estate of
Inheritance in Feesimple, without any condition, reversion, remainder or
limitation of any Use or Uses, Estate or Estates, in or to any person or
persons whatsoever, to alter, change, defeat, determine or make void the same.
And that the said J. F. at the time of ensealing and delivery of these
presents, has full power good right and lawful authority to grant, bargain,
sell and convey all and singular the before hereby granted or mentioned to be
granted premises, with their and every of their appurtenances unto the said R.
C. his Heirs and Assigns in manner and form aforesaid. And that he the said R.
C his Heirs and Assigns and every of them shall and may by force and virtue of
these presents at all times hereafter lawfully, peaceably and quietly have,
hold, use, occupy and possess the said, etc. and all and singular the before
granted premises, with their and every of their Rights Members and
Appurtenances, and have, receive and take the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof
to his and their own proper use and behoof for ever, without any lawful let,
suit, trouble, denial, interruption, eviction or disturbance of the said J. F.
his Heirs or Assigns, or from any other person or persons whatsoever lawfully
claiming by, from or under him, them or any of them, or by his or their means,
act or consent, title, interest, privity or procurement: And that free and
clear, and freely and clearly exonerated and discharged, or otherwise from time
to time well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless by the said J. F. his
Heirs and Assigns of and from all and all manner of former and other Gifts,
Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Mortgages, Jointures, Dowers, Title of Dower,
Statutes-merchant and of the Staple, Recognizances, Extents, Judgments,
Executions, Uses, Entails, Rents and Arrearages of Rent, Forfeitures, Fines,
Issues and Amerceaments, and of and from all and singular other Titles,
Encumbrances and Demands whatsoever, had made, committed, suffered, committed
or done by the said J. F. or his Assigns, or by any other person or persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him, them or any of them (the
Rents and Services which from henceforth from time to time shall grow due and
payable to Chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the premises only
excepted and foreprized.) And further the said J. F. for himself, his Heirs
Executors and Administrators does covenant, promise and agree to and with the
said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns, That he the said J. F. his Heirs, etc. and
all and every other person and persons and their Heirs lawfully having or
claiming, or which shall hereafter lawfully have and claim any Estate, Right,
Title, Interest or Demand in, to or out of the Premises or any part thereof,
by, from or under the said J. F. his Heirs or Assigns, shall and will at all
times during the space of seven Years next ensuing the date hereof, at and upon
the reasonable request and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said R.
C. his Heirs or Assigns, make, do, perform, acknowledge, levy, execute and
suffer, or cause to be made, done, performed, acknowledged, levied, executed
and suffered all and every such farther lawful and reasonable Act and Acts,
Thing and Things, Devise and Devises, Assurance and Conveyance in the Law
whatsoever, for the farther, better and more perfect Assuring and Conveying of
all and singular the before hereby granted or mentioned to be granted
premises, with their and every of their rights, members and appurtenances,
unto the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns, be it by Fine or Fines, Feoffment or
Feoffments, Deed or Deeds enrolled or not enrolled, the Enrollment of these
Presents, Recovery or Recoveries, with single or double Voucher or Vouchers,
Release and Confirmation, or by all and every, or any the ways and means
aforesaid, or by any other ways or means whatsoever, as by the said R. C. his
Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their Counsel Learned in the Law, shall be
reasonably devised, advised or required; so as the said J. F. his, etc. or such
other person or persons who shall be required to make such farther Assurance,
be not compelled travel farther than the Cities of London and Westminster, or
either of them in or about the making thereof. And lastly, It is covenanted,
granted, concluded, condescended to and agreed by and between the said Parties
to these Presents, for them, their Heirs and Assigns, by these Presents, that
all Fines, Feoffments, Recoveries and Assurances in the Law whatsoever,
hereafter to be had, made, levied, acknowledged, suffered, or done by or
between the said Parties to these Presents or any of them, of, for, touching or
concerning the said, etc. and all the said singular other the hereby before
granted Premises, with their Rights, Members and Appurtenances, and every or
any part thereof, shall be and enure, and shall be construed, esteemed and
judged, and taken to be, and enure to the only proper use and behoof of the
said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns forever, and to no other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of an Annuity or Rent for years.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of, etc. of the one part, and R. C.
of, etc. of the other part witnesses, That the said J. F. for and in
consideration of the Sum of 100 l. of lawful Money of England, to him paid by
the said R. C. before the ensealing and delivery hereof, the receipt whereof he
does hereby acknowledge, and thereof does by these Presents for ever acquit and
discharge the said R. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, Has given,
granted and confirmed, and by these Presents does give, grant and confirm for
him and his Heirs unto the said R. C. his Executors and Assigns, one Annuity or
yearly Rentcharge of 40 l. of lawful Money of England, to be issuing and going
out of all those Lands, etc. with their and every of their Appurtenances in B.
in the County of C. To have and to hold, perceive, receive and take the said
Annuity or yearly Rentcharge of, etc. unto the said R. C. his Executors and
Assigns, from the day of the date of these Presents, for and during the full
term of 20 years now next ensuing, and fully to by complete and ended, To be
paid at the four most usual Feasts or Terms in the year; That is to say, at
the Feast of, etc. by even and equal Portions, And the said J. F. for himself
his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and for every of them does covenant, promise
and grant, to and with the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns, that if the said
yearly Rent of, etc. shall happen to be behind and unpaid in part or in all,
for the space of 10 days after any of the days before limited for the payment
thereof, being lawfully demanded, That then he the said J. F. his, etc. shall
forfeit and pay to the said R. C. his Executors or Assigns, the Sum of 40 s.
for every failure of payments of the said Annuity or Rent charge on the said
days before appointed for the payment of the same; And also that it shall and
may be lawful, to and for the said R. C. his Executors and Assigns, from time
to time from and after the said Feast days appointed for payment of the said
Annuity or Rentcharge if the same be not then paid, to enter into and upon
the, etc. and distrain as well for the said yearly Rents, as for the said Sum
of Sums of Money which shall happen to be forfeited in manner and from
aforesaid, And the said J. F. for himself his, etc. does covenant, promise and
agree, to and with the said R. C. his Executors and Assigns, that he the said
J. F. at the time of the enseaing and delivery of these Presents, is solely,
rightfully and absolutely seized in his Demesne as of Fee to his own proper use
and behoof, without any manner of consideration, limitation of any use or uses
to alter, change or determine the same, of and in the said, etc. and all other
the premises abovenamed with their Appurtenances, and of every part and parcel
thereof; And that he now has full Power and lawful Authority, to charge all
the said Premises with the Appurtenances and every part thereof with the said
Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc. in manner and form aforesaid, and also that the
said, etc. and all other the Premises now are, and at all times during the
said 20 years, shall remain, continue and be liable, (if the said R. C. shall
so long live) to the distress and distresses of the said R. C. his Executors or
Assigns, as the case shall require, for and concerning the said yearly Rent or
Penalties in these Presents before mentioned, And the said J. F. for himself,
etc. That he the said J. F. his Executors or Assigns, shall and will from time
to time, and at all times during the space or 4 years next ensuing the date
hereof, at the reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of
the said R. C. his Executors or Assigns, make, acknowledge and do, or cause to
be made, acknowledged and done, all and every such further, reasonable and
lawful act and acts, thing and things, device and devices in the Law
whatsoever, for the farther, more perfect and better assurance and conveyance
of the said Annuity or yearly Rentcharge of, etc. to the said R. C. his
Executors or Assigns, for and during the said Term of 20 years, if the said R.
C. do so long live, according to the true intent and meaning of these Presents,
as by the said R. C. his Executors or Assigns, or his their Counsel learned in
the Law shall be reasonably, devised, advised, or required;

In witness whereof the said J. F. has given and delivered unto the said R. C.
5 s. of lawful Money of England, in the name of seizin of the aforesaid Annuity
or yearly Rentcharge of, etc. before mentioned; And also he the said J. F. and
R. C. have hereto interchargably set their Hand and Seals, the day and year
first above witten.
A Conveyance of Land to use of a Man's Heirs, the Profits during their Minority
to pay Debts.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between J. F. of the one part, and R. C. C. R. and
D. C. of the other part witnesses, That the said J. F. for and in
consideration of the love and affection which he bears toward A B. and his
three Sons, and for the advancement of the Heirs Male of the Body of the said
J. F. lawfully to be begotten, and for diverse other considerations herein
mentioned, Has given, granted, enfeoffed and confirmed, And by these Presents
does give, grant, enfeoff and confirm unto the said R. C. C. R. and D. C. all
those Lands, etc. with all and singular liberties courts, fairs, commodities,
privileges, jurisdictions, emoluments and appurtenances whatsoever, to or with
the said, etc. used or enjoyed, in or out of the same, or out of any part or
parcel thereof; To have and to hold the said, etc. unto the said R. C. C. R.
and D. C. and their Heirs for ever, to the use and behoof of the said J. F. for
the term of his natural life, without impeachment of wast, and from and after
the decease of the said J. F. and during the time that the said A. Son and Heir
apparent of the said J. F. or any other being the Heir of the said J. F. shall
be under the Age of 21 years, and until some Heirs of the said J. F. shall have
accomplished the full Age of 21 years, to the use of the said R. C. C. R. and
D. C. and the Survivor and Survivors of them, and the Executors and
Administrators of the Survivor of them, upon trust and to the intent and
purpose that the said R. C. and D. and the Survivors or Survivor of them, and
the Executors and Administrators of the Survivor of them, shall take, levy,
possess, use and enjoy the Rents, Issues, Profits, Revenues and Commodity of
all and singular the said, etc. with the appurtenances, and the same employ
during the minority or minorities as is aforesaid, for and toward the
performance, payment and satisfaction of all the Legacies, Bequests and
Annuities and Debts of the said J. F. to be mentioned and specified in the last
Will and Testament of the said J. F. And to the use and intent, that the said
Feoffees and the Survivors and Survivor of them, their or his Executors and
Assigns, shall with the Issues, Profits, Revenues and Rents, coming, growing
and arising out of, and from the said, etc. with the appurtenances, expend,
disburse and bestow at all times such necessary charges in the Law and
otherwise for the defense and maintenance of the Possession and Title of all
and singular the Premises, and every or any part thereof, and for the
reparation and amendment of all Buildings, etc. in, upon or belonging to the
Premises aforesaid, until such time as the said Legacies, etc. to be mentioned
in the said Testament of the said J. F. as aforesaid, shall be paid and
performed, and until some Heir of the said J. F. shall have attained to the Age
of 21 years; And to the use and intent, that after such Legacies, etc. paid and
performed, the said Feoffees shall stand and be seized of the overplus, of such
Rents, Issues, etc. to the only use and benefit of the Heirs of the said J. F.
And after the Heirs of the said J. F. shall accomplish their full Ages of 21
years, That then the said R. C. and D. and their Heirs shall stand and be
seized of all and singular the said, etc. to A. F. and the Heirs Male of his
Body lawfully begotten; And for default of such Heirs Male of the Body of the
said A. F. lawfully begotten, to the use and behoof of the said B.F. second Son
of the said J. F. and the Heirs Male of his Body lawfully begotten; And for
default of such Heirs Male of the Body of the said B. F. lawfully begotten, to
the use and behoof of the Heirs Male of the Body of C. F. third Son of the said
J. F. and in default of such Heirs Male of the Body of the said C. F. lawfully
begotten, to the use of the Heirs of the Body of the said J. F. and for default
of such Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the said A. for ever: Provided
always, and it is the true meaning, use and intent of these Presents, That if
the said J. F. hereafter at any time during his Life time, shall demise, grant
or lease the said, etc. or any part or parcel thereof, by his Deed indented
under his Seal, and with his Subscription of his Name, with his own Hand, for
term of year or years, life or lives; That then and immediately after any such
Demise, Lease or Grant so to to be made by the said J. F. the said R. C. and D.
shall stand and be seized, of, and in the said Manor, etc. so to be leased or
granted, to the use and behoof of the same Lessees or Grantees, and every of
them, and of their several Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, during the
Terms mentioned in such several Leases or Grants so to be made, So that the
yearly Rent or Rents, mentioned or reserved by the said J. F. in such Leases,
Demises or Grants, be yearly paid unto the said J. F. during his life, and
after his decease to such person or persons, as by the proper and true meaning
of these Presents, ought to have the reversion or remainder, reversions or
remainders of the said Lands, etc. so to be leased or granted, (A Letter of
Attorney to deliver seizin to the Fe-offees,) Provided always, that if the said
J. F. by his Writing signed and sealed in the presence of three witnesses,
shall repeal, revoke or determine, all or any the uses aforesaid or any part
thereof, that then, and from thenceforth the said uses so to be repealed shall
be void and of no effect, and that then the said Feoffees shall thereof stand
seized to the only use of the said J. F. and his Heirs for ever.

In witness, etc.
J. F. being seized in Fee, Convenants to levy a Fine to the use of himself for
Life, and his Wife for Life, with Entail to his first, second or third Son, and
in default of Issue Male, to his right Heirs.
THIS Indenture Tripartite made, etc. Between J. F. and R. his Wife of the
first part, R. C. and C. R. of the second part, and P. F. Son and Heir apparent
of the said J. F. of the third part witnesses, That the said J. F. for and in
Consideration of the natural love and affection, which he bears unto the said
P. F. and for the better settling of the Message, etc. hereafter mentioned to
such uses, intents and purposes as are hereafter specified, and the continuance
of the said Premises, in the Name and Blood of the said J. F. does for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, Covenant, Grant and Agree, to
and with the said P. F. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators by these
Presents, that he the said J. F. and R. his Wife on this side, and before the
Feast of, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, shall and will at his proper costs
and charges, by such Fine or Fines with Proclamations to be had and levied in
due form of Law, as shall be devised or advised by the said P. F. or his
Counsel learned in the Law, convey and assure unto the said R. C. and C. R. and
to the Heirs of one of them, all and singular, etc.

And it is covenanted, condescended unto, concluded, declared and agreed by and
between the said Parties to these Presents, that the said Fine or Fines so to
be levied, and had of the said Message, etc. and other the Premises with the
Appurtenances, before in these Presents mentioned and of every or any part or
parcel thereof, and the Estate, Right, Title, Interest and Possession of them,
the said R. C. and C. R. and either of them and of their and either of their
Heirs, of, in and to the said Premises, and every part thereof, thereby to be
had, shall be, and the said R. C. and C. R. and their Heirs and the Survivor of
them and his Heirs, and all, and every other person and persons, his and their
Heirs, that shall stand or be seized thereof, or of any part thereof, shall
stand and be seized of the same, and of every part and parcel thereof, to the
several uses, intents, agreements, limitations and payments, and under the
provisoes and conditions hereafter, in and by these Presents expressed,
mentioned and declared, and to no other use or uses, intent or purposes
whatsoever; That is to say, to the only use and behoof of the said J. F. for
and during the Term of his natural Life, without impeachment of wast; And from
and after his decease, to the use and behoof of the said R. F. his Wife, for
and during the term of her natural Life, And from and after the decease of the
said J. F. and R. F. to the use and behoof of the said P. F. and of the Heirs
Male of his Body, lawfully begotten or to be begotten, To be charged
nevertheless, and chargeable with such yearly Rent or Rents, and distresses for
the same, as shall be hereafter in these Presents Limited or expressed, And for
want of such Issue to C. F. second Son of the said J. F. and of the Heirs,
Males of the Body of the said C. F. lawfully begotten or to be begotten,
charged nevertheless and chargeable as aforesaid, And for want of such Issue,
to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said J. F. for ever.

Provided always, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said J. F. at
any time or times hereafter, during his natural Life, by his Deed or Deeds in
his life time lawfully executed, to assure, appoint, limit and convey to any
lawful Wife or Wives, which the said J. F. shall hereafter fortune to marry,
(in case he Survive the said R. F.) for term of the life only of such Wife or
Wives, for or in the name of the Jointure or Jointures of such Wife or Wives,
one full third part or less, or so much as shall amount to a third part of all
the said, etc. And also, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said J.
F. during the term of his natural Life, by any Deed or Deeds in Writing under
his Hand and Seal or otherwise, by his last Will and Testament in Writing, to
grant, assure, limit, devise and convey, to every or any the younger Sons of
the said J. F. of his Body lawfully begotten or to be begotten, for term of the
Life or Lives of such younger Son or Sons, such yearly Rentcharge or
Rent-charges, with a Clause of distress for every such Rent, as by the said J.
F. shall be thought meet and convenient, to be yearly issuing and going out of
all and every the said, etc. or any part thereof, from and after the decease of
the Survivor of them the said J. F. and R. F. so that the said Rent or Rents so
to be granted, limited or devised as aforesaid, do not exceed the Sum of 50 l.
per An. in the whole.

And further, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said J. F. at any
time or times during his natural Life to make any Lease or Leases, unto every
or any of his younger Son or Sons, for the term of One and twenty years or
under, in possession or reversion, of all or any the said, etc. whereof the
said Fine or Fines before mentioned, is covenanted to be levied by the said J.
F. or any part or parcel thereof, (the said Lease or Leases to commence
immediately, from and after the decease of the Survivor of them, the said J. F.
and R. F. his Wife,) charged and chargeable nevertheless with such Rent and
Rents, Sum and Sums of Money or Payments, as before or after in these Presents
are appointed, declared or limited to be had, levied or issuing out of the
Premises or any part thereof, in such sort as in these Presents is mentioned
and declared, so that the same Lands, etc. so to be demised and leased to any
of the said younger Sons, do not exceed in the whole the yearly value of, etc.
per annum, over and above the Rent or Rents reserved upon such Lease or Leases,
and so as upon every such Lease and Leases so to be had as aforesaid, the old
and accustomed yearly Rents and Services, be reserved to be yearly payable and
done during the continuance of every such Lease and Leases, at the days and
times formerly used, And so that the same Lease and Leases or any of them to be
made as aforesaid, be not without impeachment of Wast.

And it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, by and between the said
Parties to these Presents, that the said Fine and Fines so to be levied and had
as aforesaid, shall be and enure, and that the said R. C. and C. R. and their
Heirs and the Survivor of them and his Heirs, shall stand and be seized of all
such Lands, etc. which shall by virtue of these Presents, be limited or
appointed to be charged with any Rent or Rents, Sum or Sums of Money or
Payments, to any person or persons, or which shall hereafter be granted,
leased, demised or charged according to the intent or true meaning of these
presents, and according to the power, liberty and authority hereby given,
permited and allowed, as well to the use of such person or persons, to whom any
parcel of the Premises in these Presents mentioned, shall be hereafter so
limited, appointed, demised leased, granted and conveied, of such Estate and
Estates, and for such term and time as the same shall be pursuant to the said
Authority hereby given to be limited, appointed, leased or conveied, and under
the covenants, charges, conditions and agreements in such Lease or Leases, Deed
or Deeds to be contained; As also to the use and intent, that to every person
and persons, to whom any Rent, yearly Sum or Payment shall be hereafter
granted, limited, appointed or devised, according to the true intent and
meaning of these Presents, and according to the power, liberty and authority,
allowed and given in and by these Presents, shall and may have, receive, levy
and take the same, and likewise distrain for such Rents, Sum and Sums of Money,
as shall fortune to be behind and unpaid, according to the intent and true
meaning of these Presents, and of the several grant or grants, limitation or
limitations, device or devices, appointment or appointments, of, for or
concerning the same to be had or made, pursuant to the power and authority
hereby given as aforesaid.

A Declaration of the Uses of a Recovery and Fine already past, viz. To the use
of J. F. and of R. F. his Wife for Life, in lieu of a Jointure, and to the use
of a Trustee for ten years, to pay Debts and Legacies, and afterward to the use
of the Right Heirs of J. F. in Fee.
THIS Indenture Tripartite, etc. Between J. F. of the first part, R. F. of the
second part, and R. C. and C. R. of the third part; Whereas the said R. C. and
C. R. in Trinity Term last, did by Writ of Entry sur disseizin en le post,
Recover against the said F. J. all, etc. [as in the Recovery] as in and by the
said Recovery, remaining of Record in his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, relation being thereunto had, more fully and at large it does
appear. And whereas, etc. (recite the Fine if any be) Now this Indenture
witnesses, That the true intent and meaning of the said J. F. and of the said
Recoverors and parties to the said Recovery, and of the Cognizees of the said
Fine, and parties to the said Fine, before and at the several and respective
time and times of the suffering of the said Recovery, and acknowedging and
levying of the said Fine for, touching and concerning the said, etc. and
premises, whereof the said Recovery and Fine were severally and respectively
suffered and acknowledged as aforesaid, always was and yet is, that as well the
said Recovery as the said Fine, and all and every Fine and Fines, Recovery and
Recoveries and other Acts and Assurances of and concerning the said, etc. with
the appurtenances, or of any of them at any time formerly suffered, levied,
executed or had, wherein or whereunto the said J. F. was or is any way a party,
and all and every the Executions of the same, should and shall be and enure,
and be construed, adjudged, deemed and taken to be and enure, and are hereby
covenanted, granted, agreed and declared to be and enure to the uses, purposes
and intents, and under the Proviso's, Conditions and Limitations hereafter in
these Presents expressed, limited and declared: And that the said Recoverers,
and either of them, and all the parties in the said Recovery and takers
thereby, and their Heirs, and all other person and persons, and his and their
Heirs who now are, or then were, or hereafter shall be seized of the said etc.
with their and every of their appurtenances comprised in the said Recovery
should and shall stand and be seized of the said, etc. comprised in the said
Recovery, and of every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, to the
uses, purposes and intents hereafter expressed. And that the said Cognizees of
the said Fine, and either of them, and all the parties to the said Fine, and
the takers thereby, and the Heirs of them, and every of them, and all and every
other person and persons and his and their Heirs who at the time of the levying
of the said Fine were, or now are, or hereafter shall be seized of the
aforesaid, etc. comprised in the said Fine, and every of them should and shall
stand and be seized of the same etc. comprised in the said Fine, and every part
and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, to the uses, purposes and intents
hereafter in these presents expressed and declared, (that is to say) for,
touching and concerning the said, etc. with the appurtenances, comprised in the
said Recovery, to the use and behoof of the said J. F. and his Assigns, for and
during the term of his Natural Life, without impeachment of waste; and from and
after the decease of the said J. F. to the use and behoof of R. F. now Wife of
the said J. F. for and during the Natural Life of the said R. F. for her
Jointure, and in lieu and full recompense of her Dower, out of all the Lands,
etc. whereof the said J. F. now, is or at any time was or shall be seized of
any Estate of Inheritance, during the Coverture between him and the said R. F.
and for, touching and concerning all and every the other, etc. mentioned and
comprised in the said Recovery and Fine, to the use and behoof of the said J.
F. for and during the term of his Natural Life, without impeachment of waste.
And for, touching and concerning the immediate Remainder of the said, etc.
beforementioned, or meant to be limited to the said R. F. for her Jointure as
aforesaid, immeditately from and after the decease of the said, J. F. and R. F.
his Wife, and of the Survivor of them, and the immediate Remainder of all and
every the other, etc. and every of them, comprised within the said Recovery and
Fine (whereof there is no use before limited or declared to the said R. F. for
her Jointure) to such uses, purposes and intents (immediately from and after
the decease of the said J. F.) and under such Proviso's Conditions and
Limitations as hereafter in these presents are specified, expressed, limited
and declared, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, (that is to
say) to the use of the said R. C. and C. R. their Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, for and during the terms and, spaces of years herein after
mentioned, to commence and begin as hereafter follows, viz. For, touching and
concerning the said, etc. before limited to the said R. F. for her Jointure,
for the term or space of ten years, to begin immediately from and after the
death of the longest liver of them the said J. F. and R. F. his Wife: And for,
touching and concerning all the rest and residue of the said, etc. comprised in
the said Recovery and Fine, for and during the like term and space of ten
years, to commence imediately from and after the decease of the said J. F. upon
trust and confidence, and for and unto the end, intent and purpose, that they
the said R. C. and C. R. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns shall and
may receive, perceive, dispose and employ the Rents, Revenues, Issues and
Profits of all and every the said, etc. for and during the said several terms
of ten years, for and toward the payment and satisfaction of all such Debts
and Sums of Money which he the said J. F. does now owe, or shall hereafter
borrow or owe, or for which any person or persons now does or do, or hereafter
shall stand engaged for or with the said J. F. and for his proper Debt, and for
and toward the payment of such Legacy or Legacies, and Sums which the said J.
F. shall by his last Will and Testament in writing, to be by him signed, sealed
and published before three sufficient Witnesses at the least, give, limit,
ordain and appoint. And from and after the end, expiration, surrender or other
determination of the said term or terms of ten year; And as they shall
severally end and determine, to the use and behoof of such person and persons,
and for such Estate and Estates as the said J. F. shall by his last Will and
Testament in Writing, in the presence of three Credible Witnesses or more,
limit, appoint and declare; and in default of such limitation, appointment or
declaration, to the use and behoof of, etc. Provided always, etc.

(here may follow a power in J. F. to make Leases, etc. reserving the
accustomed Rent,) etc.

J. F. being a Tenant in Fee and by Courtesy of Lands, etc. the Reversion of
part thereof to P. F. his Son. J. F. and P. covenant to levy a Fine and
Recovery to the use of himself and Son for Life, with diverse Limitations in
Tail, and power in P. F. to make Leases for Portions for his Daughters, and
also 1500 l. to be paid to S. F. the second Son of J. F. etc.
THIS. Indenture Tripartite made, etc. between J. F. of, etc. and P. F. Son and
Heir Apparent of the said J. F. and R. F. deceased, late Wife of the said J. F.
and sole Daughter and Heir of E. D. of, etc. deceased, of the first part, R. C.
and C. R. of the second part, and C. D. and J. V. of the third part; Whereas
the said J. F. is seized in his Demesne as of Fee of some part of the Manor,
Lands, etc. hereafter mentioned, and is also seized for term of his Life as
Tenant by the Courtesy of England, of other the Manors, Messuages, etc.
hereafter specified, the Reversion whereof in Feesimple being descended by and
after the decease of the said R. F. unto the said P. F. Now to the intent and
purpose that the Manors, etc. hereafter mentioned and expressed, may be
established, vested and settled in and unto the said J. F. during the term of
him Natural life, and after his decease, upon the said P. F. and upon his Name,
Stock and Posterity, and to such other uses as are hereby appointed. It is
covenanted, condescended, concluded and fully agreed by and between the said
parties to these presents, And the said J. F. and P. F. do for themselves their
Heirs, Executors and Administrators covenant, promise, grant and agree to and
with the said R. C. and C. R. their, Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and
to and with every of them by these presents, That they the said J. F. and P. F.
shall and will on this side and before the end of Hillary Term now next
ensuing, in due form of Law, by one Fine with Proclamation, to be levied before
the Justices of our Sovereign Lord, etc. of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas
at Westminster, between the said D. C. and J. V. Plaintiffs, and the said J. F.
and P. F. Deforceants, recognize and acknowledge all those Manors of A. B. C.
and D. with the appurtenances, lying and being in B. in the County of S. in
which the said J. F. and P. F. or either of them have, or heretofore had any
Estate of Inheritance in possession or reversion, or remainder, with all and
singular the appurtenances thereof, by some name or names, etc. in the said
Fine to be contained, to be the right of the said D. C. as those which they the
said D. C. and J. V. have of the gift of the said J. F. and P. F. and the same
shall thereby remise and quit claim from the said J. F. and P. and theirs
Heirs, to the said D. C. and J. V. and to the Heirs of the said D. C. for ever.
And moreover shall by the s^id Fine, warrant the said Manors, etc. with the
Appurtenances, unto the said D. C. and J. V. and the Heirs of the said D. C.
against them the said J. F. and P. F. and their Heirs for ever. Which said Fine
or Fines so as aforesaid, or in any other sort to be levied and acknowledged,
shall be and enure, and shall be deemed, adjudged, esteemed, reputed and taken
to be and enure to the use of the said D. C. and J. V. and their Heirs, to the
end, intent and purpose, that they the said D. C. and J. V. may become perfect
Tenants of the Freehold of the said Manors, etc. whereby one or more perfect
Common Recovery or Recoveries shall or may thereof be had and suffered in
manner and form hereafter following. For which intent and purpose it is
covenanted and agreed by and between the said parties to these presents. That
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. C. and C. R. to bring, pursue
and prosecute against them the said D. C. and J. V. one or more Writ or Writs
of Entry sur disseizin en le post, of and for the said Manors, etc. with their
and every of their Appurtenances, whereby the said R. C. and C. R. shall demand
the, etc. against them the said D. C. and J. V. to which Writ the said D. C.
and J. V. shall appear personally or by Attorney, and after defense made shall
vouch to Warranty the said J. F. and P. F. who shall likewise appear and enter
into the Warranty, and vouch over the Common Vouchee, who shall likewise appear
and enter into the Warranty, and after make default, to the end that a perfect
Common Recovery, with double Voucher may be had and executed according to the
course of Common Recoveries to be had and executed of the, etc. with the
Appurtenances; which said Recovery so as aforesaid, or in any other manner to
be had, and all other Common Recoveries, Fines, Feoffments, Conveyances and
Assurances in the Law whatsoever, since the decease of the said R. F. had,
made, levied, suffered, acknowledged or executed, or to be had, made, levied,
suffered, acknowledged or executed by or between the said parties to these
presents, or any of them, or whereunto they or any of them shall be parties,
of, for and concerning the said, etc. or any of them, or any part or parcel of
them shall be and enure, and shall be adjudged, deemed, reputed to be and enure
to the uses, behoofs, intents and purposes, and with, upon and under such
Proviso's, Conditions, Powers and Limitations as are hereafter on and by these
presents mentioned, declared, limited and appointed, (that is to say) for and
concerning the said Manor of A. and B. etc. (with the general words) to the
said P. F. for and during the Term of his Natural Life, without impeachment of
or for any manner of waste, and with full power to do or commit waste. And for
and after the decease of the said P. E. to the use and behoof of the said J. F.
for and during the Term of his Natural Life. And from and after the decease of
the said J. F. and P. F. to the use and behoof of C. F. eldest Son of the said
P. F. and of the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully to be begotten, and for
default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of D. F. second Son of the said P.
F. and of the Heirs Male of the Body of the said D. F. lawfully to be begotten,
etc. (to the tenth Son) and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of
all and every other the Sons of the said P. F. lawfully to be begotten
successively one after the other, and of the Heirs Male of the Body of every
such Son or Sons, severally and respectively to be begotten, as they and every
of them shall be in Seigniority of Age and Priority of Birth; the eldest of the
said Sons, and the Heirs Male of his Body, being ever preferred before the
younger of the said Sons, and the Heirs Male of the Body of the said S. F.
lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof
of the Heirs of the Body of the said J. F. lawfully begotten and to be
begotten, and for the want of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the right
Heirs of the said J. F. for ever. And as for and concerning the said Manor of,
etc. to the use and behoof of the said R. C. and C. R. and of their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, upon trust and confidence nevertheless, and to the end,
intent and purpose, that they the said R. C. and C. R. and the Survivor of them
and his Heirs, shall and will sell, convey and assure the said Manor, etc.
with the Rights, Members and Appurtenances thereunto belonging and every part
thereof, late the Inheritance of the said R. F. deceased, for the best benefit,
profit and advantage which shall or may be bona fide had or gotten for the
same. And that the Money to be raised by every such Sale, and as every such Sale
shall be made, shall be forthwith paid and disposed of by the said R. C. and C.
R. and the Survivor of them and his Heirs as follows, (that is to say) so
much Money thereof to the said J. F. his Executors or Administrators, as
according to the true yearly value of the said Manor and Lands, shall come to
seven years purchase: And for the residue of the Money to be raised by such Sale
as aforesaid, shall be disposed of, for and toward the payment of the Debts of
the said P. F. and Sums of Money mentioned in the Schedule hereunto annexed: And
for and toward the payment of such Legacies as the said P. F. shall by his last
Will and Testament devise and bequeath if any Overplus remain after the said
Debts are fully satisfied and paid: And in default of such Devise or Bequest,
to the Executors or Administrators of the said P. F. and upon further Trust and
Confidence that the said J. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall
and may have, receive and take to his own proper use and behoof all and
singular the Rents, Issues, Revenues and Profits of the said Manor, etc.
hereby limited and intended to be sold, until such sale shall be made thereof
as aforesaid. Provided always, and it is the true intent and meaning of these
Presents. That if the said C. F. eldest Son of the said P. F. or such other
person or persons to whom any Estate is hereby limited or intended to be
limited, of and in the said Manors of A. and B. his, their or some of their
Heirs or Assigns, shall not within three years next after the decease of the
said A. F. and P. F. or the Survivor of them, well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the said S. F. second Son of the said J.F. (if he the said S. F.
shall and do so long live) the sum of 1500 l. of lawful Money of England, That
then and immediately after such default of payment, and all and every the use
and uses herein before declared and limited as for and concerning the said
Manors of A. and B. shall cease and be void: And then also and from
thenceforth the said Recovery so as aforesaid, or in any other sort to be had
and suffered, and the Recoveror and Recoverors therein named, his and their
Heirs shall stand and be seized in and of all and singular the said, etc. to
the use and behoof of the said S. F. his Heirs and Assigns, until he or they
shall or may out of the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof have fully levied and
received the said sum of 1500 l. together with lawful Interest for the same at
the rate of six pounds by the year, for every hundred pound for the forbearing
thereof, from the end of the said three years, next ensuing the deaths of the
said J. F. and P. F. or the Survivor of them; and all Damages, Costs and
Charges which he the said S. F. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators shall
sustain or be put unto in or about the recovering and obtaining of the said
Money, or in and about any Suit concerning the same. And from after such time as
the said S. F. his Heirs or Assigns shall, or without fraud or covin might have
received the said 1500 l. together with all Interest due for the same as
aforesaid, together with all charges, expenses and damages as aforesaid,
touching or any wise concerning the same, out of the Rents, Issues and Profits
of the said Manors, etc. That then and from thenceforth the said Recoveries
shall be and enure, as to the said Manors of, etc. And the Recoveror and
Recoverors therein to be named, his and their Heirs and Assigns shall stand and
be seized thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, to the use of such
person and persons, and of such Estate and Estates to whom the said Manors
ought to have come and be remaining by the true intent and meaning of these
presents, in case the said last mentioned Proviso, for, touching or concerning
the said S. F. or any matter or thing therein contained had never been. And it
is further convenanted, granted, concluded, declared and fully agreed by and
between all the said parties to these present Indentures for them and their
Heirs respectively: And the true intent and meaning of these presents, and of
all the parties thereunto is, That as to, for, touching and concerning the said
Manor of D. late part of the Inheritance of the said R. F. with the Rights,
Members, Appurtenances, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments therennto belonging;
The said Recovery so as aforesaid, or in any other manner to be had and
suffered. And all other Recoveries, Conveyances, Fines, Feoffments and
Assurances in the Law whatsoever, since the death of the said R. F. late Wife
of the said J. F. had made levied, suffered, acknowledged or executed, or to be
had, made, levied, suffered or executed by or between the said parties to these
presents or any of them, or whereto they or any of them shall be parties of,
for or concerning the said Manor of D. or part or parcel thereof, either
solely or together, with other the said Manors, etc. or any of them, shall be
and enure, and shall be adjudged, deemed, esteemed, reputed and taken to be and
enure, to the uses, behoofs intents and purposes, as to the said Manor of D.
with the Rights, Members and Appurtenances thereof, and with, upon and under
such Proviso's, Conditions, Powers, and Limitations as are hereafter in and by
these presents mentioned and declared, (that is to say) to the use and behoof
of the said P. F. and his Assigns, for and during the term of his Natural Life,
without impeachment of waste, and from and after his decease, to the use and
behoof of A. F. his Wife, for and during the term of her Natural Life: And from
and after the decease of the Survivor of them the said P. F. and A. F. his Wife
to the use and behoof of the said J. F. for and during the term of his Natural
Life: And from and after the decease of the said J. F. to the use of, etc.
Provided always, and the true intent and meaning of these presents is, That it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said P. F. at any time or times after
the decease of the said A. F. in case he shall happen to survive her, during
his Natural Life by his Deed or Deeds indented by him, duly executed in the
presence of two or more Credible Witnesses, to make one or more Lease or Leases
for one two or three Lives, or one and twenty years or under, of the said
Manor of D. or any part thereof, under such Rent, Rents, Reservations and
Covenants as he shall think fit, to any person or persons whatsoever, upon
Trust for the raising of the several portions herein after mentioned, for such
Daughter or Daughters as the said P. F. shall happen to have, and not otherwise
provided for, (that is to say) if one Daughter, then for the raising of one
thousand pounds for that Daughter, and if more Daughters, then for the raising
of five hundred pounds apiece for each and every of the said Daughters, to be
paid them at their several and respective ages of one and twenty years or days
of Marriage, which shall first happen. And that all and every such Lease and
Leases, Demise and Demises, Grant or Grants to be made as aforesaid, shall
stand and be good and effectual in the Law to all intents and purposes: And the
said Recovery so as aforesaid, or in any other manner to be had and suffered
shall be and enure, and the Recoveror or Recoverors therein named or to be
named, his and their Heirs shall stand and be seized of and in so much of the
said Manor of D. as shall be so Demised or Leased, to the use of such person
or persons, his and their Executors, Administrators and Assigns to whom such
Demise or Demises, Lease or Leases, Grant or Grants shall be made as aforesaid.
In, etc.

A way to preserve Contingent Uses in case the particular Estate determine
before they come in esse.
THIS Indenture Tripartite be ween B. A. of the first part, R. C. and C. R. of
the second part, and J. F. and F. J. of the third part witnesses, That it is
covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, etc. (insert a Covenant for B. A. to
levy a Fine to J. F. and F. J.) And it is covenanted granted, condescended,
agreed and declared by and between all the said parties to these presents, That
the said Fine or Fines, and all other Fine or Fines hereafter to be had and
levied by and between the said parties to these presents, or any of them, of
the said Manor and Premises, or any part thereof are meant and intended to
be, and immediately from and after the acknowledging and levying of the said
Fine or Fines shall be taken, judged and construed to be and enure to the
several uses, trusts and purposes, hereafter mentioned (that is to say) to the
use and behoof of the said B. A. and his Assigns, for and during the term of
his Natural Life: And from and after the determination of the Estate of the
said B. A. to the use and behoof of the said R. C. and C. R. and their Heirs,
for and during the Natural Life of the said B. A. to the end, intent and
purpose, and in trust only to preserve the contingent remainders hereafter
mentioned: And from and after the decease of the said B. A. to the use and
behoof of the first Son of the said B. A. lawfully to be begotten on the Body
of D. A. his now Wife, and of the Heirs Males of the Body of such first Son
lawfully to be begotten; and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof
of the second Son of the said B. A. on the Body of the said D. A. to be
begotten, and of the Heirs Males of such second Son (and so to third, fourth or
fifth Sons) And for want of such Issue, to the use and behoof of all and every
other Son and Sons of the Body of the said B. A. to be begotten on the said D.
A. successively, one after the other, as they shall be in seniority of Age and
priority of Birth, and the several and respective Heirs Males of their Bodies;
the eldest and his Heir Male of his Body to be always preferred before the
younger of them and the Heir Male of his Body: And for default of such Issue,
in case the said D. shall be enseint at the time of the death of the said B. A.
then to the use and behoof of the said D. until she shall be delivered of such
Child or die, which of them shall first happen, in trust only for the
preservation of the contingent Remainder unto her Son, if she shall be enseint
of a Son; and if such Child shall not be a Son, then to the use and behoof of
such after born Son, lawfully to be begotten, and the Heirs Males of the Body
of such after born Son lawfully to be begotten: And for want of such Issue, to
the use and behoof of the said R. C. and C. R. their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, for and during the term of five hundred years: And from and
immediately after the end of the said Estate or term of five hundred years, to
the use and behoof of the said B. A. and the Heirs Males of his Body, and for
want of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said B. A.
for ever. And as for, touching or concerning the said Estate of five hundred
years herein before limited, to the said R. C. and C. R. it is hereby declared,
That the said Estate is so limited to them as aforesaid in trust, That they the
said R. C. and C. R. or the Survivor of them, their or his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns shall and may out of the yearly and accidental Rents,
Issues and Profits of the said Manor, etc. herein before limited to them for
the said term of five hundred years, for default of Issue Male as aforesaid,
levy, raise and pay the several Sums hereafter mentioned, as well for the
maintenance and education, as for the Portion or Portions of the Daughter or
Daughters of the said B. A. of the Body of the said D. A. to be begotten, in
case there shall be a failure of Issue Male of the Body of the said B. A. on
the Body of the said D. A. to be begotten in such manner and form as is
hereafter expressed and declared, (that is to say) the sum of 10000 l. of good
and lawful Money of England, in case they shall have but one Daughter between
them two, for the Marriage Portion of such Daughter, if such Daughter shall not
be preferred in Marriage by the said B. A. in his lifetime: And in case there
shall be more than one Daughter between them begotten, the sum of 1000 l.
apiece of lawful Money of England to every such Daughter that shall not be
preferred in Marriage in the lifetime of the said A. B. the said Portion and
Portions to be paid to them respectively at their several Ages of one and
twenty years, or respective days of Marriage, which of them shall first happen:
And in the mean time for the raising and paying to and for such Daughter or
Daughters until their several Portions shall become due and payable as
aforesaid, necessary and convenient maintenance at the discretion of the said
Trustees, or the Survivor of them, their or his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns. And it is concluded and agreed by and between all the said parties to
these presents, and it is the true intent and meaning hereof, That when the
several Portions and Sums of Money aforesaid, shall be paid and satisfied to the
said Daughter or Daughters as aforesaid, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, or if he or they to whom the Remainder or Reversion
of the said Manor, etc. shall be, remain or come by virtue of these presents,
after the end or expiration of the said Estate of five hundred years, shall
well and truly satisfy and pay, or cause to be satisfied and paid or otherwise
secure to be satisfied or paid unto such Daughter or Daughters, the said
several sums as aforesaid, That then, immediately from and after such payment
made, or security given for payment of the said sum or sums to such Daughter or
Daughters as aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, the said Estate or Term of five hundred years herein before limited
to the said R. C. and C. R. as aforesaid, shall cease and determine, and be
utterly void and of none effect.

A Conveyance or Settlement, whereby a man Settles an Estate on himself, and
diverse Estates for Life, and in Tail by Covenant to stand seized.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of, etc. of the one part, and J. F.
of, etc. and F. J. of, etc. of the other part witnesses, That it is
covenanted, condescended and agreed, by and between the Parties to these
presents in manner and form following; That is to say, whereas the said R. C.
the day of the date hereof, has but one Son only B. C. his Heir apparent, and
one Daughter A. C. And is fully resolved and determined, how and in what manner
his Manors, etc. shall by the grace of God remain, continue and be as well in
the life time of the said R. C. and B. C. his Son as after their Deaths, And
being withal greatly desirous to contiue, and stay all and singular his said,
etc. in his Surname, And for that purpose to settle the same as follows, he
the said R. C. does as well for the Consideration aforesaid, as also for
natural and fatherly love which he bears unto his said two Children; As also
for the natural love which the said R. C. bears unto H. C. his Brother and G.
C. his Sister and toward H. C. his Kinsman hereafter named, does covenant and
grant for him and his Heirs, to and with the said J. F. and F. J. their Heirs
and Assigns by these Presents, That he the said R. C. and his Heirs, and all
and every other person and persons, and their Heirs that now stand and be
seized of, or in all and singular the, etc. or that hereafter shall be seized
of the said, etc. or of any part thereof, shall stand and be seized thereof,
and of every part thereof to such uses, intents and purposes, and upon such
conditions and limitations of uses, as in these Presents shall be expressed and
declared, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever; That is to say, to
the only use and behoof of the said R. C. for and during the term of his
natural Life, without impeachment of Wast, And from and after the determination
of the said Estate, To the use of the said J. F. and his Heirs during the Life
of the said R. C. to prevent his docking the contingent, Remainders herein
after limited and appointed, And from and after his Death, then of and
concerning the said Lands, etc. to the use of D. C. now Wife of the said R. C.
for the term of her Life for her Jointure, and in lieu and satisfaction of her
Dower; And after her decease to the use of the said B. C. and the Heirs Male of
his Body lawfully to be begotten, And for want of such Issue to the use of the
said C. C. and the Heirs Males of the said C. C. begotten, or to be begotten,
And for want of such Issue to the use of the said H. C. and the Heirs Males of
his Body lawfully begotten, And for want of such Issue to the use of the right
Heirs of the said R. C. for ever; And for and concering the Manor of, etc. and
all the residue of the said Premises not limited and appointed to the uses
before mentioned, To the use of the said B. C. for the term of his life,
without Impeachment of Wast, And after his decease to the use of the said A. C.
Daughter of the said R. C. and the Heirs of the Body of the said R. C. begotten
and to be begotten, And for want of such Issue to the use of the said F. C.
Sister of the said R. C. and the Heirs of the Body, etc. And for want of such
Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the said R. C. for ever.

Livery of Seizin by Feoffor to Feoffee.
MEmorandum, That this 10th day of December Anno Dom. 1693, peaceable and quiet
Possession, and Seizin of the said Message and Lands, and other the Premises
in this Deed contained, was delivered by the within named R. C. to the within
named J. F. according to the form and effect of this Deed, in the presence of
those whose names are hereunto subscribed.

Livery made by Attorney named in the Deed.
MEmorandum, That the 10th, etc. peaceable and quiet Possession and Seizin of
the Manor, etc. within specified, was taken, had and delivered by J. F. and F.
J. the Attorneys within named, to the within named R. C. according to the
tenor and true meaning of this present Indentrue, in the presence of those
whose names are hereunto subscribed.

Another.
MEmorandum, That the day and year within written, full and peaceable
Possession of all and singular the Lands, etc. within granted or mentioned to
be granted, was taken and had by the within named J. F. for and in the names of
F. J. within mentioned, and afterward was for and in the name of the said F.
J. delivered by the said J. F. unto the within named R. C. according to the
Authority within given, To hold to him the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns,
according to the form and effect of this present Deed, in the presence of those
whose names are underwritten.

Another when the Letter of Attorney is in a several Deed.
MEmorandum, That full, quiet and peaceable Possession of all and every the,
etc. within mentioned to be granted, was taken and had by R. C. the Attorney,
the within named C. R. by force and virtue of a Letter of Attorney to the said
R. C. in that behalf made by the said C. R. bearing date, etc. for and in the
behalf of the said C. R. And was afterward by the same authority, for and in
the name of the said C. R. delivered by the said R. C. unto one J. F. the
Attorney of the within named F. J. thereunto lawfully authorized by force and
virtue of one Letter of Attorney, made by the said F. J. unto the said J. F. in
that behalf, bearing date, etc. according to the form and effect of this
present Deed, the 10th day of December, Anno Dom. 1693, in the presence of
those persons whose names are hereunto subscribed.

Attorments.
MEmorandum, That R. C. of, etc. Lessee of all the Lands, etc. within
mentioned, having heard this present Indenture read, and taken perfect notice
and knowledge of the contents thereof, does consent and agree thereunto, And
does Attorn Tenant to the within named C. R. for the said, etc. this tenth,
etc. in the presence of those whose names are hereunto subscribed.

Another.
MEmorandum, That the within named R. C. Lessee of all, etc. within mentioned,
after the sealing and delivery of these presents, and perfect notice thereof
taken by him, and of the contents thereof did the, etc. in the year within
mentioned Attorn Tenant unto the within named C. R. upon the said Grant,
according to the form and effect thereof, by the payment of sixpence of lawful
Money of England, in the name of Attornment in the presence of, etc.

Another
MEmorandum, That F. J. of, etc. Gent. and the rest of the Tenants and Farmers
of the within mentioned Premises, by virtue of several Leases made unto them
by the within named J. F. having all of them had perfect notice of this present
Grant, did severally Attorn, and became Tenants of and for their several and
respective interests in the Premises, to the within named B. A. this present
10th day of December, in the year within written, And the said Tenants have
every of them, given unto the said B. A. one penny in the name of Attornment in
the presence of, etc.

An Attornment by a Collateral Deed.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between R. C. of the one part, and C. R. of the
other part. Whereas the said R. C. is seized in his demesne as of freehold,
for and during the term of his natural life, of and in, etc. by virtue of a
Lease to him thereof made by J. F. of, etc. by his Indenure bearing date, etc.
And whereas the said J. F. by his Deed indented bearing date the, etc. Has
granted the said, etc. with the appurtenances, and the reversion thereof, to
the said C. R. as in and by the said Indenture more at large appears: Now
this Indenture witnesses, That the said R.C. for diverse good causes and
considerations him hereunto moving, Has consented, agreed, attorned and become
Tenant; And by these Presents does consent, agree and become Tenant to the said
C. R. and to the said grant to him made, of the said, etc. and the reversion
thereof; And in the name of Attornment and seizin of the Rent reserved upon the
said Lease thereof, have, at and before the sealing of these Presents paid to
the said C. R. one half years rent due at Lady Day last, which the said C. R.
has accepted of, and from the said R. C. as from his Tenant and in name of
seizin thereof, and Attornment to the said Grant to him thereof made as
aforesaid. In witness, etc.

Livery and Attornment together.
MEmorandum. That on the, etc. Peaceable and quiet Possession and seizin of
the, etc. within specified, was taken and had, and deliver ed by the Attorney
within named, to the within named R. C. according to the tenor and true
meaning of this present Indenture, And likewise the day and year abovesaid, A.
B. C. D. And E. F. being Tenants of the Premises by several Leases to them
made of their respective Tenancies did severally Attorn Tenants to the said R.
C. according to this present Grant, whereof they and every of them had full and
perfect notice, at the time of their said respective Attornments, All which was
done in the presence of the persons, whose names are hereunto subscribed.

An Assignment of several Leases to two Assignees made Tenants in Common, and
not Joint-Tenants.
THIS Indenture Tripartite made, etc. Between J. D. of, etc. of the first part,
T. H. of, etc. of the second part, and R. H. of, etc. of the third part
witnesses, That R. F. late of, etc. by his Indenture of Lease bearing date the
10th day of, etc. in the 4th year of the Reign of the late Queen Eliz, did
Demise, Grant and to Farmlet unto, etc. (and so recite all the Leases) which
said several Indentures of Lease with the respective Estates, Interests, Term
and Terms of years of the aforesaid G. H. J. K. and L. M. of and in the said
Message, Lands, Tenements, and other all and singular the Premises with the
appurtenances before herein specified afterward by good and sufficient
Conveyances and Assurances in the Law, did vest and come unto the said J. D.
who is now lawfully possessed of all the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Premises, with the Appurtenances, for and during all the residue of the
respective Terms of years, in and by the said several Indentures of Lease
granted as are yet to come and unexpired. And this Indenture further
Witnesses, That the said J. D. for and in Consideration of 340 l. of lawful
Money of England, to him by the said T. H. and R. H. before the sealing and
delivery hereof, well and truly in hand paid, Has granted, bargained, sold,
assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely
grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said T. H. and R. H. the
said Message, Lands, Tenements and other all and singular the Premises, with
the Appurtenances, in and by the several before mentioned Indentures of Lease
demised, together with the said Indentures of Lease, and all the mean
Assignments thereof made; and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Term and
Terms of years, possession, reversion, claim and demand whatsoever of him the
said J. D. of, in and to the said Message, Lands, Tenements and Premises: To
have and hold the moiety or one half of all the said Message, Lands, Tenements
and Premises, with the Appurtenances, unto the said T. H. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the making of these presents, for and during
all the residue of the several Terms of years in and by the several before
mentioned Indentures of Lease granted, as are yet to come and unexpired. ( The
like Habendum of the other Moiety to R. H.) And the said J. D. does for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant to and
with the said T. H. and R. H. their Executors Administrators and Assigns by
these presents, That they the said T. H. and R. H. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, by Moieties respectively, as aforesaid, shall or
lawfully may from time to time, and at all times, for and during all the
residue of the several Terms of years, in and by the several before mentioned
Indentures of Lease granted as are yet to come and unexpired, under the
Reservations, Conditions and Agreements in the said several Indentures of Lease
contained, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess, enjoy and
keep all the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises, with the
appurtenances, before in these presents mentioned, to be bargained, sold or
Assigned, without any let, trouble, interruption or contradiction of or by said
J. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns; and without any lawful let or
interruption of or by any other person or persons, having or lawfully claiming,
or which shall or may have or lawfully claim, any Estate, Right, Title or
Interest, of, in or to said Message, Lands, Tenements and Premises, with the
appurtenances, or any part thereof, in, by, for, from or under the said J. D.
his Heirs. Executors or Administrators, or by or with his or their consent,
privity or procurement. And also, that the said Message, Lands, Tenements and
Premises now are, and during all the remainder of the said several Terms of
years, shall remain, continue and be unto the said T. H. and R. H. their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by Moieties respectively, as aforesaid,
free, clear and clearly acquitted and discharged, of and from all former and
other gifts, bargains, sales, surrenders, forfeitures, charges, titles,
troubles, burdens and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, done or
suffered by the said J. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns. And also,
That the said J. D. his Executors and Administrators, and all and every other
person and persons, having or lawfully claiming, or which shall or may have or
lawfully claim any Estate, Right, Title or Interest, of, in or to the said
Message, Lands, Tenements and Premises, with the appurtenances, in, by, from
or under the said J. D. shall and will upon every reasonable Request, during
the space of 10 years next coming, at the costs and charges in the Law of the
said T. H. or R. H. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, well and truly
do, acknowledge, suffer and execute all and every further lawful and reasonable
Act and Acts, thing and things, conveyance and assurance in the Law whatsoever,
for the further better and more perfect assurance, surety and more sure making
and conveying all the said Message, Lands, Tenements and Premises, with the
appurtenances, unto the said T. H. and R. H. their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, by Moieties, respectively, as aforesaid, for and during all the
remainder of the said several Terms of years as are yet respectively to come
and unexpired.

In witness, etc.
A Lease of a Message, Mill, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Tithes, and other
things, with several Exceptions, Habendums, Reservations of Rent, Provisoes and
Covenants, whereby may be made a several Lease of any of those things, with
such Exceptions, Habendums, Reservations of Rent, Provisoes and Covenants, as
the case requires.
THIS Indenture made, etc. Between J. L. of D. in the County of S. Clerk, of
the one part, and W. T. of H. in the same County, Yeoman, of the other part,
Witnesses, That the said J. L. has demised, granted, and to farm letten, and
by these presents does demise, grant and to farm let unto the said W. T. All
that Message, Tenement and Farm, called H. Farm, with all Houses, Farms,
Stables, Yards, Backsides, Gate-Rooms, Gardens Orchards, Lands, Meadows
Pastures, Feedings, Moors, Marshes, Wood-grounds, Commons, Ways, Waters,
Easments and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said H. Farm belonging, or as
part, parcel or member thereof, at any time accepted, reputed, taken, known,
used, leased, occupied or enjoyed in H. aforesaid. -- All that Message or
Tenement with the Appurtenances, sometimes called B. late in the occupation of
J. S. and all Outhouses, Barns, Stables, Buildings, Curtilages, Gardens and
Orchards thereunto belonging. And also all those several Closes or parcels of
Land, Meadow and Pasture herein after particularly mentioned; (That is to say,)
All that Close of Arable Land called T. Close, containing by Estimation, 10
Acres, between the Highway leading from A. to B. on the East a Ditch in the
Land of J. B. on the west a Hedge on the Land of W. B. on the North, and Land
in the occupation of S. C. on the South; and also all that Close or Pasture,
containing by Estimation six Acres, between a Fence of Post-Rails and Pales on
the Land of A. B. on the East, a Wall on the Land of W. Y. on the West, Land of
E. F. on the North, and Land of S. H. on the South; and also all that parcel of
Land containing in length 45 Perches and 2 Foot, and in breadth at the East End
10 Perches, 3 Foot and 6 Inches, and at the West End 15 Perches and 9 Foot, in
a common Field call Whitefield, and between Land there of B. C. on the East,
and Land of D. E. on the West. (And so of other parcels, wherein you may
briefly express, as before, whether the Fence do belong to them or the
adjoining Lands) All which said Message, Lands and Premises, are situate and
being in the Parish of D. aforesaid; and also all Ways, Waters, Easments and
Appurtenances, to the said Messuages, Lands and Premises, or any of them
belonging -- All that Message or Tenement commonly called the White-Lion, now
in the occupation of A. B. his Assigns or Under-Tenants, in or near the Street
called Cheapside, in the Parish of Mary le Bow, London, together with all and
singular Shops, Cellars, Solars, Chambers, Rooms, Entries, Lights, Windows,
Ways, Passages, Yards, Backsides, Buildings, Gutters, Watercourse, Easments,
Profits, Commodities and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Message in any
wise appertaining -- All that Message or Tenement and Brew House, late in the
occupation of A.B. his Assigns or Under-Tenants, in or near a Street called B.
Lane, in the Parish of St. Mary A. London, together with all Stables, Edifices,
Buildings, Lights, Windows, Ways, Passages, Watercourse, Profits, Commodities
and Appurtenances thereunto belonging; and also all and singular those
Furnaces, Coppers, Vats, Vessels and other Utensils, Goods and Chattles in the
said Message, Tenant and Brew House, now being, and lately used together with
the same, specified in a Schedule hereunto annexed -- All that his Water-grist,
Mill and Mills, (being two Grist-Mills under one Roof) commonly called or known
by the name of B. Mill or Mills, with the Appurtenances in the Parish of, etc.
sometimes in the Tenure or Occupation of A. B. and now, or late in the
Occupation of C. D. or his Assigns, or Under-Tenants; and all that parcel of
Ground on part whereof the said Mills stand, containing by Estimation One Acre
or thereabouts, be the same more or less; And also, All that the Suit of and to
the said Mills as well Customary as Conventionary, of all the Tenants of the
Manor of S. in the County of S. to Grind there all the Corn and Grain of the
said Tenants, and also all and singular Heads, Wares and Mill ponds, and the
Soil thereof, to the said Mill or Mills belonging or appertaining; And all
Stanks, Banks, Ponds, Streams, Waters, Watercourses, Rivers, Fishings, Fishing
places, Ways, Paths, Passages, Easments, Profits, Commodities Advantages,
Emoluments and Appurtenances, to the said Mill and Mills and other the
Premises or any of them, or any part or parcel thereof, belonging or
appertaining, or with the same now, or at any time heretofore used, occupied or
enjoyed. -- All that Message with the Barns, Stables, Outhouses, Gate-rooms,
Back-sides, Orchards and Gardens thereunto belonging, and all those several
Closes and parcels of Arable Land, Meadow and Pasture, containing together
about one hundred fifty and six Acres to the said Message belonging; All which
Premises are called Nutborne Farm, and were late in the Occupation of T. F.
And also, all Ways, Waters, Commons, Common of Pasture, Easments and
Appurtenances to the said Message or Farm in any wise appertaining; And also
all Tithes of Corn, Grain and Hay, growing, renewing or issuing out of all the
said Demised Lands and Premises -- The Rectory of A. with the Appurtenances,
and the Tithes of Corn, Grain and Hay thereunto belonging in the said County of
S. -- The Rectory of A. with the Appurtenances, and also, all Tithes both great
and small, to the said Rectory belonging in the said County of S. -- All and
all manner of Tithes both great and small belonging to the Rectory of A. in the
said County of S. -- All that Portion of Tithes in S. aforesaid, which did
formerly belong to the Rectory of R. in the said County (to wit) Two third
parts, or Two parts in three, parts, to be divided of all the Tithes of Corn,
Grain, Hay, and other great Tithes arising growing, renewing, or increasing
upon all those Lands and Grounds called K. Farm, or belonging to K. Farm; now
in Occupation of T. H. Except, and always Reserved out of this present demise
and grant unto the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, All Woods, Under-woods
Timber and Trees, now standing, growing or being, or which during this demise
and grant, shall stand, grow, or be in or upon the demised Premises, or in or
upon any part or parcel thereof; Together with free Liberty of Ingress, Egress
and Regress, for him the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, and his and their
Servants, Laborers and Workmen, with Carts, Wayns, Working-Tools, Utensils and
Implements, to Fell, cut down, Load, have, take and carry away the same Woods,
Under-woods, Timber and Trees, at his and their free Wills and Pleasures: And
also, Except, and always reserved out of this present demise, and grant unto
the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, and his and their Servants, Laborers and
Workmen, free Liberty of Ingress Egress and Regress from time to time, and at
all times seasonably and convenient during the Term hereby granted, to enter in
and upon the said Message, or Tenement, Lands, and other all and singular the
Premises, before in these presents demised, and every part and parcel thereof,
to view and see the same, and their reparations, defects and decays thereof at
their free Wills and Pleasures, Except, and always reserved out of this present
demise and grant unto the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, All Timber, and
other Trees of whatsoever Nature or kind now standing growing or being, or
which during this demise and grant, shall stand grow or be in or upon the Lands
and Grounds hereby demised, or in or upon any part or parcel thereof, with free
liberty of Ingress, Egress and Regress, for him the said J. L. his Heirs and
Assigns, and his and their Servants, Laborers and Workmen, with all Carts,
Wayns, Working-tools, Utensils and Implements, to Fell, cut down, Hew, Square,
Work out, Coard, Coal, Spoil, Convert, Load, have, take and carry aways the
said Timber Trees, and other Trees, and all the Timber, Coal, Wood and Stuff
thereof, coming, arising or increasing; And to Dig and make Coal-pits, Sawpits
and places to work in, for the Coaling, Sawing and converting thereof, in and
upon the Lands and Grounds hereby demised; And for that purpose to have and
take, cover and quench of Earth and Fern in and upon the said Lands and Grounds
hereby demised, at his and their free will and pleasure, for the better coaling
and converting thereof, doing as little hurt or spoil as may be, unto the Corn,
Grain or Grass, of the said W. T. growing on the demised Premises from time to
time, in converting the said Timber Trees and other Trees; And also Except, and
always reserved out of this demise and grant unto the said J. L. his Heirs and
Assigns, the Royalties and Games of Hawking, Hunting, Fishing and Fowling, in
and upon the demised Premises, or in or upon any part or parcel thereof, with
free liberty of Ingress, Egress, and Regress. for him the said J. L. his Heirs
and Assigns, and his and their Servants, to Hawk, Hunt, Fish and Fowl, there at
his and their free wills and pleasures, doing no wilful hurt or spoil in the
Corn or Grain of the said W. T. growing upon the demised Premises, And also,
Except and always reserved out of this demise and grant unto the said J. L. his
Heirs and Assigns, All that the Manor of S. with the Rights, Members and
Appurtenances thereof, and all Court-leets and Court-Barons, and all the
Profits of the same Courts, and all Quitrents, Fines, Herriots, Services,
Reliefs, Amerciaments, Wayfs, Estrays, Goods and Chattles of Felons, Wrecks of
Sea, Deodands and Escheats whatsoever, to the said Manor belonging or
appertaining, and free liberty of Ingress, Egress and Regress, for him the said
J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, and his and their Steward to keep Court in the
said Capital Message or Tenement before in these presents demised from time to
time, during the Term hereby granted at his and their free wills and pleasures,
for the said Manor of S. and free liberty of Ingress, Egress and Regress, for
all Servants, Tenants and Suitors, at and to any Court Leet or Court Baron to
come, be and continue there during the continuance of such Court Leet or Court
Baron, there to be held from time to time; And also, Except and reserved free
liberty for him the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, and his and their
Servants, and Workmen, with Carts and other necessaries to come upon the
Premises, to repair the Seabanks as often as need shall be, and to cut and
take Timber, Woods and Under-woods, on the Premises for the doing thereof. To
have and to hold, all the said Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Tithes and
Premises, with the Appurtenances before in these presents mentioned, to be
demised unto the said W. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the
Feast of the Annuntiation of the blessed Mary last past, before the date
hereof, for, during, and until the full end and Term of five Years, from
thenceforth next ensuing fully to be complete and ended; Yielding and paying
therefore yearly and every year during the Term hereby granted unto the said J.
L. his Heirs and Assigns, Threescore pounds of lawful Money of England, at the
Feasts of S. Michael the Archangel, and the Annuntiation of the blessed Mary by
equal Portions to be paid; Provided always, that if it shall happen the said
Yearly Rent of Threescore pounds or any part thereof, to be behind or unpaid in
part or in all by the space of One and twenty days after any Feast or day of
payment on which the same ought to be paid as aforesaid; That then and at all
times after it shall and may be lawful to and for the said J. L. his Heirs and
Assigns, into all the said demised Premises, and every part thereof, wholly to
re-enter and the same to have again, repossess and enjoy as in their former
estate, any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding; And the
said W. T. does for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
Covenant and grant to and with the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, by these
presents, that he the said W. T. Tenants covenant to pay the Rent.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will yearly and every
year during the Term hereby granted, well and truly pay or cause to be paid
unto the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, the yearly Rent of Threescore pounds
before in these presents reserved to be paid at the days and times before
herein limited for payment thereof, without Fraud or delay; And also, that the
said W. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will from time
to time during the Term hereby granted, when and so often as need shall
require, well and sufficiently Repair, amend, To Repair, and leave Repaired.
maintain, sustain, fence, scower, cleanse and keep all the Houses, Barns,
Buildings, Posts, Pales, Rails, Gates, Styles, Hedges, Ditches, Fences and
Enclosures which now are, or during this demise shall be in or upon the said
demised Premises; And the same so well and sufficiently repaired, amended,
maintained, sustained, fenced, scowred, cleansed and kept together with the
Possession of all the said demised Premises, shall and will leave and yield up
unto the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, at the end of said Term hereby
granted; And also, To leave a Wheatlane.
That he the said W. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and
will at the end of the Term hereby granted, leave Twenty Acres of the Arable
Land hereby demised in a Wheatlane, fit to be sown with Wheat in the next Year
after the end of the Term hereby granted; To pay 50 s. for every Acre of Meadow
which he shall Plough.
And also, That if the said W. T. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do
or shall at any time during the Term hereby granted, Plough, break up, sow or
convert into Tillage the Marsh or the Long Meadow next the Mill-pond, or the
Meadow through which the River runs, adjoining to the Bull-Garden, parcel of
the demised Premises or any part thereof, then the said W. T. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall and will Yearly and every Year, during all
the residue of the Term hereby granted as shall be then to come and unexpired,
yield and pay unto the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, fifty shillings of
lawful Money of England, for every Acre thereof, so to be Ploughed, broken up,
sown or converted into Tillage for and in the name of an Over-rent, or increase
of Rent over and above the Yearly Rent before in these presents reserved to be
paid; And so after that rate for any greater or less quantity thereof to be
Ploughed, broken up, or converted into Tillage, as aforesaid; Which said
Over-rent or increase of Rent if any be, shall be paid unto the said J. L. his
Heirs and Assigns, by equal Portions, at the days limited for payment of the
Yearly Rent first before in these presents reserved to be paid; The first
payment thereof to begin and be made at such of the said days as shall next
happen after such ploughing, breaking up, sowing or converting into Tillage as
aforesaid; And also, That the said W. T. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, shall and will at their own Costs, bear, To pay Taxes to Church and
Poor.
pay and discharge all such Duties, Taxes, Assessments and Payments as shall
during the Term hereby granted, be issuing due or payably out of, or for the
said demised premises to the Church, the Parish, and the Poor; Tenant to
covenant to pay on behalf of Landlord his proportionable part of a Quit-Rent.
And also, That he the said W. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns for
and on behalf of the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will yearly
during the Term hereby granted at the late Dwelling House of H. H. in E.
aforesaid, well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto H. C. his Heirs and
Assigns, at the Feasts of the Annunciation of the Blessed Mary and St. Michael
the Archangel by equal portions 7 l. for the proportion of the said J. L.
payable to the Bishop of W. of Rent for the Tithes of R. aforesaid: And also
that he the said W. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and
will from time to time, during the Term hereby granted, imbarn and lay all the
Corn, To Imbarn Corn.
Grain, Hay, Grass, Hame, Fern and Fodder, which during the said Term shall
arise, grow, renew or increase in or upon the demised Premises in the Barns,
and upon the Lands and Grounds hereby demised, and not elsewhere, and shall and
will also expend and lay all the Compost, Dung, To lay the Dung on the Land.
and Soil thereof, had, made, coming, growing, arising, renewing, or
increasing, upon the Lands and Grounds hereby demised, and not elsewhere, nor
otherwise; And shall and will also at the end of the Term hereby granted, leave
upon the demised Premises all the Compost, To leave the Dung on the Land at
the end of the Term.
Dung, and Soil there made in the last year of the said Term, to and for the
use and benefit of the said J. L. And the said W. T. does further for himself
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, covenant and grant to and with the
said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns, by these presents; That the said W. T. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall not and will not at any time during
the Term hereby granted, Not to Lop any but Pollard Trees.
Lop, Top, or Poll any Trees growing on the demised Premises, other than such
as have been heretofore usually Lopped, Topped, and Polled; Not to Lop, or cut
more than the 14th part of the Pollard Trees, Hedges and Underwoods, in one
year.
And that the said W. T. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall not in
any year of the Term hereby granted, Lop, Top, or Poll more than the fourteenth
part of the Pollard Trees upon the Premises, Nor shall or will in any year of
the said Term, fell or cut more than the fourteenth part of the Under-woods,
Hedges, Bushes, and Hedgrows there; And shall not again Lop, Top, Poll, Fell,
or cut any Trees, Under-woods, Hedges, Bushes, or Hedgrows, which before during
this demise shall have been Lopped, Topped, Polled, Felled or cut; And also,
That the said W. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall not at any
time during the Term hereby granted, Lop, Top, or Poll any Trees, or Fell or
cut down any of the Coppice-woods, Hedges, or Hedgrows which now are, or during
this demise shall be standing or growing upon the demised Premises at
unseasonable times in the Year, Not to cut Wood at unseasonable times.
or in any unhusbandry like manner; And also, that he the said W. T. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall not at any time during the Term
hereby granted in any wise Fell or cut upon the demised Premises any Tellows
likely to grow up to be Timber Trees; Not to cut Tellows likely to be Timber.
And the said J. L. does for himself, his Heirs and Assigns, Covenant and grant
to and with the said W. T. his Executors, Lessor Covenants, to pay Quit-rents
and Kings Taxes.
Administrators and Assigns by these presents, that the said W. T. his Heirs
and Assigns, shall and will at their own Cost, bear, pay, and discharge or
allow unto the said W. T. his Executors Administrators and Assign, All Rents
which are, or during this demise shall be issuing or payable out of, or for the
demised Premises or any part thereof, to the Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees
thereof; And also all such Duties, Taxes, Assessments, and payments, as shall
during this Demise, arise, become, or grow due out of, for or from the demised
Premises or any part thereof, to the King's Majesty, or for the defense or
public use or occasion of this Realm; To allow rough Timber for repair.
And also, that he the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will from
time to time upon every reasonable request when and so often as need shall
require during the Term hereby granted, Assign, allow and appoint to and for
the said W. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, sufficient and
convenient Timber rough upon the Stamp, to be had cut and taken by the said W.
T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, upon the demised Premises (if it
be there to be had) at seasonable times in the Year, to be expended, used and
employed for and toward reparation and amendment of the Message, Barns and
Buildings aforesaid; And also, of all the Gates, Posts, Pales and Rails
belonging to the demised Premises, and also sufficient Estovers for Carts,
Wayns, Wagons, Ploughs, and Harrows to be used and employed on the said
demised Premises, and not elsewhere; To allow Cart-Boot.
And also, that the said W. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall
or may hold and enjoy the Barn aforesaid, therein to lay their Corn, Grain, and
Hay, and liberty of Ingress, and Egress, into and from the said Barn, and the
Gate-room thereunto adjoining, That the Tenant may hold the Barn until May day
after the term.
to thresh out the said Corn and Grain in the said Barn, and to carry away the
same with Carts and Carriages; And the Fodder of the said Corn and Grain, and
the said Hay to spend in the said Gate-room, with their Cattle, until the first
day of May next after the end of the Term hereby granted, without any let
orinterruption of or by the said J. L. his Heirs or Assigns, The said W. T. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, then leaving the said Barn well and
sufficiently repaired, which to do the said W. T. does Covenant with the said
J. L. by these presents; And the said J. L. Does further for himself, his Heirs
and Assigns, Covenant and grant to and with the said W. T. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, that for and in consideration of
thirty and two pounds parcel of the yearly Rent aforesaid, he the said J.L. his
Heirs and Assigns, shall and will yearly, Lessor to accept of 4 Loads of Wheat
for 32 l. of Rent
and every year of the Term hereby granted, accept of four Loads of good clean
dry and well winnowed Wheat to be delivered by the said W. T. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, at D. within the Port of T. or such other place not
further distant from N. aforesaid, as the said J. L. shall appoint; And that
the said J. L. shall yearly appoint the time and place of such delivery; and
the said W. T. does Covenant to Deliver the said four Loads of Wheat
accordingly; And also, that he the said J. L. his Heirs or Assigns, shall and
will at his and their own proper Costs and Charges before the Twentieth of June
next ensuing the date hereof, erect and build one New Barn, and one New
Cart-house in and upon the demised Premises; And the Gate-room thereunto
belonging, Lesser to Build a New Barn and Cart-house.
shall and will well and sufficiently Enclose and Fence with all needful and
necessary Enclosures and Fences without fraud or delay; Tenant not to cut
Hedges at unseasonable times.
And the said VV. T. does farther for himself his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, Covenant and Grant to and with the said J.L. his Heirs and Assigns, by
these presents, that he the said VV. T. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, shall not and will not at any time or times during the Term hereby
granted, sell or cut down any the Quick-set Hedges or Fences belonging to the
demised premises, but at seasonable times in the yeat; and for the better
springing, growing and preserving of the same Hedges, shall and will do his and
their best endeavors, for the preserving, nourishing, and keeping the said
Quick-set Hedges, now belonging unto the demised Premises, or such Quick-set
Hedges as shall be new planted, upon the Premises during the Term hereby
granted; Tenant to leave the Pidgeon-House Stocked.
And also, That he the said W. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
shall and will at the end of the Term hereby granted, leave the said Dove-House
hereby demised, Stocked with a Flight of One hundred and fifty Couple of
Pigeons at the least, to and for the only sole and proper use and benefit of
the said J. L. his Heirs and Assigns; And shall and will also at the end of the
said Term leave the Pidgeon-holes in the said Dove-House well and sufficiently
repaired, amended, maintained, sustained, and kept without fraud or delay

Covenants to convey Land in Consideration of 5 s. in hand, and residue to be
be paid at a day to come, without obliging the Buyer to pay, so that if he
fails in payment, he may not pretend to have any Equity afterward.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between N. C. of the City of C. in the County of S.
Gent. of the one part, and A.B. etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the
said N.C. for and in consideration of 5 s. of lawful Money of England, to him by
the said, etc. before the sealing and delivery hereof, well and truly in hand
paid, does covenant with the said, etc. by these presents, that if the said
N.C. shall be living on the 2d day of April next coming; And if the said A. B.
or his Heirs, do or shall on the said 2d day of April, well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said N. C. the full Sum of 680 l. of lawful Money of
England, Then the said N. C. immediately after receipt of the said 680 l. shall
and will at the Costs and Charges of the said A. B. by good and sufficient
Conveyance and Assurance in the Law, and well and sufficiently to be executed,
grant, convey and assure unto the said A. B. and his Heirs, all that Message
or Tenement, Gate and Backside with the Appurtenances, containing by estimation
8 Acres of Land, and all that Field or parcel of Land called the Hine Earsh,
containing by estimation six Acres, one other Field called or known by the name
of Stanfield, containing by estimation four Acres, one piece of Land lying in
two Severals called 8 Acres, one little Coppice containing by estimation two
Roods, one parcel of Land called the Slipe, containing by estimations two
Acres, and a half, one Mead called Hamock Mead, containing by estimation two
Acres, one Mead lying near Ructon Gate between the Farm-Mead there, and Lands
formerly of W. S. all which Premises are situate lying and being in
South-Mundham in the County aforesaid, and are now in the Occupation of E.D.
And also, all that Message or Tenement called the White-Hart, with the Barn
and Gate-room thereunto adjoining and belonging, late partly in the Occupation
of R. C. and partly of M. P. in the Parish of St. Pancras near the City of C.
aforesaid; And also all that Message called the A. with the Backside and
Stable thereunto belonging, situate and being in the West Side of the
North-street within the City of C. aforesaid, and now in the Occupation of F.
M. together with all Barns, Stables, Buildings, Orchards, Woods, Commons,
Profits and Appurtenances whatsoever to the said Messuages, Lands and Premises
belonging, with Covenants on the part of the said N. C. therein to be
comprised, that the said A. B. and his Heirs, shall and may from thenceforth,
hold and enjoy all the said Premises, without any let or interruption of the
said N. C. his Heirs or Assigns, or of any person or persons claiming by, from
or under him or them, except Lessees under the most usual Rents; Provided
always, and it is hereby agreed and declared by the said parties, That if the
said N. C. shall happen to die before the said 2d day of April, Or if the said,
etc. or his Heirs, shall not pay unto the said N. C. the said 680 l. as
aforesaid, Then the said, etc. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, shall
be wholly and for ever excluded and debarred of and from all Right, pretense of
Equity, Claim, Preemption and Demand of, for or in to the said Message, Lands,
Tenements and Premises, and every part thereof, and of, in or to the said 5 s.
by the said N. C. received as aforesaid.

In witness whereof the parties first above named, have to these present
Indentures interchangeably set their Hands and Seals the day and year first
above written.
FINIS.

