THE DISCOVERY of the most dangerous Dead Faith. BY JOHN EATON, Mr of Arts, and
sometime Student in Trinity College in Oxford, and 15. years Minister and
Preacher at Wickham-Market in Suffolk. The second Impression, with an Addition
of Abraham's Steps of Faith, and The true Treasure of the Heart. By the same
Author.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop for William Adderton, and are to be sold at his
shop in Duck-lane 1642.

THE DISCOVERY of the most dangerous Dead Faith. BY JOHN EATON, Mr of Arts, and
sometime Student in Trinity College in Oxford, and 15. years Minister and
Preacher at Wickham Market in Suffolk.

Heb. 2. 12. Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing away from the living God. LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop
for William Adderton, and are to be sold at his shop in Duck-lane 1642.

The Preface to the READER.
Christian Reader,
THE elect vessel of God, St Paul, gave two special and clear prophesies of
things to be fulfilled before the second coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: the
first, of the rising, reign, and fall of Antichrist, as he says, 2 These. 2,
3, 4. that the day of Christ shall not come, except there come a falling way
first ( to wit, from faith) and that man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped; so that he, as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. Concerning whom the Spirit speaks expressly, that in
the latter times men shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits and doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
conscience seared with an hot iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from meats which God has ordained, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. All which
we now see to be in these latter times clearly revealed and plainly fulfilled,
and that the man of sin is consumed with the Spirit of Christ's mouth ( that is,
the Word of God) and shall be destroyed ( to wit, utterly) with the
brightness, or glory of his coming, 2 These. 2. 8. The other Prophecy
follows this, plainly describing these our last days wherein the truth of the
Gospel being again restored, and the purity of faith again professed; yet
people should be such sleepy embracers of the same, and such dead,
unprofitable, unfruitful, atheistical, and unthankful receivers and
professors of it, that these last days should be far more perilous and
dangerous than the former; Which prophecy, although some seem to conjoyne it
as all one with the former (which for the near following one of another may
bear the more easy interpretation:) yet Saint Paul does distinguish them, and
plainly sever this later from the former, as being for time the later, yea in
the last days, and for nature, the more perilous and dangerous; and therefore
he says, not in the later times, as in the former Prophecy. But this know
(says he) also that in novissimis, or extrem is diebus, in the last days of
all shall come hard and perilous times: Wherein hard and perilous? Because
(says he) men ( namely, such as professed themselves reformed Christians)
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, or braggers, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, or make-bates, incontinent, fierce,
despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God. Must it not needs be a very hard and
dangerous living in these last days with such a viperous generation as these.
But that which follows after is more hard and dangerous (namely) having a
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. to the 5. Mark,
I pray, that herein lies the great peril and danger of these last days,
(...) (that is) having the form, show, and appearance of faith, piety, and
true godliness, they deny, or are far from the truth, virtue, or power of
faith and godliness, having indeed neither faith, nor love; and so are not
only overwhelmed themselves in the most dangerous dead faith, to the fearful
deceiving, and utter destruction of their own souls; but also do so
dangerously inwrap the very elect in this dead faith, that (if it were
possible) the very elect might finally be deceived, and perish therein. And
hereby for a time may be deceived, because they do not mark that there are two
sorts of such as are in this dead faith.

The first sort are such (and those very many) as being borne and brought up in
the outward visible Church, can talk of Christ, and of some general points of
God, and his Gospel, saying that they hope to be saved by Christ, because they
think that they believe, and are of that true Religion that all their Country
is of: but being ignorant of the horrible filthiness of sin before God, and of
the infinite pure and righteous nature of God against sin, and thereby ignorant
and careless of free justification, that only heales them, do continue in
their old corrupt natures, and are Crabtrees, bringing forth only the sower and
bitter Crab-apples of a profane life, and a secure, and careless, loose
conversation: who though they sooth and flatter themselves in this ignorant
dead faith, and hope they shall do well enough, or at least as well as their
neighbors; yet does God by the Prophet Esaias denounce against them, saying, It
is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will have no mercy
on them; and he that formed them will show them no favor, Esaias 27. 11.
Therefore hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth above measure, and
their glory and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoices shall
descend into it, Esaias 5. 14.

The other sort that are in this dead faith, are such as seem to be awaked out
of this dead lethargy, and professing a better feeling of sin, and a deeper
consideration of their lost estate and misery by sin, aspire with a stronger
desire, and a far greater earnestness to life and salvation. But because they
are naturally conceipted, that the means to attain this life and salvatition
is to leave their sin and to become good, holy, just, and righteous:
therefore they neglect free justification, the only true means and way to life
and salvation; and set light of faith in Christ's righteousness which does
perfectly justify before God, and are carried with a blind preposterous zeal
after their own good works and well doings, secretly seeking to become good,
holy, just, and righteous before God, by their diligent keeping, and careful
walking in all Gods Commandments; and so by a carnal understanding of
justification, are carried away from Christ, and true free justification, to
hang upon their own good works and well-doings; and thereby instead of life and
free salvation, do drown themselves in sin, death, and eternal damnation;
and yet under a deep conceit of great holiness and righteousness. And thus
do they perish with the devout unbeleeving Jews, who although they had a
blind, dead faith of righteousness, life and blessedness by the Messiah to
come; for they did all eat of the same spiritual meat, and did all drink of
the same spiritual drink, ( that is, by this general dead faith in Christ to
come) for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that
Rock was Christ. But God was not well pleased with them ( in this dead faith)
and so they perished, 1 Corinthians. 10. 3. to 6. And yet S. Paul says of them,
that they followed after the Law of Righteousness, but yet did not attain to
the Law of Righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought ( the keeping and
fulfilling of it) not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law; and so
stumbled at the stumbling stone, Romans 9. 31, 32. Yea, Saint Paul testifies and
bears record of them, that herein they had the zeal even of God, but not
according to knowledge of free justication. Because being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, they went about to establish ( or to make, as it were,
to stand upon its feet) their own righteousness, and so did not submit
themselves to the righteousness of God; And thus they perished, because they
knew not that Christ was the fulfilling and end (2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 11. 14.) of
the Law for righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10. 2, 3, 4.

And thus we see that such as are in this dead faith, varnished, and garnished,
and gilt over with this preposterous zeal of diligent keeping, and careful
walking in all Gods commandments, are ignorant of Christ's righteousness, the
maine of their free-salvation; are unbeleevers, only giving Christ and free
justification a Judas his kiss, whereby they go about to stablish, or set up
(as it were) upon its feet their own righteousness wish the Jews and
Pharisees, and contemn and set light of free Grace, are rebellious against
God, in not submitting themselves to the righteousness of God, and miserably
perish (as I said) in the deep conceit of great holiness and righteousness,
which does so strongly bewitch the people with a fair glister, and beautiful
brightness of works of righteousness, that it cunningly creepes up into the
Pulpits also, and with her fair show turns the Ministers of Satan into the
seeming Ministers of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. As Christ said to the Angel
of the Church of Sardis, Thou bear a name that thou live, but thou art
dead, Rev. 3. 1.

So that although both these sorts of the dead faith do reject and set light
of free justification, and are both enemies to free grace, the glory of Christ,
and to their own free salvation: yet does this second sort more subtilely
deceive, and more dangerously destroy. And therefore the first sort of people
in this dead faith are by the Lord of wisdom Jesus Christ likened to Hogs,
that having the pearl of the Gospel, free justification, cast before them to
call them from their rooting in the earth and wallowing in the mire of sin;
although they contemptuously trample this only saving pearl under the filthy
feet of their careless and swinish affections: Yet they commonly against their
Ministers, and them that wish them well, do only give a hoggish grunt of
contempt, and away they go to their rooting in their earth, or to their
wallowing in the mire, and so are plainly discerned, soon convinced, and many
of them easilier converted and saved. But the second sort are likened to Dogs,
that greedily feeding upon the carrion of their good works, obedience, and
well-doings: if any cast before these the precious pearls of Christ's works and
well-doings, as sufficient perfectly to justify them, and freely and certainly
to save them, they do not only trample under the feet of their Pharisaicall
affections the same precious pearls; but also fall, like Dogs, abarking at them
that wish them well, with calumniations, railings, and slanderings: Yea,
through a secret inbred delight, and blind zeal of esteem of the hidden vain
glory of their own righteousness, good works, obedience, and welldoings,
contrary to the Prophet Esaias and Paul's affection, that counted all the
righteousness, works, and wel-doings of their sanctification but as filthy
stained rags, and would not be found in them before God, but esteemed them as
dung, that they might be found in the righteousness of Christ only before
God, Phil. 3. 8, 9. Through this secret lurking vainglory I say) of their own
holiness and well-doings, they will not stick to fly in the face of the
Minister and Messenger of Christ that beseeches them to be reconciled unto God
by being made the righteousness of God through Christ only, 2 Cor. 5. 20, 21.
but will tear out, if they can, his very throat; because they feel themselves
hindered from feeding upon the filthy pleasing carrion of the vain glory in
their own works of righteousness and weldoings. And therefore did the Apostle
say to the true Christians: Beware of Dogs, Phil. 3. 2, 3. because in stead of
life and salvation, which they seem so strongly to aspire unto by works, and
keeping the Law, they rush the more violently themselves, and swiftly carry
away others with them into beautiful abomination, sin, death, hell, and
everlasting damnation. So greedily with Aesops dog as Doctor Luther says)
snatching at the outward glittering shadow of righteousness of works, that they
lose the substance of Christ and his righteousness that is in their mouth.
Therefore, happy is the man that in these last so dangerous days can overcome,
and escape this Dead Faith, by getting on the white robe, that he may be
clothed, and that his filthy nakedness do not appear, and does anoint his
eyes with eye salve that he may see, and so become zealous, not with the
foresaid blind, legal zeal of his own glory, but with the true Evangelicall
zeal of Christ's glory; and so amend by coming out of this Dead Faith into the
true lively justifying faith. For, to him that overcommeth this Dead Faith
(says Christ) will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne. He that has an ear,
let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, Revel. 3 18. to 22. And
for this cause have I penned this short and abrupt Treatise discovering this
most dangerous Dead Faith, in showing how far it will go in the likeness
and appearance of true Christianity, and true saving faith, and yet how far
it comes short of the same, because they do not believe with the heart unto
true righteousness, and confess the same with a thankful and joyful mouth
unto salvation, Romans 10. 10. and so do show by their bragging Pharisaicall
life, that they perish with the Famine in their Hearts, whilst the flesh of
qauiles is in their mouths, Psalm. 78. 30, 31. And hereunto I have adjoined the
shortest course that the Word of GOD, and the established Doctrine of our
Church prescribes, how we Ministers may our selves come out of this most
dangerous DEAD FAITH, and call others out of the same into the true lively and
justifying Faith. Try all things, and keep that which is good, 1 Thessalon. 5.
21. And accept Christianly in good part the good will of him that is glad
(Christian READER) if he may speak or write a word that may edify thee in
thy most holy Faith, Iud. 20. Use it in the fear of GOD. And thus I leave thee
to the Word of his Grace which is able to build further.

Thine in all Christian affection, JOHN EATON.

THE DISCOVERY Of the Most Dangerous Dead Faith.
AMongst diverse and sundry causes of peoples being offended at, and of
cavilling against the express Word of God, and the Protestants description of
the Wedding garment of Christ's perfect righteousness, by which the justified
person is made so truly, and so perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of
sin in the sight of God, that God does, and (by his actual power) can see no
sin in his justified children freely by faith only, without works, Revel. 3.
18. The chiefest cause of all their cavills, containing in a manner, all the
rest, is the Dead faith; it being not able to understand the mysteries of
Christ, as Saint Paul testifies to the carnal Corinthians, saying, the
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. For the removal of which Dead Faith, four main things
are here especially to be considered.

First, we must mark how far the Dead Faith will go in the profession of the
Gospel, and how like it is to the true, lively, justifying, and saving faith,
being as like the true faith, both in it self, and in resembling all the
actions of the true faith, as the Image in the Looking-glass is like, and does
imitate the party that looks into the same; because the Dead Faith consists
of these three parts.

First, such as are in this Dead Faith, may have great knowledge of the whole
word and will of God, and may join therewith the reading of all the Doctors
and Expositors in the Church, and also may be zealous Preachers of the same: as
Saint Paul declares, Romans 2. 17. saying, Behold thou art called a Jew (that is,
one of Gods chosen above all the Nations of the earth) and restest in the Law
(that is, in the Word and Doctrine delivered from heaven) and gloriest in God:
And know his will, and approvest the thing that are excellent, being
instructed in the Law, or Word, verse 18. And art confident that thou art a
guide of the blind, a light of them that are in darkness, verse 19. An
instructor of the foolish, a teacher of the ignorant, having the whole form of
knowledge, and of the truth of the Law, etc. Again, the Law shall not perish
from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet.
Come let us smite Jeremiah with the tongue, Jer. 18. 18. For we have the
adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the
service of God, and the promises, Romans 9. 4. and such like Scriptures showing
great knowledge in this Dead Faith.

Secondly, such may have a kind of strong faith in all Gods graces through
Christ, and think that they believe them as well and as truly as any other,
as these and such like Scriptures teach: Thou say I am rich, and increased
with goods, and have need of nothing; but thou know not, that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Revel. 3. 17.
Again, When many believed Philip which preached the things that concerned the
Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus: then Simon Magus himself also
believed, and was baptized, and continued with Philip, and wondered when he saw
the signs and great wonders which were done, Acts 8. 12, 13. Again, the
Apostle says, I would not have you ignorant, Brethren, that all our fathers
were baptized unto Moses, in the cloud and in the sea, and did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink; for they drank
of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. But
with many of them God was not well pleased, for they were destroyed in the
Wilderness, and perished, 1 Cor. 10. 2. to 11. Thus we see that many bad
guests do sit down at the feast of the Gospel, seeming in their own opinion
to abound in faith and knowledge, to whom nothing is wanting but only the
not-having on the wedding garment, Mat. 22. 12. Thus much of their seeming
strong faith.

Thirdly and lastly, such as are in this Dead Faith may have a kind of great
humiliation and earnest repentance: As Ahab (though he was a King) rent his
clothes in great repentance, and put on sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted
and lay in sackcloth, and walked so mournfully, that the Lord the searcher of
hearts said, See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? mark, before me,
the Lord, and not before the world only; and yet was Ahab one in this Dead
Faith. And again, as David in the true faith repenting, said, I have greatly
sinned in that I have done, and have done very foolishly. So did Saul in the
Dead faith say, I have sinned, and have done foolishly, and have erred
exceedingly: Thou art more righteous than I; for thou have rendered me good, and
I have rendered thee evil, and he lift up his voice and wept, 1 Samuel, 24. 16,
17. and 26. 21. Neither only may such have this great humiliation and earnest
repentance, but also they may have a great zeal of Gods glory, and an earnest
endeavor of holy and righteous walking in all Gods Commandments, as it is
plainly declared, Esa. 58. 2, 3. saying, Yet they seek me daily, and delight
to know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the
ordinances of their God. They ask of me the ordinances of justice: They take
delight to draw near unto God by prayer and fasting, and punishing and
afflicting of themselves. And this they may do, not only not dissemblingly
and for vain glory and praise of men, as many gross Hypocrites and Pharisees
did, mentioned Matthew. 6. but as other Pharisees did of a good intent, so
zealously aiming at Gods glory, in resisting their corruptions and sins; and so
fervently following righteousness according to the Law of God, Romans 9. 31. to
the intent to be a holy people unto God by their works and well-doings; that
concerning prayer, and fasting, and all good works, and righteousness of the
Law they may be unblameable; as Paul testifies of himself and many other Jews
before their conversion to the Gospel, saying, I bear them record that they
have the zeal of God, Romans 10. 2. Instantly serving God day and night, Act.
26. 7. So eagerly following the Law of righteousness, as it were by the works
of the Law, Romans 9. 31, 32. that concerning the righteousness of the Law they
were unblameable, Phil. 3. 6. whereupon the Pharisee said, I thank thee, O God,
that concerning the second Table, I am no extortioner, nor unjust person, nor
adulterer, nor as this Publican. And in the first Table of the Law, I am so
zealous in thy worship, that I fast twice in the week, and so careful to
maintain thy service and relief of the poor, that I give tithe of all that I
possess, Luke 18. 11, 12. And by this opinion of righteousness and
well-pleasing of God, Paul being taught according to the perfect manner of the
law of the Fathers, was so zealous toward God, as they were all at that time,
that hepersecuted the Christians unto death, binding and delivering into
prison, both men and women, Act. 22. 3, 4. And after Paul was converted, this
devour, blind keeping of the law stirred up the devout and honorable women,
and the chief men of the City, and raised persecution against Paul and
Barnabas, and expelled both them and Christ himself with them, out of their
coasts, Acts 13. 15. Thus we see this first maine point proved, how far the
Dead faith goes in humiliation, repentance, and zealous keeping of the Law,
wherein they greatly appear in outward profession to themselves and others, to
be zealous Christians in the true faith of Christ: whereas in this dead faith,
gilt and varnished over with a blind, legal zeal of keeping all Gods will and
commandments, they are inwardly rather Jews, and devout zealous Pharisees,
than true saved Christians. And thus much of the first point, how far the
dead faith will go in the profession of the Gospel, and how like it is to the
true saving faith.

2. The second main point is, that now we consider the plain and evident marks
whereby this dead faith may be discerned, and whereby it discovers it self to
be naught in the three aforesaid parts, and appearances of the true lively
faith.

1. First their foresaid great knowledge before described is but literal, as
is before described, Romans 2. 17. to 29. And they are so puffed up with their
supposed great knowledge, 1 Cor. 8. 1. that they think they understand and
know as much as any true child of God can know, inwardly and secretly abhorring
to seem to learn any thing of any man: and yet they know nothing, neither the
Law nor the Gospel, neither faith nor works truly, as Saint Paul testifies,
saying, Now if any man thinks that he knows any thing, he knows nothing
yet, as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. For they being (...), that is, men
merely consisting of a natural soul, do understand the benefits and
mysteries of Christ after a carnal and humane-witted fashion of understanding;
and having not on the wedding garment, do hang upon works, and stick fast in
the religion of reason, and in the light of nature, described by the Apostle,
Romans 2. 14, 15. saying, the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the
things contained in the Law, which show the works and effect of the Law
written in their hearts, their consciences also bearing wtiness, and their
thoughts accusing them, that is, with fear of punishment when they do evil;
and excusing them, that is, with hoping to speed well, when they do well: here
is the whole maine of their religion. And do thus draw others from faith and
Christ, to hang upon works with themselves, and so make a number of sects and
schisms about works, turning all Gospel it self into precept upon precept,
and line upon line, Esaias 28. 10. and being fleshly, and sensual, not having
the spirit, Iud. 19. Though they talk and glory greatly of it, yet they see
not, and discern not the spiritual and invisible benefits wrought upon Gods
Children by the blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 9. but only ( picarum instar) after
the manner of pies do chatter of them: All their seeming great knowledge being
merely blindness and darkness: yea, (which is wonderful) none so blind as
they; as these and such like Scriptures teach: Hear ye deaf, and regard ye
blind, that ye may see: who is blind but my servant, and deaf as my messenger
that I send? who is blind as the perfect? Esaias 42. 17, 18. Whereupon the same
Prophet says, Stay your selves and wonder, they are blind and make you blind;
Therefore behold I will do a mavelous work in this people, even a mavelous
work, and a wonder. For the wisdom of the wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. For the Lord has covered you
with a spirit of slumber, and has shut up your eyes, the Prophets and your
chief Seers has he covered, Esaias 29. 9. 10. 14. The reason whereof is because
they seeing do not see, and hearing they do not understand, Matthew. 13. 13.
whereby in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias; saying, By hearing they
shall hear, that is, they hear (as they think) perfectly, but shall not
understand; and seeing ye shall see, that is, they shall see (as they think)
excellently well, but not perceive. For this peoples heart is waxed gross, and
their ears are dull of hearing. And with their eyes they have winked, lest
they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should
understand with their hearts, and should return that I might heal them. And
yet they say, are we blind also? But Jesus said unto them, If you were blind,
ye should in comparison have no sin; But now ye say, We see; therefore your
sin remains (double.) For I am come unto judgment into this world, that
they which see not might see, and that they which (say they) see might be made
blind, John 9. 39, 40, 41. And yet by this blindness they calumniating the
faith, words and works of the true believers are ever ready pressed to call
light darkness, and darkness light, good evil, and evil good, and to put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Esa. 5. 20. And thus much of their
great knowledge that are in the dead faith, being mere blindness as we see.

2. Secondly, concerning their faith. Although they seem to have a strong
faith in the mysteries of the Gospel, and to preach eloquently the benefits of
Christ: yet they speak preposterously, ignorantly, and confusedly of them,
saying, Sibboleth, but cannot say Shibboleth And because when they speak of
them, they understand not what they speak; all things in the plain Gospel
being unto them in Parables, as Christ says, Mark 4. 11, 12. therefore they
will not only in diverse Sermons, but often times in one and the same Sermon,
or conference, if not in plain words, yet in plain sense, speak flat
contraries, in and to the works of Christ, and mysteries of the Gospel: and so
say and unsay, saying one way, and unsaying, and denying the same things again
another way. And thus do see many things (as the Prophet Esaias 42. 20. says)
but keep not neither in words nor deeds, to the causes, to the nature, or to
the effects of the things which they seem to see, grant, and hold. Because
though they be great Doctors, yet they know not what they speak, nor whereof
they affirm, and even (as it were) confidently swear to, 1 Timothy 1. 7.
especially in the spiritual benefits, and mysteries of the Gospel. And so are
Saint James his double-minded men, tossed to and fro, like a wave of the sea,
and are unstable in all their ways of Religion, and these obtain nothing of
the Lord, James 1. 6, 7, 8. And all their seeming strong faith is indeed before
God nothing else but mere unbelief, as Christ testifies of such, saying,
There are some of you, (namely that profess by believing that you are my
Disciples but ye believe not; For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were
that believed not, and who should betray him, John 6. 64. And this dead faith
being like a dead man, that cannot stay up himself to stand upon his own
feet, nor rest upon his own strength; they go about to set him up, and to
underprop this dead man, that is, this dead faith with the rotten staff of
their works. And hereupon giving but a flourish of praise now and then to
faith in general; they being utterly ignorant and void of true justifying and
saving faith, do dwell in, rest upon, and stay up themselves and their dead
faith principally by works. And hereupon do in their hearts dignifie, and in
their words magnify, extol, and extort with legal arguments a preposterous
sanctification, repentance, mortification, grace, and graces Popishly and
falsely understood; new life, holy and righteous walking, universal obedience
to all Gods commandments, sincerity, humiliation, uprightness, fastings,
regeneration, Popishly also and falsely understood; and such like works
extorted (as I said) with legal arguments, of I hope of rewards and speedings
well, if we do them; and with fear of punishments and speeding ill, if we
have them not: which how much the more they are thus preposterously exacted and
legally extorted, so much the more under terms and titles of the Gospel, such
Preachers teach but the light of nature, the pride of works, and the
vainglory of man; and so do withdraw people from Christ to hang upon their
own works and doings, by resting upon the Popish rotten pillar, that God
accepts the will for the deed, and so do drown Christ's glory, free
Justification, do destroy faith, waste and consume the Church of Christ, teach
a false bastard sanctification, and are those dangerous seducers of souls,
that the faithful are commanded (as they will continue chaste Virgins to
Christ, and not to be beguiled with Eve by the subtlety of the Serpent, and
seduced from the simplicity of their faith that is in Christ) to discern and
take notice of, as they are described, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. where the Apostle
forewarneth, and thereby sufficiently fore-armeth all the children of wisdom
by thus plainly describing them. They profess themselves Apostles; that is,
sent forth of God: But they are (says Paul) false Apostles, and they are great
workers, but (says he) deceitful workers. How deceitful? transforming
themselves (says he) into the Apostles of Christ; that is, as if they were the
true Ministers of Christ, and taught the true Gospel of Christ: and no marvel;
for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light, and therefore it is
no great thing if his Ministers transform themselves, as though they were the
Ministers of 'righteousnesse; that is, calling earnestly for all works of
righteousness. But their end shall be according to their works and
righteousness, that is, though they see me to be the principal men that
shall be saved, yet the same Apostle threatens to them certain destruction.
Which he warns of purpose that we may not believe every spirit, but rather
try the spirits (by this description) whether they be of God, 1 John 4. 1.
Seeing these are the wolves whereof Saint Paul gave warning, Acts 20, 29. 30.
that should arise up out of the allowed Ministry, and should teach not seeming
false things, but only (...), preposterous things, or true things out of
order, setting the cart before the horse; that is, caring more to call for
works and a good life, than they care whether the people have assurance of the
sound faith of their free and perfect Justification, whereby although the
people bear them record, and applaud them, that they have the zeal of God; yet
it is not according to the knowledge of free Justification; Because (by a
carnal understanding of free Justification) they being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, must needs go about to stablish and set up the golden
calf of their own and the peoples own righteousness, of their supposed
sanctification, works, and well doings: and by thinking secretly in their heart
with the Papist, that free Justification is easily learned and is ready to open
the gate to the people to live wickedly and loosely, they seldom and slightly
preach free Justification, and thereby show that they have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 2, 3. And so are the
Ministers of Satan (as the true Protestants say) and are white Devils that
preach a secret Idolatry under the likeness of the true Ministers of the
Gospel; and for darkning and giving a Judas his kiss to free justification
(which only makes the true Church of Christ, and by which only Christ reigns
in his Church, as a free and glorious Redeemer and Savior) do stand ipso
facto accursed of God, and excommunicated by Saint Paul, though in all other
gifts (and as they say graces) they be like Angels from heaven, as Saint Paul
testifies Gal. 1. 8, 9. And because the greatest multitude of holy religious
ones (in a cold love to Christ, and a hot love to themselves in their own
doings and vain glory) care not to try the spirits whether they be of God, or
no, 1 John 4. 1. therefore God sends them (these zealous and holy working
Preachers in the dead faith as) strong delusions, Ezekiel. 14. 9. that they should
believe lies and be damned, because they receive not the love of the truth of
the wedding garment, being the only saving truth, Gal. 3. 1. to 8. that they
might be saved, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. and that only makes us free, John 8.
32. And being freed from the bondage and servile yoke of works, that the
children of God in the old Testament were under, Gal. 3. 23, 24, 25. and
chapter 4. 1, 7. does make us stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free, and not to be entangled in the said yoke of bondage again, Gal.
5. 1. whereas contrariwise, such zealous legal Professors, are either seeming
humble, proud Pharisees confident in their own well-doings, Luke 18. 11, 12.
or else ever wounded in their souls, distracted into sects, and troubled in
their consciences about their life and doings. And God in just judgment for the
ingratitude of such, does suffer blind zealous leaders of the blind zealous
multitude often times every where to swarm and abound, whereby both Preachers
and innumerable people fall into the pit of destruction, as Christ the truth it
self testifies and denounces, Matthew. 15. 14. Let them alone, they be blind
leaders of the blind: And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch, to wit, of destruction. And these are the traitors that under color of
greatest friendship with God, and of lying in his very lap by working out their
salvation, in distrust, in free grace, and in trust in their works and
well-doings, do break our peace with God in this land, do betray whole
Kingdoms and Countries into their enemies hand. Because they truly know not
free justification, that only makes our peace with God, as these and such like
Scriptures teach, Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace
with God, etc. this place being an exposition, as it were of that saying, Number.
23. 21. spoken then but prophetically, inchoatively, and typically at the
lifting up of the brazen serpent, saying, God sees no iniquity in Jacob, and
he sees no transgression in Israel. This is to be justified by faith. Then
follows the peace and reconciliation that we have therefrom. Therefore the
Lord his God is with him, and the joyful shout of a King is among them; that
comes only by free justification, which prophecy is now by Christ the
substance (signified by that brazen serpent) fully wrought and completely
exhibited and brought upon us in the new Testament, saying, And ye which were
in times past strangers and enemies in your mind by evil works, has he now
reconciled: How? or by what means? In the body of his flesh through death, by
making you so holy that you are (...), without all blame and without all fault
in Gods sight: if you continue rooted and grounded in this faith of free
justification by Christ's blood and death, and be not moved away from this hope
of the Gospel, Col. 1. 21, 22, 23. But contrariwise, Christ weeping over
Jerusalem, denounced, that their enemies should lay their city and them even
with the ground, and not leave a stone upon another that should not be cast
down; why? because they knew not the things that did belong to their peace,
that is, they knew not their reconciliation by Christ, they knew not his
righteousness to justify them, which only makes peace with God: but these
things were hid from their eyes, Luke 19. 41, 42, 44. Therefore did the Prophet
say, For Zions sake I will not hold my tongue, and for Ierusalems sake I will
not rest until the righteousness thereof break forth as the light: for then
the safety and salvation thereof will be as a burning Lamp. And when the
Gentiles, or people see thy righteousness and the Kings thy glory, thou shall
be a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a Royal Diadem in the hand of
thy God: It shall no more be said unto thee, forsaken: neither shall it any
more be said unto thy Lands, desolate. But thou shall be called Hephziah,
that is, my delight is in her, for the Lord will delight in thee, Esaias 62. For
thy people shall be all righteous, they shall possess the Land for ever, the
graffe of my planting shall be the work of my hands, that I may be glorified,
Esaias 60. 21. Because, as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by
the obedience of one shall many (to the end of the world) be made righteous,
Romans 5. 19. whereby, if by one man's offense, the displeasure, anger of God, and
death reigned by one: much more they which receive that abundance of grace, and
that abundance of the gift of that righteousness, shall reign in
reconciliation, well-pleasing of God, peace and life through one, that is,
Jesus Christ. That as sin had reigned unto displeasure, wrath, and death:
even so might grace reign by righteousness unto reconciliation, peace, and
eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5. 17, 21. But contrariwise, they
that are not justified by faith, have no peace with God: but by their dead
faith are fourefold traitors; namely, traitors to Christ and his Gospel,
traitors to his Church and children, traitors to their King and country, and
traitors to their own bodies and souls, seeming great friends to all these,
but betraying every one of these with a Judas his kiss. Because although they
seem in this dead Faith, and blind zeal of the Law, and works, to be lifted up
in as high a faith and happiness as any can be; yet if they do not come out of
this dead faith when they dye, be it sooner or later, they cast down themselves
into greater damnation, than if they had never professed Gods word and the
Gospel of Christ at all, as Christ testifies Matthew. 11. 23, 24. saying, and
thou Capernaum that art exalted into Heaven, (namely in professing Gods word)
shall be thrown down to hell: for if the mighty works which have been done in
thee (much more being professed to be received and believed of thee) had been
done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day: But I say unto you, it
shall be more tolerable or easy for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment
than for thee. And again, Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for
ye compass sea and land (that is, take exceeding great pains and labor) to
make one Proselyte, (that is, one zealous Professor, as you say, of the pure
word of God, and holy worship of God) and when he is made, you make him twofold
more the child of Hell than your selves, Matthew. 23. 15. And thus much of the
dead Faith, gilt over with the legal zeal of works, and confidence of
practicing repentance, humiliation, and all holy duties, by a supposed
universal obedience to all Gods commandments: and yet all is but a false
legal bastard sanctification.

3. But now thirdly, which most of all discovers this dead Faith, and blind
zeal of the good works of the Law to be mere superstitious hypocrisy,
whereof Christ gives warning to his Disciples, saying, First of all beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy, Luke 12. 1. If the old matter
of the pure Gospel be uttered but after a new manner, otherwise than these like
blind mill-horses are accustomed to run round in: or if their literal
knowledge, dead Faith, and blind legal zeal be any way a little crossed, or
but touched (although a faithful Minister must needs teach nove, but not nova,
that is after a new manner, but not any new matter) yet these humble ones, just
like Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. in that new manner of speaking do rise up against
Christ, and count the old mysteries of Christ and of his Gospel to be nova,
novelties, new doctrines; as these said when Christ himself began first to
preach the old revealed will of his Father, What thing is this? What new
doctrine is this? Mark 1. 27. Yea they count the same stark naught, and mere
foolishness, as Saint Paul says, (...), the natural man, or the man of a
mere humane soul perceives not the things of the spirit of God, but they are
foolishness unto him, neither can be perceive them, 1 Cor. 2. 14. And because
they are not truly humbled to tremble at every word of God, to believe the same
according as it is spoken, agreeable to the greatness and majesty of God the
speaker, Romans 4. 18. And because their foresaid legal zeal of their holy
working is void of Christian love and charity; therefore their feet are swift
to pick quarrels, to make a man an offender for a word, and to turn aside the
just for a thing of naught, Esaias 29. 21. And feeling their dead faith, and
corrupt worship of God to be, as I said, but touched; then their blind zeal
calumniating (as I said before) the faith, words, and works of true believers,
boyleth forth into our-cries of errors, heresies, and blasphemies: And most
innocent Christ himself shall among these not escape the black censure of
being counted a seducer of the people, and a blasphemer and troubler of the
Church: thus vilely speaking evil, and blaspheming the things they know not,
as Jude says verse 10. And being by their corrupt light of nature, naturally
born subtle sophisters against the light of grace and faith: hereby out of the
sweet flowers where the Be sucketh honey, they by the cunning art of malice do
suck poison: And then cast the imputation thereof upon the truth with outcries
of errors, heresies, and blasphemies; when all the heresy, and blasphemy is
the unbelief in their own hearts. And thus being those truth-biting dogs
(mentioned in the Scripture, Phil. 3. 2.) that bark in the daytime at true
men, they stick not to charge the truth, that it breaks the peace of the
Church, and troubles all Israel: when it is not he (as Gods word and the
established doctrine of our Church largely teach) that maintains the truth,
and holds fast the faithful word, Tit. 1. 9. But the unbeleevers in the dead
faith, that cavil and sophistrate, and resist the truth. These are they that
trouble the Church, that is, make tumults; because they can never with
Nicodemus leave wrangling, tumultuating; deriding, and scoffing at the truth of
Christ's mysteries, as seeming error, and foolishness unto them, until their
false, bloody, holy zeal of Gods glory proceed to the last mark of hypocrites,
even to smite Micaiah on the cheek, saying, When went the Spirit of the Lord
from me to speak unto thee? 1 King. 22. 24. And so they run with speed to
bitter accusations, and bloody persecutions, except they be either with
Nicodemus and Paul truly enlightened and converted to the true faith, or this
seed of the serpent be for nibling at the heels of Gods faithful children, of
God crushed in the head by the wise and godly Magistrate, or (as Cains brood)
be cast out of the house and Church of God as Ismaelites, and so cut off by God
himself, as he says Gal. 4. 30 Cast out the bondwoman and her son, for the
son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the free woman.
And then and not till then they cease to trouble the Church; God at the last
thus plainly manifesting to the world, that although their foresaid holy, and
bloody blind zeal of Gods glory seem very beautiful and be highly esteemed
before men, and in their own account; yet that it is most vile, and horrible
abomination in the sight of God; as Christ himself testifies of such, saying,
ye are they that justify your selves before men; but God knows your hearts:
For that which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of
God, Luke 16. 15.

All this description and discovery of this dead faith, gilt over with the
blind zeal and confidence of an universal obedience to all Gods commandments,
is as pithily as briefly expressed by the established doctrine of our Church,
saying thus; That such men as make a goodly show of all good works, and many
holy and godly ordinances, whereby they appear to the world the most religious
and holy of all men: yet being blind and void of true justifying faith, that
only makes the inside of the vessel clean and pure, Act. 15. 9 Christ that
saw their hearts knew that they were inwardly in the sight of God most unholy,
most abominable, and farthest from God of all men. Against which Sects and
their pretended holiness, Christ cries out more vehemently than he did
against any other persons. But why are such holy and godly men so abominable
before God? Because (says the established doctrine of our Church) although
they seem to the world most perfect men (mark I pray) both in life and
doctrine, (why, what can be wished more?) yet is their judgment preposterous,
their doctrine sour leaven, and their life hypocrisy. Sermon. of man's misery.
Sermon of free Justification: and Sermon of good works.

And thus much of the marks to discern who be in this dead faith; which as
none can discern and discover, but he that is in the true faith: because such
an one only has the mind of Christ, by which he discerns all things: but is
judged of no man, 1 Cor. 2. 15, 16. So is the matter, so weighty and worthy to
be discovered, that I heartily wish that some man of a far greater measure
and gift of faith than my self, would so point out and plainly lay forth the
vileness of the same, as that the ugliness of it might appear unto all men,
as it is in it self; yea I wish that every Christian were a Preacher and writer
against this most dangerous dead faith.

3. Now thirdly, on the contrary side, Because contraria inter se opposite a
magis elucent; that is, Contraries set one against another, do shine forth the
brighter. Let us therefore consider the parts likewise, of the true, lively,
and saving faith, which are these three.

First, the true, humble, spiritual knowledge: for the true knowledge is an
humble knowledge, feeling (through a true sight, yet but a weak sight) the
things of the kingdom of heaven, being ever ready and willing to learn
further and more even of our inferiors that bring the true word of God, and
pure Gospel of Christ, to the further edifiing of us in our most holy faith,
Jude 20. As learned Apollos that was mighty in the Scriptures, being a zealous
preacher was willing to admit conference with Aquila and Prescilla a woman, and
being instructed by them in the way of the Lord more perfectly, he preached
Christ with great efficacy, Act. 18. 24. to 28. Yea this true humble knowledge
is ever crying out with David, O open mine eyes that I may see the wonders of
thy Law, Psalm. 119. 18. For which cause Paul prayed fervently for the
Ephesians, and all other Christians whom he had converted, That God the father
of glory, would give unto them the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him, that the eye of their understanding might be more
enlightened, that they might know what the hope is of their calling, and what
the riches of his glorious inheritance is in his Saints, Ephesians. 17, 18.

Again, as the former blind and proud knowledge is but literal, so this true
knowledge is spiritual, which by the spirit discerns and sees the
spiritual things of God, both of the Law and of the Gospel, especially
discerning and seeing the invisible benefits. and unsearchable riches of the
Gospel wrought upon us by the blood, death, and resurrection of Christ,
according as they are spoken Romans 4. 18. being impossible to humane reason,
bodily sight, sense, and feeling, as these and such like Scriptures teach. The
eye has not seen, nor the ears heard, nor has entered in the heart of man,
that is, the natural man, the things that God has prepared for them that love
him. But God has revealed them unto us by his spirit. For the spirit searches
all things, yea the deep things of God. For what man knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of a man that is in him? Even so the things of God knows
no man, save the spirit of God. Now we have received not the spirit of the
world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know, or as the original
word is, (...), that we might see the things that are freely given to us of
God, 1 Cor. 2. 9. to 13. But contrariwise, the natural or the man of the mere
humane soul, receives not, or perceives not, or approves not the things of
the spirit of God, as they are spoken by the spirit, For they are foolishness
unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned; but
he that is spiritual, discerns all things, verse. 14, 15. Again, hereupon
did Paul say, Yea, doubtless I count all things but loss, for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of
all things, and do count them but dung, that I may gain Christ, that I may be
found in him not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that
which is by the faith of Christ, even that which is of God through faith, Phil.
3. 8, 9. Thus the spiritual man discerns, sees, and only esteems and
highly prizeth only spiritual things, and invisible to the bodily eyes: and
so has an ear to hear what the spirit says, whereof the Lord Christ so
often speaks, saying, He that has ears to hear let him hear, Matthew. 13.
9. and that which is often repeated, Rev. 2. and 3. chapters, saying, He that
has an ear let him hear what the spirit says unto the Churches. And these
and only these do compare spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor. 2. 13. And
thus much of the true spiritual knowledge.

Secondly, hereof arises the true lively and justifying faith, which truly
saves us, consisting in having on the wedding garment of Christ's perfect
holiness and righteousness, making us so perfectly holy and righteous, from
all spot of sin in the sight of God freely by faith only, without works,
that we feel true comfort, peace with God in our hearts, and joy in the Holy
Ghost, as these and such like Scriptures teach: Esa. 61. 10. I will greatly
rejoice in the Lord, and my soul shall be joyful in my God: why? what is the
matter? what is the cause of such joy and great rejoicing? why, He has
clothed me with the garments of salvation: That is just matter indeed of great
joy: A man can wish no greater matter of joy, than to be clothed with the
garment of salvation: what is that garment of salvation? why, he has covered
me with the robes of righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself with his
ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with her jewels. But the feast of
the Gospel being furnished with guests both good and bad, the King came in to
see the guests; and saw there a man that had not on this wedding garment: And
he said unto him, Friend, how came thou hither, and have not on the wedding
garment? and he was speechless: Then said the King to the servants, Bind him
hand and foot, take him away, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 22. 10. to 14. Therefore get on the white
robe that thou may be clothed, and thy filthy nakedness do not appear:
Anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see, Rev. 3. 18. For all have
sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God: but are justified (that is, made
righteous again) freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, Romans 3. 23, 24. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners:
so by the obedience of one shall many (to the end of the world) be made
righteous, Romans 5. 19. That as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace
reign by righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord, ver. 21.
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, Romans 5. 1. And thus
we are regenerated and freely made new creatures to Godward, whereby we are
made all new, even the righteousness of God in this faith of Christ: as Paul
in spirit testified, saying, If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old
things are passed away, Behold all things are become new: and all things are of
God who has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ. But how are all things
become new? why, God has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin: to what
end? that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, that is, by this
faith in him.

Thus are we become all new, and so by relying and resting wholly and only in
these invisible riches wrought upon us by the blood of Christ, impossible to
our reason, and contrary to our bodily sight, sense and feeling, we do so walk
in the steps of the faith of our father Abraham, as they are (that we may not
err, wander, and go astray from them) plainly described by Paul, Romans 4. 19.
to 25. saying, And he not weak in faith considered not his own body now dead,
being almost an hundred years old: nor yet the deadness of Sarahs womb,
neither did he doubt of the promise of God (concerning the justifying seed)
through unbelief: But was strengthened in faith, and gave glory to God, being
fully assured, that he which had promised (would be as good as his word,
though it seemed never so impossible to his present sent sense and feeling) and
was able to do it. And it therefore was imputed to him for righteousness. Now
it was not written for Abraham's sake only, that it was imputed to him for
righteousness: but also for us to whom it shall be imputed for
righteousness, which believe in him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the
dead, who was delivered to death for our sins, to no other end than to
abolish them from before his father, Heb. 9. 26. whereby the blood of Jesus
Christ the son of God does make us clean from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. And is
risen again for our full and perfect justification.

This is the true lively and justifying faith: This faith makes us not
bastardly children, but the true, kind, proper, and natural children, not of
Abram but of Abraham. This is the faith by which we are truly blessed, and as
truly saved as Abraham himself; as Paul testifies Gal. 3. 8. 9. saying The
Scriptures (that is, the spirit of God speaking in the Scriptures) foreseeing
that God would justify the Heathen through faith, preached the joyful news
unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all the Gentiles be blessed: So that they
which be of this faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham. And what can we
desire more than to be blessed? Now because this free justification, or the
having on this wedding garment, cannot be believed and enjoyed by this
justifying faith, but by looking into the gaping wounds of Christ, bleeding out
his blood and life to effect this free justification upon the believer.
Therefore only this justifying faith smites the heart of the believer with the
true love of Christ and of God in Christ, which reflecteth back from God
generally upon all men, as they bear the image of God, yet rests principally
upon the Church and household of faith, and makes the true believers to abound
in every good work, doing good unto all men, but especially unto the household
of faith, Gal. 6. 10. and that not of constraint, corruptly, and
hypocritically; but cheerfully, sincerely, and joyfully: because both Christ
and the Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of heaven by this true, lively,
justifying faith is within us, Luke 17. 21. Into which Kingdom of heaven no
unclean thing can enter, Rev. 21. 27. Because this Kingdom of heaven is
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. And the more
this faith of free Justification, and of having on this wedding garment,
increases; the more this peace and joy in the holy Ghost increases. For the
which it is called the garment of joy and gladness, Esa. 61. 3. And the more
this peace and joy increases, the more the foresaid love increases, and
enflameth the heart to walk freely, cheerfully, and zealously in all Gods will
and commandments declaratively to manward, and to do our vocatious, and all
good works freely, of mere love, without hope of reward or fear of
punishment, which is true sanctification, which causes us to live here among
men, as Christ himself lived, that is, not only doing all things, but also
cheerfully suffering all things to edify one another in our most holy faith
that only saves us, Jude 20. And to the glory of God our reconciled and well
pleased father in Christ, as St. John 1. Epist. chap. 2. verse. 6. testifies,
saying, He that says he abides in Christ, ought even so to walk as he has
walked. Thus much of the true saving faith.

Thirdly, of this justifying faith that works by love, there follows
inseparably a true right Evangelicall zeal of Gods glory, whereby we feeling
how by our original corruption, and by breaking the tenth commandment, and
thereby the first commandment, and all the rest in our best good works,
whereby that saying of Saint James is true in our best good works, That
whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all: we find both our selves and all our works and best actions to be so
shut up under sin, Gal. 3. 22. that being truly humbled with a vile esteem of
our selves and all our best good works, we do grant not with lip and tongue
only (as many bastard Protestants do) but do feel in our hearts in deed and
truth, that all our righteousness, even of sanctification, is as foul,
stained, filthy rags, Esaias 64. 6. Whereupon our hearts are so inflamed with
such an high prizing, and only esteeming of the wedding garment of Christ's
obedience and righteousness perfectly justifying us, and all our works. That
not only every true Minister of the Gospel, but also every true Christian
cease all contention about works, and is carried with a zealous affection to
know nothing among Gods people save Jesus Christ and him crucified to justify
them, 1. Cor. 2. 2. by which they are made such true burning coals of Gods
Altar, so enflamed with this holy fire of Christ's love from heaven, that they
cannot choose but inflame and kindle all others that come near them, caring for
nothing but to be found our selves, and to cause others to be found in Christ,
that is, not having our own righteousness in esteem, which at the best is
but man's glory before men only, Romans 4. 2. but in the most precious robes of
Christ's righteousness, making both us, and all our works perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in Gods sight, freely by faith only without
works; and so do truly know Christ, and grace, and faith, and works rightly,
as these and such like Scriptures teach: Yea doubtless, I count all things but
loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win or
gain Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is
of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the
righteousness which is of God through faith, Phil. 3. 8, 9. neither do I
pass of crosses and afflictions at all, nor do I count my life dear unto my
self, so that I may fulfill my course with joy, and the ministry which I have
received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel (that is, the joyful news)
of the grace of God, Act. 20. 24. That I might be the Minister of Jesus Christ
toward the Gentiles, ministering (as the worship of God) the Gospel (that is,
the joyful news) of God: That the offering up of the Gentiles might be
acceptable being sanctified by the holy Ghost. So that from Jerusalem, and
round about unto Illiricum I have (by Christ working in me) caused to abound
the Gospel (that is, the joyful news) of Christ, Romans 15. 16, 19. Yea so I
forced my self to preach this joyful news, not where Christ was named, lest I
should build upon another man's foundation: But as it is written, to whom he
was not spoken of, they shall see, and they that have not heard, they shall
understand, verse. 20, 21.

All which again is as briefly as notably expressed, by the established
Doctrine of our Church, out of Saint Basil, saying thus, This is a perfect and
whole rejoicing in God, when a man advances not himself for his own
righteousness: but acknowledges himself to lack true justice and
righteousness; and to be justified by only faith in Christ.

And the Apostle Saint Paul says, he does glory; in what? in the contempt of
his own righteousness; and that he looks for the righteousness of God by
faith, Sermon of salvation second part. Which established doctrine of our
Church is lamentably lost of too many Professors among us now a days. In stead
whereof must needs come in the contrary doctrine, and religion of rejoicing in
and greatly esteeming our own righteousness: but of small joy and little
regarding of Christ's righteousness perfectly justifying us. Thus much of the
right zeal of God.

4. The fourth and last point, and main thing to be considered concerning this
dead faith, is; What is the speediest course and most effectual means by
which we may come out of this dead faith, into the true lively and justifying
faith, and by which we may call others out of the same; which speediest course
or most effectual means, consists but in two maine things thoroughly marked
and deeply considered.

1. The first is to look so truly into the pure and infinite righteous nature
of God, that we clearly see in the two looking-glasses, both of the Law and of
the Gospel, the horrible filthiness of sin to be such, that God cannot but
curse and throw out of his favor and liking the creature that has any sin
in his sight, as these and such like Scriptures teach, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Cursed is
every man that continues not in all things that are written in the book of
the Law to do them: Mark, Cursed (that is, cast out of my love and favor for
ever. ( Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, Matthew. 25. 41.) is every one that
continues not in all things, that is, that has the least sin in his sight.
For if we have the least sin in Gods sight, we do not continue in all
things, and so must needs be accursed of God; or else his righteous nature must
needs be changeable in his definitive sentence against sin, which cannot be.
Fearful examples hereof are, First, the Angels, who although they were most
glorious creatures for pure holiness and righteousness: yet as soon as they
conceived but one sin, but in thought only, God spared them not (says
Peter) that sinned, but cast them down into Hell, and delivered them into
chains of darkness to be reserved unto condemnation, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Another
fearful example is that of Adam, who by one sin only brought upon him by
subtilty, did cast himself into death and destruction, and all his posterity,
even infinite millions of men and women into infinite millions of sins and
miseries, as Paul expresses, Romans 5. 12. saying, As by one man sin entered into
the world, and by sin death: so death goes over all men, in that all have
sinned, whereby through the offense of one many be dead, verse. 15. Because the
judgment came by that one offense upon all men to condemnation, verse 16. Now
the reason why God cannot but curse and cast away out of his love and favor,
the creature that has any sin in Gods sight, is because the horrible
filthiness of sin is such to Gods infinite pure and righteous nature, that
God cannot but detest, hate, abhor, and count abominable the creature in whom
he sees any sin, or that has the least sin in his sight, as these and such
like Scriptures teach. Behold the heavens are unclean in Gods sight, how much
more is man filthy and abominable, who drinks iniquity like water? Job 15.
15, 16. Thus we see that sin does make the creature spiritually foul,
filthy, loathsome, and abominable in Gods sight, though no curse or punishment
should follow upon the same: as Christ himself also testifies Mark 7. 20. to
23. saying, That which comes out of the man, that defiles the man. For out
of the heart of man come evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders,
thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye,
blasphemies, pride, foolishness. All these evil things come from within, and
these defile a man. Therefore did the Prophet Habakkuk say, God is of pure eyes
and cannot see sin, and cannot behold iniquity; but he must needs destroy
either the sin or the sinner from before him. But for this purpose was the
son of God made manifest that (in the faithful) he might destroy sin, the
work of the Devil, 1 John 3. 6. Because he was made manifest to take away our
sins. For in him is no sin, verse. 5. But unto the unbeleeving Jews the
Prophet says, Behold the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save,
neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear: but your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hindered good things
from you, Esaias 29. 1. Jer. 5. 25.

And for the deeper sight of this evil of sin, hear three things which the
Law teaches concerning sin, and deeply to be considered, and daily, and
diligently to be pressed upon secure consciences.

As first, The horrible increase of the evil of sin, because the least sin
by the Law forbidding it, Exodus 19, and 20. chapters, in fearful thundering,
and lightning, and terrible earthquake, and flaming fire reaching up to the
midst of heaven. Hereby the least sin (I say) is made out of measure sinful:
Because the least sin is increased to disobedience, and disobedience is
rebellion; that is, spiritual high treason against the highest Majesty; as
Samuel testifies of the disobedience of King Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 23. And as the
Prophet Daniel confesses of his sins, and the sins of his people, saying,
We have sinned, and done wickedly, yea, we have rebelled even by departing from
thy precepts; and thus (says he again) have we rebelled against God, Dan.
9. 5, 9. But rebellion (says Samuel) is as the sin of witchcraft, and
transgression is stubbornness, and stubbornness is wickedness and idolatry.
Thus did the Law enter upon sin, making the offense thereof to abound, Romans
5. 20. And thus the least sin by the Commandment forbidding it in such
terrible thundering and lightning, becomes out of measure, or exceeding sinful,
Romans 7. 13. And this is the first thing that the Law teaches concerning sin.

2. The second thing which the Law teaches is the multitude of our sins,
that the most honest and most religious among us are guilty of, against every
one of the ten Commandments: especially by the spiritual breach of the Law,
as Christ expounds the same in the fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of
Matthew, which made Paul to see that his whole nature was nothing else but a
mere contrariety to the spiritual meaning of the Law, saying, The Law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin, Romans 7. 14. And which made David
to cry out saying, My sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able
to look up: yea, they are me in number than the hairs of my head, Therefore
my heart has failed me, Psalm. 40. 12.

3. The third thing that the Law teaches concerning sin, is the fivefold
punishment belonging to the least sin: which God executes daily and hourly
upon one another, being Gods whip of five strings, with which he lasheth the
children of men in one place or other daily and continually, which are these
five.

1. First, the curse of God, Deuteronomy. 28. 15. to 20. If thou will not hearken to
the voice of the Lord thy God (namely which he spoke in thundering, and
lightning, and flaming fire) but do break his commandments, (that is, do do
the least sin) then all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee:
cursed shall thou be in the town, and cursed in the field; cursed shall be thy
basket and thy store, (that is, thy abundance that seems to thee a blessing,
shall be to thee accursed:) cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the
fruit of thy land, and the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep:
cursed shall thou be when thou come in, and cursed also when thou go out.
The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and trouble in all that thou
set thy hand to do, etc.

2. The second punishment is hardness of heart, that is, no spiritual sense
or feeling, but little caring for this curse of God upon us for sin, and a
slight regarding of free justification, which is the only remedy and means
that should heal us of this sin and curse, Matthew. 13. 15. For this peoples
heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and with their eyes
they have winked, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and should understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I
should heal them: But my people would not hear my voice, nor Israel would
none of me: So I gave them up to the hardness of their hearts, and they have
walked in their own counsel, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. whereby thou after thy
hardness and impenitent heart heapest up like a treasure to thy self, wrath
against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God,
Romans 2. 5.

3. The third sort of punishment for sin, is all manner of miseries, crosses,
and afflictions to body, goods, and name, which are ready every moment to
strike us: but to what end? to knock for us, and give us warning to be sure
that we be freely justified, and have on the wedding garment of Christ's
perfect righteousness, as it is expressed Job 33. 19. to verse 26. A man is
chastened with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong
pain, so that his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meats. His flesh
is consumed away; and his bones, that were not seen, stick out: his life
draws near to the grave, etc. But if there be a messenger with him, an
interpreter one of a thousand, to show unto a man his righteousness, that is,
his justifying righteousness by Christ, then God is gracious unto him, and
says, deliver him from going down into the pit, I have found a ransom.

4. The fourth punishment of sin is, that uncertain death is ready every
moment to strike us, we knowing neither the time when, nor the place where,
nor the manner how death will strike us: as God himself says, Deuteronomy. 28. 66. If
thou breakest my Commandments, and so do sin, thy life shall hang in doubt
before thee, etc. Thou shall have just cause to fear both night and day: for
thou shall have no assurance of thy life: For God said to the rich man, Luke
12. 20. Thou fool, this night will they (that is, the devils) fetch away thy
soul from thee, and then whose shall these things be which thou have
provided. So is every man that is not rich in God, that is, which has not on
the wedding garment of Christ's perfect righteousness, which only makes us
rich in God, Pro. 8. 18.

5 The fifth and last punishment for sin is, when death, which is so
uncertain, is come; then follows the full execution of Gods justice in hell
fire, there to endure easlesse and endless torments for ever and ever.
Therefore says Christ the Teacher of true wisdom, I say unto you, my
friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that are not able
to do any more: But I will forewarne you whom you shall fear: Fear him which
after he has killed, has power also to cast into hell; yea I say unto you,
fear him, Luke 12. 4, 5. for then he shall say, Depart ye cursed (which all
are that are not justified) into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and
his angels: and these shall go away into everlasting pain: but the righteous
only, that is, only they that are made perfectly holy and righteous in the
sight of God freely with Christ's righteousness, shall go into life
everlasting, Mat. 25. 41, 46.

Thus ought these three maine things that the Law teaches concerning sin to be
daily and diligently pressed upon sleeping consciences, secure in the least
sin; until the most upright, honest, yea, and most sanctified man in works may
feel himself slain by the Law, especially by the tenth Commandment, as Paul
was, Romans 7. 9. saying, For I once was alive without the Law; but when the
commandment, thou shall not lust, or covet, that is, thou shall not have the
least motion to any sin, came, that I understood it, sin revived, that is,
I saw my best good works to be sin which I took to be no sin before; but I
died, that is, I saw my self lost and damned by that beautiful sin, which I
took to be a good work before God, and no sin. And the same Commandment which
was by obeying it ordained unto life, I found by breaking it in my best good
works to be unto death. For sin, that is, original corruption dwelling in
me, taking occasion or force by the commandment, deceived me, that is, made my
best good works (as I did them) sin, when I took them to be no sin, and by
it, that is, by the commandment disobeyed and broken, slew me, that is, made
me to see, and feel my self to be in my best, and most sanctified good works,
a lost and damned creature: Because sin, that is original corruption
dwelling in me, that it might appear sin, did work death in me by that which
is good, that is, by that turning that into sin by defect, which was done by
the good and holy Law of God, that sin by the commandment disobeyed might
become out of measure or exceeding sinful. Hereupon and for this cause does
the most sanctified child of God truly enlightened, and slain by the Law, by
this right understanding of this tenth commandment, see and feel that which
is spoken of by Paul Romans 3. 9. to 19. to be most true in himself, and in his
best sanctified works, namely, That there is none righteous no not one, there
is none that understands, there is none that seeks God; they are all gone
out of the way, they are altogether become abominable, and unprofitable. There
is none that does good no not one. Their throat is an open sepulcher, with
their tongues they have used deceit, the poison of Asps is under their lips,
whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift, by anger
and malice, to shed blood; destruction and misery are in their ways, and the
way of peace they have not known; there is no fear of God before their eyes.
And whereas the natural man in the dead faith will by his civil, honest, and
supposed sanctified life, put all this away from himself to such as are
profane and grossly wicked; saying, that this is spoken of them that are merely
and wholly in the estate of nature, and that so peradventure he might have been
such a one, but now (thanks be unto God) he is not such a one; yet the true
sanctified children of God, that are truly enlightened to see the spiritual
meaning of the Law, do grant and truly feel, that by their daily and
continual spiritual breaches of the Law, they are truly such indeed as Paul
here describes; so shut up under sin, both they and all their best sanctified
good works, Gal. 3. 22. that there is not one that does good, no not one.
Whereby they feel that every mouth, even of the most sanctified, is stopped,
and all the world is found subject to the judgment of God. A clear example of
the truth hereof is Paul himself, who although he was one of the most
sanctified amongst men; yet he cried out, saying, The Law is spiritual, but I
am carnal, sold under sin: for to will is present with me; but I find no
means how to perform that which is good, Romans 7. 18. And thus feeling in
himself with the Prophet Esaias, that all his righteousness of sanctification
was as foul, menstrous, filthy rags, Esaias 64. 6. because in all his good works
he brake the tenth Commandment, and so as much as lay in him, did destroy
himself in all his good works, Hosea 13. 9. Even death it self being in the
pot of his most sanctified good works and best actions; therefore he cried
out, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death! Romans 7. 24. This is to be slain by the Law, this is to understand the
Law rightly, especially the tenth Commandment. And this is the first means to
come out of this dead faith, and to call others out of the same, being
thoroughly marked and deeply considered.

2 The second means to come out of this dead faith, and to call others out of
the same is, truly to understand, and open unto others the excellency of free
justification: That as the spirit has convinced us, and all our best works of
sin by the looking-glass of the Law, so the spirit may also convince us of
free given righteousness, Joh. 16. 8, 9, 10. namely, that we and all our
works are of unjust made just, that is, perfestly holy and righteous from all
spot of sin in the sight of God freely by faith only without works. And mark
how I say, not simply free justification; but the excellency of free
Justification must be diligently looked into, and deeply considered in four
principal respects.

1 First, in the most excellent and glorious causes of it, being the glorious
work of the whole Godhead wherein God the Father in giving his son, and God
the son in pouring forth his blood and life, and God the holy Ghost in
applying it to us, and in clothing, though mystically, yet truly, our souls
and bodies with this wedding garment, and in creating the new eyes of faith to
see these spiritual riches, do all work severally and wonderfully to effect
the same upon us, and that also freely, only by free grace, that is, God
respectign no goodness or worthiness in us to deserve the same, but rather
that we feel our wretched misery: nor respecting no evils or unworthiness in
us to hinder the free taking of his rich grace: That it might be to the praise
of the glory of his free grace wherewith he has made us freely accepted in
his beloved one, Ephesians. 1. 6. And for this cause does God bestow this benefit
upon us, that is, upon the young children of Christian parents, usually and
ordinarily in our baptism, even when we were little Infants; God pitying our
misery when we could not pity our selves, and washed us from the spiritual
blood of our original sin, Ezekiel. 16. 6, 9. with the washing of the new birth
and renewing of the holy Ghost, that we being justified by his grace should be
made heirs of eternal life, Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7. And (...), having made us pure
and clean by the washing of water through the word. That he might (even when
we were little senseless Infants, and thereby as good as double dead to all
sense and feeling in trespasses and sins, and by nature the children of
wrath) make us to himself a glorious Church, not having now at this present
time (as the Greek and Latin participles signify) one spot or wrinkle of
sin or any such thing, but are holy and without blame, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.
Because we are made thus perfectly pure and clean before God, not only from
that one offense of our original sin, but also from all the many actual
sins of our whole life, even in our baptism, even when we are Infants, that
is, utterly helpless in our selves, that all this blessedness may be the more
freely upon us: And that (as Saint Paul says) Although the judgment was by one
offense unto condemnation, yet the gift is not so; but the free gift is of many
offenses to justification, Romans 5. 16. So that if by one man's offense death
reigned by one, much more they that receive that abundance of grace, and of the
gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one, that is, Jesus Christ,
verse. 17. And thus we see, that as there is no difference of young or old, but
all have sinned, and are deprived, and come short of the glory of God: so all
that receive this free gift of righteousness, are justified freely by Gods
grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Romans 3. 23, 24. And thus
much of the excellent causes of free justification briefly touched.

2. Secondly, we must consider deeply the excellent nature it self of free
justification, in that it is the head and chiefest benefit of the Gospel,
whereby, by the power of Gods imputation we are so clothed with the wedding
garment of Christ's perfect righteousness, that of unjust we are made just
before God, that is, so perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in
the sight of God freely, by faith alone without works, That (as St. Paul
speaks) we are made the righteousness of God in him, that is, in this faith
in him: The excellency of which benefit was so rightly marked, and so
diligently considered by Chrysostom, that he thereupon breaks out into these
words of joy and admiration of the same, saying, Qualis sermo? what a saying is
this? what heart or understanding can sufficiently commend it, or set it forth?
For (says he) the righteous one he made a sinner, that he might make the
sinners righteous: nay he speaks not so slightly neither, but that which is
far more: For he said not, he made him a sinner, but sin; that we might be
made, he says, not righteous, but righteousness; yea and the righteousness
of God. For this is of God, because it is not of works: For the former
righteousness of good esteem in the Church was the righteousness of the Law
and of works; but this is the righteousness of God. Because it is necessary
that no spot be found in it, and from hence all sin vanishes away. Thus he
teaches the magnificence both of the gift and giver.

3. Thirdly, to look the better into the nature of this benefit; we must
consider deeply the excelent parts of this wonderful benefit, which are these
two chiefly.

1. First, that this wedding garment of Christ's perfect righteousness does
(though mystically, that is, above our reason, sight, sense, and feeling, that
we may live by faith in the truth and power of God speaking, and not by sight,
sense, and feeling, Romans 4. 18, to 25. yet freely) take away, and truly
abolish, not out of our flesh, 1 John 1. 8. but utterly abolish from before
God, and out of Gods sight, all our sins, as these and such like Scriptures
teach, John 1. 29. Behold the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world: For I, not you, but even I, being Sol iustitiae, the shining sun of
righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. will do away your iniquities like darkness, and
abolish your sins like a mist. Rejoice ye heavens, for the Lord has done it;
Shout ye lower parts of the earth, break forth into praises, O mountains. For
thus has the Lord redeemed Jacob, and thus will he be glorified in Israel,
Esa. 43. 25. and 44. 22, 23. For by himself has Christ purified and made us
clean from our sins, and is set at the right hand of the highest Majesty, Heb.
1. 3 Because if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer,
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: How much
more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered
himsellfe without spot to God, purge, purify, or make clean, our consciences
from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 13, 14. Therefore did he now
once in the end of the world appear (...), that is, to abolish, to do away, or
to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9. 26. For Jesus Christ
is that faithful witness, and that first begotten of the dead, and that
Prince of the Kings of the earth, who has loved us, and has washed us from
our sins in his own blood, Rev. 1. 5. whereby the blood of Jesus Christ the
son of God does make us clean from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. Now the son
having thus abolished our sins from before God, or out of Gods sight, Col. 1.
22. Hereupon does the father pardon, remit, and forgive all the punishment and
evil that is due to those sins, which his son has freely done away and
truly abolished out of his fathers sight, according to that testimony of
David, Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered, Psalm. 32. 1. Hereupon is all the anger of the father, and all his
displeasure, coffeehouse, death, and all other evils ceased, upon the
justified person before God the father. And thus much briefly of the excellency
of the first part of free justification.

2. The excellency of the second part of free justification is, That this
wedding garment of Christ's perfect righteousness does not only make us and
present us righteous in the sight of God, but it also makes us perfectly, and
completely, and sufficiently holy, and righteous from all spot of sin in the
sight of God, freely by faith only without works, or without our perfect
working; Yea, so sufficiently, and completely, and perfectly holy, and
righteous, that though mystically, yet wheresoever we sit, or walk, we shine
gloriously holy, and righteous in the sight of God, freely, as these and such
like Scriptures teach, Romans 5. 19. For as by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners: so by the obedience of one man shall many be made righteous:
whereby if by the offense of one, death reigned by one: much more, they which
receive the abundance of grace, and that abundance of the gift of
righteousness, shall reign in life through one, even Jesus Christ, Romans 5.
17. Therefore did the Angel Gabriel prophecy to Daniel, that after seventy
weeks of years, not only sin should be finished, and transgression made an
end of, and reconciliation made for iniquity: but also everlasting
righteousness be brought in upon the faithful, Dan. 9. 24. Thus is this
righteousness called not only an abundance of righteousness, and an
everlasting righteousness, but also hence it is said to make us complete
before God, even complete in him which is the head of all principalities and
powers, Col. 2. 10. Hence it is said to make us perfect, as with one sacrifice
he has made perfect for ever all them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. Hence
it is said to make us, and present us to God a glorious Church, as he has made
us pure or clean, by the washing of water through the word, to make us to
himself a glorious Church, not having, now at this present time, (as the Greek
and Latin Participles signify) one spot or wrinckle of sin, or any such
thing: but to be so holy, that we are unblameable, or without blemish, before
God Ephesians. 27. Because in the body of his flesh through death he makes us, or
presents us, so holy that we are (...), that is, without all blame, and without
all fault in Gods sight, if we continue rooted and grounded in this faith; upon
which place Chrysostom says, He has not only freed us from sin, but also he
has made us honorable, and glorious in Gods sight. Hence it is that this
wedding garment of Christ's perfect righteousness was signified by the vesture
of the gold of Ophir, that makes the bride of Christ a Queen, and all glorious
within, that is, spiritually, and mystically, saying, At thy right hand does
stand the Queen in a vesture of the gold of Ophir, and she is all glorious
within, Psalm 45. 9. Hence is the Church, and every true believer, made that
great wonder in heaven, that is, under the time and state of the Gospel, called
every where in the New Testament the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 11. 11, 12. and
chapter 13. But what is this wonder? A woman, that is, in general, the whole
Church; but in particular, every true believing soul, which is as truly by
faith married to Christ, as any woman can be married to her husband, Ephesians. 5.
30. But what of this woman? Amicta sole, clothed with the sun that shines
in the firmament; that is, clothed with the glorious robes of Christ's perfect
righteousness, making her, wheresoever she sits or walks, to shine as
glorious in Gods eyes, as the sun shines glorious in our eyes, when she
shines in her brightest hue. Thus has Christ made his Church to himself a
glorious Church, Ephesians. 5. 27. And has the moon under her feet, that is, the
righteousness of the Law directing the feet of her walking and conversation
here before men, and shining by sanctification declaratively to man-ward,
Matthew. 5. 16. as the moon shines, and gives light, that is, man walking in
the dark night of this world: and yet has this moon of sanctification on
under her feet, as of small esteem, in comparison of the glorious sun of
Christ's perfect righteousness, with which she is clothed, Phil. 3. 8, 9. And
has a Crown of twelve stars upon her head; that is, has the doctrine of the
Gospel taught by the twelve Apostles and all faithful Ministers (likened to
stars, Rev. 1. 16, 20.) in highest esteem, as her chiefest ornament or crown.
And thus we see how Christ who knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God, by true faith in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
And thus much be briefly spoken of the excellency of the two parts of free
justification.

4. Fourthly and lastly, for the right understanding and powerful laying forth
of the excellency of free Justification, we must deeply consider, and
diligently lay forth the excellent effects and precious fruits of free
Justification, which are briefly all needful blessings both temporal and
eternal; but chiefly and especially these six following.

1. First, that by this free Justification we are reconciled to God, and so
restored into his love and favor again: that all anger and displeasure of God
being ceased and abolished toward us, God is well pleased and at peace with
us, as it was notably prophesied by the Prophet, saying, I will heal their
backslidings, and I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from
him, Hosea 14. 4. But how came we to be thus healed? why, Christ was wounded
for our transgressions, Christ was broken or bruised for our iniquity: The
chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, and with his stripes we are
healed, Esaias 53. 5. Therefore says the Apostle, being justified by faith, we
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 1.

2 The second excellent effect is, that by the very hearing, meditating, and
reading, to search into the truth and learning of this benefit of free
Justification, the holy Ghost is freely and experimentally given unto us to
dwell in us, and to take up our souls and bodies to be his blessed temples to
dwell in us, as these and such like Scriptures teach: Received ye the spirit by
the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? that is, of free
Justification preached, Gal. 3. 2. For, whilst Peter was preaching of the death
and resurrection of Christ, justifying and freely saving Gods people, even
whilst he was speaking, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word,
Acts 10. 44. Therefore says S. Paul, Know you not that your bodies are the
temples of the holy Ghost which is in you, 1 Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19. For, if any
man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8. 9. For when
Paul preached the resurrection of Christ, that from all things from which they
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, by Christ's resurrection every one
that believes is justified: Then the believers were filled with joy and with
the holy Ghost, Acts 13. 39. 52.

3. The third excellent effect of Free Justification is, that the justified
person is by the holy Ghost thus dwelling in him, so united and truly married
as a glorious Bride and Queen, so effectually unto Christ, that he is made a
very member of Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. Therefore did
the Apostle say, Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? Yea,
he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 15, 17. For says Paul,
As the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of the body,
though they be many, yet are but one body: even so is Christ; for by one spirit
are we all baptized into one body, whether we be bond or free, and have been
all made to drink into one spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Now therefore ye are the
body of Christ, and members for your part, verse. 27. Yea, I say, so truly and
effectually, that we are members of his body, and of his flesh, and of his
bones, Ephesians. 5. 30. Oh how truly does the Apostle call these benefits, thus
freely wrought upon us by the blood of Christ, unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3. 8.
God make us to search into them deeper.

4 The fourth excellent effect of our free Justification is, that hereby we are
adopted and made the true children, even sons and daughters of the living
God. Therefore does St. John say, As many as received him, (namely to justify
them by his blood and death) to them he gave the prerogative or dignity to be
the sons of God: For Christ has redeemed us from under the Law, that we
might receive the adoption of sons. And because we are sons, God has sent
forth the spirit of his son into our hearts, to cry Abba, father, Gal. 4. 5,
6. And therefore S. John crying out in admiration of this great dignity, said,
Behold what love the Father has showed toward us, that we (things of nothing,
Psalm. 144. 4.) should be called the sons of God. And now we are the sons of
God, but it is not made manifest what we shall be; but we know that when he
(which is the son) shall appear, we shall be like him, 1 John 3. 1, 2.

5 The fifth excellent effect of this free Justification is, that by it we are
made assured heirs of eternal glory. For so says S. Paul, That we being
justified by his free grace, are made heirs of eternal life, Tit. 3. 7. For
if we be children, we are also heirs, even heirs of God, and joint heirs
with Christ, Romans 8. 17. For whom God justifies, them he also glorifieth, Romans
8. 30. And therefore is free Justification called the justification of life,
Romans 5. 18. Wherefore Paul testifies thus, I reckon that the sufferings of
this life are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed
in us, Romans 8. 18.

6. The sixth excellent effect of free justification is, that by it we are
made, as the upshot and fullness of all that our hearts can wish, truly
blessed. For (says Saint Paul) David pronounces that man or that woman to be
a blessed man, or a blessed woman, to whom the Lord imputes righteousness
without works, Romans 4. 6. whereof he testifies further to the Galathians,
saying, The Scripture (that is, the Spirit of God speaking in the Scripture)
foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before
this joyful news of the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, in thee shall all the
Gentiles be blessed: So that they that be of this faith, of free
justification, are blessed with faithful Abraham, Gal. 3. 8, 9. And can our
hearts wish or desire any more? This is the royalty of having on the wedding
garment of Christ's perfect righteousness freely given us to cleanse us from
our secret sins and breaches of the tenth commandment unknown unto our
selves, Psalm. 19. 12. And to make us, and all our works, both natural, civil,
and religious, pure, clean, and perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of
sin in the sight of God, freely without works, or our perfect working of
them: as Saint Paul testifies, saying, to the pure all things, that is, our
natural works, and our civil works, and our religious works, and all things
are pure, Tit. 1. 15. Thus only by free justification has Christ delivered us
from this present evil world, according to the will of God, even our father,
Gal. 1. 4. Thus has God made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of
the Saints in light. Because he has thus delivered us from the power or
kingdom of darkness and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear
son, Col. 1. 12, 13. Thus our righteousness exceeding the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, we are entered into the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.
20. which kingdom of heaven is within us, Luke 17. 21. For the kingdom of
heaven is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.
And thus if any man, either Preacher, or private Christian, have some true
touch, first of the horrible filthiness of the least sin in Gods sight, and
then of this glorious excellency of free justification thus perfectly healing
us of it, it will make us to say with Saint Paul: Yea doubtless I count all
things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my
Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but
dung, that I may make my gain of Christ, and be found in him, not having mine
own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith
of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith, Phil. 3. 8,
9. which one Scripture I have now diverse times alleged, because it so fully
describes the marks, or rather the very nature and essence of the true saving
faith. That whosoever does in any measure of truth feel the same with Paul in
his heart, let him certainly know that he has escaped out of the most
dangerous dead Faith, and has Paul's faith, that is, the true, lively, and
justifying faith, which only most certainly saves him, and glorifieth him.
For, whom God justifies, them also he glorifieth, Romans 8. 30. And thus much
be spoken of the two main points of religion, which being thus thoroughly looked
into, and deeply considered, are the effectual means to deliver us out of the
dead faith, and to translate us into the true, lively, justifying, and saving
faith.

Now out of these two points thus thoroughly looked into, and deeply considered,
will infallibly flow a third thing; which (as St. John teaches in all his
three Epistles, is Love; which Paul also very resolutely testifies, saying,
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which is effectual, operative, or workfull by love.
For the true believer having by this true faith a feeling of the true love of
Christ toward him, it only and infallibly inflames his heart with the true
love of Christ again, and of God in Christ, and of his whole Church, and of
every child of God in particular, which true love constrains the believer, 2
Cor. 5. 14. Not only to do his vocation diligently, and so with David to
serve his generation faithfully, Act. 13. 36. (as S. Paul likewise teaches,
Gal. 5. 13. saying, Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty, that is, Now
after that faith is come, ye are no longer under the whipping Schoolmasters,
Gal. 3. 25. Wherein though ye were heirs, yet being as little children, ye
differed nothing from servants, Gal. 4. 1. Only, use not your liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another) but also it constrains
him to break off from, and to mortify all sin, and ungodly conversation; and
to walk freely, cheerfully, sincerely, and zealously in all Gods will and
commandments declaratively to manward, which is true sanctification. And thus
it is most true which the established doctrine of our Church largely teaches,
saying, That this true faith of free justification is a thing of perfect
virtue, and wonderful operation, strength and power, to bring forth all good
motions and good works: or else it is not the true, lively, justifying faith,
but the blind, dead faith, that leaves men in sin, death, and double damnation,
as these and such like Scriptures teach, Titus 2. 11. to 15. For that grace of
God, namely of free justification, brings salvation, for nothing brings
salvation upon men, but only the grace of free justification, and therefore it
is called the justification of life, Romans 5. 18. has appeared to all men, and
teaches us dictamine charitatis, by the instructing power and force of love,
to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present world. What is the moving or effecting
cause hereof? Because Christ gave himself for us to redeem us from all our
iniquities and purge or purify or make us clean to be a peculiar people to
himself, zealous of good works, verse. 14. Thus Paul pithily expresses also to
the Ephesians, chap. 2. 10. saying, For we are Gods workmanship (namely by
free justification) created in Christ Jesus, that is, made by free
Justification new creatures to Godward, 2 Cor. 5. 17. 21. that is, formed anew
in Christ Jesus Gal. 4. 19. unto good works, that is, to Sanctification,
Repentance, Mortification, Sincerity, and Universal declarative obedience to
all Gods will and commandments declaratively to man-ward, Which God has
foreordained that we should walk in them: Hence it is that Saint John also so
vehemently testifies, 1 John 3. 6, 9. saying, whosoever is borne of God, that
is, whosoever is justified sins not, that is, sins not wittingly and
willingly, with free stream running to sin as before his free justification.
For Gods seed, that is, some true sight of Gods pure and righteous nature,
infinitely hating the creature defiled with the least sin in his sight, and
some feeling of the infinite love of Christ bleeding out his blood and life to
justify him; this seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, that is, he
cannot lead so dissolute a conversation in sin, as he did before, Because he
is born of God, that is, Because of a wild crabtree, he (by free
justification) is made a perfect good tree to Godward. Therefore he cannot
choose but bring forth the good fruit to man-ward of Sanctification. This is
largely taught in the whole fifth and sixth chapters of the Epistle to the
Romans, where it is showed, that free justification as the cause, and
sanctification as the effect, do always follow unseparably one the other.
Hence it is that S. James 2. 14. does so sharply taunt carnal professors of
free justification, saying, What does it profit, my brethren, for a man to say,
he has faith, and has not works. Can that faith save him? No, But show me
thy faith by thy works.

And here mark, how he says not, show God thy faith by thy works, nor show thy
self thy faith by thy works; but show me, that am thy Christian Minister, that
have the charge of thy soul, and have the keys given me of the Kingdom of
heaven to bind thee and loose thee, Matthew. 16. 19. show him thy faith by thy
works, or thy Christian neighbors that dwell round about thee, and deal with
thee, show them thy faith (namely that it is true and sound) by thy works, that
is, by thy sanctified words and deeds that flow from love and a godly
conversation. For know, O thou vain man, that faith without such works is
dead: See thou not that by the example of Abraham and Rahab, that faith was
effectual, operative, and powerful by works, and by their works was their
faith made perfect, that is, declared to be sound and true. But as the body
without the spirit is dead, so faith also without sanctified words and deeds
flowing from true love, is dead, verse 26. This even Christ himself teaches
also, Mat. 5. 16. saying, Let your light, namely of free Justification, so
shine before men: how shine? by sanctification, that they may see, the beams
of, your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. Thus a
Christian (as Saint James speaks) is made perfect, and entire, lacking nothing:
why? because he is pure as the Sun to Godward by free Justification, fair as
the Moon to Manward by sanctification, and terrible as an army with banners by
zeal of Gods glory, Cant. 6. 9.

This is the established doctrine of our Church: this is true Protestancy: this
is (...), to go with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2. 14. If
any man can show me a better way, I will endeavor to run with him in it. But
if this be the old way that we be commanded of God, Ier. 6. 16. to ask after,
that old Abraham and all the ancient saved fathers walked in, mentioned Heb.
11. And not only the old way, but also the good way which only brings rest
and peace unto our souls: For being justified by faith, we have peace with
God, Romans 5. 1. Then let us embrace one another in the truth of this way. Let
no man be so wilful and obstinate to his own damnation, as to say with the
stubborn lost Jews, We will not walk in it, Ier. 6. 16.

FINIS.
Abraham's Stepps of Faith.
The two maine saving points of Religion, the deep consideration by Gods holy
spirit, and thorough marking whereof, causes our true conversion, peace of
conscience, and assurance of free salvation by Jesus Christ.

Being the express word of God, and the established Doctrine of our Church, at
the restoring of the pure Gospel of Christ into this land; enjoined to the
Ministers of England by the godly authority and public consent of Parliament,
to be taught to the people for suppression of Errors and Popery, for the
quieting of consciences in the matters of religion, for the beating down of sin
and all vitiousness of life out of the Land: consisting of these two main
points, mentioned John 17. 3. This is eternal life to know thee the only true,
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

FIrst, that the filthiness of sin is such to Gods infinite, pure and
righteous nature, that God cannot but detest, curse, and abhor the creature
that has any sin in his sight, as these and such like Scriptures teach, Esaias
59. 2. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Romans 5. 12. Deuteronomy. 28. 15. to 20. Because sin
being spiritual high Treason against the highest Majesty, 1 Samuel 15. 23. and
the Image of the Devil does make the creature spiritually foul, filthy,
loathsome, and abominable in Gods sight, though no curse and punishment should
follow upon the same, as these and such like Scriptures teach, Job 15. 15, 16.
Hab. 1. 13. Mark 7. 20. to 25. Yea and makes the best good works of the most
sanctified children of God to be sin, and all their righteousness of
sanctification to be as soul, filthy, menstruous rags, as these and such like
Scriptures teach, Romans 7. 18. Esaias 64. 6. Romans 4. 5. Gal. 3. 22. And we must
look so deeply into the truth of this first point, that we be thoroughly
affected with the same as the Prophet Esaias was, chap. 6. 5. the neglect whereof
is the main cause that the huge multitude, yea of many zealous workers, do
perish in the dead Faith: Because they know not God, that is, his
righteousness, that is, his holy and righteous nature, where in we were most
blinded by the fall of Adam, Esaias 46. 12. 13. this is the first point.

The second point is, that by the power of Gods imputation we are so clothed
with the wedding garment of Christ's perfect righteousness, that all our sins
being done away and abolished out of Gods sight, we and all our works are
freely made, of unjust, just before God, that is, perfectly holy and righteous,
from all spot of sin, in the sight of God freely, by faith only without works,
as these and such like Scriptures do teach, Dan. 9. 24. Esaias 45. 24, 25. Esaias
53. 11. Romans 5. 16, 17, 18. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Romans 5. 19. Romans 3. 23, 24, 28. Tit.
1. 15.

Hereby we may see that the parts of free Justification are two: First, that by
the blood and weddinggarment of Christ's perfect righteousness all our sins are
done away and abolished, not out of us, 1 John 1. 8. (that we may live by
faith) Gal. 2. 20. but from before God, or out of Gods sight, 1 Col. 2. 22. and
we and all our works are made pure and clean from all sin freely in the sight
of God, as these and such like Scriptures teach, Esaias 44. 22. John 1. 29. Esaias
43. 25. 1 John 1. 7. Revel. 1. 5, 6. Heb. 9. 26. Act. 10. 15. Act. 15. 8, 9.
Heb. 1. 3. and 9. 13, 14. Col. 1. 22. And this was the Prophet Esay's remedy
against the filthiness of his sin in Gods sight, chap. 6. 6, 7.

Secondly, that the same wedding-garme^t of Christ's perfect righteousness does
also make us, and all our works of unjust, just before God, that is, perfectly
holy and righteous, from all spot of sin, in the sight of God freely without
our perfect workings, as these and such like Scriptures teach, Esaias 61. 10.
Romans 3. 21, 22. Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. Romans 5. 17, 19. Rev. 3. 18. Col. 1. 22. and 2.
10. Romans 8. 4. and 9. 30. Heb. 10. 14. And mark how I say, not only we our
persons, but also all our works, both natural, civil, and religious, and all
our sanctified actions, which by their imperfections are in themselves foul
and filthy, are by free Justification made so pure and clean, yea so perfectly
holy and righteous, and thereby so acceptable and perfectly wellpleasing to
God, that they are all (as I said) both natural, civil, and religious
actions, like the excellent sacrifice of righteous Abel, and works of Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, as these and such like Scriptures teach, Heb. 11. 4, 5, 6, 7,
etc. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 13. 16. Act. 15. 9. Hos. 14. 2. Heb. 13. 15. Phil. 4.
18. Heb. 13. 20, 21. This is the Kingdom of heaven set up here on earth by
Christ, so much spoken of in the Gospel, Matthew. 11. 11, 12. Matthew. 6. 33. Romans
4. 17, 18. this is to know Jesus Christ whom the Father has sent, John 17. 3.

Now God will have this benefit of Christ's righteousness, justifying both our
persons and works, to be received and enjoyed by faith only for diverse Reasons.
First, that it may be free, only for taking it by faith. Secondly, that it may
be to the praise and glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6. Thirdly, that he that
glories, may glory only in the Lord Christ, Esaias. 45. 25. 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31.
Fourthly, that none may boast, but be humbled in his best works of
sanctification, Ephesians. 2. 9. Romans 7. 24. Fifthly, that the promise of inheritance
of Righteousness and Life might be sure to all the seed Romans 4. 16. Sixthly,
and especially because none shall be saved but the true children of Abraham, as
these Scriptures teach, Romans 2. 28, 29. Rom 4. 11, 12, 16. Gal. 3. 16. 29. But
none are the true children of Abraham, but such as walk in the steps of the
faith of their father Abraham, Romans 4. 12. Therefore it is exceeding needful,
yea only necessary to know what those steps are; hereof the Apostle does
diligently describe unto us the justifying faith of Abraham, Romans 4. 17. to 22.
that we may not be ignorant except we will be wilful in our own just
damnation, what those steps of Abraham's faith were, which were these four.

The first step is the foundation and ground of Abraham's faith, namely that he
believed in him that quickens the dead, and calls those things that be not,
as though they were, verse 17. that is, he makes the things that be not to have
as true a being before himself, by his call, or as he calls them, as if they
had a visible being to our eyes; and so faith is a true substance and being of
things that are not seen, Heb. 11. 1. This is the first Step.

The second Step is the battle of his faith, namely that Abraham against, or
contrary to hope, believed under hope, according as it was spoken: So shall thy
seed be, verse 18. that is, contrary to all hope of what he saw and felt in
himself, in that he was as good as dead to the having of children, and yet he
believed under hope of Gods word, according as it was spoken; not that he,
notwithstanding his deadness to children, should yet have three or four
children: but, thou art so fruitful before me, that thy seed shall be as the
stars of heaven for multitude: In this was the battle of his faith, in that
against hope he believed under hope.

The third step is the victory of his faith, namely, that he not weak in
faith, considered not, but pulled back his eyes from his own body now dead, and
thereby impossible to reason to have children: and also considered not the
deadness of Sarahs womb, who was more unlikely to have children than he:
neither did he doubt of the promise of God by unbelief, but was strengthened
in faith: and thus got the victory in his faith, verse 19.

The fourth step is the triumph of faith, namely, that he gave glory to God,
that is, confessed in his heart the truth of God speaking, though he spoke
impossible things to reason, and present sense and feeling: and also glorified
the power of God as all-sufficient to do impossible things as he had spoken
it. Being fully assured that he which had spoken, though it seemed never so
impossible, must needs be true of his word, and also was able to do it.
Because he has power enough to do all impossible things to reason, and so
gave glory to God, verse. 20, 21. and therefore it was imputed unto him for
righteousness verse. 22.

Now this was not written for Abraham only, that it was imputed unto him for
righteousness, verse. 23. but also for us, to whom it shall be imputed for
righteousness that trust in the death of Christ, for the abolishing of our
sins; and in his resurrection for our free and full justification, whereby as
the true sons and daughters of Abraham we do imitate in our free
justification Abraham's faith, and so do walk in the steps of the faith of our
father Abraham, thus or after this manner.

First is the foundation and ground of our faith of free justification, namely,
to believe in God, that by imputing his sons righteousness, quickens them that
are dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 5. How? by making us that are not
just and righteous, to be by his call, as truly and perfectly just and
righteous in Gods sight, as he calls us, as if we did see and feel our selves
perfectly holy and righteous in outward sense and feeling, and this is the
foundation and ground of our free justification, which causes the substance
and very being of free justification to be in us, Romans 3. 26. though we do see
no such things with bodily eyes, Heb. 11. 1. 3.

Secondly follows the battle in our faith of free justification, that we
contrary to all hope of what we see and feel in our selves, whereby we see and
feel our own righteousness to be as filthy menstruous rags, Esa. 64. 6. do yet
believe under hope of Christ's righteousness, that we of unjust are made just
before God, that is, our bodies and souls are made perfectly holy and righteous
from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely without works, according to
that which is spoken, As by the disobedience of one man many were made sinners;
so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous, Romans 5. 19. according
as it is spoken, The blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God does make us clean
from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. this is the battle in the faith of our free
justification, that against hope we believe under hope.

Thirdly follows the victory, that we not weak in faith do not consider, but
pull back our eyes from the free consideration of our bodies which we feel dead
in sin, Romans 7. 24. nor yet consider the deadness of our natures by
original corruption dwelling in us, like Sarahs unfruitful womb: neither
will we doubt of this justifying promise by unbelief, but be strengthened in
faith, that our bodies and souls are made perfectly holy and righteous from
all spot of sin in the sight of God freely. And thus we get with Abraham the
victory in our faith of free justification.

Fourthly follows the triumph of faith of free justification, that we give
glory to God; being fully assured that he which has spoken it, that by his
Sons blood he has made us pure and clean, yea perfectly holy and righteous
from all spot of sin in his own sight freely, Heb. 10. 14. Col. 1. 22. must
needs be true of his word: and also able to do it, because he is almighty and
has power sufficient to do all things, to reason, sense, and feeling
impossible, Matthew. 19. 26. Luke 1. 37. and so gives glory to God, which is the
Religion of Religions, the worship of worships, the service of services, the
sacrifice of sacrifices, the wisdom of wisdoms, the righteousness of
righteousnesses, without which all other service and worship are sin and
abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. Heb. 10. 38, 39.

Thus we walking by free justification in the steps of our father Abraham,
there follow thereof these two great and excellent effects.

First, perfect reconciliation and peace with God, for being justified by faith
we have peace with God, Romans 5. 1 And all evils and punishments for sin being
done away, that we may serve God without fear, Luke 1. 74. we are truly
blessed, for as many as are of faith of free justification, are blessed with
faithful Abraham, Gal. 38. 9. and together with faithful Abraham are made
sufficiently rich with all temporal riches, Genesis 13. 2, 5, 6. and also
spiritual and eternal riches which Abraham chiefly rejoiced in, Ioh. 8. 56.
2. Cor. 8. 9. Heb. 11. 9, 10. yea heirs of the whole world only by this
righteousness of faith: for (says Paul) the promise that Abraham should be
the heir of the world, was not given unto Abraham or to his seed through the
Law, but through the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 13. 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. For
if they that are of the Law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise is
made of none effect, verse. 14. Therefore it is of faith, that it may come by
grace, and the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that only which is
of the Law, that is, to the Jews only; but also to that which is of the faith
of Abraham, that is, to the Gentiles also, who is the father of us all, verse.
16.

The second effect is, that this faith of free justification, and this walking
in the steps of our father Abraham, causes us infallibly to walk in the steps
of the works of our father Abraham, whereby like Abraham without the Law of the
ten Commandments, we walk holily, soberly, and righteously in all Gods
Commandments declaratively to manward, being zealous of good works, Tit. 2.
11, 12, 13. etc. By all this it is clear that the practice, and preachings, and
books of such Ministers are exceeding bad and dangerous, as by a preposterous
zeal of works and well-doings, speak little or nothing of faith of free
justification; thinking by the dead faith it is an easy matter to walk in the
steps of the faith of Abraham, but that all the hardness lies in workings and
well-doings; and therefore do call for a good life, and the doing of all holy
duties zealously, but preposterously, before people be sure by comfort and joy
of free justification, that they walk in the steps of the faith our father
Abraham: such Ministers (I say) in stead of making people the true children of
Abraham, of the free woman Sarah, do make them bastard children of the
bondwoman Hagar, that must be cast out of the inheritance, Gal. 4. 21. In
stead of making them the children of the promise, they make them children that
will be under the Law and works, Gal. 4. 21. In stead of making them children
of faith and of the blessing, they make them the children of works and of the
curse, Gal. 3. 10. In stead of working peace with God in their consciences,
they work unquietness, fears, and troubles of conscience about works: In
stead of making the inheritance of righteousness and life to come by grace,
and the promise to be sure to all the seed, they make it to come as it were by
working, and the promise to be unsure and doubtful to all the seed: In stead
of making them heirs of all blessings temporal and eternal with faithful
Abraham, they make them as much as in them lies heirs of all evils and
punishments, with the deceitful workmen mentioned 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. In
stead of making them to walk in the true good works of Abraham, they make
them at the best but to walk in the seeming good works of the devouter sort of
Scribes and Pharisees, that is in a legal bastard sanctification, which is of
high esteem and beauty amongst men, but is filthy abomination in the sight of
God. Luke 18. 19. Romans 10. 2, 3. Luke 18. 19. 11. 12. Act. 22. 3, 4. and 26. 5,
7. and 13. 50.

The true Treasure of the Heart.
Matthew. 6. 21.
FOr where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also: so that if the
wedding garment of Christ's perfect righteousness making us perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, by faith only,
without works and working, be our treasure, there will be our hearts and
tongues also; and then our hearts stand right to Christ, and our tongues to
make others chaste virgins to Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. and true children of
Abraham, and of that Jerusalem which is above, the mother of us all, and we
shall never be cast out as bastard children, Gal. 1. 21, to 31. Col. 1. 28,
29, 21, 22. and chap. 2. 10. Heb. 10. 14. Romans 5. 10, 21. Col. 1. 12, 13.
Because we bring forth a true godly life, only for and by the joy and
excellency of Free Justification, not carnally but rightly understood and
embraced, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. But if Sanctification, repentance,
humiliation, mortification, universal obedience, holy and righteous walking in
all Gods commandments, sincerity, and new life, and such like works be our
treasure and diamond, then there will be our hearts and tongues also to extol,
dignifie, and extort the same, whereby producing by legal arguments but a
false bastard sanctification, Phil. 3. 6. our hearts stand adulterously to
Christ; and all such preaching and holiness produced thereby is but idolatry
and unbelief, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. and such Preachers by misunderstanding and
darkning Free Justification, do ipso facto stand accursed by S. Paul, and
excommunicated, though in all other gifts and graces they be like Angels from
heaven, Gal. 1. 8, 9. and ever in danger of sudden death, Rev. 3. 13. Gal. 5.
12. Therefore beware of the dead Faith, which being varnished and gilt over
with a preposterous zeal and opinion of holiness and righteousness before
God, by walking in all Gods commandments, does give Christ and Free
Justification a Judas his kiss, Romans 10. 3. And yet such Preachers tremble not
as they go up into the Pulpits, although their preachings be both idolatrous
and traiterous.

Here is life and death, who has an ear to regard it? FINIS.

