A VOYAGE TO THE East Indies: GIVING An Account of the Isles of Madagascar, and
Mascareigne, of Suratte, the Coast of Malabar, of Goa, Gameron, Ormus, and the
Coast of Brasil, with the Religion, Customs, Trade, etc. Of the Inhabitants, as
also a Treatise, of the Distempers peculiar to the Eastern Countries.

To which is Annexed an Abstract of Monsieur de Rennefort's History of the
East Indies, with his Propositions for the improvement of the East India
Company.

Written Originally in French, By Mr. DELLON, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for D. Brown, at the Black-Swan without Temple Bar; A. Roper,
at the Black-Boy; and T. Leigh, at the Peacock, both in Fleet Street, School.

TO THE WORTHY Samuel Sheppard, Esquire SHERIFF Elect for the CITY of LONDON And
COUNTY of MIDDLESEX.
SIR, when I saw so considerable a part of the Nation joined in the design of
settling the East India Trade upon a new Foundation, I thought I could scarce
pitch upon a more seasonable juncture, than this, to make my Authors appear in
England, to give us an account of their ten Years Transactions, among the same
Nations, where in all probability our Indian Trade is to be carried on to the
Honor and Advantage of the English Nation. I will not pretend to enlarge my
self here upon the usefulness of Commerce in General, or of that of the Indies
in Particular; if the station I am in did not excuse me from undertaking that
task, the universal consent of all civilized Nations, who look upon traffic as
one of the main Pillars of the prosperity of the Commonwealth, is a
demonstration sufficient to over-balance any thing that can be said upon so
ample a subject by a private hand. And as to what relates to the Indian Trade
in particular, our Neighbors the Dutch, who have made it the foundation stone
of the present flourishing State of their Commonwealth, are living instances,
to convince us what improvements may be made in this kind, if managed by a
dextrous hand. I might in this place have made some Reflections, perhaps not
altogether useless, upon the present condition of some of the Indian Countries,
especially upon those on the Coast of Malabar, who being divided into so many
petty Principalities, and for the most part Situated very convenient for
Traffic, seem to invite us to be sharers with them in the vast advantages the
East India Trade affords: But when I considered with my self the extraordinary
ability of the Person, unto whom I was making my addresses, and on the other
hand what slender share of experience I had in these affairs, I was not without
reason afraid I should run my self into the same Error a certain ancient
Grecian Philosopher did, who being Honored with a Visit by that renowned
African Warrior Hannibal, entertained him with a very long and tedious lesson
concerning the duty of a General. I will ingenuously confess, it was chiefly
upon the score of your Merits, and the reputation you have so deservedly
acquired in the management of an affair of the utmost consequence to the Glory
and Advantage of the English Nation, that when these Indian Travelers after
their return home from a long and most dangerous Voyage, were to make their
appearance among us; I judged I could not recommend them to the protection of
any other person, than your self, who both for your Ability and Zeal, have
given such ample demonstrations to the World in what relates to the affairs of
the East Indies; that, as your Judgment, by the consent of all sides, is
unquestionable, so these Travelers have all the reason imaginable to promise
themselves due Encouragement from your generous inclinations. Before I
conclude; I cannot pass by in silence, and apply with some small alterations
here, the words Mr. Rennefort makes use of in respect of the French East India
Company; that since our present East India Company is established by the
consent of the representatives of the whole Nation, under the protection of his
present Majesty, who by his most Glorious Actions, has made himself both
Admired and Redoubted in far distant Countries, we have all the reason to hope,
that under the Direction of such Persons, who have an equal share of
Experience, Conduct and Honor, they may in time, at least equalize, if not
outvie the rest of the European Nations that have established themselves in
the East Indies. Which is the hearty wish of him, who subscribes himself,

Sir, Your Humble Servant, J. C. Med. D.

THE PREEACE TO THE READER.
THE ensuing Treatise, falling by chance into my hands; after a full perusal of
it, I thought it highly worth my care of making it appear in the World under an
English Garb, at a time, when our Nation has a very near concern in Foreign
Affairs, and its Genius seems more than ever bent upon the improvement of its
Knowledge, in relation to Foreign Countries. I lay this down as a general
meaning, which I suppose few will contradict, that as those who want the
convenience of satisfying their curiosity by traveling abroad themselves,
(especially in far distant Countries) cannot in any way better supply this
defect, than by applying themselves to such Authors, as by a long experience
having had the opportunity of informing themselves concerning the true
constitution of these-Countries, are in all probability, the most proper
Persons to answer their end, as having at their own expense, endeavored to
improve the general knowledge of Mankind. It cannot be denied, but that in our
time, there have appeared more Books of this kind abroad, than perhaps all the
Ages before us can produce; and that the French in particular have been more
liberal in furnishing us with the Relations of their Travels, than any other
Nation: But not to deviate from the truth, it must be also confessed, That as
to what relates to their Voyages to the Indies, they are for the most part
confined to the Description of some particular Country or other, whereas the
ensuing Treatise gives a view of a great part of that vast Country,
comprehended under the Name of the East Indies. It may also be observed, that
many of our Modern Authors, in their Descriptions of these far distant
Countries, have affected a way of surprising rather than instructing their
Readers; they represent both the Climate of the Indies and its products, as the
effects of a quite different, if not contrary principle of Nature, from what we
find in our parts, whereas it may be sufficiently evident, to all such as will
consider the whole without prejudice, that Nature performs its operations in
all parts of the World, according to its primitive Fundamental Laws, that the
Heats and Colds of these several Climates differ only in degrees, and that the
Monsters of Africa or the Indies, are no more surprising to the Inhabitants of
these parts, than the Beasts that are commonly seen and bred among us are to
the Europeans. Most of these Authors seem to have been seized with an itch of
pleasing their Readers, and of creating in them an Opinion of their own more
than ordinary Ability, and insight into the Manners and Customs of those
Nations they have treated of, which has made them dispose their Treatises into
large Volumes by many Digressions, artificial Reflections, and sometimes
inventions of their own, such as they thought most suitable to the genious of
such as they intended to please. I don't in the least question, but that those
who will peruse the ensuing Account, will soon be convinced, that Monsieur
Dillon its Author, (though a Man of a more than ordinary Capacity and Learning)
has throughout the whole Treatise acted with more Sincerity than Artifice, and
to make use of his own Words in his Preface. That, though after a stay of Ten
Years in the Indies, he was by an unforeseen Accident obliged to return to
France much sooner than he expected, whereby he was prevented of making some
particular Observations, which might have been sufficiently diverting to the
Reader; and that therefore, if this Relation might not be equally pleasing to
all who affect Novelties beyond Truths, and are taken with Voluminous pieces;
nevertheless, he could assure them, that as his intention had been to reduce
the whole into as small a compass as the nature of the thing would admit of,
without entangling himself in the Relation of many strange Adventures, which he
could not but Judge to be nauseous to persons of a solid Judgment, so he had
taken all the imaginable care not to insert any thing but what was in all
respects consonant to Truth, and what he had not by hearsay and upon the Credit
of others, but by his own Experience, during his stay in the Indies. I cannot
pass by in silence, that the Appendix concerning the Distempers of the Indies,
ought to be looked upon as a singular piece, if it be considered how little
that is Authentic there is extant upon that Subject, and that Monsieur Dellon,
being a Doctor of Physic, his profession entitles him to have had a better
insight into it, than most other Travelers could pretend to. That nothing
might be wanting, which in all probability could give the better satisfaction
to the public, I judged it not unadvisable, to add by way of Supplement, some
matters relating to the Indies, taken out of Monsieur de Rennefort's History of
the East Indies, which having a near affinity to many things related by
Monsieur Dellon, I thought might much illustrate some matters, which
questionless for brevity's sake he thought fit to pass by in silence; some
others there are, which not being come to Monsieur Dellon's knowledge, (as
about Monsieur de la Hay's expedition against the Isle of St. Thomas, and his
Transactions in the Isle of Madagascar,) I believed would be no ungrateful
Addition to render the whole the more complete; especially when I made due
reflection upon the Character of Monsieur de Rennefort, who having been
entrusted for a considerable time with the management of Affairs in the Indies,
by the French East India Company, might claim the same Authority with Monsieur
Dellon; but I will not enlarge my self any further upon the merits of my
Author, being sufficiently convinced that as his last Chapter, which contains a
project for the improvement of the French East India Company, shows him to be a
person of a more than ordinary Capacity and Experience in the Indian Affairs,
so the whole Book will be in all probability accepted of by the unbiased and
judicious Reader, if not, as the most ample and perfect in all its parts, at
least as the most Sincere and extensive for its bulk, as representing in a
small compass a short view of many of the most considerable parts of those vast
Countries, comprehended under the Name of the East Indies.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
PART I.
CHAP. I. OUR Departure out of France, and Arrival at Cape Verd. Page 1 CHAP.
II. Of Cape Verd, the Isle of Gorea, and its Inhabitants. 3 CHAP. III. A
Description of the Isle of Bourbon, otherwise called Mascareigne. 7 CHAP. IV.
Of the Tortoises, and some other living Creatures of the Island of Mascareigne.
11 CHAP. V. A Description of the Isle Dauphine, called otherwise Madagascar. 14
CHAP. VI. Of the Products and Commerce of this Island. 16 CHAP. VII. Of the
Inhabitants of the Isle Dauphine or Madagascar. 17 CHAP. VIII. Of the Religion,
Manners, and Customs of the Inhab^iants of this Island. 21 CHAP. IX. Of their
Feasts. 23 CHAP. X. Of Locusts, Crocodiles, and Camelions. 25 CHAP. XI. A
Voyage to Galamboule, the Isle of St. Maurice, and the Isle of St. Mary. 28
CHAP. XII. Of the Bay of Antongill and our return to Fort-Dauphine. 31 CHAP.
XIII. Our departure from Madagascar to the Indies, of the Bay of St. Austin,
and the Isle of Don John. 34 CHAP. XIV. Our arrival at Suratte, with a
Description of that City and its Traffic. 37 CHAP. XV. A further Description
of the City of Suratte, with the adjacent Country. 40 CHAP. XVI. Of their
different Religions. 43 CHAP. XVII. How the Indian Women burn themselves with
the Dead Carcasses of their Husbands, and how that Custom was introduced. 47
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Temples and Habits of the Indians. 51 CHAP. XIX. Our
Departure from Suratte for the Coast of Malabar; a Description of Rajapour. 55
CHAP. XX. What further happened during our Voyage to the Coast of Malabar; a
Description of Mirscou, of Visapour, and Batiepatan. 57 CHAP. XXI. Of the Coast
of Malabar, the Kings of Cananor and Samorin, and the Products of these
Countries. 61 CHAP. XXII. Of the two Fruits, called the Jacque and the Mango's.
65 CHAP. XXIII. Of Pepper, Cardamum, Cinnamon and Bethel. 66 CHAP. XXIV. Of the
Elephant, and some other Animals of the Coast of Malabar. 71 CAAP. XXV. Of the
Tiger and some other Creatures of Malabar. 77 CHAP. XXVI. Of some other Animals
of that Coast; of the Jackcall; of the Boufler; of the Civet Cat and Ape. 81
CHAP. XXVII. Of the Gaselet and some other Animals of Malabar. 84 CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Inhabitants of the Coast of Malabar, how divided into several Tribes,
and their Manners and Customs. 91 CHAP. XXIX. Of the Nahers or Gentlemen. 94
CHAP. XXX. Of some other Customs of the Malabars, especially in respect of the
difference of their Quality. 97 CHAP. XXXI. A further Account of their Laws,
and some other Customs. 100 CHAP. XXXII. Of their Marriages, how they derive
their Pedigree, and some other Customs of the Malabars. 104 CHAP. XXXIII. Of
their Habits, Houses, and manner of living. 106 CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Riches of
their Pagan Temples. 108 CHAP. XXXV. Of their Idols and Processions. 111 CHAP.
XXXVI. Of their Arms and Combats. 112 CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Mahometans
inhabiting on the Coast of Malabar, and the Malabar Corsairs. 115 CHAP.
XXXVIII. The French Settlement at Til^ery; of Cananor, the Maldive Islands, and
Tremapatan. 117 CHAP. XXXIX. Our departure from Baticpatan, with a Description
of Tilcery. 120 CHAP. XL. A Voyage of the Sieur de Flacour to the Kingdom of
Samorin. 123 CHAP. XLI. New Troubles at Tilcery. 126 CHAP. XLII. The arrival of
some Vessels. 128 CHAP. XLIII. Our departure from Tilcery. 130
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
PART II.
CHAP. I. OUR Journey to Tanor, with a Description of Mealy, Bargara, and Cota.
Page 138 CHAP. II. A Description of Calicut, and the English Factory there. 140
CHAP. III. A Description of the Kingdom and City of Tanor 143 CHAP. IV. Our
Departure from Tanor, and a Description of Chali. 145 CHAP. V. Our Journey to
Batiepatan, and the English Factory there. 147 CHAP. VI. The Return of the
Sieur de Flacour, and the Commodities brought from Sirinpatan. 149 CHAP. VII.
Our Departure from Tilcery; a Description of Mangalor, and the Kingdom of
Canara. 151 CHAP. VIII. Our Departure from Mangalor, and Meeting with Monsieur
de la Hay. 155 CHAP. IX. Our Arrival at Goa, with a Description of the River
and Forts of Goa. 157 CHAP. X. Description of the City of Goa, with an Account
of the Charitable Society. 160 CHAP. XI. Of the Inhabitants of Goa. 163 CHAP.
XII. Concerning our stay at Goa. 167 CHAP. XIII. Our Departure from Goa. 168
CHAP. XIV. Our Arrival at Suratte, and of the Ship called The Holy Ghost. 171
CHAP. XV. Of the Death of Mr. Blot and his Funeral. 173 CHAP. XVI. Of the City
of Bandar Abassy, or Gameron, and of Ormus. 176 CHAP. XVII. Our Departure from
Gameron. 179 CHAP. XVIII. Our Departure from Suratte, a Description of Dawan,
and the Fort of St. Jerome. 182 CHAP. XIX. Concerning our stay at Daman. 185
CHAP. XX. Description of Trapor. 187 CHAP. XXI. (...) Return to Daman. 190
CHAP. XXII. Departure from Daman, a Description of the City of Bassaim. 192
CHAP. XXIII. My Departure out of the Indies. 194 CHAP. XXIV. Our Arrival on the
Coast of Brasil, and its Description. 197 CHAP. XXV. A further Account of the
Commodities and Products of Brasil. 198 CHAP. XXVI. Of the Inhabitants of
Brasil, and particularly of the Portugueses. 200 CHAP. XXVII. A Description of
the City and Port of the Bay (...) All Saints. 20^ CHAP. XXVIII. The Manners
and Customs of the Inhabitants (...) Brasil* 20^ CHAP. XXIX. Our Departure from
Brasil; a Description of the Isle of Ferdnand de Narogna; of the Isles of
Tercera, and St. Michael. 20^ CHAP. XXX. The pursuit of our Voyage, and our
arrival at Lisbon in Portugal. 21^ CHAP. XXXI. Of the Port and River of Lisbon;
the Fort of C^scais, with two other Forts. 21^ CHAP. XXXII. A Description of
the City of Lisbon. 21^ CHAP. XXXIII. My departure from Lisbon, and return into
France* 21^
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE Treatise relating to the Distempers
peculiar to the Eastern Countries.
CHAP. I. OF Vomiting, and how best prevented at Sea. 223 CHAP. II. Of the
Scurvy, called by the French, the Land Evil; its Causes, Symptoms, and Cure.
230 CHAP. III. Of the Colicks of Madagascar, their Causes, Symptoms, and Cures.
230 CHAP. IV. Of the Venereal Distemper, in the Isle Dauphine, and how cured by
the Negroes. 231 CHAP. V. Of the Distempers of the Indies, and first of their
Fevers, and how cured by the Pandites, or Pagan Physicians. 232 CHAP. VI. Of
the Distemper called by the Indians, Mordechi, and in what manner its Cure is
performed. 237 CHAP. VII. Of the Bloody Flux, and the Erroneous Practice of the
Pandites in respect of this Distemper. 239 CHAP. VIII. Of the Distempered
Persons, called by the Portugueses, Esfalfados, and how best to be cured. 242
CHAP. IX. Of the Smallpox, and the barbarous usage of such as are afflicted
with them among the Malabars. 243 CHAP. X. Of the Bitings of the Adders, and
the mavelous Effects of the true Adder-stone. 244 CHAP. XI. Of the Distemper
called by the Portugueses, Bicho; its several Kinds and Cures. 246
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE Supplement.
CHAP. I. A Description of the Isle of St. Hellens. 3 CHAP. II. (...)
Description of the Isle of Teneriffe, and its Products. 5 CHAP. III. (...)
Description of the Cities of Fernambouque, and Olinda on the Coast of Brasil. 7
CHAP. IV. ^f the Isle of Ceylon, and the Forts the Dutch are Possessed of in
that Island, with a Description of the Cities of Portugal, Colombo, and
Battacalo. 9 CHAP. V. (...) Description of the City of Cochin, and how the
Dutch made themselves Masters of this Kingdom. 11 CHAP. VI. Some Particulars
concerning the Cape of Good H^ of the Dutch Fort at Table-Bay, and of the
Saldaigne. ^ CHAP. VII. Of the Arrival of the Sieur de la Hay, Vicero^ the
East Indies for the most Christian King the Isles of Madegascar and
Mascarcigne. ^ CHAP. VIII. The taking and loss of the Isle of St. Thomas by
Sieur de la Hay. ^ CHAP. IX. Of the City of Suratte, its Inhabitants, T^ and
what is else Remarkable thereabouts ^ CHAP. X. Of the Empire and Riches of the
Great Mogul ^ CHAP. XI. Of the Musk, and from whence it comes. ^ CHAP. XII.
Containing some propositions made by the Sie^ Rennefort, for the improvement of
the F^ East-India-Company, and the resetling themselves in the Isle of
Madagascar. ^
A VOYAGE TO THE EAST INDIES.
By Mr. Dellon, M. D.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
Our Departure out of France.
ALL Mankind have a certain Natural propensity to Curiosity, but Young people
have commonly a greater Inclination to satisfy their own Fancies, taken up for
the most part with Novelties, than those who are arrived to a ripe Age. For my
part having always been inflamed with a most ardent desire of Traveling, after
I had finished the course of my Studies, I left Paris with no other resolution
than to leave France, and by the Conversation with Foreigners to make my self
acquainted with their Genius and Manners.

Being informed that the Royal East India Company was Equipping some Ships at
Port Royal, I directed my course thither, and entered my self into their
Service; in a Ship of 400 Tuns, called the Strong, Commanded by Captain
Merchand, and left that Harbor within 14 days after, in the Company of the
Golden-Eagle. But we had scarce been a few Hours under Sail, when a Calm
obliged us to come to an Anchor, near the Isle of Groy, about 2 Leagues from
the French Shore, where we remained till the next Morning, when with a fresh
Gale of North-East Wind, we soon lost sight of our Native Shore.

The first inconveniency I was sensible of in this Voyage, was, my being
Sea-Sick, as well as all the rest, who were most acquainted before with the
Watery Element, but a little time cured us of that Distemper. For 8 days
together we saw nothing but the Sea and the Skies, when at last our Sentries
discovered 4 Sails to the Windward of us, and we being at that time engaged in
a War with Spain, our Captain was getting every thing ready, in case there
should be any occasion of engaging the Enemy; ordering the Golden-Eagle, who
was a nimbler Sailer than we, to endeavor to come up with them first: But
having soon discovered them to be French Ships, bound for Newfoundland, we
continued our Voyage without any further hinderance; till some days after, when
a most furious Tempest arose, which lasted near 18 Hours, put us into no small
distress; scarce had we escaped that danger, but we were thrown into another,
no less dangerous than the former* For our Ship Sprung a Leak, and then fell in
such a vast quantity of Water, that both our Pumps not being sufficient to
exhaust it, it was thought most advisable, to make, together with the
Golden-Eagle, the best of our way to the French Coast. Whilst we were just upon
the point of putting it in execution, the Leak was by good Fortune discovered,
and soon stopped, so that we spent the remainder of the day in making good
Cheer for Joy of having escaped so imminent a danger. The next Morning by break
of day, we came in sight of a very large Ship, and the Golden-Eagle being
advanced within Canon-Shot, gave her the Signal of Striking; but finding her
not to comply immediately with our desire, we put out the White Flag, when she
instantly lowered her Top Sail. This was a Ship belonging to Diep, which was
bound to Senegal, where they Trade in Ivory, Feathers and Gold-Dust; the
Captain's Name was Le Moyne, and having thus continued our Voyage together, we
left him near the Mouth of the River Niger, directing our Course to Cape Verd,
where we Arrived in 6 Weeks, after our first departure out of France.

CHAP. II.
Of Cape Verd.
THIS is a part of Africa, Cape Verd.
Situate at about 14 Degrees North Latitude; it has a pretty large Bay, but no
safe Riding for Ships, as having no shelter against the violence of the Winds,
and it is so dangerous Landing, all round the Bay, that many Chaloups have been
lost at their approach near the Shore. The Hollanders Inhabited at that time a
small Island, The Island of Go^ea*
at a little distance from it, which has had almost as many Masters as have
thought it worth their while to take Possession of it; it being of so little
Defense, that the Dutch seem only to keep it, because no body Disputes with
them about the Propriety of a place, which being very Barren, is destitute of
every thing requisite for the necessity and convenience of human Life, except
what they are supplied with from Cape Verd.

The people Inhabiting Cape Verd, Inhabitants of Cape Verd.
are of a most dreadful Aspect, much beyond what the rest of the Africans are;
the Women are as ugly as the Men; the first carry their Children upon their
Backs, and suckle them over their Shoulders. They are much addicted to hunting,
and as lascivious as they are ugly, prostituting themselves in public to
Strangers. The Africans are for the most part Mahometans, but besides this,
they use many superstitious Ceremonies, which have not the least Affinity with
those prescribed in the Alcoran. They are generally very obliging to such
Strangers as chance to Land on their Coast; but Stealing is so common a
practice with them, that one is obliged to be constantly upon one's guard. They
Live for the most part upon what they catch when they go a Hunting, and their
Bread is made of Millet, they having no great store of Rice or Wheat.

But I will not pretend to enlarge my self here upon their manner of living,
others having sufficiently acquitted themselves as to this part before me; and,
as I have taken a resolution to deal with the utmost sincerity in all respects,
so I will confess ingeniously, that I had not sufficient opportunity to inform
my self fully concerning all matters relating to this people, we not staying
here any longer than was absolutely requisite, for the providing us with
necessary refreshments.

For after a stay of 12 days, the Wind being favorable, we weighed Anchor, and
put again to Sea, but before we lost sight of the Shore, we were becalmed for
some days, during which time, we diverted our selves with Fishing, but
especially with catching of Requins, (which the Portugueses call Tuberos) of
whom we took a considerable number, The Fish called Requin.
only to have the satisfaction of selling them; they being seldom made use of,
but in case of the greatest extremity, because their Flesh is extremely hard
and scarce digestible. There are some of them of that bigness as to be able to
swallow a Man; the Females bear their Young ones in their Bellies, without the
least appearance of any Spawn; I have found a dozen Young ones at a time, which
being cut out of the Bellies of the Old ones, were a Foot and half long, and
much better to Eat than the great ones.

There are also several other sorts of Fish caught betwixt the two Tropicks,
and among others those called by the Portugueses, Bonites.
Bonites, a very delicious Fish, and one of the best in those Seas. The flying
Fish are to be met with here in great numbers, Flying-Fish.
resembling both in shape and bigness our Herrings, their Wings being not
unlike to those of a Flittermouse. They cannot make use of them unless they be
wet, which makes them continually plunge themselves in the Water. It is the
most surprising thing in the World to see them in so prodigious numbers, if it
be considered that they are surrounded in both the Elements by their Enemies,
who gives them but little rest, wherever they meet with them; for the Birds
continually persecute them in the Air, and when they seek for refuge in the
Water, the Bonites, who have a great antipathy against them, devour them; so
that wherever they are, they are never secure against their Enemies.

We passed the Equinoctial Line about 3 Weeks after our departure from Cape
Verd, and about a Month after the Tropic of Capricorn.

Hitherto we had met with no considerable disaster, during our whole Voyage;
but now the Golden-Eagle being destitute of fresh Water, we were fain to share
ours with her, and the next following Night were separated from one another by
stress of Weather. But the worst of all was, that our Ship sprung 3 days after
another Leak, which let in the Water in such a quantity, as to make us
sufficiently sensible of our imminent danger, of being inevitably lost, we
being at too great a distance from any Shore, to entertain the least hopes of
escaping the danger; but we had once more the good Fortune to find out the
Leak, and by applying speedy and effectual Remedies against the evil, that a
few Hours before threatened our destruction, the hopes of Life began to resettle
our disturbed Spirits, which the fear of our approaching cruel Fate and the
constant fatigues had almost robbed us of before. But we were for a
considerable time afterward pestered by contrary Winds, so that we did not
come within sight of the Isle Dauphin, (called by the Portugueses, St.
Laurence, and by the Natives, Madagascar,) under the 26th Degree of the
Southern Latitude, till 7 Weeks after we had passed the Tropic of Capricorn,
on the West Side, which did not a little surprise our Pilates, who believed to
have been on the East side of it. We were put to no small trouble, and endured
great fatigues, before we could double the Southern Cape of this Island, by
reason of the contrary Winds. It was then that Distempers began to reign among
our Ships Crew, two thirds of them being disabled by the Scurvy; this is that
so much dreaded Sea-plague, which the French Seamen call the Evil of the Land,
because it is from thence alone they expect the cure of this dreadful
Distemper. There were very few of the whole Ships Crew, who had not their share
of it, and this joined with the continual fatigues, occasioned by the fury of
contrary Winds, put us almost in despair, as being bereaved of all hopes of
reaching the Shore, if Providence had not delivered us again by Miracle. For
the Wind wheeling about, all upon a sudden, we came 3 Weeks after we had first
discovered the Shore of Madagascar, in sight of the Isle of Burbon, (otherwise
called Mascareigne,) having not lost above 3 of our whole Crew, yet we were 4
days longer before we could reach the Shore, where we cast our Anchors,
directly opposite to one of the French Plantations, called St. Paul, Situate on
the West Side of the Island; the first thing we had to do was to take care of
our Sick Men, who were brought on Shore, where we lost 2 more of our Men, one
being Drowned, and the other expiring so soon as he was set on Shore.

CHAP. III.
Of the Isle of Burbon, otherwise called Mascareigne.
THOUGH I am sufficiently sensible that several others before have given a
particular Description of this Island; I will nevertheless relate here, what I
have been an eye witness of, pursuant to my intention.

This Island is Situate under the 21st Degree of Southern Latitude; The Isle of
Burbon described.
150 Leagues distant from the Isle Dauphine. Its Circuit is of about 22 French
Leagues, and its figure almost circular. The French have settled themselves
there for above these 40 Years, and there are not the least Footsteps to be
found of any people having Inhabited this Island before that time. What the
Ancients have been persuaded about the Torrid Zone to be Uninhabitable, is
sufficiently contradicted by the experience of our Modern Travelers; the Air
being not so excessive hot, as has been imagined, in those parts, because the
heats occasioned by the near approach of the Sun, are allayed by the cool Rains
that fall in the Nightime. It never Rains here but toward the end of April,
or the beginning of March; about which time, the Hurricanes being so frequent
on this Coast, Ships cannot approach, much less ride at Anchor, without great
danger; the Island being destitute of safe Harbors. From the time of the first
Establishment of the French in this Island, 'till our Arrival, there has not
been one instance, that Travelers who came to this Island were ever troubled
with any Distempers; on the contrary, it is very rare but such as are afflicted
with different Diseases, are restored to their Health in a little time; Is
Healthful.
fourscore of our Ships Crew can verify this by their own Experience, they
having all been recovered in 10 or 12 days. This Island is watered by a great
many small Rivers, abounding in Fish to that degree, that if you intend to wade
through them, (which you may do for the most part with ease,) you must provide
your self with a good Stick to lean upon, for fear of being carried away by the
vast number and swiftness of the Fish, which you may catch at pleasure with
your Hands, without any Lines or Hooks.

The French call the Northern Coast of this Island, the Burnt Country, because
that in the Nightime there constantly issues Fire out of the Ground, which
though it vanishes in the Daytime, yet renders these Plains quite Barren, Its
Fertility and Fruits.
and unfit for use. But on the opposite side, there is a great Tract of Ground,
which the French call the Beautiful Country; this having been Cultivated with
great Industry, produces several sorts of Fruits, Grain, and Herbs in abundance.

Here you have most excellent Water-Melons, which the Indians call Patequas,
and the Portugueses Balancias; they exceed our European Melons in bigness,
their peel is greener, they are much tenderer, nothing in the World is more
proper to quench ones Thirst, they being of a most agreeable re^^sh, and you
may eat as much of them as you please, without the least danger to your ^^ealth.

The Bananas or Indian Figs, Bananas or Indian Figs.
are no less plenti^^l here, and of a most delicious Taste. The Tree (...)
stalk on which they grow is different from ours; (...) seldom grows above 8 or
10 Foot high, without any Branches; quite on the Top of the Trunk, ^^ere
sprouts out a single bunch or cluster, of the ^^ickness of a Man's Arm, and
about 3 Foot long, ^^und which the Bananas hang like Grapes. The ^ruit differs
as well in Color, as in Taste and ^^gness. The least of these Figs are about 3
In^^es long, and 2 in circumference, the biggest are ^^ar a Foot long; their
Skin grows yellow as they ^^ipen, and nevertheless some of them remain always
Green; their Peel is pretty thick, not very ^^ose to the Pulp, which is very
White, and of an ^dmirable Taste, and the Tree bears this Fruit all (...) Year
round.

The Ananas don't grow so plentifully, The Ananas.
but are ^uch finer than the Bananas; they are of an Oval ^^gure, coming near
in bigness to our Melons, their Color inclining to yellow, and their Skin is
^ot unlike to the Pineapple; on the Top of the ^ruit grows a certain Green
knot, resembling in ^^ape a Coronet, which together with its excellent flavor,
has given it the name of the King of Fruits; it is very hot, consequently
dangerous to ^e eaten in great quantities, but when it is used, it (...) eaten
with Wine and Sugar; it produces no ^eed, being propagated, by cutting off the
small ^prouts, which come forth at the bottom of the ^talk, which by
Transplanting grow to the height of an Artichoak; bear but once, and but one
single Fruit at a time. The Banana Tree is Transplan^ed in the same manner.

There are many sorts of other Fruits to be found in this Island, too many to
be inserted here. The first Colony that was erected here by the French is
called St. Paul; it is Situate on the Weste^^ Shore of the Isle, near a great
Lake, not above (...) Hundred Paces distant from the Sea. This Lak^ affords
great store of most excellent Fish, and (...) Water is very wholesome and good
to Drink. (...) often as the Hurricanes rage upon these Coas^^ the Sea commonly
swells to that degree, as to ^^verflow the Ground, which divides this Lake from
the Sea, and consequently mixes its Salt Wat^^ with the Fresh of the Lake; but
as these Hurr^^canes are seldom of any long continuance, so (...) Water soon
recovers its former sweetness.

It is not determined hitherto, who were (...) first that brought Hogs and
Goats into this Islan^^ but it is most certain, Hogs and Goats.
that they are found here (...) great numbers; the French are always provide^
with Dogs bred up for that purpose, who cat^^ them without much difficulty,
especially the Hogs^ who are very Wild. It is not above five (...) Twenty or
Thirty Years, since Oxen and Co^^ were first Transported from the Isle of
Dauphine to Mascareigne, which makes them to be as (...) pretty scarce.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Tortoises, and some other Living Creatures of this Island.
THE Tortoises are of two different Kinds, to wit, the Land and Sea Tortoises.
The Land Tortoises Land Tortoises.
are so numerous in this Island, that you can^carce avoid meeting with them,
wherever you ^o; their Flesh is accounted very good, coming (...) Taste next
to Veal; out of their Livers they (...) an Oil* which, for want of better,
some^imes serves for Salleting.

The Sea Tortoises are somewhat rarer than the others; Sea Tortoises.
they never come on Shore but in the Nightime, on the West side of the
Island, where (...) the Colony of St. Paul. They take great care ^o cover their
Eggs deep in the Sand, for fear of ^he Wild Boars, who are very greedy after
them. Those that go out to catch them, How caught*
watch their opportunity, as they are coming out of the Sea, and finding them
upon the Sand, they turn them upon their Backs, by putting a Stick under the
Bel^y; But the Land Tortoises being not altogether ^s;o flat as the others,
soon get upon their Feet again. There are some of both kinds, of a prodigious
bigness, but they are of a different Taste; The Flesh of the Sea Tortoises is
looked upon as a sovereign Remedy against the Scurvy. There have been 800 Eggs
found at a time in a Tortoise, every one as big as a Goose Egg* some ready to
be said others without Shells; they don't come near our Pullets Eggs in
goodness. Nevertheless, these Tortoises stand sometimes in no small stead to
Ships that come that way, because they may be kept alive on Board for two
Months, by only waterin^ of them every day with Sea Water.

There are also in the Isle of Burbon, good sto^^ of Pigeons, Turtles, and
Partridges, and (...) numbers of other Birds, Birds of this Island.
but especially Parro^^ which are so Tame as to be caught with a Man^ Hand, or
at the most, one may knock them dow^ with a Stick at pleasure. The only Bird
which (...) shyer than the rest, and is generally killed by the Fusee, is that
called Flamand. It is as big as (...) Young Turkey, but his Neck and Legs (...)
4 or 5 Foot long; and being not to be catch^^ without a great deal of trouble,
is looked upon here as a rarety.

The Sparrows are no bigger in the Isle of Mascareigne, than in other parts,
but they are excessively troublesome to the Country, by their prodigious
numbers; for, wherever they come they consume the Seeds lately Sowed, and the
Houses are as much pestered with them here, as we are with Flies; for being
quite spent by the heat of the Sun, they seek for shelter in the Houses, when
they fall in the pots and dishes, and often (...) their Wings in the Fire.

There is also a kind of Flitter-mice in this Island, almost as big as Pullets;
they are Eaten by the Indians but not by the French.

For the rest, Salubrity of this Island.
there is neither Serpent, nor Scorpion, or any other reptiles or venomous
Insects to be found in this Island, the goodness of it being such, as to be
quite contrary to these Creatures, as it has been found by several Experiments
which the French have made upon Rats.

After we had sufficiently refreshed our selves here, our Ships Crew being all
very well restored to Health, and our Ship provided with good Provisions, we
set Sail with a fair Wind on the 22d day of September, from Mascareigne, and
without much difficulty gained the Isle Dauphin, on the 29th day of the same
Month. Being at the sight of 24 Degrees and some Minutes, we were not a little
a^^aid of passing Fort Dauphin in the Nightime, because that the Current
which always runs to the ^^uth, and the North-East Winds, which are so ^^equent
on the Coast, will not let you get out a^^in without great trouble, if you are
once got ^^der the Wind. We therefore cast our Anchor (...) sight of the point
of Itapere, and the next day (...) 11 a Clock in the Forenoon, entered the Bay
Dauphine, where we met with the Golden-Eagle, which was Arrived there 15 days
before us, having suffered and lost more Men than we, even after her Arrival at
Madagascar, the Air being not ^ear so wholesome here as in the Isle of
Mascareigne:

We found them very busy in refitting the Ships, which together with the Mary,
was designed to ^^rry Monsieur de Faye, Director of the East India Company, to
the Indies, where he afterward Died, (...) Suratte. They were extremely
overjoyed at the ^^ght of us, having given us over for lost, and accordingly we
were received with all the demon^^rations of joy. Whilst we were here, there
Arri^ed the Ship called St. Jean, from the East Indies, Commanded by Monsieur
de Lopi, Nephew of Monsieur de Mondevergue, who was the King's
Lieutenant General in the Isle of Madagascar. He ^rdered our Ship also to be
Careen'd, and to be re^tted, for the prosecuting our Voyage, which was ^xecuted
with so much diligence, that those Ships ^et Sail together for the Indies,
whilst I with some ^ew continued for some time longer in this Island.

CHAP. V.
Of the Isle Dauphine or Madagascar.
MAdagascar, the Isle Dauphine, and St. Lauren^ are Names belonging to one and
the (...) Island. A general Description of this Island.
The first it has received from its Nativ^ the second from the French, and the
last from (...) Portugueses, who first discovered it on St. L^^rence's day.

Its Length extends from the right to the 27^ Degree of Southern Latitude. It
is the largest Island in the whole World, at least as far as is discovered
hitherto, being 750 French Leagues in Co^pass. The Climate, considering its
Situation, (...) pretty Temperate; the ordinary Food of the Inhabitants is
Rice, besides which, there is goo^ store of Bananas, Ananas, Cocos, Oranges,
Lim^^ and other sorts of Fruits. There are many Rivers, both small and great,
in this Island, and (...) great many fine Lakes, which are extremely
Commodious, and supply the want of Rivers in some places, during the dry Season
of the Year. Their chief Commodity is Oxen, Their Oxen.
they are of an extraordinary Bigness, and have a great bunch weighing
sometimes 30 pounds, on the Top of their Necks; it is all Fat, and is counted
the daintie^ piece of the whole Ox.

The Air of Madagascar, though it be pretty Temperate, The Air of Madagascar.
yet is it not very wholesome. That part where Fort Dauphine lies, is somewhat
better tha^ all the rest. A great many Distempers are contracted by the
Commerce of Foreigners with the Negroes; these must be followed over Rivers an^
Mountains, without the convenience of Shipping^ or other Carriage; so that what
with these fatigues and the heat of the Climate, most Foreigners (...) subject
to most dangerous Diseases; those that (...) Sick are carried to Fort Dauphine,
where there (...) a Hospital Erected for that purpose; but the ^evers which
reign here are so Malignant and ^^ontageous, that a great many of them Die
daily, notwithstanding which, the Hospital is generally filled up with Sick
persons.

The Inhabitants of Madagascar, make use of two (...) of Boats, Their Boats.
as well at Sea as in the River; the (...) sort are called Canoes or Canots,
and the others ^^rogues. These last are made out of Planks joy^^d, The Pirogues.
or rather sowed together, by the help of cer^^in Ropes made of the Bark of
certain Trees, without Nails, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, or any other (...);
notwithstanding which, they will con^^in a Hundred Men at a time; but they must
be (...) cautious in balancing of them, because they (...) very apt to
overturn. Those they make use of for (...) most part when they go out a Fishing.

The Canots are made out of one large piece of ^imber, Canots.
hollowed out with Knives, which is the (...) Instrument the Blacks make use of
in their Workmanship; it is easy to be conceived that this (...) of Gondola,
is no less apt to overturn than (...) Pirogues, notwithstanding which, the
Negroes ^^oss with them Rivers of a great breadth, and (...) sometimes in them
upon the Sea. I have seen (...) of them of that bigness as to contain 100
^ersons, besides 60 Baskets of Rice, weighing each (...) pound weight.

CHAP. VI.
Of their Commerce.
THE Commodities which are vended by Fo^reigners to the Inhabitants of
Madagascar, Commodities to be Truck'd in Madagascar.
(...) painted Callicoes, and Linen Clothes, Cornelia^^ Bracelets, and
Necklaces of Silver, Copper, (...) Tin; Iron is of great esteem among them,
because they have none in the whole Island: (...) above all the rest, Aqua
vitae, which they call (...), and signifies as much as burning Wine; the^^ they
truck for Wine, Beef, Fruits, Honey, (...) which they have great store,) and
sometimes (...) Gold. It was the hopes of discovering some considerable
Gold-Mines in those parts, which (...) not a little contribute toward the
Establishme^^ of this Company; but hitherto all their endeavors have been
frustrated; for, their chief Governors, (whom they call Rohandrians,) being
jealous of the Design of the French, have several time^ under pretense of
several Engagements by way (...) Alliance, and otherwise drawn the French into
(...) remote places, where in lieu of discovering to the^^ their Gold-Mines,
they have been Massacred (...) these Savages. The reiterated instances of these
Tragical Accidents, having debarred the rest from advancing too far into the
Country in quest after these imaginary Gold-Mines, it remains uncertai^ to this
day, whether there be Originally any Gol^ to be found in Madagascar, or not;
but it is mos^ probable, that what Gold the Africans have, is conveyed to them
by the Commerce with the Inhabitants of the Continent.

Near the Fort Dauphin Topazes and Amethysts are found, which formerly were in
great esteem among the French, inhabiting the Island; but experience has
convinced them that they are of no great value.

CHAP VII.
The Inhabitants of Madagascar.
THE Inhabitants of this Island are for the generality Black, Treacherous,
Savage and Crew. They wear their Hair very long: There are also a ^reat many of
a yellowish Complexion, and some ^pproaching to White, the last of which have
much ^etter Features in their Faces, than the rest.

At the time of the first arrival of the French in this Island, Whites in this
Island*
they found a considerable number of the inhabitants of the same Complexion
with the Europe^^ns, but they could never be instructed concerning their first
Origin; thus far is certain, that they had ^cquired to themselves so great an
Authority, as (...) be respected among the Negroes as their Kings, their Words
were a Law to the People, who where their Slaves, and paid them Obedience
without (...).

The arrival of the French, and the advantage the ^egroes observed in their
Firearms, first inspired ^^em with the thoughts by the help of these Stran^ers
to endeavor to shake off the Yoke, which they themselves had imposed upon
their Necks. For which purpose, being encouraged by the favor of ^^ese new
Comers, they began by degrees to sup^^ess the excessive power of these Tyrants;
and ^^ese seeing themselves in danger of being dispossessed (...) a power they
had enjoyed so long without con^^ul, and being reduced to despair, were not
sparing to employ all their Artifices and treasonable Practices, to rid their
hands of these unwellcome Guests; till at last it came to an open Rupture, when
the French soon extirpated the whole race of these Tyrannical Leaders, Are
extirpated.
there being nothing left of them now, but the slender Remnants of a few Women
who were saved out of compassion to their Sex.

The Isle Dauphine is near as populous as France; they have no Cities, but a
vast number of Villages at a small distance from one another; their Houses are
all of Wood, the Doors so low, that a Child of twelve years can scarce enter
without bending his Body; they make use neither of Windows nor Chimneys, and
their Houses are covered with leaves or a certain kind of Straw, Their manner
of living.
which will keep out the Rain for ten or twelve years, without being mended;
but if a Fire happens to light among these Houses, it makes great havoc. Their
Household Stuff consists in no more than a few Baskets, wherein they put their
clothes; if they don't like their dwelling places, they remove their Houses
without much difficulty, some of them frequently changing their Habitations.

Both Men and Women go bare-headed, Their Apparel.
and let their Hair grow to a great length. The men seldom wear any thing else
but a piece of Cotton or Silk, of the breadth of half an Ell, and an Ell and a
half long; this they wind round their Waste, one end of it coming betwixt their
Legs. The Women wear a kind of narrow Wast-coasts, scarce covering their
Breasts, but the Sleeves reach down to their Wrists; for the rest, they have a
piece of stuff which they wind round their middle, and from thence reaches down
to their Heels.

The poorer sort cloth themselves with a stuff made out of the Bark of Trees,
which reaches no further than the Knees; because it should be no impediment to
them in their daily Employment. Both Men and Women take equal Pride in
Bracelets and Necklaces; they walk all Barefooted; they Anoint their Bodies
with a certain stinking Grease, which together with their Natural Ugliness,
renders them the nastiest People in the Universe. They make use of no other
Beds than Mats spread upon Planks, a piece of Wood or Stone serves them for a
good Bolster.

The Rohundrians (their chief Governors or petty Princes) cause themselves to
be carried in a kind of a Litter, upon the Shoulders of four Slaves; this they
call in their Language Tacon, and their Women of Quality are carried in the
same manner, as are also the Frenchmen here of any Fashion, especially when
they Travel.

They are much addicted to War, Are Warlike.
and very faithful to their Rohundrians. All the riches of these petty Kings
consist in the great number of their Oxen and Slaves; they are embroiled in
continual Quarrels with their Neighbors, which commonly end in bloody Wars
among themselves; the vanquished are most cruelly treated by the Conquerors,
who spare neither Sex nor Age, but sacrifice all to their Vengeance; if you ask
them the reason of their Cruelties, why they should carry their Vengeance so
far, as not to spare the innocent Babes, whom they tear from their Mothers
Breasts, to dash out their Brains against the Rocks, they give you for answer,
That to spare them, would be to preserve in them their most irreconcilable
Enemies, who one day, might be in a Capacity, to revenge upon their heads, the
Cruelties exercised against their Parents, Revengeful.
which sufficiently Testifies, that they are very Revengeful, and never forgive
an Injury.

Their Arms they call Zagaye, Their Arms.
and is a kind of a Dart, the point of which being piked with a poisoned Iron,
they throw with a great deal of Skill and Activity; they also make use of
Half-pikes, and some of them have Bucklers made of a very hard Wood; they Fight
always on Foot, the first Horse that ever was seen in this Island, having been
brought out of the Indies, by order of Monsieur Mondevergue.

During our stay at* Fort Dauphine, we were engaged in a War with one of the
most Potent Lords of the whole Island, whose Name was Rasaf: He brought about
Fourteen Thousand Men into the Field, whereas the whole strength of the French
consisted only in an Hundred and Forty Frenchmen, and Three Hundred Negroes,
who had espoused the French Interest. They were Commanded by Monsieur de
Charmagouz, who carrying along with him a Led-horse, the poor Negroes were so
surprised at the sight of this Creature, that they paid it the same respect as
to its Master.

The French met the Madagascarians, Commandded by Rasaf in Person, in a great
Plain, which by reason of the inequality of their Number, being very
advantageous for Rasaf, The French rout the Islanders.
he marched upon the French, with a great deal of Bravery, but being warmly
received by the French Firelocks, they were soon repulsed and put to Flight;
their Prince used all possible means to Rally his Subjects, but these being
terrified by the surprise of the French Firearms, would not return to the
charge, except some few who were near his Person; with these he renewed the
Combat, endeavoring to dispute the Victory with the French, till he lost both
the Battle and his Life, leaving a Booty of Thirty Thousand Oxen, and a vast
number of Slaves to the Conquerors, who sent them to Fort Dauphine; some of
them died by the way, tired with the Fatigues of there Engagement, and the
tediousness of the Journey; the rest were shared among the Victors.

This prosperous Success put all the petty Kings of the whole Island into such
a Consternation, that dreading the Fate of Rasaf, and being become wiser by his
Misfortune, endeavored by all means possible, to purchase the Friendship of
the French Nation; some of them came in Person to do Homage to Monsieur de
Mondevergue, and such as lived at a greater distance, sent their Ambassadors to
perform the same in their Master's Name. But very few performed their promise,
some among them being so perfidious as to make use of the same Arms which they
had received as presents at the time of their being with Monsieur de
Mondevergue, against the French themselves; but they were soon Chastised for
their Insolence, and the misfortunes attending their Rebellions, fell at last
upon their own heads.

CHAP. VIII.
Of their Religion.
THere are so few footsteps of Religion to be seen among the Inhabitants of
the Isle of Madagascar, that it might admit of a Question; Whether they have
any or not? Their Sacrifices.
They have neither Churches nor Priests, the Rohundrians are the only Persons,
who observe some religious Ceremonies, and that but very seldom, and upon
extraordinary occasions: At certain times they Sacrifice an Ox, but as all the
Subjects are Slaves, so no body but the Prince is to perform the Sacrifice.

It is a General received Custom among them, to Carbonade their Faces and Arms;
but as they are altogether stupid and ignorant, acting without any rational
motive, I have never been able to discover the real intention of this Custom,
whether it proceeded out of a motion of Piety, or that they looked upon it as
conducing to their Health, or whether they thus Martyrized their Bodies for
Ornaments sake. The most intelligible among them, confess that there is an
infinite Sovereign Being, which Being all Goodness has the direction of all
Human Affairs; nevertheless being perverted by an incorrigible obstinacy, Adore
the Devil.
they say, That they see no reason why we should direct our Prayers to him, who
cannot do Evil, but that we ought to reserve all our Veneration and Vows for
the Demon, who has power to Torment us. They don't believe the immortality of
the Soul, and consequently making no account of a future State, they improve
this to their best advantage, giving themselves over to all manner of
Debaucheries; from whence it comes, that such among them as have been by the
Missionaries converted to the Christian Faith, finding the Rules of
Christianity too strict, and not suitable to their former course of life,
commonly return also to their former Libertinism, as it has been sufficiently
confirmed by experience; for of three Thousand that had been Baptized before
our arrival, there were scarce twenty that used to frequent our Church.

It cannot be denied, but that some of the French, by their manner of living,
showed but a very ill example to these new Converts; for some of them live so
scandalous a life, that they were forbid the use of the Sacrament, and to stand
only in the Church porch, during Divine Service. But this Penance which was
intended as a proper remedy to correct their Libertinism, had almost proved the
occasion of a Schism; for these Libertines having met with a Priest of their
own Kidney, they set up a Chapel for their own use, where they exercised Divine
Worship in spite of the Commands of their Superiors to the Contrary, till at
last the said Chapel was ordered to be burnt.

Among some of the Madagascarians they observe not any Rules in their
Marriages, Their Marriages.
they copulate together without the least Engagement or promise on either side,
and leave one another as freely again as they met at first. The quite contrary
is practiced in the Countries of Galamboule and Antongil, where they are so far
from being common, that they keep the Women very close, and if they are
convicted of Adultery, they are punished with Death. In other places where they
are more Barbarous, they without the least regard to the nearness of Blood,
commit the most abominable incests at pleasure.

I will not determine here, whether the Women of Madagascar are subject to the
same pains as our European Women in Childbed; but thus much is certain, that
no sooner are they delivered, but leaving the Child upon a Mat, they go
straight-ways to the next River to Wash themselves, neither take they any
further care of the Child, but only to give it now and then the Teat.

They have certain days which they solemnize with Dancing to certain
Instruments, made after their way, besides which they eat at an excessive rate.
Their Songs are not composed to any certain Tune, as it is Customary among
other Nations, but every one Sings as he pleases; one Voice begins, the rest
follow and make up a Chorus as well as they can, endeavoring to make their
Gesticulations bear some proportion to their Song and small Timbrels; all which
together, makes a confused, but sometimes not so very disagreeable a Noise.

CHAP. IX.
Of their Feasts,
THe common Food of the Inhabitants of this Island Dauphine or Madagascar, is
Rice boiled with Salt and Water, which serves them instead of Bread; not but
that the Ground will bring forth good Wheat, but the laziness of those, who
should cultivate it, deprives them of the advantage of this so useful
Commodity. They are great Eaters.
They are all in general vast Eaters; nevertheless if a Famine happens, they
are able to endure it with a prodigious Constancy, as when on the other hand
they are at liberty to eat their fill, six of them will eat a good Ox at a Meal.

In their Feasts they observe the following method; in the middle of the
Assembly, which lie all round about upon the Ground, they set a good quantity
of boiled Rice; then they lay a whole Ox, (or sometimes two or three, according
to the number of the Guests) extended upon his Hide, which serves instead of a
Dish; every one cuts a good piece for himself where he pleases, which having
put upon a Wooden Stick, he holds it a little to the Fire, and so devours it
before it be half roasted.

There is good store of Grapes in this Island, but they make seldom any Wine of
them; nay, the Negroes will scarce touch them to eat; for before the French
came into the Isle, they looked upon them as Poison. They make their Drink out
of Honey, which they call Tenteb, and their Wine Chictenteb, which signifies as
much as Honey Wine, Hydromel.
or as we call it, Hydromel: The French rarely use any other, and prefer it
before Wine.

In each Village there is a large public Hall, open on all sides, covered only
on the Roof, where they put upon any Solemn occasion, a great Vessel with this
Hydromel, containing three or four Hogs-heads, according to the Number of
People inhabiting the Village, and the Rohundrian having ordered a
proportionable quantity of Beef and Rice to be brought thither, he himself
follows in Person, and thus entertains his Subjects from Morning till Night.

CHAP. X.
Of Locusts Crocodiles and Camelions.
THere is scarce any body so ignorant, but what knows, how God Almighty in
former ^ges made use of Locusts to afflict the Egyptians, ^^d to reduce
Pharaoh to Obedience; the same Pro^^dence does also to this day, send this
Plague at ^^rtain times among the Inhabitants of Madagascar, ^here they
sometimes are to be seen in such prodi^^ous Numbers, that they lay that part of
the Coun^^y, were they pass, quite desolate, and occasion ^^ch a Famine, that
the Cattle die for want of ^^od, it being not the custom of the Negroes, to lay
(...) any thing for future use. I was once my self an ^ye-witness of such a
dreadful inundation, which ^ppening in the Month of February, began at six
(...) Clock in the Morning, and continued till Noon, ^^ere was such an infinite
Number of them, as that ^^ey filled the whole Air, and quite darkened the Sky*
^et notwithstanding, that it was a very serene and ^ear day, these few Hours
were sufficient to de^^roy all the Fruits of the Earth. They are no ^^gger than
in France, but they fly much further; ^^ey are driven along by the Wind, and it
is a good ^^ance if the Wind happens to blow them toward (...) Sea, where they
commonly find their Graves (...) the Salt Water; some are of Opinion, that they
^re carried hither from the Continent of Africa, but (...) cannot agree with
this Opinion, by reason of the vast ^^istance of the African Coast from the
Isle of Madagascar. The Negroes eat them, to revenge themselves, as they say,
upon their Carcasses, for the Evils they make them endure; and I have seen some
French eat them, with as good an Appetite, as (...) Blacks, who all affirm,
that they are of a very goo^ taste.

There are a great number of Crocodiles in (...) Lakes and Rivers of this
Island; the Inhabitan^^ call them Jacaret, Crododiles.
which renders the passages b^ Water very dangerous, because they will atta^^
the People in their Canots; to prevent which, (...) Negroes make a great Noise
as they are passing (...) Lakes, which keeps them at a distance. This (...) an
Amphibious Animal, as well as the Tortoise, (...) does not differ from the
Lizard, but only in (...). There are some of thirty or forty Foot lon^ at the
least Noise, they make the best of their (...) toward the Water, where they
shelter themselves* We once killed one in the Indies, where they are (...)
frequent as in Madagascar. At our approach, (...) looked steadfastly upon us,
neither would he (...) from the place, till we discharged our Fuzee at (...)
which wounded him under the Scales, as good lu^^ would have it, for their
Scales are inpenetrable; (...) he found himself Wounded, he run from (...)
making not the least stop, till after he had run fo^^ paces, his Spirits
beginning to fail, he stood (...) making a most terrible Noise with his Jaws,
the ^^^dermost of which is unmovable; at last we d^^patch'd him, and Prince
Onitri, of whom we sha^^ have occasion to speak hereafter, ordered him (...) be
fetched from thence.

Experience has sufficiently convinced us, th^^ what has been related
concerning the Crocodil^ how they draw the Passengers into the Snare, in o^der
to surprise and devour them, is a mere (...) as is also what has been invented
concerning the Spittle, which they leave behind them: As soon (...) they are
got a shore, their natural Courage, Act^vity and Strength leaves them.

Of this, we saw an instance in a young Frenc^ man, who Washing himself one day
in a certai^ Lake, called the Sweet Lake, was all on a sudden surprised and
attacked by a Crocodile, who seiz^^ him by the Leg. Notwithstanding the
painfulness ^f his Wound, he did not loose Courage, but recollecting himself as
well as he could, he watched ^is opportunity so well as to take hold of the
Crocodile's upper Jaw, which being a long move^ble he dragged him thus, with an
incredible re^olution, to the Shore of the Lake. He had re^eiv'd 6 Wounds in
this Engagement with the Crocodile, and lost abundance of Blood, but was ^y the
help of proper Remedies afterward perfectly restored. That which indeed most
contributed toward the obtaining this Victory, was, that this Crocodile was
none of the biggest.

The Negroes consider the Crocodile no otherwise than a Devil, Crocodiles in
great esteem with the Negroes.
they Swear by him when they ^ntend to assever any thing for a real Truth. ^f
there be any Contest betwixt two Parties, they ^ppear on the Shore of a Lake or
River; he that ^s to confirm the Truth of his Affirmation by Oath, plunges
himself into the River, Conjures and ^rays the Jacaret, to be Arbitrators
betwixt him and his Enemy, and to decide their Quarrel; ^o let him Live if he
speaks Truth, and to devour him instantly if he affirms any thing contrary to
it. And this they make use of for a Trial of the Guilt or Innocence of him who
thus commits himself to the decision of the Crocodile in the Water.

Before I conclude this Chapter, I must say something concerning the Camelion.
Camelion.
This is a little Creature, not unlike a Lizard, but its Back somewhat rounder
and higher, and its Head not so broad. Its Skin is so transparent, that it
receives and reflects the same Color with those things upon which it is found;
among all other Colors the Black makes the most lively impression upon it; but
it retains neither any longer than it is near the same thing, from whence it
had derived its Color.

As I had often heard it affirmed positively for Truth, that it lived upon
nothing but the Air, I had the Curiosity to open several of them, (...) which I
found full of Flies, Live upon Flies.
from whence I conj^cture, that these are their ordinary Food and No^rishment.

CHAP. XI.
A Voyage to Galamboule.
DUring our stay at Fort Dauphine, there Arrive^ several Ships from the Indies,
laden with Provisions, which came very opportunely to supply our present
Necessities, occasioned by the last Inu^dations of the Locusts.

Monsieur de Mondevergue, being at that time preparing to return into France,
he ordered a Ship lately come from Suratte, to be got ready, in order to send
it to Galamboule, and some Islands in those parts, to fetch him what
Necessaries he had occasion for, and to bring away such French as were in
Garrison in several little Forts in those parts, which were very chargeable to
the East India Company, without any prospect of Advantages. Abundance of Sick
were also Shipped on Board the Vessel, to be carried to the Isle of Burbon, for
the recovery of their Health, with whom I embarked, in the Ship called the
Crown, Commanded by Captain Lovet, and set Sail in the beginning of April.

The difficulty we met with at our going out of the Bay Dauphine, was a sure
presage of the Misfortunes that befell us afterward, in our passage from
Madagascar to Mascareigne, which we could not accomplish till after a most
troublesome and tedious Voyage of 30 Days; whereas, with a fair Gale it may be
performed in five: abundance of our Sick Men died, in the mean while, we lost
our ^^ain Topmast, by the fury of the Tempest, (...) were reduced to that
extremity for want of ^^ovisions, that we had nothing left, Stinting in the
Ship.
but a small ^^antity of Rice and Water to feed upon.

The cause of these Disasters being in a great mea^^re attributed to the ill
Conduct of the Captain, ^^ere arose a Mutiny in the Ship, so that we had ^^ough
to do to prevent the Seamen from throw^^g him over Board. At last after a
great many ^^igues and dangers, we came within sight of (...) Isle of St.
Maurice, Isle of St. Maurice.
Inhabited by the Dutch, (...) about 25 Leagues distant to the East, from (...)
Isle of Burbon, being much of the same big^ess and fertility.

The next day follwing we cast Anchor near St. (...), where such of the Sick as
had escaped with me ^^ter so troublesome a Voyage, were set on Shore, and ^^ter
we had taken in fresh Provisions, we set Sail (...) Galamboule. Our Pilot was a
Drunken Dutch Man, who having mistaken his Course, we found our selves fallen
off too far to the North, Arrive at Galamboule.
so that ^e did not Arrive at Galamboule, till the fourth of (...).

This part of the Isle Dauphine, or Madagascar, (...) Situate under 15 Degrees
and 50 Minutes of Southern Latitude, 15 Leagues distant from the Isle of St.
Mary, where we had one of these Forts, which were to be Abandoned by order from
the Company. We showed them the Orders of Monsieur de Mondevergue, in order to
get themselves ready for their departure, against our return; and the next day
set Sail for the Isle of St. Mary, where we showed them the same orders we had
left at Galamboule.

The Isle of St. Mary is Situate under the fifteenth Degree of Southern
Latitude, Isle of St. Mary.
its Compass is of about 4 Leagues, and 2 Leagues distant from the Isle of
Madagascar. It is a very fruitful Island, and well peopled, it produces
abundance of Am^er-grease, which the Inhabitants mix with their Tobacco, when
they Smoke, besides that, they (...) a considerable quantity to the French. But
(...) Air is here very unwholesome, by reason of (...) continual Rains, that
fall all the Year round. Thi^ Island contains a prodigious number of Apes,
(...) different kinds and shape, which are very mi^^chievous; One of our
Seamen had the misfortu^^ to be convinced of it by woeful Experience. For
having a great Inclination to Taste some of (...) Oranges, which the Negroes
call Vorgases, he we^^ into an Adjacent Wood, to satisfy his Appetite (...)
but scarce was he advanced a few paces within (...) Wood, when he was furiously
attacked by the^^ Animals, who took from him his Fusee, teari^^ him with their
paws, in a most dreadful manner, (...) stuck so close to him, that his Comrades
who hearing him cry out most pitifully, came to his relief^ had enough to do to
rescue him from the fury o^ these dangerous Creatures.

Having dispatched our Business at St. Mary's we directed our Course toward
Antongil. At the Entrance of the Bay, we were in most immine^^ danger of having
been lost, and dashed to pieces against a great Rock, which by reason of a very
thick Fog, we did not discover, till we were come within Musket Shot of it,
when by good chance the Sun having favored us with a glance, we were made
sensible of our danger, and immediately cast Anchor near one of the small
Islands in the Bay.

CHAP. XII.
^f the Bay of Antongil, and our return to Fort Dauphine.
THE Bay of Antongil, Description of the Bay of Antongil.
is one of the most considerable in the whole World, for its bigness, (...)
firmness of its bottom, and the secure station (...) Ships, which are sheltered
here against the most ^iolent Tempests; besides that the fertility of the
^^rcumjacent Country, renders it one of the most ^onvenient places for Ships to
furnish themselves with all manner of Refreshments. The Bay is 15 Leagues long,
at its Entrance 3 broad, in the ^^iddle 9, and so increases gradually toward
the ^hoar. It is able to contain a great number of Ships, and comprehends
within its Circuit several ^mall Islands, among which, the most considerable ^s
called Maroca; Near this Island most of the Ships come to an Anchor, as being
sheltred against the Winds from all sides. The South and East Winds are most
favorable to further the Entrance of Ships into this Bay; but on the other
hand, they are directly opposite to those who are to come out; so that these
Winds being very frequent here, you may enter without much difficulty in a few
Hours, but it will require oftentimes some Months before you can get out again.
They are as much pestered here with continual Rains, as they are at the Isle of
St. Mary's, neither is the Air much better; the people hereabouts Live like the
rest of the Inhabitants of Madagascar; but that their Religion comes somewhat
nearer to Mahometism; the Men are here Jealous of their Wives, even to a degree
of Madness, and punish Adultery with Death: They never eat any Swines-Flesh,
and have such an Aversion to this Creature, that if one chances to Die, they
Bury it very deep under Ground, least they should be defiled by the smell, as
they pass by. They esteem Gold and Silver, no more than they do Tin and Copper.

We caught here abundance of Wild-Fowl, and reckoning the Commodities we
Truckt with them, at the rate they Cost us in France, we did not pay for a good
Fowl above one Penny.

After we had got on Board as much as we had occasion for at present, we
doubled the uttermost Cape of the Bay, in order to our return to St. Mary's,
where we also continued no longer, than was absolutely requisite to Embark
those we came to fetch away. Some that were Married in the Country, chose
rather to stay behind, than to leave their Wives, Leave St. Mary' s.
which the Captain would not take on Board; and the next day after we set Sail
from the Island, we came to an Anchor in the Road of Galamboule, where there is
always a high Sea, let the Weather be never so fair. After we had Embarked all
the French that were to go along with us, we blew up the Fort, at the sight of
which, and the Embarkment of the Canon, the Negroes dreading the Cruelties of
the Neighboring Mountainers, their irreconcilable Enemies, after our
Departure, broke out into most horrible outcries, and gave us all the possible
Demonstrations of their utmost Despair. Their miserable Condition moving us to
Compassion, we took as many of them as our Ship would hold, on Board of us,
endeavoring to comfort the rest with some Presents, and the hopes of a speedy
return, in order to deliver them out of the Hands of their Enemies.

Thus we quitted this dangerous Port, Leaves Galamboule.
on the Twenty first of June, with a very favorable Gale, so that on the
Twenty sixth of the same Month, we were within sight of the point of Itapere,
which is only 3 Leagues distant from Fort Dauphine.

The Pilots frequenting these Coasts, are always very careful to come to an
Anchor toward Night, near this Point, and to stay till Daylight, the better
to avoid the Rocks that are at the Entrance of the Bay Dauphine; but our Pilot
being foolhardy, continued his Course all the Night, so that at break of Day,
beside the danger we had escaped, of being lost upon the Shelves and Rocks, we
found our selves a great way below the Bay. The worst of all was, that being
encouraged by the hopes of a speedy Passage, we had not managed our Provisions
to the best Advantage, so that having nothing left, but a small quantity of
Rice, we began to consult what was most expedient to be done in this present
emergency; then it was at last resolved to approach the Shore, and to Land all
those whom we had brought along with us from St. Mary's and Galamboule.
Pursuant to this Resolution, we came to an Anchor in the Bay of Galleons, which
received its Name from some Portuguese Galleons that were lost near this place.
This Bay being not above 3 Leagues from Fort Dauphine, we only stayed for
Daylight, that we might with the more convenience disembark our Men; where on
a sudden, a fresh Gale arising from the West, we immediately set Sail, and
after some small difficulties, which we easily surmounted, entered the so much
desired Fort about Noon, on the 5th of August.

So soon as we found our selves in a place of security, the whole Ships Crew
made their Complaints against the Captain, who being immediately dispossessed,
Monsieur Lambety, who had formerly Commanded the Ship, was put in his place.

CHAP. XIII.
Our Departure from Madagascar to the Indies.
THE New Captain received immediate Orders to have his Ship refitted, and to
prepare every thing for his Voyage to the Indies, whither he was to go in
Company with the Mazarine Frigate, and a Hoy called the St. John.

The Season being very far advanced, we got every thing in readiness with the
utmost diligence; so that all the three Ships being in a Sailing posture by the
12th of August, we doubled the most Southern Cape of the Isle Dauphine, with a
North-East Wind, blowing a fresh Gale; the Mazarine Frigate being an Old Ship,
lost her Main Topmast, and her Main-Yard, of which Accidents we were quickly
advertised in our Ship; but our Orders being to make the best of our way to
Suratte, we did not stay for the rest, but pursued our Voyage alone. The Wind
proved as favorable to us as we could have wished, Bay of St. Austin.
so that making use of all our Sails, we passed in sight of the Bay of St.
Austin, a good Port belonging to the Isle of Madagascar, Situate on the West
side of the Island, under the five and Twentieth Degree of Southern Latitude;
from whence we steered our Course to the Isle of Don John, Isle of Don John.
where we intended to refresh our selves. The Portugueses have given the Island
this Name, after him who was the first discoverer of it. It is Situate betwixt
the Continent of Africa and the Isle of Madagascar, near 3 or 4 other Islands,
the most considerable of which, is called Majota. We were scarce come within
sight of it, when being becalmed, the violence of the Current drove us upon the
Rocks, which surrounded this Island, where we must have infallibly perished, if
the Calm had continued a little longer; but there arising a Gale, we continued
our Voyage, without pursuing our design of refreshing our selves, for feat of a
new Accident.

We passed pretty near the Isle of Socotora, Isle of Socotora
Situate not far from the Red Sea; from whence we have the best Aloes. Here we
were again becalmed for some days, which being followed by a furious Tempest,
carried away our Main Topmast. Thus we pursued our Voyage without any
remarkable Accident, till the 18th of September, where we met with the St. John
Hoy, on the Indian Coast; We were parted from her the first day of our Voyage,
and being in want of Provisions, she furnished us with some, and so we
continued our Voyage together to Suratte.

The Indian Shore about Suratte being very low, we were very careful in
sounding frequently the depths; notwithstanding which precaution, we passed
over, the Sand Banks lying betwixt Diu and Daman, belonging to the Portugueses,
of which we shall have occasion to speak hereafter, from the 18th to the 20th
of September, being misguided by the unskilfulness of our Pilot; Our Vessels
being but very small and not heavy Laden, we escaped this danger, without
receiving the least damage.

Toward Night, we discovered the Ships riding at Anchor in the Road of
Suratte, before we could discover the Land; and, as the late danger we had so
narrowly escaped, made us act with more circumspection, we cast Anchor till
break of Day.

The 21st we Arrived in the Road, about two Leagues distant from the Rivers
Mouth, Arrive in the Road of Suratte.
and about 5 from the City of Suratte; We sent immediately several Chaloups to
give notice of our Arrival. But scarce had we lost sight of them, but a violent
Tempest arising from the West, we did not imagine otherwise, but that they must
infallibly be lost, before they could reach the Shore. The fury of the Winds
increasing every Minute, we cast out all our Anchors, they being the only hopes
we had left, without which we must have been cast upon the Sand, and destroyed
immediately, this Hurricane being one of those the Indians call the Elephant, A
Hurricane.
by reason of its violence.

We had at last once more the good fortune to escape this danger, the Winds
having abated their fury; and to add to our good fortune, all our Messengers
Arrived safely at Suratte, to the no small astonishment of all that beheld
them. Monsieur Carva, immediately sent us some Provisions, Pil^ts, and Seamen,
to assist us in making the River, but they did not come on Board of us till the
23d. The St. John Hoy having been driven in the last Storm upon a Sand Bank,
had also the good fortune to get clear by the help of the Tide.

With the assistance of those sent us from Suratte, we made the River, which
however by reason of the swiftness of the Current we did not enter without much
difficulty, Arrive near the City of Suratte.
but at last Arrived safely near the Garden of the Company, which is not above
a quarter of a League on this side of the City of Suratte.

The Vessel in which I came, was immediately ordered to be Careened, and being
freighted for Masusipatan, departed toward the end of November; the St. John
returned to the Isle Dauphine, and the Mazarine Frigate, which Arrived not till
a considerable time after, being an Old Ship, and no longer able to endure the
Sea, was broke to pieces.

The Ship called the Crown; which had brought me to Suratte, being as I told
before, ordered to go to Masusipatan, a City upon the Coast of Cormandel, I
left her, expecting further Orders at Suratte; so that pursuant to my design, I
will give an exact account of what I found most remarkable in that City.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the City of Suratte.
THE City is Situate under the one and Twentieth Degree of North Latitude, and
is one of the most considerable Ports in the Empire of the Great Mogul. It is
very large and populous, Built upon the Banks of a fair River, which runs under
its Walls, and about 3 Leagues from thence disembogues into the Sea. When I
Arrived near the City, the Gates were not shut up; the Inhabitants were obliged
for their Security to a neighboring Prince called Sevagi, who by his frequent
Incursions has caused them to surround their City with a good Wall, and to be
constantly upon their Guard. The Sand Banks which are at the Entrance of this
River, are very uncertain, being by the violence of the Current frequently
transposed from one place to another, so that they are rarely to be met withal
two Years together in the same place, which renders the passage of Ships both
very troublesome and dangerous.

The Streets of Suratte are handsome enough, but they have this inconvenience,
Streets of Suratte.
that they are very dusty during the dry Season, which the Indians call their
Summer, though all the time the Sun is at the greatest distance from them. To
remedy this, they continually water the Streets, especially in those parts
where the better sort Inhabit. The Houses are here but one Story high, those of
the common people are covered with Tiles; but people of Fashions Houses are
flat at Top, with Terrace Walks, made with a certain sort of Plaster; which
appears as beautiful as White Marble, and keeps out the Rain, they have only a
little rising in the middle, for the better convenience of conveying the Water
into the Streets; abundance of people pass whole Nights upon these Terraces, to
enjoy the benefit of the cool Air.

All Houses of people of any Fashion, have their Gardens surrounded with fine
Arbours, Their Gardens.
bearing Grapes twice a Year. Besides which, they have great store of all sorts
of Flowers, but especially those they call Mougrin, which being not unlike our
Jassamin Flowers, are in great request among the Indians. They have also
certain Trees bearing Flowers, which open at Sunrising, and fall off at
Sunset; and others of which the Flowers open at Sunset, and decay at
Sunrising; and the whole Year being but one continued Spring Season in this
Climate, furnishes them always with all sorts of Fruits and Flowers.

People of Quality, nay, even those of an Inferior Rank, have their Bathing
places, which being made all of Stone, are extremely neat. They make use of
them partly upon the account of their Religion, partly to allay the violence of
the heat of the Climate.

The French, English, and Dutch, Inhabit the best Houses in Suratte, those of
the Armenians are no less Sumptuous, and all of them are very pleasantly Seated.

Suratte is a place of great Commerce; Their Diamonds are brought thither out
of the Kingdom of Golconda, Their Commerce.
which is Tributary to the Great-Mogul; the Pearls are fished near the Cape of
Comoria, and in several places of the Persian Golf; Amber-grea^e is brought
from the Coast beyond the Cape of Good-Hope, as Musk and Civet come out of
China, the last of which, is taken from a certain Creature bearing the same
Name. There is besides this at Suratte, a great Trade in Silk, and Gold and
Silver brocados, in the finest Cottons in the World, in Indico and all sorts of
Druggs, which are the products either of the Indies or Arabia. Their Spices
they have from the Indies, Malaca furnishes them with Nutmegs, Macasar with
Clove-Gilly-flowers, the Isle of Ceilon with Cinnamon, all the Coast of Malabar
with Pepper; so that there is nothing so precious or rare, but the Warehouses
of Suratte are sufficiently provided with it.

The Governor of the whole Province, The Governor's Court.
which is of a very large extent, has his Residence in this City; He keeps a
very Splendid Court, is attended by a strong Guard, Consisting of several
Companies both Horse and Foot; when he goes abroad, he is carried by an
Elephant, upon whose Neck, is fastened a Tent, big enough to contain 12 or more
persons, according to the bigness of the Beast. Sometimes he is carried in a
Palanquin, which is a certain sort of a Bed, covered with very rich Tapestry,
carried by 4 Men, which being much easier than our Sedans, are used by most
people of Fashion, at Suratte. For you may hire 4 such Chair-Men for 20 Livers
per Month, without being obliged to provide them with Victuals, unless you go
into the Country. Those that cannot afford a Palanquin, go on Horseback, and
the Indians have very Fine Horses, which are brought thither out of Arabia.

The Place of the Governor of Suratte is not Hereditary, and is seldom
continued for above 4 or 5 Years to the same Person. On the West side of the
City, The Castle.
there is an Old Castle, surrounded with a very deep Ditch. There is always a
strong Garrison kept here, under its own Governor, who has no dependence on
him of the City.

All the Europeans keep some Canons near their Houses, wherewith they defend
themselves against the Insolency of the Rabble, when they are in a Mutiny,
which happens very often among so many Barbarous Nations. They have a great
many public Bagnio's, Their Bagnio's.
and Hot-Houses at Suratte, besides which, there are some others for the use of
such as would Bath in private; in the first, you pay no Money, being Erected
for the public good.

CHAP. XV.
A further Description of Suratte.
ABout a quarter of a League from Suratte, there is a great Tancke or Cistern,
made of Freestone. It was Built by a Rich Banjan, and is of a great
Circumference; you go into it by a fair pair of Stairs, and in the middle you
see a little Temple Consecrated to their Gods, unto whom, they offer their
Prayers, after they have Bathed themselves. The Walks leading to it are very
finely Planted with Trees, and are looked upon as the most pleasant of the
whole Country. There are also about Suratte, Public Gardens.
public Gardens, which being very neatly kept, want nothing that may recreate
the Eye, and are of free access for every Body.

The Banjans Inhabiting Suratte, are indeed the Richest, and have the chief
management of the Traffic throughout the Indies; nevertheless, the Moors or
Mahometans live in much more splendour. If a person of Quality happens to pass
through the City, upon any Solemn occasion, he has his Trumpets before him,
which being 8 or 10 Foot long, and proportionable in bigness, make a pleasant
and Warlike Harmony.

After the Example of these, Foreigners who bear any considerable Office have
the Arms of the Princes or Commonwealths, whom they serve, carried before
them, and have likewise their Trumpets, which attend them where ever they go.

At about a League distant from the City, there is a Village which is inhabited
only by Persians or Parsis, A Village inhabited by Persians.
who adore the Sun and Fire; hither the Inhabitants of Suratte come frequently
to drink Palm-Wine, which they call Tarry. It is a most delicious sort of
Liquor; how it is made, I shall have occasion to mention hereafter. All round
the City is a fair, champagne and fertile Country; they Sow toward the end of
September, when the rainy Season is over, abundance of Wheat, which they reap
in January.

The Air of Suratte is very good; it is never cold here, and the heats are
pretty tolerable.

The Port of Sovaly is about four Leagues to the North-West, Harbor of Suratte.
this is the place where all Foreign Ships come to Anchor, but they can scarce
abide there longer than from October till May, the rest of the Year being very
dangerous for Ships, by reason of the frequent Tempests and changeableness of
the Winds. There are a great many fair Villages round the Harbors, among which
Sovaly has communicated its Name to the Port, is the most considerable. Here
most of the European Companies have their Warehouses and Offices, which they
adorn with the Arms of their Principals to whom they belong. The Great Mogul's
Subjects are not permitted to enter the Port or Sovaly, for fear they should
defraud him of the Customs, none but the Europeans enjoy this Privilege. These
draw to this Village great number of Banjans, Moors and Persians, who during
the time, that the European Vessels tarry in this Port, set up their Booths,
which being put in good order, and divided into several Streets, make up a kind
of a moveable Village, where they sell every thing, which may be useful to the
Foreign Mariners. There happened some years before my arrival, an unlucky
accident to a Frenchman in this Port, which had been likely to have proved of
very ill consequence. A Mohammedan came on board a French Vessel to cheapen some
things, and amongst the rest, asked them, whether they had any Pistols to sell?
Several pair having been showed him, he went to discharge one of them out of a
Window in the Cabin, but he, who was the Seller, finding him very unexpert in
handling of Firearms, took one and discharged it himself; but the Pistol being
charged with three Bullets, he unfortunately shot a young Child which was
playing a shore, through the Breast, of which it died instantly. The news of
this unfortunate accident was soon spread, not only through the Village, but in
Suratte it self, where the Rabble began to be mutinous, and to declare
publicly, that they would not rest satisfied, till they had Sacrificed all the
French in Suratte, and had revenged the Death of the Child upon a Nation, who
made killing and slaying their Pass-time; so that for several days together, no
Frenchman durst stir out of the Doors. At last, the Person, who by his
carelessness had been the occasion of this unfortunate accident, having by some
of his Friends convinced them of his innocence, the matter was accommodated,
and the Tumult ceased. For it happened, that the Child that was killed, belonged
to Pagan Parents, so that they were appeased by the means of a Sum of Money,
under condition, that the who had committed the Fact, should not be permitted
to come ashore, but to return into Europe, by the same Vessel that had brought
him thither. If this Child had been a Mohammedan, he would not have come off at
so easy a rate, but would have been in no small danger of his Life, it being
an indispensable Law, and always religiously observed among the Mahometans,
that if a Foreigner, but especially a Christian, kills a Musulman (a name which
all the Mahometans assume, signifying as much as a true Believer) he must
expiate the crime by his Death.

CHAP. XVI.
Of their different Religions.
TO give an exact account here of all the Sects of the Indians, would be too
tedious, if not quite impossible. The Christian Faith was first planted in
those parts by St. Thomas, and that Apostle sealed the truth of the Gospel
which he had Preached to these Infidels with his Blood. On the Coast of
Cormandel it is preserved in its purity to this day; and before these People
entered into commerce with the Portuguese, they only made use of the Gospel of
St. Matthew in those Eastern parts; Christians in the Indies.
but after the rest were Communicated to them, they were not a little
surprised, that so many great and powerful Nations, were enlightened by the
Gospel, and adored the Name of Jesus Christ, as well as themselves: It is true,
there is some difference in the ceremonial part, but the substance of their
Religion is the same with ours.

The Portugueses who have sufficiently testified their Zeal for the propagating
of the Christian Doctrine, have made considerable progresses in the Indies,
toward the Establishment of Christianity; nothing can be more complete than
their Churches and Monasteries, but their Zeal is involved in no small
difficulties, which obstructs their pious Endeavors.

The severity of the Inquisition established in all places under the obedience
of the King of Portugal, Inquisition.
Holy by its Name, but so terrible in its Consequences, serves for nothing else
than to abalienate the Infidels from the Christian Church.

Though the Christians are not allowed the public Exercise of their Religion,
in the Territories* under the jurisdiction of the Mahometans, nevertheless they
are not debarred from Worshipping Go^ in private. There are certain private
Convents, such a one the French Capuchins have at Suratte; but they are
forbidden under pain of Death to teach any thing to the Mahometans, which may
induce them to embrace the Christian Faith, and if a Mahomet^^ be suspected to
have received the least tincture of Christianity, he is Condemned to the
Flames, unless he will save his life by a public Profession of Mahometism.

There are at Suratte a great Number of Armenia^ Christians, of the Greek
Church, who have their Churches, as well as the Roman Catholics, the English,
Dutch, and other European Nations; but the Sect of Mahomet is the most
prodominant in the Indies, and other parts of Asia, both for its number and
strength. The Great Mogul himself, is a Mohammedan, and most of his Subject,
follow his Footsteps.

There is also in the Indies another sort of People, Parsis in the Indies.
called Parsis or Perse, descended from the race of the Ancient Persians, who
being forced out of their Native Country by the first Mahometans, endeavored
to preserve their lives from the rage of their Enemies by flight. They were
tossed upon the Sea, for a considerable time, and many of them being lost in
their Voyage, three of their Vessels came to the Indian shore, whereof the
first set up themselves near Suratte, the second at Dieu, and the third at
Gandavy, a Town betwixt Suratte and Daman. They are neither very Numerous nor
Rich, one of the fundamental Rules of their Faith is, not to wear any other
Arms but a little Knife; they respect and adore the Sun, and the Firelike
Deities, and they look upon it as a great crime to extinguish a Candle, or at
least they must do it by a sudden Agitation of the Candle, if they would not
have it burn any longer. Their Lamps and Fire-places are their ^ltars; they
neither Interr nor burn their Dead; ^^ey make certain Cisterns in the Ground,
covered ^ith an Iron Grate, where they expose their dead ^^orps to the Rays of
the Sun.

Though all those who don't receive Baptism, may (...) numbered among the
Pagans, and that the Parsis (...) such in effect; nevertheless, the Indians, by
reason of the plurality of their Gods, may most pro^erly be comprehended under
that Name; such be^^g their ridiculous Superstition, as to extend to (...)
adoration of Adders, Serpents, and other Crea^^res.

All the Pagans have a great Veneration for Apes and Oxen; they are divided
into several Races, Fa^ilies and Seats, which the Portugueses comprehend under
the Name of Casta.

The chiefest and most considerable among them (...), The Bramans.
that of the Bramans, or Bragmans; these are Priests, who by an indispensible
Rule, are tied to Eat nothing that has or may have enjoyed life, and ^o live
upon Fruits, Pulse, and Milk Meats, nor ^o drink any strong Liquor. They are so
rigorous ^n their Fasts, as to eat but once in three days; they are respected
by all the rest as their Superiors; they are forbidden the use of Arms, and
dare not kill either Man nor Beast, though in their own Defense; they receive
the offerings of the People made to their Gods. The poorer sort appear in the
Morning near the Banks of Rivers, where they pray for such as come there to
wash and purify themselves; which done, they touch their Foreheads with a
little Bolus or some other Color, which they persuade the People to have a
virtue of preserving them that day against any sinister Accident, in recompense
of which they receive the Alms of the People, wherewith they maintain their
Families.

The Banjans are the next in order, The Banjans.
but they are not permitted to enter their Temples, unless it be to bring their
Offerings to the Idol. As for their manner of living, they observe very near
the same Rules as the Bramans; they are chiefly employed in managing the
Traffic of the Indies, and are more expert at it, than the rest of the
Indians. Both the Bramans and Banjans follow the opinion of Pyth^goras,
concerning the transmigration of the Soul, believing that so soon as the Soul
leaves the Body, it is transplanted into another; for which reason it i^ that
they neither kill, nor permit to be killed, any living Creature: And some are
so simple, as to distribute daily, certain quantities of Bread to their Dogs,
because, say they, it may please the Gods, to transplant one day their Souls
into more noble Bodies.

There is besides these an infinite number of other Sects among the Pagans,
each Profession maintaining a particular Race; But they are not all tied to the
same austerity of Life. Some of them will eat Fish, others all sorts of Meat,
except Beef.

There is a certain Gang of them, Mendicants in the Indies.
who making a show of Poverty, spend all their days in Begging, and as they are
much respected where ever they come, so they rather command than beg Alms. They
flock in great numbers about the Country, especially near their Temples, they
are very insolent, and let their Hair grow very long, to distinguish themselves
from the other Pagans, who shave themselves all over, unless it be a lock,
which they leave on the top of the Head as a Mark of their Religion. Those who
let their Hair grow thus long, make use of a certain Pill, which makes the Hair
grow both very thick and long. I have seen some of them wear their Hair near
two Fathoms long.

There are some who call themselves Faquirs; Certain Votaries in the Indies.
these make a Vow to remain for several Years together in their Temples, either
Standing, Sitting, their Arms Across, or lifted up, or in any other posture
they pitch upon, without changing their Station; and for fear, that in their
sleep, they should alter their Posture, and consequently break their Vow, they
cause themselves to be tied in the same Posture they have chosen, and thus
continue till the time of their Vow be expired; during which, those that ^ave
the oversight over the Temple, take care to feed them, their Joints being by
the length of time ren^red quite useless and inflexible, they remain for e^^er
after, either straight or crooked, according to (...) Posture they put
themselves in at the first en^rance of the Temple, in order to perform their
Vow.

The greatest part of the Pagans Subject, to the Great Mogul, burn their Dead,
and there are but ^ew Nations in all the Indies, who interr them after ^he
example of the Europeans.

CHAP. XVII.
How the Indian Women burn themselves with the dead Carcasses of their Husbands.
THE Indian Histories affirm, That in former Ages these Countries being
Governed by Pagan Princes, the Women often grown weary of their Husbands, made
a common practice of ridding their hands of them by Poison. How this Custom was
introduced.
The many tragical instances of this Nature, did oblige at last those Princes
who were not always exempt from the cruel designs of the Women, to make a Law,
that all Women of what Age and Quality soever, should be burnt with the dead
Carcasses of their Husbands. To give the better color to this cruel Decree, it
was backed by the specious pretext of Religion, promising a large share of
Enjoyment to those unfortunate Creatures, in the other World. Besides, that the
Bramans paid them very near the same reverence as to their Deities, by which
vain glory the crafty Priests having gained upon the Weakness of their Sex,
they frequently chose to make a virtue of necessity, and by a voluntary Act, to
render their Deaths more glorious.

Many Ages after the Mahometans being become Masters of the greatest part of
the Indies, were for abolishing this dreadful Custom of forcing People to be
their own Executioners; for which reason it was ordained, that none should be
constrained to Sacrifice themselves at their Husbands Funerals, but that they
should be left to their liberty, either to survive or die with them.

The Governors are in Person to examine such of the Pagan Women as offer
themselves to be Burnt; they are to endeavor by all fair means and
persuasions, to divert them from their designs, and if they persist in their
Resolution, they are obliged to give their consent, but withal to keep them
under a strict Guard, for fear, that if they should happen to change their
mind, they may not be rescued out of their hands. They look upon this as a very
necessary precaution, the better to oblige them to reflect seriously upon what
they undertake, before they enter upon so fatal a Resolution; for there have
not been wanting instances of those, who at first courted and demanded Death
from the Governors with an undaunted Courage, who have been startled and
trembled at the sight of the Funeral Pile, and too late repented themselves of
their rash Vows.

The Ceremony is performed in the following manner: How the Ceremony is
performed.
The Corpse of the deceased Husband is carried to the place where it is to be
consumed by Fire, the Inhabitants of Surat perform it commonly at a Leagues
distance from the City up the River, in a certain place, called Soulpara, where
there is one of the most famous Temples of the whole Province, it being their
Custom upon such an occasion, to be as near a Temple and the Water as they can;
then the Widow is brought thither in Triumph on Horse Back, most magnificently
attired with a Garland of Flowers about her Head; she is surrounded by several
that play upon Musical Instruments, and followed by her Kindred and Friends,
who Dance and Sing for joy, to have such a Heroine in their Family, or to be
allied to her by Friendship. Sometimes they are carried by Water; when the dead
Corpse is laid in the Boat, so as that the Widow, who is seated upon a Chair,
may set her Feet against it.

Being arrived at the place, the dead Corpse is laid upon the Bank of the River,
where the Widow washes it; which done, it is carried into a little Hut of seven
or eight foot square, made for that purpose of very dry Wood, covered with
Reed, dipped in Oil, Rosin and Brimstone, to render it the more Combustible; it
has a little Door through which the dead Body being conveyed into the place,
the Widow comes out of the Water, and thus wet, takes several rounds about the
Funeral Pile, which done, she embraces her Children, if she have any, and the
rest of her Kindred or Friends there present, among whom having distributed
what precious movables she has about her, they are removed at a further
distance, for fear their Tears should disturb her. How they burn themselves.
Thus prepared she enters the fatal place, where she is to sacrifice her self,
and being seated upon a heap of Straw, mixed with Brimstone, near the dead
Carcass of her Husband, a Braman exhorts her to constancy, comforting her with
the hopes of being soon reunited with her own better half; then he gives her a
Torch in one hand, and some leaves of a Book in which he has been reading
before in the other, if her heart don't fail her, she sets the Pile on fire her
self, but if she be not courageous enough to do it, the Braman after being come
out, and shutting the door behind him, does her this last office, whilst the
Spectators sing certain Songs to the Honor and Praise of the Lady, who thus
happily has made her self a Sacrifice.

The first time that I was an Eyewitness of this Tragical Ceremony, I took
most particular notice of all Passages and Circumstances that attend it; she
that sacrificed her self, did not appear to be above twenty Years of Age; she
looked upon her Funeral* Pile with a very settled* Countenance, showing not the
least marks of sorrow at her approaching ^ate; she with her own hands set fire
to the combustible matter that surrounded her; I was very near the Pile, so
that I could exactly see her lift up her deceased Husband's Head, and press her
Cheeks to his, which done, she pulled her Veil over her Face, and died without
the least appearance of regret.

Some time after, I saw such another Spectacle. She that was to be sacrificed,
was not quite so young as the former, and had pressed the Execution of her Vow
with a great deal of Resolution, which however began to fail her at that very
time when she stood most in need of it; for, scarce was she enclosed within the
Funeral Pile, but she strove by all means possible to get out, but the Braman
immediately set fire to the Combustible Materials, and thus forced her to
undergo that cruel fate, which she had sought for with so much eagerness. So
soon as the Bodies are consumed by the Fire, their Ashes are thrown into the
next River, and the Families of those Women who thus have sacrificed
themselves, are in great esteem ever after among the Indians.

In those places where the Pagans are absolute Masters, this Law is put in
Execution with the utmost severity, the Women that don't voluntarily offer
themselves to be sacrificed, being constrained by force, to satisfy the cruel
Law of their Native Country.

But what is the most surprising of all, is, That sometimes Men very far
advanced in Years, marry young Creatures of seven or eight years of Age, and
these notwithstanding the innocence and tenderness of their Age, are forced to
conform themselves to the barbarous custom of their Country, if their Husbands
die before them.

There are some Kingdoms in the Indies, where these Sacrifices are performed in
a different manner. They dig a deep hole in the Ground, wherein they lay the
dead Corpse; they make a great Fire round about it, for three days
consecutively; the Widow is led round about it, covered with a certain Veil,
made out of the Leaves of the Banana-Tree, and after having taken her turns and
bid farewell to all her Friends, She throws her self into the Fire, where She
is consumed to Ashes.

Others dig a Grave, Several ways of Sacrificing themselves.
wherein they Bury the Dead Carcass of the Husband, and the Widow being laid
a-top of him, they throw so much Earth upon them as covers her Body quite up to
the Neck; then the Braman approaches, and after having imparted to the poor
Victim his Consolations and Blessing, he Strangles her, and then covers them
all over with Earth.

The King of Maudre has seldom less than 3 or 400 Wives, who are all obliged to
be Sacrificed, whenever he comes to Die.

There is another more Barbarous Custom observed at the Funeral Obsequies of
the Princes of the Race of Sevagi; for, all the Officers of his Household (which
amount to a considerable number,) are Burnt with their Dead Corpse; the same is
observed in several of the other petty Kingdoms of the Indies.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Temples and Habits of the Indians.
AS the Indians are very different in their Religions, so their Temples have
but little resemblance to one another. The Mahometans at Suratte, have most
Magnificent Mosques. Mosques.
There are above 200 of them in that City, but some are but small, and
indifferently Built. They abhor Images, and have only one hollow place in
their Mosques, toward the side of Mecha. And because the Mahometans who are
very Zealous in their Superstitious Worship, have not always the opportunity of
visiting their principal Mosques, they have erected every where some small
edifices, which contain no more than a Cistern or great Basin to purify
themselves, and a hole in the Wall, where to make their Ejaculations; all these
are entitled with the Name of a Mosque, and in this Sense must be taken, what
we hear related concerning the vast number of Mosques in the City of
Grand-Cairo, and other Cities where the Mohammedan Religion is predominant.

According to the Institution of the Alcoran, the Friday is their Sunday, which
Day, being set apart for the Exercise of their Devotion, they there offer up
their Prayers and Alms.

The Temples of the Pagans are without the Cities, Pagan Temples.
though some of the Richer sort have them also in their Dwelling-Houses, they are
commonly very large and Magnificent; all days are alike to them, and the
Offerings they make to their Gods consist always in things that are inanimate.

The Parsis, The Parsis.
who, as we said before, adore the Sun and Fire, have neither Altars nor any
other places appointed for the Exercise of their Devotion. The Image of the
Sun, was formerly their Idol, but ever since they live under the jurisdiction
of the Great Mogul, they are forbidden to adore it, and if some among them
continue this Worship, they must do it in private, and with a great deal of
circumspection for fear of being discovered.

All the Subjects of the Great Mogul wear Turbans, Habit of the Indians.
though somewhat distinguished in folding according to the difference of their
Religion. The Mahometans and Parsis, never Shave their Beards.

The Men wear a certain kind of Vests, not unlike to our loose Coats, the
Sleeves are very strait, but withal so long as to be laid in a great many
pleats upon the Arm. They make use of a kind of Drawers or Breeches, very
strait, not open before, and reaching down to their Heels; the Pagans wear over
these a thin Petticoat. Stockings are not used in the Indies, and their Shoes
are flatsoled like our Slippers.

The Indian Women are very careful of their Hair, Mohammedan Women.
which generally is very fine and long. Their Habit is but little different
from the Men, unless it be in their Head Attire, which is made of a Crepine of
Lawn. They are very curious and neat in their Apparel, and always perfumed with
the richest Essences of the Indies. The never appear in public with their
Faces uncovered, the Mahometans being naturally addicted to Jealousy, to so
excessive a degree, as to be mistrustful upon the least occasion; of which I
will give you an instance, which may sufficiently verify this assertion, to
all who are not thoroughly acquainted with their Inclinations.

The Governor of Suratte tenderly loved one of his Wives, Jealousy of the
Mahometans.
by reason of her extraordinary Beauty, wherein she exceeded all the rest.
Being sometimes obliged to be absent from her, he was very desirous to have her
Picture drawn, and understanding that there was a certain young Picture-drawer
belonging to the French East India Company, at Suratte, who was a very good
Artist, he sent to the President of that Company to desire him to let him speak
with the young Man. They being ready to oblige him in so reasonable a request,
sent the young Painter to him, to whom he spoke concerning his intention,
promising to reward him plentifully for his pains. The French Man returned his
Compliment, telling him, That he should be very Proud of employing his Pencil
in the drawing the Picture of so Excellent a Person, without any hopes of
further Rewards; Then replied the Indian, go to Work as soon as you please, and
make use of your utmost Skill to do it to perfection. I will, answered the
Painter, but you must take care to have me brought into the presence of the
Person, whose Picture I am to draw. How, said the Governor, interrupting his
Discourse angrily, would you pretend to have a Sight of my Wife! And how is it
possible for me to draw her Picture without seeing her, answered the Painter.
Away with you, replied the jealous Indian, you have no business here, if you
cannot draw her Picture without seeing her; I will rather deny my self the
satisfaction of having her Picture, than that she should be exposed to the
Sight of any Man Living. By this you may see to what an excess of folly the
Mahometans carry their Jealousy; notwithstanding which, the Women don't want
ingenuity and dexterity to please themselves upon certain occasions, in spite
of all the care and watchfulness of their Jealous Husbands.

The Women of the Parsis, and other Pagans, wear nothing else but close Bodice
fastened behind, Pagan Women.
the Sleeves reaching only to the Elbow: For the rest they make use of a piece
of Stuff, either of Cotton or Silk, according to their Quality, which they wind
about their middle. They are generally very handsome, much addicted to Venery,
unless it be those of the Banjans, who are something more Modest. They affect a
great deal of Magnificence in their Jewels, and besides their Necklaces and
Bracelets, wear on their Feet Golden-Rings hollow within, and filled with
Gravel or any other thing that will make a noise. Their Heads are adorned with
small Golden Coronets, richly beset with Precious Stones. They have holes in
their Ears, in which they wear their Pendants, and in their Nostrils, which are
bored through, they hang Gold and Silver Plates, of that bigness as almost to
cover their Faces. They are very clear Limbed, and well proportioned; the
richer sort Bath themselves every day at home, the rest abroad in the Rivers,
where you meet with some of them from Sunrising till late at Night; where the
Bramans are employed to Pray for them, and to take care of their Clothes; I
mean those, which they put on after they have washed themselves; for they go
with their Clothes into the River, and afterward change them; which they do
with so much dexterity, that the standers by, though never so attentive and
quick-sighted, cannot see the least thing which favors of immodesty; They are
very Religious in observing their Ancient Laws and Customs, but withal,
extremely addicted to Voluptuousness.

After 3 Months stay at Suratte, I Embarked in the Port of Sonaly, on Board a
Vessel called the Mary, which in Company of another Vessel called the Strong,
was going to Batiepatan, to take in there the rest of her Cargo in Spices.

CHAP. XIX.
Our Departure from Suratte for Malabar.
WE set Sail from the Port of Sonaly the 6th of January, with a very favorable
Wind, which thus continued till our Arrival at Rajapour, where we left the
Strong, and continued our Voyage to Mirscou, and some other places in the
Indies, of which we shall have occasion to speak anon; but because I have been
at other times at Rajapour, I will here insert what I found most worth taking
notice of, in this place.

It is Situate in the Territories of Sevagi, Description of Rajapour.
a famous Rebel, who for a considerable time has been in Wars with the Great
Mogul, and the King of Visapour his Liege Lord. It lies exactly under the 17th
Degree of North Latitude, on the Coast of Malabar, about 20 Leagues North from
Goa; and you come to it by a River, which runs with a very gentle Current. Near
the Mouth of it on the right side of the Shore, you see a small Village,
Inhabited only by Fishermen, and 4 Leagues beyond it is the City of Rajapour,
which has Communicated its Name to the said River. You may go up with a Vessel
of 100 Tuns, as far as to a small Island, which is about half way betwixt the
City and the Mouth of the River; afterward you make use of Chaloups and
Barges, to carry the Merchandice to the City, where the River is so shallow
that at low Water it is fordable in some places.

The English had here formerly a Factory, but the Indians have dislodged them
from thence. The French Company has not many years ago got a Settlement there,
where they have a fine House and Garden, near a great Cistern, from whence,
arises a Spring of Hot-Water, Natural Bath of Rajapour.
not inferior in virtue to any in Europe. The Adjacent Mountains and Forests
are full of Apes, which are much reverenced by the Pagans, Inhabiting the
Territories of Sevagi, no body being permitted to kill them, without running
the Hazard of his Life. The chief Commodities at Rajapour, are Saltperer and
Callicoes, but especially Pepper, which grows thereabouts in great quantity.

This Sevagi is a very Potent Prince, Prince Sevagi.
who has managed his Affairs with so much Prudence as to have Established
himself, in spite of his Potent Enemies, in all the Territories, Situate
betwixt Suratte and Goa, unless it be some few Seaports, belonging to the
Portuguese. He has made himself so dreadful to his Neighbors, as to have made
the City of Goa it self Tremble at his Approach, and has several times made
those of Suratte feel the direful effects of his Fury, by Plundering all the
Country round about, and carrying away great Riches, without sparing either
Mosques or the Pagan Temples. But it has been observed of him, that he always
used a great deal of moderation toward the Europeans, perhaps for fear of
being called to a severe account by their Principals* which Motive might induce
him to show (...) favorable to them, without which, it (...) have been no
difficult matter for him to have Plundered their Houses, like those of the
Indians. In the Year 1671. he made such an inroad into the Territories of
Suratte, when he made so terrible a havoc in the circumjacent places, that the
damage could not be repaired for many Years after. All his Strong holds are
Built among the Mountains; His Subjects are Pagans* like himself. But he
Tolerates all Religions, and is looked upon as one of the most Politic Princes
in those parts.

The Strong being entered the River of Rajapour, met there with another French
Ship called the Golden-Eagle, which was Arrived there but a few days before,
coming from Achem, the Capital of the Isle of Sumatra, and the ordinary
Residence of their Queen, the Island being Governed by Women. Before she
touched at Achem, she had been at Masusipatan, a City belonging to the Kingdom
of Golconda, on the Coast of Coromandel, from whence come the best Painted
Indian Callicoes, the Color of which, is as lasting as the Stuff it self,
without losing any thing of its Beauty. The French East India Company have
their Factors in all those places.

CHAP. XX.
What further happened during our Voyage to Malabar.
AS we continued our Course toward Malabar, we passed within sight of the
Forts Situate at the Entrance of the River of Goa, whereof we shall speak
hereafter, and came before Mirscou, on the 14th, where we cast Anchor the same
day, near the Mouth of the River.

Mirscou is a City of the Kingdom of Visapour, Mirscou described.
about 18 Leagues South of Goa, where the French Company has their Warehouses
for Pepper. The Climate here is very agreeable and Fertile; the first place you
meet with after you are entered the River, is the Town and Castle of Mirscou; it
is of a considerable bigness, surrounded with a deep Moat, and the Castle is
provided with a good Artillery. He that was then Governor of the place, was a
Persian by Birth, who is Name being C^jabdella, treated us with all imaginable
Civility. For no sooner had he been advertised of our Arrival, but he came to
visit our Captain, and before his departure invited us all to Supper, though it
was not as yet Dinnertime; he was so much delighted with our Company, that he
obliged us to go along with him, so that we followed him to his Palace, some in
Palanquins, the rest on Horseback, with his Guards before us, under the sound
of the Haut-boys and Trumpets.

As soon as we were come within the Castle, An Indian Feast.
we were brought into a spacious Room hanged all over with the richest
Tapestries, where we were seated round about him upon Cushions made of the same
stuff. Scarce had our Interpreters begun to Compliment the Governor in our
behalf, when we saw come into the Room a Band of Women Dancers, which he had
ordered to appear there for our Diversion; these Women make profession of
Dancing and Singing, having no other Employment to get a livelihood. They Dance
with an extraordinary activity, and an exact observance of the Cadence, but
their Gestures are not very modest, they are generally well shaped, and appear
very sumptuous in their Apparel. This Ball which lasted the greatest part of
the Day, was diverting enough to us, by reason of the Novelty of the Spectacle;
but we were extremely fatigued by the long continuance of the show, because we
had not so much as broke our fast before we came out, so that we had much
rather had a more substantial Entertainment, than that, which only served to
divert our Eyes, and all this time was not so entertaining to us, as a good
dish of Meat would have been. Night approaching at last, we saw the Flambeau's
brought in, which put us in hopes, that Supper-time was drawing near,
especially when we saw our selves conducted into the inner Court; but instead
of Tables, we saw the old sport of Dancing renewed* and this being over, we
were entertained with an artificial Fire-work, which lasted till ten a Clock at
Night, and almost put us quite out of Patience. At last we were conducted to
the place where we were to Sup, the Table being laid upon the Ground (according
to the custom, as well of that, as other Eastern Countries) under a very
magnificent Cupolo. There was served up variety of most excellent Meats, of
which our hungry Stomachs would not give us leave to distinguish the true
relish; our Drink was Fimonade, which was brought in great porcelain Vessels,
out of which we took the Liquor with Spoons into small Glasses, of which every
one present had one for his own use. The second course was made up of the best
Fruits of the Indies and preserves, and the Feast being concluded with the old
Dancing sport, we did not take our leave from the Governor till very late, who
caused us to be reconducted by his Guards and Trumpets to the House belonging
to the French Company.

The next day we prayed him to come on board our Ship, which lay in the Road.
He came according to our Invitation, giving presents to every Man in particular
that had Supped with him. He was received under the discharge of our Cannon,
and was entertained the whole day on board our Ship. At his departure, we
offered Him and his Officers some presents (more valuable than his) in the Name
of the French East India Company, which he accepted; and went home as well
satisfied with our Entertainment, as we were with the many Civilities he had
shown us the day before.

The King of Visapour is one of the most Potent in the Indies, King of Visapour.
but is tributary to the Great Mogul; he makes profession of the Mohammedan
Religion, but most of his Subjects are Pagans.

We parted from before Mirscou the nineteenth of January, five days after our
Arrival, and the two and twentieth of the same Month, arrived at Batiepatan,
where meeting with good store of Pepper, our Vessel got her full Cargo.

Batiepatan is a Town belonging to the Kingdom of Cananor, Description of
Batiepatan.
on the East of Malabar, situate under eleven Degrees, and forty five Minutes
of North Latitude. The Town it self is of a very large extent, not above a
League distant from the Seaside, and is inhabited for the most part by rich
Merchants, who are all Mahometans.

At a small distance from the Town, is the King's Palace, surrounded by a great
many Pagan Temples, very magnificently built; and it was near this place the
Governor had assigned a settlement to the French at that time, till they could
pitch upon another place, which might be more suitable to their purpose.

The Ship called the Strong, arriving some days after ours, they were both
dispatched with all possible speed, and accordingly set sail on the first of
February toward the Isle Dauphine, from whence they were to carry Monsieur
Mondevergue into France.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Malabar.
WHen we speak of the Coast of Malabar, we commonly comprehend that large tract
of Ground, which extends from Suratte, as far as to Cape Comorin; but to
distinguish it the more exactly from other adjacent Countries, belonging to the
Indies, we will fix its beginning at the Mount of Eli, situate under the
twelfth degree of North Latitude, this being the place, where the People begin
to assume the Name of Malabars or Malavars.

Its extent all along the Coast is of above two hundred Leagues in length, The
extent of Malabar.
being divided into several Kingdoms, the Princes whereof are generally Pagans.
Most of these petty Kings possess but small Territories; nevertheless they are
independent, and not tributary to any other Prince.

The most powerful of them all is the King of Cananor, King of Cananor.
being dreaded and respected by all the rest; he is called Cotitri, a name
belonging to all the Kings of Cananor.

The King of Samorin, King of Samorin.
though his Territories are much larger than the formers, yet is looked upon as
much inferior in Strength.

Their manner of Living, Religion and Customs are the same, so that what we
relate of the Kingdom of Cananor, may be applied to all the rest of the
Malabars.

The Air is very good all over the Country, which is one of the most fertile in
all Asia; they reap Rice twice a Year, and have good store of most excellent
Fruits, but quite different from those in Europe.

Though it be evident that the Cocoe is none of the most delicious Fruit of the
Indies, nevertheless its usefulness being so universal, it deserves to be
mentioned here, and we will insert a particular Description of the Tree that
bears so useful a Fruit.

The Malabars call it Tencar, which signifies as much as straight, as having no
Branches, though the Tree it self be sometimes thirty or forty foot high,
seldom exceeding three foot in compass. The Wood is spongy, and consequently
useless for Building, unless it be when it grows very old, when it becomes much
more solid. Cocoe-Tree described.
The roots of it are many, spreading almost above ground, notwithstanding
which, the Tree out-braves the utmost fury of Winds, it being very rare to see
them t^rn up even by the most violent Hurricanes. Toward the top there sprouts
out about a douzen leaves of ten foot long each, and one and an half broad,
being divided in the middle like those of the Date-tree; when they are dried,
they serve instead of Tiles to cover Houses withal; out of their finest
Threads they make very fine Mats. Tents and Huts of the courser Branches. The
middle part of the leaf serves for Fuel. Their number is always the same; for
so soon as one falls, another grows in its stead. On the very top of the Tree
there sprouts out a very large Bud, not unlike a Cabbage or Cawly-flower, but
much larger and finer than ours, enough to serve ten People for a Meal; but,
because the Tree dies soon after the Fruit is gathered, they commonly cut down
the Tree near the Root, when they intend to make use of it. Betwixt the top and
the leaves come forth abundance of young Sprigs, about the thickness of a Man's
Arm; these they cut, from whence destills a Liquor of a white Color, and a
sweet and delicious taste, which the Tieves (such among the Malabars, as apply
themselves to Husbandry) come to gather Mornings and Evenings in certain
Vessels fastened to the end of the Sprigs, Palm Tree Wine.
from whence flows the said Liquor.

This is the Wine of the Country, called by them Houry, or Tarry; it is so
strong as to inebriate a Man like our Wines; Vinegar and Brandy.
in few hours it contracts a sharpness, and in one Day and Night turns quite
Sour, when it is used instead of Vinegar, they having no other throughout the
Indies. They also make of it a kind of Aqua Vitae or Brandy, which by repeated
Destillations becomes excessive strong.

If you put this Liquor as soon as it is drawn from the Quick-tree, into a
Basin with a small quantity of Lime, it becomes as sweet as Honey, which they
make use of for Preserves, and if it be boiled for some time, it becomes Sugar,
not quite so good as that which is drawn from Canes, but which is nevertherless
much used among the common People of Malabar; the Natives call it Jagara, and
the Portuguese Jagre. As long as the Tarry destills out of the Sprigs, the Tree
bears no Fruit, but if you let them grow, there come forth great Bunches, which
produce the Cocoes hanging in Clusters, to the number of ten or twelve.

Their skin is very tender at first, Cocoes.
and easy to be slit, from whence flows a very clear and fresh Liquor, of a
very agreeable taste; some of them will afford not much above a pint of Liquor,
whereas others give near a Gallon.

This Liquor is by degrees converted into a solid substance, which is very soft
and white, and then the Malabars call the Cocoes Elenir, and the Portuguese
Lagne. Afterward the moisture being all consumed, the Fruit becomes hard, and
its taste is not unlike our Hasle Nuts. They are so well known in those parts,
that it would be superfluous to give a particular account here, to what use
they are put in Europe, since they are brought thither from all parts in so
great quantities, that they are no more looked upon now a days as a rarity, but
are esteemed merely for their Natural and intrinsic goodness.

The Tree brings forth Fruit three times a year; some are as big as a Man's
Head, and because they are beaten down by the least Wind, it is dangerous to
walk under these Trees when the Fruit is come to perfection.

They make out of the outward Husk, when dried, a kind of Hemp, the threads of
which serve to make strong Cordage and Cables, for the biggest Ships; and as
there is a prodigious quantity of this Fruit all over the Indies, so besides
what is consumed by the Natives, and what is exported by Foreigners; they burn
abundance of it, to make Charcoals for the use of the Goldsmiths and others.

The Indian Cooks season their Meats with a certain Liquor which they get out
of the Cocoes by scraping it, and the poorer sort extract an Oil of it, which
they both Eat and Burn in their Lamps. They fatten their Poultry and Hogs with
the remnants out of which the Oil has been pressed, and so the poor sometimes
make Bread of it. Indian Paper.
The Pith of the Tree is White, and as fine as any Paper, for which use it is
much sought after by persons of Quality.

Considering the extraordinary benefit reaped from this Tree, he may well be
looked upon as one of the most precious in the Universe, though he be none of
the rarest. What has been related by some, to wit, That they make Ships that
cross the Seas without any thing but what the Cocoe affords, though it seems to
savor of a Romance, is nevertheless thus far true; that they may equip a good
large Barge with Masts, Sails, (which are made out of the leaves) and Cordage
laden with the products of the Tree and Fruits of the Cocoes.

There are besides this two other kinds of Palm Trees; the first bears that
sort of Dates, which never come to maturity in the Indies; the Tree is not
above eight or ten foot high, without Branches, and bears its leaves on the
top, much like the Cocoe-tree, but they are not near so large. They bore a hole
in the Arm of the Tree, from whence by the help of a Pipe, they draw a certain
Liquor not unlike the Tarry, we have mentioned before. The Inhabitants call it
Nary, and it serves them to make Vinegar of and Aqua Vitae, but no Sugar.

The other kind is the Wild Palm Tree; Two other sorts of Palm Trees.
its fruit is good for nothing; they call it Traf^uli; but the Liquor which
they draw out of it, is not inferior to that of the Cocoes. The Tree exceeds
the other in Bigness, and its leaves are so large, as that four of them serve
for a Coverlid to a Bed of five foot long; they make of them Umbrella's, or as
the Portuguese call them, Somb^arios, which are very useful both against the
Rain, and heat of the Sun.

CHAP XXII.
Of the two Fruits called the Jacque and the Mangos.
THE Jacque is of so prodigious a bigness, that one of them is sometimes a good
Burden for a Man; though the Tree seldom exceeds our Apple Trees in Bulk. Its
leaves are not unlike to the Laurel, but something larger: The Fruit is fastened
to the Stemm, because the Branches are not strong enough to bear it; it buds
out at first sight most like Moss, is of a green Color, till it comes to
maturity; its Skin is most like that of the Anana's; it is pretty thick but
soft, and may easily be cut with a Knife, provided you dip it first in Oil, or
any other oleaginous substance, which prevents the Gumm from sticking to it.
The Fruit is divided within by many partitions, containing a certain substance
not unlike our Plums, and of the bigness of an ordinary Pullet's Egg; there are
sometimes two hundred of them, the Pulp that surrounds it, is about an inch
thick, of a Yellow Color, and tastes almost like our best Melons. In the very
midst of the Fruit, there appears something not unlike our Chestnuts, which
being the Seed of the Jacque, is never eaten; and the whole substance it self
is very unwholesome, unless you drink a good quantity of Water after it.

The Mangos is a much more excellent Fruit, The Mangos.
resembling our Nectarins; they are of different colors, to wit, Red, White
and Green, when they are Ripe. Some are of the bigness of an Egg, some bigger
than our largest Pears; their Skin is pretty hard, but the Pulp soft; they are
to be met with all over the Indies, but are much better in some places than in
others, those on the coast of Malabar are of the worst sort. About Suratte and
Daman, they are indifferently good, but the best are in the Isle of Goa; they
are not ripe till September, they are most excellent preserved whilst they are
Green; they also pickle them with Vinegar; the Tree is of the bigness of our
Wallnut-tree, and the Wood very fit for all sorts of Joyners Work.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Pepper, Cardamon, Cinnamon and Bethel.
THE Shrub which bears the Pepper is always planted near other great Trees,
which keep it upright; its leaves are very like the Ivy, whose smell is as
biting to the Nostrils, as the Fruit is to the Tongue. The Pepper sprouts forth
in small Bunches; its color is Green at first, but turns Red when it comes to
Maturity, and after it has been dried in the Sun, appears such as we see it in
Europe. There is but one kind, the difference betwixt the Black and White
(according to the opinion of the vulgar) being nothing else, but that the first
retains its native husk, whereas the other is peeled, which they do by
thrashing it with small sticks before it be quite dry, or after it is dried, by
soaking it for a little while in Water, and then rub off the outward peel; by
which means, every body that has black Pepper, may soon convert it into White,
if he will take the trouble to do it.

The Indians preserve it with Sugar whilst it is Green, Pepper preserved.
and make also a Pickle of it with Vinegar, which they call Achar, a name they
give to all their Pickles made with Vinegar.

The Pepper grows in a great many places, but no where in such abundance as
from Rajapour, as far as to Cape Comorin; the largest sort comes from Visapour
and Canara; the Pepper that grows on the Coast of Malabar, that is from Mount
Eli, to the most Southern part of the Coast, is not so big as the other, but it
multiplies faster, and most Nations furnish themselves with Pepper in those
parts, to transport it into their respective Countries.

The Cardamom grows in the Kingdom of Cananor near a certain Mountain, Cardamom.
about six or seven Leagues distant from the Seaside, this being the only
place in the whole World where it grows; this spot of Ground produces a vast
yearly revenue to the owners. They need neither Sow nor Plant it, all the pains
they are obliged to take, is, to burn the Herbs after the rainy Season is over,
which grow there abouts; the Ashes of which produce the Cardamom.

It is transported from hence all over the Indies into Persia and Arabia, the
Inhabitants of these Countries never relishing their Rice well, unless it be
seasoned with the Cardamom, so that the greatest part of it is consumed in the
East, the rest is bought up by the Europeans, who chiefly make use of it in
Physic: It is three times as dear as the Pepper.

There also grows Cinnamon on this Coast, Cinnamon.
but does not come in goodness near to that which the Isle of Ceylon produces,
which the Hollanders formerly took from the Pertuguese.

The Leaves which by the Malabars are called Betle, The Leaves of Bethel.
by the Portuguese Bethel, and the other Indians Panthle, ought not to be
passed by in silence in this place. They grow on Shrubs like the Pepper, and
are not unlike the Ivy Leaves as well as the others; but they have a pleasant
aromatic flavor, their natural Color being Green. They whiten them without
the least prejudice to their native virtue, by laying them in Wooden Casks,
made out of the Bananas Tree, and by sprinkling them with Water once a day.
They never chew them without the Areque; this is a small Fruit, Areque.
very like our Green Wall-Nuts, which they lay in water to make the Peel
rotten. The Areque has a very offensive smell, whilst it is fresh, but being
dried, retains nothing of its ill scent; it is a little biting upon the Tongue,
and promotes Spitting.

The Chaw made of the Bethel they prepare thus: Indian Chaw.


They take about the quantity of a Pea of Chalk or Lime, which they put among 3
or 4 Leaves of Bethel, and mix with it a fourth part of an Areque Nut, which
they will use together, and chaw it at pleasure. There are some of the Indians,
who add to it a few Grains of Cardamom, a small quantity of Cloves and
Cinnamon, which gives it a very agreeable taste. The Tree which produces the
Areque, grows straight, without Branches, only a few Leaves on the Top; the
Wood is tolerably good for Building, but most used for Masts of Barges, they
being not strong enough for large Vessels.

The Chaw being thus prepared, fortifies the Stomach, promotes Digestion, and
leaves a good smell behind it, moistens the Mouth, and dies the Spittle and
Lips red; from whence without Question is arisen this vulgar error, that some
have affirmed it makes the Gums Bleed.

It is a great Specific against the Stone, as I my self have Experienced
several times, when I prescribed it to some of my Acquaintance in that case.
And what may serve as a confirmation of what I have asserted as to this
particular, it is to be observed that in those places, where it is frequently
used; I never met with any body that was Afflicted with this Distemper.

Before a Man is used to this Chaw, it will cause a Dizziness, occasioned by
the Areque, but this may in a great measure be prevented, by well cleansing the
said Fruit, from a certain white substance, which is within it. The Europeans
who have for some time lived in the Indies, are generally as fond of this Chaw
as the Indians themselves; and the Leaves of the Bethel as common as they are,
are nevertheless in great esteem, as well among Persons of the first Rank, as
the meanest Peasants. If you pay a Visit to any body here, the first thing
which is presented is a Roll of this Chaw; if you should let a Friend go out of
your House without it, he would take it as a gross Affront, and so it would be
looked upon on the other hand, if he should refuse to accept it; nevertheless,
no body is obliged to take it upon the spot, the Asiaticks in general being
very jealous of one another, and extremely fearful of Poison.

There is a certain Tree all over the Indies, but more especially in Malabar,
which grows to a considerable height, its Leaves are like those of the Laurel,
or at least very little different; it bears a whitish Flower of a very good
scent; out of the Stem distills a Gum, which is very useful for Ships; but what
is particularly remarkable in this Tree, is, that its Branches after they are
grown up to some height, turn downwards again to the Ground, where as soon as
they touch they take root, and in process of time, grow equal in bulk to the
first Stem. If the Inhabitants did not prevent the spreading of this Tree by
continually cutting down its Branches, one Tree would in time be sufficient to
spread it self all over the Country.

Malabar abounds in almost all the same sorts of Pulse we have in these parts,
besides which, it has some peculiar to it self; among these are certain Beans
of four Fingers long, Large Peans.
the Cod containing in length a foot and half. They come very quickly to
maturity, are of no good taste, and only used by the poorer sort. They are
never seen in Gardens, unless it be to cover and shadow their Arbours or
Summer-Houses.

Besides which, they have on both sides of their Walks, Hedge-rows of a certain
Shrub, which spreads and twists it self in a little time to admiration; it is
very full of Leaves, resembling those of the Garden Burnet, and bears a great
quantity of Flowers, of a right Red Color, not unlike the Jessamine Flowers,
but having not the least scent, serve only to please the Eye. They begin to
blow at Sunrising, and fall off at Sunset. Notwithstanding which, these
Hedges never want Flowers the whole Year round, without the trouble of Sowing
or Planting them after the first time, because they scatter certain Grains upon
the Ground, which immediately taking root, furnish the Hedge with an immediate
supply of new Shrubs and Flowers. The Malabars are not such great admirers of
Flowers as the Indians, who are subject to the Great Mogul, and though their
Country is not destitute of these materials, from whence they draw their
essences in the Indies, yet their Women seldom make use of any thing else than
the Oil drawn from the Cocoes, they not being inclined so much to the vanity of
perfumes, as the rest of the Indian Women.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Elephant and some other Animals of Malabar.
THE Birds which are found in Malabar, are the same which you meet with in
other parts of the Indies. Perroquets or Perrots, of all sizes and Colors, are
here in great numbers; they catch them with Nets, sometimes 200 at a time, but
the Indians never take any pains to teach them to Speak, as we do in Europe.

They do abound in all sorts of Wild fowl, which they take with a great deal of
ease, unless it be the Wild-Peacock, which is very difficult to be caught,
which makes him to be looked upon as a rarity, not only for the Tail, but also
for his Feathers, which are in great esteem among all the Asiaticks; they make
Umbrella's, Shrines, and Fans of them, for persons of Quality, which they adorn
with Gold, and Precious Stones. They have also good store of Tame-Fowl.

The Elephant ought to hold the first rank among the Beasts which are to be
found on the Coast of Malabar, Elephant.
though it be brought thither from other parts of the Indies. It is the biggest
among all the Terrestrial Creatures, the Head is not proportionable in bigness
to the Body, its Ears are in shape not unlike to the Wings of a Flitter-Mouse;
Its Legs round and thick, and of an equal bigness, but is not destitute of
Joints. He makes use of his Snout to take hold of any thing that is offered
him, this he can draw in or extend at pleasure, and wherever he lays hold
with it, no Man alive is able to wrest it from him against his will; he will
handle a Cimetar with the same dexterity as if he had the use of Hands; this
Trunk or Snout, is hollow within, so that when the Elephant drinks, he draws
the Water through it into his Mouth. I have seen them returning from the River
side, when some of them had kept in their Trunks near a Pailful of Water, which
they would spout into the Faces of such persons as they bore a grudge to; no
Creature alive is more intelligible, nor has a greater memory than the
Elephant, of which I have been sufficiently convinced, upon several occasions.

Each City in the Indies entertains a certain number of young Fellows, who is
Business it is to sweep their Houses and Streets. A Boy of about 12 or 13 Years
of Age, who belonged to those employed in this drudgery in the City of Suratte,
having swept together some excrements, and seeing an Elephant coming that way,
took up as many of them as he could hold in both his Hands, and threw it
directly at the Elephant's Eyes, who went on his way without showing the least
sign of resentment. But several days after, meeting the same Boy in a narrow
Street, he took hold of him with his Trunk round the Waste, and so tossed him
above 100 times at a great height in the Air, to the no small surprise of all
that beheld it; I did not imagine otherwise, but that it would have cost the
Boy his Life; but after some time we were agreeably surprised to find that the
Elephant only intended to put him into a fright, in retalliation for the
Affront he had received from him some days before; for, after he had thus
sported with him, as long as he thought convenient, he laid him gently again in
the same place where he had taken him up, and without more ado went his way.

A certain Portuguese Viceroy, had an Elephant of an extraordinary Bigness,
which he being resolved to Present to the King, he ordered he should be
Embarked in the first Vessel, that was to go for Lisbon. He that had the
oversight of the Elephant, being unwilling to leave his Native Country, used in
the mean while to tell the Elephant in the same terms as one should speak to a
Man, That they were going to Transport him into a Country where he must expect
to undergo all the Slavery and Hardship that could be imagined; which had made
such a lively impression upon the Elephant, that all the Art of Mankind, could
not get him into the Vessel, which was to Transport him, several having lost
their Lives by his fury, who attempted to force him into the Ship; the Viceroy
being advertized of what had passed, and not doubting but that this Trick had
been put upon him by the Manager of the Elephant, had him brought into his
presence, and threatened him with Death, if within a limited time, he did not
take care to have the Elephant conveyed into the Ship; the Fellow dreading the
Viceroy's Anger, was obliged to change his Lesson, and to tell the Elephant,
that he was to be Presented to a great Prince, where he was to lead a very
easy Life, which had such an influence upon this Creature, that they
afterward Embarked him without the least resistance.

There is scarce any Person of Quality in the Indies but what has some
Elephants; Usefulness of the Elephant.
their Kings make use of them when they are engaged in War, they employ them in
carrying their Canon and Soldiers; I have seen some of the Indian Governors
going into the Country for their divertisement, upon the Back of an Elephant,
where they had fixed very large and Magnificent Tents, divided into 2 or 3
Apartments, to wit, one for the Men, and the other for the Women, and the third
for a Table provided with variety of eatables.

They adorn them with fine Coverings, not unlike in fashion to our
Horse-Cloaths; I have seen some of them which took up no less than 100 Yards of
Cloth apiece; and yet these were made for Elephants that are not of the
biggest size; for, I can affirm it for Truth, because I have been an eye
witness of it, that there are some much larger; which may be easily discovered
by their Teeth. For those of the Elephants on the Coast of Malabar, seldom
exceed 3 or 4 Foot in length, and may be carried without much difficulty by one
Man; Elephant's Teeth.
whereas the Elephant's Teeth of Bombaza and Mosambigue, two places in Africa,
are generally above 10 Foot long, and of such a bigness, that two Men can
scarce lift them from the Ground.

Abundance of these Teeth are brought to the Indies, each Elephant has no more
than two of them, which furnish us as well as other parts of the World with
what we call Ivory.

After I had by my own Experience been sufficiently instructed concerning the
nature of the Elephant, I could not but admire with what Impudence some have
forged their Fables concerning the Elephant's having no joints in their Legs,
Fables concerning the Elephant.
how they could never lie down, and if by mischance he happened to fall, he
could never rise again; that when he takes his natural rest, he leans against a
Tree, and that the only way to catch him is to saw the Trunk of the Tree, which
he is observed to make his Sleeping-place, that so he may fall down together
with the Tree; but these are mere Inventions of those who Travel no farther
than within the compass of their own homes; for, whoever has been in any part
of Asia must needs be convinced to the contrary.

The Elephant lies down without any great trouble, he bends his Knee as often
as his Master mounts on the Back of him, and Sleeps in the same posture as a
Horse.

They catch him in the following manner: How he is caught.
when they know the way he commonly takes, they dig a hole or ditch, which they
cover slightly with Branches, with some Earth a-top of it, where the Elephant
is drawn into the Snare; for the bulk of his Body being such, as to prevent his
turning and lifting himself as in so narrow a Compass, he is caught by those
who have laid the Trap.

The African Negroes eat his Flesh, and I have heard it affirmed for Truth,
that his Snout is very delicious meat; but generally they are killed for their
Teeth sake, though they also sometimes fall out of themselves.

The Hyde rightly dressed, is of such thickness, that they are proof against a
Musket-ball; abundance of the young ones are brought up and Tamed, and are
generally caught as they run astray, after they have lost the old ones by one
accident or another. Notwithstanding the prodigious Bulk of this Animal, it
Swims extremely well, and goes a great pace; besides which, it is as Courageous
as it is Strong, and does great Service to the Indian Kings in their Wars.

During my abode in the Indies, there was a certain Governor, who being willing
to give an extraordinary piece of diversion to some persons of Quality, caused
an Elephant and Tiger to be brought into a kind of an Amphitheatre, erected for
that purpose, to try their Strength and Activity, against one another; the
Tiger is a very nimble Creature, but much inferior in Bulk to the Elephant;
his chief Strength lies in his Claws and Teeth, of which he gave a sufficient
proof to his Enemy; Combat betwixt an Elephant and Tiger.
for sometimes he was upon his Back, sometimes under his Belly, where he left
very Bloody marks of his furious Attempts; the Elephant on the other hand, used
his Snout with a great deal of dexterity, tossing the Tiger at a great
distance, and endeavoring to trample him under his Feet, whilst the other tore
his Skin in every part where he could lay hold with his Claws or Teeth. Their
fury did not end till with the loss of their Lives, they continuing the Combat
till the Elephant pressing with utmost violence upon the Tiger, and the other
fastening with his Claws to his Belly, they disputed the Victory, till both
remained dead upon the Spot.

Those who manage the Elephant are by the Malabars called Cornac; they sit upon
the neck of the Beast, where they hold themselves without the help of a Bridle;
they have always two sticks with Iron Hooks at the end, one bigger than the
other; the small one they use instead of a Spur, wherewith they strike the
Elephant over the Head, to make him go as they please; so that you seldom see
any of these Beasts without a Wound on their Heads. The other they make use of
to keep the Elephant back, and to make him stop when he is furious, and when
the little one is insufficient.

I have seen some Elephants belonging to some of the Malabar Princes get loose,
who destroy every thing they meet in their way, tear up Trees, and pull down
the Peasants Cottages (which indeed in those parts, must not be imagined to be
so well built as ours) forcing the inhabitants to leave their dwelling places,
and to seek for shelter in the adjacent Towns; thus have I several times seen a
considerable number of Country People come to our Habitations, who dreading the
fury of these Animals, had been forced to abandon their Houses.

The Kings of the Malabars frequently employ their Elephants to chastise their
rebellious Subjects, by letting them loose into their Grounds, where they
destroy not only all the Fruits of the Earth, but also the biggest Trees, there
being not wanting instances, that a large Elephant has torn up a Cocoe-tree.

The Merchants in the Indies hire Elephants to draw their Vessels and Barges a
shore, when they are to be refitted; and, as the Indian Princes keep th^^ to
show their magnificence, so the Bramans make use of them on their great Feasts,
when they carry the Statues of their Idol, there being certain Temples, which
entertain a set number of Elephants merely for that purpose.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Tiger, and some other Creatures of Malabar.
IN Malabar the Tigers are found in greater numbers than in any other part of
the Indies. Of these Creatures so famous for their Cruelties, Several sorts of
Tigers.
there are three sorts, distinguished only by their different sizes.

The first is not much bigger than a large Cat; of this kind I saw one, which
was kept in the House of the French East India Company, in the Kingdom of
Cananor, which was brought thither from Mirscou, and when he cried, made as
much noise as an Ox. They fed him commonly with Flesh, and if they threw him
some Rice, he was so cunning as to draw back as far as the Chain would give him
leave when he would watch his opportunity to snatch up the Pullets and Ducks
that came to feed upon the Rice; at last our Tiger found means one time to
break his Chain, and to give us the Slip. I was one of the foremost who pursued
him, but got nothing for my pains, but a Wound, which he gave me with his Claws
in the right hand, and so he got into the open Fields, where we were not able
to overtake him.

The second kind is as big as a good Mutton, The second kind.
or a slender Calf; these as they are most common, so they do the most mischief
among the Cattle, and are therefore most closely pursued. The Princes in those
parts to encourage their Subjects to destroy these mischievous Creatures, give
always a Bracelet of Gold to any Man that kills one of those Tigers, which
present is looked upon in the Indies as a Badge of Honor, not unlike to our
Knighthood, no body being allowed to wear a Golden Bracelet here, without being
authorized to it by the King of that Country, whose subject he is.

I was acquainted with an Indian, who alone killed one of these Tigers, without
receiving the least hurt, and had no other Arms but his Shield and Cimetar.

The English residing at Batiepatan, A Tiger kills three English.
had not the same good fortune with a Tiger which used to come now and then
into their Grounds in the Nightime. For having made great Havoc all round
their Habitations for a considerable time, they took a resolution to watch his
coming; for which purpose, having provided themselves with Firearms, they met
and wounded him with a Ball out of a Fuzee, but the Wound not proving mortal,
the Tiger fell in among them with such a Fury, that he killed two or three of
them, and got away.

I was once my self in no small danger of having been surprised by this cruel
Animal, not long after my arrival in Malabar. The excessive heat of the Season,
made me very desirous to lay abroad very often, having three great Dogs near me
for my Guard. One Night I was all on a sudden awakened by their Cries, and
seeing them fly away as fast as they could from a certain Animal, that pursued
them with great Eagerness; I called for help, and some of our Domestics being
come with lighted Torches to my assistance, we found two of the Dogs, which
were returned to the place where they had left me, but the third was missing;
we looked all about as far as we could, but in vain, not being able to learn
any tidings of our Dog till the next day, when we found his Bones scattered at
two hundred paces from the House. This adventure served me for a warning, not
to expose my self thus for the future, by lying abroad all Night.

The Tiger of the third kind is near as big as a Horse, The third kind of
Tigers.
the Portuguese call it the Royal Tiger. I never saw any of them alive, but
have seen several of their Skins which were big enough to cover a Bed of six
foot long; they are only found toward the North of Goa, where it is therefore
extremely dangerous Traveling alone, or without being well provided with good
Firearms.

I was acquainted with a certain Gentleman, a Portuguese by Birth, whose name
was John de Liquiera, living at Daman: He had a Country House near the said
City, whither two Friends of his being come to give him a Visit, he would needs
divert them with Hunting the wild Boar; going out early in the Morning, in a
Calash, each with a Fuzee, they met with one of these Royal Tigers, and seeing
him at some distance, they agreed it would be best to let fly at him, which
John de Liquiera did with so much dexterity, A remarkable History of a Tiger.
that he dropped down immediately, without the least appearance of life; it is
easy to be conceived that they were extremely rejoiced at their Victory, which
they had gained at so cheap a rate, and being in a solitary place, not far from
Liquiera's Country House, they resolved to leave their Prey, (which is esteemed
a great rarity by reason of the Beauty of the Skin) till they had broke their
Fast. But afterward returning to the place, they were not a little surprised
when they found neither the Tiger nor any tract of Blood; so that John de
Liquiera against the advice of his Friends, getting out of the Calash into the
adjacent Bushes, found the Tiger there wallowing in his own Blood; but the
enraged Animal, as if it had been sensible of the approach of him who had given
him his mortal Wound, A Portuguese in danger of being torn in pieces by a Tiger.
flew upon him with so much fury, that he threw him immediately upon the
Ground, and fell a tearing his Flesh, where ever he fixed his Claws. His other
two Friends, who had followed him at some distance, were at the greatest
incertitude what to do in this extremity, they wanting Arms to come to a close
Engagement with the Tiger* to rescue their Friend, and they durst not make use
of their Firearms for fear of killing him instead of the cruel Beast; their
only hopes was, that the Tiger would be soon disabled by the loss of Blood,
which flowed like a stream out of his Wound; but perceiving his fierceness
rather increase than abate, they resolved to venture all, and advancing as near
as they thought convenient, one of them shot the Tiger with his Fuzee, so as
that he dropped down dead upon the spot. They ran immediately to the assistance
of their Friend, whom they found with his Face downwards, and his back and
sides torn in so miserable a manner, that it was the most tragical Spectacle
that ever was seen; they made a shift to carry him to his own House, where
having laid him upon a Bed, they found his Wounds in so desperate a condition,
that they expected every moment, when he would breath his last.

Whilst they were in this confusion, no body knowing what to resolve on, one of
the Pagan Slaves belonging to this Gentleman, having been informed of his
Master's misfortune, came into the Room, and told them, That if they would
leave him to his care, he would certainly save him. There was scarce any body
who made any great reflections upon what the Slave had assured them; but
looking upon their Friends case as desperate, they accepted his offer: And the
Slave went immediately to apply his remedy, which was made of the juice of
certain Herbs mixed with Milk, Mavelous cure.
by the help of which he in time restored his Master to perfect Health,
ordering him all the while, nothing else for his Diet, but Bread and Milk; a
cure so miraculous, as scarce will find credit in these parts.

This same Gentleman, who has given me the Relation with his own Mouth, which
he himself is scarce able to make without horror, preserves to this day the
Skin of this Tiger, which being above six foot long, serves him as a lasting
remembrance of this dreadful Adventure.

To avoid the Tigers in the Nightime, nothing is more proper than to keep a
Candle or some other Light near one, which they avoid to come near* But in the
Daytime you must be provided with good Firearms, or a Bow, to let fly at him,
before he comes too near you; but you must be sure of your hits, for if you do
not wound him mortally, he becomes more furious, and you will be in great
danger of being torn in pieces; wherefore if ^ou be not an excellent Marks-man,
the best way is (...) discharge your Gun into the Air, the noise of which will
frighten, and make him turn his back to you.

The Skins of these three several sorts of Tigers, are very near the same, as
to their color, their Beauty makes them much esteemed, they use them in the
Indies to cover their Beds and Palanquins, and in Europe are looked upon as a
great variety. Formerly our great Warriors used to adorn their Horses with
them, it being one of the finest Furs in the World.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of some other Animals; of the Jaccal; of the Buffler; of the Civet Cat and Ape.
THE Jaccal or Adive is about the bigness of a middle siezed Dog, resembling a
Fox toward the Tail, but has a Face not unlike a Wolf; they are sometimes
tamed and entertained at home among other Domestic Animals. When they are
Wild, they hide themselves under Ground in the Daytime, and never come abroad
but in the Night, when they look out for Pray. They commonly appear in Troops,
fall upon Children to devour them, and sometimes frighten Travelers that are
unprovided with Arms; they howl in a most doleful manner, not unlike the cries
of a great many Children of different Ages mixed together. They are at
perpetual War with the Dogs, who are always at their heels, if they appear near
their dwelling places. They are generally the forerunner of the Tigers, who
never devour them, but make use of them as their Setting Dogs, to draw the
House Dogs into the Snare; wherefore the Indian Peasants, who are not ignorant
of the cunning of the Tiger, when they hear the Adive cry, take care to keep
their Dogs close at home, for fear of the Tiger. It is an insignificant
Creature, and quite useless, and therefore deserves not our further Description.

The Buffler is larger than an ordinary Ox, The Buffler.
but much of the same shape, only that his Head is something longer and
flatter; his Eyes, which are almost White, much larger; his Horns, also flat
and sometimes ten foot long; his Legs very short and thick. It is an ugly
Creature to look on, having scarce any Hair. He goes very slow, but will carry
a great Burden. You may see them feed in herds like the Cows, and they give
good store of Milk, whereof they make Butter and Cheese. Their flesh is
tolerably good, but not so delicious as Beef; they swim excellently well, and
pass without much difficulty the largest Rivers; the wild Bufflers are
dangerous Creatures, they often tear or crush to pieces; in the Woods they are
not so much to be dreaded as in the Plains, because their large Horns are apt
to entangle in the Branches of the Trees, which gives those who are surprised
by them, time to escape the danger. Their hides are put to many uses, the
Indians make Pitchers of them to keep their Water or other Liquors in. Those on
the Coast of Malabar are for the most part wild, and Strangers have liberty to
hunt and kill them at pleasure for their own use.

There are here abundance of Civet Cats; ^^vit Cat.
this is a small Creature very like our Cats, only that its Nose is something
sharper, and its Claws not so dangerous; the Perfume which it produces is
engendered in a small opening, which is under its Tail; it appears not unlike a
Grease, and is taken out from thence by little and little at a time, and is
replenished according as the Civet Cat is well or ill fed. They drive a great
trade in this Commodity at Calicut, but it is seldom to be got unfalsified,
unless one have the opportunity of taking it out ones self.

Malabar has also Apes, Apes.
but not in such abundance as in some other parts of the Indies; they are no
where in so great numbers as in the Territories of the Prince Sevagi, and in
Canara.

The Eastern Pagans look upon the Ape no otherwise than as a rational Creature,
and believe that they can speak as well as the rest of Mankind, but that they
forbear to make use of their Tongue, because they would avoid those toils and
hardships, which Men endure.

Some of the Indian Pagans reverence them like Deities, Are reverenced by the
Indians.
erect Statues, and consecrate certain days which are celebrated by Sacrifices
made to them; in the Territories of all the Indian Princes that are Pagans, it
is forbidden by pain of death to kill them.

It is a common thing to see them assemble and appear in the Fields in great
Companies, where they will watch their opportunity to set upon the Country
Women, as they are going to Market, and if not assisted by the Country Men,
take away from them their Eatables. The Females always keep their young ones
close in their Arms, whom they will not part with upon any occasion whatsoever,
so that one may see them tip from one Tree to another, with their young ones,
as nimbly as if they were alone. They will make great havoc among the Fruits
of the Earth, but especially they are great Lovers of Rice, and of the Tari,
which they will Drink out of the Vessels that are fastened to the Cocoes.

This Creature being always in motion, appears at first sight to be very
timorous, notwithstanding which it is very fierce, and gives sometimes very
evident signs of a most undaunted courage.

One of my Acquaintance being abroad a Hunting, in the Kingdom of Cananor, had
seated himself under a Tree to eat some Comfits he had in his Pocket; a very
large Ape sat watching him all the while upon the same Tree, to see whether he
would not leave something behind him, but being discovered by the Gentleman as
he rose out of his place, he Shot him with his Fusee in the Belly; the Ape
without stirring from the place, or showing the least sign of fear, tore the
Wound open with his Fingers, took hold of one of his Guts, and so drew them out
very leisurely, till he dropped down dead upon the Ground.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of some other Animals of Malabar.
OXEN are only employed in the East Indies to Cultivate the Ground, and the
Pagans pay them too much reverence to kill and to eat them. There is abundance
of Wild Boars in Malabar, and the Nahers, (Gentlemen of Malabar,) make it their
chief diversion to Hunt them; they all eat Pork here, unless it be the Bramans,
and Nambouris. They have also good store of Mutton and Roe-bucks.

They go also frequently abroad to Hunt the Gaselet; this is a Creature
extremely like a Stag, but that its Horns are plain, and its Body something
less; they take them with Nets, which is the general way of Hunting in the
Indies. There are no Rabbets in this Country, but Hares in abundance; they are
not eaten by the Inhabitants, and when they catch them, they sell them to the
Europeans.

There are very few places in the World but where Adders are to be met with,
but those of the Indies, and especially of the Coast of Malabar, having
something extraordinary beyond the rest, deserve particularly to be taken
notice of here. I had heard so many surprising things of them before I came
into this Country, that I looked upon them for the most part as Fables,
contrived on purpose by Travelers, to deceive the credulous people; but I have
since been convinced by my own Experience; nothing being more certain than what
I am going to relate concerning the Adders on the Coast of Malabar.

Some of them are not above an Inch thick, but 5 or 6 Feet long, and of a
Greenish Color, so that they are not easily to be discerned in the Grass and
Bushes, Adders in Malabar.
where they lie lurking to seize upon such as pass by, and commonly endeavor
to fasten either on their Eyes, Noses, or Ears. They don't Communicate their
Poison by making an impression with their Teeth, but they have a little Bladder
full of a very subtle Poison under their Necks, from whence issues that
venomous substance, which in spite of all the best Antidotes, always proves
Mortal, and that in less than an Hours time. These Adders being so very
frequent and difficult to be discovered in these parts, all persons of any
Fashion when they Travel, cause their Servants to go before them at a certain
distance, who with little rods beat the Bushes, the better to discover those
dangerous Insects.

I knew an Indian who being a Christian, Traveled with a Pagan Indian from
Basarto Batiepatan, to visit one of their Pagan Temples; but whilst they were
upon the Road, one of these Green Adders all upon a sudden fastened upon the
Pagan Indian's Nose, and creeping into his right Nostril, got out through the
left, where she remained till the poor Fellow fell down Dead upon the Spot.

There is another kind of Adders in Malabar, called by the Indians Nalle
bambou, that is to say, the good Adder; and by the Portugueses Cobra capel,
because it has a Skin of the breadth of a Hand hanging over* its Head of diverse
Colors, as if it were enameled, as all the rest of the Body is of a very
lively and agreeable Color. The bite of this Adder is not accounted so
dangerous as the former, for though it often proves Mortal, yet its fatal
consequences are sometimes prevented by proper Antidotes.

One cannot but be surprised at the most stupid ignorance and blindness of
those Pagans, who pay a most profound reverence to all sorts of Reptils, but
especially to the Adders; their Statues making up the chief Ornaments of their
Temples. They are blinded to such a degree of superstition in regard of these
Creatures, that it is impossible to undeceive them, and to make them open their
Eyes. Superstition of the Indians concerning Adders.
For if an Adder appear in a House, they first Address their Prayers to her,
and if these don't prevail, they endeavor to draw her away from the House, by
offering of it Food without Doors; and if the Adder notwithsta^^^ng this will
not quit the House, they are so far from attempting to dislodge her by any
violent means, that they daily apply their Rhetoric and Addresses to her, no
otherwise than if she were a rational Creature.

A Secretary belonging to a certain Prince in those parts, was at the time
whilst I was in the Country, wounded by one of these Adders; She was 8 Foot
long, and of the thickness of a Man's Arm; this accident happening in the
Country, the Secretary's Servant took the Adder, which they enclosed in an
Earthen Vessel, and brought her up to Court; a Convocation of the Bramans being
held, they unanimously addressed their Prayers to the Adder, entreating her in
the most respectful manner that could be, to spare the Life of the wounded
Secretary, as being a person of great Ability in his Station, and consequently
very useful to his Prince, who threatened to burn the Adder, if She did not take
care to keep his Secretary alive; but this Adder being very stubborn as it
seems, their Prayers and threats proved equally ineffectual; for the Secretary
being destitute in the Country of proper Antidotes, died in a few days, to the
no small regret of his Prince; notwithstanding which, being persuaded by the
Bramans, that his Favorite must needs have committed some secret and erroneous
Crime against their God, who had thought fit to punish him thus. In expiation
of his Crimes, he ordered the Adder to be carried out of his Palace, where she
was put in the Grass, with a great deal of Ceremony, the Prince and all his
Courtiers having paid her a great deal of respect, and taken their formal leave
of this Deity.

There are a great many among the Indians so over superstitious in their Zeal
as to carry every day a certain quantity of Milk abroad, for the nourishment of
these Deities, that they may not be obliged to seek for their Food, at or near
their Houses.

But if the ignorance of these poor people deserves pity, the imposture of the
^ramans, (their Priests*) ought to be detested by all the World. There are
among them some very well skilled in Astrology, who have received some Tincture
of Learning, and are exactly well versed in the History of the Indian Nations,
and who consequently cannot be supposed to believe themselves, what they impose
upon the Vulgar; I have often entered in Discourse with them upon that Subject,
and more especially with one who was my familiar Acquaintance, whom I used to
upbraid with their impostures, and in what abominable a manner they misemployed
that talent, wherewith they were entrusted by God; in thus grossly imposing upon
the credulity of an ignorant people by their fabulous inventions, barely in
hopes of gaining some reputation, and a slender share of worldly interest. He
was so far from being moved or convinced with what I alleged to him, that on
the contrary he persisted in justifying their proceedings, and had folly enough
to endeavor to persuade me of the verity of their Doctrine by the following
History. One of the Principal Bramans, belonging to one of the most famous
Temples among the Malabars, being very solicitous to exhort his Auditors to
Devotion, proposed to them the erecting a Statue of Gold of an Adder, with 12
Eggs of the same substance, which being to be effected by a voluntary
Contribution, and the Statue to be placed in a certain place within the Temple,
where it was to be Adored, he told them that the same Statue in 6 Weeks time
would not only be turned into a live Adder of the same bigness, but also hatch
out of the 12 Eggs, so many young ones, that would in time all become
Protectors of the said Temple. His proposition being received with a general*
consent, they contributed toward the erecting of the said Statue with such a
cheerfulness, that it was soon brought to perfection, and carried in great
State by the Bramans, followed by the joyful Acclamations of a vast number of
people to the Temple, where it was set up in a place assigned for that purpose,
which was shut up close by the principal Braman, till the 6 Weeks were expired;
when having again assembled the people, he went at the Head of them to the same
place where they had left the Statue locked up before; and not finding the
least Remnants either of the Golden Adder, or the 12 Eggs, they unanimously
concluded that they were all turned into Living Adders. The Miracle was
followed by an universal Acclamation of the people, each of them striving to
outdo the other, in giving the most evident Demonstrations of Joy for having
been the happy Instruments of the production of those new Deities.

Though I could scarce forbear Laughing at the foolishness of this contrivance,
yet the impudence wherewith it was related by the Braman put me into such a
Passion, that I gave him sufficiently to understand that I was not to be
imposed upon by such Tricks; but he was so brazen faced as to persist in his
former assurance, so that I was forced to leave him to his own obstinacy.

But though the Pagans have imposed upon themselves this as an unalterable Law,
not to kill an Adder, the Christians and Mahometans are not obliged to the same
rule in the Indies, where you often meet with them in your Dwelling Houses;
nay, I have several times found them lurking under the Beds. What Antidote is
most effectual to be made use of against the Poison of this Creature, I shall
have occasion to speak more at large hereafter.

The Adders of the largest size, are near 20 Foot long, and of so vast a
thickness, that they are able to swallow a Man; but they are less dangerous
than the rest, because they are sooner discovered, and consequently easier to
be avoided. Besides, that they are scarce ever to be met with, unless it be in
deserts; and, if they are sometimes seen near great Towns or on the Banks or
Shore of the Sea or Rivers, it is commonly after some great inundation of the
latter, whereby they are sometimes carried near to the abovementioned places; I
never saw any of them but what were Dead, which appeared no otherwise than a
Trunk of a large Tree lying upon the Ground.

I heard once a Christian who had been formerly a Pagan, relate a very
remarkable History of one of these Adders: A Remarkable History of an Adder.
It seems it was in Harvest-time, and certain Country people being gone into
the Field to reap Rice, had left no body at home but a Sick Child; which being
got without doors, had laid it self asleep, near the House, upon some Leaves,
where it thus continued till Night; all the Domestics being then returned from
reaping, heard some outcries of the Child, which, being weary of the fatigues
they had undergone in the Field, they did not much regard, as believing them to
proceed from the illness of the Child; but whilst Supper was getting ready,
some of them having in the mean while observing the Child to continue its
Cries, in a most lamentable manner, ran out toward the place, where they found
it almost swallowed up by one of those Adders; one half of the Child being
within the Body of this venomous Creature: It is easy to be imagined in what a
Consternation so unfortunate an accident put the whole Family, but especially
the Parents, who did not know by what means to preserve the Child from present
Death; being afraid that if they should do any thing to exasperate this
Creature, it would at once devour the Child; after several propositions made by
the beholders of so Tragical a Spectacle equally dangerous in the execution of
it, they resolved to try whether they could with a good Cimetar cut the Adder
asunder in the middle, which was executed accordingly, with a great deal of
dexterity. But this venomous Creature was so strong lived, as not to die
immediately after it was cut in pieces, so that it closed up the unfortunate
Child within the one half of his Body, where it was soon venomed so as that it
died in a few Minutes after the Serpent.

One Evening we heard a Jaccal or Adive, cry near our Habitation, which
notwithstanding the Barking of all the Dogs round about us, we perceived to
approach nearer and nearer; whereupon, the Servants being got abroad with
lighted Torches, made up toward the place, where they heard the Jaccal cry,
whom they found very near devoured, by one of these Adders, who had
questionless surprised him asleep; our Servants killed both of them, and the
Adder though not above 10 Foot long, yet was of such a thickness as to be able to
swallow so large a Creature as the Jaccal.

Malabar produces Crocodiles of all sorts and sizes, and here it was that I had
my share in killing one, as I have related before.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the people of Malabar, and their Customs.
THE Inhabitants of Malabar are generally well shaped, all of them Black, or at
least very Brown, but are not near so ugly as the Africans. They let their Hair
grow to a great length; they don't want natural Ingenuity, but very rarely
improve it by any useful Arts or Sciences. They are very Treacherous, breach of
Faith being their daily practice. The Mahometans are accounted the most
perfidious, but the Pagans so closely follow their footsteps in this point,
that they almost outdo their Masters.

The last of these two are the offspring of the Ancient Natives of the
Country, and consequently exceed the others in number. They are distinguished
into several Degrees, or Tribes. The first is that of the Princes; Several
Tribes among the Malabars.
the second of the Nambouris, or their chief Priests; the Bramans or common
Priests are of the third, and the Nahers, or the Gentlemen of the fourth Rank.
These as they are by their Birthright entitled to the prerogative of bearing
Arms, so they are not allowed to intermeddle with Traffic, which if they do,
they forfeit their Gentility, as they do likewise if they change their Religion.

Those whom they call Tives, apply themselves to Husbandry and gathering the
Tarry, or Palm-Tree-Wine, these are also suffered to bear Arms, but this is only
by permission. The Moconas or Fishermen are all obliged to live near the
Sea-Shoar, and not permitted to follow any other Employment, they are not
suffered to bear Arms, even not in case of the greatest extremity. The Mainats
or whiteners of Linen, the Weavers, and those that make it their Employment to
draw it, are divided into so many different Degrees or Tribes.

The vilest and most contemptible of all are the Pouliats, being despised by
the rest, and living in a manner like vagabonds in most wretched Huts, made of
the Leaves of the Palm Tree; their whole Employment is to watch in the Fields,
where the Rice grows. It is looked upon as scandalous to have any Conversation
with them, nay, even to approach them, and if any of the other Tribes happen to
speak to them unless it be at 10 or 12 Yards distance, they are obliged to
purify themselves before they come into any other Company.

If a Nambouri, Braman, or a Naher meets with any of those Pouliats upon the
Road, they command them at first sight, to get out of the way, which if they do
not obey in an instant, they let fly at them with their Muskets or Arrows, and
kill them at pleasure, provided it be not in some Sanctified or Privileged
place. If a Naher or Gentleman has a mind to make trial of his Arms, he may
show his dexterity upon one of those unfortunate wretches, without any regard
to Age or Sex, or fearing to be called to an account for it. This vile
Generation being subject to so many disasters, it is no wonder if they don't
propagate so fast as the rest of the Indians; their condition being looked upon
so mean as not to be permitted to wear any kind of Stuffs or Linen, but only to
cover some part of their Bodies with Leaves. They eat frequently Carrion, nay,
even Insects, and what makes them above all others abominable to the Pagan
Indians, is, that they eat Beef, which died a natural Death. They are so
despisable as that no Presents, neither for their Gods, or their Princes, are
accepted of from them, unless it be Gold or Silver; but they are obliged to lay
it down at a great distance, and retire immediately from the place, when the
Nahers, who are the Guards of the Prince's Person, come and take it up, talking
to them at a distance, and giving them what answer is to be made, without
allowing them to approach within 20 Paces near to them. They are often fined in
very great Sums; and because it may seem strange how they that are banished
from all civil Society, and have no way to improve themselves, should be in a
capacity to pay them; it is to be observed, that the Malabars are so foolishly
Superstitious, as to Bury most of their Gold and Silver with them after their
Death, and it is looked upon as a Crime to Rob the Dead. But the Pouliats
frequently watch their opportunity to find out these hidden Treasures, and to
convert them to their own use; which makes them to be considered among the
Malabars, as Sorcerers, and an infamous Generation, guilty of the most inormous
Crimes; for which reason it is, that upon the least suspicion they are accused
and condemned to Death. But the other Tribes are not used with so much rigor,
they being not to be Convicted even in evil cases, without very substantial
Evidence.

It is a fundamental Law among the Malabars, as well as most other Nations of
the Indies, which they look upon as unalterable and never to be neglected, to
wit, That no body can rise beyond the degree of his Tribe, wherein he is Born,
and let his Riches be never so great, neither he nor his Posterity can exclude
themselves from that Tribe, or change their Condition.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Nahers.
THE Nahers are the Gentlemen of the Contry* and may easily be distinguished
from the rest by their civil Demeanor and Conversation, as well as by their
Birth. There is a most ancient Custom, which time has established for a Law in
all the Kingdoms on the Coast of Malabar; that all Strangers or others, who are
not Pagans, are obliged never to Travel without a Guard of one or more of these
Nahers; this being an indispensible necessity laid upon Travelers; because
these Princes never take cognizance of any violences offered them, if they
Travel without these Guards. If they are to Travel from one Kingdom to another,
the Nahers of the place where they are, take care to procure them out of the
other Kingdoms, whither they intend to go, some who are to conduct them. To
every one of these Nahers you pay eight Tares per diem, which amounts to half a
Fanon. The Fanon is a small piece of Gold worth 16 Tares; and the Tare is a
small Silver Coin worth about a halfpenny. Each Naher has not above 4 Tares a
day, when he keeps Guard in a House, but when he Travels he has double pay.

These Nahers have this most excellent quality, that they never betray or
abandon such Travelers as they Guard upon the Road. If a Man happen to lose
his Life, whilst he is under their protection, they will not survive him, but
undergo the same fate; if they should do otherwise, they would be looked upon
as Cowards.

I have received a relation from very good Hands, which well deserves to be
inserted here: Two Rich Portuguese Merchants Traveling along the Malabar
Coast, from the Northern to the Southern parts, were pursuant to the Custom of
the Country Conducted by several Nahers, through the Kingdom of Cananor; but
coming to the Borders of the Kingdom of Samorin, were provided with new Guards,
to protect them in their Journey through that Kingdom. But these perfidious
wretches being enticed by the great quantity of Gold and Jewels these Merchants
carried with them, Massacred them, and having robbed them of all their Precious
Movables, retired to another Kingdom, in hopes to find shelter there against
the severity of the Law. After the first, to whose care they were committed,
were returned to their homes, the News of the Murder soon spread over the
Country, their Dead Carcasses having soon after the Fact was committed, been
discovered by some others Traveling on the same Road; they were examined
concerning their Conduct, and having given an exact Account, to whose care they
had left these Merchants, these Ruffians Names were soon known, and
consequently they were apprehended, and sent to their Native Country, to
receive condign Punishment. Some part of the Treasure which they had taken from
the Portuguese Merchants being found upon them, when they were seized, was a
convincing proof of their Guilt, wherefore being Condemned to Death, their
Wives and nearest Kindred appeared at the place of Execution, telling them,
That since they had Committed a Fact tending so much to the Dishonor of their
Family, they ought to be the Executioners, and so dispatched them out of the
way.

There is another thing worth observing of these Nahers; That Travelers who
are Conducted by a good number of these Guards, are often exposed to more
danger, than if they were guided by one of their Children; it being the custom
of the Indian Robbers, never to hurt any Children or such as are not able to
defend themselves; but never to spare any that are provided with Arms for their
Defense.

When these Children of the Nahers Travel into the Country, they are only
provided with a twisted Stick of a Foot and a half long, with a handle a-top
most like our Daggers or Bagonets; but in lieu of being sharp at the end, it is
as thick at the bottom as a Fist; and this kind of Stick they make use of till
they come to the Age appointed for their bearing of Arms. No body but the Sons
of the Nahers are permitted to wear such a Stick, by which they are
distinguished from the rest, and when they thus Travel, they are not allowed
above three halfpence a day apiece. But though this be the securest way of
Traveling, none but the Poorer sort make use of them, because that Travelers
are commonly respected in this Country according to the number of Guards, which
attend them from one place to another.

CHAP. XXX.
Of some other Customs of the Malabars.
THose of a higher Rank are obliged to have no commerce with the inferior
Tribes, especially in respect of Eating and Drinking, in which point they are
so scrupulous, as not to permit their Victuals to be dressed by those of an
inferior Rank, but rather, if possible, by one of a more noble Degree; Nicety
of the Indians in respect of their Quality.
nay, such is their nicety, as not to make use of the same Wells, where those
of an inferior condition fetch their Water. The same precaution is observed in
respect of their Lakes, where they purify themselves, the Rivers being only
common to all without distinction. They are no less Ceremonious in their
Houses, where if any of a lower Rank happen to enter, the Braman is sent for,
to take away the infection by certain Ceremonies used for that purpose.

But above all, they observe this Rule with the greatest exactness in the
World, when they contract any Alliances by Marriages; nay, they are even
debarred from having commerce with a Woman of an inferior Degree. Thus a Man
may marry a Woman of the same Quality with himself, or at most of the next
Degree under his, but not of a superior Degree; if any of either Sex are
convicted of having transgressed in this point, they are punished with Death,
except the Females of the Race of the Nambouri's and Bramans, who have this
particular privilege belonging to them, That, if they are surprised in any
thing of this Nature, they are to be left to the Prince's disposal, who sells
them for (...) as they are generally the handsomest amongst the Malabars, so
Foreigners are very eager to purchase them at a dear rate.

Of this I saw an instance at Cananor, where a Portuguese Captain, who lately
had lost his Ship at Sea, to comfort himself for his loss, bought a handsome
Indian, the Daughter of a Braman, who had been surprised in the very act with a
Tive or Countryman. He happening to pass by our Habitation with his pretty
Slave, we entertained them with the best we had, and asking the Indian Lady
some Questions concerning her adventures, she at first would give us no answer;
but at last bursting out into Tears, she told us, That after the death of her
Mother, she lived with an Uncle of hers, who used to send her frequently with
some other young Maids of the same Quality into the Field to look after his
Grounds; where having seen this young Tive, she began to feel at first some
tender sentiments for his Person, but considering the inequality of their
Extraction, checked her inclinations for some time, till the young Countryman
being become sensible of her Passion, did by degrees so strongly insinuate
himself into her Affection, that in spite of all the rigor of the Law, he
became absolute Master of her Heart, so that she resolved to admit him
privately into her Uncle's House, which was done accordingly to her utter
destruction, they having been so unfortunate, as to be surprised the very first
time, where the poor Tive was sacrificed immediately before her Eyes to the
revenge of her Family, and she conducted to the Prince, who according to the
custom of the Country, had sold her to the Portuguese Captain.

The Tears wherewith she accompanied her Narration sufficiently testified the
tenderness she had for the unfortunate young Peasant, so that there was not one
of the whole Company, who did not show a great deal of Compassion for this
unfortunate Creature. But the Portuguese, who, like all the rest of that
Nation, was of a very jealous Nature, not approving of our tenderness for his
handsome Slave, would not allow her to stay any longer near our Company, but
having ordered her to be conducted to another place, he caused her to be
Baptized, when she lived with him, where I have several times afterward had
the opportunity to see her.

If a Man of an inferior degree, Severe punishment among the Malabars.
be accused of having received a favor from a Lady of a Rank superior to his,
they conduct him laden with Fetters on Hand and Feet to the Prince, where he
is put to death; but what is the worst of all, is, That the death of the
Criminal alone is looked upon as insufficient to expiate the Crime; for the
three next ensuing days, after the Execution, the nearest kindred of the Lady,
have free liberty to kill all such Relations as they meet with, of him who has
enjoyed the Lady, without any distinction of Age or Sex, but this does not
extend any further than in the same district or jurisdiction, where the fault
has been committed.

The Nahers have a power to exercise this cruelty upon such occasions against
the Tives and Cheres or Weavers, as these have the same power over the
Mokcona's or Fishermen, and these again over the Pouliats. The Nambouri's and
Bramans are not allowed to kill any body, so that their authority extends no
further in this point, than to deliver up these poor victims to the Slaughter.
This custom is the most cruel in the whole World, and would be altogether
insupportable, were it not that they commonly keep these Criminals for the
space of eight days alive, whereby their nearest Relations, who stand in fear
of their Enemies, have sufficient leisure given them to get out of the way,
till after the expiration of the three days allotted by the Law, for revenging
the affront put upon the Family.

CHAP. XXXI.
A further Account of their Customs.
THey don't look upon it as a Crime to kill a Pouliat, Murder not punished
with death.
neither is any body to be called to an account for it; nay, they very rarely
punish murder with death, though committed upon persons of a more eminent
Rank. The Law takes no cognizance of this point, so as to regulate the
satisfaction on to be given for the Murder, leaving the whole to the
discretion of the Kindred of the murdered Person, who revenge his death at
pleasure.

But in case of any Robbery committed, Robbery severely punished.
they are the severest people in the World, they having generally such an
abhorrence to this Vice, as scarce to spare any body that has but stolen a Bunch
of Pepper, or to the value of it, but he pays for it with his life.

They have no close or barricado'd Prisons in Malabar, their Criminals are but
slenderly guarded, they are only Ioaden with Fetters, which are never taken off
till they are either Discharged or Executed.

All causes both Civil and Criminal are pleaded before the Prince, where both
parties produce their Evidences; if the accusation appear so doubtful as not to
be decided according to the Evidence produced, the accused may clear themselves
by an Oath which is performed in the following manner.

They cause a piece of Iron, Manner of taking the Oath by the Malabars.
not unlike an hatchet to be made red hot in the presence of him who is to
prove his innocence, which done, they lay upon his Hand a leaf of the Bananas
Tree, and a top of that the hot Iron, which he is not to throw upon the Ground,
till after the redness be gone; after which, one who has the oversight over the
Prince's Laundry, standing by with a Napkin dipped in water made of Rice, wraps
it about his Hand, and after having tied round about it a certain Cord or
Ribband, the Prince Seals it up with his Signet: Three days after the Hand is
opened, and if there be no marks of any hurt done by the Hot Iron, he is
declared innocent; but if there appear any impression made by the heat of the
Iron, he is looked upon as a Perjured Person, and Punished accordingly.

It is the Prince in Person, who is always to pronounce Sentence, from whence
there lies no Appeal; and if the Criminal be Condemned to Death, it is Executed
immediately upon the Spot, only leading him without the Precinct of the Royal
Palace.

As the Indians in these parts look upon it as the most glorious Action they
can do, to Obey their Prince without reserve, they have no occasion to employ
common Executioners upon such like occasions, but the Nahers belonging to the
Prince's Guards are the most forward to execute his Orders against these
miserable Wretches; nay, nothing is more common, than if the Crime be very
heinous, for the next Kindred of the Criminal, to strive who shall be the first
that shall give the fatal blow to his Kinsman, to expiate as they say, the
indignity he has put upon the Family.

Their common way of putting Criminals to Death, is* by running a Lance quite
through their Bodies, after which, they cut them into Quarters, which are
hanged upon Trees.

In each Kingdom among the Malabars, there are several Princely Families, which
are altogether descended and make up one Royal Line, superior in Rank to all
the rest. It is a general Custom in all the States of the Malabars, that after
the Decease of the King, the most Ancient of all the Princes succeeds without
the least opposition from the rest, so that a young Sovereign is the greatest
rarity that can be seen among the Malabars.

The first thing the New King does after his elevation to the Throne, Their
right of Succession.
is, to choose one from among his own Subjects, whom he believes to be most
understanding and fittest for so high a Trust, for his Lieutenant General,
who is Business is to take upon him, the chief management of all Affairs of
Moment. This is the highest dignity in the State, and though it be always
exposed to Sail, yet does the King reserve to himself the Prerogative of
choosing out of the Pretenders, such a one as he likes best, and whom he thinks
most deserving, without any regard to his Birth or Quality; so that a Naher or
Chati, being invested with this Dignity, will make himself to be obeyed by the
Princes themselves; though it happens also very often that this Office is
conferred upon Persons of Eminent Quality. All their Acts and Letters Patents
are written with a kind of an Iron Pen, upon the Leaves of the Wild Palm Tree.

The King being fully satisfied in the Zeal and Prudence of his Chief Minister
of State, leaves the whole management of Affairs to his Conduct, and for the
most part Lives in a retired place, but with a great deal of Magnificence. This
Governor General manages altogether the whole Treasury; it is he that makes
Peace and War, without being obliged to Communicate with any Body, unless it be
with the King himself, if, by reason of his great Age, he be not incapable of
taking cognizance of public Affairs; He remains always standing in the King's
Presence, permits not any of his Courtiers or Guards to enter his Bedchamber,
and never speaks to him, without laying his Hand upon his Mouth. He must be
very careful in not neglecting the least punctilio of these Ceremonies, a fault
of this nature not being to be repaired, unless with the loss of his Office,
the King always reserving to himself the liberty of discharging his primier
Minister from his place, when he pleases, which however is very rarely seen in
those parts, where they act with a great deal of circumspection, in a matter of
so great consequence.

When the King of Cananor goes abroad, he is either carried upon the Back of an
Elephant, How their Kings and Princes appear in public.
or else in a Palanquin, being Adorned with a Crown of Massive Gold upon his
Head, made not unlike a Ducal Bonnet. This Crown weighs something above 200
Guineas in Gold, and is always given by the New Governor-General, immediately
after his Elevation to that Dignity, the Crown of the last Deceased King being
to be reposited in the Treasury of the chief Pagod or Pagan Temple. The King is
surrounded by his Guards composed out of the Nahers, under the sound of Drums
and Trumpets, and other Warlike Instruments. Some Officers of his Court march
at some distance before the Guards, whose Business is to make way, and to cry
the King is coming. All the Princes if they go abroad by themselves, as also
the Princesses are served with the same Magnificence; If the Governor or Chief
Minister of State be a Prince, he goes abroad in the same Pomp, in respect of
his high extraction, not of the dignity of his Office. But if he be not of the
Royal Family, he is only attended by his Guards, without the sounding of any
Instruments of War, neither is he preceeded by any Officers who clear the way
before him.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of some other Customs of the Malabars.
IT is sufficiently known that in all Political Constitutions Princes are
considered as the Heads of the Government, but among these Pagans their Kings
are (in all matters relating to Religion,) subject to the Nambouri's and
Bramans.

Before I speak of their Marriages, How they derive their Pedigree.
it is to be observed, that the Children of the Malabars derive their Pedigree
from their Mothers, and that consequently they are counted to be of the same
Race, not of that of their Father's, the reason of which, we shall have
occasion to mention anon.

Princesses are Married here to the Nambouri's, or Bramans, What Rules they
observe in their Marriages.
and the Children begotten betwixt them are Princes, and lawful Successors of
the Crown, each in their Rank. But, as there is not a sufficient number of
Princesses to furnish all the Nambouri's, and Bramans with Wives, so they are
allowed to Marry Women of the same Rank with themselves, and the Children
begotten betwixt them are either Nambouri's or Bramans, according to the
Quality of their Mothers.

The Princes Marry the Daughters of the Nahers, but never any Princesses, and
the Children begotten betwixt them belong to the Race of the Nahers, and not of
the Princes.

The Nahers are obliged to Marry one of the same Quality, or almost of the next
degree to themselves, to wit, of the Minats or Cheti. The rest of the several
Lines have the same liberty, to Marry one of their own Rank, or one degree
below themselves, but, as we said before, the Women must not debase themselves
in the least degree in their Marriage, under pain of Death.

The Malabar Princes, the Nambouri's and Bramans, as also the chiefest among
the Nahers, have commonly but one Wife, and they endeavor by all obliging
means in the World to engage them to be faithful to them, and not to look out
for another Husband, which is not in their power to prevent by any other than
gentle means, this liberty being allowed to the Malabar Women, provided they
don't Marry below themselves. For the Pagan Women in these parts (contrary to
what is practiced among the Mahometans,) enjoy according to the Custom of their
Country this Prerogative, to Marry as many Husbands as they please; and what is
the most surprising, is, that all this is done without the least disorder or
Jealousy; for, the Man when he comes to pay his Duty to his Lady leaves his
Arms at the Chamber Door, as a sure sign to the rest, that the place is taken
up, and that they must stay his leisure before they can enter.

Their Marriage-engagements are only during pleasure, and when they are
satisfied with one another, they part as freely as they met. The ordinary
present which the New Married Men make to their Wives, is, a piece of Linen
Cloth, wherewith to cover themselves.

It is from this Custom of Marrying so many Husbands, and to abandon them at
pleasure, that their Children owe their Pedigree to their Mothers, it being
impossible to know their true Fathers; neither are the Sons here considered as
the next Heirs, but the Nephews, but they must be the Sister's Sons.

The Mahometans though they keep a most watchful Eye over their Wives,
nevertheless do they observe this Custom, in respect of Succession or
Inheritance, all over Malabar.

They Marry their Daughters for the most part at 12 Years of Age, and there are
abundance among them who bear Children before that Age, though they are generally
but very small, which may perhaps be Attributed to their being Married at so
tender an Age.

Widwives are unknown in these parts, those of a more advanced Age supply this
defect in a Country where they are Delivered with much ease, in Comparison to
what is done in Europe. For the Malabar as well as the African Women, are no
sooner Delivered, but they wash themselves, and take no further care of their
Babes, than to give them Suck.

The Malabar Women are for the generality well shaped, and not ill Featured,
but the little ones are in greater esteem than the tall ones; the privilege of
Marrying so many Husbands as they please, exempts them from that most cruel
Custom of burning themselves with the Dead Carcasses of their Husbands, to
which the rest of the Indian Women are Subject.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of their Habits and Houses.
AS to their Habits, there is scarce any difference betwixt the Men and the
Women in Malabar; they wear their Hair, which is Black, very long, and go Naked
as far as the middle; even the Princes themselves, who, if they sometimes make
use of a small Vest, always leave it open before. They wear about their Middle
a piece of Cloth, which comes down as low as their Knees, and never make use of
Shoes or Stockings.

In other Countries Ladies of Quality endeavor to outvie one another by their
rich Gold and Silver Stuffs; but the quite contrary is practiced among the
Malabars, where these Stuffs are not worn but by the meaner sort, the Ladies of
the Nahers and all the rest of a Superior Rank wearing nothing but fine White
Callico. The richer sort wear Girdles of Gold, and Bracelets of Silver or Horn,
in which, they take all most particular Pride. The Women never adorn themselves
with any Jewels, unless it be a Ring. Both Men and Women have holes in their
Ears, which are so long, that they hang down quite to their Shoulders; because
they are so careful in continually enlarging the holes, that you may thrust a
Fist into them, which is occasioned by the weight of the Pendants, who
sometimes exceed two Ounces; some of them wear Golden Chains, but these being
the peculiar marks of the King's favor, are never bestowed but upon such as
have signalized themselves by some remarkable Action. All the Malabars Shave
their Beards close, except some few, that wear Mustachio's.

Their Houses are commonly made of Earth, and instead of Tiles they cover them
with the Leaves of the Cocoe-Tree, it being a great rarity here to see a House
of Stone or Brick. Their Furniture consists in some Baskets and a few Earthen
Pots and Dishes; their Cups are of the same matter, and their Kings themselves
make use of them as the European Princes do of Gold and Silver Vessels. They
have no other Light at Nights, but what their Lamps furnish them with, which
are supplied by the Oil drawn from the Cocoes; when they eat, they always turn
their Back to the Light. As they are never sensible of Cold here, so they don't
make use of Chimneys, but what Fire they have occasion for, to dress their
Victuals, is made without Doors. Wheat being a scarce Commodity in this part of
the Indies, they make use only of Rice instead of it. Their Dishes are dressed
without Sauces, and consequently very unsavory; their Beds are nothing else but
Deal Boards, which the Richer sort cover with Tapestry suitable to their
Quality, and the Poor only with Mats. There is no Villages to be seen all over
Malabar, every one has his separate Habitation, and enclosure in the Country;
and, it is impossible for all of them to live near the River side, and that it
is a constant Custom among them, not to make use of their Neighbor's Water,
there is no House so inconsiderable but what has a Well of its own.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of the Riches of their Pagan Temples.
THEIR Pagan Temples are most Magnificent, being generally covered with Copper,
and sometimes with Silver. There is always a Basin near the Temple,
proportionable in bigness to the largeness of the Temple, where the Pagans
purify themselves before they approach their Idols. The number of the Bramans
is regulated according to the Revenues belonging to the Temple. Every day there
is a certain quantity of Rice allotted for the use of the Poor that live near
it, as also for the benefit of such Strangers as pass by that way, let them be
of what Religion they will; the Pagans having only this Prerogative to enter
within the Temple, whereas, the others are obliged to remain without Doors,
under certain Barracks made for that purpose, where they may Sleep, if Night
surprise them in their Journey.

Besides the ordinary Revenue of these Pagan Temples, the people bring every
day their Offerings, which are given to the Bramans, who are to offer it to the
Idols. And as these Offerings don't consist in any thing that has Life, so they
are most commonly Rice, Butter, Fruits, Preserves, Gold, or Silver; the two
last are but rarely offered, and the rest serve the Bramans for the Maintenance
of their Families, they having no more to do than to bring forth their empty
Dishes to these ignorant people, who think it a Crime to believe otherwise,
than what they have offered to have been consumed by the Idols.

Some of the richest Temples have large Territories belonging to them, from
whence, they draw their yearly Revenues; and if any one happen to spill Blood
in these Grounds, though in his own defense, Prerogative of their Sacred places.
and upon the most Innocent occasion in the World, the Crime is unpardonable,
and he that commits it is punished with Death, without the least respect to his
Merits or Quality; nay, they use so much Rigor in this point, that if any one
saves himself by flight, the next akin to him must pay for it with his Life,
to expiate, as they say, the hainousness of the Crime committed against the
Majesty of the Gods.

Of this I saw an instance, during my stay in these parts: Two Nahers passing
through the Borough or Market Town of Batiepatan, and seeing a Rich Merchant,
who was a Mohammedan, receive a considerable Sum of Money in Ducats, took a
resolution to lie in wait for him at a certain place, through which he was to
pass, to kill him, and seize the Money for their own use. Accordingly they
followed him at some distance, till they overtook him at a certain place, which
they believed to be beyond the Precinct of the Territories belonging to the
Temple of Batiepatan, where they run him through in several places, till they
had killed him, and so retired to Calicut, under the Jurisdiction of the King
of Samorin. The Dead Carcass of the Mohammedan Merchant having been soon after
found, the Bramans were consulted, and being come to the place, they declared
that he that had committed the Murder, had defiled the Holy Ground of their
Idol, the place being within the Territories (which are of a very large
extent,) belonging to the Temple. Complaints being made hereof to Prince
Onitri, he caused an exact enquiry to be made after the Malefactor's Names and
place of Abode, who being two Brothers, they were Summoned to make their
Appearance before the Prince, but being no where to be found, they were
Condemned to Death, as if they had been present; and to expiate the Crime, an
Uncle of theirs, so far advanced in Years, as not to be able to walk, without
leaning upon some Body, was carried before Prince Onitri, who examined him
concerning the Fact and the Flight of his Nephews; he answered, that he was
ignorant both of the causes and manner of the Flight of his Nephews, but this
availed but little; for the Prince told him that he would give him 8 Days to
find out his Nephews, and if in the mean time he did not bring them forth, he
should be proceeded against as a Criminal. The poor Old Man did what he could
to save his Life, but in vain, so that the next day after the prefixed term was
expired, he was Condemned to Die, and notwithstanding his Old Age, his
Innocence, and the Intercession of his Friends, was immediately executed.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of their Idols.
BEsides that these Pagans Worship many Idols, which have no resemblance to any
thing in the World; there are several kinds of living Creatures, whom they
adore, but the most profound respect they pay to the Sun and Moon. As at the
new Moon, they make great rejoycings, so when she is Eclipsed, they appear
abroad, making most horrible outcries, whereby, as they say, they frighten
away the Dragon, who then endeavors to devour the Moon. They use the same
Veneration to their Kings, as they do to their Gods, and they Reverence old Age
to so high a Degree, that even the most Potent and Richest of the Nahers, will
not sit down before those that are considerably older than themselves, though
their Enemies.

They count their time by the Moon, notwithstanding which, their Festivals are
not fixed to certain days, this depending merely on the Capricio of the
Bramans. These Priests are very exact in their Fasts, and upon any Solemn Day,
they call together such as live within a reasonable distance of the Temple,
from whence they bring forth the Idol, and having placed it upon an Elephant
very righly Harnassed, Their Processions.
they carry it about in triumph, at the sight of which, the People to show
their utmost Veneration, prostrate themselves upon the Ground. The Elephant is
surrounded by a good number of the Nahers, who having each a Fan tied to a long
Cane in their hands, drive away the Flies; which, as the Bramans say, would
else be troublesome to their Gods, but in effect, because they would not
incommode themselves. Whilst the People make a confused Noise with diverse
Instruments, and their joyful Acclamations, one of the Bramans, with a two
edged Cymetar in his hand, having some small Bells hanging at the handle, runs
round about the Elephant, and after a thousand ridiculous and extravagant
Postures, which are looked upon by the People as Mysterious, he wounds himself
in the Head, offering his Blood as a Sacrifice to the Idol, which is as little
known to him, as it is sensible of his extravagant impostures.

Thus after having taken their Rounds through such places as were appointed for
that days Solemnity, they carry the Idol back to the Temple in the same manner,
as it was brought out before. They have also several other Ceremonies, which
being abominable to relate, we will pass by in silence.

They burn the dead Bodies of their Princes, of the Nambouri's, the Bramans,
and the Nahers, but all the rest of an inferior Rank, are interred.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of their Arms.
ALL the Malabars in general, Are very dexterous at their Arms.
who are capable of bearing Arms, use them with great Dexterity; they take
particular care to instruct their Children in those Exercises, and scarce are
they able to walk upwright, but they are furnished with Bows and Arrows, which
they make use of to shoot at the Birds. They are so very careful in this point,
that in each Kingdom there are maintained certain Academies at the King's
Charge, where the young People are trained up in their Exercise of Arms. The
Indians are furnished with the materials for their Arms from abroad, but they
make them always themselves for their own use.

Their Muskets are very light, though they are six foot long, and there is no
Naher, but he always carries a mould about him for his Ball. They don't lay the
But-end of their Muskets to their Shoulders, but on their Cheeks, when they
are going to give fire, Their Arms.
and are most excellent Marks-men. They make use also of a Lance, a Cymetar,
and the Bow; of the last of which they are masters to such a Degree, that I
have seen them frequently shoot two Arrows immediately one after another into
the Air, with so much Dexterity, that the second hit the first.

Their Bows are six foot long, their Arrows three; the Iron at the point about
three inches broad, and eight long: They do not carry them in a Quiver as they
do at Suratte, where they are not near so big, but they hold always seven or
eight of them ready in their hands. Besides this, they have fastened to their
sides with an iron Hook a sort of a large Knife or Bagonet, of about half a
foot broad, and a foot and a half long; this they make use of when they come to
a close Engagement. Those who wear Cymetars make use of Bucklers; all of them
wear their Arms without Scabbards or any other Coverts, for which reason they
are very careful to keep them neat and bright.

The young People frequently perform their Exercises of Arms in the presence of
the Prince, or before some others of the most eminent rank in the Kingdom.

Those who have a more than ordinary esteem of their skill in the exercise of
Weapons, Their Combats.
invite People of Quality at certain times appointed for that purpose, to be
judges of their Ability in the feats of Arms, when the prize is given to such
as behave themselves best. Being animated by a double motive of honor and
interest, they attack one another in these Combats, with so much vigor, that
it most commonly costs the lives of several young fellows.

If their happen to be a Family quarrel betwixt the Nahers, Family quarrels how
decided.
they choose one or more of their vassels of a mean condition on each side, who
being well Fed and Educated for that purpose, are appointed by joint consent to
decide the Quarrel. Time and place being agreed on by the parties concerned,
the Prince appears there with his whole Court, in whose presence these
Gladiators being armed only with certain Knives or Bagonets, invented and used
only for this purpose, fight naked till by the death of one party or the other,
the quarrel be decided in favor of the Conqueror, who very often does not long
survive the Victory.

The Malabars are generally very patient, and not easily put in a Passion;
Besides which it ought to be mentioned to their Honor, that they never revenge
themselves by any clandestine means, but give themselves due satisfaction by
the most honorable ways that possibly can be, the use of poison being not so
much as known among them.

When they go abroad into the Wars, they march without observing the least
order, without making any account of Rank or File. They fight barely out of a
point of Honor, or at the most for a little Pillage, these Kings being most
infected with the Ambition of enlarging their Territories, it brings a general
received Custom among the Malabar Princes, to restore to one another, as soon
as the Peace is concluded, all that they have taken during the War.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the Mahometans in Malabar.
THE Mahometans in Malabar owe their offspring to such Foreigners of their
Religion, as formerly have settled themselves in those parts for the
convenience of Commerce. For few of the Pagans, but especially the Nahers,
never apply themselves to it, which is the reason, that most of the Commodities
imported, or exported, pass through the hands of Strangers. The Villages or
places inhabited by these Foreign Merchants, are called in the Malabar Tongue,
Basars, which is as much as to say, a Marketplace. The most considerable of
these trading places are generally seated on the Seashoar, or near the mouth of
some River or another, for the more convenience of the Foreign Merchants, who
are for the most part Europeans.

The Mahometans dwelling in those parts are a vile and treacherous sort of
People, abundance of them live upon Piracy, and attack all Ships they meet,
without any difference, Malabar Corsairs.
provided they think them not able to resist them; but what makes them most
dreaded, is, That they use their Slaves with a most barbarous cruelty. Their
Vessels resemble in shape our Galleys, and are generally manned with five or
six hundred men; they call them Paros, and run with them all along the Indian
Coast, even as far as the Red Sea. They very rarely attack any European
Vessels, especially if they be of any defense, and if they happen to take any,
it is commonly done by surprise, seldom by open force.

If these Corsairs render the Indian Seas somewhat troublesome, it is very safe
traveling by Land, especially, if you be conducted by some Nahers, as you
travel from one Town to another; for robbing upon the Highway and Stealing, is
most severely punished, whereas Pirating is looked upon as a free Exercise, the
Kings in those parts not taking Cognizance of what is transacted upon the open
Sea, where they are persuaded the weakest ought to submit to the strongest.
These Corsairs pay the tenth of what Booty they take, either in Money or Slaves
to the Prince, under whose Jurisdiction they live; upon the Seas nothing is
exempted from their attempts, they attacking all they meet, without any respect
of Religion or Nation, or having the least regard to any passes, though given
by such Lords or Princes as they stand in awe of.

If their next Neighbors or their best Friends chance to fall into their hands
at Sea, they spare them no more, than if they were the greatest strangers in
the World, but load them with Irons till they have paid their Ransom. These
Pirates are more ignorant and barbarous than the other Mahometans, they are
distinguished from the Pagans only by their Beards, Turbants and Vests.

If they happen to take any Mahometans or Pagans, they only strip them of all
they find, but seldom make them Slaves, unless it be a person from whom they
expect an extraordinary Ransom. The Christians are treated with more severity,
and are sure to die in Slavery, unless they be either ransomed, or else embrace
Mahometanism, when they are much respected, and commonly are made Captain of
their Paros.

At their first going abroad with one of those Vessels, their chiefest aim is
to initiate the new Vessel with the Blood of the first Christian Slave they
take. But among all the Europeans, The Portugueses are their declared Enemies.
the Portuguese most frequently receive the bloody Marks of their most
barbarous cruelty; for which reason it is, that they are declared Enemies to
these Corsairs, and if they meet with any of them, they carry them for the most
part to Goa, where they put them in Chains in their Galleys, or else keep them
in Irons in the Casal de Polvera, which signifies the Powder-House, from
whence, there is seldom any Redemption; These Barbarians being naturally so
covetous as scarce ever to attempt the Redemption of their Friends out of
Slavery, unless it be sometimes a Captain of their Paros, which however is
scarce ever granted by the Portuguese, who in requital of the Cruelties
exercised by them against their Countrymen, rather choose to let them Die in
Bondage, than to make the advantage of their ransom.

The Mahometans living among the Malabars, are obliged to Accommodate
themselves in all respects to their Laws and Customs, unless it be in such
matters as are directly opposite to their Religion; though the Mahometans in
those parts are more Jealous to fill their Coffers, and in frequenting the best
Market Town, than their Mosques.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The French Settlement at Tilcery.
WE being seated at Batiepatan, in a place where we wanted all manner of
convenience, by reason of its distance from the Seaside, as soon as the two
Ships called the Mary, and the Strong, had set Sail in order to their return
into France, we made our Applications to Prince Onitri, to assign us another
more Commodious place for our Habitations, which having soon been granted by
the means of some Presents, he himself settled us in a place called Tatichere,
(afterward by us named Tilcery,) being part of his own Estate, Situate about 4
Leagues to the South of Batiepatan, Cananor.
and 3 of Cananor.

The last of these two places is Situate at 11 Degrees, and 40 Minutes North
Latitude, in the most Fertile and Beautiful part of the whole Kingdom. Its Port
is very fair and Commodious, during the Summer Season, but dangerous in Winter.
It was in this place the Portuguese first settled themselves after their first
discovery of the Indies. There is to this day to be seen a strong Tower Built
of Stone; which they had brought along with them from Portugal; it is environed
with a very good high Wall, whereupon are Mounted above 100 pieces of Cannon;
they soon after Built a very handsome Town just by the Fort, and made
themselves so considerable in those parts, that they were a Terror to all the
Indians round about them. Cananor is destitute of the convenience of a River,
but this is supplied by a small Bay, where there is very Commodious Landing.

The Dutch having afterward got a settlement here under the protection of the
King of Cananor, the Inhabitants craved their assistance against the
encroachments made upon them by the Portugueses; and these glad of so
favorable an opportunity of ridding their hands of their Rival's being
assisted by the Nahers of the Country, Portugueses beaten out by the Dutch.
beat the Portugueses after a most vigorous resistance, out of their strong
hold, rased the City, and kept the Fort for their own use.

On the South side there is a very large Market Town, Inhabited by Mohammedan
Merchants, who live there under the jurisdiction of a person of Quality of
their own Religion, who is nevertheless dependant from the King and his Chief
Minister. He that was there Governor all my time, was called Atitaja, and was
King of several of the Maldive Islands.

These Islands are very Healthful and Fertile, The Maldive Islands.
where by reason of their great Traffic, you may be furnished with every thing
the Indies afford. They make use of neither Wagons, nor Coaches, but instead
of them use Elephants, Horses, and their Palanquins.

It Is here that those Canas, which we call Bambou's, grow in great quantities.
They are when they come to perfection, as thick as a Man's Thigh, and 20 or 30
Foot long; whilst they are very young and tender they cut them and pickle them
in Vinegar. They slit them before they are dry, to make Palanquins of them, but
when they are come to full perfection, they are sold at the rate of 200 Crowns
apiece.

Since the departure of the Portugueses from Cananor, the Dutch are become as
grievous to the Inhabitants as the Portuguese, and if their Pride was
insupportable to the Indians, the insolence of the others is no less
troublesome to them, so that in all likelihood they would be forward enough to
lend a helping hand, to such as would attempt to drive the Hollanders from
thence.

At a League distance from Cananor, as you Travel toward the South, you pass
through a Town called Carla, Inhabited by Tives and Cheti's, where are made the
best Callicoes, which retain the Name of that place for their goodness sake.

A League further toward the South, you come to Tremapatan, Tremapatan.
or as the Malabars call it, Talmorte, being a very considerable Market Town,
Inhabited by Mohammedan Merchants. And hard by upon a Hill, you see a Fort or
Castle belonging to the King, where there is no Garrison, though when the Princes
come that way, they always there take up their Lodgings. There runs a very fair
River on one side of the Basar, or Marketplace, which falls into the Sea not
above 100 Paces below it. This River is very broad, but so shallow, that a Ship
of above 100 Tuns cannot enter it without great hazard. At its Entrance, (at a
League's distance from the Shore,) are abundance of Rocks, and a small Island
without any Inhabitants, where there is however very good Hunting; besides
which, it serves very often for a shelter to such Vessels as in Tempestuous
Weather cannot make the River; there are no Corsairs at Tremapatan, but those
who Cruise this way from the Neighboring Coasts, frequently lie perdue under
this Island, and wait for such ships as they intend to surprise at their going
into, or coming out of the River.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Our Departure from Batiepatan.
BEfore I say any thing more of Tilcery, you must know that the Sieur de
Flacour and de la Terine, being gone with the Prince Onitri, to take possession
of the place assigned for our new Settlement; I staid behind at Batiepatan, to
take care of the Transportation of our Movables and Effects, to our new
Habitations, in such Vessels as were appointed for that purpose, under the
Convoy of a certain number of Nahers.

We passed the Fort of Cananor, and the Town of Carla, without meeting with any
Pirates, but as we made toward Tremapatan, we perceived one to appear from
behind the abovementioned Island, making the best of his way toward us. Those
that knew them by the Bulk and Shape of their Vessel, assuring me that they
were Pirates, I to avoid the danger of meeting with them, ordered our Vessels
to get into a small River thereabouts, and leaving them to be guarded by the
Nahers, I Traveled my self by Land, under the Conduct of two of these Nahers
to Tilcery, where I met with the Ship called the City of Marseille, Commanded
by Captain Perotin, who was formerly Lieutenant in the same Ship, which carried
me out of France, as far as the Fort Dauphine, in the Isle of Madagascar.
Having told the Captain how our Ship was beset in a small adjacent River, by a
Pirate, he sent out an Armed Chaloup, with 20 Men, and 4 Patarero's, who, in
sight of the Pirate, carried off our Vessels, without the least obstacle.

The Ship the City of Marseille, having immediately received her Cargo of
Pepper, Cardamom, and Cinnamon, was sent away into Persia, leaving with us the
Reverend Father Gabriel de Chinon, a Capuchin, who by the Order of the Reverend
Father Ambrosius de Previlly, of the same Order, and Superior of the
Missionaries in the Indies, was sent in Quality of a Missionary, to the Coast
of Malabar.

That part which Prince Onitri had given, Tilcery.
or rather Sold us for our Settlement, is Situate at 11 Degrees and a half
North Latitude, a League distant from Tremapatan, 3 Leagues from Cananor, and 4
from Batiepatan to the South. There is a House Built according to the Indian
Fashion, of Wood and Earth, upon a rising Ground, in the midst of an Orchard,
containing betwixt 2 and 300 Cocoe-Trees; and something lower there is a large
enclosure full of Cocoe and other Fruit Trees, surrounded with a small Ditch.
To the Land side, there is a small Market Town, Inhabited by Mahometans, who
have there a Mosque, which is pitifully Built and as pitifully maintained,
where the Mahometans say their Prayers. On the Sea-Shoar there are several
Habitations of the Moncovas, or Pagan Fishermen, and all round about it are
very fair Grounds belonging to some of the Richest Nahers of the Country.

Tilcery it self, Tilcery.
as I have told you before, belonged to the Prince Onitri, who Sold it to the
Royal French East India Company, there being not another such a convenient
place for their purpose in the whole Kingdom.

No sooner were the French put in possession of the place, but they caused a
House with Commodious Watch-Houses for their Merchandises to be Built out of
such Materials as the Country afforded, all which, they fortified with all
possible diligence, to serve them for a defense against any surprise.

About the same time Father Gabriel, whom we mentioned before, fell very
dangerously ill of a Dysentery, and being of Opinion, that the Indian
Physicians might be better Skilled in the Distempers of their own Country, he
sent for a Paudite, (thus they call their Physicians,) who, notwithstanding the
violence of the Symptoms, which to me were no good Presages, promised to Cure
him in 3 days time, and in part he made good his Word, for having given him a
certain Medicine, which, as far as I could judge was a Composition of Opium,
(by the Indians called Amphion,) of Oil, and of Jagra, or Sugar of the Cocoes,
of which, he was to take a Spoonful every Night and Morning, he put an end to
his Distemper and Life on the 27th of June. By the loss of so good a Man, we
were deprived of the greatest Spiritual Comfort we so much stood in need of in
a Barbarous Country, Inhabited by Idolaters, but as we were forced to submit to
Providence, so the Memory of a person highly venerable for his Age, and other
rare Endowments, which begot a great respect in the Mahometans and Pagans,
ought always to be Sacred among his Friends.

The better to secure our selves and the Effects of the East India Company at
Tilcery, we were obliged for a considerable time to entertain 50 Nahers in our
Service, there passing scarce a day but that we were Alarmed by the
Neighboring Indians, who having conceived a Jealousy at our Buildings and
Fortifications, openly threatened to take the first opportunity to cut our
Throats; which obliged us to make our Application to Prince Onitri, and to
desire his Protection; but he being at that time not at leisure to come in
Person, the Neighboring Indians would not permit their Workmen to assist us in
finishing our Settlement; at last after various obstacles to be surmounted, and
great Entreaties, Prince Onitri appearing among us, and declaring that he would
Protect us against all that should dare to oppose us, he caused several of
those who had been most troublesome to us, to be severely chastised, which put
such a Terror among the rest, that they did not disturb us for some time after;
especially when they saw that Prince Onitri tarried thereabouts for full 6
Months, the better to keep these mutinous people in awe by his presence.

CHAP. XL.
A Voyage of the Sieur de Flacour, into the Kingdom of Samorin.
THE Dutch who are in continual Broils with one or other of these Indian
Princes, War betwixt the Dutch and Samorins.
did about the same time renew the War with the King of Samorin, being the most
Potent among all the Malabar Princes. For some time the War was carried on
without any considerable advantage on both sides, till the Dutch having got the
better of the Indians, made a great havoc wherever they came, demolishing
their Towns, and pillaging their Temples, and at last laid Siege to a certain
Castle called Batacota, or Trianvaca Catota Batacota. The Fortress being very
strong and of no small consequence, and the Samorins having provided the place
with every thing necessary for its defense, stood it out bravely at first
against the Dutch; but their heavy Artillery having disheartened the Nahers, who
defended the place, and the King having sought in vain for Succors among his
Neighbors, who durst not break with the Dutch, judged it most advisable to
have recourse to the Europeans. The Portugueses were not in a condition to
assist him, neither was he perhaps willing to give them an opportunity of
re-settling themselves in his Dominions; wherefore he made his Application to
us, desiring our Assistance against his Enemies. It Is true, the War was not
then declared betwixt France and Holland, but considering that this crafty
Nation had all along thwarted our Designs in the Indies, we resolved to embrace
the party of the King of Samorin.

For which reason the Sieurs de Flacour and de Coche, were sent thither from
Tilcery, with full power to conclude an Alliance with that King. They were
received with all imaginable Demonstrations of Joy and respect, The French side
with the Samorins.
and the King of Samorin among other Articles, granted to the French East India
Company, a tract of Ground in his Kingdom, called Aticote, with all its
dependencies, and the Sovereignty it self, for the more convenient settlement
of our Company. This place is not far distant from Cochin, near a River capable
of bearing Vessels of a moderate Bulk.

The Dutch having got scent of the Treaty concluded betwixt us and the Indians,
Attacked the place more furiously than before, and the Prince putting all his
hopes in the French relief; the more to encourage them to hasten to his
assistance, promised to put the Castle into their Hands as soon as relieved,
which he caused to be Published near the Enemy's Camp. But these were so far
from being frightened at it, that they pushed on their Attacks so vigorously,
that the Sieur de Flacour who was constituted Governor of the Fort, after a
brave Defense found means to get out of the place; and the Nahers discouraged
by his departure, soon delivered it to the Hollanders, who caused it to be
Demolished.

The King of Samorin finding himself incapable to sustain alone the Burden of
the War, Peace betwixt the Dutch and Samorins.
and being disappointed in his hopes of a powerful succor from Suratte,
proposed certain Articles of Peace to the Dutch, which being accepted of by
them, the Peace was Concluded; and the Sieur de Flacour returned to Tilcery,
having in vain endeavored to serve a Prince who had given him many
Demonstrations of his good will, and favorable inclinations to our Nation.

But as the King had been forced by an unavoidable necessity to clap up this
Peace with the Hollanders, so all his thoughts were bent upon revenging himself
against them, as soon as the French succors promised by their East India
Company, should Arrive in those parts. For which reason, he desired the Sieur
de Flacour to leave the Sieur de Coche with him, who accordingly staid at his
Court in expectation of the succors promised by the East India Company.

CHAP. XLI.
New Troubles arisen at Tilcery.
IN the mean time our Enemies, who by the presence and threats of Prince
Onitri, had for some time been kept in awe, being afresh encouraged by his
absence, began to be very troublesome to us. The worst of all was that we did
not only stand in fear of the Neighboring Nahers, and other Pagans, but the
Corsairs of Bargara and Cognaly, also threatened to come and Plunder us, and if
they found any resistance, to cut us to pieces. For which reason we were forced
to entertain a good number of Nahers, and to put our selves in a posture of
Defense, as much as possibly we could, with a resolution, rather to sacrifice
our Lives, than to submit to an intolerable Slavery among these Barbarians.

Some time after the departure of the Sieur de Flacour for Samorin, there
appearing a Vessel to the South of our Shore, with a White Flag, we also set up
ours, and an Ensign of theirs being sent on Shore, satisfied us, that it was
the St. Francis, a Ship belonging to our Company, Commanded by Captain Vimont,
having on Board the Sieur Pilavene, a Merchant of Paris, who was sent into the
Indies in Quality of a Director. This Vessel was Bound for Suratte, and after
its departure out of France, having met with no Disaster till after she had
doubled the Cape of Good-Hope, was Attacked by so furious a Tempest, that she
lost her Masts and some of her Ships Crew, and became very Leaky, which obliged
the Chief Officers there to make a Vow, that if they happened to escape so
imminent a danger, they would go to pay their Devotions before the Corpse of St.
Francis Xavier, at the place where it is deposited at Goa. After the Hurricane
was abated, they refreshed themselves at Batavia, the Capital City of the Isle
of Java, belonging to the Hollanders, the biggest of all they are Masters of in
the Indies. Having provided themselves there with what necessaries they wanted,
they were steering their course toward Goa, to discharge their Vow, and from
thence to continue their Voyage to Suratte.

This Ship did not continue above four and twenty Hours in our Road, in which
time we took care to send them on Board all manner of refreshments; and the
French Officers on board her, having understood, how we were kept in continual
fear by the Indians, presented us with some Cymetars, Muskets and Gunpowder,
besides a quantity of Brandy. The sight of this Vessel, and the Arms which they
sent us wrought no small effect for our safety, which we improved to our best
advantage, by giving it out among them, that we expected daily more ships with
Arms, Men and Ammunition from France, which struck such a terror into our
Enemies, that they proved less troublesome afterward. The Sieur Deshayes
Embarked in the Ship called the St. Francis, having for some time before
desired to be dismissed, the Air of Malabar not being very agreeable to his
Constitution.

After the Sieur de Flacour's return from the King of Samorin's Court, we gave
Notice to the Dutch, residing at Cananor, of the donation made to us by that
Prince, which they regarded as little as did those inhabiting Cochin.

CHAP. XLII.
The Arrival of several Vessels.
A Little after, the Ship called the City of Bourdeaux, which came from
Suratte, and was bound for Mascate, Mascate.
a City of Arabia in the Persian Gulf, arrived in the road of Tilcery. The
Portugueses had formerly settled themselves in that Port, and for their
security, built a new strong Fort, but the Arabians chased them from thence,
since which time the French have settled a Factory there.

One Mr. Petit was Commander of the Vessel, he staid but a little while in our
Road, and sailed directly to Mangalor, to load some Rice there. Before his
departure, he assured us, That the Sieur de Caron, Director General of the
French East India Company in the Indies, being at his departure ready to sail
for Bantam, would certainly in a little time pass by our way; upon which,
having prepared every thing for his Reception, we placed constantly some
Sentinels to observe whether any Ships appeared toward the North; but having
for some time used our endeavors in vain, we began to imagine that we had been
misinformed, when one morning there came in sight of us the Ship called the
St. Paul, which was soon after followed by the Vulture, and the St. Francis, in
the last of which was the Sieur de Caron, who was going to settle a French
Factory at Bantam, not far from Batavia, and having taken an exact account of
the true State of Affairs at Tilcery, he pursued his Voyage to Bantam.

Prince Onitri having before received intelligence of his arrival, came to pay
him a visit, but he came a little two late, the Sieur de Caron who was
unwilling to let slip the opportunity of improving the advantage of a fair
Gale, being already under sa^^ at his Arrival. The Sieur de Caron however had
sent his excuses to the Prince with some presents, who sent a Messenger after
him in a Chaloup, who repaid the Complement and regaled him with some
refreshments.

We had for a considerable time before laid a design to settle a French Factory
at Sirinpatan, called by the Malabars, Padenote, which being communicated to
the Sieur de Caron, before his Departure from Tilcery, he ordered immediately
the Sieur de Flacour to take a Journey thither. He chose me for his Companion,
and notwithstanding the rainy Season which continues for six Months together on
the Coast of Malabar, resolved to undertake the Journey without any further
delay. I did all I could to represent to him the inconveniency of traveling at
this Season, when the Roads by the overflowing of the Rivers were perhaps
rendered unpassable, desiring him to delay his Journey for some little time, but
he persisted in his former Resolution, telling me, That having but five and
twenty Leagues to travel, we should in all probability find the Roads not so
difficult to pass, as I imagined.

CHAP. XLIII.
Our departure from Tilcery.
ACcordingly we set out from Tilcery, about the middle of June, being conducted
by some Guides, and guarded by several Nahers. Our whole Equipage consisted in
no more than a Shirt and a pair of Drawers; on our Feet we wore a kind of
Sandals, and to keep off the Rain, we were each of us provided with an
Umbrello, made out of the leaves of Palm Trees.

The first days Journey proved extremely troublesome, being obliged to march
all day long through the Waters that had over flown the Roads, which in some
places came to our middle, so that we were not able to travel above two Leagues
the whole day; at Night we took up our Lodgings which were sorry enough, in a
small Market Town, where we dried our Cloths without much difficulty, they
being all of Callicoe. Thus after a miserable Nights Lodging, we continued our
Journey the next Morning, when we were refreshed with a small interval of fair
Weather, which however lasted but a few hours. As we were marching through the
Waters, we were extremely pestered with Horse Leaches, which fastened themselves
in great numbers to our Legs, and fatigued us to that degree, that being quite
spent by Noon, we were forced to take up our Quarters at the Habitations of
some Mahometans. In the afternoon the Sieur de Flacour paid a visit to the
Naher, who though a Subject of the King of Cananor, was Lord of the place, and
without whose consent we could not pass, which we easily obtained by the means
of a present. The next day we found the Road somewhat better than we had done
hitherto, but another misfortune abated much of our satisfaction; for after we
had traveled near four hours, we found our selves, being misled by the
ignorance of our Guides, near the same place from whence we set out in the
Morning. An unseasonable anger would have stood us but in little stead with
those, who had us at their Mercy, and in whom we were obliged to confide as our
Conductors, so that patience was the best remedy we could prescribe our selves,
and thus we continued our Journey in hopes of better luck. But we found our
selves soon deceived in our expectation, for we had not traveled far, when the
Rains began to be more violent than ever, besides that we traveled all over
stony Grounds full of deep and large Ditches, which we were forced to pass over
small Planks or pieces of Trees laid a cross. Armed with Patience, and an
unshaken Resolution to overcome all Obstacles, we at last came to a
Market Town, inhabited by Mahometans, situated near a River which runs by
Cognaly. We were kindly received by the Inhabitants, and the great Rains and
passed fatigues, obliged us to rest there for one day.

But, what we had suffered hitherto, was all it seems nothing in comparison of
what we were likely to undergo for the future; the Dangers and Fatigues which
were represented to us by these Mahometans, made so lively an impression upon
me, that I earnestly requested the Sieur de Flacour not to go further, and
though every one there present was of my Opinion, and gave himself fresh
assurances of the dangers and troubles he must undergo, he stood firm in his
resolution, to prosecute his Journey, in order to dispatch his business before
the return of the Sieur de Caron.

As for my part, I being not under any further obligation, than to bear the
Sieur de Flacour Company, I thought it rashness to expose my life to danger
without any prospect of doing good; so that I resolved to quit the Sieur de
Flacour, and to take the convenience of a small River, which discharges it self
not far from hence into the Sea.

According to this resolution, I hired a Canoe or Boat, refusing to accept of
the Firearms that were offered me, because I did not imagine I should have any
occasion for them, being in hopes to reach and lodge that Night at Bargara, in
the House of Couleas Marcal, a rich Mohammedan Merchant, and famous Pirate in
those parts, with whom I had some Business. I passed without any hindrance,
(having only the Master and his Boy in my Company) by Cotta or Cognaly, a
Market Town, from whence the most famous Pirate in those Seas, whose Lordship
it is, derives his Name; and thus being gently conveyed by the current, I
thought my self out of all danger, as being near Bargara, when some Pirates who
had discovered me from far of, were making toward me with their Boat. As I was
not ignorant, that all what these Barbarians lay hold on upon the Water, they
look upon as their own; we made the best of our way to the shore, but scarce
had we reached the Bank, when we perceived the Pirates at the heels of us,
which so terrified both the Master of the Boat, and his Boy, who carried my
Portmantle, that they looked for their safety in the switness of their heels,
leaving me to the mercy of those Robbers, who pursued me closely, till they
overtook me. I now began to repent my self of having refused the firelocks
that were offered me, one of which would have been a sufficient defense against
a couple of cowardly Rovers, who had no other Arms, The Author taken by a
Malabar (...).
but their Lances. Finding me without any Arms, they soon knocked me down, and
seeing there were no Witness of the violence offered to me by Land, they forced
me into their Boat, and carried me back to Cognaly. As I was the first of our
Nation who had the misfortune to fall into their hands, so I was conducted
before their Chieftain, who used his utmost endeavors to extort from me a Sum
of Money for my Ransom; but having answered him that I had none to give, he
asked me for what reason I had quitted the Sieur de Flacour, and whether in his
return he was to pass that way through his Lordship; I told him, that I was not
able to give him an account, upon which he ordered the Irons to be brought in,
which were laid close by me, so that I expected every moment to be laden with
Irons.

But as good fortune would have it, this Chieftain had heard something of the
late alliance concluded betwixt us and the King of Samorin, whose Subject he
was, which consideration together with the utmost severity, used against such
as commit Robberies on Land, or in a River, had so good an effect upon him,
that he ordered the Irons to be taken away, and when I expected it least,
turned the civilest man in the World, offering me his House and every thing
else for my convenience.

But as I was eager to see my self at Liberty, Is (...) at liberty.
so I returned him thanks for his offers, desiring him to give me leave to go
straight to Bargara, pretending that I had business of great moment to transact
there that Night. He having granted my request, and ordered a Vessel to be got
ready, he presented me in the mean while with some sweet Meats* of which I took
a few for Decency's sake, but did not eat any of them for fear of Poison,
though at the same time it must be confessed, that Poison is less known among
the Malabars, than any other Nation.

After I had taken my leave of the Pirate, I entered the Vessel which was to
carry me to Bargara, where I was no sooner arrived, but I met with the same
Canoe, which had left me before in the lurch, the Master pretending that he had
stayed for me there in hopes of my coming. But what rejoiced me most was, That
a certain Fisherman told me, that there was very lately a Frenchman arrived in
this Market Town. You may imagine, that I made all the have I could to find him
out, and meeting with my old Friend the Sieur de la Serine the Elder, who was
lately returned from Calicut, this happy meeting was no small comfort to me,
for what I had suffered during this troublesome Journey, of which and the last
adventure, I gave him an exact relation.

He having already settled matters with the Corsair who is Lord of Bargara, we
traveled the next day together to Tilcery, which being not above three Leagues
from thence, we arrived there before Noon. There was scarce any body but was
surprised at my sudden return, but at the same time, approved of my Resolution,
of not exposing my self to the hazards of so dangerous a Journey, without an
absolute necessity.

The End of the first Part.
AN ACCOUNT OF A VOYAGE TO THE EAST INDIES.

Dedicated to the Bishop of MEAVX.

By Mr. DELLON, M. D.

Translated from the French.

PART II.

LONDON, Printed for D. Brown, at the Black-Swan, without Temple Bar; A.
Roper, at the Black-Boy in Fleet Street; and T. Leigh, at the Peacock in
Fleet Street, School.

A VOYAGE TO THE EAST INDIES.
PART II.
CHAP. I.
Our Journey to Tanor.
THE Sieur de la Serine had bought a considerable quantity of Pepper at Calicut
and Tanor, which being to be weighed and put in Bales against the arrival of
our Ships, he and I set out from Tilcery for these two places, which lie to the
South of Tilcery.

The first Town we came to in our Journey, Mealy.
is called Mealy* it has a small Marketplace, but is (...) inhabited by Tives.
The River upon which it is built, will bear Vessels of good Burden, and there
is always a good number of them to be seen near the Town, which are freighted
here with the products of the circumjacent Country, which is one of the most
fertile in the World.

Bargara is about two Leagues distant from Mealy; Bargara.
it is one of the most considerable Market Towns in those parts, whether in
respect of its commerce, or of the riches of its inhabitants, who are most
Pirates: It is destitute of a River, so that both the Corsairs and Merchants
are obliged to let their Paros and Vessels* run ashore on the Seaside, when
they want careening, or that they cannot hold out against the violence of the
Hurricanes. Bargara lies upon the utmost Borders of the Kingdom of Cananor; a
certain Naher is Lord of the place, who, though a subject to the King, yet
enjoys the prerogative of receiving the tribute paid both by the Inhabitants
and Strangers.

Not far from Bargara, there is a small Gulf made by the River Cognaly, a
place very commodious for the Neighboring Corsairs.

About half a League from Bargara, there is a Market Town, or Basar, which the
Malabars call Cota, or Cognaly; the first signifies in their Language as much
as a Fort, the second is the Name of the Corsair, who is Lord of the place.

Cota is a Peninsule of a very difficult access, Cota.
even in that part where it is adjoined to the Land, by reason of the deep pits
occasioned by the overflowing of the Sea. The River bears Vessels of three
hundred Tuns, but is very dangerous at the Entrance, not far from whence there
is a small Island, which serves for a shelter in tempestuous Weather, both to
the Merchant Men and Paros.

The Lord of Cognaly is a famous Corsair in these parts; The Lord of Cognaly.
he seldom has less than ten or twelve Paros out at Sea, each being manned with
five or six hundred of his Subjects, who are most of them of the same
Employment, and as they are commonly very Rich, so they are intolerably Proud
and Insolent.

Some years ago they revolted against the King of Samorin, their Sovereign, who
finding himself alone not strong enough to reduce these Rebels to Obedience,
sought for aid by the Portugueses. These having sent to his assistance a Fleet,
he Besieged them by Land, as they did by Sea, but with very ill success; for
the Portuguese Ships having most of them been tossed by a Tempest, the King was
forced to withdraw his Army, not without great loss, without being able to
reduce the Corsairs to their Devoir. But the next year proved less favorable
to them; for the Portugueses being resolved to revenge the Affront received the
year before, made a Descent, Is carried to Goa, and Stoned to Death.
routed them, and took their Chieftain Prisoner, whom they led laden with
Chains to Goa, where the populace being highly incensed against these
Barbarians, on account of the Cruelties exercised by them upon their
Countrymen, and other Europeans, he was stoned to Death by the Boys.

One of his Nephews after having submitted himself to the King of Samorin,
succeeded him both in his Estate and Employment, who has ever since continued
to Cruise upon the Merchant Ships with such success, that he is dreaded all
over the Indies.

The Fort which has given the Name to the Basar, or Market Town, is Built at a
small distance from it, on the utmost confines of the Kingdom of Samorin. From
thence they count it seven Leagues to Calicut, where you meet with nothing but
3 or 4 small Towns, so inconsiderable as not to deserve to be mentioned here.

CHAP. II.
Of Calicut.
CAlicut, Calicut or Coi-Cota.
is in the Malabar Tongue called Coi-Cota, deriving its Name from two different
Words, the first whereof signifies as much as a Cock, and the last a Fort;
because, as it is related among the Malabars, the Kingdom of Samorin was in
former Ages of no greater extent than you might hear a Cock Crow. And though this
Kingdom be considerably augmented since, yet the City of Calicut, (the
principal of the Country,) retains the same Name to this day.

It is Situated under the Eleventh Degree of North Latitude, about 11 Leagues
distant from Tilcery. Formerly it was the Chief place of Commerce of all the
Indies, and though it be much declined from its Ancient luster, yet its
Inhabitants are generally very Rich, and most of them Merchants. This was the
place where the Portugueses first set foot on Shore, after their first
Discovery of the East Indies. Their King who at that time kept his Residence in
that City, received them with a great deal of kindness and respect, granting
them a considerable settlement in his Territories, but they were so far from
making a suitable return to his Civilities, that they began to Lord it both
over him and his Subjects, so that the King thought himself obliged to rid his
Hands of these bold Guests; whom the Samorins drove out of their Territories,
and never suffered them to re-settle there since.

All about Calicut there are very low Grounds, subject to frequent Inundations,
there being scarce a year but some part or other of this Kingdom is laid under
Water, by the overflowing of the Rivers. The Fort which the Portugueses
formerly had Built at a good distance from the Shore, may now be seen 2 Leagues
deep in the Sea, above half under Water, The Portuguese Fort.
so that you may frequently see small Vessels pass betwixt that and the Shore.
These Inundations are ceased by the strong South West Winds, which blow on that
Coast continually, from May till September. Whilst I was there I was an
eyewitness of the Disaster that befell the English, whose Habitations, which
had not been Built many Years before, were entirely swallowed up by the Waters.

The frequent mischiefs occasioned by these Inundations, has been one of the
main reasons why the Foreign Trade has in a great measure removed from Calicut
to Goa, which City, has laid the foundation of its greatness upon the Ruins of
that of Calicut.

Goa is the most considerable City of all the East Indies, in the Possession of
the Portugueses, who wallowing in Riches, by reason of the vast Commerce of the
Foreign Merchant's Trafficking in the East Indies, grew at last so insolent and
insupportable to them, that they Transported their Effects and Traffic to
Suratte, which is now the chief Trading place of all the Indies.

Calicut, is notwithstanding all this, accounted a very good Market Town,
having 4 or 5 large and handsome Streets; besides, the Suburbs, which are
Inhabited by Fishermen and Tives, all which joined together make up a City of a
pretty large Bulk.

Since the Kings of Samorin have removed their Court to another place, there
resides here a Governor (whom they call Bajador,) in the Royal Palace, where
there is as yet to be seen a very large Bell, and some Brass Cannon, which were
brought thither, after they had chased the Portugueses out of their Fort.

Among the Sands of the Shore there is good store of Gold Dust, Gold Dust.
which is very fine, and every Body has the freedom to gather it at pleasure;
the biggest piece that ere I saw, was not worth above 15 Pence, and commonly
they are not worth above 4 or 5 Pence apiece, abundance of people get a
livelihood by it; and with consent of the Governor (which is to be purchased
by a certain set Price, for the maintenance of 100 Poor people,) you may have
as much Sand as you please, carried to your Dwelling-places, in order to
separate it with the most convenience.

It is a considerable time since the English have been settled at Calicut;
English Factory.
but their Habitations having been ruined, (as we said before,) by the
overflowing of the Waters; they Built another House in a rising and
consequently less dangerous piece of Ground. As in those far distant places the
Europeans, though of different Nations, pay a great deal of Civility to one
another upon all occasions, and as it would have been looked upon by them as an
Affront, if we had not stopped at their Habitation as we passed that way, we
took up our Lodgings with the English, who Entertained us with all the Civility
imaginable, and we staid with them much longer than we at first intended, by
reason that a Paros of the Cosairs waited for our coming out of the Port to
surprise us.

Having staid for some time in hopes of his going out of the Road, his
Obstinacy at last overcame our Patience, and being resolved to run the hazard,
we rowed out of the Port in the middle of the Day, but kept near the Shore, in
order to Land if they should come to Attack us. But as these Cowardly
Barbarians seldom Attack any but whom they believe either not to dare or to be
able to cope with them, our resolute Behavior put them to a stand, so that
imagining us to be stronger than we were, they had not the Courage to come near
us. But this was not the only danger that threatened us, for we had not gone
much further when espying another Vessel riding at a good distance from us near
the Shore, put us into a great consternation; our Nahers and Mariners having
assured us that it was without the least doubt a Corsair Ship, we entered upon
a Consultation what to do at this emergency, whether it were not the safest way
for us to get a-shoar, and stay there till the Corsair had quitted the Road, or
for us to go straightways on Foot to Tanor, and let our Vessel take the
convenience of the Night to escape the Pirate. But there being no Houses at any
reasonable distance from the Shore, we did not think fit to put this Project in
execution, but setting the best face we could upon the matter, rowed as near
the Shore as we could in the same manner as we had done before; and thus with
our Arms ready to receive the Pirate, if he should come to Attack us, we passed
unmolested betwixt him and the Shore, and Arrived safely the same Evening at
Tanor.

CHAP. III.
Of Tanor.
TAnor is the principal Town of a petty Kingdom, which has given it its Name;
it is 5 Leagues distant to the South from Calicut. It wants the convenience of
a River, the Ships that are bound to this place being obliged to ride in the
Road where there is tolerable good riding, but only in the Summer. The
Inhabitants of the place are Mohammedan Merchants, who, most of them are very
Rich. On the very Sea side there are two small Towns Inhabited by Fishermen,
whereof those of one are Christians, those of the other Pagans. Near the first
of these two you see a small Church standing in a Churchyard, where stands a
very high Cross. The King of Tanor keeps his Court at about a League's distance
from thence, his Mohammedan and Pagan Subjects living under the Jurisdiction of
a Governor of his, who has not the least Authority over the Christians, who
are under the Government of him that has the oversight over the abovementioned
Church, which has long since been in the possession of the Jesuits, who from
time to time send hither their Missionaries, to labor in the Conversion of
these Idolatrous people to the Christian Faith. He that was there at the time
when I passed that way, was called Matthias Fernandez, who having lived there
for these 7 or 8 Years together, is perfectly well versed in the Language of
the Country.

Though the whole Kingdom of Tanor be not above 8 or 10 Leagues long, and as many
broad, yet is their King as Absolute as any in Malabar, not being Tributary to
any other. He has always kept a very strict Alliance with the Portugueses, and
these have been as careful to maintain a constant good understanding with him.
King of Tanor is an Enemy to the Dutch.
The differences which were then betwixt us and the Hollanders, being risen to
that pitch, that we expected nothing else but to come quickly to an open
Rupture, and this Prince having always been a Mortal Enemy of the Dutch, we
endeavored by all means possible to gain his good Will, for which purpose we
made him some Presents in the name of the French East India Company.

All the Territories belonging to the King of Tanor, are extremely Fertile, the
Air is very wholesome, there is great plenty of Fish and extraordinary good
Hunting. The ordinary Food of the Inhabitants is for the most part Fish, unless
it be some persons much advanced in Years, who eat Fowl and sometimes a Kid,
Beef being looked upon by these as well as the other Pagans as a forbidden
Fruit. After we had dispatched our Business at Tanor, we Traveled by Land to
Calicut, whither we had sent our Almadre or small Vessel before us.

CHAP. IV.
Our Departure from Tanor.
WE did not set out till pretty late from Tanor, which was the reason we could
not Travel farther that Night than to Chali, Chali.
two Leagues distant from Tanor, where we lay that Night. This is a Market Town
belonging to the King of Samorin, where besides the Merchants there live a good
number of Tives. It lies on a River capable of bearing Ships of 100 Tuns
Burden, but is so pestered with Pirates, that it is not very safe for
Merchantmen to enter here. We being lodged at a Tive's House, we had the
opportunity of seeing them perform one of these ridiculous Ceremonies used
among the Pagans, for the Recovery of their Kindred, in case of any dangerous
Sickness.

A Nephew of our Host much Beloved by him, was fallen dangerously ill of a
Fever, and in spite of all the Remedies that were used by his Uncle, (who had
left nothing unattempted which might conduce to the Recovery of his Health,)
was by the violence of his Distemper reduced to that Condition, that his Life
was despaired of. All other Remedies having proved ineffectual, he had recourse
to the Mysterious Superstition of his Religion, and having sent for the Bramans
belonging to the next Temple, to try their Skill with the Patient, they sent
one of their Number, who began the Ceremony with crying silence to the Company.

After this he ordered a large Wooden Bowl to be brought to him, which was laid
all over the bottom with Leaves; into this he put some fresh Cocoes, some
dried, some Bananas, some Jagre, or Sugar of the Cocoes, some boiled Rice, and
some broiled Fish, besides a good cup full of Tarry, or Palm Tree Wine. The
Braman put in every thing with his own hand, muttering out certain Words, and
making most extravagant and ridiculous Postures. Round the great Bowl he stuck
many Wax Candles lighted, and betwixt each of them a stick of the same
thickness tied all round about with Flowers. Then the Braman fell to his
Prayers, which being ended, he called to one of the Standers by, who gave him
one of the lighted Wax Candles, which he put in his Mouth. This was no sooner
done, but he appeared to be all in a Rapture, making most strange Postures and
Faces, this being the very nick of time, when they believe him to be inspired,
and look upon what he pronounces, as Oracles, whether the Patient be to live or
die. However it was, this Devil happened to be none of the most skilful; for he
foretold that the young Man should recover his Health, which proved quite
contrary, for he died in a few days after.

We went the next day from Chali, and arrived the day following early at
Calicut, where we found the English busy in removing after the late
inundation; we traveled a league beyond it the same day, where we lodged that
Night, and the next following at Bargara, from whence we returned the next day
to Calicut.

CHAP. V.
Our Journey to Batiepatan.
HAving received the welcome News, English Ships arrived at Batiepatan.
that the English Ships, which the English East India Company sends every year
to the Coast of Malabar to fetch Pepper, were safely arrived at Batiepatan; I
resolved with another Friend of mine to go thither, to learn if possible some
News out of Europe, and from Suratte; we entered the River of Batiepatan before
Noon, and came up as high as the English House by that time they were just
going to Dinner. The English Factory of Batiepatan, is above a League and a
half from the Seaside, built upon a rising Ground just on the very Riverside,
which will not bear any Ships of Burden. The English Commissary, and the
Captains there present, entertained us very handsomely, so that we staid there
all the rest of the day; our Mariners having in the mean while refreshed
themselves, and fearing if we staid any longer, we should be hard put to it
with drinking; we parted at Night, and came safely the next Morning to Tilcery,
where, in a few days after, the English returned us the visit.

But as these diversions were but very rare among us, so I began to be weary of
this kind of Life, which had made me write several times to the Directors of
our East India Company, to desire them to remove me from Tilcery, being fully
resolved to leave it without their permission, if in a little time I did not
receive a favorable answer.

In the mean while we took another Journey to Tanor, where we heard the news of
the death of the young Tive, of whom I spoke before, to have been cured by the
Braman. We only stayed here for a few days, when having dispatched our
business, we returned to Tilcery by Sea.

As it is very dangerous to coast it along the shore, by reason of the great
number of the Corsairs, that are watching thereabouts for pray, we put out to
Sea, where they are not so frequent. But scarce had we sailed a League, when we
were on a sudden over whelmed with such an infinite number of Fish, as big as
our Mackerel, which threw themselves into our Vessel, that the diversion we
took at it at first sight, not long after turned into fear of being sunk by
their weight. We were fain to set all hands to work to throw them out as fast
as possibly we could, which however would have stood us but in little stead, if
we had not avoided the danger, by making toward the shore with all speed we
could. Having rid our selves thus of our unwelcome Guests, troublesome only by
their number we put to Sea again a second time, and arrived at Calicut about
Midnight.

We entertained the next day the English with all their Domestics, and our
selves with some of the Fish that were come into our Vessel the day before;
besides which, our Ships Crew sold whole Baskets full of them to the
Inhabitants. We did not stay here above two days, and having sent back our
Vessel to Tanor, we traveled back by Land to Tilcery.

CHAP. VI.
The Return of the Sieur de Flacour.
THE Sieur de Flacour returning from Sirinpatan toward the end of November,
gave us an exact account of the Danger and Fatigues he had undergone after I
had left him upon his Journey, which had taken him up five and thirty days,
though he had not above thirty Leagues to Travel. Besides which he had been in
danger of being drowned by the violence of the Currents of those Rivers which
he had been forced to pass, having lost several of his Company by these
Disasters. But the good success of his Negotiation, having made him a full
amends for the troubles he had suffered, he remembered the past dangers with a
greal deal of Satisfaction.

The Commodities brought from Sirinpatan are the finest Callicoes, Commodities
brought from Sirinpatan.
Sandal Wood, which grows in such a quantity there abouts, that the Kings and
other great Men make use of it in their Buildings. There is also in that
Country, good store of a Native Salt Petre, which is bought very cheap and
wants but little refining. The Sieur de Flacour showed us some patterns of
these Callicoes, half as fine again as those of Suratte for the same price.

We were busied the remaining part of this year in buying up of Pepper, to be
ready at hand against the arrival of our Vessels, which were expected daily to
come into our Road; and in the beginning of January, the Ship called the
Providence, arrived to take in part of her Cargo in that Commodity. The
Captains name was Mr. Petit, who had not above seven Frenchmen on Board, the
rest of his Ships Crew being all Mahometans. He informed us of the arrival of
the Sieur de Blot, Director of the French East India Company in those parts,
and that he had sent his Orders to the Sieur de la Serine to quit Malabar, and
to return to Suratte. I was not a little out of Humor to find that I had not
been mentioned by him, but as all the Gentlemen that had any Command here, were
my particular Friends, so I obtained without much difficulty their consent of
going in the same Ship with the Sieur de Serine, being resolved not to spend
the best part of my younger days, nor to confine my curiosity to this remote
corner of the Indies.

The Sieur de Flacour was the very person who was unwilling to lose my Company,
and to stay behind alone; but being convinced of the necessity of my departure,
I prepared my self to go along with the above mentioned Captain Petit, so soon
as he should return from Tanor and Calicut, whither he was sailed to take in
such Commodities, as we had bought up before.

In the mean while, One of the Kings Ships arrives.
one of the Kings Ships, carrying sixty pieces of Cannon, commanded by Captain
du Clos, came to an Anchor in our Road. He was come out in Company with two
Pinks. They were to join the Sieur de la Hay, who was come out of France a
year before them, having on board a good Sum to pay the Troops in the service
of the East India Company. They being separated from one another, some days
before by stress of Weather, the Captain was at an uncertainty whether the
Pinks were behind or before him, and perceiving our White Flag, they came to an
Anchor in the Road, but did not stay longer than four and twenty hours, during
which they were provided with all manner of refreshments. The King's Ship was
scarce got out of sight, being not above four hours under Sail, when Captain de
Petit returned with his Ship from Calicut, and we were getting every thing
ready to set sail the next day.

The same day toward Evening, we perceived a small Vessel which was making
toward our Road, and sent out her Chaloup, which did not come till late at
Night on Board the Province. There was in the Chaloup a Lieutenant belonging to
one of the Pinks, which had been separated from the King's Ship, commanded by
Captain de Clos, and the Lieutenant having been informed, that we were to set
Sail the next Morning by break of day, did not go ashore, and at parting it was
agreed, that we should weigh our Anchors together, of which we were to
advertise one another by a certain Signal agreed on betwixt us, which was the
discharging of a Cannon.

CHAP. VII.
Our departure from Tilcery.
IT was on the 20th. day of January, early in the Morning, when having given
the Signal to the Captain of the Pink, we weighed Anchor at the same time, and
with a favorable Gale, blowing from the Land, put to Sea, and safely passed
the Bar of Batiepatan, where we were to take in some Sand or Wood, which the
Sieur de Flacour had sent thither for that purpose. We were fain to stay here
two days, and when we were just ready to set sail, we discovered a large Vessel
which our Mohammedan Seamen assured us to be one of the Indian Corsairs, who
infest these Coasts.

Having got every thing ready, we made all the sail after him we could,
ordering our Pink to enclose him on one side, whilst we did the same on the
other. But after we had chased him for some hours, we lost sight of him, he
being a nimbler Saile^ that we.

Some of us went afterward on Board the Pink, where they were much rejoiced to
hear news of the King's Ship, we spoke of before, in hopes they should soon
meet with her on these Coasts. We kept all Day long out at Sea, but toward
Night constantly approached nearer the Shore, to take the advantage of the
Wind, which blows from the Shore always after Midnight; in three days we came
within sight of Mangalor, where we intended to refresh our selves for a little
time.

With much ado, They are in danger of being lost.
we got safely into the Road of Mangalor, by Eight a-Clock at Night, but the
Pink did not come to an Anchor there till the next Morning; for fear of
sticking upon the Sands, if they should come in the Nightime, as we did, who
trusting to the skill of our Mariners, who pretended to be well acquainted with
that port, were in great danger of being lost; for having put our selves in the
Night into a Chaloup, in order to go on shore, we missed the Passage, which is
the only way, through which one may safely enter the River. We expected every
moment to have been split upon the Rocks, which lay hidden just under the
surface of the Water, but at last we had the good luck to escape and get safely
on shore.

The Pink came to Anchor the next morning just by our ship, and the Officers
being all met the next day on shore, we passed that and the next following day
in what diversion the place would afford, and we should scarce have parted so
soon, if the Sieur de Barbot, Commander of the Pink, had not been in so much
have, being impatient to join the French Fleet, commanded by Monsieur de la
Hay.

Mangalor is one of the most considerable places in the Kingdom of Canara,
Mangalor deprived.
eighteen leagues distant from Batiepatan. It has a most excellent Road for
ships to Anchor in, and whilst the Rains last, the ships may enter the River
without any hazard, it being all that time very deap and broad; the most danger
is at its entrance, by reason of the Sand-banks which cannot well be passed
without a great hazard, unless at Spring-Tydes. The Town is Situate upon a
rising Ground, inhabited by Pagans and Mohammedan Merchants; and near it you see
the Factory of the Portugueses which they call in their Language Feituria.

Formerly all the Forts which are near the ports of the Kingdom of Canara,
belonged to the Portugueses, but the Canarins as well as most of the other
Indian People, thinking their Pride insupportable, took their opportunity,
whilst they were engaged in a War with the Hollanders, to drive them from
thence.

The Portugueses, Portugueses chased out of Canara*
who knew the importance of these places, after the Peace concluded betwixt
them and the Dutch, have left no stone unturned to regain from the Canarins
these places; for which purpose they sent a Fleet on that coast, which ruined
the commerce of that Kingdom to that degree, that it was reduced to the utmost
misery, which obliged the King of Canara to sue for Peace to Lewis de Mendoza,
then Viceroy of the Indies for the King of Portugal, offering the restitution
of the two most considerable Forts of Mangalor and Barcalor. The Portugueses
accepted the conditions, but thinking it two chargeable to entertain two strong
Garrisons at such a distance, they were contented with erecting new Factories
in these places, reserving to themselves half the profits of all the customs
paid from goods, exported or imported in these two Ports.

The subjects of the King of Canara, The Kingdom of Canara.
are for the most part Pagans, the rest are Mahometans: They don't follow the
Laws and Customs of the Malabars, especially in what relates to the differences
and degrees of their Tribes; they are seldom without being engaged in a War
with the Neighboring Malabars, where the Canarins commonly are worsted. They
live in most respects according to the Laws and Customs of the Pagan Indians,
who are subjects of the Great Mogul, the King of Canara being his Tributary.

The Canarins are of a Tawny Complexion, and middle sized, wear their Hair
long, and Cloth themselves not unlike the Indians of Suratte. They are most of
them very good Soldiers, and most expert in Mining, besides that they don't
Fight so disorderly as the Malabars, but they are not so brave, being more
addicted to Commerce, for which reason, you meet with them in all parts of the
Indies, to vend their Commodities.

The manner of Solemnizing their Feasts being the most extravagant in the
World, Their Feasts.
deserves to be taken notice of here: At these Solemnities they carry their
Idols in Triumph, being placed in a Wagon, adorned on all sides with Flowers.
But what is the most surprising, is, that there are several sharp crooked Iron
hooks fastened to the Wheels upon which these poor Superstitious wretches throw
themselves, and thus to signalize their Zeal, cause themselves to be turned
round with the Wheels till they are cut to pieces.

Others lie sprawling upon the Ground, on purpose to be crushed to pieces by
the force of the Wheels and the weight of the Wagon, which passes over their
Bodies. All which is done out of a vain belief they have that by thus
Sacrificing themselves for the Honor of their Gods, they shall enjoy the bliss
of Immortality hereafter.

The manner of Executing their Criminals, How they Execute their Criminals.
as it is very Cruel, so it ought not to be passed by in silence: They strip
them quite Naked, and thus tied Hand and Feet, expose them upon the Sands to
the Sun, where they die a most miserable and lingering Death, being consumed by
degrees by the violent heat of the Sun and the Flies. And for fear that the
place where they are laid should grow cool and afford them some intervals in
their Misery, they take care to remove them frequently, till such time they
expire amidst the most cruel Torments.

The Air of Canara is very pure and sufficiently pleasant, and the Country though
not of a very great extent, extremely Fertile, this part of the Country
furnishing all Europe with Rice, besides which there are great quantities of
Rice exported from hence to Achem, Bantam, Socotora, Moqua, Mascate, Balsora,
Mosambique, Bombase, and to several other places in the Indies.

CHAP. VIII.
Our Departure from Mangalor.
WE set Sail from Mangalor the next day after the Pink, Commanded by the Sieur
the Barbot, and after we had Sailed 24 Hours, passed in sight of Barcalor, but
did not enter the Port, being resolved to come to an Anchor that Night, if
possible, in the Road of Mirscou.

Immediately after our Arrival, we went to pay our respects to the Governor
Cojabdalle, of whom we have had occasion to speak before, who, since we saw him
last, had been involved in great Troubles. He had been accused of Extorsions,
and other Malversation, whereupon, having been Summoned to appear before his
Prince, he was Condemned to a Prison, where he suffered great hardships for
some time; but having at last found means to justify himself against these
Aspersions, the King his Master had restored him to all his Offices and
Dignities he enjoyed before his Disgrace. The discontent occasioned by his late
Troubles might easily have been read in his Face, when we saw him,
notwithstanding which, he received us with a great deal of Civility; telling
us, that it was a great dissatisfaction to him to see our East India Company to
Abandon the place where he was Governor, and to see them transport it to any
Port where he had no Authority, and consequently was not in a Capacity to serve
them. We returned him Thanks for his Kindness, with assurance, that we were not
without hopes of returning thither in a little time, and to settle the concerns
of the Company upon a more solid foundation than before, under his Government;
at which, he was extremely pleased, and writ a Letter to the Directors of our
Company at Suratte, to Invite them to Mirscou, with great promises of all the
assistance he was able to give them.

After two days stay, we set Sail again from Mirscou, and the next Morning
early discovered a Squadron of 13 Ships, They meet with Monsieur de la Hay.
which proved to be the French Squadron, Commanded by Monsieur de la Hay, of
which we have made mention before. The Admiral with another Ship coming up with
us, informed our Captain that the Sieur de Caron, one of the Directors of our
Company in the Indies, was on Board one of these Vessels, he went in a Chaloup
to pay him a Visit, and after his return, told us, that the French Squadron was
bound to the South, and that there was a discourse among them of creating
Factories for the French East India Company, in the Isle of Ceylon; so we left
them, Steering our Course toward Goa.

We came the same Night within sight of the Forts, which are at the Entrance of
the River of Goa, but being not very well acquainted with the Coast, which is
accounted very dangerous, we did not come to an Anchor till early in the
Morning the next day, being the last of January.

CHAP. IX.
Our Arrival at Goa.
THE City of Goa is Situate under the 15th Degree of North Latitude; it
formerly belonged to the King of Visapour, but is now in the possession of the
Portuguese.

The River of Goa is one of the finest in the whole World, no Ships of what
Burden soever, but may go up without the least danger to the City.

This River is as it were divided into two Branches, The River of Goa. Isle of
Goa.
by an Isle called Goa, which has given its Name to the City, which is Built
upon it. The Isle is of an Oval Figure, about 7 Leagues in Circuit; the most
narrow point of the Island extends it self into the open Sea; Parallel with the
two Capes of the Continent, which makes a double Harbor equally Commodious for
Vessels on either side.

The Southern point of the Continent is called by the Portugueses, Cabo de
Rama, where they have a strong Fort, Fort Mourmougon.
called Fort de Mourmougon, which being always provided with a good Garrison,
and Artillery proportionable to defend the Entrance of the Harbor on that side.

On the utmost point of the Island, which separates the two Harbors, there is
another Fort which has taken its Name from a Monastery of the Recollects, (a
sort of Franciscan Friars,) who have Dedicated their Church to the Virgin Mary,
and is by the Portuguese called Nossa Senhora Docaba.

On the Northern Cape of the Continent lies the Fort of Agoada, Fort of Agoada.
so called, because there is most excellent Water thereabouts, which furnishes
all Ships that come into that Port.

The Fort of Agoada is the most considerable, both for its strength and
bigness, this being the most convenient Harbor of the two for Anchorage, where
Ships cannot pass the Chanel but within Cannon Shot of the Fort, as they are
either going or coming from Goa. The Governors of Goa have here a House so
Magnificently Built that it would pass for a fine Palace, even in Europe, where
they divert themselves frequently.

About 3 Leagues from the City there are several other lesser Forts, where they
keep no Garrisons, and on both sides of the Shore you see abundance of fine
Country Houses, belonging to the Inhabitants of Goa, and several very large and
stately Villages, by the Portugueses called Aldea's; the vast number of Gardens
which are seen near the City being the whole Year round, stored with several
sorts of Fruits, Flowers, and Leaves, afford a very pleasant prospect.

There is about a League from the City of Goa, a very large Village or Aldea
called Pangim, surpassing in Beauty many goodly Cities, where persons of
Quality have their Palaces, to shelter themselves here against the heats of the
Sun; and the Gardens being in all respects suitable to the Grandeur of the
edifices, appear very surprising to Strangers.

Half way betwixt Pangim and Goa, is the Church called Notra Senhora de
Ribaudar, concerning which the Portugueses relate the following History.

A Portuguese Ship from Lisbon, being come as far as the Cape of Good-Hope, was
there surprised toward Night by a most violent Tempest, so that the Mariners
expected nothing but Death every Moment, but the next Morning by break of day,
they found their Ship riding at Anchor in the River of Goa, just opposite to
the place, where in Memory of the Miracle, the abovementioned Church is Built
on the River side. To perpetuate the Memory of so surprising an Adventure there
is a Ship Painted upon the Church-Door, and upon the very Banks of the River
are to be seen 2 large Crosses made of Stone, which they say are of the same
length with the Ship, that performed this Miraculous Voyage, which without
question was the nimblest Sailer that ever was known, since she Sailed 2000
Leagues in one Night.

La Casa de Polvera, or the Powder-House, is without the City, where they keep
their Criminals Condemned to Imprisonment; which is also the Prison of all such
Malabar Pirates as they take at Sea.

All such Vessels as come to Goa, betwixt the 20th day of May and the last of
August are obliged to enter the River by the Southern Channel, where lies the
Fort of Mourmougon, no body being permitted to pass during that time, through
the North Channels, near the Fort of Agoada, which however is open for all the
rest of the Year.

Those Ships that Arrive at Goa in a proper Season of what bulk soever, may
without the least danger go up as high as the City, and ride at another just
before the Viceroy's Palace.

CHAP. X.
Of the City of Goa.
THIS City was once one of the most flourishing of all the Indies, but has lost
much of its former greatness in the last War betwixt the Portugueses and Dutch.
It is the most considerable the Portugueses are Masters of in all the Eastern
parts; being the Residence of their Viceroy of the Indies, and where they keep
their highest Court of Justice. One half of it is Built upon an ascent upon the
very Bank of the River, the other part lies in a bottom, where the heat is very
excessive, which makes the Inhabitants retire into the circumjacent Country
Villages, during the violence of the Hot Season. Description of the City of Goa.
For the rest, the Marketplaces and Streets of Goa are very fine; it is
surrounded with a Wall, but of little Strength, the Avenues tending to the City
being so well guarded, as not to stand in need of any other Works to defend it
against any Attempts of an Enemy. The High Court of Justice is kept in the
Viceroy's Palace; this Court is by the Portugueses called Ralacam; and it is
to this Court that all the other Subaltern Courts of Goa, and other parts of
the Indies, under the Jurisdiction of the Portugueses may bring their Appeals.

The Houses of Goa are generally very handsomely Built, Houses of Goa.
but somewhat Dark at their Windows, being made out of certain Oister-shells
very thin cut.

The Cathedral is Dedicated to St. Catharine, and is a vast Structure, but
rudely Built. Next to it is the Archbishop's Palace, and the Bishops, or
rather the great Vicar's House, who is not inferior to any Bishop, and is
called by the Portugueses Bispo d'Anelt.

Not far from this you see the Prison, called Atiouvar, where no body is
Committed but upon the account of Ecclesiastical concerns.

Just opposite to the Cathedral in a great Square, stands that Famous House,
whose very Name makes many thousands Tremble in those parts; this is the Court
of Inquisition, called by the Portugueses, Santa Casaou Casa d'o santo Officio.

There is also a Nunnery in the City, where the Nuns live with a great deal of
Austerity, without making use of the same liberty as they do in Portugal; and
it is to their Capacity and that of the holy Inquisition, the Portugueses own
themselves chiefly indebted for the great affluence of their Fortunes, and
other conveniences they enjoy at Goa.

Besides their Parish Churches, there are many Monasteries of several Orders.
The Jesuits have here 3 fine Churches, in one of which, the Corpse of St.
Francis Xavier is deposited; besides which, they have 3 most Magnificent
Houses, each of them being fit for the reception of a King, with abundance of
the best Lands round the City, from whence they draw a vast yearly Revenue. All
their Churches are very finely Built, but the Hospital exceeds the rest.

The Church of the Th^otins, though not the most Magnificent, yet is the neatest
and most regular of all the Churches in Goa; this Church is Dedicated to Nossa
Sen Hora de Divina Providentia.

The Church called de Misericordia, has nothing remarkable beyond the rest, The
Charitable Society.
but the Society for whose sake this Church has been erected and has derived
its Name, deserves particularly to be taken notice of here.

This Society is by the Portugueses called Irmandal de Misericordia, and its
Members Irmaous da Misericordia; the chief Citizens of Goa, and persons of the
best Quality, not excepting the Viceroy himself, are Ambitious of being
Members of this Fraternity, who Celebrate two great Feasts every Year.

The Holy-Thursday, because on that day our Savior gave to the World the most
evident proof of his Humiliation, when he washed the Feet of the Apostles; and
the other is Celebrated on the day when the Virgin Mary came to visit her
Cousin; this last is performed with more Solemnity than the first, and as they
go in Procession, they wear a kind of Black Surplice.

The next day after the last Feast, the whole Society meets, Officers belonging
to this Society.
when they choose their Officers. First they have a Prior, whom they call
Prouvedor; formerly none but Noblemen were chosen to that Dignity, but of late
the Rich Merchants are chosen as well as the Noblemen. All the Contributions
here are made for the Advantage of the Poor, and there is scarce a Prouvedor,
who at the Years end does not contribute 20000 Livres of his own. Besides the
Prouvedor, there is a Treasurer and Steward; a Prouvedor or Overseer of the
Prisoners, all which, are chosen out of the Members of this Society. The
Treasurer disposes of the Alms among the Poor, as the Overseer of the Prisoners
sollicites their Business in causes both Civil and Criminal, and often procures
their Pardon.

The Prouvedor General's Office is to manage the Business of the whole Society,
to assist underhand Widows, Orphans, and all others that are in a low
Condition. The Members of this Society are obliged to visit the Poor and Sick,
as also the Prisoners, to Bury the Dead, to assist Criminals when they go to
Execution, and to give them what Comfort they can even to the last Gasp, and to
cause Masses to be said for them after they have suffered the Law. They choose
every Year new Officers, by which means, every one of the Members is in a
probability of bearing his share, and though all these Offices are chargeable,
there is very few but what are very eager after them.

Charity is the whole foundation of this Noble and most Glorious Society; and
there is scarce a City, no not a Borough of note, under the Jurisdiction of
the Portugueses, but what has a Church Dedicated to the same use, with some
Revenues to be applied to the same purpose with this Society, though for the rest
they have no dependence on one another.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Inhabitants of Goa.
THE Inhabitants of Goa may conveniently be divided into several kinds: The
first are the true Portugueses, whom they call Reinots; the second are the
Mestices, Several sorts of Inhabitants in Goa.
begotten betwixt a Portuguese and an Indian Woman, or a Negroe, the last of
these too much exceed the others in number. There are besides this abundance of
Indians, who having Abandoned their Superstitious Idolatry, are turned Roman
Catholics. The Slaves they call Cafres, who are most Indians. There are also
at Goa some Mahometans and Banyans, who are tolerated by the Portugueses, by
reason of the advantages they receive from them, by way of Commerce. They enjoy
the same Freedom with the rest, but are not permitted to make public
profession of their Religion, which if they do, they are put under the
Inquisition, and are treated like Christian Apostates.

Persons of Quality are carried in Palanquins by their Slaves, and seldom are
seen on Horseback, unless it be upon extraordinary occasions, as to Conduct
the Viceroy into the Country, or to assist at the running of the Ring, or
Bull-fightings.

The Slaves at Goa not wanting convenience to Desert their Masters, Slaves at
Goa.
and to shelter themselves in the Adjacent Provinces, where they are out of
their reach, makes them not to be treated so harshly as in some other parts,
which makes these Barbarians very unruly and insolent. They frequently Rob on
the Highways, and though they are not permitted to wear any thing else about
them but a Cane, yet they commonly knock Passengers on the Head before they Rob
them.

A certain Gentleman coming one day alone from his Country House, near Goa, was
set upon by one of these Negroe Slaves, who threatened to knock his Brains out
if he did not immediately surrender his Money and Clothes. The Portuguese had a
Sword and Dagger by his side, but the other having surprised him unawares, and
holding up his Cane ready to strike if he made the least motion, he found
himself not in a condition to put himself in a posture of defense, without most
imminent danger of being killed. And finding no other remedy than to surrender,
he cunningly, but in a careless manner, let drop some of his Money, and whilst
the Slave was busy in taking it up, took this opportunity to draw his Dagger
wherewith he dispatched him presently.

It would be superfluous to enlarge here upon the Manners and Customs of the
Portugueses, they being too well known in these parts to deserve a particular
Description. There are very few but what are sufficiently sensible that the
Portugueses in general have these three Qualities belonging to them: Genius of
the Portugueses.
To be Zealous to the highest degree of Superstition; to be Amorous to a degree
of Madness, and Jealous beyond all reason. Neither will it appear strange, if
the Ladies of Goa are as tractable and obliging to handsome Men, as those of
Lisbon. It Is true, they are watched as narrowly as is possible to be done, but
they seldom want wit to deceive their Keepers, when they are resolved to taste
of the forbidden Fruit; and they are the most revengeful Creatures in the
World, if they happen to be disappointed in their Expectation.

I cannot but remember a certain Amorous Intrigue which happened at the same time
when I was at Goa. Ladies of Goa.
It seems a Lady of this City, had cast her Eyes upon a certain young English
Gentleman, who was at that time at Goa, about some Business concerning their
East India Company. Her Heart being easily susceptible of Love, the very first
sight of this Stranger, had made so lively an impression upon it, that she
could not rest satisfied till she had sent one of her Female Slaves, (no novice
in the procuring Trade,) to desire the English Man to give her a visit; the
Slave sufficiently acquitted her self of her Charge, telling the Young
Gentleman, that he had the best opportunity in the World, of taking his
Satisfaction, her Lady's Husband being abroad, so that the English Man overcome
by her entreaties and persuasions, promised to come at the appointed time, at
which she being overjoyed returned to her Mistress to bring her the welcome
News that her Gallant would certainly be with her according to her appointment.

The Lady being one of those that cannot bear delays without much impatience,
made the poor Slave stand Sentry two Hours before the appointed time, to
receive her Lover, and Conduct him to her Apartment. But whether it was that
the English Man dreading the Jealousy of the Portugueses, did not think it
worth his while to venture his Life for a chance bit, or that some other reason
hindered him, he did not make his personal appearance, according to his promise;
so that the poor Slave after she had kept her post till Midnight, returned
disconsolate to her Mistress, who being put beyond all Patience, by reason of
her disappointment, revenged her self upon the Slave, whose Back paid for all;
and she would certainly have felt the most direful effects of her fury, if she
had not promised she would go the next Morning to find out the English Man, to
upbraid him with the breach of his Word, and not to leave him till she had
engaged him to comply with her desires.

The Negroe Slave as it happened had the good Fortune to meet with the English
Man, unto whom, she related in a most ample manner how she had been treated by
her Mistress, occasioned by his neglect or breach of Word, most earnestly
entreating him only to afford her Mistress the favor of one visit, without
which, she would be in danger of being torn to pieces by this passionate body.
He promised, out of Complaisance, to come very shortly to pay her a visit, but
performed his promise no better than the first time, being obliged to leave Goa
in a few days after.

The Portugueses and Mestices wear their Clothes in the Indies after the same
manner as they do in Portugal, except that they use no Stockings, their
Breeches reaching down to their Ankles, the better to defend themselves against
the burning Heat of that Climate.

But the Goa Ladies Dress is different from that of the Ladies of Lisbon. Their
Dress.
They wear a kind of half Smocks, of the clearest and finest Muslin, which
serves more to keep them from being incommoded by the Flies, than to cover
their Bodies. They don't reach below the Waste, and their Sleeves come quite
down to their Wrists. Their Petticoats are of fine White Callicoe, scarce
covering half their Legs, over which, when they go abroad, they wear according
to their Quality, some Silk pieces of Stuff, which they wind twice round them,
and reaches down below their Ankles; they don't wear Stockings no more than the
Men, and instead of Shoes make use of Slippers. They are generally carried
abroad in Palanquins, and never appear at Church without a Veil, which covers
their Face and some part of their Bodies; they are debarred the Conversation of
Men, unless it be now and then with their nearest Relations.

There is a great number of Clergymen in Goa, but there are more Negroe
Priests than the Portugueses among them, they wear long Cassocks, and to all
outward appearance live a very regular Life. Every Monastery has its House
belonging to it, where they dispose of their Slaves; and I have seen the
Friars, during the excessive heat of the Season, Cloth themselves in Taffata
of the same Color, the Monks wear in Europe according to the Institution of
their respective Orders.

CHAP. XII.
Concerning our stay at Goa.
THere are in the River of Goa many very pleasant and most fruitful small
Islands, and on the Shore of the Continent, (being under the Jurisdiction of
the Sevagi, whom we have mentioned before,) a most curious Fountain surrounded
on all sides with Trees, whither the Ladies of Goa go in gilt Boats to divert
themselves in the cool of the Evening.

The first thing we did after our Arrival at Goa, was to visit Father Cornelius
de St. Cyprian, Prior of the discalceated Carmelites, who being our Countryman
showed us all the Respect and Civility in the World; the day after we went to
see Mr. Martin a rich French Merchant, with whom we stayed three days; and who
among other diversions, showed us the Fountain I spoke of before, where the
Ladies of Goa pass their Evenings; as we came thither we found the places round
about it taken up with several Companies of the fair Sex, so that we were
obliged to follow the custom of the Country, and out of respect to the Ladies
to remain at some distance till they were gone.

Mr. Martin had caused above 20 of the Indian Women Dancers to be conducted
thither, who showed their Activity by the light of several Torches, and
diverted us to our no small satisfaction a great part of the Night; several of
them being very handsome and extraordinary well shaped, some of our Company
entered with them in close Conversation, and Mr. Martin having thus entertained
us very handsomely, we took our Leave of him, and spent the next day in settling
our Business in order to our Departure from Goa.

CHAP. XIII.
Our Departure from Goa.
THE Wind being not very favorable to us as we Sailed out of the Harbor of
Goa, we could scarce reach that day within sight of Betageurta, a place Situate
about 8 Leagues to the North of Goa, and under the jurisdiction of the Prince
Sevagi; our intention was to have touched at Rajapour, but not being able to go
thither without much loss of time, we were obliged to go ashore at Achara, a
place likewise belonging to the Prince Sevagi, to take in fresh Provisions.

But as we were within a League of the Shore, we discovered 6 stout Vessels,
which we believing to belong to the Port of Achara, the Sieurs Petit, de la
Serine, and my self went with our Chaloup Manned only with 7 Mahometans, and an
Interpreter, to take a full view of them; but scarce were we come within Cannon
Shot, when we perceived them to be 6 Malabar Corsairs, who could have no less
than 1500 Men on Board.

Our Seamen being all Mahometans, They are in danger of being taken by the
Corsairs.
had less reason to be frighted at the danger that threatened us than we, who
being Christians, could not expect the least Mercy from these Barbarians,
notwithstanding which, they would have leaped overboard to save themselves with
Swiming, if we had not forced them with our Swords in hand to row to the Shore,
this being the only means to escape the danger into which we had thrown our
selves by our own imprudence and foolhardiness. The Seamen seeing us so
resolute plied their Oars so warily that in a very small time they brought us
without the reach of their Cannon, so that we got safely a-shoar, without
having received the least damage.

No sooner were we got a-shoar, but we were informed that the same Corsairs had
just before taken a Hoy belonging to the French East India Company, valued at
2000 l. Sterling, which they having sold to the Governor of Achara, we saw the
Vessel lying afterward in the River.

Though the Prince Sevagi, the Lord of this Port, was absolutely in our Interest,
yet all our Seamen being Mahometans, except only three French Men, we were
very uneasy about our Ship, for fear it should fall into the Hands of these
Corsairs. Mr. Petit the Captain had more reason to be concerned than all the
rest, he having left his Ship to go ashore in a place where he had no concerns
on the account of the Company; and to add to our affliction, the Wind being
quite contrary, we could not get back again to the Ship.

In this extremity, the Captain took a resolution suitable to the emergency of
our Affairs, which did not admit of any delay; for which reason he got into a
small Canoe, or Fisher-Boat, and leaving us a shore, was by two Fishermen
happily conducted to his Ship.

We had no sooner received this well-come news, but we found means to insinuate
into those that lived near the Seaside, that we were come hither on purpose to
ransom the Vessel, these Corsairs had taken before; that we had sent our
Captain on board to attack these Pirates, and that we having five and twenty
Guns ready mounted, and 150 men on Board, did not question but to give shortly
a very good account of them.

This Rhodomontado succeeded beyond expectation; for some of the Corsairs
having been informed of what we had related to the inhabitants, and seeing our
Ship to be in a readiness to set sail, they were so frightened thereat, that
they set up all the sail they could, and making the best of their way toward
the South, left a free passage for our Ship to enter the port of Achara.

After we had dispatched our business in this place, we set sail from thence
with a fair and fresh gale, which brought us the same day to the Entrance of
the River of Rajapour, of which I will say no more here, having had occasion to
speak of it before.

We set sail again the next day, and were scarce a League from the shore, when
to the North of us we discovered a Vessel, with the white Flag; she proved to
be the Vulture, belonging to the French East India Company, being ordered in
her return to France, to touch at Bantam, whither she was to carry my Lord
Bishop of Heliopolis, who was going to Siam; but was, much against his Will,
detained by the Spaniards in the Philippin Islands, and from thence conducted
into Spain, from whence he traveled through Italy into France; as may be seen
in the Relation Printed by order of the Fathers Missionaries.

We all went to pay our respect to this Prelate, and on St. Matthew's day heard
Mass on board of him. The Winds proving very contrary, all the rest of our
Yoyage to Suratte, which is not above fourscore Leagues from Rajapour, we were
above a month before we reached that Port, where we arrived the 20th. day of
March.

CHAP. XIV.
The arrival of the Ship called the Holy Ghost.
THE next day after our arrival in the Road of Suratte, we received orders to
enter the Port of Sovaly; and I having no occasion to stay on board, went a
shore and paid my respects to our Directors, the Sieurs de Blot, and Baron.

Soon after the Ship called the Holy Ghost, burden 600 Tuns, commanded by
Captain le Rokd, came to an Anchor in the Road of Suratte; she had on board the
Sieur de Goeron, Director General of the French East India Company, and his
Son, and had been near nine Months in her passage from France, having been
droven by tempestuous Weather among the Maldive Islands, from whence few Ships
escape.

The Scurvy was got so desperately among the whole Ships Crew, that they had
scarce hands enough left to manage the Sails. So soon as the Directors were
advertised of her arrival, they furnished her with skillful Pilates, which
conducted her into the Port of Sovaly. The sick Mariners being brought on
shore, were committed to my care, and what with the help of the Land-Air, and
other proper Remedies, very few of them but what recovered in a little time.

Orders being come in the mean while from the Directors, to get every thing in
readiness for her Voyage to Bantam, as also for the Parl, which being a Ship of
less Burden, and laden with Wheat and Soap, did set sail on the beginning of
May, and the Ship called the St. Francis, being sent before in April to the
Persian Coast, I had orders sent me, to get my self in readiness to go in the
Ship the Holy Ghost. We were just ready to set sail, expecting only our last
dispatches, when our Ship, notwithstanding she was but lately built, sprung a
leak, and drew abundance of Water, so that she was forced to be unloaden, and
being judged unfit for so great a Voyage, all her Cannon was taken out, and
ordered to be laid up in order to be refitted, but as she was entering the
River, she struck upon the Sands, and was staved to pieces in less than four
and twenty Hours.

The loss of so fine a Ship put us all out of humor, and the Directors being
willing to save some of her Rigging, several were employed for that purpose,
but to no effect, some of them being drowned in the attempt.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Death of Mr. Blot.
I Staid as long as the rainy Season lasted at Suratte, where there happened at
that time some differences betwixt the Directors, which however did not hinder
us from taking our pleasure our selves, as well as we could; but it was not
long before our Jollity was turned into Grief, by the sudden death of the Sieur
de Blot, one of the most considerable Persons of our Nation in those parts, who
being seized with a violent Fever, died after nine days sickness.

According to the custom of the Europeans in the Indies, Mr. de Blot's Funeral.
we invited all the chief Men of the English and Dutch to the Funeral, who
appeared there with all their attendance, as did also abundance of other
Merchants, both Armenians and Mahometans.

All the Fr^nch there present were in Mourning, some on Horseback, some in
Palanquins, who accompanied the Corpse, which was carried in a Mourning Coach to
the Churchyard, belonging to the French, which was at a Miles distance from
the City.

The Rains being more violent than usual this Winter Season, were followed by
most terrible inundations, which caused the Rivers to swell to an extraordinary
degree, so that abundance of Ships were forced from their Anchors by the
violence of the Current, some of them run a Ground, others were staved to
pieces. A Ship belonging to the Great Mogul was forced with only one Man in her
out of the River, and was never heard of since: Another Ship of 1800 Tuns
belonging to the same Prince, was carried by the violence of the Waters so far
upon the Land, that after the Waters were: sunk, she was found a League from
the River side.

Much about the same time we received intelligence, Mr. de la Hay makes a
descent at St. Thomas.
That the Sieur de la Hay had touched in the Isle of Ceylon, in order to
establish a French Factory there; but having been disappointed in his design,
he was sailed from thence to St. Thomas in the Kingdom of Golconda, to furnish
himself with necessary Provisions; but some of his Men who were sent on shore
for that purpose, having been very ill treated by the Inhabitants, he had
landed his Forces and taken their Capital City, which he de^ended with great
Bravery against all the Indian Forces thereabouts, that he laid Seige to the
place. This surprising News would scarce have found credit among us, if it had
not been confirmed by several Letters.

About the beginning of October, the Sieur Fermanel who was Captain of the Ship
called the St. James, received orders to get every thing ready for his
departure, and I being commanded to go on board the same Ship, we departed from
Suratte without knowing whither we were bound, our orders being sealed up and
not to be opened till we were twenty Leagues at Sea of off Suratte.

It was our Opinion, that the French Directors having received secret
intelligence, that we were come to a rupture with Holland, and knowing our
selves much inferior in strength to them in the Indies, they were afraid; for
the Ship called the St. Francis, which being of no small consequence to the
Company they had ordered our Ship, to convoy her in her return to Suratte.

The orders being opened at the appointed place, we found our selves to have
been pretty near the Mark, for we were commanded to stop and search all such
Ships as we met, that were weaker than we, and to take all the Dutch Ships we
could.

The Winds proved very changeable, notwithstanding which, our Voyage proved
pretty successful. We came within sight of the Cape of Rasalgate, situate on
the South Side of the entrance into the Persian Gulf, and after we had doubled
the Cape, The City of Mascate.
we sailed all along the Arabian Coast, and passed in sight of the City of
Mascate, very considerable for its most advantageous Situation.

Here it was that the Portugueses had formerly a strong Fort, which being
judged impregnable, made them Masters of the whole Persian Gulf; this so
advantageous place the Portugueses lost by the avariciousness of him who
commanded in the Fort, who having sold the Provisions laid up for the use of
the Garrison, to the Arabians at an excessive price, in hopes of receiving
fresh supplies in a little time; the King of the Country took hold of this
opportunity, straightly Besieged the place, and forced the Portugueses to
surrender at Discretion. The Portugueses remain ever since at Enmity with these
Arabians, but have hitherto not been able to recover the Fort.

From hence we coasted it along to the Cape of Mosandan, where the Gulf begins
to be so straight, that the Land appears on both sides. Not far from this Cape
we discovered a Vessel, after which, pursuant to our orders, we made all the
sail we could to come up with her. But finding that she avoided our Company, we
gave her a Cannon Ball, and put up our Flag, when the Captain came on board of
us, and showed us his Pass from the French East India Company, by which it
appeared that she belonged to some Merchants of Suratte.

We came afterward in sight of the Isle of Areque, and it being a misty
Morning, we took it for that of Ormus; but we were soon undeceived as we came
nearer, and passed betwixt the two Islands of Areque and Cevichemiche, near the
last of which we were forced to come to an Anchor, by reason of a tempest that
surprised us hereabouts. This proved a most terrible Night to us, the Tempest
being so violent as to put us in fear of losing our Anchors, which if it had
happened, we must have infallibly split against the Rocks.

No sooner did day appear, but we left this dangerous place, and came to an
Anchor in the Road of Baudar Abasty, otherwise called Gameron, where we found
the St. Francis riding at Anchor, she having been there but two days before us;
she came last from Bassora, a City of Arabia, Situate upon the River Euphrates,
and was taken by the Turks in the Year 1669.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Gameron, and of Ormus.
BAudar Abasty is a City belonging to the King of Persia, The City of Gameron.
having received its name from their King Shach Abas, who caused this City to
be Repaired and Beautified. It was formerly called Gameron, and is Situate
under the twenty seventh degree of North Latitude; it is one of the largest and
best peopled Cities in those parts, where there is always a great concourse of
Merchants, as well Persians as Foreigners Most of the Indian Ships touch in
this Port, it being looked upon as the staple of such Indian Commodities as are
consumed in Persia; their Houses are built two Stories high, being flat and
Tarrassed on the top with Summer Houses, the better to enjoy the benefit of the
fresh Air. The Streets are here very narrow, and their Marketplaces not
extraordinary large. People of Quality divert themselves in their Country
Houses built among the Mountains, from April to September, during which time,
few others but Merchants, and those depending on them, are to be seen in the
City.

The Situation of this place is such, as to contribute not a little to the
inconveniences occasioned by the excessive heats. For just without the Walls
of the City, to the East, there are several high Rocky Hills, from whence the
burning rage of the Sun reflecting upon the City and the Port, Its Situation.
makes the heats almost insupportable. Besides which, the hot South Winds lay
so continually upon the Port, which choaks up the Foreign Mariners not used to
the Climate, abundance of whom die very suddenly.

Upon these Hills there are vast quantities of the Roses, we call Roses of
Jericho, which open as soon as they are put in Water, and shut again as soon as
taken out. The Mountains of Arabia lie on the other side of the Gulf, which is
not above eight Leagues broad hereabouts.

There is not one fountain in this great City; some Wells they have, but the
Water is brackish: So that they fetch all their fresh Water at a Leagues
distance from the Town. They have a certain kind of Earthen Vessels, in which
they keep their Water as cool as if it had been lately drawn from the Spring.

The Ground about Baudar Abasty is very Sandy, and consequently not very
fruitful, but some Leagues from thence, there grows most excellent Wine, which
they call Chiras Wine. They use also another sort of White Wine, which is made
in the Isle of Quichemiche, where the Grapes are without Stones.

Several of the European Nations have their Factories at Gameron, this City
being a free Port for all Foreigners to Trade in.

The Persians are all Mahometans, and so is their Prince, but as there are
abundance of Pagans also in Persia, they allow them the free Exercise of their
Religion in their Temples, and their public Bathing places. I met near this
place with some of these Trees, of which I have spoken before, to wit, that
they turn their Branches down-ward, and when they touch the Ground, they take
root immediately: I saw here one of this kind, under which 6000 Men might have
been placed with good convenience. I also met with a Pagan, whose hair was
above fifteen foot long, he was one of that Sect they call Faquirs.

I must confess, I did not stay long enough at Gameron, to make particular
observations concerning all their Manners and Customs; but thus much I took
notice of, Inhabitants of Gameron.
That the Men are generally very Civil and Complaisant, and the Women as
Amorous as they are Handsome. They are not very scrupulous in granting a favor
to Strangers, many of them looking upon it as a mere piece of Gallantry.

About three Leagues distant from the Continent of Gameron, are three Islands:
The first and the biggest of all extends it self all along the Coast to the
North of Congo, a place about fifteen Leagues distant from Gameron, where the
Portugueses share the Customs with the Persians. The first of these Islands is
called Quichemiche. Quichemiche.


The second is called Areque, Areque.
situate more to the South, being uninhabited by reason of the lowness of the
Grounds. It has not above three Leagues in compass. We were in no small danger
of being cast away, as we passed betwixt these two Islands, as we were going to
Baudar Abasty.

The Island of Ormus is not above a Mile distant from Areque to the South.
Ormus.
This Isle is much of the same bigness with the former, but the Grounds are not
so low. Here are whole Mountains of Salt, which by reason of their Whiteness,
are seen at a great distance at Sea. The ground is quite unfit to produce any
thing for the convenience or sustenance of Mankind, neither does it afford any
fresh Water, which they are obliged to carry thither from the Continent, and to
keep it in Cisterns.

The Portugueses built formerly in this Island a very strong Fort, which
remains entire to this day, with all its Artillery. They were droven from
thence by the Persians, with the assistance of the English, who in recompense
of this piece of service, had granted them the one moity of all the Customs of
Baudar Abasty, by the Persian King. The Portugueses nevertheless enjoy the
freedom of the Port, as well as other Foreigners. Formerly they used to fish
for and catch very fine Pearls, betwixt this Island and the Continent, but at
present they catch most small ones, and those not very often.

CHAP. XVII.
Our Departure from Gameron.
WE having no other business in Persia, than to convoy the St. Francis from
thence to Suratte; we staid no longer at Baudar Abasty, than was necessary for
the Officers of the Ships to dispatch their Affairs. We therefore set sail out
of the Road of Gameron, on the 10th. day of December, but the Winds almost
chopping about every moment in the Persian Gulf, it was not without a great
deal of trouble we got out of the Gulf.

Some days after we discovered four sails of Ships, which we believing to be
Hollanders, put us under some apprehensions of danger, for which reason, we
made a Merchant Man, belonging to Suratte, lead the Van to get what
intelligence they could of them; but our fear was groundless, these four ships
proving to be French, and were commanded by the Sieurs le Road, Tovillaast and
Jon^here; the fourth being a Merchant Man of Suratte, had a Dutch Captain, who
formerly had been in the service of our Company as a Pilot. We would have
detained him as our Prisoner, but showing us his Pass, and a Discharge from the
Directors of the Company, we let him pass without any further molestation. The
Directors of the French East India Company at Suratte, being sensible of what
consequence the Ship the St. Francis was to our Company, had sent these three
Ships to join us, with orders to sail all together to the Port of Bombay, to
avoid falling into the Hands of the Dutch Fleet, which they had intelligence to
be out at Sea, coming from Ceylon to Suratte.

There happened some difference betwixt the two Captains of the St. Francis,
and of the St. Paul, the last of these two carrying her Flag on the main Mast,
with orders from the Directors, for the other to take down his so soon as they
were joined; which the Captain of the St. Francis, who had carried the Flag all
along, being unwilling to comply with, they came to very high Words: But there
being an absolute necessity of obeying the Orders of their Masters, the matter
went no further.

Though we were continually pestered with contrary Winds, yet did we on the
Sixth of January, pass within sight of Diu, where there is a Portuguese Colony,
which had been some years before pillaged by the Arabians. For some days after,
the Wind blowing a favorable Gale from the North-east, we came within sight of
the shore near Bassaim on the tenth.

Just at the Entrance of the Port of Bombay, there lies a Rock, which
stretching a Mile deep into the Sea, makes this passage very dangerous; for
which reason we sent for some Pilots, who conducted us very safely on the 12th.
into the Harbor, which is one of the safest in the World, provided you are
well acquainted with the Situation of the place, to avoid the Rocks.

It was not many years ago in the possession of the Portugueses, Bombay.
who surrendered it to the English at the time of the marriage betwixt the King
of England, with the Infanta of Portugal.

The English have since that time built there a very fine Fort, where the
President of their East India Company commonly keeps his Residence. They have
also laid the Foundation of a City, where they grant Liberty to all strangers
of what Religion or Nation soever to settle themselves, and exempt them from
all manner of Taxes for the first twenty years. We were treated here with
abundance of Civility, which we in part attributed to the good understanding
there was at that time betwixt those two Nations.

We sent notice of our arrival at Bombay, to our Directors at Suratte, and
having received orders from them to set sail without any further delay for that
Port, we weighed Anchor and left Bombay the 30th. of January, and in two days
after came in the Road of Suratte. We found there the St. John of Bayonne, and
another Vessel commanded by the Sieur de Guille; they both belonged to the
Sieur de la Hay. They were together with the St. James, bound for St. Thomas,
whither they were to carry the Sieur Baron, who with some Forces was going to
the relief of the abovementioned Sieur de la Hay, who was Besieged by the
forces of the King of Golconda, in the City he had taken from them before.

After my return from Persia to Suratte, I received Letters from my Father out
of France; the bearer of them was one Mr. Care a Clergyman, who being obliged
to go streightways to St. Thomas, to carry certain Instructions to Mr. la Hay,
from the East India Company out of France, from whence he was come with all the
expedition imaginable by Land, he had left them with the Sieur Petit, who was
to deliver them to me.

The Sieur Baron was no sooner gone for St. Thomas, but the Sieur Greton began
to get his Equipage in readiness, in order for his departure into Persia,
whither he was to go in the quality of an Ambassador. Accordingly he set sail
out of the road of Suratte, on the 20th day of February, notwithstanding it was
noised about the Town that the Dutch Fleet had been seen on that Coast. But
before his departure, having obtained permission from him to go whither I
thought most convenient my self, I disposed every thing to quit Suratte with
the first opportunity, to satisfy my Curiosity in some other parts of the
Indies.

CHAP. XVIII.
My Departure from Suratte.
MY chief design was to visit after my departure from Suratte, all the places
in the possession of the Portugueses on that Coast as far as Goa, and from
thence to Travel into the Country of Bengala. And as I was sufficiently
sensible of what consequence it was to a Stranger Traveling in those parts, to
be provided with good recommendations from persons of Note, I Addressed my self
to the Reverend Father Ambrose de Previlly, a Capuchin, who accordingly gave me
a Letter of recommendation to Father John de Forsecap, Rector of the College of
Jesuits in the City of Daman, whither I was to go first of all. He was so kind
as not only to recommend me to him in person, but also earnestly to desire him
to favor me with his recommendatory Letters to such places as I should have
occasion to visit hereafter.

After I had taken my farewell of all my Friends at Suratte, Leaves Suratte.
I set out from thence on the 3d day of March. I Traveled by Land in a Calash,
drawn according to the Indian Fashion, by 2 Oxen, without any other Company but
my Guide. We laid that Night at a House which stood all alone, where we had
pretty good Accommodation. The next day we came to Gandivi, where,
notwithstanding I was provided with a Pass, I was stopped by the Guard of the
Town, who detained my Goods; but having made my Complaints to the Governor, he
ordered them to let me pass without any further hindrance; so that early the
next Morning I pursued my Journey to the River of Daman, where my Guide left
me. I passed the River the same Night, and being not ignorant of the Portuguese
Tongue, I was in a capacity to provide for my self a Lodging, which I took up
at a certain Indian's House, who being turned Christian, made it his Business
to Lodge Foreign Travelers. The House was all of Straw, Comes to Daman.
and the Chamber where I was to Sleep, open on the Top, the better to enjoy the
benefit of the fresh Air. Our Host's Employment was to m^ke Aqu^ Vitae of the
(...), and his House was adjoining to the very Walls of the City, of which I
will give you a short Description here, before we go further.

This City was Built by the Portugueses, (...) of Daman.
who remain in possession of it to this day; it is about 20 Leagues from
Suratte, and 80 from Goa; it is not very large, but strong and neatly kept; the
Streets are not Paved, but very straight and regular. The Houses are all
handsome Buildings, and the Churches very Magnificent, especially the Parish
Church, and the Chapel of the Charitable Society. Besides which, there are 4
others belonging to the Jesuits, to the Jacobin, and Austin Friar^, and to the
Recollects.

The Inhabitants of Daman are looked upon as the best Horsemen in the Indies*
It^ Inhab^tan^s.
they having once defended themselves with great bravery against an Army of the
Great Mogul, consisting of 40000 Men, who had Besieged the place. This
Government is one of the most considerable the Portugueses are Masters of in
these parts: He that was Governor there at that time, was one Manuel Furtado
de Mendoza, a Bastard Cousin German of the Portuguese Viceroy.

The River washes the Walls of the City, where there is a very safe Harbor for
Ships, unless it happen sometimes that by the violence of the Current,
occasioned by the overflowing of the Waters, they are sometimes forced from
their Anchors, if they be not carefully looked after.

The City lies not above a good Cannon Shot from the Sea side, and on the
opposite Shore of the River is the Fort of St. Jerome, The Fort of St. Jerome.
which is a great addition to the Strength and defense of Daman; for which
reason it is, that the Portugueses are more careful of this Fort, than of any
other they are Masters of in the Indies, they not allowing any Negroes to be
received among the Soldiers of the Garrison, which always consists of 400 Men
at least. Every one of these are obliged to lie every Night within the Fort,
and if any one chances to do otherwise, without special leave from the
Governor, (who never grants it but upon extraordinary occasions,) they lose
their Pay for that day, for the first offense, and the second time they are
Cashiered. The Governor of this Fort has no dependence on the Governor of the
City; they are never above 3 Years in the same post, a Custom observed by the
Portugueses with all the rest of their Governors.

The Air about Daman is very pleasant, and the principal Inhabitants of the
City pass the greatest part of the Year at their Country Houses.

CHAP. XIX.
Concerning our stay at Daman.
NOT long before my Arrival at Daman, the Sieur de St. James, Son of a French
Physician, and another young French Man, were Married there. The last of these
two had Married the Bastard Sister of a Lady of Quality, called Donna
Petronilla de la Cerda, who, after she was a Widow, had Married a person of the
first Rank among the Portugueses. The Sieur de St. James had Married the
Daughter of this Lady, whose Name being Donna Rosa de Mello, was in all
respects answerable to her Youth and Beauty.

I having heard much talk of them at Suratte, I thought my self under an
indispensible obligation to pay them a visit. But the first thing I did was to
deliver my recommendation to the Rector of the Jesuit College, who received me
with all the Civility imaginable, and conducted me to the Governor, who after
he had treated me according to his Quality, proposed to me to stay at Daman,
where there was at that time no other Physician, but some Pagan Indians, whose
Practice consisting only in a few Receipts, they apply them indifferently to
all Patients. I returned his Compliment, desiring some time to consider of the
matter; and the Rector of the Jesuits observing my inclination to Traveling to
be more prevailing with me than the Prospect of present advantages, urged me to
accept of the Governor's offers, assuring me, that he would make use of all
his interests for my further advantage.

The next following day I paid a visit to my two Countrymen, of whom I spoke
just now, they were overjoyed to see me, and Treated me with a most Magnificent
Collation; in the mean while, the Sieur de St. James had spoke in my behalf, to
his Mother-in-law, to desire her permission to let me Lodge in their House,
which she having easily granted, they had without my knowledge sent for my
Trunks, so that when after some Hours stay, I was going to take my leave, they
entreated me to accept of their House, which at their reiterated entreaties I
could not refuse to my two generous Countrymen.

I was not ignorant of the Custom of the Portugueses, with whom you can scarce
meet with sufficient circumspection, in respect of the fair Sex, I did not as
yet mention one word concerning their Ladies; but the next day they were the
first that mentioned and proposed a visit to them; I seemed to be careless in
the matter, and having spent the greatest part of the day in visiting some of
my Patients in the City, at my return toward Night, they introduced me to them
in their Apartments, where I entertained them with the same freedom as we do in
France, whereat they seemed not at all displeased. They did ask me many
Questions, which I answered as well as I could, and Donna Petronilla Addressing
her Discourse to me, above the rest, we did not part till late at Night.

I did not fail afterward to visit them at least once a day, and Petronilla
treated me always with more than ordinary Civility. She was of about 39 years
of Age, notwithstanding which, she had sufficient Charms, being of a very
pleasing Aspect, of an admirable Shape, delicately featured and agreeable in
all respects; she had a very lively Eye, and her Humor was the sweetest and
most Complaisant in the World. We diverted our selves together for some Hours
every Night, and I must confess that I never passed three Weeks more pleasantly
than these, in all my life time.

CHAP. XX.
Of Trapor.
DOnna Petronilla's Seat was at Trapor, she being only come to Daman about some
particular Business; she was to be at home with her Husband before Easter, and
desired me to conduct her Home, being not above 10 Leagues from Daman. Having
first asked the Governor's Leave, I accepted of their kind offer, and
Traveled with their whole Family toward Trapor. On the Monday of the Holy
Week we laid at a place called Danou, a Lordship belonging to the Eldest Son of
Donna Petronilla; near to this is the Mountain called the Picque of Danou,
resembling in shape a Sugar Loaf; which lying betwixt Suratte and Bassaim,
serves for a guide to the Ships that Sail near this Coast; there is here a
small River which bears no Ships of any Burden but only some small Craft.

Donna Petronilla's Husband met us at Danou, and received me with all
imaginable Civility, and the Wednesday following we came to Trapor or Tarapour.

This is a small City Built on the Sea side, half ways betwixt Daman and
Bassaim, belonging to the Portugueses, who have here a Deputy Governor,
depending on the Governor of Daman. The Inhabitants here are very Rich, though
the River be so shallow as not to be Navigable, unless by small Ships. There is
but one Parish Church, one Chapel belonging to the Charitable Society, and a
Church belonging to the Jacobin-Friars. On the Friday in the Afternoon we heard
a Sermon of the Passion of Christ, and the Priest made many pauses, the more
passionately, as I suppose, to represent the Mystery of the matter he was
treating of. The Women sit in a Gallery by themselves at Church, and have
Curtains drawn before them, to avoid their being seen by the Men; but if they
are not seen they make themselves to be understood by their knocking their
Breasts, by their Sighs and Groans, which they send forth as often as the
Priest says any thing that moves Compassion. Nevertheless, there are many among
them, who make but ill use of this Holy Day, and under the cloak of this
affected Zeal, carry on their Intrigues.

After Sermon we saw the Procession, Procession at Trapor.
which was preceded by several Penitents, who having their Faces covered, and
their Backs naked, did whip themselves with so much eagerness, that the Blood
followed the lash. After these came the Inhabitants of the place, each with a
lighted Torch in his Hand, and then the Priests. Immediately after them was
carried the Image, representing our Savior's descending from the Cross, which
being surrounded with about 20 young Negroes Masked and armed with Lances, with
a Captain at the head of them, and several Drums and Trumpets, made altogether
a very strange Spectacle. For, after they had taken a round in the City, the
Crucifix was Solemnly Interred in a Sepulcher prepared for that purpose; and I
must confess that this Ceremony, which in other places, where the whole is
transacted with more decency, inspires the people with Devotion, did appear so
ridiculous among the Portugueses in those parts, that I could scarce forbear
Laughing my self.

I went again to Church on Saturday, where I saw nothing worth particular
Observation. But on Easter-Sunday, after I had been present at the Ceremony,
when the Holy Sacrament was carried from the Jacobin to the Parish Church, I
heard there a Sermon, which being the oddest I ever heard in my Life, I cannot
forbear mentioning some passages of it here: The Priest being come into the
Pulpit, and having made the Sign of the Cross; A pleasant Sermon.
Gentlemen, (said he,) you cannot be ignorant, that for three particular
reasons we always have a Sermon on Easter-Sunday. The first is to wish a Merry
Feast to the Congregation; the second to put you in mind of my Easter Eggs; and
the third, to tell you a Merry Tale to make you Laugh. Not to recede from my
former Custom, and to give you all due satisfaction as to the first point, I
wish you all Merry Easter Holy Days; as to the second, I can assure you, that
if you will be pleased to send me some Easter Eggs I will not refuse them. And
as to what concerns the third, I will only tell you, that I met yesterday our
Fatgutted Gregory, and what do you think I said to him? I asked him whether he
would always act the Person of Pilate in the Passion of our Savior. With this
he left the Pulpit, without as much as imparting the Benediction to his
Auditors, who Laughed out aloud, that you might have heard them at a
considerable distance.

I passed the Easter Holy Days with a great deal of satisfaction, which with
the constant entreaties of my Friends to stay me for some time longer, would
have been a sufficient motive for me not to quit a place, where I received
daily new proofs of their Affection toward me, if I had not been engaged upon
my part to the Governor, to return to Daman after the Holy Days were over.

CHAP. XXI.
My return to Daman.
BEfore Donna Petronilla went to Trapor, she had done me the favor to
introduce me into the Acquaintance of Father John de St. Michael, Superior of
the Jacobins, and at my departure, she was so generous as to give me a Letter
of Recommendation, wherein, she desired him to serve me in every thing that
might be in his power. I had left my Trunks and other movables with him, when
we departed for Trapor, so that I was obliged to make my first visit to him,
and to fetch away my Trunks; but the Father had the goodness to engage me to
stay with him, till such time as I had taken a resolution whether I would
settle at Daman, and if not, till I should have taken a full view of all the
Town, to satisfy my Curiosity.

I remained with him thus 14 or 15 days, being at a great uncertainty what to
resolve upon, till at last being overcome by the Civilities and entreaties of
the Governor, and the Prayers of the Inhabitants, who made me very
advantageous offers, I thought I ought not to refuse the kindness of my
Friends, who showed themselves the most Zealous promoters of my concerns.

Accordingly I left the Convent, and having settled my self in a House of my
own, I chose some few Friends among the rest of the Inhabitants, with whom I
might divert my self at seasonable times, when I was at leisure from my
Practice, which needs must happen very often in a little place, where I could
visit a good number of Patients in a few Hours.

There was at that time a certain Lady of great Quality, called Senhora
Francisca Sereira, living at Daman, and one of her Daughters falling ill of a
violent and most dangerous Fever, I was called to her, and had the good fortune
to recover her, which so deeply engaged the Lady in my interest, that I cannot
sufficiently acknowledge her generosity, and must confess that she was one main
instrument in making me stay so long at Daman as I did.

For though I must confess that I received all the kind usage I could expect from
the Inhabitants of this place, yet the natural propensity I had to Traveling,
and to make curious and new. Observations abroad over-balancing all other
Considerations, I did at last resolve to leave Daman. Pursuant to this
resolution, I took the convenience of the Portuguese Fleet, which goes every
year to Cambeja. This Fleet being under the Command of Joseph de Mello, Arrives
at Daman toward the latter end of December, and was to be ready to Sail for
Goa toward the beginning of January.

CHAP. XXII.
Our departure from Daman.
ALL my Friends at Daman having in vain endeavored to detain me longer, I took
at last my leave of them, and embarked my self upon one of the Galleots
belonging to the above mentioned Fleet. We set sail on the first day of January
for Bassaim, where we were to stay for the Galleots, which were behind at
Cambeja.

We arrived at Bassaim the next day in the Afternoon, when I, to satisfy my
curiosity, went into the Town, where I met with the Sieur de Segvineau, a
French Physician, who formerly came with me in the same Ship from Madagascar to
Suratte, and being since that time Married and settled in this place, gave me
all the real demonstrations of a most sincere Friendship.

The City of Bassaim lies twenty Leagues South of Daman, The City of Bassaim.
and is about four times longer. Their Churches here are very Rich, and most
magnificently Built, their private Houses very neat and Commodious, the Market
places very large and handsome, and the Streets very clean and regular: It is
surrounded with a Wall, but the Fortifications are but slight.

The greatest convenience belonging to this City, is the River which washes its
very Walls, and is a safe Harbor for Ships of the greatest Burden at all
Seasons, which draws thither the Merchants from all parts, Its Harbor.
and renders the City one of the most considerable the Portugueses are masters
of in the Indies.

There live more Gentry in and about this place, Inhabitants.
than at Goa, from whence comes the Portuguese Proverb, Fidalgos de Bassaim,
that is to say, Gentlemen of Bassaim, the Grounds hereabouts are extremely
fertile, and produce great store of Rice.

Just without the Gates of the City is that famous Church called by the
Portugueses, Nossa senhora de remedio, which being formerly a noted Pagan
Temple, is since turned into a Christian Church, where due Reverence is paid to
the true God. Upon the great Altar is to be seen the miraculous Image of the
Holy Virgin.

They relate that a Thief having cast his Eyes upon the rich Crown she wears
upon her Head, An Indian Miracle.
had hid himself in the Church, with an intention to steal it as soon as the
Church should be shut up. Accordingly the Villain approaching the Image, was
going to take off the Crown, but by a most surprising Miracle, both the Robber
and Crown became immovable in the same instant, in which posture he was found
so soon as the Church doors were opened. There is a part of the Forehead,
(which they say is the place where he fixed his Thumb) which at a distance,
shines as bright as a Star, and as you draw nearer and nearer, it disappears by
degrees, so that when you come to touch it, you find nothing extraordinary in
the matter.

This Image is in such Veneration in those parts, that not alone the
Christians, but also the Mahometans and Pagans make their Vows to it, before
they undertake any thing of Moment, and as these Vows commonly consist in some
offerings or other, this Church has gathered vast Riches.

We staid at Bassaim about five or six days, and then set sail for Goa, where
we arrived on the fourteenth day of January toward Night. I went on shore the
next day, and by the advantageous offers made by my Friends, was prevailed upon
to stay near three whole Years in this great City, of which I have given you a
Description before.

After this, some Affairs of moment happening, which required my presence in my
Native Country, I was obliged to quit the Indies, in order to my speedy return
into Europe. I took therefore the convenience of a Portuguese Galeon, which
being ready to set sail for Lisbon, I (with the permission of the Governor)
embarked my self in the said Vessel toward the latter end of January.

CHAP. XXIII.
My departure out of the Indies.
THE ship which was to carry me to Lisbon, was called the San Pedre de Ratel,
of above 1500 Tuns, commanded by Captain Simon de Sousa. It was the seven and
twentieth day of January, when we sailed from the Bar of Goa, toward Lisbon.

So soon as we were got under sail, the Captain desired to speak with me, and
having told me, that being sensible of my Capacity he had not taken with him
any Surgeons, but only a Barber to Trim and let Blood upon occasion, and
therefore he hoped I would not refuse the offer he would make me, to take care
of the Ship as a Physician, and that I should be honorably rewarded for my
pains. I returned him thanks for his good Opinion, and having accepted his
offer, I was considered in the quality of the Physician of the Ship.

We went on with a favorable Gale, till we came under the Equinoctial Line,
where we were becalmed for a few days, when the Winds proving again to our
satisfaction, we continued our Voyage with all the imaginable success, till we
came under the thirteenth degree of Southern Latitude. There it was that the
Winds began to change continually, but as it did not blow hard, so we advanced
something every day in our Voyage.

We passed a great way to the East of the Isle Dauphin, and toward the end of
the Month of March came to the height of the Cape of Good Hope, where our
Pilots had a mind to sound the Coast, for their better Instruction, when they
should happen to come this way another time; the Wind being then in the East,
and consequently very fair for us, blew very briskly in the beginning of the
Holy Week, and on the Holy Wednesday grew so violent, that we were forced to
take in'most all our sails, and to make use only of- our foremast Sail. The
Sea runs so terribly high, that our ship was tossed most violently;
notwithstanding which, we continued our course, knowing-our selves to be far
enough from the shore, to stand in fear of any sinister accident from thence.
But on Thursday Morning, the Wind chopped about to the West, Are overtaken by a
violent Storm.
and blew so terribly, that we began to be afraid of our Ship, which though one
of the strongest that ever I saw, let in so much Water, that two Pumps were
scarce able to throw it out as fast as it came in. We changed our course and
run it before the Wind, which continued with so much violence, that even the
most expert and most courageous of our Seamen began to be afraid; but after a
Storm which lasted four and twenty Hours, the Wind veering about to the East,
we altered a second time our Course, and with a moderate Gale stood it in
toward the Cape, which we discovered on the Holy Saturday early in the
Morning. We were again becalmed for some days, till the next day after the Holy
Days, when with a North East Wind we doubled the Cape of Good Hope, but were
not within sight of it, being afraid of being becalmed again if we did not keep
out at Sea.

We saw hereabouts several wracks of Ships which we believed to have been lost
in the late Tempest.

Toward Night we discovered a Vessel, which steered a quite contrary course to
us; but as they are constantly upon their Guard at Sea, our Captain ordered
every thing to be got in readiness, if there should be any occasion of Engaging
an Enemy; but the next Morning at break of day, we found them at so great a
distance from us, that we had all the reason to believe, there would be no
occasion for fighting at this time.

In the mean while, Are troubled with the Scurvy.
we had a worse Enemy within our own Ship; this was that pernicious Evil, the
Scurvy, which in the month of April, began to make a great havoc among our
Ships Crew, and notwithstanding all our Precautions, killed us some of our Men
every day: To add to our Affliction we were often becalmed, till at last a
favorable Gale arising, we made toward the Coast of Brasil, where we were to
touch in our Voyage, so that on the 19th. day of May, we discovered the shore
of Brasil, near the Bay of All Saints.

Some Fishermen who were out at Sea, having discovered our Vessel, came on
board of us about Noon, who undertook to conduct us safely into the Road, but
had almost lost our Ship, she striking upon the Sands, but as good fortune
would have it, so slightly, that it drew us into no further ill consequences.
But we had all the reason in the World to thank Providence for our delivery, a
Ship of the same bulk with ours having been lost in the same place some years
before, so that scarce a Man escaped with life, of a thousand that belonged to
the Ship. But the advantage of a very fair Day and Wind, joined with the
indefatigable care of our Mariners, made us by God's Providence escape the
danger, which threatened no less than our Destruction. Being got clear of the
Sands, we came to an Anchor at a good distance from thence, and the next day
being the 20th. of May, entered the Port and cast Anchor before the Town, which
bears the same name with the Bay. We had lost five and twenty of our Men in our
Voyage from Goa, and had above 300 more on board, so terribly afflicted with
the Scurvy, that if we had been detained but never so little a while longer at
Sea, most of them would infallibly have died.

CHAP. XXIV.
Our Arrival in Brasil, and its Description.
DUring my stay in Brasil, I got intimately acquainted with a certain Merchant,
a Spaniard by Birth, but who having lived for a considerable time in those
parts, gave me an exact account of the whole state of affairs of this Country,
and showed me much kindness in all other respects. I am not ignorant, that
several others before me have given us an account of Brasil, nevertheless I
will insert shortly what observations I have made here.

Brasil is Situate on the Eastern Coast of America, A Description of Barsil.
where the Portugueses, (who where the first and sole discoverers of it) have
built several Towns and created Colonies, which now, after a long and vigorous
War with the Dutch, who disputed with them the possession of it, they enjoy
quietly. The Country is very pleasant, the Air tolerably good and temperate, by
reason of the frequent Rains, which in a great measure, allay the heat of the
Sun. The Ground here produces abundance of Fruits without being cultivated;
such as Citrons, Lemons, Oranges, Ananas, Bananas, and several others. There
are also Grapes in Brasil, but not in such plenty as in Europe.

They have prodigious quantities of Canes, which turn to a mighty account, if
the inhabitants did improve them to the best advantage, and knew how to vend
them abroad. From Brasil comes most excellent Tobacco, and here it is that they
have sto^e of those Water Melons, which surpass all other k^nds in goodness.
The Grounds of Brasil will not produce any Garlic or Onions. They are obliged
to be furnished with them from Portugal.

They have also abundance of Coco's in Brasil, but they coming not near in
bigness to those in the East Indies, they make Tobacco and other Boxes of them,
some of them being so small as scarce to be fit for Beads.

They don't draw any Tarry from the Coco-trees in Brasil, as they do in the
East Indies, neither make they any Suchar of it, or Aqua Vitae, because their
Canes furnish them sufficiently with the first, and the latter they are
supplied with from Portugal.

CHAP. XXV.
A further account of Brasil.
BEsides the Brasil Wood there are several other sorts of Trees in this
Country, Commodities of Brasil.
quite unknown to us in Europe, among which is the chiefest, the Tree from
whence destills that Balsom, we surname of Peru: The Wood is made use of for
Cabinet Work for Ladies of Quality, because they have a most sweet Scent, and
Perfume any thing that is enclosed within them. In the Southern Parts of the
Coast, Produces no Wheat.
they have very good Wheat, but near the Bay of All Saints, there grows none,
and most other parts of Brasil are deprived of the advantage of this so useful
a Commodity. They give two reasons for it; first, because, say they, the Ground
is not fit for it; and secondly, which I look upon to be the better of the two,
because that they are pestered hereabouts with such prodigious numbers of Ants,
that they consume the Grains before they take root. Prillet and Rice grows in
all parts of Brasil, but the ordinary Food of the Brasilians is the flower of
Mandioc, which the French call Cassave, and the Portuguese, Farina de Rao. This
Mandioc root is propagated by cutting of it in pieces, and putting them into
the Ground where they grow to a considerable bigness; they are very White, and
if they are eaten unprepared, they prove often mortal. They take away their
venomous quality by steeping them in Water, till they are soft, when they take
them out, and let them dry; this they repeat several times, and so often, till
they think them to be sufficiently cured of their ill Quality, when they make
flower of it, almost as course in outward appearance as Gunpowder, which at the
best is but insipid and very heavy, causing obstructions in such as are not
used to eat it. They make Cakes out of this Flower, which they call Bejous,
they are of somewhat a better taste than the common Bread, but retain the same
ill quality.

They are furnished with Wheat from Rio de Janeiro, and with good Flower from
Portugal, so that they are not absolutely destitute of wheaten Bread in this
Bay, but it is somewhat dearer here than in other places. They have also
sufficient store of Oil, Wine, Linen Clothes, Stuffs, and all other Commodities
requisite for the Convenience and Necessity of Human Life, which are imported
there from Europe. Their own Grounds furnish them sufficiently with Flesh,
Poultry and Fish, and Fruits and Sweetmeats are very cheap here.

But Brasil is not without its great inconveniences; they are always pestered
with a certain kind of Vermin, or small Worms, of which I shall have occasion
to say more hereafter in the Appendix of this Relation, which treats of the
Dist^mper^ in those parts: Besides this, the Ants of all sorts, but especially
that kind which is of a reddish Color, and bigger than the rest, are a
continual Plague to them; for they cover the Grounds wherever they light in
such prodigious heaps, that at a distance you would take them for a little
Village. Neither are the Cities free from this Plague. These Creatures are at
continual War with the Rats and Snakes, who notwithstanding the advantage of
their strength, in comparison of these little Creatures, yet are always worsted
by their infinite number.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Inhabitants of Brasil.
NOT to entangle my self here in a tedious digression, and distinction of the
Inhabitants of this Country; I will only tell you in a few words, That the
Native Brasilians are to this day, Idolaters; That they are much addicted to
Witchcraft, or at least are reputed so to be; they are very superstitious, have
neither Temples nor Feasts, and adore the Devil. Their Hair they wear of a
great length, their Complexion is swarthy, they go Naked, are naturally Brave
and Nimble, and never forgive an Injury. Their Arms are only a few Arrows,
which instead of Iron, are provided with a bone of a Fish at the end; and if
any of them make use of Iron, they are such as have got it by the conversation
with the Europeans. They are not unskilful in Husbandry, but are more addicted
to Hunting and Fishing. They eat all sorts of Flesh, and as they never lay up
any Provisions for future use, so they endure Famine upon an occasion with an
unparalleled constancy. They are naturally Warlike, and always at Wars with
one another; such of their Enemies as they take Prisoners, they Fetter, and
publicly kill them, Brasilians eat their dead Friends.
and so eat them. They don't even interr their dead Friends, but devour them,
even sometimes before the breath is out of their Bodies. For if they judge
their Friends past all hopes of recovery, they kill them for fear they should
grow lean before they die; and because they would husband their Dead Friends to
the best advantage, they dry their Bones, which they beat to Powder, and make
up in a kind of a pap, and so eat it. When the Europeans upbraid them with
their Cruelties, they return us for answer, that we are a Company of impious
wretches, who suffer our Friends and Parents to be consumed in the Earth by the
Vermin, when we might with more reason afford them our Belly for their
Burying-place.

The Portugueses in Brasil, The Portugueses in Brasil.
live here for the most part after the same manner as they do in other places,
where they have settled their Colonies. They have very good Forts in several
parts of the Country. They compel the Neighboring Brasilians to obey them, and
are so well provided in their Garrisons as not to stand in fear either of the
Brasilians or Europeans, in case they should come to Attack them.

Whenever any of the Portugueses have the misfortune to fall into the hands of
the Wild Brasilians, whether by the chance of War, or any other mishap, they
receive the same treatment as we have mentioned before; and these on the other
hand retaliate upon such, as they become Masters of, the Cruelties committed
against their Countrymen, and in lieu of one Death, make them to undergo what
is a thousand times worse, I mean, the most cruel Slavery in the World; all
what is left for the Brasilians to do in this case is either voluntarily to
submit to the Portugueses, or, if they find themselves not strong enough to
resist them, to fly and shelter themselves in more remote Countries.

The Portugueses prompted by an Ambition to extend their borders, send
constantly abroad their Parties, who by degrees, as they Conquer these
Barbarians, curb them by some Forts, which they Build in their new Conquests.
Whilst I was there, I was credibly informed that they had extended their
Conquests above 80 Leagues deep into the Country. They are very careful in
instructing the Brasilians, both Free and Slaves in the principles of the
Christian Religion; and there are some among the Portugueses who have Married
these Barbarian Women, who though otherwise of a good Complexion and handsome
enough, yet in their Behavior sufficiently show the remnants of that Barbarous
Blood from whence they drew their offspring, and by which they are easily
distinguished from the Portuguese Women.

The vast number of Slaves used by the Portugueses in Brasil, The Slavery in
Brasil.
and the Hardship wherewith they are treated, not having a sufficient allowance
for their sustenance, and being to be Punished in a most severe manner for the
least fault, proves the occasion of great disorders and outrages, which are
committed by the Slaves, both in City and Country. They are for the most part
Negroes, brought thither from Angola, and the Guinea Coast, their chief
Employment being to work in making of Sugars, and Planting of Tobacco. They are
brought to Market in whole Droves, where they are Bought and Sold no otherwise
than we do our Cattle. Those who have great Plantations have several hundreds
of them at a time, who are under the tuition of certain Commissaries, who are
sometimes more cruel than their Masters. Those who have no Grounds of their
own, give their Slaves leave to work where they can, provided they pay them a
certain Tax Monthly or Weekly. Those who work in their Master's Ground being
used with so much severity, if they fail to perform their Task, and the rest
being commonly overtasked by their Covetous Masters, this makes them Rob and
Steal wherever they come in the Country, and being reduced to despair, they
often revenge themselves upon others for the Torments they are forced to endure
at home.

If these Vagabond Slaves render the Highways in the Country very dangerous,
it is no less troublesome to walk the Streets at Night in the Cities; where,
notwithstanding all the precautions, and the severe Punishments inflicted upon
all such as are Convicted of these Crimes, they commit frequent Robberies in
the Streets.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the City and Port of the Bay of All Saints.
THE Bay of All Saints, The Bay of All Saints.
is Situate under the 15th Degree of Southern Latitude, the Port from whence
the Adjacent City has derived its Name, is one of the largest and most
Commodious in the whole Ocean. There are a few Sand Banks at one side of the
Entrance of the Harbor, but these are not so dangerous, but that they may be
easily avoided, provided you have a Pilot who is well acquainted with the Coast
and the Harbor. The Entrance and the bottom of the Harbor lie directly East
and West, so that you need but turn never so little Northwards, where you may
cast Anchor just before the City, and when you are once got betwixt the two
Capes, you are out of all danger, there being very good Anchorage all over the
Bay, which is so large, as to be able to contain several thousands of stout
Ships. The Bay is surrounded with very high Lands, which afford a very pleasant
prospect to the Seaside, they are irrigated with several small Rivers, which
loose themselves thereabouts before they reach the Seaside.

Whalefishing is their constant employment in this Bay from June to September;
Whales how taken.
there are very few so ignorant, but what know that this prodigious Creature is
taken by the help of a Dart tied to a strong Cord. The Fishermen Cruise about
the Bay in their Boats, to watch the coming of the Whale; so soon as she finds
her self Wounded by the Dart, she flies away, and the Fishermen follow her at a
distance, letting the Cord go after her, till such time that being quite spent
by the loss of Blood she dies, and Swims upon the surface of the Water. Then
they draw her to the Shore, at high Tides, and cut her to pieces. The Oil which
is drawn from this Fish, is much used in Lamps all over Brasil, and the Negroes
and some of the poorer sort eat the substance of the Fish with a good Appetite.

After you are come about 2 Leagues within the Bay, you see the City, which
directly faces its Entrance, just before you, where you may safely ride at
Anchor, at about half a League's distance from the Shore. The City of All
Saints.
The City it self is Built upon a high Mountain, stretching on both sides of
it, from whence it comes, that most of the Streets lie upon an ascent. It is
the largest the Portugueses are Masters of in Brasil, and the residence of the
Governor in chief of the Brasil Coast. It Is true, the Governor of the City has
no Authority over the rest, yet is he considered as the chief, because he takes
place of all the rest.

It was strongly discoursed whilst I was in Brasil, that there was to be sent
thither a Viceroy, with the same Prerogative and Authority as the Viceroy of
the Indies residing at Goa* and they also expected a Bishop out of Portugal to
fill up that See, which had been racked for several (...) ^^fore; and they were
of Opinion th^^ (...) ^^vernment of Brasil should happen (...) into a
Vice-Royalty, this Church would also be made a Metropolitan Church.

There is a kind of Parliament, Parliament of Brasil.
or High Court of Judicature in Brasil, whose Jurisdiction extends over all
that Coast; but their Power is limited, there lying an Appeal from them in all
Criminal Causes to Lisbon, and in Civil Causes, if the matter in Contest
exceeds the value of 100 l. Sterling.

The City it self is very large and Populous, their Churches are very
Magnificent, as is likewise the Palace of the Governor, which is Built on the
very top of the Mountain, where the Parliament also dispatch their Business.
The Houses are generally very well Built, there being a great concourse of all
Nations here, who are drawn hither by reason of the great convenience of the
Port and Trade, this being the Staple of all sorts of Commodities to be met
with in these parts.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants.
I Am not very well assured whether Debauchery is so common all over Brasil, as
it is at the Bay of All Saints, where even Women who pretend to a reasonable
share of Reputation, look upon it as a piece of Gallantry to dress up their
Female Slaves in their own Clothes, Are very Debauched.
to give them the better opportunity of vending their hidden Commodities at a
dearer rate; from whence it may easily be concluded, that there is scarce any
other place where Debauchery has got such an ascendant as here. The Women are
generally great Admirers of all Strangers, but especially of the French; the
worst is that they are not so acceptable to the Men, who being naturally
Jealous to a degree of Madness, this infirmity of theirs proves sometimes the
occasion of great mischiefs, as may appear out of the following relation.

A Young French Man who practiced Physic in Brasil, was sent for to a Lady
that was very ill; this Lady being Young, Handsome, and Rich, the Young
Physician made use of his best Skill to recover her as soon as possible he
could. He had the good Fortune not only to restore her to her Health in a
little time, but also to insinuate himself by his constant attendance, into the
Affection both of the Mother and Daughter, so that soon after he was Privately
Married to the Young Lady, though with the consent of the Mother.

Some Enemies of the Young French Man who envied his good Fortune, took an
opportunity to set a certain Gentleman, who had Married his Wife's Eldest
Sister against him, representing to him, how unbecoming and little suitable it
would be to his Quality, to have a Brother-in-law that was no more than a
Surgeon, though he had assumed the Title of a Doctor of Physic, and who
perhaps besides all this might be a Heretic. The Gentleman, who had more
Wealth than good Sense, being over-perswaded by these Malicious Fellows, began
to exclaim in the presence of the rest of their Relations, against the
indignity put upon the whole Family by so scandalous a Match, not forgetting
any thing which he thought might exasperate them against this New
Brother-in-law; but finding them not to agree with him in their Sentiments, he
came one Night with a select number of Ruffians into the City, where they found
means to get into the House of his Sister-in-law, and to cut to pieces a
certain Young Man, who bearing some resemblance to the Young French Man they
sought for, and who had saved himself by flight, paid dearly for it by the
mistake of these Villains, who took the flight after they had satisfied their
revenge, as they believed, for fear of being taken in the Fact by the
Neighboring Inhabitants, who were drawn thither by the most lamentable
outcries of the Women.

This Bloody Action being come to the Judge's-Ears, he ordered some Guards to
be put in the Young French Man's House, to prevent a second Attempt, which they
were resolved to make, as soon as they had got notice that they had missed
their aim.

The Young French Man finding himself thus in danger of being Assassinated,
took a resolution to leave Brasil, and to go to Lisbon, which he did
accordingly, never appearing abroad without a good Guard, till his departure;
when I was afterward in Lisbon, I understood that he was Petitioning the King,
to grant him his Warrant for the bringing over his Wife with all her Effects
from Brasil to Lisbon.

CHAP. XXIX.
Our departure from Brasil.
THE Grand Fleet which goes every Year from Lisbon to the several places on the
Coast of Brasil, arrived there in the Month of June. The Admiral being to
convoy some Ships to Rio de Janeiro, went thither in person, whilst we were
getting every thing ready against his return, which we did not expect to be
till toward the end of August. Being ready laden and provided with all
necessaries for our Voyage, we only staid till the Ships that were come in with
the Admiral could take in some fresh Provisions, and so set sail together from
the Bay of All Saints on the 3d. day of September in the Morning, being in all
thirty Sail, two and twenty of this Fleet being bound for Lisbon, the rest,
being eight for Oporto.

We were scarce well out at Sea, when the Winds turned contrary the very first
day, and thus continued for near a Month after, so that we were not able to
double the Cape of St. Austin till toward the end of September.

The Vessels bound to Oporto being the nimblest Sailers of the whole Fleet,
left us here abouts, in hopes to reach the Portuguese Coast before us, but they
paid dear for their haste, the Algerines having taken two of them, as we were
informed afterward at Lisbon.

The Wind veering about at the height of the Cape of St. Austin, proved pretty
favorable to us till we came to Cape Verd. Much about the same time it was we
got sight of the Isle called Ferdnand de Narogna, The Isle of Ferdnand de
Narogna.
having borrowed its name from the person, who first discovered it. Formerly
all the Ships that passed this way, used to provide themselves with fresh Water
in this Island, if they had occasion for any. But some strangers having left
some of their Dogs behind them, these are multiplied and become wild to that
degree, that there is no coming on shore in that Island now a days.

As we came within ten degrees of the line, the Wind began to be very
changeable, and proved soon after quite contrary to us, but it blowing a pretty
even Gale, we advanced by little and little, till a most dreadful Tempest
arising, drove us till under the 26th. Degree, where a great many of our Ships
lost their Masts and Sails.

But after having weathered it out, Isle of Tercera.
we at last came in sight of the Isle of Tercera, belonging to the Portugueses,
where they kept their King Prisoner for a considerable time, and in all
likelihood he would have ended there his days, if they had not been afraid that
he might find means to get from thence. It was on the twenty first of November,
that we got sight of this Island, and if the Seas had not run so high, we would
have gone a shore to refresh our selves; but as there is never a Port in the
whole Island, and that there is no safe Anchoring in the Road, Isle of St.
Michael.
we continued our course, and on the three and twentieth, came in sight of the
Isle of St. Michael, where abouts we staid all that Night near the Cape. The
next Morning all our Ships sent their Chaloups a shore to fetch some fresh
Provisions, but did not come to an Anchor, that they might be in readiness to
put to Sea upon all occasions, the Hurricanes being so frequent here at this
Season, that there is no safe riding for Ships.

The Isles of St. Michael, Tercera, and some other adjacent Islands, belong to
the Portugueses, they are very fertile, affording great store of very good
Wheat, which being from thence for the most part transported to Portugal, they
may well be called the Granaries of that Kingdom.

Our Chaloups being returned on the four and twentieth at Night, we set sail
with a North West Wind, which did not last long, for all on a sudden the Wind
chopped about to the East, Are overtaken by a most dreadful Tempest.
and from thence to the South with such violence, that this tempest appeared to
me the most terrible that ever I saw in my life. It continued thus for ten days
together in so dreadful a manner, as is scarce to be expressed; our Ship began
to draw Water on all sides, and we saw before our Eyes nothing less than our
approaching death. We made all the signals of distress to the rest by day, and
by setting up our lights by night, but in vain, the horrid darkness, but above
all the violence of the Tempest, had dispersed all our Ships, so that we found
our selves alone, having lost all our sails, except our Foremast sail.

We had nothing left to hope for, and therefore betook our selves to Prayers,
and the whole ships crew made their Vows to the Blessed Virgin, under whose
protection we at last escaped the danger. In the mean while, every thing was in
such a confusion, as is easier to be imagined than to be expressed; the Waves
which rise as high as Mountains, beating continually over the Ship, which we
thought would have been swallowed up every moment in the bottomless Abyss. The
approaching day rendered every thing much more supportable, but the dreadful
darkness of the Nights put us under such apprehensions of approaching death,
that we were always despairing of ever seeing day again. An accident which
befell us the last Night, was the most terrible of all, which put even the most
courageous into despair.

It is to be known, that we had some Top-masts and Yards in the Ship to make
use of upon occasion, which were so well fastened upon the Deck, that they had
not stirred hitherto. Our two Chaloups were placed a top of them, one within
the other, and in the smallest of the two, there were some hogs, which we had
brought from Brasil, to make presents of them in Portugal, they being of an
extraordinary size. The most violent tossing of the Ship, for so many days
together, had at last either loosened or broke the Ropes, which had fastened all
these things together, so that the Masts, Yards and Chalops rolling from one
side to the other, according to the motion of the Ship, and being thrown
against her sides, we did not imagine otherwise but that she had been staved to
pieces; there was not one in the Ship, but what was uttering forth his last
Prayers, expecting every moment to be the last of his life.

We had Passengers and Mariners on Board of us of several different Nations,
each of them offering their Vows and Moans in a different Language; this made
the most doleful noise that ever was heard, which together with the darkness of
the Night, made every thing appear more dreadful than it was; no body daring to
go upon the deck for fear of being crushed to pieces, as we found the Hogs to
be afterward. At last, Daylight began to appear, the most welcome that ever
was seen, and our Mariners taking new Courage with the approaching light,
fastened the Chaloups and Masts again; and scarce were a few hours past, but the
sky began to clear up, the Sun rejoiced us with its most delightful Rays, the
Winds began to abate their Fury, and we saw our selves soon freed from the
apprehension of danger.

CHAP. XXX.
The pursuit of our Voyage, and our Arrival at Lisbon.
AFter we had spent some time in putting things in order, and stopping the
leaks occasioned by the late Tempest, we were cruising up and down, often
changing our course, to try whether we could meet with any of our Ships, that
were separated from us in the last Storm; but meeting with no Vessel that could
give us the least account of them, we thought it our best way to direct our
course toward the Port of Lisbon.

On the Eleventh of December toward Evening, our Sentinels discovered a stout
Ship making up toward us; which we believing to be an Algerine, we were
getting every thing in readiness for a vigorous defense, in case we should be
attacked by these Corsairs. We continued in this Posture, the approaching Night
having robbed us of the satisfaction to be rightly informed, whether this Ship
were an Enemy or not; as she put out her Lights all the Night long, so we did
the same, to give them to understand, that we were not afraid of them. Thus we
kept in sight of one another till next Morning, and each of us having done the
best we could to come up with one ather, we soon found our mistake, the Ship
proving to be one of our Fleet, that had lost our Company.

Thus we sailed in Company together all that day, and the next following being
the Thirteenth of the same Month came in sight of the Por^^guese shore, and
toward Night advanced pretty near to the River, but could not enter it, by
reason of the contrary Winds, we cruised up and down at its Entrance, till the
Fourteenth, without coming to an Anchor, when being joined by the rest of the
Fleet, that were separated from us in the last Storm, except two, that came in
two days after us: We entered the Port on the Fifteenth in the Morning, with a
satisfaction much easier to be felt, than to be expressed. We came to an Anchor
just opposite to the King's Palace, who did us the Honor to be a Spectator of
our Entrance from a Balcony, both sides of the River being lined with an
infinite number of People, who by their Joyful Acclamations, gave us
sufficient demonstrations of the Joy they conceived at our happy Arrival in the
Port of Lisbon.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Port of Lisbon.
I Stayed six whole Months at Lisbon, to satisfy my Curiosity in taking a full
view of this large and Beautiful City. I had the honor to be acquainted with
the Sieur Fabre, chief Physician to the Queen of Portugal, who is in great
esteem not only with this Princess, but also among all the Grandees of the
Kingdom. He was so obliging as to offer me his House, and I must freely
acknowledge, that I received during my stay in this City, so many kindnesses
and obligations from his hands, that the only way left me to repay them, is to
confess ingeniously that they are so many as to put me into despair of ever
being able to retaliate them, unless it be by a perpetual acknowledgement.

I am not ignorant that Lisbon is much frequented by Strangers, and that such
as have not had the opportunity to go thither in person, may easily be
instructed concerning this great City, out of several Books that treat of it in
particular, nevertheless. I hope it may not be unacceptable, if I say something
here as it were en passant, of a City, where I stayed six whole Months.

The River Tagus, The River of Lisbon.
by the Portugueses called Tejo, is very famous both for its largeness, and the
Gold which is drawn out of its Sands. It waters several goodly Provinces, and
runs directly under the Walls of the City of Lisbon, where is one of the best
Harbors in the World.

This River is Situate under the 39th and 40th Degrees of North Latitude. Its
Entrance is to be seen far off at Sea by the Mountain called by the Portugueses
La Roqua. As you pass the Bar you must be very careful to avoid the Sand Banks
that are on the South side.

Before you come up to the City of Lisbon, you see the strong Fort and Town of
Cascais. The Fort of Cascais.
This place is about 5 Leagues distant from the Capital City, is always
provided with a good Garrison, and has a Port capable of containing Ships of a
great Bulk, but they don't ride very safely here, if the Wind blows hard at
West or South West. Cascais is dignified with the Title of a Marquisate,
belonging to one of the greatest Lords of the Kingdom. Near this place is the
Bar of Lisbon, where it is dangerous passing, if you are not provided with a
good Pilot, abundance of Ships having been lost here for want of such guides as
were well acquainted with this passage.

About two Leagues beyond Cascais there are two Forts; Two other Forts.
one whereof is Built upon Piles in the midst of the River; the Portugueses
call it a Torre de Bougio; the other is the Fort of St. Gian, or St. Julian;
both these Forts are provided with good Garrisons and a good Artillery, all the
Ships that either enter or go out of the Port of Lisbon, being obliged to pass
within the reach of their Cannon.

Half ways betwixt these two Forts and the City is the Castle of Belem or
Bethlehem. It is Built in the River, which is but narrow in this place. This
Castle is as carefully guarded as the rest, and here it is that the Officers of
the Custom-House visit all the Ships, going out of the Port, to see whether
they are discharged at the Custom-House, before they come away.

Near this Castle upon the very Banks of the River, there is a very large Town,
where the Sh^ps as they are going out are forced to come to an Anchor, to stay
for their last discharge from the Officers of the Custom-House within the
Adjacent Castle. It is a very Populous place, and affords all manner of
refreshment to such Ships as come there to an Anchor.

There is in this place a Convent belonging to the Bernardin Friars, one of the
finest in the whole Kingdom. It is called Bethlehem, (having given its Name to
the Adjacent Castle, and the Town it self) being Consecrated to the Memory of
the Birth of our Savior Jesus Christ. It was Founded by Don Manuel, King of
Portugal, under whose Reign the East Indies were first discovered by the
Portugueses. In the Church are to be seen several Tombs, and very Magnificent
Mausolaeum's of the Kings and Queens of Portugal.

On the other side of the River directly opposite to the Convent of Bethlehem,
you see a very large Structure, where such Ships as come from any places
suspected to be infected with the Plague, are obliged to unload their Goods,
and to keep their Quarantain all along the River side. Betwixt Bethlehem and
the City, you see very pleasant Country Houses, which afford a very delightful
Prospect to such as pass along the River.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the City of Lisbon.
THE City of Lisbon is the ordinary Residence of the Kings of Portugal, City of
Lisbon.
is one of the finest and richest Cities in all Europe, which affords every
thing that is most rare and precious in Foreign Countries. It contains 7 Hills
within the Precinct of its Walls, on one of these Hills is Built the Castle.
There are abundance of fine Churches in this City, among which, that of the
Jacobin Friars excels all the rest.

In one of the Chapels of this Church is an Altar, Its Churches.
where a Crucifix of an inestimable value of Relieve, is enclosed in an Iron
Grate, with the Wound in our Savior's Side; it is daily exposed to public
view, there being constantly kept 6 white Wax Candles, and 7 Lamps burning
before it. The great Chapel belonging to the Cathedral is also a most
magnificent Structure.

In a Convent called a Madre de Deos, there is to be seen the Handkerchief of
our Savior Jesus Christ, which most precious Relick is showed to the people
every Holy Friday in the Afternoon.

The Streets of Lisbon are generally very narrow, there being very few but such
as have been lately Built, which are passable for Coaches, and I suppose it is
upon this account that Chairs and Litters are so much used in this City.

The Royal Palace is Built upon the very Bank of the River. The grand
Place-Royal faces this Castle, called by the Portugueses, Tereriro de Paco,
where they run at the Ring, and keep their Bull-fightings.

There are in Lisbon several good Marketplaces, and other large and fine
Squares; abundance of stately Buildings, and a great number of Fountains, which
are to be seen all over the City, and serve both for an Ornament to the City,
and for the convenience of the Inhabitants.

The Portugueses are very cautious in following the French Fashion in their
Dresses. The Portuguese Women are very little, but well shaped. Ladies of
Quality appear abroad with their Faces uncovered, the rest wear Veils, but they
have a way of opening them, when they have a Mind to be seen.

CHAP. XXXIII.
My Departure from Lisbon and return into France.
AFter I had made the best Observations I could concerning every thing I
thought worth taking notice of in Lisbon, I took Shipping in a Vessel, which
was bound to Bayonne in France.

We weighed Anchor from before the Castle of Bethlehem on the 22d of July, and
the next day got out to Sea; but the Wind turning about, and it blowing very
hard all the following Night, our Mizen Mast Split, so that we were forced to
make toward the Shore to refit.

We came to an Anchor the next day in the Port of Cascais, where the Sieur Du
Casso, an Inhabitant of Bajonne and I went a-shoar, we continued there till the
28th of the same Month, when we took Shipping again, and got out at Sea a
second time.

But the Wind Steering about soon after we were fain to keep at a great
distance from the Shore; so we doubled the Cape of Finistre the 4th of August,
and Sailed along the Coast of Spain till the 15th of the same Month, when we
got sight of our Native Shore, and at the same time of a Vessel that was making
all the Sail she could toward us.

We having no more than 25 Men, and 6 Guns on Board, we thought it our best way
to change our Course; but whilst we were flying from our supposed Enemy, we
soon got sight of another, which made us alter our Resolution, and to pursue
our former course, which we did accordingly, but so near the Shore, that we
might have an opportunity of running our Vessel on Shore, if we should be
constrained so to do. Thus we Sailed all the Night, surrounded with terrible
apprehensions both of the danger of the Shore and our Enemies, but by Daylight
seeing but one of the Ships that were in pursuit of us the day before, and
finding our selves not far off of the River of Bayonne, we made all the sails
we could, and happily entered it the same Night. Thus after 10 Years Absence,
and a Thousand dangers and fatigues, the necessary consequences of long
Voyages, I had the satisfaction to set once more foot on Shore, the 16th day of
August, in my Native Country, France.

The End of the Second Part.
A TREATISE OF THE DISTEMPERS Relating in Particular to the Eastern Countries,
AND Such other DISEASES as commonly happen in the VOYAGES into those PARTS,
with their proper REMEDIES.

By M. C. D. D. E. M.

Translated from the French.

LONDON, Printed for D. Brown, at the Black-Swan, without Temple Bar; A.
Roper, at the Black-Boy; and T. Leigh, at the Peacock, both in Fleet Street,
School.

OF THE DISTEMPERS Peculiar to the Eastern-Countries, AND THEIR REMEDIES.
CHAP. I.
Of Vomiting.
VOmiting is the first inconveniency Travellors are afflicted with at Sea, it
is caused partly by the motion of the Ship, partly by the change of the Air.

Vomiting as common as it is, is sometimes not without danger. I have seen some
people of a tender Constitution weakened by it to that degree, that they were in
no small danger of their Life, by the great loss of Spirits. Others I have
seen, who for 3 or 4 Months together have not been able to stir out of their
Beds.

To prevent in some measure the violent Vomitting at Sea, it is very convenient
to take 2 or 3 proper Purges, a little before you go to Sea, especially if you
have not lived very regularly before. When you are at Sea, you may mitigate the
violence of it, if you keep your self quiet betwixt Decks, for the first 4 or 5
days of your Voyage, but not to abstain from Eating and Drinking, though you
should bring it up again immediately after; for, if you Vomit with a full
Stomach, you don't strain so violently as you do when it is empty, when violent
Vomitings cause often very dangerous Haemorrhagies.

It is of great moment, to feed at first upon nothing but what is of very easy
Digestion and good nourishment, to drink but little Wine, and to abstain as
much as possible can be from Brandy or Aqua vitae, it having been found by
Experience that strong Liquors are so far from fortifying the Stomach upon this
occasion, that they are rather very hurtful.

CHAP. II.
Of the Scurvy, called by the French, The Land-Evil.
THE Scurvy, called by the French Mariners, the Land Evil, is the most
dangerous and troublesome of all those Distempers, which are incident to those
that undertake great Voyages; it being not only contagious, but also scarce
ever to be cured till you get ashore.

The general Causes of this Distemper are, Causes of the Scurvy (...) Sea.
the Sea Air, the Salt Provision, both which cause great alterations in the
Blood; Melancholy, occasioned by the tediousness, and other Inconveniences of
long Voyages; Thirst, the common Companion of those who are to pass into the
Eastern-Parts, and that commonly at such a time when they stand most in need of
Refreshment. And last of all, the Nastiness of the Mariners, who seldom keep
themselves clean and neat.

For which reason it is, that the Officers, and others above the common Rank on
board these Ships, are not so much subject to the Scurvy as the common Seamen,
because they are better provided with change of Linen, and feed upon such
things as are of a better Digestion and Nourishment.

The first Symptoms of the Scurvy, appear most commonly in the Mouth and Gums,
which swell, grow black, and emit a very ill Scent, so that you are obliged to
make very deep Incisions, and sometimes to take away a considerable quantity of
corrupted Flesh and Matter, which not only loosens the Teeth, but also often
makes them fall out.

This Distemper discovers it self also frequently by certain black Spots, Its
Symptoms and Signs.
which appear upon the Arms, Legs and Thighs, and last of all over the whole
Body; and it is to be observed, that, the broader these Spots are, and nearer
the Heart, the more dangerous is the Distemper.

This Corruption of the Gums, and the breaking out into Blotches is commonly
preceded, or immediately followed by a nauseousness in the Stomach, a Laziness
by fainting and swooning Fits, pains in the Head, Arms and Legs, and a
Looseness, but seldom by any Fever, I having often observed, that the Pulse
commonly appears very little declining from its natural State and Motion.

The Blood being (for Reasons above-alledged) rendered thick and terrestrious,
does not circulate freely in the lesser Vessels, which are spread in the Gums,
the extremities of our Bodies, and all over our Skin; so that its motion
ceasing in those parts, they are deprived of their usual supply of Spirits;
what wonder is it if the coagulated Blood go's into a Corruption, from whence
proceed those Tumors and Blotches; And as the said Corruption is augmented in
proportion, and communicated to other parts, the circulation of the Blood is by
degrees also obstructed in the larger Vessels; from whence proceed those
violent Symptoms, but especially those frequent Swoonings, which are commonly
the forerunners of Death.

To prevent this Evil so destructive to Mariners, Precaution against the Scurvy.
the Officers, to whose management the Ship is committed; ought, before their
Embarquement to take effectual care that their Ships be Victuall'd with good
and sound Provision, that the Biscuits be not moldy, or the Victuals tainted,
which is too frequently practiced, to the great detriment of the whole
Ships-Crew, when either the Captain dares not contradict those who have the
Victualling of the Ship, or when out of covetousness he shares with others the
Profits arising by this Malversation.

When they are out at Sea, the Officers belonging to the Ship ought to be very
careful to have her kept (...) neat and clean, to cause her to be well swept,
and washed with Seawater every day, and to be sprink^'d and sweetn'd two or
three times a Week with good strong Vinegar, which purifies the Air, and
renders it more subtle and thin.

Each particular Person on board the Ship ought, as far as is possible, provide
himself with the Juice of Citrons, Limons, Ros solis, preserved and dried
Fruits, but especially with good Store of Prunes; to abstain as much as can be,
from all sorts of Meat, which are in the least tainted, from Salt-Flesh and
Fish, unless they be well fresh'd out; to feed much upon Rice, Barley and
Prunes, drink Wine mixed with Water, and not to abstain from drinking if you be
thirsty, unless it be in case of the highest necessity; to change frequently
your Linen, and to wash often your Mouths and the whole Body, to cleanse it
from all the Filth and ill Scents, which are engendered by the continual Sweats,
and which hindering the insensible Transpiration, do not a little contribute
toward the production of the Scurvy.

But if a body be already seized with this pernicious Disease, which will soon
appear by the swelling and blackness of the Gums, no time ought to be neglected
to stop the progress of this Evil, which in a little time will spread all over
the Body. If it be in a plethorick and vigorous Body, it will not be amiss to
let a little Blood, to facilitate the circulation of the Blood; but this ought
not to be done in great quantity, for fear of impairing the Patient's Spirits,
who in this Distemper stands in need of all his strength to support him against
his Enemy.

Some days after, Remedies against the ^^rvy.
you may make use of a gentle Purge, but above all, you ought frequently to
apply Clysters, if you have convenience to do it* but this is sometimes not to
be put in practice, by reason of the scarcity of fresh Water on board (...)
these Ships.

The next thing you have to do is to mix some good Vinegar, or Juice of Limons
or Citrons with some Salt, wherewith you must carefully wash your Mouth, and
rub your Gums till they bleed, which being nothing but the gross and
terrestrious part of the Blood settled in these parts, ought to be removed by
these means.

If the Scurvy appears in its true colors, I mea^ by the black Blotches upon
your Arms, Legs and Thighs, you must often wash them with warm Seawater, and
rub them soundly till they sma^^^ again. If you catch any of your Sea-Hogs,
(...) sure to bathe them well with their Blood, (...) having been found by
experience that it has a specific Quality against this Evil, at least to stop
its progress, which is as much as can be expect^^ to be done at Sea, it being
impossible entirely (...) eradicate this Distemper, unless it be on sho^^ where
those who have been seized with it at (...) are commonly Cured, and recover
their forme^ Health in a little time, oftentimes without any other Remedies,
unless they be brought so (...) before they have the good fortune to reach
(...) Land, as to want strength and spirits to overcom^ the frequent Swoonings,
and other violent Symptoms, which are often occasioned by the ch^ng^ of the Air.

But if inspite of all the Remedies the Distemper increases, and the Heart
begins to be infect^ by the malignant Vapors that are conveyed ^^^her from the
corrupted parts, you must have (...) course to such Cordials as are commonly
prescrib^ in those Cases, and of which there is always a sufficient provision
made, for Ships that are to go upon such long Voyages. But above all things,
(...) heed, as soon as the Scurvy appears, to abstain from any thing that is
Salted, and if you have no fresh Meat and Fish, feed, as I said before, upon
Rice and Barley, and I can assure you, that if you follow this Rule, by being
thus careful in your Diet, and to drink only a little Wine mixed with Water;
this alone, I say, will stand you in more stead to hinder the further progress
of this Evil, than all the Cordials are able to do, if you don't abstain from
Salt Diet, and such other Victuals as are not easily digestible and of ill
Nourishment.

It is of great help to those who are afflicted with this Distemper, to go on
shore in a hot Country, or in the Summer Season, but, if you happen to come to
an Anchor in a cold Climate, you must take care not to expose them to the cold
Air, but to keep them up close and very vvarm, Svveating being very beneficial,
and much conducing to the Cure of this Evil, especially if backed by a good
Diet, such as are all sorts of Meats of a kind Digestion and good Nourishment.

It is very proper, when they are upon recovery to let them Blood, to purge,
and to bathe them in lukewarm Water; but above all, not to neglect to give
them Clysters, which make up a great part of the Cure.

CHAP. III.
Of the Colicks of Madagascar.
SUch of our Ships-Crew as were used to drink Wine, and could not meet with any
in the Isle Dauphine, used frequently to debauch themselves in Brandy and Aqua
vitae, Their Cause.
which with the heat of the Climate, and the violent motion they used in
traveling up and down the Isle, putting the bilious Humor into a ferment,
proved the cause of these violent Colicks, which used frequently to seize upon
those who were given to Drunkenness; whereas those who led a sober Life, scarce
ever felt the effects of this Evil, or if they did, it was not with near so
much violence as the rest.

These Colicks are accompanied with very violent Symptoms; Symptoms.
they are never without a Fever, you observe a great alteration in the Pulse,
and the Patient is often troubled with a stoppage of the Urine. The tormenting
Pains cause frequent Convulsions and Palsies in several parts of the Body,
which continue sometimes after the Colic is passed.

To cure this Disease, Cu^e*
I always ordered them to be let Blood in the Foot; next to which, I used to
have some Anodine Clysters applied, and often repeated, besides Fomentations,
and bathing the inferior part of the Body up to the Navel with lukewarm Water.
But above all, you must have recourse to the Pills of Laudanum, without which
the Patients will have but little rest. For, it is to be observed, that the
choierick Humor being settled betwixt the Tunicks of the Intestines, you must
be very careful of irritating them by strong Remedies; wherefore it is most
advisable to abstain from all sorts of Purges, even those that perfect their
Operation very gently, I having been convinced by experience, that they cannot
be made use of without danger, as long as the pain of the Colic continues.

The Negro's in those Parts, whose Bodies are accustomed and inured to the heat
of the Climate, and who consequently travel with less fatigue and trouble; and,
who having no Aqua vitae of their own, but only such as we used now and then to
treat them withal, and consequently not being in a capacity to drink it to any
excess, and that but seldom, were seldom afflicted with this Distemper, or if
they sometimes were, the Cure was much easier with them than with the Frenchmen.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Venereal Distemper in the Isle Dauphine*
THis Distemper is as common, and appears with the same Symptoms among the
Frenchmen living in those Parts, as among the Negro's, they being equally given
to Debauchery. The Europeans commonly make use of their own Surgeons, who
cure them in the same manner, as is usual among us.

The Negro's are never so careful as to cure themselves, when they see the
forerunners of this Evil (which is needless to be named here) to appear, they
never trouble themselves to be cured, till the whole mass of Blood being
infect^d with the malignan^y of the Distemper, its symptoms appear so terrible,
that they think it no longer time to delay the Cure.

Mercury and Guaiacum are unknown to them; if the Distemper have not taken too
deep root, they only purge themselves, and sweat frequently* But if it be
inveterate, they take a broad red hot Iron, which they thus apply to the bottom
of their Feet, How the Negro's cure the French Pox.
which producing an Ulcer, they let it run for thirty or forty days, keeping an
exact Diet, by which means they pretend to evacuate the malignant Humor. But
as these people are extremely debauched, and consequently seldom without some
Symptoms of this Distemper; it is hard to be judged whether they are perfectly
cured by this cruel Remedy or not.

CHAP. V.
Of the Distempers of the Indies, and first of their Fevers.
MAlignant Fevers are not frequent in the Indies, but the simple continual
Fevers are much in vogue. Among the intermitting Fevers, the Tertians and
double Tertians are the most common; and as their Cure is very difficult in
those Parts, Italian Physicians.
so they prove often mortal.

The Pagan Physicians, whom they call Pandites, are a sort of People without
Learning or any Knowledge or insight into Anatomy. All their Skill is confined
to a certain number of Receipts, which they have received by Tradition from
their Ancestors; these they apply promiscuously, without making the least
Alteration, as often as they meet with a Patient af^licted with the same
Distemper, against which their Receipt was intended, without making the least
reflection upon the different Age, Sex, Constitution, o^ Strength of their
Patients. They are very timorous, and rather will let a Patient perish than run
the hazard of a Remedy, which, as they believe, not being sufficiently approved
by experience, appears doubtful to them, though they judge the Distemper to be
mortal, or incurable without it.

Nevertheless it is observable, that by their long experience they have made
such Observations concerning certain Distempers peculiar to those Countries,
that they practice with better success than the most learned foreign
Physicians, who upon certain occasions must follow their footsteps, if they
expect to succeed in their Cures in this Climate.

They never allow their Patients afflicted with any kind of Fever in the
Indies, neither Meat, neither Eggs or Broth, this would be as much as the
Patient's life is worth, if they should give them any of these things. They
allow them no other Drink but fair Water, and for the rest for their
sustenance, they give them a Cange, which is made in the following manner.

They beat about half a Pound of Rice in two or three quarts of Water, which
they boil so long, till the Rice be well broken, which is commonly done in an
hours time. Then they strain it through a Linen-Cloth, and squeeze it well to
draw out all the goodness from the Rice; of this they give a Spoonful at a
time, four or five times a day to the Patient, making it always warm, and
putting a little Salt into it, to make it the more savory. I shall have
occasion to tell you anon, upon what occasion they put Pepper into this Cange.

This Cange besides that it nourishes well, The Cange of the Indians.
serves also to squench the Thirst; I must confess I prefer this much before
our Jelly-Broaths, it coming much nearer to the Diets prescribed us by the
ancient Physicians in these cases, than what is used now adays in France,
rather by the connivance than the approbation of the Physicians.

For, is it not very strange to see a sick body to take more Nourishment,
whilst he is sick, than perhaps he used to do when he was in Health? It being
beyond all question, that Jelly-broath taken perhaps seven or eight times a
day, and new-laid Eggs, which we give our Patients, contain more Nourishment,
and produce a greater quantity of pure Chyle than a moderate quantity of Bread
and Meat, which is the ordinary Food of People, when they are in good Health.

Besides this, the Cange has also this Excellency, that it causes no aversion
in the Patient, which is the general Inconveniency in these strong Broths,
which being taken with so much Repugnancy, can scarce be supposed to produce
any good effect.

If it be a continual Fever, they allow them nothing else but Cange; but if it
be a Tertian Ague, they allow them betwixt the Fits, to eat a little Bread and
Sweetmeats; But no kind of Meat or Eggs, unless it be after the Ague has
entirely left them, and that there is no fear of a Relapse.

Letting of Blood is much used among the Indians, Letting of Blood and Cupping.
and that with good Success; the Pandites, being by long Experience, convinced
of the usefulness of this Remedy, will sometimes let Blood twenty times one
after another, without the least Reluctance to be observed in the Patient, who
never grumble here at what their Physicians do, but are exactly observant to
their Orders, much beyond what is practiced in most Parts of Europe, where the
Patients, their Friends, and the Nurses propose their own Remedies, before the
Physician's Prescriptions.

They let blood most commonly in the Foot with extraordinary good Success; and
I have made this Observation, not only in the Indies, but also in all other
places which I have visited in my Travels, as well as in France, that there are
few Distempers, where the letting of Blood in the Foot proves not more
successful than when done in the Arm.

The Indians prescribe Cupping and Leeches in those Distempers, where they
don't think it proper to let blood.

Clysters are also much in use among them, they are composed of Senna, Cassia
and Tamarinds, and so are their Purges, which have the same effect only by two
different ways; they mix with them some Sirups of Simples, to wit: of Cichory,
Roses, Limons and Maidenhair.

Chemical Preparations are unknown to the Pandites; they are surprised when
they see us Foreigners to produce such Evacuations as we do* by the help of
such small quantities of Physic.

The Pandites perceiving the Urine of the Patient that is afflicted with a
Fever to be white, they judge it to proceed from a cold Cause, without having
the least respect to the Delirium and other Symptoms, which are the ordinary
signs of this Urine.

For which purpose they put Pepper in the Cange, which they apply to the
Patient's Head, to warm the Brains, which, they say, are too cold; and for the
same reason it is, that they will not let blood in such a case, before they
find the Urine to be of a high Color.

I have made it my particular Observation, that of all those that ever I saw,
who were seized with a Delirium before they were let blood, and whose Urines
appeared thus white in the beginning, very few escaped with life, unless, by
good fortune they happened to light into the hands of some European Physicians,
who are better acquainted with the true cause of this Distemper and its
Symptoms; of which, I cannot forbear to give you an instance.

I lived at Daman for several Months, where, inspite of all the Pandites there,
who were very envious at me, I was employ^d as a Physician in all the best
Families. I had some time before had under my Cure the eldest Daughter of a
certain Lady of the best Quality in that place, in which I had succeeded so
well, that I received all the acknowledgment imaginable from her hands.
Nevertheless, one of her younger Daughters being fallen dangerously ill of a
continual Fever with a Delirium; the Lady, upon the persuasion of a certain
Pandite, who had been a Physician to the Family a great while, made use of his
Prescriptions, without letting me know any thing of the matter; But finding her
Child grow worse and worse, she sent to me unknown to the Pagan Physician,
desiring my advice concerning her Daughter. It was the ninth Day, when I was
called to her, and finding her Urine of a whitish color, and the Fever very
high with a violent Delirium, I drew from thence far different Indications to
what the Pandite had done; and having remonstrated to her Mother the danger of
her Daughter, who was not above seven years of age, I ordered her to be let
blood immediately. The Indian Physician happening to come in the same moment,
maintained in my presence, that the Fever proceeding from a cold Cause, the
young Lady would infallibly die if she were let blood; but I laughed at the
weakness of his Argument, and my Advice prevailing with the Child's Friends, she
was let blood, and I took from her head the Pepper mixed with the Cange, of
which there was near half a pound, very finely beaten upon the Child's head; I
let her, in all, five or six times blood, after which the Fever left her, and I
consummated the Cure by giving her 2 or 3 Purgations, contrary to the
expectation of the Pagan Physician, who thought her death to have been
infallible.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Distemper called, The Indians Mordechi.
THe Distemper called by the Indians, Mordechi, is properly no more, than an
Indigestion, very frequent among the Indians, whose Stomachs by reason of the
violence of the Heats, and the continual Sweats, are very weak, and
consequently apt to be surfeited; so that sometimes this Distemper, as slight
as it appears at first sight, is very dangerous, and kills People in a few
hours time, if they are not assisted with proper Remedies.

Excess in eating and drinking, Its causes and Signs.
especially of such things as are not of an easy Digestion, especially at
Night is the ordinary Cause of this Distemper. Its signs are, sudden Heat,
pains in the Head, want of rest, with a Fever, Delirium, Vomiting and
Looseness; the Pulse is strong and uneven* the Urine sometimes red, sometimes
white, but always clear; These signs are not always apparent in one and the
same Subject, but this Distemper being very acute, and making quick dispatch,
it is not advisable to stay till all of them appear, but by some of them it is
easy to guess at the rest.

The first and chief Remedy to be applied to those whom they imagine to be
seized with the Mordechi is, The Cure.
to burn their Feet; This they do with a red hot Iron of the thickness of a
common Roasting-Spit, wherewith they touch the Feet of the Patient cross the
Ankles, in that part where it is most callous, and hold it close to the place,
till the Patient begin to cry out, and signify thereby that he begins to be
sensible of the Pain, when it is taken away immediately; which done, they take
a Slipper or some such thing, and give two or three good Strokes upon the
place, where the Iron has touched, which prevents the rising of a Blister,
without any further Application.

This manner of burning with an Iron, as terrible as it appears at first sight,
does not any considerable to the place where it is applied; and I have seen
some walk as freely immediately after, as if they had not been touched with any
thing. It is certain that this Remedy stops the violence of the Mordechi, and
oftentimes cures all its Symptoms in an instant; and if it happen that the
Fever continue some time after, it never proves dangerous, and is easy to be
cured by ordinary Remedies.

It is also in these Fevers, that the Indians put abundance of Pepper in the
Cange, which they give both inwardly to the Patients, and apply it outwardly to
their Heads, as we have mentioned it before. And generally speaking, it is only
by these means and burning under the Feet, they cure this Distemper, without
letting Blood, which would infallibly prove mortal, if it were made use of in
the beginning of this Distemper. Neither do they prescribe any Purgations (if
there be occasion for any) till after the most violent Symptoms are ceased, and
that there is no further appearance of a Fever.

I don't in the least question, but that abundance of People will look upon
this Cure, which is performed by burning the Feet, as ridiculous, and not fit
to be taken notice of, considering there seems to be so very slender a relation
betwixt the Remedy and the Distemper, for which it is put in use. I cannot
deny, but that at my first coming into the Indies, I was of the same opinion,
till being convinced of the truth of it by experience, I have since that time
put it in practice as well upon my self, as a great many others, never without
good success, when all other Remedies, which I had applied to some, in hopes to
remove the cause of this Distemper have proved ineffectual.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Bloody Flux.
DYsenteries of all kinds are contagious, not easy to be cured, dangerous, and
very often mortal, not only in the Indies, but more frequently on Shipboard.

The Indians are no less subject to this Distemper than the Europeans; but the
latter are not so easy to be cured as the first, by reason of their
Debaucheries in Wine and Aqua vitae, which is not so common among the Eastern
Nations.

If the Dysentery has a Fever for its Companion (which indeed it is seldom
without) the Pandites give to the Patients of their Cange, and some Rice very
thick boiled, but without Salt; this they mix with an equal quantity of curded
sour Milk, which they praise as the most sovereign Remedy in the Universe
against this Distemper; But I must confess that I never saw it made use of, but
it proved fatal; they let blood in this Distemper and repeat it frequently; But
they don't make use of any Purgations, nay not so much as of any Anodyne
Clysters, which they say, would increase the Evil, but in lieu of them they
make use of Astringents; which as they sometimes stop the Flux, without
removing the Cause; so the Patients by the violence of the Torments, are put
under most intolerable Inquietudes, resting neither day nor night; To obviate
this, they give them Opium very plentifully, and that without the least
Preparation, sometimes ten Grains for one Dose.

It cannot be denied but that the Indians, being accustomed to the use of Opium,
they can bear a much greater Quantity than the Europeans; nevertheless I can
testify it, I know very few that have been cured by their Opium, as little as
by their other Remedies they make use of in this case.

But if this method commonly proves pernicious to the Indians, it was certainly
fatal to such Europeans as trusted themselves to the management of these Pagan
Physicians; and I do protest to you, that I never saw any European who was
afflicted with the Dysentery, but what died under their Hands.

I am apt to believe, that those who rightly under stand the pernicious quality
of Opium, will give credit to what I say; and it was Chiefly upon this account
that I could never be prevailed upon to follow the Method of these Pagan
Physicians in this case; I was rather contented that they should call in those
Pandites, and take their Remedies from their own hands, without my Approbation.

Thus it hapn'd to a certain religious Person, who during my stay on the Coast
of Malabar, being taken dangerously ill of a Dysentery with a Fever, and
finding that the Remedies which I had prescribed did not produce the desired
effect, he asked my consent to call in a Pandite, which being done accordingly,
he prescribed the good Father five or six Doses of Opium, mixed with Oil and
Jagre, or Suchar of the Coco's, by which means he sent the Patient to the other
World.

It was no small dissatisfaction to me, to find, that all the Remedies I
applied in this case, did not answer the desired Effect, which raised in me an
extraordinary desire, of finding out such a method, as might effectually answer
my expectation*

I had observed among the Portugueses, that they prescribed only Cange, Rice,
Bread, and Chaly-beat-water in the Bloody Flux, and that, after some gentle
Purgations, they made use of Astringent Medicines, entirely rejecting the use
of the Curds and of Opium of the Pandites. This Method I must confess, as it
appears more reasonable, so I thought it must be more secure than that used by
the Indians.

But this not giving me all the Satisfaction I could wish for in this case, I
got at last, by good fortune, acquainted with a certain Person, who having
lived for many years together in the Indies, taught me a certain Preparation,
which is as easily taken as prepared, by the help of which, and certain Rules
to be observed in the management of the Diet, I have cured a great many Persons
in the Indies, on Shipboard, and in France, after my return from the Indies.

It is not to be denied, but that the Flux may proceed from different Causes,
and that therefore there ought to be a suitable Change to be observed, both in
relation to the Remedy and Diet, but this being no difficult task for a
Physician, who understands the true nature and cause of a Distemper; I am well
assured, that, provided, the Patient be not too far gone, it never fails to
cure any Dysentery of what nature soever.

CHAP. I.
Of the Distempered Persons, called by the Portugeses, Esfalfados.
YOU meet frequently in the Indies, with a sort of sick People, called by the
Portugeses, Esfalfados; they are such as have wasted all their natural Strength
and Vigor, by the accesses of Debauchery with Women; which frequently happ^ns
in a Climate, whereby the continual Sweats, occasioned by the excessive heats,
there is a constant Dissipation of our Spirits; which is evident in the
Indians, whose Bodies being accustomed to the Climate, are seldom subject to
this Distemper, though it must be also confessed that they are much more moderate
in this point than the Portugeses.

The cause of this Distemper is, what I have alleged just now; Its signs are,
great Droughts, Heats, Inquietudes, a continual Fever, with a nauseous sme^l in
the Stomach; The Pulse beats uneven, sometimes very high, and by and by so low
as to be sca^^e discernable; Their Urine is red but clear.

This being a common Distemper in those parts, which if treated like other
Fevers, would doubtless prove fatal. A Physician therefore when called to a
Pa^ient, ought to act with a great deal of circumspection, for fear of
committing a mistake, not to be repaired afterward, by all his Skill; For
which reason he ought very strictly to examine his Patient concerning his
former course of Life, especially if it be a young body, who perhaps is
unwilling to discover his Faults in the pre^ence of his Friends, or Parents.
For this Fever, without duly pondering all the circumstances, may ^eceive the
most expert Physician, I having known Examples of those that died of this
Distemper, because they were but once let blood.

The chief Indication of the whole Cure con^ists in restoring the decayed
strength and spirits of the Patient, which is best to be done by giving him
Meats of an easy Digestion, and of good Nourishment; as good Jelly Broths,
New-laid Eggs, and other Meats prepared with all sorts of good Gravies. Let
them drink good Wine, mixed ^ess or more with Water, according as they were
used to drink it, when they were in health; but let them by no means drink
common Water or Barley Water, for fear that the abovementioned Diet should
augment the Fever, it being so far from it, that it will certainly remove it.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Smallpox.
IN the Indies they know no other Plague or Infectious Distemper besides the
Smallpox; they are as contagious there as in Europe, and though one might
suppose them to be less dangerous in a Climate, where the Pores of our Bodies
being always open, consequently facilitate the Expulsion of the venomous
Matter, they make worse havoc here than in Europe, by the unsk ilfulness of
the Pandites, who being ignorant of the true way of assisting Nature in her
efforts by proper Remedies, let her be oppressed by the weight of the Di^temper*

These Pagan Physicians used to be extreaml^ scandalized when they saw us let
blood and orde^ Clysters before the cruption of the Smallpox and though they
found the success for the most part answerable to the intention, for which they
were put in practice, yet they could not overcome their own obstinacy so far as
to follow our footsteps.

The Malabars use those infected with this Distemper more cruelly than any
others of the Eastern-Nations. For they are not contented to let them lie alone
without giving them the least attendance or any other manner of assistance,
(...) fear of an infection; but they will not even (...) them in their Houses, but
expose them at a good distance from their dwelling-places, under some Tree or
another. All the ca^e they take of them is to bring them every day some Cange,
which they leave near them, without taking the least Care whether they take it
or not; For they cannot be persuaded to touch any body that is af^^^cted with
the Smallpox, for fear of catching them, till they are fully restored to
H^alth, which is the reason (as it is easy to be judged) that they prove so
fatal among them.

CHAP. X.
Of the Bitings of the Adders.
AMong the several kinds of Adders, which are to be found in the Indies, some
are of so pernicious a nature, that, whenever they infect any Person, he dies
in an instant, without the least hope of relief. Of this kind are the green
ones, of which I have spoke before, when I treated of the Coast of Malabar. The
Poison which issues from the rest, being not altogether of so quick an
operation, give one sometimes leisure to obviate the Evil by proper Antidotes.

They make use in the Indies, of a certain Stone, which they say, is found in
the Heads of some Adders, and for that reason is called by the Portugeses, The
Adder-sto^^
Pedra de Cobre, or Adders Stone. This they apply to the place where the Adder
has fixed her Poison, where the Stone fastens it self, without any other help,
and having sucked in as much of the Poison, as it is able to contain, it falls
off; Then they put it in Milk, where having discha^g'd the Poison it had
attracted before, it is applied afresh in the same manner, as before, till such
time that it will not fasten no longer, which is an evident sign, that the
Poison is removed, and the Danger past.

It is observable, that when this Stone is put in Milk to discharge the Poison,
the Milk appears as if Excrements had been put into it, and of several Colors.
I have been frequently an eyewitness of the stupendous effects of this Stone;
but the worst is, that it is a great Rarity to meet with a good one, there
being abundance of Counterfeit ones, who have not the same Virtue.

If it therefore happen that any one be bitten by an Adder, and you have not
any of these true Stone, at hand, the best way is to have that part where the
Wound is, scarified, and by the help of Cups to draw as much Blood from thence
as you can; afterward apply to the place such Remedies, as have a peculiar
Virtue to attract Poison, from the Center of the Body to it Circumference. For
which purpose it is convenient, to keep the Wound open for a considerable time,
to use Juice of Citrons or Limons, in every thing you eat, drink Wine, and take
inwardly the true Powder of Vipers, provided it may be had unadulterated. These
are, in my Opinion, the most proper Antidotes to be made use of, upon such an
occasion.

The Poison of these pernicious Creatures being so volatile, and of so subtle a
nature, as to be soon conveyed to the Heart, many times before it is possible
to apply proper Antidotes, a great many die miserably for want of present
Convenience to obviate the Evil, before it siezes their Vitals.

It is upon this score, that we have seen some of the Indians, who were
sensible of their present danger on such an occasion, cut off themselves
immediately that Member which they knew to be infected by the Poison. Of this I
remember an instance in a certain Naher, during my stay at Tilcery.

This Gentleman being a little overcome by the Tarry or Palm Tree Wine, found
one of these small green Adders, (the most pernicious kind of all) which he
took by the Tail, and played with her so long, till she found means to bite him
in the Finger. The Naher, notwithstanding he was in drink, being sensible of
the present danger of loosing his Life, killed the Adder, and in an instant cut
off his Finger.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Distemper, called by the Portugeses, Bicho.
THE Word Bicho, signifies in the Portugese Language as much as an Earth-worm,
or a small Creature; besides which the Portugueses use it for three several
sorts of Distempers, peculiar to the Inhabitants of the Coast of Brasil.

The first is occasioned by a certain kind of a Worm, long and pretty thick,
which being engendered in the Legs, causes most cruel Pains, afterward very
sordid Ulcers, and last of all, an incurable Gangrene, if you don't prevent it
in time; by opening the Skin where it lies, from whence you may draw out the
Worm by winding of it gradually round a large Needle or small Sticks, but very
gently, for fear of tearing the Worm in pieces, in which case you must make a
large Incision, to take out the remaining part; The Worm being removed, you may
apply common Detergents to the Ulcer, and afterward Cicatrise it, after the
ordinary way.

The Bicho of the second kind is a Worm, but so small, as it is impossible to
be seen by the most clear-sighted. They are in great quantities in ruined
Houses, as well as new Buildings, and among Excrements and Dust.

They enter insensibly through the Pores of the Skin, especially in the Feet,
insinuate themselves betwixt the Flesh and Skin, and will sometimes settle
under the Nails. The Negro's and Brasilians, who go barefooted, are often
troubled with them, and the Europeans, though they commonly wear Shoo's and
Stockins, are not always free from this Mischance. These small Worms, don't
cause any immediate Pain; on the contrary, it is a great while before you are
sensible of them, unless you carefully look upon your feet every day. But they
soon increase in your Skin, and in fourteen or fifteen days time, grow as big
as a Pea, and do easily discover themselves by their black Color. The safest
way is, to take them out as soon as you are sensible of them; for the longer
they remain in the Skin, the more difficult they are to be taken out; and, if
they are there long enough, they will cause a Corruption, which produces such
malignant Ulcers, that I have seen oftentimes Negro's, to have the Flesh of
their Feet corrupted in so miserable a manner, that the bare Bones appeared.

It is next to an impossibility to avoid catching of these Worms: The only way
is to take care not to let them settle long in the Skin; for if they be taken
in time, they are not attended with any considerable ill consequences. If they
have caused any Corruption or Ulcers, they may be cured after the common way,
after you have taken out the Worms, or have killed them with Tobacco-powder.
Besides this, the Portugeses, living on the Coast of Brasil, are pestered with
another Distemper, which they call Bicho; This is an Inflammation in the
Fundamental, which as it is very common, so it is no less dangerous in this
Country; Heat-aches and Burning-heats in the affected part, being the constant
companions of these Inflammations, which are often not without a Fever; and if
neglected, produce in a few days time very malignant Ulcers, from whence this
Distemper has gotten the name Bicho.

Such as keep these parts clean by washing them often with fair Water only, are
less subject to this Evil, than such as do otherwise. As soon as you find your
self siez'd by this Distemper, bath it oftentimes a day with a Decoction made
of Limons, and mix with it a little Salt. You may also put with good success
Slices of Limons within your Fundament, which often cures the Distemper without
any more ado, if you take it in the beginning. But if it be already gone into a
Corruption, they used to dilate some Gunpowder with a sufficient quantity of
Rose or Plantain-Water, in which Liniment they dip some Linen-Rags, which they
put in the Fundament, not neglecting to bath it before with the Decoction of
Limons. Special care is to be taken, that if a Fever appear in this case, not
to let blood, it having been found by Experience, that it has always proved
prejudicial. It is much more safe to keep constant to Anodyne and Detersive
Clysters, according as the Corruption or Inflammation is more or less, and to
conclude the whole Cure with a gentle Purge.

FINIS.
A Supplement TO THE Sieur DELLONE's RELATION of his VOYAGE TO THE East Indies.

Taken out of the Sieur De Rennefort's HISTORY of the EAST INDIES.

CONTAINING A short Account of the Isle of St. Helens; Of the Isle of
Teneriffe; Of the Isle of Ceylon; Of the Cape of Good-Hope; The Isle of
Madagascar: And some other Matters, having a near Relation to the former
TREATISE.

London, Printed for A. Roper, at the Black-Boy, over against St. Dunstan' s
Church, Fleet Street, and D. Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible, without
Temple Bar. School.

A Supplement TO THE Sieur DELLONE's VOYAGE TO THE East Indies, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the Isle of St* Helens.
THE Isle of St. Helens is situate under the Torrid Zone, at sixteen degrees of
Southern Latitude, having but one Landing-place, to wit, In that Part where the
English have their Fort. Its Circumference is of about five Leagues, being
surrounded with unaccessible Rocks; You enter, or rather climb up to the
Island, just near the Fort, by many Steps, near a Mile high, from whence a
Soldier had broke his Neck, a few Weeks before, as he was going up, this being
the only Person that died there in six years before; The Air was extremely
wholesome here, the heat of the Sun being allayed by the continual Dews and
small Rains.

It is a very fruitful Island, affording good store of Pease, Beans, Reddishes,
Turnips, Cabbages, A^ana's, Banana's, Citrons, Oranges, Melons and
Pomegranates. The English told us, that Vines would not thrive in this Island.
There is also a p^odigious Quantity of Rats, who consume all the Wheat and Rice
that is sowed. They have great plenty of Rabbits. They have several times
transported some Horses thither, but they grew so wild in a little time, that
they would let no body come near them; and if they were pursued and driven into
a Corner, they would rather precipitate themselves from the Rocks that surround
the Island, into the Sea, than suffer themselves to be caught.

There are also good Patridges, and some other sorts of wild Fowl; so that they
enjoy here all the Conveniences of Human Life, were it not for these Rats,
which being their only redoubtable Enemies, the English endeavor by all means
possible, to extirpate from this Island, which belongs to the English
East India Company. The Inhabitants live upon Biscuit, Oil, and Salt-Beef,
besides what their own Grounds furnish them withal. Most of them have their
settled Habitations in the Island, and only come at certain times, in their
turns, to do duty in the Fort.

This Island affords a very delightful Prospect at a great distance at Sea, by
reason of the vast height of the Rocks, which appearing at nine or ten Leagues
distance, seem to out-brave the force of the whole Ocean.

CHAP. II.
A Description of the Isle of Teneriffe.
THE Isle of Teneriffe is about eighteen Leagues long, and ten broad. The
Principal Fort, which lies under the eight and twentieth degree, has four
Bastions, which commands the adjacent Town, called Vera Cruz, where is the
safest Landing in the whole Island.

Toward the North on the Seaside, there are three other small Forts, and on
the South Side another Fort, built in the nature of a Castle with round Towers.
Betwixt the Seaside and the Town, there are two small Forts, which defend the
Passage that leads to the City. There are in the place three Monasteries,
belonging to the Jacobines, Carmelites and Austin Friars, as many Nunneries,
and a Cathedral very handsomely built.

About two Leagues from Lagona, there issues out of a Mountain a very large
Spring, on both sides of which are very high Trees, who by the thickness of
their Leaves, keep the Sunbeams from heating the Water, which is extremely
cool near the Spring. The circumjacent Hills were stored with Orange, Citron,
and Pomegranate Trees, the Fruits of which covered the Grounds where they
stood, on the foot of the Mountain, is seen a very pleasant Wilderness, near
one side of which, the Water of the Spring fell from the descent of the Hill,
with a pleasing noise, and gathering below in a Channel, run with an easy
current for a League and a half through the adjacent Plains. From hence it was by
a large Aqueduct, about half a League in length, conve^^^d till within two
hundred Paces distance of (...), which was furnished with fresh Water by (...)
very large Cisterns with Cocks for the use of the Inhabitants. There is also
near the City (...) a Hill a small Lake, surrounded with other Hills, where the
Cattle belonging to the Inhabitants are furnished with Water.

The People of Quality in the Isle of Teneriffe, are very obliging; But the
Vulgar, are here, as all over Spain, very proud and lazy, there being scarce a
Handycrafts-Fellow, but what has his great Sword on his side, whether at home
or abroad; and will rather starve at home, or at the best rather be contented
with Pulse and Roots, than to go to fetch it from abroad, there being great
store of Wild-Fowl here. The Women wear Veils, but have a way of squinting
through it with one eye.

Their Wheat is not unlike the Turkey Wheat. The Products of Teneriffe.
Malvasier Wine they have in great plenty. A whole Pipe cost commonly not above
twenty Ducats. They pay seventeen Reals for Custom when it is exported, so that
in all it does not amount to above fourscore and nine French Livers; A Pipe
containing four hundred and fourscore pints of Paris measure, which is above a
hundred English Gallons* They have here great plenty of Money, for which reason
your Foreign Merchants Trade hither, with very great advantage.

The chief Commodities to be vended here, are, Swords, Pistols, Knives, Combs,
Cloths, Clokes, Black and Gray, Broad Hats, Ribons and Linen-Cloaths.

Just opposite to Santa Cruz, there is another Harbor, which they call La
Rota, the rest of this Island being environed by unaccessable Rocks. The Famous
Picque of Teneriffe, which is two Leagues distant from L^gona, is 47812 Feet
high* The top of it is never without Snow.

CHAP* III.
Of the Cities of Fernamboucq and Olinde on the Coast of Brasil.
THE City of Fernamboucq is built upon a Point of Land, having on one side the
Ocean, and on the other a small branch of the Sea, which they call the River
Sallee. The City of Fernamboucq.
Its figure is Circular, containing not above three hundred edifices, which
deserve the name of well built houses, the rest being rather cottages, not
above one story high. The Parish Church stands in the Center of the Town.

There is a small Island, which being separated by the abovementioned Branch of
the Sea, from the City, is joined to it by a long narrow Bridge sustained by
forty five Arches, whereof some are of Stone, the rest of Wood, the last are
built for the convenience of the Tide, and the first to serve as a solid
foundation of the whole Fabric. It is called St. Anthony's Island, it contains
about a hundred Houses, besides three Monastries; one belonging to the
Recollects, which is a fine structure, the other to the Jefuits, and the third
to the French Capucines.

There is all along the Coast of Brasil a vast tract of Rocky Mountains, which
run all along the Southern Coast of America even as far as the Streights of
Magellan being above seven hundred Leagues in length; They are called the Recif
in their Language.

This Congeries of Mountains has its large Breches in several p^aces, which
most of them make convenient Harbors, as all Fernamboq, which is counted one
of the best Ports in all America.

At the entrance of this Port, you see two very strong Forts, Forts near
Fernambouq.
one of which is built upon some of the Rocks of the Recif, lying Perpendicular
with the surface of the Water at High-Tide.

Just on the point of Land, upon which is the City of Fermambouq, opposite to
that of the Recif is a Fort-Royal, Surrounded with very strong Pallisadoes. Two
other Forts are Erected on the Land side, for the defense of the City, one of
which lies on the West, the other on the South side of the Town.

About a League and a half North from Fernambouq, The City of Olinda.
is the City of Olinda, formerly a very handsome City, approaching in bigness
to the City of Orleans in France before it was ruined by the Hollanders. It was
built upon four Hills, which afford a very delightful prospect. There are as
yet remaining a few goodly Houses, but the ruins of the old ones are sufficient
testimonies of its former luster. The remains upon one of these Hills standing
to this day the house belonging to the Jesuits, which has cost a Hundred
thousand Pounds building. Besides which, there are several other Monasteries
belonging to the Benedictines, Capuchines, the Carmelites and Grey-Friars.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Isle of Ceylon, and the Forts the Dutch are Possessed of in that Island.
THE Hollanders have several Colonies in the Isle of Ceylon, among which the
Cities of Portugal and Colombo are the chiefest. The City of Portugal.
Portugal lies in a very convenient Bay, about three Leagues distant from a
very high Mountain which appears at Sea in the shape of a Pique, like that of
Teneriffe, and serve^ as a guide to the Mariners. Near the City is a very
regular Fort, which defends the entrance of the Harbor.

To the South of Portugal, betwixt that City and Colombo, there is another
goodly Plantation upon an Eminence near the Seaside, called Barberin.

About twenty Leagues distant from Portugal is the City of Colombo; it is
situate in a very fair plain, near the Seashore, The City of Colombo.
being surrounded with a vast number of fine Trees, which afford a very
delightful Prospect. Just by is a very large Castle very considerable for its
strength. Besides which they are Masters of Negombo and Japhnepatan, two very
considerable Cities, and have Fortified all the Western, Nothern and Southern
Coasts of this Island; as for the Eastern parts, they have, as it seems,
neglected them, because thereabouts grows but little Cinnamon.

The Portugueses had formerly in their Possession several Forts in this Island,
which the Dutch have taken from them, and Demolished them. The two choicest
were called Tinkemale and Battecalo, situate betwixt the seventh and eighth
Degree of Northern Latitude.

The Last of these two is situate upon a River disemboguing in a very fair Bay,
Battecalo.
where there is very safe riding at Anchor for Ships, who may without any
danger enter the River which is both very large and deep. On the point of this
Bay there might be built a Fort, which would lie very convenient to Command the
Bay.

I am well assured that the King of Ceylon would be willing enough to bestow
this tract of ground upon a Foreign Prince, in case they would assist him
against the Dutch, who export the Cinnamon in prodigious Quantities, without
paying any Customs, under pretense that they having been at great Expenses to
deliver that Island from the Portugueses, they ought to keep such Cities and
Forts as they have taken from the Portugueses, and (which by virtue of a Treaty
made with the King of Ceylon they were to deliver into his hands) in their
possession as a pledge for their money till it be repaid, and that in the mean
while they take the Cinnamon on discount of the interest.

There might easily a correspondence be settled betwixt Battecalo and the City
of Candie, the Residence of the King of Ceylon, being situate in the very
Center of the Island, about two days journey from Battecalo, and as many from
Colombo.

Not far from the City of Candie, toward the side of Battecalo, there is a
very fine Wood of Cinnamon Trees, which hitherto has escaped both the hands of
the Portugueses and Dutch, as being so near the Residence of the King. But it
is most probable that the Dutch do not think it worth their while to put
themselves to the charge, of sending a considerable Force at such a distance,
the Western parts alone abounding so much with Cinnamon, that from thence all
the World may be furnished sufficiently.

The King of Ceylon has several times offered thi^ Wood to Sale to any foreign
power that would ^urnish him with a good Sum of Money, he being ^one of the
richest, because the Dutch are Masters of the best Commodities of his Country,
which ^hey take away without paying any thing for it. This Cinnamon Trade might
very well turn to ac^ount here, if it were put into the hands of the French,
whereas now the Hollanders Monopolize ^his Commodity, which is no where to be
found, but in the Isle of Ceylon. Tho^ there are not a few, who are of opinion,
that the Dutch would not put themselves to such excessive Expenses, unless they
had some other prospect in view beyond the Cinnamon Trade.

CHAP. V.
A Description of the City of Cochin.
THE City of Cochin was formerly a very large City, but the Hollanders having
burnt down all the Suburbs and one half of the City, have enclosed the same now
with a very regular Fortification, containing Nine Bastions, whereof seven are
on the Land-side, two upon the River. There is still remaining a very strong
Tower built formerly by the Portugueses, which serves as a Castle to the City.

There is an Artillery of three hundred Pieces of Cannon, The City of Cochin.
as well of Iron as Brass in Cochin, a hundred whereof are ready mounted upon
the Bastions. The Garrison is seldom above three hundred strong, composed of
Dutch Soldiers, which considering the large compass of the Fortifications is
but a slender defense, in a place where it may well be questioned, whether the
Inhabitants are altogether at their devotion, considering that the Indians, the
Mestices and Portuguese Roman Catholics, who without doubt would be willing
enough to shake off the yoke, are six to one of the Dutch.

There is still a titular King, a native of the Country at Cochin, in whose
name all public businesses are transacted, these people having so strong an
inclination to a Monarchical Government that it is impossible, to raze out the
impression they have received from their Ancestors concerning the Royal
Authority.

The Dutch took Cochin from the Portugueses in the year 1662, and perceiving
that the King, that then was, showed more Inclination for their Enemies, than
for them, they found means to put him to death with three of his next kindred.
Two Brothers had the good fortune to escape their hands.

The Eldest retired to Carnopoly, about four days journey distant from Cochin,
and his Brother sought for refuge at Goa among the Portugueses, who gave him an
allowance of four hundred Livers a Month.

The Eldest, whose name was Godolme, was the rightful Heir of the Kingdom, but
the Prince to whom he was fled for shelter was not in a condition to
reestablish him in his Throne, neither could the Portugueses pretend to restore
him, who had embraced their Protection, How the ^utch bec^me (...) of Cochin.
unless they could re-take Cochin, and drive the Hollanders from thence, which
they were not in a condition to attempt, these Princes were fain to quit their
claim.

To satisfy the common People, the Dutch East-India-Company gave one Montavy
the Title of King of Cochin, whom they gave an allowance of a Crown a day,
wherewith he was fain to live as contented as he could in his Palace near
Cochin.

The Streets of this City are very large and handsome, the Houses built of
stone after the Portuguese Fashion, with fair Balconies. At the end of each of
the Capital Streets are cross Streets, and in the Center of the City a very
large Market place, the ordinary Rendezvous of the Garrison.

Of twenty three Churches which were built by the Portugueses, there is no more
than one left in the hands of the Roman Catholics, belonging to the
Grey-Friars. The high Altars and all the Chappel^ are finely gilt, and
beautified with Pictures. The Convent which was designed for forty Friars, runs
to ruin, there being but one left now of all the rest, who most of them took
refuge at Goa.

This Church faces a very large Square, on the other side of which is the
Governor's house built at the end of an Alley of Coco Trees, planted by the
Dutch, since their being Masters of the City.

The Church which formerly belonged to the Jesuits is now dedicated to the
Divine Service of the Dutch Inhabitants, but that which bore the Name of St.
Peter's-Church is turned into a Magazine.

Toward the Sea side, are to be seen the ruins of that Famous Church called
Nostra senhora de^la savida, and nearer to the Fortifications, the Foundation
of one designed to be much bigger than the other. The rest are entirely
demolished, and the Dutch have employed the stones of these Churches as of the
best houses, toward making up their Fortifications, which are faced with a
kind of a red stone, extremely hard, which they fetch from a neighboring Rock.

In the time of the Portugueses, there were two very stately Fountains in the
City which have been ruined by the Dutch, who make now use of Well Water only,
which is here pretty good.

Every thing is Sold here at an extraordinary cheap rate; you buy a tolerable
good Cow for a Crown, a good Hog for half a Crown, a Goose for four Pence, and
a Pullet for two Pence, Rice and very good white Bread at the rate of a Penny*
per Pound.

CHAP. VI.
Some Particulars concerning the Cape of Good-Hope; of the Dutch Fort at
Table-Bay, and of the Bay of Saldaigne.
THE Inhabitants near the Cape of Good-Hope, called in their Language Cafres,
or Hautentottes, Inhabitants near the Cape of Good-Hope.
are all black, both Men and Women go naked, only covering their privy Parts,
with a piece of an Oxes-hide. It is very rare to meet here with a Savage who
has above one Testicle, which is always the left, the right being taken out
soon after they are born, this Ceremony being used among them, as Circumcision
is among the Mahometans. The Chiefest among them wear a kind of a little Cloak,
made out of the Skin of Beasts.

They look upon Blackness as a great Perfection, and happy is he who is Master
of a good old black earthen Pot or Drying Pan, the outside of which serves
them to blacken their Faces; which afterward they beautify, (though in a most
barbarous manner) by making deep impressions in it with their Nails, in which
they put Brick-dust. Their common Food is the Entrails of Beast. You seldom
meet any of them, without good store of raw Tripe about them of all sorts of
Beasts, which they look upon as the best Dainty.

They all lead a Vagabond life, roving up and down in the Fields in the
daytime, toward night they retire to the Mountains or Forests, where they
have their Huts, covered with the Hides of Beasts* near which they keep Fires
all night long. There are not the least footsteps of Religion to be found among
them, unless that they seem to show a particular respect to the Fire, when the
Sun do^s not app^^^. It is next to an impossibility to imagine the barbari^y of
this Nation, and how little ^^^^tion their manner of living has to the Customs
of other Nations, who have received the least tincture of Civil Society.

Table-Bay is near twelve Leagues in Compass, Table-Bay.
the Country round about being extremely fertile and beautiful. There is very
safe riding at Anchor here for Ships, which lying under a high Shore, are on
all sides protected against the violence of the Winds. Our Ships rid here at
six Fathoms depth.

Nevertheless is this Bay at certain Seasons pestered with Hurricanes, which
they call Raphales, and prove sometimes dangerous, to such Ships as are
surprised by them in the Bay.

The Dutch had formerly a Fort here of four Bastions, The Dutch Fort.
which defended the entrance of the Bay; it was very strong, being well
pallisado'd with a deep Ditch round about it, well provided with Cannon which
commanded the Road; The Commander in chief, and the Factor general used to live
within this Fort, but since they have built another Royal Fort of five
Bastions, being all faced with square Stone, the other has been demolished, and
the Seat of the Governor, and some other of their principal Men has been
transplanted likewise from thence to this place.

About two Leagues from the Seaside, there is a very fine and richly
furnished* House belonging to the Dutch East India Company, Dutch East India
House.
with a very fair Garden belonging to it, where you might see all sorts of
Herbs and Pulse, and among the rest Cabbages of a prodigious bigness. Here were
Olive Trees full of Olives, very fine Apples of diverse kinds, Bon Chretien
Pears, Orange and Chesnut-trees, Very good Grapes.
all of them either in Blossom, or stocked with Fruits. About two Acres of
Ground were enclosed, and planted with Vines, and the Grapes did not want above
a fortnight or three Weeks to come to perfection. We met with a few Bunches in
this Vineyard, which being pretty ripe, we tasted of them, but could not give
an exact Judgment of their goodness; but those who had drunk of the Wine made
out of these Grapes, assured us, that both in taste and goodness, it came near
to the Rhenish Wine.

All round about this House, Dutch Plantations.
and from thence quite down to the Seaside, we saw nothing but Dutch
Plantations, the owners whereof held their Lands from the Dutch East India
Company, paying only some small yearly Quit-Rent; besides which, they were
under an obligation to furnish the Company with a certain Quantity of Wheat at
such a price as they should judge reasonable, and to truck the Products of
their Grounds for such European Commodities as they stood in need of, and are
imported there by the Dutch East India Company. They are also forbidden to buy
any thing from the Natives of the Country, for ready Money, because they should
not diminish their ready Cash; but this precaution seems superfluous, because
these Savages will truck a Mutton or Cow for a piece of roul'd Tobacco of the
same length as the Beast. Bay of Saldaigne.


The Bay of Saldaigne having been founded, and visited by Orders from the
Commander in Chief of the Dutch-Fort at Table-Bay, they reported that there was
very good Anchorage there, and great store of Fish; that on shore they had seen
Fallow-Deer, and multitudes of wild Fowl and Rabbits. That the Sea-Wolves,
being thereabouts to be caught in great numbers, might prove a profitable
Commodity by reason of their Skin, and the Oil that is drawn from their Flesh.
They could not get sight of any of the Savages there. That the worst
inconveniency seems to be the difficulty there was of getting fresh Water,
there being but one small Spring near the place, where they could come to an
Anchor, all the rest being six Leagues distant from thence; and that there was
scarce any Wood thereabouts. Islands in the Bay.


They found and visited five Islands within the Bay, among which, as they
judged, two might be fit to be cultivated, and to be stocked with Inhabitants
and Cattle, provided there could be found or dug Springs of sweet Water. The
other three were so barren, as to be only a proper receptacle for Cormorants
and other birds of Prey.

CHAP. VII.
Of the arrival of the Sieur de la Hay, Viceroy of the East Indies, for the
most Christian King in the Isle of Madagascar, and Mascareigne.
THE Sieur De la Hay, of whom frequent mention has been made in the foregoing
Treatise, being constituted Viceroy of the East Indies by His most Christian
Majesty, ^^rives a^ Madagascar.
came to an Anchor with ten of the King's Ships, near Fort Dauphin in the Isle
of Madagascar, toward the latter end of November. On the fourth of December, a
Throne being placed near the Gate of the Fort Dauphin, the Sieurs de Greteloup,
Lieutenant General in the East Indies, De la Rationere Marshal de Camp, and the
Sieurs de Charmagou and la Case, with the rest of the Marine Officers, having
taken their respective Places, the Sieur de la Haye's Patent being read in
their presence, by virtue of which, he was Constituted Viceroy over the
Indies. in the King of France's Name, with a full Power to administer Justice,
and exercise all other Acts belonging to the Government in all places under the
King's Jurisdiction (even not excepted the Ecclesiastics) all there present
took the Oath of Allegiance to the King, and that of Fidelity to the Sieur de
la Hay. Is acknowledged as Viceroy.
This done, he caused immediately a General Amnesty to be published, in which
were al^o included the Natives of the Country, promising absolute Pardon for
all what was past, and exhorting all His Majesty's Subjects in those Parts, to
leave the Service of Foreigners, and return into the Pay of the French
East India Company, under pain of Death.

Then arising from the Throne, he constituted the Sieur de Charmagou,
Lieutenant General in the King's Name, and the Sieur de la Case, Major of the
Island, of which he took possession in the King's Name, into whose hands the
East India Company had resigned it, by reason of the mismanagement of their
Agents and Officers.

The Sieur de la Hay, whose Authority was not limited as the former Governors
had been, who could not undertake any thing of moment without the approbation
of the Directors and the Council, being resolved to bring under the King's
Obedience the Neighboring places, proposed to the Sieurs de Charmagou, and de
la Case, to attack Remousaye, who being the next Neighbor to the French, had
refused to do Homage to him.

He had hitherto been an Ally of the French, but having lately married his
Daughter to Ramilange, their mortal Enemy, the Sieur de la Hay thought it most
advisable to thwart the Design of this new Alliance by an open Rupture.

For which purpose, having demanded from them all the Arms they formerly had
received from the French, and such Firelocks as they had lately bought from a
Dutch Ship, they sent word, that they were resolved not to part with their
Arms, as long as they had any Life left them.

The Sieur de la Hay, having got together a Body of seven hundred French, and
six hundred Madagascarians, besieged Remousaye in his Village, who behaved
himself with great Bravery, and repulsed the French with considerable Loss in
several Attacks; Attacks the Natives without Success
And finding himself not in a Condition to resist the Fury of his Enemies, he
found means to make an honorable Retreat to a place where he could not be
pursued but with a great deal of difficulty.

The most are of opinion, that the ill Success of this Enterprise was to be
attributed to the Jealousy there was betwixt the Sieur de la Hay, and the
Sieur de Charmagou, the last of which not brooking the Affront of being
Commanded in a place, where he had been Chief before, without question rendered
the whole Design abortive.

The Sieur de la Hay, having been convinced by experience that all his
Industry, Policy, and absolute Power stood him in little stead in a place,
where there was a Faction of a contrary Interest, who directed all their
Actions for a far different End from his Intentions, he thought it most
advisable, to leave the management of this Island to those, who had contracted
a habit of commanding there, long before his arrival in those Parts.

For which purpose, having called together all his Officers and others that
were come along with him from France, he ordered them to embarque on board the
Ship under his Command, with whom he set sail for the Isle of Mascareigne.

Thus was the Isle of Madagascar, Leaves Madagascar.
about which they had made such glorious Projects in France, entirely abandoned
by the King's Forces, and not long after by the Company, there being scarce any
left of the French Nation, but a few of the most ancient French Inhabitants,
and some Missioners, who resolving to stay behind, were afterward, for the
most part massacred by the Natives, few of them escaping into France.

The Sieur de la Hay came to an Anchor near the Isle of Mascareigne, Comes to
an Anchor in the Isle of Mascareigne.
directly opposite to the French Plantation, called St. Denis, on the first of
May, and tarried there till toward the latter end of June following. In the
mean while he caused the General Amnesty and other Declarations which he had
brought with him from France, to be published, among which, there being one
against spoiling the Game, under pain of Death, he ordered a certain French
Gentleman, who had been caught a Hunting, to be tied to a Tree, in order, as
it was supposed, to have him shot to death. But judging the terror of Death to
be a sufficient Punishment for his Crime, he ordered the Fusileers that were to
do the Execution, to discharge their Fusees without Ball, which being done
accordingly, the poor Gentleman was saved for that time; but it seems Death had
appeared to him in so terrible a shape, that he had frightened him out of his
Life, he dying a few hours after he was taken from the Tree.

The Sieur de la Hay finding his presence no further necessary in Mascareigne
took on board of his own Ship, the Sieur de Renaud, who had commanded there in
Chief before, and having committed the whole Management of Affairs to one Hure,
a Creature of his own, he set sail for Suratte.

CHAP. VIII.
The Taking and Loss of St. Thomas by the Sieur de la Hay.
THE Sieur de la Hay, after some stay at Suratte, set sail with the Ships
under his Command to the Coast of Cormandel, and to the Isle of Ceylon. Attacks
St. Thomas.
Coming near St. Thomas under pretense of some Robberies and other Enormities
committed against the French, but in effect to make himself Master of a Place,
which might serve for a safe Retreat to those of his Nation, living in those
parts, he made a descent in the Isle of St. Thomas, and soon made himself
Master of the principal City, Takes it.
belonging to the Mahometans. They being resolved to draw out the Thorn, that
stuck so close in their flesh, and which they were not without reason afraid,
would soon be converted into an impregnable Fort, if they gave him leisure to
effect it, they soon after attacked, and closely besieged him with all the
Forces of the whole Island, in hopes to recover their Loss; But the Sieur de la
Hay, who knew the Importance of the Place, being resolved not to part with it
upon easy Terms, defended himself with so much bravery, that the Infidels
gained but little ground; Thus having endured the Siege with an unparalleled
bravery for the space of two years, and being reduced to the last Extremity for
want of Provisions, Loses it again.
he was at last forced to capitulate, and returned from thence in a Dutch Ship,
to France, where he afterward behaved himself with great bravery upon several
occasions, and being made Lieutenant General, was killed in an Engagement near
Thionville.

CHAP. IX.
Of the City of Suratte, its Inhabitants, Traffic, and what else is remarkable
thereabouts.
THE City of Suratte in the Kingdom of Gusuratte, Its bigness
under the Jurisdiction of the Great Mogul, comes in bigness near to Roan in
France; its Inhabitants are Indians, some of whom are Mahometans, some Pagans.
Besides which there are Persians, Inhabitants
Arabians, Turks, Armenians, French, English, Portugueses, Dutch and several
other European Nations, who have settled themselves here for the convenience of
Commerce. There are among the other several Sects of the Pagans, some who call
themselves Persis, who being descended from the race of the Ancient Persians,
that were driven from their native Country by the Mahometans, do in Imitation
of their Ancestors, Adore the Fire to this day.

The Pagan Priests or Doctors are called Bramans, The Braman.
some among them pretend to some knowledge in Philosophy. They are clad in
Cotton of a light reddish color, but so full of slashes and cuts that they
appear half naked* We saw one march at a certain time thus through the streets,
who being followed by a great number of Women, some among them who seemed to be
more devout than the rest, wou^d run before him, and kneeling down take hold of
his Privy parts to cure them, as we were informed, of their Barrenness.

The Banjans are Pagans who apply themselves chefly to trade.

The City of Suratte is Surrounded with a strong Brick Wall twelve foot thick,
each Gate being defended by two Towers. Houses of Suratte.
The Houses of the common People, are built only with Canes and Branches of the
Palm Tree; Those of the Richer sort are of Wood and stone, but at the best not
above two stories high, flat on the top with Terrasses, adorned with flowers
and waterworks, for the better convenience and diversion of its Iahabitants,
especially among the Mahometans. Their Houses have very few windows toward the
streets, most of them looking into the Court, they being extravagantly jealous
of their Wives, for fear they should be too much taken with strangers, of whom
there is here always a great number of all Nations.

They are no less careful of their Treasure, for which purpose they have, as
they have in Persia, secret deep wells, which being covered very artificially
with large stones, and strengthened with thick Iron Bars, they hide in them all
their most precious movables, over which they put their Beds, and make them
their ordinary sleeping places.

At one end of the City of Suratte upon the very Banks of the River called
Tapty, The Castle of Suratte.
you see a very fair Castle with four large Towers of Freestone, with a broad
Ditch always full of Water. It has a very good Garrison, no body being
permitted to enter it but those belonging to the Garrison. Every hour in the
day and night, they sound the Trumpet. The Governor has no dependence on the
Governor of the City, and never remains in the same station above three years,
when he is re-called by the Great Mogul. They are so careful in preventing any
body from approaching near the Castle, that they keep constant Centries at
fifty paces distance round about it, for that purpose. The Prince Sevagi, who
has several times attacked and Plundered the City of Suratte, could never make
himself Master of this Castle.

The chief Secretary, The Civil Officers at Suratte.
who depends immedia^e^y on the Great Mogul, and is entrusted with all the
Registers and Accounts of what is imported at Suratte, of which he sends from
time to time Copies to Court, is the next in Dignity to the two Governors to
wit of the City and Castle. There is also a Mufti, whose Office is to take
cognizance of all Religious concerns; A Cadi for the interpretation of the Law;
A Judge Criminal, who is invested with an Authority to punish Criminals,
nevertheless under this limitation, not to inflict a Capital punishment upon
any without giving an Account of the nature of the Crime to the Great Mogul,
and receiving his approbation.

When he appears abroad he is surrounded by his Archers well Armed* he is
Captain of the night Watch and Patroles round the City, every Night from nine
till three in the Morning. He ought to be responsible for all Robberies
committed within the Precincts of this great City, but it is very rarely known
that he gives satisfaction for any, very few of the Inhabitants daring to
encounter him upon such an occasion. The Provost who is to take care of the
Circumjacent Country on the same account, is also liable to make satisfaction
for all Robberies committed upon the Highways, but he so closely follows the
footsteps of the Judge Criminal in this point, that he seldom makes any
reparation to the losers.

The Mahometans all keep their Heads shaved, but the Pagans look upon their
hair as their chief Ornament. The Dress of the Indians.
All the Subjects of the Great Mogul of what Religion soever, wear Turbants and
Wast-coats not unlike our Cassocks over their shirts. The Mahometans make use
of straight Drawers, which reach down to their Ancles, the Pagans wear a kind
of a Petticoat; neither of them trouble themselves about Shoes or Stockings,
unless that some of them wear Sandals not unlike our Slippers, which, among the
richer sort, are finely embroidered with Gold. When they go abroad they wrap
about them a kind of a Toilet in the nature of a Cloak; some of which are very
rich, and amount to a great price.

The Mohammedan Women wear very fine Wast-coats under their Shifts, which are
made of Muslin, and reach only to the Wast; round which they wrap a piece of
Stuff, which comes down quite to their Feet, one corner of it turning upwards
all along the Back, over the Head.

Some of these Ladies, who are of a freer Carriage than the rest, make use of
the same Dress with the Men, except that their Smock-Sleeves, come but just to
the Elbow, their Arms being for the rest adorned with Bracelets of Diamonds,
and Gold, and Silver Locks, and Chains, which they also wear round their
Ankle-bones; they seldom walk without Pattins, because they judge it a great
advantage to appear tall. They have Holes both in their Ears and Nostrils, in
which they put Rings. They wear also many of them on their Fingers, and among
the rest, one with a small Looking-glass in it, which serves them to
contemplate themselves.

The Pagan Women go with their Faces uncovered; but the Mahometans never
without a Vail. The Indian Women are generally very neat, but especially in
their Hair, which are always very fine, and dressed with rich Perfumes.

The Pagan Women, but especially among the Parsis, are much more careless in
their Dress than the Mahometans, but they exceed them in the richness of their
Jewels, their Necklaces, and Bracelets; they wear also a kind of Cornets upon
their Heads, are for the most part very handsome, and extraordinary agreeable in
Conversation, which is so Charming, that they seem to be made for the enjoyment
of Love.

I don't know any place where Heremophrodites are more common, Heremophradites.
than at Suratte, they are obliged to wear besides their Female Dress, a
Turbant, for distinction's sake.

All the Burying-places are without the Walls of Suratte; Those belonging to
the French, English, and Dutch, are surrounded with Brick-Walls; The Mahometans
have their Sepulchers in an open Field without any enclosure, and are sometimes
in form of a Pyramide, Their Sepulchers.
sometimes of a Cupola, made of Plaster or Brick; the worst sort being of a
square figure of Stone, not unlike those which are near Arles and Nismes in
France.

The Pagan Clergymen have their separate Burying-places, their dead Carcasses
being not to be burnt, no more than those of Children, that die under two years
of Age. The rest of the Pagan-Indians are burnt after their Decease, after they
have been well washed in the River Tapty, which they look upon as sacred.

Such Wives as do not burn themselves with their deceased Husbands, are not
regarded among the Pagan-Indians, because they have betrayed their weakness in
shunning Death; wherefore they always remain Widows, unless they renounce their
Religion, and turn either Christians or Mahometans.

The Parsis neither burn, neither interr their dead Bodies; The Parsis.
they lay them upon an Iron-Grate, and thus expose them to the Sun, till their
Flesh being consumed, the Bones fall through the Grate into the Hole that is
underneath the Grate. These Parsis have no Temples, every Fireplace being
their Altar, where they pay their Devotion.

The Mahometans have several goodly Mosques in Suratte, besides which they have
many others in the circumjacent places, which, though entitled with the names of
Mosques, are no more than so many Arches with a ^ole in them toward the side
of Mecha, and a small Cistern near it, for the Convenience of bathing.

The Pagan Temples are all without the City; though some of the richer sort, by
the powerful Intercession of good Presents, obtain leave to have private ones
in their Houses; It is in these Temples they exercise their Devotion, where
they adore and bring their Offerings to their idols, which sometime, resemble
some living Creatures, but for the most part are very strange and ridiculous
Postures, the Offerings serve for the maintenance of the Bramans.

Without one of the Gates of Suratte, A large Cistern near Suratte.
there is a great Tanke or Cistern of sixteen Angles, containing in compass two
thousand Paces; it is paved at the bottom with Freestone, having at every
Angle, a pair of Stairs to go down into it, except three which are reserved for
watering-places. This Cistern is during the rainy Season, filled with Water,
which being conveyed thither by a Canal, formerly supplied the whole City with
Water, till of late years, the Inhabitants are more commodiously furnished with
it from five very large and fine Wells. In the very center of this Cistern is a
magnificent Structure of Freestone, whither you must go to in a Boat.

On the same side of the City, where this Cistern is, but at some miles
distance, is the Princesses Garden, so called, because it belongs to the Sister
of the Great Mogul; it has several fine Chapels, beautified with Walks on both
sides.

About a Musket shot from thence, The sacred Tree.
is to be seen that Tree, called by the Pagan Indians, The sacred Tree, of such
a bigness, that its Branches spread two hundred and fifty Paces round. The
Banians have a particular Veneration for this Tree, and adorn it with Banners;
under its shadow is a Pagan Temple, resembling a Grotto, dedicated to a certain
Idol, which they call, The Mother of Mankind. At the Gate, there is constantly
attending a Braman* who receives the Offerings, and marks the Foreheads of
such as come to pay their Devotion, with a red Stroke.

All round about Suratte are many large Wells, of about 36 Foot Diameter, for
the convenience of Passengers to squench their Thirst, provided with very
commodious Steps. They draw the Water out of these Cisterns or Wells in great
quantities, by Oxen, How they water their Grounds.
who perform this service by the help of certain Wheels; The Water being
afterward by small Channels or Ditches, conveyed all over the neighboring
Grounds, renders them very fertile, so that they bear Wheat, notwithstanding
the violence of the heat of the Climate; and it seems not improbable, that the
like Invention might be put in practice in the Isle of Madagascar, with the
same advantage.

The delicious Gardens about this City, Gard^^^ near S^ratte.
are the most delightful in the World, affording among other Fruits of all
sorts, great store of Grapes, nevertheless they don't make any Wine here,
because both the Mahometans and Pagans, rather admire the Tarry, or Palm Tree
Wine, which is altogether like the same which is drawn at Cape-Verd.

All the Ships coming to Suratte out of the Territories belonging to the Great
Mogul, as all other Mohammedan or Indian Vessels enter over the Bar of the River
Tapty, six Leagues from Suratte, as all the European and other Christian
Vessels come to an Anchor in the Port of Sovaly, at five Leagues distance from
the City. All Ships are visited by the Commissioner-General of the
Custom-house, assisted by his inferior Officers; you pay two and one half per
Cent. for all coined Silver or Gold, the Mahometans and Indians pay five per
Cent. Custom for all Merchandises, but the Christians no more than four per
Cent.

As you go from Sovaly by Land to Suratte, The Port of Sovaly.
you cross a most delicious Champion Country, where there is great plenty of
good Pastorage, till you come to a Ferry-boat, which transports you to the
other side of the River. There are scarce any Houses at Sovaly, unless a few
for the convenience of foreign Seamen: Besides which, there are here three
great Factories, to wit: of the French, English and Dutch East India Companies,
each of which are distinguished by their Banners of their respective Nations,
which are to be seen on the top of their Houses. But when any European Ships
arrive in this Port, the Persians, Indians, Armenians and Turks, plant here
their Tents or Booths in such numbers, as to give it the resemblance of a very
handsome Fair.

The City of Suratte may well be accounted the Staple of the Indies and all
Asia, and may contend for the Superiority for its Commerce, with any City in
the World. For, here they trade with Pearls, Diamonds, Ambergreese, Civet,
Musk, Gold, Silk, Stuffs, Cal^icoes, Spices, Indigo, and in short, all the
Commodities, which, are brought thither from all parts of the World.

CHAP. X.
Of the Empire and Riches of the Great Mogul.
THE Empire of the Great Mogul, called otherwise Indosthan, is bordered on the
East and West, by the Rivers Indus and Ganges, the Mountains of Zayatay on the
North, and the Great Indian Peninsula, as far as Cape Camroin to the South. All
the petty Kings and Princes of this Peninsula, from Suratte, as far as Cananor,
are tributary to him.

The City of Agra is the Capital of all Indosthan, The City of Agr^
and the largest and most populous in all the Indies; it is situate under the
20th degree. The Castle of Agra is but at some distance from the fair River
Camroin, betwixt which and the Castle, there are certain places appointed for
the exercising of Troops, for the Combats of Elephants, and for such other
Sports as the Great Mogul does divert himself with at certain times.

Within the Precinct of this Castle is the Royal Palace, Its Castle.
which has three distinct Courts, each of them embellished with fine Portico's
and Galleries richly gilt, where the Omrats or Lords, the Officers of the Court
and of the Guards, have their Lodgings.

Behind this there are several other most magnificent Palaces, which are very
pleasantly situated near the River side. To be short, Agra infinitely exceeds
Suratte, its Marketplaces, Mosques, Temples, Tombs, Gardens and Bagnio's,
being much more magnificent in all respects.

The Great Mogul does not at present keep his Residence at Agra, Where the
Great Mogul keeps his Residence.
but at Dely, four Leagues further from Suratte than Agra. He there keeps his
Court, which for its magnificence exceeds all others in those Parts; his Palace
is half a League in compass, where is to be seen his Throne, so Famous in the
Indian Histories, being composed of what is most valuable and precious in the
Indies, which ever since the Reign of the Great Tamerlain, has been deputed by
his Successors, to the present Great Mogul Auren Zebe, (who deduces his
Pedigree from that Great Warrior) for the beautifying of this Throne, to render
it the most accomplished in the World. The Great Mogul wears upon his Arm a
Diamond, of an inestimable Value, being as big as a Pullets Egg.

This Diamond was stolen out of the Diamond-Mines belonging to the King of
Bisnagar, Diamond-Mines.
betwixt Tonguin and Pegu, where every day are 20000 Men at work. The King
reserves all the best Diamonds for his own Uses, which are not to be sold. The
best of those we have in Europe, being only looked upon as inconsiderable, are
sold to the European Merchants. Such Diamonds as are abroad, and exceed the
common sizes are all stolen, as the abovementioned Diamond was, belonging to
the Great Mogul, which weighs two hundred fourscore and ten Mangetins, each
Mangetin being five Grains.

The Great Mogul sets aside every day two hours for public Audiences, and
dispensing of Justice to his Subjects, in the presence of the Great Lords of
his Court, who stand by with their Hands cross their Stomachs. His standing
Forces are always three hundred thousand Horses, of which fifty thousand are
his Guards. The rest are divided in the several Garrisons, under the
Jurisdiction of their particular Governors, who never have above ten thousand
Men under their Command, and are to assemble upon the first Summons from the
Great Mogul, at the Rendezvous, were he sometimes Musters all his Forces,
consisting of 30000 Horse. Their Infantry is very inconsiderable.

At the Great Mogul's Court (as indeed in all others in the Indies) nothing is
to be done without Money; The best and most accepable Complement you can make
to the Courtiers here, is, to bring your Presents along with you, when you are
admitted into their presence. There is no Nation but what is welcome to them,
provided they make use of the Gold Key, which indeed, opens a free Passage to
all, in most Courts in Europe.

The Arms used by the Subjects of the Great Mogul, are; Swords, Ponyards, Bows
and Arrows, Javellins and Pistols. The Infantry is provided with Piques and
Muskets. They also make use of Armours and Head-pieces.

Before ever the Great Moguls kept their Court at Agra or Dely, their Residence
were at Lahor, under the 30th degree of North Latitude. Besides the Ruins of a
large and magnificent City, the Royal Palace remains entire to this day.

All the way betwixt Agra and Lahor (which is above a hundred and fifty
Leagues) the Country is planted with Trees near the Road side, which appears
like one Ally of so many Leagues.

Besides the Provinces of Gusuratte, Agra, Dely and Lahor, the Great Mogul has
sixteen more under his Jurisdiction, each of which may pass very well for a
Kingdom. The Province of Cachenjire excels all the rest for its pleasant
Situation, but as to its Revenues, it is less considerable than any of the
rest: The whole yearly Revenue of the Great Mogul, amounts to three hundred and
fifty Millions of Livres per Annum.

In the Territories of the Great Mogul, there are Elephants, Rhinoceros's,
Camels, Dromedaries, Bouflers, Horses, Mules; Mutton, Rabbits, Hogs, Lions,
Tigers, Leopards, Panthers, Dogs, Apes; all sorts of Birds of Prey, Peacocks,
Pullets, Pigeons, Patridges, Parrots, and all sorts of wild Fowl. The Grounds
are generally fertile; the Men are very dextrous and ingenious at any thing
they undertake, and the Women very handsome and complaisant. The Cities are for
the most part, very pleasantly situated, their Market places and Squares very
convenient, their Gardens and Buildings most magnificent; especially their
public Structures, which are erected either by their Princes or rich
Merchants, who generally are of the Race of the Banians. The whole Country is
full of public Inns for the convenience of Foreigners and other Travelers,
where they may be accommodated with every thing, that a plentiful Country can
afford for the convenience of Mankind.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Musk, and from whence it comes.
THE Musck which is sold at Suratte is brought thither from Tonquin and
Bengalle, from whence it is Transported into Europe; they put it up in Leaden
Boxes, notwithstanding which it loses a third part in weight: The Kingdom of
Betton.
But its true Origin is neither in Tonquin nor Bengalle, but in the Kingdom of
Betton. This Kingdom is under the 42th Degree, about 300 Leagues North from the
Mouth of the River Ganges, which disembogues into the Sea of Bengalle, being
surrounded on all sides with unaccessible Rocks. The King of this Country, whom
they call Geudonfrain, is a Sovereign Prince, who has no dependency on the
Great Mogul or any other King, living always in Tranquillity, by reason of these
high Mountains, which serve them as a Bulwork against any Attempts of the
Enemies. The Inhabitants are all of a white Complexion, very tall, have large
and flat Noses, and for the rest, are a very simple People. They seldom Travel
beyond the compass of their own Country, unless it be a few among them who
Trade to China, but they never come within the Territories of the Great Mogul,
and they suffer but very few of his Subjects to Trade among them. It is the
general Opinion, that this Country of Betton is the only in the World which
produces the Creature that furnishes us with that Perfume called Musk. It is
Transported from thence through the Kingdom of Bengalle, into the Country of
the Great Mogul, into Persia, the Red Sea, Turkey, and Europe. And on the
Eastern-side, into Tartary, China, and Japan.

The Creature that bears the Musk is not unlike a She-Goat; The Inhabitants
catch them a Hunting, How they Catch this Creature.
and shoot them with Arrows. Sometimes they dig Holes and thus catch them in
the Trap. They have also another way of entangling them in Nets, and so knock
them on the head; For they fasten very large Nets round the Woods where they
know them to resort in whole Troops; which done, they make a noise with a
certain Instrument, called by the Inhabitants, Gomene, which having a sound
most like our Bells, these Creatures are thus frightened and caught in the Nets.

Both Males and Females have betwixt the Flesh and Skin, just under the Navel*
a certain Bag or Bladder of a Semicirculer Figure, one part being joined to the
Flesh, which being full of an Unctious Substance, is sometimes bigger and
plumper, sometimes less and flatter; These Substance is these that we call Musk.

Great care must be taken in gathering this Perfume not to break the Bladder or
Vessel that contains it, How Musk is gathered*
for fear of loosing part of so precious a Commodity. To prevent which, they
commonly cut some small part of the Flesh where it adjoins to it, out with the
Bag, which, after it becomes dry, is easily separated from it, when it appears
like a Ball and one entire Bag, if it be otherwise, they suppose it to be
Adulterated. They have a way of sewing up the Slit so artificially, that it is
very difficult to be discerned.

CHAP. XII.
Some Propositions made by the Sieur de Rennefort for the Improvement of the
French East India Company.
HAving already showed the true Causes, which in all Human Probability ruined
the Trade of our East India Company in the Isle of Madagascar, and entirely
lost us these Colonies, which were of such consequence to us, I think it my
Duty to propose some means by which this Company may be settled upon a more
firm Foundation and promise it self better success for the future.

First of all, East and West India Companies to be joined.
I lay this down as a Fundamental Rule, That both the East and West India
Companies are to be joined into one, that so being but one and the same* both
their Stock and Forces may be united, and consequently be rendered more
Powerful, the better to defend themselves against the Attempts of their
Ennemies, who being Envious at their Success, will not in all likelihood meet
with the same Advantage against them when they find them to act with united
Counsels and Purses, than they might if their Interests are separated.

All of what Degree soever should have free admittance to this Company: I would
have some of the Prelacy, many of the Nobility and Magistracy, have
considerable Shares in it. For the rest, They should endeavor to make such as
have had ^onsiderable Commands both by Sea and Land, the richest Merchants and
Citizens of Paris, Roan, Lions, and the other chief Cities of the Kingdom,
Members of this Society.

There ought to be distinct Offices settled, one for the Management of the
Political Part, the other for Traffic; each of them under the Dir^ction of a
President and Commissioners, who being Men of Sense, and such as have been in
the Indies before, ought to have their Voices, and take Cognizance of all
Matters relating to their respective Offices of the Company, who ought to
provide them with a competent yearly Salary. The Lords of the first, and of the
most Illustrious Families of France should be constituted Generalissimo's, one
for the East, the other for the West Indies. These ought to derive their
Authority, and full Power to Command in Chief from the King, without control,
in all such Places as are Dependent from the said Company, and all the
Directors, and other Agents, who are entrusted with the Management of Affairs
in Persia, both the Indies, China, and Japan; and finally, all such Officers as
have any Commissions on account of the said Company, beyond the Borders of
Europe, ought to receive their Orders from these Generalissimo's.

The Persons chosen for the discharge of so great a Trust, What Generals are to
be chosen.
ought to be such as have signalized themselves by their great Actions, and are
Endowed with Moderation, Justice, Constancy, Valor, Piety, and such other
Qualifications as are requisite for the discharging their Office, in a station
of so much consequence to the whole Nation.

Persons of a Noble Extraction and equally Qualified with such Endowments, when
strengthened with so great a Character, are most suitable to the Genius of the
French Nation, who living under the Jurisdiction of a great and virtuous Prince
at home, don't without Reluctance submit to the Commands of others, who have
scarce any title to their Greatness, than perhaps bare chance, and are more
beholding for it to Fortune than their own Merits. We ought in this Point to
follow the footsteps of the Portugueses, who have found their Viceroy's in the
Indies, (who are always chosen out of the Noblest Families of Portugal) prove
very advantageous to their Affairs.

I would have the Sea-Captains to be chosen for that Service, of betwixt 35 and
45 years of Age; If they be much older, their frequent Trials and Hazards of
the Seas, makes them more timorous than they ought to be; whereas young People
are more daring, and consequently much more proper to undertake those Hazards
which must needs attend new Discoveries and unknown Countries.

I take it for granted, that there are few places in those parts, were this
Company strengthened and established under the Protection of Lewis the Great,
may not establish themselves, either by the Consent of the Inhabitants or force
of Arms; wherefore I judge it advisable to establish Colonies on the African
Coast, about 600 Leagues distant from one another at farthest, and among the
rest to take care that one may be settled as near as possibly can be near the
Cape of Good Hope; Some there must also be established in America, but
especially on the Coast of Brasil. It would also be very convenient to make our
selves Masters of one of the Islands under the Torrid Zone, near the African
Coast; where care must be taken to build a good Fort for the security and
convenience of such as from time to time should be sent thither from France,
the better to inure them by degrees to the Sea-Air and the Hot Climate.

All these Places will be of great service at one time or other to the French
Ships in their Voyages to the East Indies, it being unquestionable, that one of
the main Inconveniences in those long Voyages, proceeds from the want of
convenient Harboring where to refresh themselves; and to seek for a place of
Retreat among Strangers is very chargeable, and seldom granted but under very
strict Limitations, and consequently ought not to be relied upon, nor to be
made use of but in case of necessity.

These places will also afford another considerable advantage, which is, that
such Persons that have lived there for sometime, may be carried with much
better prospect to the Indies, than these, who but lately were brought out of
Europe, forasmuch as they being already accustomed to the heats of the Climate,
their constitution must needs be more agreeable to the Climate of the Indies.

I would advise to carry to the Indies no other but Secular Priests, the rest
being generally Ambitious and too much addicted to their own Interests, and
always intermeddling with State Affairs, and such other Matters as have not the
least affinity with the Character they ought to bear in the World.

I would have this Company take this for a Maxim in their Colonies: One Nation,
one Religion. The Dutch mixed with the French, and the Hugonots with the
Catholics, did never live in a good Union. We are obliged for this to the
Piety of Lewis le Grand, that in France there is now but one, and that the true
ancient Religion; neither see I the least reason, why the French should have
any occasion to make use of strangers in their Colonies in the Indies. I am
well assured that the French are alone in a capacity to live under what Climate
soever; They Inhabit a Country surrounded by the Spaniards, Portugeses, English
and Dutch, who have establshed themselves under the Torrid-Zone, in the Indies,
and in America.

To give the French their due; there is not a more Civilized Nation in the
World, their Manners and Conversation being looked upon as most agreeable to
Introduce themselves in all places. Besides which they are very Populous, Brave
and Daring, which makes them have an easy access wherever they come* I appeal
to experience, the kind Reception they met with in the Empire of the Great
Mogul, of Calicut, Siam, and other places in the Indies, of late years, are so
many convincing demonstrations, that these Princes received them in their
Territores with a more than ordinary satisfaction.

Care ought to be taken that some Persons may be sent into Japan, to undeceive
that Prince, concerning the wrongful opinion the Japoneses are preposess'd with
in prejudice of the Catholic Religion. And all opportunities ought to be
courted to get footing in this, as well as the Chinese Empire.

But it ought to be observed, that the persons entrusted with these
Negotiations in these two Empires, as well as in the other parts of the Indies,
ought to be men of Experience and Authority: These, as well as all other
public Affairs of Consequence, ought not to be left to the management of
Merchants; as it is in Holland, where Merchants have a great share in managing
Affairs of state, and the Courts of Justice, and consequently are better
qualified for such business than those of France.

Care ought to be taken that from time to time, Envoy's may be sent to those
parts, who may relieve one another; and that they may be provided with good
Yearly Salleries which must be paid them exactly, without being pinched in
their Allowances by those who have the management of the Treasury in their
hands. For if Persons in such a Station find themselves neglected, they will be
sure to lose no opportunity to retrieve themselves at any rate.

It is also absolutely necessary for the Company, to have a Certain City both
in the East and West Indies, which lying, as near as can be, in the Center of
the French Colonies, must be the residence of the Generalissimo's, each in his
respective place. The Cities ought to be of an Advantageous situatition, both
in respect of their Fortifications and the convenience of their Harbors.

The Isle of Madegascar ought to be considered as the chief place of Retreat
for such Ships of the Company as Sail to the East Indies. I am absolutely of
opinion, that the first project made in France concerning that Island, ought
not to be laid aside, but is to be pursued to all its intents and purposes. For
besides that, it is not for the Honor of France thus to abandon an Enterprise,
which they looked upon as so advantageous to the Nation; The situation of this
Island, its Products and Riches* are sufficient Invitations for us to establish
our Colonies among them.

It ought to be taken into Consideration, that this Island lies betwixt the two
Indies, there is as good a Road near Fort-Dauphine, and in the Bay of Antogil.
Beef there is in such plenty, that we have taken forty Thousand Oxen at a time,
after we had defeated one of their Grands. Wild-Fowl, Fish, Fruits, Grapes,
Honey and Wax it produces in great abundance, and the very Mountains bring
forth good store of Rice. Their Waters are excellently good, and the Ground is
very Rich and Fruitful. There is not the least question, but that if the
Grounds were carefully cultivated they would produce very good Wheat, and the
Grapes might be brought to maturity. But if it were otherwise, Wheat may be
easily Transported thither from Suratte, from the Coast of Malabar and
Coromandet, where it is very Cheap. The defect of good Wine might be easily
supplied from the Canary Islands, where it costs not above four Pence a Pint,
and a Pint considering its strength, will go further than a Quart of French
Wine; besides that, this Wine gows better by keeping, it being much finer after
it has lain four years, than it was at the first. It would also be no difficult
matter to transport thither of our Grave Wine, Persian and Goat Wines, and as
much Brandy as they have occasion.

There is scarce any Commodity which the Europeans are Masters of in Africa,
America* and Asia, but what you meet with in the Isle of Madagascar* They have
Pepper, a sort of Nutmegs, and Clove-Trees, all sorts of Gums, Riches of
Madag^scar.
Spices, Sugar, Tobacco, precious Stones, Silver and Gold.

I cannot be persuaded, that what the Natives tell us is true; to wit, that
what Gold they have, was brought into the Island by some Ships which Casually
came near that shore, whereof some perished thereabouts; there being scarce a
Man or Woman so mean, but what have some Golden Ornaments about them; not to
mention here the Treasures hoarded up by their Grands, which they never touch
but in case of the greatest extremity; and seems to be a convincing argument,
that there are some Gold Mines in this Island.

The Sieur de la Case was not ignorant of this advantage, and Monsieur de la
Milleray, was so well convinced of the Riches and true Value of the Products of
this Island, that he would never part with his right, while he lived.

The Sieur de Caron got once into his possession a piece of Amber-Greese,
weighing Eighteen-Ounces. There is a Prodigious quantity of Silk and Cotton in
the Island, and yet these are the chief Commodities, which are brought out of
the Territories of the Great Mogul, and of fourteen other Kings, his
Tributaries, who all must be courted by great Presents to allow the Exportation
of these Commodities.

As for the Air of Madagascar, it is very wholesome and pure, witness those of
its Inhabitants who arrive to a great age, it being common among them to see
some of a Hundred and Twenty years of Age. It cannot be denied, but that it has
not proved so agreeable to the Fren^h constitution, but if the matter be duly
weighed, it will appear, that this proceeded more from the change of Diet, and
from their carlesness in not keeping their Stomachs warm, than from any other
cause; For I have made this observation, that those born under a cold Climate,
if transported into those parts, ought not to neglect that point, as they
tender their health and lives.

There is one objection to be made, to wit: That several other Nations, who
have taken a* view of the Isle of Madagascar, never showed any Inclination to
P^ant their Colonies here; But this I think derogates nothing from the true
value which ought to be put upon this Island. For it is possible, Why other
Nations never settled in this Island.
that these Nations who are less powerful than the French, being before settled
in many other places, found themselves not in a capacity to Conquer an Island,
which is the biggest in the whole World.

The Portugueses have their Settlements in the Indies, and the Ports of China.
The Dutch in the Isle of Ceylon, and the Molucees, and in short in all other
places in the Indies, where the Portugueses had established themselves before.
The English have their Forts on the Malabar Coast, at Coromandel, and several
other places in the Indies, where they Traffic with less charge and
inconveniency, than in a place which they were first to be possessed or by
force of Arms.

The re-estab^ishment of the French in the Isle of Madagascar, ought to be
committed to the management of a Person, who by his Merits and long Experience
has acquired a great Reputation abroad; This being a point of that ^icety, and
such a nature, where one man by his Conduct may be able to do more than a
thousand others who act without prudence.

The first thing the French have to do after their Landing, is to re-fortifie
the Fort Dauphine, which they ought to look upon as the Capital of their
Colonies here, and must be the residence of the Governor, by reason of the
temperature of the air, and its convenient situation, which is on the Point of
Madagascar.

The Conquest of this Island is not so difficult as some have Imagined, the
Grands, (or Lords) of the Country, being divided among themselves by so many
different Interests, that the most Powerful among them is not in a capacity to
bring one hundred part of the Inhabitants (...) Arms. Their Arms having no
comparison to ours, they are so frightened at our Firelocks, that we have seen
160 Frenchmen Force one third part of the Isle to do homage to them. Dian
Manangve, who being one of their Principal Lords, and the only person that had
got an insight into the French Affairs, is now dead; and their Reb^llion
chiefly carried on by his advice against the French, ought to serve them as a
precaution for the future, not to admit any of their Grands into their
Councils, and to let them have any knowledge in the Military Art.

The Madagascarians are naturally jealous of their Liberty, Rebel^^ous,
Mistrustful, and Revengeful, seldom forgetting an injury. It will be therefore
the Duty of a Governor to take such measures as may be most effectual to curb
their Insolency, and especially so to clip their wings for time to come, as to
put them beyond all probability, to execute their vengeance and cruelties upon
their Conquerers.

FINIS.

