CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Office of the Lord Chancellor.

Composed by the Right Honorable, and most Learned, Thomas Lord Ellesmere, late
Lord CHANCELLOR of ENGLAND.

Whereunto is annexed a perfect Table, and a Methodicall Analysis of the whole
Treatise.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew VValbanck, at Grayes-Inne Gate; for Henry Twyford,
in Vine Court, Middle Temple, and John Place, at Furnivalls Inn Gate 1651.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
SOme years past, the Copy of this Treatise was delivered unto me by John
Harding, late of Grayes Inn, Esquire, deceased, and one of the Readers of that
Honorable Society, and by him then affirmed to be composed by the Right
Honorable, and most learned, Thomas Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of
England, of whose great and eminent abilities I dare not presume to speak,
being so unable and unworthy to be a judge of, and the rather I am confident no
man will be so hardy as to detract from the memory of so famous a Statesman.

A Perfect Table of the most notable matters contained in the first Part of
this Treatise.
CHancellor, his name in several Languages. Page 1. His Antiquity, and
Authority here, and in other forain Nations. 3, 4, etc. His name and office in
France from the time of Charles the Great. 8. And in England from the time of
Edward the Confessor. 12, 13, etc. Cancillarii Regis and Cancellarii Reg^i, 14.
Simon the Norman the first sole Keeper of the Great Seal, about 23 H 3. ibid.
Sometimes there were two Keepers and sometimes three. 15. Chancellor and his
Election of diverse sorts, and of diverse degrees. ib. and 18, 19 Chancellor,
chief Justice, and Treasurer, their Election belongs to the Parliament. 16.
Patents of the office, and their several forms. 16, 17. Chancery, the nature
and orginall thereof. 21. Chancellor, his ordinary Authority, when it began.
26, 27. Much enlarged by 36 E. 3. 28 His absolute power whereupon it was
grounded. ibi. Error there reversable only in Parl. 30. No prejudice for
mis-pleading there, or default of form. ibid. Process is a Subpoena, and the
order of Proceeding in the Court. 31 The Judge of the Court. 31. How the Seal
is to be ordered. 32. The form and fashion thereof. 33. The Assistants to the
Lord Chancellor. 36 Master of the Rols. ibid. The Officers of the Court. 37,
38, etc. And their privilege. 40. The manner of proceeding, and the matter of
the subject, from 44, to 120.
See in the end of this Treatise an exact Summary or Analysis of the whole
book most methodically composed by the Author thereof.

These books following are Printed and to be sold for Matthew Walbanck at Grays
Inn Gate, for Henry Twyford in Vine Court, middle Temple, and John Place at
Furnivals Inn Gate, 1651.
PErfect Convveyancer, Mirror Justice, Abridgment of Lord Cokes Reports,
Abridgment of Lord Dyers Reports, Abridgment of Plowdens Reports, Perkins Law:
English. Actions Slander, Marches Reports. History of Normans both parts,
Parsons Law, Privilege of Parliaments, Young Clerks Guide, Collins Justice of
Peace, Paul's Progress, Attorney Common Pleas, Attorneys Accademy, Terms of
the Law, Fathers Legacy, Complete Parson, Book of Oaths, Habeas Corpus, Woman's
Lawyer, Liberty Subject, Wards and Liveries, Wilkinsons Sheriff, Derhams
Manuel, Letter Writer, Amends for Ladies, Bancrofts Epigrams, English Grammar,
Lee; Caesar. Mr. Williams in Paul's Church yard sells them, Thorps charge,
Edgars charge,
Books sold by W. Lee, M. Walbanck, D. Pakeman, G. Bedell.
Touchstone of common assurances, by William Shepherd, Esquire, Fleta,
corrected and enlarged by Io: Seldom, Esquire. Three Readings. One by Sir James
Dyer, one by Sir John Bregrave, one by Thomas Risden, Esquire.
Books sold by John Place.
Transactions of the high Court of Chancery' both by practice and president,
with fees and special orders in extraordinary cases* by Will. Tothill, Esquire; and
revived by Sir Robert Holborn, late Bencher of Lincolns Inn. Clarastella, with
pious occasional Elegies, Epigrams and Satyrs, by Robert Heath, Esquire; Vade
mecum* being the substance of all Statutes, useful for a Justice of Peace, by
Val. Young, Esquire
Certain OBSERVATIONS concerning the Office of the Lord CHANCELLOR.
HAVING ENDEAVOVRED (for duties sake) some what to consider the nature of this
high Place and Dignity, for two causes, chiefly, I was much discouraged. For
neither could I remember any man in this kind of discourse to have bin
employed; Neither any Judge or Potentate with whom this Magistrate may be
compared, and herein the more I searched, the more I found my self confounded.
2 Samuel 8. 16.
IN THE Eighth Chapter of the Second of Samuel Jehosaphat the Son of Ah^lud,
the Chancellor among the Hebrews, as the second of David his chief Officers,
is termed Mazur; in he Greek, Ananinnescoon, by Tremelius and J^aius
translated (a Memoria or Monitor) by the Spaniard Chanciller* which is all one
with Cancellarius or a Comentarijs; by the Italian, Seritor de le Cose Fat,
in the Duch Cantzfe^, in the French Chroniqueur, and in our English
Translation, a Recorder, In the fifth place is called Serayah, and he is called
Sopher, which in all the aforesaid Translations is termed Scriba or
Sec^etarius, saving that the Italian does name him Cancellario. Sebastian
Munster conceives Mazur to be a Comentarius, and he was ordained says he, to
be the principal Master to note such things as were worthy of remembrance, or
as Solomon says, his Office consisted in this point, to report the actions of
old time unto the King, and Sopher was appointed to Record them; Herewith
agrees (for the signification of the words) the twentieth of the same Book of
Samuel, and the fourth Chapter of the first of the Kings; But whether the Lord
Chancellor of England as now he is, may be properly termed Sopher or Mazur, it
may receive some needless question, howbeit it cannot be doubted but his
Office does participate of both their Functions, being by William the Conquer
our appointed Magister Collegij Scribabarum, by the same King instituted in the
third year of his Reign, (as writes Polydore) and likewise having had the
keeping of the Rolls of Records as Bracton witnesses, either at the same time
that the Common place was erected, which was about the ninth year of Henry the
third, or not long after. But something more near to our name of Chancellor, I
find the Hebrew word Kinkall, in Greek Knilizo, and in Latin Cancello,
whereof comes Kankill, in Greek Knilis, and in Latin Cancellus, and thereof
not unproperly Cancellarius, as he s^teth intra Cancellos legis, (viz.) and
Conscientiae, or otherwise a Cancellando, as shall be afterward touched.
Notwithstanding for that I find the word Mazur better avowed than this latter,
and I do not remember much mention to be made of any great Officer among the
Grecians near sounding to Kniklum, I will content my self with the former
name only of the H^bricians, without further consideration of his Authority in
Jury, notwithstanding with this observation, that long time before this
Monarchy of the Hebrews, a special privilege of Jurisdiction in Difficult
matters was reserved to Moses wherein he might demean his decrees according
to the Information of his good conscience, for so it may be understood if I be
not deceived that in those cases he asked Counsel of God, who gave him Warrant
of his Authority, and therefore some have not feared to call him Cancellariu
Dei: So was Joseph said to be Pharaohs Chancellor, and therefore his Successors
the Chancellors in our days, are called Patres Patriae, as he was Patriarcha;
and as the King only was in seat superior unto him, so is the Chancellor with
us at this day, Primus post Regem, and secundus in ordine of any temporal
Magistrate.

And surely if in Greece I should look for a meet pattern and president to this
purpose, I would hope to find him in the Commonwealth of the Athenians, where
from the time of the first King Cecrops unto the (Athentes Anno) I dare be bold
^o affirm, that little light would be given unto any man much better
conversant in the Greekish Histories than my self, and from the same time into
the Tyranny of ^isistratus, from thence to ^e renewed Domecticy, after the
Domination of Antigonus, I cannot single out any one Justicer of ^ike quality,
unless I might allow that Solon was therefore Chancellor for that he did
moderate and temper the positive Laws of Draco by his discretion, as well in
decreeing as in execution, the which ^berty and power was after attributed to
the Nemoth^tae, not those which did make laws, but those that did allow or
reform the laws already famed; But me seems the cniefest part of our ^han
cellors Office may be applied to the Senate ^o whom the power was given of
making decrees in the causes of private persons and the holding of daily
accidents, but so as that they did not oppugn or contrary the laws positive.
And further we may say of him, that he has Jus consultand^ with their
Demarches, Jus judicandi between Citizen and Citizen, with Action between
Citizen and Alie^ with their Polymarchus, whom the Masters of the Rolls, and
the Masters of the Chancery are Paredri to inform him of the law, as shall
more easily be gathered in the process of this Treaty, and that he has jus
imperandi and Principatio judicior. with the A^opagitae; and further that he
may multum irr^ga^e with the aforesaid The smothetae, whereof it follows that
he is undoubtedly a most absolute Magistrate, and for that he has closed in
his office a credit for conservation of the peace over all the Realm, with
shall not be amisie to call him Nomophilax with this remembrance that Plutarch
writes, Eumenes Cardiqnus to be Archigra^matea Alexandri magni Valgo
Cancellarium ac principem Scribarum qui l^gothet^ in regno and petitiones
de^retabat quos signabit and in eis se suseridebat.

In the policy of the Roman Empire, I meet not with one example, saving that by
report of Dyonisius the best and worthiest of the hundredth Senators was chosen
by Romulus, to whom oversight of Justice, the appeasing of Tumults, and the
conservatio^ of peace in the City, was appointed at such times as the K. was
otherwise busied in the expedition of warfare, not unlike to the Ordinance of
Ed^. the 3. who in the twentieth year of his reign addressing himself to his
wars upon the French, did then authorize the Chancellor and the Treasurer of
England, to hear and determine of all complaints against extortion of Officers
maintenance, imbracery, and such like offenses, by which authority he procured
to be confirmed unto them by Act of Parliament, and so it is at this day. The
Chancellor of France, V^carius Regis and as will appear hereafter; and that
there was no other Magistrates in the time of the Roman Kings is expressed by
the same Dyonisius excepting only Tribunus Celerum, which was Militaris, and
as some hold opinion, certain Quaesteres for oversight o the Treasury, sent but
otherwise in Rome omnia Regum Arbitrio administrata sunt; in imitation whereof,
the two great Officers of France, which are preferred before all other* Et
semper adsunt ad latu, principis, are the Constable of the Kingdom and the
Chancellor, which is called Quaestor by some writers. Now in the permanent and
ordinary offices of their popular government, what Magistrate might be so
mighty or general in his Jurisdiction, as is the present pre-eminence of the
Chancellor? I speak not of the Consuls of Dictators, which did want nothing at
all but the title and the denomination only of Kings and chief Rulers. Herbert
Budaeus does not stick to call him Praefectum praetorio, and further (qui loco
Dictatoris sit) that our Chancellor has Jus ^dicendi, appears by his rules
and orders for matters of Consclence in the Chancery, which do especially
concern his absolute Authority, Jus judicandi upon Audita qu^relaes, Petitions
de droit, etc. where he judges according to form of Common Law, jus cogendi,
by his service of the Mace, and jus coercendi, for over all the Realm he has
authority to command a man to Prison: How he might be termed Censor, in that he
sends for the Commissioners for survey of Armor, etc. Aedi^es in the prizing
of Wines and Fish, etc. in the appointing of Sewers, etc. And so to compare him
with the several Officers of that Commonwealth, by reason of his several
qualityes it were both tedious and impertinent, only I have thought convenient
to term him Praetor for these congruities: First quoad cognitionem, then quead
curationem. The Cognizance of the Praetor was either Praetor.
Domestical or Popular, Domestical whereby he might hear the Complaints of
every private man which his Palace and in his own Chamber, Ministrante at que
admittente Cubiculario, and order them by the Law of his Reason, the which
orders were engrossed by any one of his Clarks and sealed with his own signet;
Popular when he sat in Basilie^ or in Foro, where he was Circumdatus
Cancell^s, and had attendant upon him, Scribes, Cryers of the Court, and
Sergeants, and this was called Locus sta^uendi, in whose constitutions there
were two kinds, one of decreeing, another of giving judgment. He was said to
decree when without the Counsel or advise of the Judge he would manumiss,
emancipate, award possessions of lands and goods, commit wardship of pupills,
grant injunctions, and generally when without assistance of a Judge he did hold
cognizance of causes and determine thereof as he thought convenient, and in
this manner of Cognizance sometimes he would statuere sine Judice, sometime he
would Rem iudicibus Statuendum permittere, as we may fitly translate to
dismiss them to the Common law. It was said the Judgment of the Praetor either
when he proceeded to Judgment according to leges Regis, duodecim tabulas, Jus
Civil, leges, plebiscita, or Senatus Consulta, and herein his authority was
not absolute as in the other, or where himself did hear and define, remitting
the sentence of judgment to be pronounced by the Judges, in this kind our
Chancellor and their Praetor ^oe differ, especially for that the Praetor would at
his entry into that Office, publish and propound certain Edicts, which were
principles and fountains out of the which he would derive his decrees. But
what names or general notions the Lord Chancellor does assign unto himself
for limitation of equity and direction of his Conscience that lies hidden and
concealed in his own breast, for as says Lindwood, Conscientia est Cognitione
sui ipsuis Cordis and Conscientiae alicujus quando quid relinquitur ipsemet
erit judex etc. Whereby the man of Law is not able to inform his Clyent what
is like to become of his action, or whether it be determinable in the Court of
Chancery, or to be tried at Common Law. But to give some understanding of such
matters as are proper to this Court, so far forth as the absolute power of
the Chancellor extends, there shall be set here under a competent store of
cases whereupon reasonable conjecture may be grounded what is like to fall out
in matters of many natures; But of his ordinary power of Judge, and of his
Office as he is the Princes Minister, they shall not in this discourse be
largely handled in particular, but only touched (obiter) in a word or two. And
thus much of Rome, calling to mind by the way that Tribonianus to Justinian,
Seneca to Nero, ulpian to Alexander the Pope, are reported to have bin
Chancellor.

The Chancellor of France.
And now in the mean time let us in short have regard to the Chancellor of
France, and to the great Chancery of that Kingdom which comes nearest to our
selves, and would be much resemblance of the form and force of our English
Chancery, had not the Court of Requests bin enacted by Commission from K. H.
the 8. before which time the Masters of Requests had no warrant of ordinary
Jurisdiction.

We are to give credit unto the Historyes of France, which do: report the first
Chancellor of that Kingdom to be ordained by Charles the Great, and that his
authority was enlarged by Charles the wise the fist of that name. It may be
gathered out of these words of Divus Lucius which I do therefore report in
Latin as he writ them, for that they be significant, Constitutionum Ca^oli
quinti Supremus o^ni^m ordinum and honorum Cancellarius (quique subinde Regi a
Consi^^s intimis statent, exhibit is tactisque sanctis Evangelijs in manu Regia
in ^oec verba j^rabunt, quod sci^cet et nullum faedus nec ullum conspirationem
ini^^ut inter ^os and si quia a quoquam contra fieret a statu su^ dejectus
exauthorazetur.

Per insignem dignamque Majestat is regiae huc refer libuit modum quem
Carolus ille q^^ntus cognomine sapiens in ^ligend^ and designando supremo (...)
Nom^^hylice Cancel^arie non minus cite quam sancte observavit, cum ad c^ntum
and trigint. ade^sent p^tres conscripti octo juri a libellis Proceres
caeterisque rati^^ales, cos a conclavi Rex ab^re and exire jussit, postea
sigillatim omnes ad unum accersunt, and Jure jurando adegit, ut bona fide quem
e Republica huno Nomophylacie putarent esse ^erficiendum utrius li^et status
sacrae aut Secularis hominem profiterentur latis suffragiis Petrus Orgs Montius
Latinacensis Episcopus Centum quinque puncta and tabulas tulit. Tumille ut
ingenius erat semoribus minimeque ambitiosus tanto huic munere (ne dicam on^ri)
sese long imparem excusare. Ac vero Rex tot tantisque ca^culis a^probatum sibi
and jam valde probari testatus est signaque Codi cillaria ei in manus dando ab
co Iusjurandum Sacrosancto per Evangelia excepit sub ijs concept is verbis Tuo
Juramento firmas Orge menti Regi te obsequentissimum sore. That you shall give
unto him faithful advice and Counsel and such as shall be for his commodity
and convenient for his Majesty, as also for the profit of him and the
Commonwealth: That you shall never put your self under the obedience of other
than of Him, that you shall preserve to the uttermost of your power the revenue
of the King and of the Crown, that you shall never receive nor accept without
his consent, any gown, Cloak, Fee or wages, present or profit whatsoever of
any other than of him; that for favor, affection or hatred, you shall do
nothing, and if at this present you are bound by Oath to any Lord or Lady, or
have bin so heretofore, that you forsake and renounce it wholly.

Hereout may be collected the pre-eminence, election, and duty of the
Chancellor, if we add hereunto the Words of Budenes, That body ejus par^es
primoe sunt videre ut nulla principis constitutio, nulla Sanctio, nullum
diploma, nullum Res^rip^um, nulli Cudicilli Regij none Republica atque etiam e
dignitate Reipublicae principaliqu^ exeant cujus censurae aut stilo principum
Majestas acts sua eximi volunt, denique qui principis pr^sentis viarius
pera^ere agente Interrex quod a morbo esse censetur Jare and proprie Nomophilax
legum presidium Juris Assylum id quod E Papiniano quondam dictum est morum
institurorum quae ara ^qui bonique Columen appellari potest atque etiam debet
id quae creder eme cogit consensus fere hominum institutu^ quae quod eam quasi
per manus traditum caput eum per verticem Justic. appellantum. And namely it is
to be noted, that he might be of either State, Ecclesiastical or temporal,
religious or secular, for the order of all the Chancery Courts in France may be
seen one A^re^ in the time of Charles the 7th. another of Charles the 8th. and
that the High Court of Chancery which follows the King at this day, was
ordained by Jews the 12th. may appear by the Ordinance of the same King. Anno
1498. as also by the acts of Francis the First, Anno 1540. and of Charles the
9th. Anno 1560.

There are two Seals belonging to the Chancery, one is the great Seal wherewith
are sealed letters of grace, and the other called the Common Seal, lesser than
the former, wherewith are sealed the writs of simple Justice, and so have I
heard a motion to be made for a like little Seal proper and peculiar for the
sealing of Writs original in our Chancery, all Letters Patents of the King,
arrests and ordinances made and agreed in the Privy Counsel, are sealed with
the Seal of the King, either by the Chancellor or Keeper of the Seal in the
great Chancery, which follows the Court, For in France they have a chief or
principal Chancery attendant upon the King in the which the Chancellor of
France does exercise the office of Sealing, or else his Commissarie assisted
with the Kings Secretaries which of right have a certain Fee out of every
Patent by them signed, and also with the Masters of Requests which have the
oversight and admitment of all such Writs and Patents as are to be sealed, and
moreover in every Parliament of France there is by the King of France
established a Chancery, wherein is placed a Keeper of the Seal, a certain
number of Secretaryes as in the former, which are said subscripti in sublevamen
Cancellarij propter multitudinem negotiorum in Cancellaria and Curia Regis
affluentium; and likewise as are in the Great Chancery, there is one Audiencer,
one Comptroler, and one Referendary or Recorder, The Chancellor if he do
exercise his Office, has for wages by the year eighteen thousand French
livers and having a Keeper of the Seal substituted he received twelve thousand
Livers, and six thousand Livers are assigned unto him, principally for the
entertainment of the Masters of Requests, which do ordinarily dyne at the Lord
Chancelors Table in their turn of quarters, he has also besides his wages
many other rights and duties, as at the entry of Kings into Cities, he has a
garment of cloth of Gold, and yearly he has certain Else of Velvet, a certain
number of lights, and an allowance of Wax, the Chancellor ought not nor may not
pass any writing under Seal, contrary to the deliberation and determination
of the Privy Council, neither whereof any doubt is moved by any Master of
Requests of the household, but he ought to send the same to the Council for a
resolution.

Of those which have access to the Seal we may place in order next to the
Chancellor, the Master of Requests, which are appointed him for surveyors and
examiners of such writings as pass the Seal, especially of Patents and
Commissions and all other persons whatsoever are forbidden to enter at Sealing
time, saving the Kings Secreraries, the Audiencers, the Comptroller, the
Procurator General, which is ordained in the said Chancery, and the C^afewax.

By this appears the name, and some part of the Office of the Chancellor of
France, to be given by Cha^lemain, more than one hundred years before the time
of Edward the Confessor, in whose days began the name of our English
Chancellors according to the assertion of Florentius Wigornensis, for that the
aforesaid Edward having spent a great part of his Age in Normandy, was the
first that brought the use of the Seal from thence, and with it the name of
him that had the charge thereof, and that is the Chancellor, in whom Leafricies
the Britain is named the first Chancellor, But saving correction I must be of
that opinion of the Normans, we did not learn our manner of sealing, not only
for that I have seen the Copies of our Kings Patents before those days, with
Ego I^a, Ego Aluredus etc. subsignavi, which indeed may be al one with
subscripsi, according to 40th. Law in the Digests lib 50. But surely I have
either seen the very points of the Saxony, Danish Seal, or else they were
counterfeit to no profitable purpose.

Let other men give what credit they will to the collection of Chancellors by
Mr. Thin in the new addition to Mr. Hollinsteeds Chronicle lately Published,
For my own part I am neither of experience nor judgment to impugn it, But
under the authority of allowable writers, I shall set down, and that shortly,
what I have gathered in so few days as I have therein bestowed, of the present
estate of our Modern Chancellor, and herein some particulars of the Court of
Chancery; and first in mine opinion he is the same Chancellor that was
Rembaldus to holy Edward, and Mauritius to William the Conqueror, whose office
was to make and seal the instruments that passed from the Prince, as writes
Lupanus, and as for the former mentioned Chancellors before this time, they
seem more kindly chief Secretaries, than to exercize the present Office of
Chancellors. For howsoever I am induced probably to conjecture, that before
Edward the Confessor there was use of Sealing, as I have said; so have I no
warrant to allege for a great Seal of the King to pass the Instruments,
whereof the charge was committed to the Chancellors, the which, as I take it,
may be reputed the original of his office, and this his original office was
not altered by the aforesaid Conqueror in the erection of the College of
Scribes or notaries, neither his name changed as I conceive the words of
Pollydore where he says that Ejus Collegij Magistrum vocavit Cancel. larium
qui paulatim supremus effectu^ magistratus of qualis body habetur. But I
suppose that authority was also given him by sealing and making certain Writs
originalls, the form whereof was for the most part produced out of Normandy,
but not the granting of all originalls, because that by Glanvill it is affirmed
that many of them did bear Test of himself (viz.) Ranulpho Ganvilla who was
chief Justice many years after; and this by the way is to be remembered, that
in the name of Chancellor our ancient Histories may easily deceive us, for some
were called (Cancellarij Regis) and others (Cancellarij Regni) and of those
which had this great Sea^ of the K. in their charge and custody, Some were
termed Chancellors and Seal bearers, also that had no partakers of their
office, such a one was the same Rembaldo to the aforesaid Edward, and many
others; some were Keepers of the Great Seal, and that solely, Q^i Custodiam
sigilli Regli acciperent Cancellarii vices acturi and officium etc. as says
Matthew Paris of John Maunsell, although there may be perceived some small
difference between a Keeper of the grev Seal and a Vice Chancellor, for of
Vice-Chancellors also I find two sorts, the one (as I take it) exercising the
Office of a Chancellor in matters of Justice, and such a one was Malus Catulus
in the time of Richard the First, another which was chief Secretary as it
seemed unto the Chancellor, to write the Patent of the Prince, and such a one
was Sywardus, whose name I have seen subscribed to a Charter of Edward the
Consessor, Ego Sywardus Notorius ad vicem Rambaldi Regis Dignitatis Concellarij
subscripsi.

The first sole Keeper of the Great Seal I take to be Simon the No^man, who
had the Seal delivered unto him in the 23d. year of the Reign of King Hen. 3d.
and shortly after also taken from him again, when he was also banished the
Court for that he would not seal the Patent, whereby Thomas Earl of Flanders
might ask 4d. for every sack of Wool that went out of England into Flanders;
But that the Authority of the Lord Keeper was beforetime some way inferior to
the Authority of the Chanceller, that may seem by the Act of Parliament which
was made Anno 5 Eltz that did equal the power of the one with the other;
sometimes also the Chancellor of England had a Keeper of the seal subscribed
to him, and so was Ranulphus the Chancellor, and Richard the Chaplain keeper
of the Great Seal, both at one instant to Henry the first. Sometime there were
two Keepers of the Great Seal and both at once, as were Jefferey le Templer,
and John de Lexinton, notwithstanding that Ralph Nevill remained Cancellor, of
whom infra.

Sometime the great Seal was delivered unto 3 at once, as by Edward the 2d. to
Will: Melton and 2 others, joined with him for a certain time to execute all
such things as were to be done therewith during the Kings pleasure.

The Election of the Chancellor.
The election or creation of Chancellors, and Keepers, etc. was of more than
one sort, and also of Men of diverse degrees and qualities

Sometimes, and for the most part, the Chancellor was elected by the King
Durante bene-placito, and put in power of his Office, by the Delivery of the
Seal, and sometimes the Chancellor was made by Patent to hold that place or
office during his life, as Walter Gray Bishop of Chester, in the time of King
John and others, some, and the most part were elected by the King only, some
had Patents of the King and were confirmed Chancellors by consent of the three
Estates, as were Ralph Nevill Bishop of Chester in the time of King Henry the
third, with whom the Prince being offended as reports Matthew Paris, and
demanding the Seal at his hands, he refused to yield the same unto him,
affirming that as he had received it by the common consent of the Nobility, so
he would not, without like Warran resign the same. And in the days of the
same King, it was told him by all his Lords spiritual and Tempotall, that of
ancient time, the election and dispofition of the chief Justice, Chancellor and
Treasurer, belonged to the Parliament, an^ although the King in displeasure did
take the sea^ from him, and delivered the same to the custod^ of others; yet
did the aforesaid Nevill remain^ Chancellor notwithstanding, and received the
profits thereof, to whom the King would have restored the Seal, but he refused
to receiv^ it.

And hereupon may be gathered, that the Keeper of the Seal is not
Vice Chancellor in every respect.

An^ ^et us note by the way three several Parent^ were granted unto this Ral^h
Nevill aforesaid, w^ whereby he is ordained to be Chancellor, and the third for
the custody of the Scale, all remaining among the Records in the Tower, in hae^
^erba.

Henricus Rex, etc. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis etc. Sciatis nos dedisse,
concess^sse and ^a^ charta nostra confirmasse Vene. Pa^^^ Randolpho

Cicestrensi Episcopo Cancelldria^ nostram hahend. and ^^nend* to^o ^^mpore
vitae suae, cum omnibus p^rtinent. libertatihus and ^^^eris consuetudinibus ad
praedictam Cancellariam nostram, habeat been and in pace libere and (...)
integre, honorifice cum ^^^^bus exitus libertatibus and omnious all^s ad eam
per^inentibus sicut Cancellar* Regn. Angl. praedecessor. nostror. ea mell us
quietius liberius and integrius hab^ere hijs Testibus etc. datum per manum
nostram 12. F^br. Anno Regni nostri 11.

His second Patent was of this Form.
Henricus Dei gratia, etc. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, etc. Sciatis nos
concessisse et ^ac Charta nostra confirmasse pro nobis, et haered. nostris
venerab. pri. Randolpho Cicistrensi Episcopo Cancellario nostro Cancellariam
Angliae toto tompore vitae suae cum omnibus pertin. libertatibus and liberis
consuetudinibus ad praedict: Cancellariam pertinen. quare volumus et firmit*
praecipimus pro nob is et haered. nostris, quod praedictus Episcopus habeat
ipsam Cancellariam toto tempere vitae suae cum omnibus pertinent. libertat* et
liberis consuetudinibus ad praedictam Cancellariam pertin. sicut praedictum
est. Testibus etc. Datum per manum meum apud Westminster. quarto die Maij An^o regni
nostri decimo septimo.

This is the transcript of his third Patent the same day and year.
Henricus Dei gratia, etc. Archiepiscopis, etc. Sciatis ^os concessisse et hac
charta nostra confirmasse venerab. patri Randolpho Cicestr. Episcopo Cancellar.
nostro custodiam Sigilli nostri toto tempore vitae suae cum omnibus pertin.
libertat. et consuetudinibus ad praedict. custod. pertinent. Ita quod sigillum
illud Portat et custodiat in propria persona sua quamdiu voluerit vel per
aliquem virum discretum sufficientem and idoneum assignatsuum qui quidem
assignat nob. fidelitat. faciat de fideli servitio and de sigillo nostro loco
suo fideliter Custodiendo, aut quam custodiam praedicti sigilli recipiat* (...)
si forte idem assignat. ^suus discesserit, vel vitam suam mutaverit, vel ob
causam rationalem per nos vel per ipsum Cancellar* amotus fuerit, vel ipse
assignat* sigillum illud ulterius portare noluerit, idem Cancellarius loco
illius assignat. substituat. alium virum discretum sufficientem and idoneum
substituat. Item quod fidelitatem faciat nobis de fideli servitio suo and de
praedicto sigillo loco suo fideliter custodiend. antiqua Carstiaca sigilli
praedicti recipiat sicut praedictum est, quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus
quod praedictus Cancellar. habeat custodiam, etc. hiis Testibus, etc. Datum per
manum nostrum apud Westminster. quarto die Maii Anno Regni nostri decimo septimo.

Sometimes the Chancellors of England were elected by the Nobility, as Nicholas
of Eli was made Chancellor by the Barons; But this seemed a usurpation by them,
for they were afterward the most of them most sharply chastised, and the said
Nicholas deprived by Hen. the 3 d. disdaining to have Officers of that estate
appointed him by his Subjects.

Sometimes the Chancellors were created out of the Nobility, as Richard Nevill
Earl of Salisbury, in the time of Hen. the 6. Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex,
in the time of Edw. the 4. the Lord Wrotesley, the Lord Rich, etc.

Sometimes they were enobled after their advancement to that Office, as Richard
Scroope, Knight, created Lord of Boulton, and Michael de la Pool^ created Earl
of Suffolk, in the time of Hen Beakford.
Rich. the 2. Sometimes they were the Sons of Noblemen and Princes children,
as Henry ^eauford, son of John of Caunt, etc. in the time of Hen* the 4.
Sometimes of base and mean parentage, as Wolsey Cardinal, etc.

Sometimes Archbishops and Clerks were ordained Chancellors, whereof the first
Archbishop was Walter Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the time of King
John, to whom a Nobleman said in scor^e, That he had often seen a Chancellor
made a Bishop, but he never before saw an Archbishop made a Chancellor, where
of is to be noted, that many of the former Chancellors were not Bishops when
they were elected to that Office, but afterward promoted to their Bishoprics,
upon which promotions, many of them did yield and surrender up their Authority
of Chancellors, and to this purpose makes the testimony of Thomas Walsingham,
who writes that in the 3 year of Rich. the 2. in a Parliament holden at London.

Dominus Richardus Scroope cessit officio Cancellariae, etc. Archiep. Cantuar.
Magister Simon Sudbury contra gradum suae dignitat. ut plurimi conclamabant,
illi Officio militaturus accessit, sed si ipse illum procuraverit aut sponte
susceperit, novit Deus.

Sometimes were chosen to that place Archbishops and Cardinals, as John
Thoresby, Archbishop of York and Cardinal, etc. in the time of Edw. the 3. etc.

Sometimes Threasaurers of England were advanced to the honor of Chancellors,
as Henry de Burgh, in the time of Edw. the 3. Sometimes to the Office of the
Keeper of the Great Seal, as John de Cheshall, in the time of Henry the 3. and
many other to either of the places

Sometimes common Lawyers were called to be Chancellors, as Robert ^erning
Justice, and Robert Thorpe Justice, in the time of Edward the 3. Sir Thomas
Moore, in the time of Hen. the 8. and others.

Sometimes were trusted with the Keeping and exercise of the Seal, as John
Maunsell L. Chief Justice, in the time of Edw. the 3. etc.

Sometimes the Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal was made Lord Chancellor, as
Edmund Stafford, in the time of Henry the 4. and others.

Sometimes were made Keepers of the Seal men cunning in the Custom of the
Chancery, as was Sylvester de Eversden, in the time of Hen. 3.

Sometime men learned in the Civil and Common Laws, as William of Kilkenny,
in the time of the said King.

Sometimes the Master of the R*o^^s, as Henry Cliffe, in the time of Edw. 3.
who was his Chancellor also, and others.

Sometimes a Keeper of the Wardrobe has been appointed to keep the Seal, as
John Drakensord to Edw. 1.

Some have been twice Lo. Chancellors, as John Hotham, in the time of Rich. 2.

Some thrice, as John Stratford, in the time of Edward 3.

And sometimes there have been three Chancellors in one year, as Rotheram,
Alcoch, and Moreton, in the 1. year of Htn. 7. and he that has been the
longest in office, either of Chancellor or Keeper of the Seal, is not
remembered to have continued above 18. years.

Some with their Office of Chancellor, have retained other places, as William
Velson (after Bishop of Tel^ard) was at one time Chaplain and Chancellor to
William the Conqueror; Rannlph Britain at one time Cancellarius Regis
specialis (as says Matthew Paris) and Treasurer of the Chamber: But the
mightiest of living by multiplicity of Offices that I may readily find, were
John Maunsell, in the time of Henry the 3. Simon Langham, in the time of Edw.
3. John Stafford, in the time of Hen. 6. Woolsey Cardinal, in the time of Hen.
the 8. And in honor and temporal Dignities, the Lord Marquess (...).
of Winchester, who was Keeper of the Seal in the time of Edw. the 6. And thus
much may suffice for the Original, Office, Dignity, and Election of the Lord
Chancellor. Now may something be added of the Conrt of Chancery, and Authority
absolute of the Chancellor.

The nature original of the Chancery.
As the Chancellor is at this day, Norma omnium jura Reddentium c^^^mnes
Magistrate* honorun suorum fasces submittere not ^ndignentur: And withal, as
Budeus calls them, Promus and Condus clementiae benigni^atisque principalis,
and generally the mouth, the ear, the eye, and the very heart of the Prince,
so is the Court, whereof he has the most particular administration, the Oracle
of equity, the Storehouse of the favor, of Justice, of the liberality Royal,
and of the right pretoriall, which opens the way to right, gives power and
Commission to the Judges, has jurisdiction to correct the rigor of Law, by
the judgment and discretion of equity and grace. It is the refuge of the poor
and afflicted; It is the Altar and sanctuary for such as against the might of
rich men, and the countenance of great men cannot maintain the goodness of
their cause, and truth of their Title, the entry and door whereof ought,
Patere omni postulanti omnibus ^oris, nulli tamen ^^are; which is meant not to
gape after such men as bring rewards, o^ seek access to the help thereof by
corruption, and it is called Caria, says Valla, a Cura, for that care and heed
is to be taken therein, for the deciding of controversies; but it seems
rather to be called, Curia, an Assembly, or the place of assembly, etc. like as
the Kings Court was first called Curia, for that the Court of Justice was there
first holden.

For the original of this special Court, is to be considered, that in the
time of the Saxons and of the Danes, the King by himself did hold a high Court
of Justice, wherein he sat in person, and did judge not only according to
mere right and Law, but also after equity and good conscience; and this is
confirmed by the Law of the Saxon King Edgar, (viz.) Let no man seek to the
King, in matter of variance, unless he cannot find right at home; but if the
right be too heavy for him, then let him seek to the King to have it lightened:
The like to this Law, is also among the Laws of Canutus the Dane; and for the
understanding of this right at home, we may remember that in those days were
certain Jurisdictions over Leets, Boroughs, and Tythings, etc. and there by
authority permitted to the Reeves or Judges of the lower rooms, for the
hearing of suits of small importance, and grant of greater power to the
Sheriffs and Aldermen which had the charge of greater Assemblies, all was
retained and reserved to the King himself, the decision of such matters as by
just cause of appellation* either for law or equity, should be brought before
him, to be considered and resolved in the aforesaid high Court of the King; out
of which as were the former, so were all the high Courts of Justice or
Conscience at this day derived by the Ecclesiastical Courts or Temporal.

And here I might take some fit occasion to touch by the way, how in the
Parliament, Laws, Parliam.
not only for civil, and criminal causes, but also for the matters of the
Church, are made, abrogated or mitigated; common wrongs not holden in other
Courts, are there amended and heard, and difficult causes are there ended,
Attainders confirmed and annulled, corruption of blood there restored, errors
committed in other Courts there corrected, and all constitutions for the State
are there confirmed, etc.

Kings Bench.
How in the Kings Bench are properly all such causes only to be handled, which
appertain to the Crown, or wherein the King is a party, if they be not by
Commission particularly assigned to some other Court.

Common Pleas*
How in the Court of Common Pleas are holden all Common Pleas between subject
and subject of all matters of Common Law.

Exchequer
How in the Exchequer are the Queens receipts and her yearly revenues recorded
and kept, how it is her common Treasury, and a Court for Justice between her
Majesty and her Subjects, etc.

Court of Wards.
How the Court of Wards and Liveries is the Court wherein the Queens
prerogative for Wards is maintained, out of which are sued Liveries, and
therein their ages are proved which are in Ward to the King by reason of
Tenure, etc.

Star Chamber.
How the Court of Star Chamber is ordained to redress certain great
offenses, provided by Statute, and appointed to this Court.

Dutby Court.
How the Duchy Court of Lancaster is also the Queens Court, and of Record,
wherein are holden all Pleas real and personal, which concern any the
Tenants of the Duchy lands, now in the hands of her Majesty, and parcel of her
Crown, but severed in Court and Jurisdiction.

Court of Requests:
How in the Court of Requests are holden by virtue of their Commission none
other but suits that are made to her Majesty by way of supplication, which is
called the poor man's Court, because he should have right there without paying
any money.

Admiralls court.
How the Admiral has disseisin of Marine.

How the Constable and Marshall of England determines the Contract, touching
Deeds of Constable of England.
Arms out of the Realm, and handles matters concerning wars within the
Realm, and Combats, Blazon, and Armory, etc. may be tried by the Laws of the
Land.

Marshalls court.
How the Marshall of the Kings House before the Stat. of Articuli super chartas
had Authority to hear and determine the pleas of the Crown within the verge,
and now has the hearing of Trespasses, Contracts and Covenants made within the
verge, etc.

President of Wales and the North parts.
How the Court of Presidents and Councels in the Marches of Wales, and in the
North parts, are Courts of equity in their principal Jurisdiction, although
they do withal exercise other powers by virtue of other several Commissions
that do accompany the same, etc.

I might further busy my self with the County Courts Leets, Courts of Barons,
and Courts of Pyepowders, etc. the Assizes, Quarter Sessions, Commissions of
Oyer and Determiner, and Justices in Air, to search and set down when, by
whom, and upon what occasion all the aforesaid Courts were erected, wherein
they do contain within their appointed limits, and wherein they do usurp
Jurisdiction, which was appropriated to some others, etc. but for that the
matters to be moved therein would require a several Treatise of every several
Court, for the which I feel my self very insufficient, I will forbear at
this time to mingle Jurisdictions, and only continue in the course of the
Court of Chancery, the which Court I cannot find in the time of the
Conqueror, to be served from the Court of the King, and appointed to be holden
by the Chancellor, although I read in that time, and the time of his son
Rufus, the ordinary course of Justice was altered in form, but not in
substance, and whether the Collegium s^ribarum, founded by the Conqueror,
whereof he appointed the Chancellor to be President, might bear the name and
title of a Chancery, in very truth I have much doubted, for I cannot gather
thereout any jurisdiction to determine causes; and moreover, I read expressly,
that during the Reigns of both the Williams, Hen. 1. Stephen, and Hen. the 2.
there continued still a Court belonging to the King, which was the place of
Sovereign justice, both for matters of Law and Conscience, called, Curia
Domini Regis, and Aula Regia, for that the Prince himself did many times sit
there in person, and had Justices a latere suo sedente, as says Bracton,
namely his chief Justice, Chancellor, Constable, Marshall and others; and
howbeit in the 9. year of Hen. 3. by the erection of the Common Pleas, the
Common Pleas were withdrawn from the Court which followed the King, to a place
and Jurisdiction certain, it seems that by the division of Jurisdiction made
by Bracton in his Book which he compiled by the commandment of K. Edw. 1. in
the beginning of his reign, and of the particular authorities delivered out by
the King to his Justices, Comm^ssioners, and Delegates, that the Jurisdiction
o^ determining the causes now belonging to this Court, did remain to the
exercise of himself, and yet was not the Jurisdiction of the other Courts out
of the King, for Jurisdiction, as says Bracton, Non potest a Rege delegare,
but the causes proper to this Court were managed and determined either by
himself in person, or in his absence by his Chancellor, Councillors of State
and Justices of Law, that continually attend upon him for that service* namely
the Justices to inform him of the Law, and the Chancellor (which was most
usually a spiritual person) to give advice according to equity and good
conscience, in which respect also he was visitor for the King, and passed the
presentations of Benefices, so that such as sought for relief by equity, were
suitors to the King himself* who being assisted with the Chancellor and his
Council, did mitigate the severity of the Law in his own person, when it
pleased him to be present, and did in absence either refer it to the
Chancellor alone, or to him or some other of the Council; yet have I some good
causes of conjecture, that the Chancellor in those days was a Judge ordinary
in the same Court, to hold plea by Latin Bil, In monstrance de Droit* Pleas and
Enterpleas of Livery and Ouster ie Man's, of portions and such like, as a
Minister to make process, etc. And therefore I cannot agree with the opinion
of some men, that this Court of Chancery was erected, and first assigned to the
Lord Chancellor, in the 36. year of Edw. 3. as well for the Patentees before set
down do grant and confirm unto the said Nevill officium Cancellariae of the
Chancery, and not Cauc^llarii, which was in Hen. 3. time, as also for that in
diverse Statutes long before this time, and in Year Books, there is mention
made of the ordinary authority of the Chancellor, the Register, and the Clerks
of the Chancery, (viz.) in the Statute of Glouc. in Anno 6. Quo warranto, etc.
of Acton Burnell in Anno 11. Process upon Recognizance, in Westminster* 2. cap. 24.
concordand. Cleris. de novo brevi, etc. Ad* cap. 49. Champertie, etc. and
Statut. Marchante, Brev. al. Viscount, etc. in Anno 13. Slat. de consultat.
procedendo, etc. in Anno 24. Articuli super chartas, cap. 5. follow the King,
etc. 6. Seal, etc. in Anno 28. of Ed. 1. and in Ed. 3. his time, Anno t. Stat.
2. cap. 15. writing by Dures, etc. Anno 14. cap. 8. choose Escheators, etc. Anno
5. Stat. Carhal. adymytt. Attorneyes, etc. Anno 19. Sacrum Clericorum
Cancellar. etc. Anno 20. cap. 3* Oath of Justices Chancery, etc. ad cap. 6.
Chancellor and Treasurer, etc. Anno 25. cap. 2. Sley Chancellor, Treason, etc.
and ibid. cap. 4. writ to Mayors, etc. Anno 31. ca. 3 Fifty wives, etc. in the
29. of the Book of Assizes we may see partition before this time made in the
Chancery and execution thereof by Scire fac. out of the com. pleas in the 20*
Ed. 3. Suit in the Chancery by Petition to repeal a patent, etc. So may we
remember 15. 18* and 2. Edw. 3. for Petitions, etc. before this time, and
diverse other cases.

In 20. of Edw. 3. an absolute power was by Statute given to the Chancellor
jointly with the Treasurer, to punish diverse offenses therein mentioned,
according as Law and Reason required, etc. but whether this may be said to give
them authority of extraordinary and absolute proceeding against the^, I stand
in some doubt; how be it, I do not think, that the jurisdiction of the Chancery
was thereby enlarged, but it seems very probable, that the Statute of 36. of
the same King, though it were not the foundation and erection of the Chancery,
did notwithstanding add a great measure of jurisdiction unto the same, for
there it was agreed by Parliament, that if any man were grieved contrary to the
Articles in that Statute mentioned, which were many and general; or others
contained in diverse Statutes, he might come into the Chancery, or any for him,
and thereof make his complaint, where he should be relieved by force of the
said Articles and Statutes without, elsewhere pursuing to have remedy: By which
Law, the Chancellou^ was not only made sole Judge in this Court, but was
enabled also to proceed in judgment there after his own discretion, for
otherwise the word^ without other Suit, were not beneficial; but saving
correction, I take the Statute of 17 Edw. 2 to be the especial groundwork of
the Chancellor his absolute power, where authority is given him upon untrue
suggestions, to ordain and award damages according to his discretion, by
express word, etc. after which time his power from time to time, Vires
accrevit eundo, be enlarged by sundry Parliaments, as by one, to sen^ forth
Proclamations of Rebellions, etc. against such as would not appear, and by
others, both to grant Commissions of diverse kinds, and to do^ many other
things, whereof mention shall be made in the cases set down hereafter
concerning his power absolute, the which is intended the special, but an
object of this Treatise; Now therefore in the mean time may we confidently
cali the Chancery the Kings High Court of Conscience, made especially to
redress private causes, such as by extremity of Law, cannot have agreeable end
to equity, by reason of circumstances hindering; wherein it is to be noted,
that conscience is so regarded in this Court, that the Laws are not neglected,
but they must both meet and join in a third, that is in a moderation of
extremity. It holds plea also of common or civil matters between the Prince
and his Subjects, so far forth as the same has to do with Petitions,
Traverses, Monstrance de Droit, and such like; out of this Court, as from the
person of the Prince came all manner of original Writs, whereof some are
Commissional or Commissary, giving Authority to certain Judges or Officers to
hear and determine causes, some are certificatory, or Remotaries of Records,
Pleas or other Acts, some do command to proceed as Writs De Procedendo, etc.
some inhibit or excuse, as Prohibitions, Protections, or Graunties de jours*
and of Essoynes, etc. Some are deductory, to summon and bring the party
impleated into the Court, to answer to the Plaintiff.

Out of this Court come most commonly Commissions, Patents, Licenses,
Inquisitions, etc. of this Court is said, Ar^icul^ super narrationes novas,
that it is Curia ordinaria, pro brevibus originalibus emendis and concedendis,
sed non pro placitis Communibus habuendis; meant, as it seems, according to
the course of the common Law, and in the Treatise of Diversities of Courts, It
is noted, that the Court of Chancery is a Court of high nature, out of the
which does proceed Writs Original, as is aforesaid, and there a man may
traverse Offices, and in the same Court the Kings Widows shall be sworn that
they will not marry without the Kings leave before they be endowed; and it is
there said, that the error upon a Patent or Traverse there, cannot be reversed
any where else then in Parliament, etc. And in this Court a man shall have
remedy for such things, for therewith he shall not have remedy at the common
Law, etc. ibid. In this Court of Chancery a man shall not be prejudiced for
his mispleading, or for default of form, but according to the truth of the
matter, for that awards there are to be made according unto conscience, and not
Ex rigore Juris; And further in Fleta are these words, Fiant autem brevia inde
audicialia in Cancellaria ea recognitionibus and contractis habitis and inde
Rotulis Cancellariae irrotulatis, Et ex Recordo Consellario and Cloricis sibi
assasiatus per hanc constitut. concessae quia de h^s quae Recordata sunt coram
Cancellario Dom. Regis and ejus Justitiar. qui recordum habent and in rotulis
eorum irrotulantur, non debent fieri processus placiti per summonationem vel
Attachiamenta Essonia visus terrae and alios Solempnita^is Curiae sicut fieri
consuevit in contractibus and commencionibus factis extra Curiam, etc. This
Court is also by some called O^ffic. Juris Civilis Anglorum, because out of
this Court issue all manner of Process, which give the party his cause of action
in other Courts.

Process Cancella*riae.
The Process in the Chancery is a Subpoena, which is to call the party before
the Chancellor, upon pain of one hundred pounds, etc. and this is the way
used to bring in the party, or else by the Sergeant, as shall be said
afterward, and how the pain is but in terrorem, for thereof shall be no
forfeiture; but if the party come not in, or coming in will not obey the order
of the Court, he shall be imprisoned, during the pleasure of the Lord
Chancellor, as will appear in the several handling of his absolute power,
where also will be remembered the Stat of 15. H. 6. that no Subpoena may be
granted without Suerty to satisfy the Defend. for his damages and expenses, ^f
the matter cannot be made good, which is contained in the Bill, etc.

The order of proceeding in the Chancery is by Injunctions, Decrees, and
Orders, the which how far they bind the party, and how he is punished by
imprisonment, for resisting them, shall be also showed in the cases of the
power absolute hereafter plaeed.

The Judge.
The Judge in this Court, is the Lord Chancellor only, and he is Keeper also
of the Great Seal, the which is usually carried with him wheresoever he goes,
so he go not beyond the Seas, for then he is to leave it behind him to such
for whose fidelity he will answer; As did John Stratford Chancellor and
Ambassador in the time of Edw. 3. And so did Stephen Gardener, in the time of
Queen Mary, when he went to Calice, leave the Seal with the Marquess of
Winton, the which lesson he might learn by the chastisement of Cardinal
Woolsey, who carried the same beyond the Seas to Calice, where he left it with
Doctor Tailor, Mr. of the Rolls, to keep until his return out of the French
Dominions.

Yet may there be other occasions also, for the which the Chancellor may
commit the same to other men's custody, as did Robert Thorpe Chancellor, in the
time of Edw. 3. at his going hom to his own house he left the great Seal
with four of the Guardians, or Masters of the Chancery, to keep and ufe as
need required.

Further for the keeping of the Seal we may remember, that as the King
himself does deliver the same unto the Chancellor, so may he not surrender it
to any other but to the same King or to his Successor.

To this purpose says Thomas Walsingham, that Sir Richard Scroope having very
solemn Messengers sent unto him from Rich. 2. and that in the Kings
displeasure, to demand the Great Seal to be committed unto them: His Answer
was, The Seal I am ready to resign, not unto you, but unto him which gave me
the same in custody: Nec erit medius portitor inter me and illum, sed ego
restituam illud manibus suis qui mihi propriis non alicujus manibus commisit
illud. Et ita pergens ad Regem sigillum quidem retradidit, and se fidelem Regi
s^cut hactenus repromisit ^fficiaturum tamen se futurum sub ^llo in posterum
denegavit, etc.

Yet seems it not so necessary, that the Chancellor deliver it with his own
hands: For it is written that R. Baldolke, Chancellor, upon the death of Edw.
1. did send the great Seal to Ed. 2. And Thomas Rotheram was shrewdly blamed
for that he rendered the Seal to the Queen Widow, to whom it did not
appertain after the death of Edw. 1. and in the circumstance of the delivery
thereof we may also note this difference, that the Chancellor has heretofore
received an Oath with the receipt of the same, although the Keeper of the sease
does receive it without oath, for so it is Recorded, that Rich. 2. Manibus suis
propriis received the Seal, Et ineontinenter praedictus Dom. nost. dictum
magnum Sigillum suum in Bago sic inclusum venerab. in Christ. patri. Edoard.
Episc. Exon. cujus sacrum de officio cancellarii been and fideliter faciend.
and excereend. ib. recepit in praesentia, etc. liberavit.

The form or fashion of this Seal is usually altered upon every succession,
the print whereof is directed by the pleasure of the Prince, the validity
thereof I dare not to dispute, for that on the one side it is said by the
Justices in the reports of the 18. and 19. of this Queen, that a Patent under
the Great Seal is good, though the Chancellor have not warranty to make it.

And on the other side, the History is not forgotten, of the Duke of
Northumberland, who alleged, as is reported, the Great Seal for his Warrant,
etc. which was not accepted, and moreover is recorded in the time of Hen. the
6. a confirmation of such Deeds, etc. as had past the Great Seal, (viz.) Henry
by the Grace of God, etc. To our Chancellor of England, greeting. All such
Grants as that since the tenth year of our Reign, until this time, you by
force and virtue of Bills with our own hand, and by Letters under our Signet
of the Eagle and Arms, and also by Bills endorsed by our Chamberlains hand,
and Clerks of our Coun^ell, have made our Letters Patents under our Great
Seal, we hold them firm and stable, and of as great strenght, etc. as though
you had for them our Letters of Privy Seal, etc. long before which time there
was a Statute made in the 2. year of Edw. 3. (viz.) it shall not be commanded
by the Great or Little Seal, to delay or disturb common right, and though
such commandment do come, the Justices therefore shall not cease to do right
in any point; and by the Statute of Articles, super Charia, cap. 6. It is
forbidden that from thenceforth should pass under the little Seal, any Writ
that concerns common Law; And long after this time also (viz.) 2. and 3.
Phil. and Mary, cap. 20. It is ordained, That the King under the Great Seal of
England may unite Lands to the Duchy of Lancaster; but for the manner of
renewing the Seal, the defacing and bestowing of the old, with the
Proclamation and notification of the ne, we may observe the ancient manner out
of these words remaining in the Tower of the time of Edward the First, (viz.)

Rex Vic. Ebor. salu^em. Quia pro regimine Regni nostri quoddam magnum Sigillum
de novo fecimus fabricari differenetam in circumferentia ^uam in diversi^
sculpturis ex utraque part sigilli sigillo a quo hucusque utebamur, and
volumus quod eidem novo sigillo a quarto die praesen^* mensis October* fides
prebeatur and dictum antiquum sigillu^ ^umpa^u^ deinde post p^aedictum q^ar^um
diem aliqua brevia seu litera nullaetenus consignentar and impressionem dicti
sigilli novi in cera alba tibi duximus transmittendam tibi praecipimus quod in
pleno Comitatu tu^ mercatis feriis and locis aliis in balliva tu*a ubi expedere
videris dictam impressionem*^stondi and pace fieri facias omnibus and singulis
ex part nostra injungend. quod*b^ev. brevis literis and chartis dicto novo
sigilo consignatis fidem praebeant and aliqua brevia seu literas post
praedictum quartum diem antiquo sigillo signat. non recipiant nec eis utantur
quoquomodo, volumus tamen quod brevia literae and chart. praedicto antiquo
sigillo ante praedictum quartum diem consignat*in suo robore perseverent and
eis fides praebeat. prout decet Test Rege apud Nottingham tertio die Octobris,
etc.

Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vicecom. per Angliam, and further.

Memorandum quod die Dominiea, (viz.) quarto die October. Anno Regni Ed. primo;
Eliens. Episcop. Cancellar. ipsius Regis in Camera sua in Priorat. de Lenta
juxta Nottingham in praesen*clericor. de can^el^ar. and aliorum tuuc ibidem
existen. protulit in quodam panno lineo sigillo suo consignat: quoddam magnum
sigillum ipsius Regis de novo fabricatu^ and asseru^t quod voluntas ipsius
Regis fuit quod extunc. omnia brev. lit, et c^artae ipso novo sigillo
consigna^en. and quod anti^. Sigil*rumperat. et diae Lunae prox. sequen. in
praesentia ipsius Regis in Came. sua in Castro de Not. dict. antiq. Sigil.
praecipiente ipso Rege ruptum fuit in m^ltas pecias and idem Cancellarius
pecias illas dedit Richar. Spigurnello ipsius Cancellar. and dictum novum
Sigillum ad dictum hospitium suum secum detulit and inde brevia chartas and
literas consignavit, etc. And to the same purpose of bestowing the Old Seal,
appears in Richard the 2. a Writ directed to the Treasurer, etc. of the
Exchequer in this form.

Rex Thesa^rar, et camerar. Quia ex relata fide dignor. accepimus quod
quotiescunque magnum Sigillum quod pro regimine Regni nostri Angl. ordinat.
existit per mortem Regis aut alio modo mutari contigerit sigillum illu^
Spigurnello Cancellar. nostrae pro tempor^ existen. tanquam feodum suum de jure
pertinere debet, nos volentes dilecto nobis Willialm. Wightman Spigurnello
Cancellar. nostra pro feod. suo magni Sigilli dom. Ed. nuper Regis Angl. Avi
nostri quod post mortem dict. Avi nostri cum gubernaculum Regni praedict.
suscepimus mutatum existit satisfieri jubere vobis mandamus qud cidem Williel*
centum solid. pro feodo suo sigilli praedict. de thesauro nostro solvatis
excusa praed. Test Rege apud Westminster. 6. die Junij, etc.

The Assistants.
The Assistants of the Lord Chancellor are the Masters of the Rolls, and the
Masters of the Chancery.

The Master of the Rolls.
The Chancellor and the Master of the Rolls, have been heretofore spiritual
persons, it appears by the election of Bishops, etc. before rehearsed, to the
place of Chancellor, and by a Patent of Ed. the 3. the Master of the Rolls was
appointed and installed in the house of the Rolls in Chancery Lane by the Lord
Chancellor, the which manner of induction and installment continued as long as
the Masters of the Rolls were of the Clergy, which may be proved by the
Presidents of those Inrollments, and the Writs themselves extant of Record.

The Mr. of the Rolls at this day is the Keeper of all Records, Judgments and
Sentences given in the Chancery.

Besides that, in the absence of the Chancellor he does both hear and decree,
etc. as well in the Court, as in the Chapel of the Rolls, howbeit the Decrees
made by him are entered either Per curiam, or Per Cancellar. and further, he
has much pre-eminence, and diverse prerogatives by Statutes, Commission, and
prescription.

The Masters of the Chancery are, for the most part, Doctors of the Civil Law,
and do assist the Court, to show what is the equity of the Civil Law, and
what is conscience; but surely they have bin heretofore such as have been
expert in the course of the Chancery, and skillful in the Laws of the Realm;
as appears by the 2d. of Rich: 3 d. where they do show unto the Justice, the
course of Writs of Error, and may be gathered out of the Book, Entitled Fleta,
whose words are these.

Est inter caetera quoddam Officium quod dicitur Cancellaria quod in viro
provido and discreto utpote Episcopo vel Clerico magnae dignitatis debet
comitti simul cum cura magni sigilli regni cujus substituti sunt omnes
Cancellarij in Anglia, Hibernia, Wallia, and Scotia, omnes quae sigilla Regis
custodientes ubique praeter custodem sigilli privati, cui^ associentur Clerici
honesti and circumspecti Domino Regi Jurat* qui in legibus and cons^e^udinibus
Anglicanis notitiam habent pleniorem quorum officium sit supplicationes and
querelas conquerentium audire and eis super qualitatibus injuriarum ostensurum
debitum remedium exhiberi per brevia Regis, etc. And further of the Masters of
the Chancery ibidem.

Episcopi autem collaterales and socij Cancellarij esse dicuntur Praeceptores
eo quod brevia causis examinat is remedialia fieri praecipiant and hoc
quandoque tam sive denarijs ad opus Regis tam sive Fine, etc. The Officers of
the Chancery:


The Officers in this Court are the Pregnatory of whose Office in Fleta is
written thus.

Habet and Rex Clericos suos Prothonataries in Officio illo, qui cum Clericis,
etc. Familiares Regis esso consueverunt and praecipue ad victum and vestitum
qui ad brevia scribend. secund. diversitates queretarum sunt intitulati and qui
omnes pro victu and vestitut de proficuo sigilli in cujuscunque usus pervenerit
debent honest inveniri. But at this day there is but one Pregnatory, neither
does he exercise his Office in the form abovesaid.

The Clerk of the Crown is the chief Guardian of the matters of the Crown.

The six Clarks of the Chancery, which are the Attorneys, as well for the
Plaintiff as Defendant, in every Suit in this Court, and they were heretofore
Spiritual men, as may appear by the Statute 14. Hen. 8. which does License
them to Marry, with Proviso; That the Master of the Rolls may notwithstanding
grant those Offices as before time, the forfeiture by reason of Marriage only
excepted.

The Register, who is the penner and keeper of the Decrees, Publications,
Orders and Injunctions issuing out of this Court.

The Comptroller of the Seal, who is to see and allow of all the Writs made in
the Court, of whom I take it is spoken in Fleta* where it is said; Eleget and
Rex Clericos in Officio illo expertes and legales qui formas brevium cognoscunt
qui approband. admittant, defectiva omnino repellan. quibus omnia brevia
priusquam ad sigillum perveniunt cum deliberatione distinct et aperte in
ration. dictione litera and silliba examinare injunctum est* and sciend. quod
nullum brenisi per manus ^orand* debet ad Sigillum admit^i.

Two Examiners also, who do take the Examination of the Witnesses, brought to
prove or disprove any thing in Suit in this Court, and to put their Depositions
and Answers made to their Interrogatories in writing.

The Clerk of the Hamper, which does receive the Fines, due for every Writ
sealed in this Court, etc.

The three Clerks of the Pettibagge, which do Record the Offices that are
found in the Court of Wards, and have the making of diverse Writs proper to
their Office, etc.

The 24. Cursitors have sundry divisions of charges, for the writing of all
Writs Originals, etc. in all the Shires of England, etc. Qui bus de gratia
Cancellaria concessum est pro expeditione populi, brevia facere Cursoria, as is
in Fleta; the which Cursitor s at this day, by Ordinance set down by the
deceased Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper, and confirmed by her Majesty's Letters
Patents, are authorized and appointed to make all manner of Writs of Debt,
Trespass, Account, Assizes, Attaints, Replevies, Conspiracies, Cui in vita
Dower, and Form* dons, Ejectments of Leases and custodies, Errors, false
Judgments, Petitions quare impedit, Recordaries and Writs of Right, valor
Marritagij, Wast, Excommunicat. Ca^iend. and all Writs of Covenant, and of
every and all manner of Dedimus potestat. to be made upon any such Writs, and
original process, and all other original Writs, or of the nature of
original Writs, that are to be made within the Shires and Places to them
allotted; And that no other person shall make these Writs but they, by which
Ordinance also the nomination and allowance of these Cursitors, does appertain
to the Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being, as in the
said Ordinances is declared, together with all other Orders, etc. concerning
the said company, whereof is to be observed, that although by the late Lord
Keeper the writing of the aforesaid Writs was particularly assigned to such
particular Officers, yet were there Cursitors before that time, of the same
name, and of the same exercise. The Sergeant of the Mace, who carries the Mace
before the Lord Chancellor, and is to call any man before him, at his
commandment. There is also mentioned in Record of Edw. 3^ Officium de portandi
votulis ubi Curia se divertabat priusquam in loco certo tenebatur vocat Por^j.
concessum Adamo Marlyn, etc. The which is the same Office of Keeper of the
Rolls at this day. And this place in the 13th year of Edw. 3. was granted by
the chancellor and Master of the Rolls, the which Grant remains upon Record.
Other Officers there are for particular Functions in the Chancery, granted by
Patent from the Prince, as of making the Writ of Diem clausit extremum, making
of Subpoena's, writing the Liecnse of Alienation, of Protections, and a great
number of others of the like nature; so are there also the Sealer, the
Chafe-wax, etc. Some are constituted by Parliament to be Ordained by the Kings
Letters patents, as the writer and inroller of confirmations of all such
Licenses, Dispensations, etc. as shall be brought into the Chancery, under the
Archbishop of Canterbury his Seal, etc. For the Oath to be taken by the Clerks
of the Chancery may be seen the Statute of 18. Ed. 3. which is to be taken not
by the six Clerks only, but by all other Officers in the Chancery, of the like
quality, and their servants also. Moreover for the privilege of the Officers in
the Chancery there is a record of Rich. the 2.

Quod Clerici ibidem nec eorum servientes non c^gantur respondere coram
aliquibus Justiciarijs and Judicibus secularibus praeter quam coram Cancellario
Regis seu custoae magni sigilli Regis super aliquibus placitis seu demandis
quae Dom. Regem non tanguut (except placitis de libero tent. felon. and Apellis
B^ev. Regis. Anno secundo, R. 2 part secunda, Article 18.

The form of their privilege is set down in the Register of Writs; and in the
new Natura brevium.

The Masters of the Chancery have privilege to be exempted from being
Procurators of the Clergy.

But leave we the Officers, to speak something more largely of the power of the
aforesaid Judge, which is the Chancellor, etc. wherein will fall out some further
matter concerning the Chancery.

The absolute power of the Lord Chancellor.
THe power of the Lord Chancellor is divided into two parts, the one Judicial,
and the other Ministerial; the Judicial is likewise of two distinct sorts,
(viz.) either absolute, or else ordinary; whereof intending to proceed to their
particular discourse, I have chosen the absolute power to be the first, as well
for that it proceeds in Dignity, being absolute without comptrollment, other
than in Parliament; as also it spreads it self most largely, being most
infinite, without any prescribed limitation, intending to leave the rest to be
hereafter severally handled with better opportunity.

In this present Treatise I have plainly and faithfully set down the Cases,
Opinions, and Decrees, in such sort as they may, by the Reports of the
Year-Books, and by the ancientest sort of Records in the Chancery, be best
warranted; and have thought fitter to set down the makers of the Statutes, and
the pronouncers of the Law to be heard as it were speaking in their own phrases
and proper terms, than that I should presumptuously wrest the same into any
other curious method, only I had regard unto two things, the manner of
proceeding, and the matter of the subject, unto the first I referred these
Titles following, (viz.)

CHAP. 1. Of the Authority Judicial of the Lord Chancellor, and Court of
Chancery in general for praesenti. Chap. 2. What matters he may absolutely
hold Plea of, in his absolute power. Chap. 3. Whom he may call to be
assistants. Chap. 4. How the absolute power increased, and of the Statutes
concerning the same. Chap. 5. Of what force the Decrees, Injunctions,
Executions and Punishments of the Chancery be. Chap. 6. Whether the Chancellor
may intermixe his power absolute, with the ordinary. Chap. 7. The form of
pleadings. Chap. 8. What costs and damages shall be awarded in the Chancery.
And under the second I have contrived these Titles.

CHAP. 1. Of Lands. Chap. 2. Of Lands in use, or in trust. Chap. 3. Of
Coppy-holds. Chap. 4. Of Chatells real. Chap. 5. Of Chatells personal. Chap.
6. Of Chatells entrust. Chap. 7. Of Aliens, and Strangers. Chap. 8. Certain
special powers absolute, given to the Lord Chancellor by several Statutes.
Chap. 9. Certain special powers absolute, given to the Lord Chancellor
jointly with others, by several Statutes.
CHAP. I.
Of the Authority Judicial of the Lord Chancellor, and Court of Chancery in
general.
1 9. E. 4. Potentia ordinatam.
THe Chancellor has two manner of powers, (viz.) Potentiam ordinatam, and
Potentiam absoluta^; Ordinata potentia, is where a certain order is observed,
and so it is used in positive Law.

But Potentia absoluta, is lex naturae, quae non Potentia absoluta.
habet certam ordinem, but uses all means to know the verity, Et ideo dicitur
processus absolutus, also in lege naturae requiritur, that the parties be
praesentes, or that they be absentes, per contumaciam, which is when they are
warned, and make Default.
default, and in both these there must be Excommunicatio veritatis per
Cancellar. 9. E. 4. 14. Excom. veritatis.
Subpoena, 11. b. Conscientiae, 26. b. Jurisdict. 10.

2. The Chancery is no Court of Record, in respect 37. H. 6.
that it is a Court of Conscience, and holds Plea upon Subpoena, but as it
tries matter Court of Record.
upon Scir. fac. and Debt, and such like, it is a Court of Record, Per Prisc.
Cap. Justic. in Com. Banco, 37. H. 6. 14.

8. E. 4.Statute process.
3. If a Statute do ordain process at the Common Law, the Chancery does not
follow the Form prescribed by the Statute; but if a Statute does give a title
of right to any man, then the Right.
Chancery does obey the Statute; per Cancellar. 8. E. 4. 5. This is to be
understood of general Statutes, in which the Court of Chancery is not expressly
named. Filz. Natura brevium. Term.


4. The Chancery may hold plea upon Scir. fac. and other such Writs as
appertain to that Court, as well out of the Term as in the Term, per Fitz
Harbert in Natura Brevium. b. Jurisdict. 116.

4. E. 4. Adjournment.
5. When the Term is adjourned by reason of sickness, or of any other cause;
yet the Chancery is never adjourned; for the Chancery is always open, 4. E. 4.
21. b. Jurisdict.

5. E, 6. Common Law. Original. Conscience.
6. In an audita querela sued to avoid a recognizance, knowledged in the
Chancery, the Chancellor ought to judge according to the course of the common
Law, because the matter comes before him by Original Writ, but upon matters
depending before him upon Bill, he may judge according to conscience* 5. E. 6,
Con. 72. casus Rosse and Pope.

6. E. 6. Surmise.
7. The Ceancellor ought not to take precise knowledge of any surmizes, nor
ought not to take away the Jurisdiction of any Court, nor the profit of any
person, by credit or suggestions, 6. E. 6. Con. 74. casus Wymbish, etc.

8. By these authorities it appears, that (...) has two powers, the one
ordinary, the other absolute: By the ordinary, he holds plea in Latin, and
the Record after issue joined, is sent into the Kings Bench, to be tried by
Jury.

And this is wholly according to common Law, and in such it is a Court of
Record; but the absolute power holds plea upon Subpoena, and by English Bill,
and by pleading, and so it has English Bill. Pleadings in French.
been used, excepting in Anno 20. H. 6. there are some Bills in French, as
appears by the Records of that Year, and he intermedleth only with matters of
Conscience, and therein it is no Court of Record, and in both these powers he
may hold plea out of the Term.

CHAP. II.
What matters he may hold plea of in the absolute power.
1. THe Chancery in the absolute power, holds suit by Subpoena only, of such
matters 39. H. 6. No remedy.
as are nor remediable by the Common Law, per Prisot. capit. Justic. in Com.
Banco 37. H. 6. 14. and per Jenney Apprentic. 39. E. 6. 2. 6. conscience, 6.
and 4. E. 7. 4. Subp. 17.

2. It appears that in Anno 21. E. 4. Many Good pleaders.
Subpoena's were used to be sued, and therefore Fairfax Justice said; That if
the Chancellors would be good Pleaders, there would not be so many Subpoena's
sued in the Chancery as there Privilege.
are, for diverse of those Chancery matters might be converted to actions upon
the case, and so the Jurisdiction of the Common Law Courts should ^e
maintained, as for example; if one do obtain surmise false.
a Supersed. of privilege upon a false surmise, an action upon the case does
lie, and there needs no Subpoena. 21. E. 4. 23.

Secundum Conscientiam. Secundum allegatum.
3. The Chancellor must judge secundum conscientiam, and non secundum
allegatum. For if the Complaintiffe suppose in his Bill, that the Defendant
has done some wrong, and the Defendant answers nothing; yet if the
Chancellor has knowledge that he has done no wrong Default. 9. E. 4.
to the Complaintiffe, the Complaintiffe shall not recover at all, per Cancel.
9. E. 4. 14. subp. 11. b. consc. 26. and 6. Jurisdictions 50.

21. H. 7.
4. One sued by Bill in the Chancery, and he could not prove his Bill, but the
proof of the Defendant was better than his; Wherefore Grevill Sergeant said,
That the Defendant ought to have Judgment to be discharged, and Complaintiffe
to be barred; to whom it was said for the Complaintiffe, That the matter is
determinable at the Common Law, and therefore such Judgments may not be given;
and Grevill said, That the Complaintiffe shall be estopped to sue so, because
Estoppell. Default.
it is his own doing; And when one sueth a Bill, he must prove his Bill before
he shall have Judgment, although the Defendant never answered: and the
Chancellor was of the same opinion* but yet Conesby Sergeant, said to the
Defendant, That he should never have Judgment in the Chancery upon the matter,
but only a procedendo. 21 H. 7. 34. H.

5. By these causes it appears, That the Chancellor holds plea but of
matter not remediable by the Common Law, and that he must judge according to
truth, and not upon the default of the party, as the Common Law u^^^h.

Rot. Parliam. br.
6. Note that in ancient time, where the matter was against reason, and the
party had no remedy by the Common Law, it was used to sue for remedy in
Parliament, and the Parliaments were holden of course, twice every year, but
now most of those suits are in the Chancery, and the Parliaments Parliam.
are not so often holden, vide Rot. Parl. and Brook Parl. 33.

Remedy without Remedy.
7. The Chancellor said, Nullus recedat* a Cur Cancellar. sine remedio; but
Fineux said, si nul*lus recedat sine remedio ergo nullus indiget esse
confessus, but the common Law is ordained for many matters, and some, such as
are not remediable by the Common Law, are to be relieved in the Chancery, but
diverse are remediable by neither; and such are in Conscience between a man
Conscience Doctor and Student. without Remedy. Conscience.
and his Confessor, 4* H. 7. 4*

8. In many cases where a man does wrong, yet he shall not be compelled by way
of compulsion, to reform it, for many times it must be left to the Conscience
of the party, whether he will redress it or not, and in such case he is in
Conscience, as well bound to redress it, if he will save his sonle, as he were
if he were compellable thereto Wager of the Law.
by the Law. As if the Defendant wage his Law in an action of debt, brought upon
a true debt, the Plaintiff has no means to come by his debt, by way of
compulsion, neither by Subpoena, nor otherwise, and yet the Defendant is False
verdict.
bound in Conscience to pay him. Also, if the Grand Jury in Attaint affirm a
false Verdict, given by a petty Jury, there is no other remedy but Proof.
the Conscience of the party: Also where there can be had no sufficient proof,
there can be no remedy in the Chancery, no more than there may be in the
spiritual Court, as Doctor and Student, C^. 18.

9. Note by these two last Authorities, that there are two sorts of ^^ges
conscientiae, the one is lex conscientiae politicae, by which the Chancellor
orders matters; In which Law of Conscience, there is respect had unto the
Laws, Customs, and State of this Commonwealth, and the other is lex
conscientiae Divinae, by which there is no compulsive relief in this world, but
the offender stands at the judgment of God only, and this in times past was
said to be examinable between the Offender and the Confessor.

Note also that this rule, Nullus recedat a Cancellar. sine remedio, is to be
expounded that the Chancery gives remedy for the common law matters, by
granting of the Original Writs, which are for the most part returnable into
the common law Courts; and for matter of Conscience, by examining them in the
Chancery it self, neither does this rule any way extend to the Law of
Conscience divine.

The Statute made in the 4. H. 4. is this* That whereas in Plea real as well
as personal, Stat. 4. H. 4.
after Judgment given in the Kings Courts, the parties be made to come upon
grievous pain, sometimes before the King himself, sometimes Judgment.
before the Kings Council, and sometimes into the Parliament, to make new
answer thereunto, to the great annoyance of the parties, and in subversion of
the common Law. It is ordained, That after Judgment be given in the Kings
Courts the parties and their heirs be thereof quiet, until the Judgment be
admitted by attaint or by error, if there be any error, as it has been used
by the Law, in the time of the Kings Progenitors. Stat. Anno 4. H 4. Ca. 22.

And upon the said Statute is made by Doctor and Student an inference, (viz.)
There is a Statute, made 4. H. 4. cap. 22. Whereby it is Enacted; That
Judgments given in the Kings Courts, shall not be examined in the Chancery,
Parliament, nor else where; by which Statute it appears, that if any Judgment
be given in the Kings Courts against Conscience, that there can be had no
remedy, for the Judgment cannot be remedied without examination, and the
examination is by that Statute prohibited; Yet this Statute is not against
Conscience: for if such Judgments should be examined in the Chancery before the
Counsel, or in any other place, the Plaintiffes should seldom come to the
effect of their sure, nor the Law should never have end; to eschew that
inconvenience the Statute was made, lib. Doct. and Stud. cap. 18. Note by that
Statute, and by this explanation thereof, that the Chancery may not examine,
nor intermeddle after judgment is given at the Common Law, and yet the Statute
speaks not expressly of the Chancery.

CHAP. III.
Whom he may call to be assistants to him.
1 IN a Parliament holden in the 2 d. year of H. 4. The Commons exhibited a
Petition, conceiving that the Justices of both the Benches were called into the
Chancery from both their places, to help the discussing of matters traversed
into the Chancery, whereby the Common Law was hindered, and the subjects
damaged, and therefore they prayed; That it might be Enacted, That when any
traverse of any Office is tendered in any scir. fac. awarded, that the same may
be sent and returned into one of the Benches, there to be discussed and ended
according to Common Law.

To which Petition the King answered, the Chancellor may do so by his Office,
and let it be as it has been heretofore, by the discretion of the Chancellor
for the time being, Rot, Parl. Anno. 2. H. 4. Artic. 95.

Sta 4: H: 4
2. The Statute de Anno 4. H. 4. is, Let the Chancellor have power, by
Authority of Parliament, to call unto him such Justices as it shall please him,
and the chief Baron of the Exchequer Justices Chief Baron.
it need be, to provide remedy from time to time, according to their diseretion.
Stat. Anno 4. H. 4. cap. 9. in most of the time of H. 6. the Decrees were
entered in this form, Considerat. Temp. H. 6 Decrees
fuit per cur. de Assensu Johannis Fortescue Milit. capitalis Jus^ic. Dom*
Regis, ad placita tenend. and diversor. alior. Justic. and Servient. ad legem
Justices* S e^jeants.
in Cur. praesent. existent. quod, etc. And sometime it was De assensu omnium
Justic. utriusque Banci. And sometimes of one or two Justices, petition in
Cancellar. de temps H. 6.

27* H. 6: 37. H. 6. 7. E. 4. 22. E. 4. Exchequer Chamber Justices.
In the Chancery upon a Subpoena sued, the matter being doubtful in Law, the
Chancellor adjourned the parties into the Exchequer Chamber, and called the
Justices of both Benches to assist him. 27. H. 6. 13. b. consc. 4. and 37. H.
6. b. consc. and 7. E. 4. 14. and 22. E. 4. b.

The Lord Chancellor called Fi^z-harbert, Justice into the Chancery, to assist
him in the argument of a Question in Law, arising upon a 27. H. 8. Chancery.
suit of Conscience, 27. H. 8.

By these Authorities it is evident, That the Chancellor may, as well in
matters conce ning the absolute, as ordinary power, call the Justices to assist
him, and that either into the Chancery, or into the Exchequer Chamber.

CHAP. IV.
How the absolute power increased, and of the Statutes concerning the same.
Magna Charta.
1 THe Statute of Magna Charta is, That Nul^us liber homo ca^iatur, vel
impriso^etur aut d^^ss^is^tur, de libero tenemento suo, vel libertat. vel
liberis consuetudinib us suis, aut ut legetur, aut ^xuletur, aut aliquo modo
disturbatur, nec super eumibimus, ^ec super eum mittemus, nis^ per legem
terrae, Magna Charta cap. 30. This Chapter is but a confirmation of the custom
of the Realm, lib. Doct. and Student, cap. 7.

Doctor and Stud. Stat. 5. E. 3
2. The Statute of the 5. E. 3. is, That none shall be attached, by any
accusation, nor forejudged of life nor limb, nor his Lands, Tenements, Goods
nor Chatels seized into the Kings hands, against the form of the Great charter,
and the Law of the Land. Statute 5, E. 3. cap. 9.

1^. E. 3. 5. Stat.
3. The Statute of 15. E. 3. is, That none shall b^ taken, by Petition or
Suggestion made to the King, or to his Council, unless it be by Indictment,
or Presentment of good and lawful men where such deeds be done, in due manner,
or by Process made by writ, or original at the Common Law, nor that none be put
out of the Franchises, nor of their Free holds, unless he be duly brought in
to answer, and forejudged of the same by way of Law, and if any thing be done
against the same, it shall be redresled, and holden for non-Stature. Anno 25.
Edw. 3. cap. 4th.

4. The Statute 28. E. 3. is that no man shall be put out of any Land or
Tenement, or taken, or imprisoned, or disherited, or put to death, without
being brought in to answer by due process of the Law. Statute Anno 28. E. 3.
cap. 3.

5. By these Statutes it seems that neither the King, Counsel, not
Chancellor, might not atach, imprison, banish, or put to death any man, nor
seize his lands nor goods, or cause him to answer, but upon indictment,
presentment, or original, as in the case ensuing.

A Commission was awarded out of the Chancery 42. E. 3.
in 42. E. 3. to Commissioners, authorizing them to apprehend a man and his
goods, and to commit him to Prison, and because this was done without
Indictment, or suit of any party, or other due Process, it is contrary to the
Law, and the Commission was adjudged void, per Knivet and Thorpe, Captal.
Justic. 42. Assi. 15 and crompton 67.

Stat. 37. E. 3.
The Statute of 37. E 3. That though it be not contained in the great Charter,
that no man be taken, imprisoned, or put out of his Freehold, without process of
the law, yet diverse people make false suggestions to the King himself, as well
for malice as otherwise, whereby the King is often grieved, and diverse of the
Realm put to great damage and loss, against the form of the same Charter.
Wherefore it is ordained, that all they that make such suggestions* be sent
before the Chancellor, Treasurer, and his great Counsel, and that they there
find surety to pursue their suggestions, and to incur the same pain that the
other should have had if he were attached, in case that this suggestion be
found evil, and then process of the Law be made against them, without being
taken or imprisoned, against the form of the Great charter. Stat. 37. E. 3.
cap. 18. But this punishment is qualified by another Statute.

By this Statute, the abuse of suggestions was reserved and a form of
proceeding appointed, also it seems to allow, that the party accused may have
punishment, if the suggestion be true, by these words [the same pain as the
other should have had if he were attainted.]

Also, though the Statute make mention that the Petition be sent before the
Chancellor, Treasurer, and Counsel, yet this has been expounded of the
Chancellor in the Chancery alone, as experience teaches, and so was the Law
taken before the making of this Statute, in Anno 12. 12. E. 3. C^^^^^n Pu^sell.
E. 3. 47. b. Jurisdiction 102. notwithstanding that the Petitioners, were by
the indorsement directed to the Archbishop and Counsel, calling to them the
Chancellor.

The S^^tute of Anno 43. E. 3. is, That Stat. 43. E. 3.
some accused persons have been imprisoned, and others compelled ^o come before
the Kings Counsel b^ writ or otherwise, upon a grievous pain against the Law;
It is therefore affented, that no man be put to answer without presentiments
before Justices, or thing upon record, or by due process, or by writ
original, according to the old Law of the land; and If an^ thing from
henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in the law, and holden for
error. Stat. Anno 42. E. 3 cap. 3.

11. By this Statute it appears, That men had been compelled to come before
the Counsel by Writ or otherwise, upon grievous pain, which imployeth the
usage of the Subpoena, but it was all restrained by this Act.

12. The Statute of 17. R. ^. When people be compelled to come before the
Kings Counsel, or in the Chancery by writ grounded upon untrue suggestions,
the Chancellor for the time being, by and by after such suggestions be duly
found and proved untrue, shall have power to ordain and award damages
according to his discretion, to him which is so troubled untruly, Stat. Anno
17. R. 2. cap. 6.

13. This Statute, as it gives damages against the accuser for it,
establishes the authority of the Chancellor in trying of such suits, for the
makers of the Statute would not ordain punishment for the abusers of such
suggestions, unless they had meant to allow of the suits being orderly used,
and this Statute seems to give the first and greatest allowance to the
Jurisdiction of the Chancery by Subpoena, which appears by Petition made by
the Commons, in a Parliament holden 3. H. 8. where they complained, that the
Writs, called Subpoena, et certis de causis, were never granted before the
time of R: 2. the art* of which complaint are as follows.

In the third year of King H 5: the Commons exhibited a Petition unto the
Parliament, concerning the grievances that did arise by the Suits of Subpoena
in the Chancery and Exchequer (viz.)

THat these Writs were sued of matters determinable by the Common Law. Rot.
Parl. 3. H. 6.


That they were never granted nor used before the time of Richard the second,
wherein John Waltham late Bishop of Sarum, and the Master of the Rolls, by his
subtilty caused them to be found out, and to begin, that they are contrary to
the form of the Common Law.

That they are a loss and hindrance of the proffits which should arise to the
King, by the Fees, Fines, Issues and Amerciaments, and other profits in other
Courts, if such matters were sued and determined by the Common Law, because no
profit arises to the King by the Subpoena, but only 6 d. for the Seal.

That the Justices of both Benches, when they should intend their places, about
Pleas and taking of Inquests, for the dispatch of the People, be occupied with
the Examinations upon Subpoenas, to the great vexation, loss, and costage of
the People Subjects.

That the Subjects are long time delayed from the sealing of their Original
Writs, because of the great business of the Chancellor about such examinations.

That in such examinations there is great clamor and noise made by men
unlearned in the laws without entering any record thereof.

That such suits will not be ended but by examination and oath of the parties,
according to the form of the civil Law and spiritual Law, in subversion of the
Common Law.

That if the Defendant cannot be convicted by their examinations, then they are
forced to compound and agree with their adversaries; or else to abide in Ward,
or upon Bail, until they have compounded or agreed.

That if the Defendants cannot be convicted by their examinations, then they
are forced to find Suerties for the Peace, which they might have done in their
Country, without repair to the Courts.

Wherefore they pray redress after special form in the Bill limited, but
this Bill passes not. Rot. Parl. Anno 3. Hen. 5. Art. 46.

Stat. 15. H. 6.
14. The Statute made in the 15. H. 6. is, That diverse persons have been
grearly grieved by writ of Subpoena, purchased for matters determinable by the
Common Law of this Land, to the great damage of such persons so vexed, in
subversion and impediment of the Common Law, the King will, that the Statutes
thereof made, shall be kept after the form and effect of the same, and that no
writ of Subpoena be granted, till surety be found to ^atisfie the party so
grieved and vexed for his damages and expenses (if so be the matcer cannot be
made good, which is contained in the n Bill.) Statute Anno 15. Hen. 6. cap the
4th.

15. This Statute explaineth, that the making of the great Charter, and the
other old Statutes, was to redress suggestions to the Kings Counsel or
Chancellor, where the matters were determinable at the common law, but
exte^deth not to such as had no other remedy* For this Statute wills that the
old Statutes shall stand, and yet allows a Subpoena to be granted, upon
putting in of sureties* It is proved also by this President.

Note also that there are no petitions of the Chancery, remaining in the Office
of Records, of elder time then the making of the said Statute.

16. One sued by Petition to the King, who delivered the same to the
Chancellor, and upon a 21. E. 3. Petition
scire sac. the Defendant appearing, took exception, alleging; That his Suit is
to recover his Freehold which ought to be at the common law, and non allocatur,
because this Suit cannot be in any Court but in the Chancery, 21. E. 3. 47.
jurisdict. 102.

Note also that there are no Petitions of the Chancery remaining in the Office
of Records, of elder time, then the making of the Statute of the 15. H: 6. for
the ancientest to oe found are in the 20th. year.

So that by this may appear, that the absolute power was feared, and prevented
in the time of K. John, by whom the Magna Char* was granted, and that it was
frequented and usurped in the time of Edward 3. who so often restrained the
same, and it was allowed and established in the time of R: 2. who in some part
made Reformation thereof.

CHAP. V.
Of what force the Decrees, and Injunctions, Executions, and Punishments of the
Chancery be.
39. E. 3. Judgment Reversall Counsel.
1. IN an Assize, the Parliament wrote to the Justices to surcease,
notwithstanding which they proceeded, and awarded the Assize; whereupon the
Chancellor did reverse the judgment before the Council, this reversall was
adjudged void, for that was no place where a Judgment might be reversed, 39. E
3. 14. b. Judges 13.

33. H. 6.
It was decreed in the Chancery, by the advice of all the Justices, that the
Defendant should bring in an Obligation, wherein the Complaintiffe was bound to
him to be cancelled, and because he refused, Obligation
he was committed to the Fleet, there to remain until he would fulfill the
Decree, and the Defendant having put his Obligation in suit at the common Law,
the Complaintiffe pleaded this Decree in Bar, andit was ruled to be no good
plea in Bar, because the obligation had lost his force by the Decree per
P^iso^ and alios Justic. in com. Banco.

And if it had been decreed by express words, that the Obligation should lose
his force, these words in the Decree would have bin void at the common Law, per
Billing Sergeant, and of the Counselors aw^rd a supersed* under the Great
Seal, reversing the Decree, and commanding the Justices not to proceed at the
common law, the same is not to be obeyed, otherwise it is a supers. supersed.
Privilege.
of Privilege, per Billing and Boef S^rj^ants, 37. Henry 6. 13. Bar 75. b
consc. 4

2. If a Feoffee upon trust, refuse to perform the trust, and upon Sub^oe^^*
in Chancery it is 37. H. 6.
decreed that he shall reinfeoffe the Feoffor, and he refuse and is committed,
if the Feoffor enter into the Land, and the Feoffee bring an Assize Assise.
Decree. Plea.
against him, this Decree is no plea in Bar to the Assize, per Laicon
Sergeant. 37. H. 6. 13.

37. H 6. Judgment* Plea.
3. Note that Judgment was glven in the Chancery in Pleas of Debt or of Patents
may be pleaded Decree. Court of Record.
in any other Court at the common law, other. wist it is of decrees made,
thereupon a Subdoena, because it is no Court of Record, in respect of such
suits, per Prisott: cap. Justic. Co. Ba. 37. H. 6. 14.

4. Note that if it be decreed that a Defendant 37. H. 6.
shall bring in an Obligation to be cancelled, the Chancellor can do no
otherwise but command him to prison, to remain there until he will do it, and
that is all which the Chancellor can do, for if the party will lie in prison,
rather than deliver the Obligation, the Complaintiffe is without remedy, per
Prisot. cap. Just. Co. Ba. 37 H. 6. 14.

9. E. 4. Commandment.
5. Note that Young Justice demanded this Question, What if the Chancellor
should command me upon a pain, that I should not sue my Debtor? Billing Justice
answered, that he were not bound to obey it; for that commandment is contrary
to Law: 9. E. 4. 53. b. Judges 22. but this is meant of a commandment, no Bill
being exhibited.

22. E. 4. Injunction Judgment.
6. In an action of Trespass, the Plaintiff recovered by verd^ct at nisi
prius before Judgment; the Chancellor granted an Injunction, commanding the
Plaintiff that he should not proceed to Judgment upon pain of 100l. Fairfax
Justice said, that although the Injunction were against the Plaintiff, yet his
Attorney might pray Jument, vel e contra: Hussy chief Justice of England said,
that they had communed upon the matter, and they could se^^o hurt that could
come Forfeiture. Subpoena.
to the Plaintiff, although he prayed Judgment contrary unto the Injunction,
for the Law does not give any forfeiture of the sum contained in the
Subpoena, and if he be committed to the Fleet we will ptesently grant a habeas
corpus ret Habeas Corpus.
before us, and then we will dismiss him, and the Justices said, though the
Chancellor would not disallow the Injunction, yet they would give Judgment if
the party would desire it, quod notum Banco Regis, 22. E. 4. 37. 6. Judgment
86.

2. R. 3: Judgment.
7. King Richard the third called before him into the Inner Starchamber all his
Justices, and demanded of them this Question among others, That whereas Tho.
Staunton had Judgment in the Chancery, to recover against Tho. Gate certain
Lands and Tenements, and in execution thereupon, yet Tho. Gate, contrary to the
judgment and execution entered into the Lands; where unto the chief Justices
answered, That if Notice. Imprisonment.
Gate had notice of the Judgment, then at al times after such notice the
Chancellor might compel him by imprisonment. 2. R. 3. 9. 2. R. 3. 9.


8. A Feoffee upon trust, was enjoined to make estate to the Feoffee before a
certain day, Subpoena 10. H. 7. Injunction
100l. and he did nor perform the Injunction, and H^ssey chief Justice of
England, and Vavisor Justices, and diverse Apprentices said clearly, that there
could no* scire fac. or other process be awarded for the King against the party,
to levy the 100l. because it is but a pain; and if the Defendant make default
in a Supoena, the Subpoena. Forfeiture.
pain is not forfeited, for it is put in the writ but only interiorem, but if
the party make default, the Chancellor may assesse a Fine upon him, according
to his discretion, and that assessement is a Judgment, and a scire fac. shall
be awarded upon that, in such sort as it may be upon Recognizance in
Cancellar. 10. H. 7. 4. b. Constable. 29.

27. H. 8. Decree Right. Person.
10. Note that a Decree in Chancery does bind the right of the party, but does
not only bind his person to obedience, that if he will not obey, the Chancellor
may commit him to ward until he do obey* and that is all which the Chancellor
may do, but Judgment given in the Kings Imprisonment.
Court, Common Pleas, and other Courts of the common law, do bind the right of
the party, per Knightly Sergeant, in Canc, 27. H. 8. 15. 27. H. 8. Injunction
Execution. Obligation.
Judges. 1. and b. Judgment 2.

11. If an Injunction in Chancery be made, That I shall not sue S I. if I dye
my Executors may sue him notwithstanding, for they are not bound thereby: For
if I be bound by Obligation that I shall not sue S I. if I dye, my Executors
may sue him, and it is no for feiture of the Obligation, per Fitzharbert
Justic. in Canc. 27. Brook. Heir. Executor.
H. S. 16. consc: 1. and Brook in abridging the case, does think it were hard,
that the Chancellor should enjoin the Heirs or Executors, although they were
expressed in the Injunction 27. H. 8* 15. But at this day the form of
Injunctions does by express words extend to bind the Heirs, Executors,
Counselors, Attorneys, and Solicitors of the party, saving that the Sergeants
of the law, do take themselves to be exempted by Warrant of their Oath, by
which it seems also, that they should not be of Counsel with any
Complaintiffe in the Chancery.

Fleta.
12. Note that in the Book called Fleta which was made in the time of King Edw*
the first, by all the Justices, either at such time as they were in the Fleet,
or else at such time as they inhabited in the street called Fleet-lane, it is
thus written. Tot erant formulae Brev. quot sunt genera actionum, quia non
poterit, quid sine bre. agere praecipue de libero tento suo quia non tenetur
quis respondere sine brevi nisi gratis voluerit, and cum hoc secerit quis ex
hoc ei non injurabitur volenti enim and scienti non fit injuria.

13. By this it is to be collected, that the right and possession of land, may
be decreed in the Chancery, in a suit commenced by the parties consent, as
appears also by a President following. Consent.


14. Agnis Lumbard being expulsed without process out of Tenements in Beverley
by Thomas Lumbard, they submitted themselves to the Decree, Order, and Award of
Michael De la Polle Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chancellor; who by writing under his
Seal decreed, that she should have the Tenements, rents, and arrerages thereof
during her life, and an Injunction Subpoena was awarded to the tenants to pay
the rents and arrerages accordingly, and to certain tenants unto whom Tho.
Lumbard had leased against the will of Agnis, that they should not meddle any
more therewith, or else they to show cause to the contrary, in decimaquinta
pascha, also it was then decreed by the advice of Robert Belknap, chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, and of John de Waltham Master of the Rolls and others,
that she should be put it full and peaceable seiz in thereof, whereof a Writ
Patent by warrant of the Counsel was directed to the Bailiffes, Aldermen and
Burgesses of Beverly, to put her in seizin and possession, and to defend her
therein, claus. Anno 9. R. 2. pro Agnet Lumbard.

CHAP VI.
Whether the Chancellor may intermixe his power absolute, with the ordinary.
8. E. 4. Privilege. Judge. Temporal Conscience. And the Debtor was discharged
of the execution, and prayed his damage against them both, and the Master of
the Rolls said, although by the Common law damages should be adjudged against
them both. Audita querela Damages.
1 IF an attachment of Privilege be sued against an Attorney in the Chancery,
this attachment is in the nature of an action at the common law, and the
Chancellor said, that in that suit he had two powers, one as a Judge temporal,
another as a Judge of Conscience, for if it appear unto him upon the matter
showed in the suit that there is conscience, he may judge thereof according to
Conscience, but all the Judges said that he might not ludge aecording to
Conscience, because it is to be ruled according to common law, and if there be
Conscience in the matter, then the party grieved may exhibit a bill thereof,
and in that the Chancellor may judge according to conscience, 8. E. 4. 66.
consc. 15. Jurisd. 112.

2. One was bound unto I S. and I D. in a star. staple, and I S. released
afterward, I S. not knowing thereof sued execution, the Debtor sued an Audita
querela, and upon the scir. fac. I S. and I D* being demanded in the Chancery I
D. made default, and that was ruled to be a default in them both. Yet this
being the Court of Conscience, we as well judge according to conscience, as to
law; and it were against conscience that he which had no knowledge of the
release, should pay damages; But Chock Justice said, that in this case they are
and must be Judges only according to Law, and the Master of the Rolls said
Conscience. Common Law.
he would be advised, 11. E. 4. 9. b. damages.

3. One traversed an office in the Chancery, and being at issue was sent into
the Kings Bench to be tried, and the party came and showed, that the King had
granted the Land before, and so he should have had a scir. ^ac. against the
Grantee, wherefore he pursued not his Traverse, and it was demanded of the
Justices if he might have a scir^ fac. out of he Chancery upon the first
Traverse, and they all answered that he might, because that in pleading a
default of form should not in any case be prejudicial in the Chancery, for it
cannot be called a Court of conscience, if the act of a Clerk in pleading
should cause the party to lose his suit and his expenses.

14. E. 4.
4. In Camera Scaccarij, 14. E. 4. 76. traverse d' Office, 39. and 6.
Jurisdict. 76. Upon Petition made to the King, and by him delivered over
Traverse of Office.
to the Chancellor to do right, appeared that the Kings Tenant being Tenant in
Tail, had granted with warranty, Lands, and an advowson to a College, and that
the King had Presented by color of the Wardship of the Heir, contrary to the
grant, and the Incumbent pleaded for the King, That the Heir had no Lands
descended from his Father, and that the Wardship was no Bar; but because it
appeared by diverse Offices returned Mispleading.
into the Court, that Lands to the value of 1000. marks were descended to the
Heir, Therefore the Court awarded in Conscience, That the College should be
restored to the Presentation without trial by Jury, that the same assetz did
descend. 43. ass. p. 21. Agr. 75.

Hereby it appears, That although the Chancellor may not mix his absolute
power with the ordinary concerning the right of the cause, yet he may somewhat
use the same in matters of expedition of proceedings.

CHAP. VII.
The form of the Pleadings.
9. E. 4.
ONe sold certain Wool to I S. and I D. for 3. l. and I S. had all the profit
thereof, and they were bound in several Obligations; Afterward the Creditor
sued I D. the surety, upon one of Obligation
the Obligations, being 300l. who sued a Subpoena, and showed in his Bill, that
the Creditor was satisfied of a great part, and had given long day for the
rest, and exception was taken to the bill by Catesby A^prentice, because that
the longer day,
Complalntiffe alleged, that a great part of the whole sum was paid, and
showed not how much was paid, and it may be that the money paid was for other
obligations and not for this; also he has not shown what day was given to I
S. The Chancellor said, that it did not lie in Incertainty. the sum,
the notice of I. D* what sum was paid, or what day was appointed; and
therefore he cannot declare it, but it must appear upon the examination of the
Defendants confidence, but he shall show certainly such matter as lies in his
knowledge.

Also in this Court it is not requisite that the Notice the day certainty
Bill be all certain, according to the solempnity of the Common law; for it is
but a Petition. 9. E. 4. 41. Subp. 12. et b. Conse. 3.

2. Note, that the Chancellor said, that a man shall not be prejudiced by
mispleading, or for default of form, but according to the verity of his matter;
and the Chancellor must judge secundum conscientiam, and non secundum allegat.
For if the Complaintiffe suppose by his Bill that the Defendant has done him
wrong, a d the Defendant answers nothing, yet if the Chancellor have
knowledge that the Defendant did no wrong to the Complaintiffe, the
Complaintiffe shall not recover any thing, 9. E. 4. 14* Snbp. 1^. Jurisd. 51.
and Consc. 26.

Mispleading.
3. Mispleading, nor default of form, shall not be prejudicial to the
Chancery: omnes Justice. in Camera Scacc. 14. E. 4. 7. b. traverse d' Office
39. and b. Jurisd. 76.

14. E. 4. Bill.
4. A Subpoena was sued against T. Tate, and before answer Tate exhibited a
Bill against the Complaintiff, to have an estate in the same land, and because
his Bill came in last, he was forced to put in his answer to the first Bill,
and so they Answer.
were at issue; And afterward it was showed to the Court, that Tates Bil did
vary from his own answer in two points, which were the ground of the matter.
And it was holden by the Chancellor, by the advice of the Kings Sergeants, that
the answer should stand, and it was notwithstanding the Bill, and it was
objected, that if the Variance,
matter were fond for Tate, then he should recover upon his Bill, but now he
cannot do so, because his answer is directly contrary. Whereunto the Kings
Sergeants answered* That Tate might be suffered to amend his Bill, according to
his answer, because he was sworn upon his answer, Amend.
but not upon his Bill. quod nota 14. E. 4. subp. 15.

16 E. 4. Answer.
5. A Bill was ab^^red for insufficiency of matter, and the Complaintiffe
showed new matter, and the Defendant was awarded to answer to it, per Cur.
Cancellar. 16. E: 4.

16 E. 4. Answer.
6. If a sub poena be sued against 4. Executors, and one of them does only
appear, he shall not be forced to answer without his Companions, but Markeham.
Capit. Justice. Angl. But Rogers Apprentice said, that he might answer alone if
he 8 E. 4. Executors Answer.
would, without his Companions, but shall not be compelled thereunto. 8. E. 4.
5. Brook, Con^c. 15.

CHAP. VIII.
What Costs and Damages shall be awarded in the Chancery.
1 NOte that where a Woman is only endowed 43 E. 31
by reason that her first Dower was recovered from her she shall recover no
damages, Damages.
for damages are not awarded in the Chancery per Cur. Cancellar. in praesen.
Just. 43. Asss. p. 32. and 43 E. 3. 2. Damages 195. and B. sc. sa. 161

W. Fishlack exhibi ed a Petition to the King against the Prior of Windham,
that his ship sailing to Lon. was assaulted by Enemies of France, that he and
his Mariners for fear fled to the land by boae by Hapsburgh in Norsolk, and the
ship being spoiled by them was cast up at Hapsburgh in the Priors land, who
seized the same as wreck, The King delivered the Pe^it. by writ to the Admiral,
willing him to do justice, who proceeding therein upon suit of the Prior made
to the King was commanded to certify his proceedings before the King and his
Council, and to warn the parties to appear at a day certain in the Chancery,
where upon hearing, it seemed to the Justices and Kings Sergeants, and other
Lawyers being there, that the ship, goods, and chattels ought not to be
accounted wreck, and Judgment was given that William Fishlack Wreck, Damages,
Costs.
should be restored thereunto, and to his damages, costs, and expenses which he
had sustained by the Priors default in the prosecuting, and that he should
fatisfie the Prior and his servants for their reasonable costs employed in
saving the sh^p and goods. Clauss. An. 5 R. 2. R. 6. pro W. Fishlack de Bacton.

17 R. 2 Damages.
It was enacted Anno 17 R. 2. that where people be compelled to come before the
Kings Council, or in the Chancery by writs granted upon untrue suggestions, the
Chancellor after that such suggestions be found and proved untrue shall have
power to ordain and award damages after his discretion, to him which shall so
unduly be troubled, Stat. Anno 17 R. 2. c* 6 accusation 8.

Stat. 15. H. 6. Surety.
It was enacted Anno 15 H. 6. that no writ of sub poena shall be granted till
Surety be found to satisfy the party grieved for his damages and expenses, if
the matter cannot be made good which is contained in the bill, Stat. Anno 15 H.
6 c 4. accusac 9*

5. It was used since these Statutes to enter the Sureties upon the bill in
this form, Plegii de prosequend. T. W. de H. in Com. Midd. Ar. and J. K. de B.
in Com. Midd. Ar. or else in this form, Memorand. quoth. 23 die Januar. An. R. R.
H. 6 34. E* F. de paroch. de S* London Fulles, and T. J. de London Ye^man coram
ipso Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua personaliter constituit manuceperunt
^ropraed. querent. quod si ipse materiam in hac supplicatione content. verum
probare non poterit tunc ipsi omnia damna and expenss Damna, Expenss.
quae sub poena d^ct. d^f. in hac part sustinebit per considerationem Curtae
and satisfaciet juxta formam statuti inde editi, but this is now neglected*
Pe^ic. in Canc. de An. H. 6.

7 E 4. Bill ^nsuffic,
6. Note if a Bill be exhibited and the Deft. demur upon the insufficiency
thereof, and by the Court the bill is awarded insufficient, in that case the
Def. shall have no costs or damages by Costs, Damages, Bill untrue
the statute, because the statute gives the damages ^here the bill is found
true or untrue, but in this case the truth is not tried, 7 E. 4 14. Dam. 44. b.
Costs 19. and b. Damages 163 per Cancellartam and Jnstic. utriusque Banci in
Camera Scaccar.

7 E. 4. Grant to use costs.
7. Note that the grantee of Lands, or Goods upon trust, is not compellable in
consc ence to sue or ^efend, but only at the costs and charges of the grantor,
7 E. 4 29.

11 E. 4. Audit. que. Damages.
8. It seemoth that if one sue execution upon a statute staple, where he has
released the duty before, and the debtor sueth an Audit. quer. against him to
avoid the Execution, and the creditor makes default, he shall pay damages,
vid. 11 E 4. he fo. 46. a casu secundo.

2^ E 4. Injunction.
In an action of Tresp. the Plaint. recovered by verdict, and the Plaint*
showed in the Kings bench, that the Chancellor had awarded an Injunction
against him, whereby the sure had not long delayed, and now (depending the
Injunction) he prayed his Judgment in the Kings Bench, Judgment Damages.
Kings Bench, and it was given, but the Court would not afford any damages for
the Plaint. vexation in the Chancery, by the Injunction, in Banco Regis 22 E*
4. 37. b. Damages 138. and b. Judgment 86.

21 E. 4.
10. In an Action of Trespass the Defendant was found guilty by verdict, and the
Plaintiff showed in the Common place that the Defend Common place* Injunction
had sued a sub poena in the Chancery, and had obtained an Injunction, that he
should not proceed at the common Law till the matter in the Chancery were
tried, and how by means of the suit in the Chancery the Plaintiff had spent ten
Marks, and now the Injunction is dissolved, the Plaintiff dismissed to the
common Law, Dismission
and therefore he prayed the Justice to increase the costs because of this
vexation. And Brian the chapter Just. awarded that the Plaintiff should recover
three pounds for his costs, besides his damages in com. banco, 21 E. 4. 78 b.
consc. 22. and b. costs.

CHAP. IX.
Reformation and Reversal of Judgments and Decrees made in the Chancery.
37. H. 6. Decree, Parliament Error.
1. NOte that upon a Decree made in the Chancery by sub Poena, the party may
have a writ of error in the Parliament to recover the same if it be erroneous,
in such sort as he may have to reverse Judgments erroneously given in the
Kings Bench per Chock Sergeant, 37 H. 6. 3. Iurisd. 53. and error 95. But Brook.
note that Brook abridgeth the case, that Prisot the chief Justice was of the
contrary opinion, which is not to be so collected by the book, but by
implication; yet may it seem that no writ Petition,
of error does lie, but a petition to the Parliament in the nature of a writ of
error, but Judgment Record.
Prisot said that Judgments in the Chancery upon scire facias to repeal
Parents and pleas or persons privileged are reversable by Parliament, because
they are Judgments, but the decrees are not.

27 H. 8:
2. Cholmly Sergeant said, if a decree be made in the Chancery, that the
Chancellor has not Decree, tho same Court, Parliament
power to reverse that decree in the same Court, but it must be redressed in the
Parliament, for Judgment given in the Kings Bench, Commonplace or Exchequer,
are not reversable in the same Court but in a higher Court.

Order, good cause.
But Knightley Sergeant said* that a decree was but an Order taken by the Court
for the time the which upon good causes showed may be redressed in the same
Court, hut Devistall Sergeant said, that if it might be so, there would be an
incessant confusion of all causes, wherefore the Chancellor cannot reverse an
absolute absolute decree,
Decree, but he may reverse a Decree which is made with a quousque; for an
absolute decree is much like a definitive sentence given in the definitive,
spiritual Court, which cannot be redressed in the same Court, but by
application into a higher Court; and the Kings Secretary interrupted him to
speak any further of the authority of the appellation. 2 R. 3. patent,
scirefacias error, the same court, reform. Revocation.
Chancery. In Cancel. 27 H. 8. 6.

In a writ of error to reverse a Judgment of petition in Chancery, the
Defendant took exception that the Judgment given in the Chancery might not be
reve sed in the Chancery, being all one Court, but in the Parliament. Et non
allocatur exception. per Cur* Cancel. 42. asss. p. 22. b* error. 131. It
seems that this was not properly a reversall of the petition, but rather and
is like to the case ensuing.

2 R. 3. patent, scire facias, error, the same court, reform. 18 E. 3. Stat.
Merchant, Kings Bench,
I the Lord Chancellor grant a patent of land and after make a patent to
another of the same land, the second patent is revocable in the Chancery by
scire facias, but not by writ of error, for a Court may reform, but not reverse
their own Judgments, 2 R* 3.

A statute Merchant was acknowledged in the Chancery, the money payable Anno
16. and the party sued execution, and his writ supposed the same to be payable,
Anno 14. and by this suit the Feoffee was put out of power, and he sued a writ
of error in the Kings Bench, and it was awarded that he should be received to
the suit, 18 E. 3. 25. error p. and 17. asss. p. 24.

13 Eliz. common Law.
And Plowden reciting the case says, that if upon suits in the Chancery
according to the order of the common Law there be error, that shall be reformed
by a writ of error in the Kings Bench, which is a higher Court, 13 El. Com. 393.

The Second Part of the Absolute Power.
CHAP. I.
Of Lands.
6 E. 4. Coparceners Covin.
IF two Copartners bring a Formidon, and one of them by Covin between the
Tenant and him will not join with the other in a true Declaration, the other
may compel her by such poe^a to join in the true Declaration, for else the
Action would abate. per M^^le Justice and Ien^ey Sergeant, in Co. Ba* 6 E. 4.
10. b. cons^. 12.

Doct. and S^ud. Iointenant all the profit.
2. If two men have a wood jointly* and one of them felleth the wood and
keeps all the money to himself, his f^llow has ^o remedy by the Law, for as
when they took the wood jointly, they put each other in trust, and were
contented to occupy together, so the La^ suffers them to order the profit^
thereof according to the trust that each did put in other, and yet if one took
all the profits he is bound in Conscience
conscience to restore the half to his fellow; for as the Law gives him right
only to half the land, so it gives him right only in conscience to the half
profits; and yet it cannot be Law.
said that the law is against conscience; for the Law wills not that one shall
take all the profits, but leaves it to their conscience, Lib. Doct and Stud.
cap. 19.

Doct. and Stnd. eldest son.
3. In many cases conscience shall be ruled after the Law; as the eldest son
shall have his fathers land by conscience, as he shall in law; and so he shall
in law, and so in Burgh English, the youngest son shall enjoy the land both in
Gravelkinde all children. Law, Custom,
law and conscience; and in Gravel-kinde all the sons and daughters shall
inherit together, and there can be no other reason gives why it should be so in
conscience, but because law or custom is so, lib. Doct. and Stud. 2. c. 15.
for diverse good causes upon that ground.

4. Tho. Parrick and Agnes his wife exhibited a bill, containing that one
Beatrice whose heir Agnes is, was seized, and took to husband Thomas Bradley
present in the Court, and dyed, Bradley continued as Tenant by the courtesy of
England, until now of late he claims and publishes that he has fee-simple,
and withheld Present in Sect. Tent* cur^efie* claim fee-simple.
the Charters; wherefore they prayed that he might he examined what estate he
claims, and to be recorded, and to knowledge what Charters he has, and to
deliver them to the complainants defendant D^smissum est a curia quietus sine
die per consi*cur. co quoth materia in hac supplicatione contenta non est
sufficiens ad p^nendum ips^m defend. ad examinat. super ^undem petition. Pet.
in Canc. 20 H. 6. the defendant has authority by law to keep the Charters,
Charters.
and although in words he claims feesimple, yet because it is not alleged
that he did not any act to the dis-inheritance of the Dismission
complainants, therefore it seems he was dismissed.

CHAP. II.
Of Lands in use or trust.
LAnds in Land. were devised to the devisors son and three others in fee, and
that one of 3 H. 9.
them should have the profits during his life, Rem. of use
the devisor dyed, the son and heir sued a sub p* against the two others, to
compel them to release unto him, because the use of the land ought use for life
to be in him after the death of the per ^or, and it was thought reasonable per
omnes Justic. in Release.
camera Scac. 3 H. 6. devise 22. and 8* feofment al uses 49. So it is if the
same had been done by Feofment.

2. On^^made a Feofment upon confidence, 31 H. 6.
and afterward declared his will to the Feoffee that one of the daughters
should have the land after his decease, and after that he came to the Feoffee
and told him that his said daughter would not be married by him, and therefore
he revoked his Will, and willed that his other daughter should have the land by
conscience. Revocation of will.
Laicon, when he made his first Will, the first daughter had presently an
interest in the land, Revocation of use. quid pro quo.
which he would not defeat; as if one make a Feofment to the use of a stranger,
he cannot afterward revoke that use. Illingworth, there appears not any
cause why the first daughter should have the land; and therefore seeing the
Feoffor had not quid pro quo, it is no bargain, but of his mere will which he
may by good conscience change, as if the Feoffor had afterward fall into
poverty.
fallen into poverty, he might with good conscience compel the Feoffee to re-fe
off him again, Prisot chapter Justice of the Common Pleas, when the Re-feoffor had
once declared his Will, and willed the land to his daughter, the Feoffee
stands presently subject to the will of the daughter, and is discharged of
the Feoffee; and such a Will is as strong as a Feoffee, Special cause.
which is annexed to a Livery of Seizin, Fortescue chief Justice of England, the
Feoffor may have his will, if there be special cause, otherwise not; as if
after the first Will the Son born.
Feoffor had a son born he might well have changed his Will, and given it to his
son and Felon after feofment.
heir, for there is a reasonable cause of his claim, and so it is if the
daughter had become a Felon, 35 H. 6* sub poena.

Felon, 15 Eliz.
3. Stac. consc. note that the better opinion is conceived to be, that he may
revoke the first Will, 15 Eliz. Dyer. 3. 25.

3 H. 6: use after feofment.
4. Note, it was agreed, if any infeoff another, he may declare his Will unto
him afterward, and appoint the use to whom he will; 31 H. 6. sub poena 23.
Stach. consc.

5. If I infeoff one to perform my last Will and himself a stranger, I have no
cause of sub poena against the Feoffee, but I may sue my first Feoffee and
recover in damages for the value of the land, per Yelverton and Wilby, Clericis
Enfeoff a stranger, second Feoffee, Damages, bona fide, trust.
Rotulorum, and this is meant where the second Feofment is made bona fide, in
which cause I have no remedy for the land, and so it was adjudged in the
Cardinal of Winchesters case, but if the second Feofment had been also upon
trust, then I might recover the land by sub poena against the second Feoffee,
31 H. 6. sub poena 19. Stach. sub poena.

33 H. 6* Enfeoff strangers, bona fide, second feofment, refuse to infeoff.
6. If I make a Feofment upon trust that the Feoffee shall infeoff my heir when
he comes to full age, and the Feoffee infeoffeth a stranger bona fide to the
intent to dis*inherit my heir, there the trust is detained, and the heir is
without remedy against the second Feoffee by sub p. or otherwise; but if the
Feoffee had ret^ined the land himself, and refused to infeoff the heir at his
full age he might have compelled him thereunto by sub poena per Dunby Just. in
com. banco, 33 H. 6. 15.

33 H. 6. pet. in law.
7. Richard Frank made Feoffees to the use of the last Will of him, and Agnes
his wife, and they dyed, having issue John and Izabel; John was outlawed of
murder, and also delivered to the Abbot of Westminster, as a Clerk attainted
for robbing a boy called a (Monstral) out of the Church of the Prioress of
Clerkenwell; Outlawed, Clerk attainted, outlawed of treason.
and lastly was indicted and outlawed for Felonies and Treasons, and during his
life Isabel sued a sub poen, against the Feoffees to be infeoffed of the land,
as next heir to the land, the Feoffees upon their Oaths confessed the trust,
wherefore it was decreed by the Court, by advise of John Fortescue Knight chief
Justice of the K* Bench and diverse other Justices and Serj. that the Feoffees
should execute an estate next heir.
to Isabel and her heirs, q^ nota petic. in Canc. Ann. 33 H. 6. 2 pts.

37 H. 6. Refuse to inf^off, Imprisonment: 37 H. 6. Will, 2 Feoffees.
8. It the Feoffee upon trust do refuse to perform the trust by denying to
re-infeoff the Feoffer, he shall be compelled thereunto by sub poena, and
decree and imprisonment, per Liac. Ser. 37 H. 6. 13.

9. One having four Feoffees seized to his use, sold his land to J. S. and said
to two of his Feoffees, that his Will was that they four should make a Feofment
unto J. S. accordingly, which two Feoffees notified his Will unto the other
two, who refused to join in the Feofment; whereupon the first two alone made a
Feofment to J. S. of their parts* and afterward* the Feoffer sold the lands to
J. D. and required those two Feoffees which refused before Notice.
to infeoff J. D. who did so accordingly, and J. S. sued a sub poena against the
two Feoffees which refused, and because the two Feoffes did bur only give
notice to the other two Feoffees of the Feoffers Will, and did not tell them
that the Feoffer had commanded them to infeoff commandment.
I. S. and without commandment they were not compellable to make the Feofment,
therefore the two Feoffees which so refused were dismissed per canc. and omnes
Just. 37 H 6. 35. sub poena b. consc. 5.

37 H. 6.
10. If the Feoffer do send his servant to his Feoffees commanding them to make
estate according to his Will, the Feoffees are not bound to make a Feofment
without specialty proving his Will per plur. Instic. 37 H. 6 35 37 H. 6. refuse
to take.
sub poena 1* b. consc. 5.

11. One willed that his Feoffees should make an estate for life to I. S. the
Remainders. to I. D. in fee, I. S. refused to make the Estate for life, I. D.
may compel the Feoffees by sub poena, to limit an estate in rem* unto him
after the death of I. S. per Ienney Serj. and Fincham apprentice, and Fincham
said, that the Feoffees ought to make an Estate to the heir of the Feoff r
during Remainder.
the life of I. S. if I. S. did ^^fuse the rem. to I. D.

Refusal by Tenant for life.
12 And I. D. may compel the F offees by sub poena to grant the rem. in the
life of I. S. for else by the refusal of I. S. he should lose his rem.
otherwise it is if a man devise ^a^ds by his Testament to I. S. for life, the
rem. to I. D. Testament
further if I. S. refuse, yet there needs (...) sub poena, because he may
enter by the law b^ force of the Testament, 37 H. 6. 36. sub poena* 6. consc. 5.

13 If any Feoffee in trust be diss^iz^d* I Diss^izin in assize.
may have sub poena to compel him (...) bring Assize against the Diss^^sor per
M^^le and Danvers Justice in communibance, 2 E. 4. 2. b. consc. 5.

14 If If I be bound by obligation to I. S. ^. E. 4. Obligation refuse to take.
to the use of I D. that I shall infec^s I. D. for certain lands, if I do offer
a Feofnient unto I. D. and do refuse ^o receive, the obligation is thereby
discharged, but I. D. may ^ave a sub poena to compel me to infeoff him
notwithstanding per Danby Capit. Iu stice de communi banco, 2 E. 4. 3.

15 If any Feoffee upon trust infeoff a stranger* and do s^ll the l^nd to him
for money, yet if he give knowledge unto the stranger, that he himself (...) i^
^^ely upon trust, I may compel the stronger by su^ ^oena to perform my Will,
5 E. 4. 76. Feofments a^ use 32. sub poena 2.

5 E. 4. Youngest son.
16 If Tenant in Burgh English infeoff one to the use of the Feoffor and his
heirs, the youngest son shall have a sub poen, to recover the land but not the
eldest, 5 E. 4. 7. 6. Feofments al use 32. sub poena 2.

5 E. 4. Mothers side, heir of the fathers side.
17 If one seized of land which is descended unto him from his mother do make a
Feofment upon trust, and then die without issue, the* heir by the mothers side
shall have a sub p. to recover the land, not the heir by the fathers side, 5 E.
4. 7. b. Feofments al use 32. sub poena 2.

5 E. 4. Remainder,
18 If a Tenant in tail (the remainder being a stranger) do make a Feofment to
his use, and die without issue, having declared his Will, the sub poena
belongs to such person as is limited Tenant in tail, declare Testament.
by his Will, and not to him that has the remainder, but if he have declared
no Will then he in the remainder should have had the sub poena, quaere E. 5.
47 sub poena 26. Feofm. al use 32. But Brook thinks that he in the remainder
shall have no sub poena in neither case, Common Law. 5 E. 4. Husband and Wife.
because he may have his remedy at the common Law.

19 If the Husband and the Wife be seized in the right of the Wife, and the
Husband make a Feofment* although he declare no Will, yet the Wife shall not
have the sub poena, because as Brook thinks;

no consi^. use not expressed.
20 When a Feofment is made without any consideration and no use expressed,
the Feofment shall be intended to be to the use of the Feoffor, and his heirs;
and also the Wife may have her cui in vita by the common Law, 5 E. 4. 76.
Feofments al uses 32. sub poena.

4 E. 4. Half blood*
21 If a man have issue, a Son and a Daughter by one Wife, and a Daughter by
another Wife, and makes a Feofmeut to his use, and dies; if the Son do take
the profits, and die, Take profits,
his Sister by the whole Blood shall have the land by sub poena, and the other
suffer nothing, because the rule, that Possessio fratris de feod. Possessio
fratris.
simplici fecit sororem esse haeredem, does extend to uses, as well as to
lands, 5 E. 4. 7. sub poena 3. b. Feofment al uses 33. and b. descent. 36. and
4 E* 6.
Com. 4 E. 6. 58. per Mountague capit. Justic. de communi banco; and if the
Father had devised his land to a stranger, this would have been no possessio
fratris, because the freehold of the use estate for life, for years.
was in the stranger; but if he had devised it only for years, it would have
been a good possessio fratris, 5. E. 4. 7. sub poena 36. Consc. 12. and by
descent.

5 E. 4. Attainder, Felony, Escheat.
22 If I. S. make a Feofment in trust, and be afterward attainted of Felony,
the lord of whom the land is holden shall not have the sub poena by Escheat, 5
E. 4. 7. B. Feofment al use 34.

5 E. 4. 7 E. 4. King use void.
23 Note that the King cannot be infeoffed to any other man's use although it be
so expressed, neither does any sub poena lie against him, but the Feofment is
good, and the limitation of the use void, per Markham and Brian capit. Justice.
5 E. 4. 7. 7 E. 4. 17. Office 2.

24 One being infeoffed to the use of a Woman, she took a Husband, and the
Husband sold the land to a stranger, and the Woman received the money, and the
Feoffee at their request infeoffed the stranger, the Husband died, and the Wife
brought a sub poena against the Feoffee, who showed the matter, and the Wife 7
E. 4. Husband and Wife.
demurred; Starkie Apprentice, if the Husband make a Feofment of the Wives
land, she shall avoid it by a cui in vi^a; and so if the Husband do sell the
Wives use in the land, this Sale shall in conscience be said the Sale of her
Husband alone, and not of them both, and therefore the sub poena does lie;
which saying was affirmed of all the Receive money.
Justices of both the Benches; and the Chancellor said, that all which a Woman
Covert does shall be esteemed to be done for fear of her Husband, and the
receipt of the money by her cui in vita Coverture. Prison, Satisfact.
is not material, because she cannot have the free disposition thereof, and the
Complaintiff prayed that the Defendant might be committed unto Prison until he
made satisfaction; and the Chancellor said, that the Complaintiff might have a
sub poena against the stranger which bought the land; but Yelverton said, that
she might have a sub poena, if the stranger had Feoffee, Notice.
knowledge of the wrong and deceit done to her, but otherwise not. The
Chancellor answered, that the stranger knew well that she was a Woman Covert,
in came. Scacc. 7 E, 4. 14. Sub poena 3. B. consc. 13. b. Feofm. al use 4.

7 E. 4. Plead Actions, c^^ts.
25 Note that a Feoffee of trust is bound by conscience to plead all Pleas, and
to maintain such actions for the land as the Feoffor will have him, but it
shall be at the Feoffees charge, per omnes Justic. but it is doubtful whether
Dilatories.
the Feoffees be compellable to plead dilatory Pleas, 7 E. 4. 29. sub poena 9.
br. Feofments al uses 38. and 6. consc. 27.

8 E. 4. He^^.
26 Note that Coke Justice said, that he sued once a sub poena against the
heirs of a Feoffee upon trust, and the matter was long debated, and the opinion
of the Chancellor, and of the Justices was, that the sub poena did not lie
against the Hei^, whereby he was put to exhibit his Bill in the Parliament, 8 E.
4. 6. sub poena, 8. B. consc. 16. Note that it must be intended Parliament
that the Heir had not the land, but that the land was sold before by the
Feoffee to a stranger; for if the Heir had the Land, he is liable to the trust
as well as the Feoffee.

9 E. 4. Payment, Tender, Refuse to re-infeoff.
27 If I do lend money to I. S. and he infeoffeth me of his Lands, and it is
agreed that I shall take the profits thereof until he have paid me: if I. S.
do pay the money, or tender it unto me, and I refuse to re-infeoff him, he may
compel me by the sub poena, per Pigo^ Ser*jeant. 9 E. 4. 25. Bar. 100.

28 It was holden in the Chancery, that if any Feoffee upon trust do infeoff
any other which knows of the trust, I may have a sub poena against them both;
but if a stranger knowing the trust had done a Tre^passe upon 11 E. 4. 8. 13.
consc. 17
any Feoffee, I might compel my Feoffee by sub poena to sue him, and to recover
Damages, I shall have no sub poena against the Trespassor, but only against my
Feoffer, because he might lawfully procure his own discharge, but the Reporter
thinks that the Trespassor is punishable by sub poena, as well as the
Feoffee, 11 E. 4. 8. sub poena 13. consc. 17.

14 E. 4. Heirs, gavel kind, common voice.
28 A sub poena was sued against two sons and heirs of gavel land to compel
them to make an Estate of the land of which the Complaintiff had infecffed
their father and others to his use, of whom their father was the Survivor, the
Defendant said, that the common voice of the Country is, that the Feofment was
to the use of the Complaintiff, and of his Wife, and of the Heirs of their two
Bodies begotten, who have Issue, therefore they prayed a Writ to warn the
Issue, and upon the Writ the issued appeared, and showed that he was under
age, and prayed that the matter might Age, Descent,
stay until he came to age, and the Chancellor by the advice of Laicon and
Littleton Justices awarded that the matter should not stay, because he was not
seized of the Land by a Descent, Next Cousin, 14 E. 4. Heir,
wherefore the Issue by his next Cousin declared his Title, 14 E. 4. Age 20.

30 Note that a sub poena does lie against the Heir of the surviving Feoffees,
14 E. 4. Sub. 14.

31 A sub poena was brought against three Feoffees upon trust, to compel them
to execute an Estate to the Complaintiff, one of them said, that the
Complaintiff made a Feofment to the other two in his absence to the behoof of
Agree. Lord.
all three, and he died never agreed to the Feofment, and the Land is holden of
him, so that he cannot execute an Estate but that he shall Extinguishment.
Disclaimes.
extinguish his own Seigniority; and therefore he disclaimed in the Land, and it
was allowed to be a good answer, per curiam Cancellarii, 16 E. 44. sub poena 18.

17 E. 4. Award, Release.
32 If I and another do submit our selves to an award, and it is awarded that I
shall cause my Feoffees in trust to release to the other being in possession, I
may compel my Feoffees by sub poena to fulfill the award per omner Justice. in
communi banco, 17 E. 4. 4.

Testament.
33 A Woman made a Feofment upon confidence* and afterward took a Husband,
and in her Deathbed she made Testament that her Feoffees should make an Estate
to her Husband, and to his Heirs; the Woman died, and the Husband sued a sub
poena to compel the Feoffees to perform her Testament, and it was ruled that
the Testament was void, and Coverture. Fine.
that the Feoffees were not compellable to perform the same, for Law and
Conscience do allow nothing to be good which is done by Woman Covert
concerning her Inheritance, except it be by Fine leavied where she is openly
examined in the Court, for this Testament would be a Dis*inheritance to her
Heir, but she may make her Testamet of Goods, and make Executions by consent of
her Husband per Cancel. and omnes Justic. uno tantum excepto. And Vavasor
showed to the Court that Anno 7 E. 4. a Woman Covert having Feoffees upon
trust, she and her Hus^and sold the Land, and she received the money, and
afterward the Husband died, and she sued a sub poena, and it was adjudged to
be a good suit, 18 E. 4. 118. consc. 28. b. Testament. 13.

20 E. 4. Custom, Infant, Sale.
34 The custom of Kent is, that an Infant of fifteen years may sell his Land,
and the case was that an Infant made Feoffees upon trust, and afterward being
above fifteen years old he willed the Feoffe^s to make an Estate thereof to him
and his Wife in tail, and the question was whether they were compellable by
sub poena to do it or no, and it was holden that the Feoffees were not
compellable, because the Infant cannot will his Land by the custom, for the
custom is only of Sale, and is always to be construed strictly, according to
the very words also at the Common Law* such a Will Custom Strict.
made by the Infant of Lands is void, and so it is in conscience per Littleton
Jenney and omnes socios Justic. 21 E. 4. b. Testament. 17.

21 E. 4. Burgh English, youngest son, Gavelkinde.
35 Note in Burgh English land where the youngest shall inherit, if the Father
make a Feofment upon trust, the youngest son shall have the use, and the sub
poena, and so it is of Gavel-kinde land, where all the Brothers do inherit per
Dig. App. 21 E. 4. 24. b. Testament. 17.

22 E. 4.
36 Hussy chief Justice of England said, that when he came first to the Court
which was about thirty years past, it was holden by all the Court that if one
infeoffed another of trust Heir, Descent,
which died seized so that his Heir were in by Descent, no sub poena should lie
against the Heir, for the same reason a sub poena might be against the Heir
after two Discents which were inconvenient, but the Chancellor said that there
President.
are Presidents in the Chancery that a sub poena does lie against the Heir in
Came. Scacc. 22 E. 4. 6. b. consc. 23.

7 H. 7: Notice, Feoffee.
37 If a ftoffee upon confidence make a feofment to one that has knowledge of
the confidence the feoffer shall be restored again in the Chancery, otherwise
it is if the purchasor had no knowledge of the confidence per Cancel. 7 H. 7.
12. sub poena 18.

5 H. 7. Infant, Offices.
38 The Feoffees upon trust of an Infant may grant all ordinary Offices for
term of life, as Steward, Bailiff, and Receiver, and they shall have allowance
thereof, in their Accounts when they are called to account in the Chancery,
Account* Fees, Ass^nt*
but they cannot grant any fees for term of life, without the assent of the Heir
when he is of full age per Hussy and Brian cap. Just. Ang. But Keble Sergeant
said, that if the Feoffor were able and willing to be Bailiff or Receiver
himself, or if that there were need of any Defense, Suits. Allowance.
Steward, Bailiff, or Receiver, then he might repeal the Grants by sub poena,
also it was agreed that the feoffees might defend the Land in all suits with
the profits thereof, and should have allowance thereof in Counsel, 8 H. 7. b.
Ftofments al uses 12.

10 H. 7. Coverture,
39 Note it was adjudged that a Woman Covert Executrix might make sale of her
lands to her Husband, and that it is a good Bargain, and the feoffees upon
trust are bound to make a Executrix, Sale, Fleet.
feofment accordingly; and in this case because three feoffees did the contrary,
they were committed to the Fleet, 10 H. 7. 20. This is to be understood, where
the Land was devised to the Woman being Executrix to the intent to be sold for
the performance of the Will of the Testator.

40 Certain feoffees were seized to the case of 10 H. 7. use for life,
Sir Richard Rooe for life, and afterward to the use of others, and the
feoffees made a feofment in fee to Sir Richard Rooe, the question was whether
Sir Richard Rooe had forfeited his Estate or no, and Hussy and Brian chief
Justices Forfeiture, Discontinuance, Reformation.
agreed that it was no forfeiture by the common Law, for no man's Reversion is
dis*continued thereby, otherwise it is if Tenant for life of land had made a
feofment to a stranger, for that were a forfeiture, and the Chancellor said,
that in the first case it was no forfeiture in conscience, but he would reform
so much as was amiss done and no more, and so it had oftentimes been ordered
before the Chancellor, 10 H. 7. 2.

10 H. 7.
41 A feoffee upon trust was seized by a Injunction, Infeoff.
sub poena by the Feoffor, and the feoffee was enjoined that he should make an
Estate to the feoffor before a day certain sub poena 100. lib. in Cau^. 10 H.
7. 4.

Refeoff Die seized.
42 The Heir of Co. qu. use shall have after the death of his father the issues
and profits of the Lands, as if his father had died seized thereof, and he may
compel the Feoffees upon trust by sub poena to infeoff him, and shall have all
advantages, as if his father had died seized in Camera Scacc. per Wood
Sergeant, 13 H. 7. 7.

4 H. 7. ^ Ref^off.
43 If the Feoffees upon trust will not infeoff the Feoffor, he may compel
them by sub poena in communi banco per Brian cap. Justic. de communi banco and
Danvers Justic. 14 H. 7. 19.

15 H. 7. Testament, sell.
44 One having feoffees in trust, devised by his Testament, that his Feoffees
should sell the Land, the Feoffor died, the Feoffees infeoffed others to the
first use, the second Feoffees may not perform the Will, but the first Feoffees
may, and the second Feoffees may do it, because there is a kind of use in I.
S. seeing he is specially named, and he may compel them to sell unto him, and
if the Will were that the Feoffees should sell his Lands to pay his Debts, the
Creditors may compel the feoffees to sel^ it, but if he had willed that the
feoffees should sell the Land for money to be distributed there no man can
compel them to make the Sale per Fineux cap. Justic. and Read and Tremaine
Just. Specialtie named, Debts, Creditors.
If the Will were that his Executors should sell it, though his Executors refuse
to administer, yet the ordinary Administrator may not sell it, but the
Executors themselves may, notwithstanding the refusal cause the uses not
testamentory Distributed, Executors refuse Administration, Ordinary
Administrator, Testamentory Executors, Executors, Heirs.

14 H. 7. Testament, Specialty, named second Feoffees.

14 H. 8. Pleas refuse, Voucher, Action de case without Heir, within age,
attainted, Eschete, Lord.

14 H. 8. Office, without Heir.


per Finenx cap. Iusiic. Angl. Read and Termail Justice. And if he will that his
Land shall be sold, and show not by whom, his Executors shall sell it, and not
the feoffees, for the Executors have the greatest confidence put in them, for
they have the disposition of the money for which it is sold per Fineux cap.
Just. Angl. Read and Tremaine and Frowick Sergeant. And if the Will be that the
Land shall be sold, the Heir shall take the profits until it be sold per
eosdem in Banco Regis, 15 H. 7. 1^. b. Feofm. al use 12.

45 If one having feoffees upon trust do make his Testment that they shall have
an Estate to I. S. and dies, if the feoffees infeoff others to the first use,
the second feoffees may make the Estate by Kingsmell Sergeant, 14 H. 7. 33. 23.
Feofments al use 12.

46 In a Formedon against two feoffees upon trust, if the feoffees refuse such
Pleas as the feoffor does minister to them, or if they or one of them do refuse
to vouch where the feoffor shows to them good cause of voucher, the feoffor
has no remedy against the feoffees to compel them buy by sub poena, or else
by Action upon the case per to^am Curiam. And Bradnell chief Justice of the
Commonplace said, that if a feoffee upon trust die without Heir, or die his
Heir being within age, or is attainted of felony, so that the Land comes to
the Lord, the Lord shall have it to his own use, and the feoffor has no remedy
in communi Banco, 14 H* 8. 24.

47 The feoffees upon trust may grant the Offices of Steward and Receiver per
Newdibank Sergeant: if the feoffor die without Issue within age, the Lord shall
hold the land to his own use, and if the feoffees acknowledge a Stat. within
age,
Merchant, and the Conusee do extend the Land, he shall hold it to his own use,
because the said persons do come unto the Land by the Lord, Dower,
operation of Law, and not by their own Act, nor by the Act of the Feoffees, but
if the feoffees infeof a stranger which has notice of the Stat. Merchant,
Notice, Particeps criminis consentientur fraus.
first use, there the second feoffee shall be seized to the first use, though he
paid a consideration, Quia participes criminis consentientes and agentes paci
plena plectentur dolus and fraus nemini patrocinetur; and if the second
feofment be to one that has notice, and he pay consideration, then he shall be
seized to the first use, but if he pay no consideration, nor have no notice,
yet it shall be to the first use per Justic. and Servients. If the feoffees
grant a Rent for Life out of the Land without any consideration. If it be to
one that has notice of the first use this Rent shall be to the use of the
feoffor of the Land, per Pollard, Brook, and Fitzherbert Just. in communi
Banco, 14 H. 8. 4.

27 H. 8. Burgh English, Gavelkinde.
48 A use shall ensue the nature of the Land, for if it be use of the Burgh
English Land, the youngest shall have it; and if of Gavel-kinde, then all the
Children, por Pilman Sergeant, 14 H. 8. 6. in banco and 27 H. 8. per Pollard
apprentic.

49 If the feoffee upon trust die, his Heir shall be subject to the trust, per
Bradwell cap. Just. Fitzherbert, and Brook Justic. in communi banco, ^4 H. 8. 7.

14 H. 8. Common Law.
50 Note by Brook Justice, that uses are created by the common Law, and are
relieved by conscience, and all meddling with the Land by the Feoffees ought to
be at the desire of the Creation, Relief, Desire of Feoffer. 14 H. 8.

S^igatory, Escheats, Recovery in value. 19 H. 8.

Executor, Executor of Executor.


Feoffor, and if the Feoffee do otherwise, he is chargeable in conscience, 14
H. 8. 8. in communi Banco.

51 If one have Feoffees in trust of Seigniory, if the Tenancy do escheat unto
them they shall be feised to the use of the Feoffor, and so it is of Land
recovered in value, per (...) Just in communi Banco, 14 H. 8 9

52 One having feoffees upon trust wills that his Executors should sell his
Lard, (...) died, if that Executor make another Executor, in that case the
Executor of the Executor cannot sell the Land, because the first Executor had
that power as in authority several from his Executor ship, and though the
first Executor had refused the Aministration, yet he might have sold the Land
per curiam in cancella^^a Scacc. And if he had willed that the chief Justice
should Refnse, Administ. Chapter Justice, Resignation, Heir.
sell his Land, although that the chief Justice had resigned his Office and
another been placed, yea the first should sell his Land per Bradwell Justic.
communis Banci, and if the will were that John S. should sell his Land, if I.
S. die his Heir cannot sell it, because the trust is determined per Shelley and
Ingelfield Justic. and Willoughby and Spilman Sergeants, 19 Hen. 8. 9.

^ R. 3.
53 Note by a Statute in Ann. 1 R. 3. the Will of the Feoffor is made good by
the common Law release before it took effect but by conscience, 1 R. 3.

H. 8. H. 8. Testament, Revoke use.
54 One make a Feofment to the use of his last will and Testament, and
declares by his Testament that the Land shall be to the use of his Wife for
Life, and afterward to the use of Revoke Expressed upon Livery.
his Son in tail, in this case he may change his Will and the uses at his
pleasure, because it is referred to his Testament per Bradwell capit. Just.
communis banci and Fetchlers and Inglefield Just. in communi Banco, 19 H. 8.
11. and 30 H. 86. Feofment 47.

30 H. 8. Covenant,
55 If I do covenant with I. S. that when he shall infeof one of three Acres, I
and my Heirs and Assigns will stand seized of other Lands to his use. If I.
make a Feofment unto Notice,
me that has no notice of this use, yet it I. S. do infeof me of their Acres,
the Feoffee shall be seized to the use of I. S. because it is a Springing
Springing use,
use, and the land is charged with that use in whose hands soever it come, but
if I. have feoffed, and they sell the said land to me that has Sale.
no notice of the use, there the second Feoffees shall be seized to their own
use, 30 H. 8. 6. Feofments al use 50.

Temps H. 8 Fundamentum legum imperpetuum.
56 If I do buy lands and the Seller executes an Estate unto me, habendum
imperpetuum, without saying to my Heir, the meaning of the Bargain being that I
shall have the Feesimple if the Seller do refuse to make further assurance, I
may compel by sub poena per Audley Cancel. temp. H. 8. and liber qui dicitur
fundamentum legum Angliae B. consc. 25.

34 H. 6. Pet. in Canc. Sale, Profits, Executor.
57 The Feoffee upon trust sold away part of the Lands, and received money for
it, and the rest he kept, and took the profits, and dyed; the Feoffor per Bill
in Cancel. recovered against the Feoffees Executor the money received, the
value of the profits, per decretum in Cancel. ex assensu omnium Justice. and
aliorum de Concilio Regis praesentium pet. in Cancel. de Anno 34 H. 6.

CHAP. III.
Of Copy-holds.
32 H. 6. Put out Lord.
TEnant at will by Copy of Court Roll shall have a sub poena against his Lord,
if he put him out of his Ten^men^, per Kirkby Magistrum Rotulornm, and Pool
Sergeant, in Canc. 32 H. 6. 21. Stat. sub poena 2.

Note, Littleton Sergeant said, that he saw once that Tenant by Copy Court Roll
sued a sub poena against his Lord, and it was holden by the Justices that he
should recover nothing; but Daaby chief Justice of the common Pleas said, that
the Judgment was so given because he sued to have recovered the Freehold
whereunto he being a Copyholder could have no right, 7 E. 4. 19. sub poena 6.
Tenant per Copy 10.

CHAP. IV.
Of Chattels Real.
22 E. 4. Statute Merchant, Payment, Release,
ONe being bound in a Statute Merchant paid the money without having a Release,
and notwithstanding the Conusee sued Execution, the Question was whether the
Chancellor might grant a sub poena against the Conusee Fairfax Just. and Hussy
chief Justice of England said, that he might not, for it were no Witnesses,
Record. 7 H. 7.

Statute Merchant. Recovery,


reason that the Testimony of two VVitnesses should defeat a matter of R^cord,
Came^a Scacc. 22 E. 4. 6.

Richard Read had Execution of certain Lands upon a statute Merchant, and the
Debtor sold the Land to Sir William Capell who recovered the same by Default
with Voucher Termor,
against the Debtor, whereupon William Capell entered, and the Termor sued a sub
poena, and Falsify,
it was holden that if Read had no remedy to falsify this recovery, then he
should be restored Covin.
in the Chancery by sub poena, because it was done by Covin per Cancel. and
Hussy and Brian cap. Just. 7 H. 7. 11. and 12. b. consc. 8. and b. Faux 7 H.
7. Recovery, Receipts, Termor, In Prison, Beyond Sea.
Recovery 25*

If a Recovery be had against the Lessor, and the Lessor for years do not pray
to be received, if by that means he have no remedy at the common Law, he shall
have remedy in the Chancery, so that he were in Prison or beyond Sea, or had
any reasonable cause of his Default, per Conisby and Keble Sergeants, but
quaere it he had 3 M^. Use, Lease, Stat. 3 H. 7.

Fraud, Creditors.


no such cause, 7 H. 7. 10.

If one make a Lease for years, or grant his Lease for years to a use, this
grant and use is good notwithstanding the statute of Ann. 3 H. 7. cap. 15* uses
7. because the statute makes only these Gifts of Chattels void, which were
made to defraud Creditors, 3 M. 16. Feofments al use 60.

CHAP. V.
Of Chattels Personals.
37 H. 6. Debts, Obligation
IT was agreed upon between I. S. and I. D. that I. D. should have certain
Debts due unto I. S. by diverse persons, and I. D. did enter into Obligation to
I. S. for the Government of certain sums in consideration of the same Debts;
Things in Action.
and because there were but things in Action, and that I. had no remedy to
recover the Debts by the common Law, therefore I. D. sued a sub poena against I
S. to be discharged of the Obligation by conscience, and for so much as it
appeared that by his Contract no Duty could rest in I. D. therefore it was
decreed that I. D. should bring in the Obligation by conscience, for so much it
appeared, that by his Contract no Duty could rest in* I. D. therefore it was
decreed that I. S. should bring in the Obligation to be cancelled, or else
release to I. D. per Canc*cum No remedy
opinione omnium Justiciar. 37 H. 6. 13. b. Bar. 75. 6. consc. 4.

39 H. 6: Treason,
2 Sir Thomas Brown being possessed of certain Goods was attainted of Treason,
which Goods came to the hands of John Brown, the King by Patent gave the Goods
unto Walwine, and Walwine sued a sub poena against John Brown for the Goods,
who came into the Chancery by Jenney his Counsel, and demanded Judgment of the
sub poena, for that a sub Attainder, King, No remedy Detinue.
poena does not lie but where the party has no remedy by the common Law, and
in this case the Complaintiff may have an Action of Detinue, for the King might
have had the like Action, to whom it was answered by Greefield, being the
Complaintiffs Counsel, that the King himself can have no Action by the common
Forfeiture, Seizure, Record,
Law for Goods forfeited, until the Goods have been seized to his use, or else
that the Goods be proved to be his by matter of Record, and yet the King has
Election to sue for Court,
them in what Court he will, and so may his Patentee; also the Grantee can have
no Action for the Goods at the common Law without having Possession, Things in
Action,
had possession, seeing they were granted to him as things in Action, and the
Court held that the sub poena did lie very well, and John Brown was commanded
to bring in an Inventory Inventory, Fleet.
of the Goods against the next day, or else to be committed to the Fleet, in
Cancel. 39 H. 6. 26. b. conse. 6.

8 E. 4. 3. Procurator, Save harmless, Notice Oath, Court Christian, Affiance,
Damage, Promise, Folly.
A Clerk made I. S. his Procurator of his Benefice, and promised him by Oath
that he would save him harmless for the Occupation, the Clerk resigned unknown
to be the Procurator, and he was sued for the Occupation, and therefore sued a
sub poena. Jenney Apprentice said, that he ought to sue in the Court Christian
for the breach of his faith; as if one be affianced to a Woman, and then
forsake her, he is to be sued there and not here, the Chancellor said, that it
was true that he ought to sue there for breach of Oath, Si petit ipsum canonice
inimicitia; but he shall have remedy here for the Damages he sustained by the
not performance of the promise, Jenney said also, that it was his folly to
trust his word, and therefore he had no remedy, Quia Deus est Procurator
fatuorum, S E. 4. b. consc. 14. sub poena 7.

8 E. 4. Executors, Answer,
A sub poena was sued against three Executors, and one of them appeared, and
the Complaintiff prayed that he might be compelled to answer; Fairfax said that
he ought not to answer until his fellows appeared also; for in the Action of
the common Law one Executor One Executor,
shall not be forced to answer without his Companions, by the statute of 9 E. 3.
cap. 3. Also it may be that the others can show matter to abate the Bill of
which this Executor has no knowledge, the Chancellor said that the three
Executors Abate Bill, Notice,
are instead but of one person, viz. the Testator, and therefore one of them
being but a Member shall not be forced to answer until they have all appeared.
Also if he should answer, it might be that through his ignorance the other
should be concluded, which Ignorance,
were not conscience; also that statutes that ordain Process do not extend to
this Court, but if it give a little right this Court must obey it, 8 E. 4. 5.
because 15. Responder. 6.

9 E. 4. Obligation,
A sub poena was sued, because the Defendant had recovered upon an Obligation
by suit one Court, whereas in truth the Obligation was made in another Court,
by means whereof the Complaintiff could not be suffered to plead diverse Pleas,
which he might have pleaded if the suit had been pleaded in the right Court,
Foreign County, Action, Pleas.
and the Counselor said that the sub poena did well lie, because the Defendant
did against conscience, for he would not have the truth known, and therefore be
sued in a foreign County, and the truth cannot be so well known and tried in
any place as it may be in the County where it was done, 9 E. 4. 2. sub poena
10. b. consc.

9 E. 4.
6 Worsley and Middleton bought certain Obligation,
Wools price three pounds of Sir Henry Which, and were bound by several
Obligations, whereof one was of three hundred pounds, and Miadleton had all the
profit of the Woolls; Sir Henry died and made his Executrix, against whom
Worlsey sued a sub poena, showing in his Bill Receive part, Longer day,
that whereas she had received a part of the money of Middleton, and had given
him longer day, yet notwithstanding she had put in suit against Woolsey;
Catesby for the Defendant said, that though ^he had respited the suit against
Middleton, yet Worsley is not to have advantage by it, for by Law and
Conscience she might Discharge, Election,
have sued which of them she would; and if she had granted to Middleton that she
would never sue him, yet that is no Discharge to Worsley; the Chancellor said,
that at first she might have chosen to sue the one or the other, but seeing
that she had made a covenant in the law of nature Respite, Suit,
between her and Middleton to respit the suit against him, that shall give
advantage to Worsley, for she has chosen to be paid by Middleton, Payment by
one.
and if he had either paid her, or else that it were agreed between them that
she should take it up of a stranger which is indebted to Middleton, Worsley
should have advantage of that, 9 E. 4. 41. sub poena 12. b. consc.

16 E. 4: Defraud Gift, Sanctuary, Husband and Wife,
7 A Debtor made a Gift of all his Goods to another to the intent to defraud
his Creditors, and keep still the Goods in his own possession, and took
Sanctuary at Westminster, and died, the Goods coming to the hands of his Wife,
who took another Husband, against whom (being possessed of the Goods) the
Creditors sued a sub poena, and the Husband was compelled to answer to it, per*
curiam cancel: 16 E. 4 9 consc. 19. it seems the Gift wa^ void in Law.

16 E. 4. Surety,
One was Surety for another, and the Debtor with two others were bound by
Obligation to the Surety to save him harm less, afterward the Surety paid the
money and sued his Obligation against the principal and the two others, which
suit depending the principal sued a sub poena against the Surety to have
certain Goods Goods,
out of his hands which he had delivered unto the Surety for his security,
before the making of the Obligation, and so prayed that he might Double charged,
not be double charged, wherefore he prayed redelivery of his Goods, the
Defendant answered that his Goods were delivered for another cause, and showed
the cause, and thereupon they were at issue; and the Complaintiff prayed an
Injunction that the Defendant should not Injunction.
proceed in suit upon the Obligation, but the Court denied it, because the
Defendant had entitled himself by several means, as well to the Goods, as to
the Obligation, and therefore it were against reason to delay his suit, quoth
nota, 16 E. 4. 9. b. consc. 20.

One was Surety in a statute Merchant, paid the money without having a
Release, and notwithstanding 22 E. 4. Statute Merchant.
that the Conusee sued Execution, the Question was whether the Chancellor might
grant a sub poena against the Conusee; Fairfax Justice and Hussy chief Justice
of England said that he might not, for it were not reason by the Testimony of
two Witnesses to Witnesses, Record, Obligation, Acquittance.
defeat a matter of Record, and so it is of an Obligation, for the Debtor may
refuse to pay the Debt without any Acquittance, it is his folly to pay the Debt
twice then to avoid Accord or Specialty by two Witnesses, and the Chancellor
Common course,
said that it was the common course of the Chancery to grant sub poena upon an
Obligation so satisfied, and that thereof there are Presidents.
diverse Presidents in the Chancery, but he agreed that no sub poena does lie
upon statute, because it is matter of Record, in Came. Scacc. 22 E. 4. 6. b.
consc. 23.

22 E. 4. Recovery, Payment, Release, Acquittance,
10 A Bill exhibited containing that whereas the Defendant had recovered Debt
and Damage against the Plaintiff, and was paid without any Release or
Acquittance, yet the Defendant had sued Execution notwithstanding, and because
the Complaintiff had no remedy by the common Law, he prayed a sub poena, but
the Chancellor would not grant it without advice of the Justices; for by that
means every Record Record.
might come to be examined before him, and so the common place should be
destroyed, 22 E. 4. sub poena 16.

4 H. 7. One Executor,
11 One Executor released unto a Debtor without the consent of his Companion,
by means where of the Will could not be performed, and the other Executor sued
a sub poena against Release, Testament,
the Executor which released, and against the Debtor, Fineux Sergeant said, that
it was not remediable, for every Executor has Sine remedia, Common Law,
an absolute power by himself, the Chancellor said, Nullus recedat a cancellor.
sine remedio, and it is against reason that one Executor should have all and
release alone, Fineux, Si nullus recedat sine remedio nullus indiget esse
confessus, but the common Law is ordained for many matters, and some such as
are remediable by the common Law, are to be relieved in the Chancery.
Chancery, and diverse are remediable by neither, Consoience.
and such are in conscience between a man and his Confessor, of which sort this
is one; the Chancellor* said that every Law is or ought to be according to Gods
Laws, and Gods Law Gods Law
is that one Executor being of evil disposition should not spend all the Goods,
and if such an Restitution, Willing, Damned, Joint power, Pro salute animoe,
Mispend, Argue.
Executor being able do not make restitution, or being unable be not willing to
make restitution, he shall be damned in Hell, and the Testament is, Constituo
tales esse executores meos ut ipsi disponant. So that their power in conscience
is joint and not several; and also it is pro salute animae meae, wherefore
they must not mispend, if they do, they do contrary, then it is without
Warrant, and to be remedied in conscience, and the Chancellor that he would
have the matter argued, 4 H. 7. 4. sub poena 17. b. 7 H. 7. Obligation
Acquittance, Bar, 7 H. 7 Simple Contract, Debt Executors.
consc.

If the Debtor pays Debt wherein he was bound by Obligation, and receive
Acquittance, this is no Bar at the common Law, and yet to be relieved in
conscience, per canc. 7 H. 7. 11. If one be indebted to me without Writing, and
he dye, I have no remedy against the Executors by the common Law, but in the
Chancery by Conscience, per canc. 7 H. 7. 12.

20 H. 6. Petic. in Canc.

Goods, Trust, Promise, Sale, Detinue, Wager of Law, Damages.


Thomas Baby exhibited a Bill, that whereas he delivered certain Goods of trust
to the Defendant, and thereon borrowed twenty sh. to be paid at a day certain,
at which day he paid the same, and the Defendant then promised to deliver the
Goods on the next morrow; yet the Defendant before the morning sold the Goods
to a stranger, to the end that if the Complaintiff should sue an Action of
Detinue he must wage his Law; and it was decreed in curiam cancel* Doct. and
Stud. Obligation, Payment, Acquittance. Stat. 27 E. 3.

Stat. 31 H. 6.

Robbery, Spoil, Seaports, Subject.


that the Complaintiff shoul recover his Goods and fourteen sh. for six Spoons
parcel thereof, Pet. in Canc. 20 H. 6.

If one be bound in a single Obligation, pay the Money and take no Acquittance,
or if he take one and happen to lose it, he shall be compelled by the Law to
pay it again, but yet he may be helped by sub poena, Lib. Doct* and Stud. cap.
12.

Note that the statute of 27 E. 3. cap. 13. and Anno 31 H. 6. cap. 4. do give
authority to the Chancellor to hear and determine Robberies and Spoilings upon
the Sea, or in the Ports* as well in the Cases of Subjects as Strangers. v. hic
fo. 58. casu pro and 3.

CHAP. VI.
Of Chattels in trust.
2 E. 4. Obligation, Sue.
IF I. be bound unto I. S. to the use of I. D. there I. D. may sue a sub poena
against I. S. and compel him to sue an Action of Debt against me upon the
Obligation, per Moil and Danvers Junsticiarii in communi Banco, 26. consc. 6.

4 E. 4. Money, Obligation, Administrators.
2 I. S. delivered two hundred Marks to the Chamberlain of London to be kept,
and appointed the same to be delivered to his Executors or Administrators after
his Decease to be employed for his Soul, the Chamberlain delivered the Money to
I. D. to keep, and I. D. entered into Bond unto the Chamberlain to the use of I.
S. that he would re-deliver it to the Chamberlain when he should be required;
I. D. died, and the Administrators sued a sub poena against the Chamberlain to
compel him to sue I. D. upon the Obligation, because I. D. had refused to
deliver the money for the Chamberlain, 4 E. 4. 34. b. consc. 10. and b.
prohibicon. 11. b. Oblig. 40.

7 E. 4. Goods, Trespass, Appeal of Robbery,
3 Note that if I give Goods to another to my use, and they be taken from him,
he is bound in conscience to sue an Action of Trespass against him at my
charge, and to my use, but not to sue an Appeal of Robbery, because the
Appellant must swear that his Appeal is true; and I cannot compel him to take
that Oath,
Oath, per Chock Just. and ^ittleton Serj. and Brook thinks the reason to be
because the Defendant in the Appeal may challenge the Combat, Combat.
and bring the others life in adventure, 7 E. 4. 29. sub poena 6. b. Feofments
al use 38. and b. consc. 27.

7 E. 4. Stat. Staple,
4 One was bound in a statute staple unto I. S. and I. D. to the use of I. S.
and afterward I. D. released to the Debtor, whereupon I. S. sued a suh poena
against I. D. and the Debtor, and rehearsed his Bill that the Debtor had
knowledge that the Obligation was to the Complaintiffs One releaseth,
only use, that the Release was made by Covin between them to defraud him of
his Debt, and it was ordered in the Chancery that the sub poena should stand
good against I. D. because Notice,
of his Deceit, but the Debtor was discharged of the suit, because it is lawful
for every man to help himself, and to procure the Discharge Covin.
of his Debt, especially seeing that I. D. might have molested him for the same;
also it might be that the Debtor had paid I. D. and it Fraud,
were no reason that he should pay it again to I. S. and it was alleged for
the Complaintiff that if I deliver Goods to another to keep to my use, if he
sell them to one that knows the Deceit,
use of the Goods to belong unto me, I may have a sub poe^a against the Seller
and Buyer Discharge, Goods,
both, and so in this case, whereunto the Court answered that it was so in that
case, because the Buyer did purchase Goods which in conscience are mine, but in
this case by the Release the Debtor purcha^eth nothing but only discharges
Notice, Sale,
himself, but the Reporter thought that the difference made between a Purchase
and a Purchase,
Discharge was not good; for the Debtor is not cleared in conscience and before
God unless he to whom the Debt in conscience appertains Policy,
do discharge him, or if he exclude him of his Payment to one*
Debt by policy it is not good conscience, but if the Creditor had paid the
money unto I. D. it would have discharged him against I. S. 11 E. 4. sub poena
13. 6. b. consc. 17.

5 If one be bound to another to any use, and the Obligee knowing the use do
release to the Obligor, I may have a sub poena against the Obligee, per
cancellariam* 7 H. 7. 12. sub poena 18.

CHAP. VII.
Of Aliens.
Stat. 27 E. 3. Merchant. Robbery,
THe statute of Anno 27 E* 3. is, that if any Merchant privy or stranger be
robbed of his Goods upon the Sea, and the Goods so robbed come into any parties
hands within the Realm, and he will sue to recover the said Sea,
Goods, he shall be received to prove the said Goods to be his own by his work
or by his Chart. or Caket, or by good and lawful Merchants, privy or
strangers, and by such proofs Proof,
the same Goods shall be delivered to the Merchant without making other ^ute at
the common Law, Stat. Anno 27 E. 3. cap. 13. Merchant 12. 2 R. 3. Chancellor
alone.
Note that by this statute the Chancellor alone without any of the Justices has
power to proceed to Judgment, 2 R. 3. 2.

Stat. 27 E. 3.
2 Also the statute of 27 E. 3. is, that if Debate arise betwixt the Mai^r and
Constables of the Staple and such Merchant stranger as shall be assigned to ^it
with them upon discussing of Staple,
any plea or quarrel touching Merchants Aliens, the Tenor of the same Plea
shall be sent Debate,
before the Chancellor and other of the Kings Counsel to be determined there
without delay, Stat. 31 H. 6.

Seaport, Amity, League, Truce, Safe Conduct,


Anno 27 E. 3. cap. 24. staple 17.

3 If any Subject attempt or offend upon the Sea, or in any Port within the
Realm against any person stranger being upon the Sea, or in any Port aforesaid,
by way of Amity, or League, or truce, or by force of the Kings safe conduct or
safeguard in any matter, and especially in attaching of any such strange
person, robbing oq spoiling him of his Ship or Goods, or against any other
person of his Lay People, the Chancellor as well for the deliverance of such
person attached, as to make Restitution of Ship or Goods or the value thereof,
shall have authority calling to him any of the Justices upon a Bill of
Attachment, Robbery,
Complaint to him made to make such process of the Chancery, as well against
such Offenders to bring them into the Chancery to answer, as against any other
persous to whose hands any such person so attached, Ship or Goods shall
Delivery, Restitution,
come, and for the Deliverance and Restitution by them to be made as shall seem
to the Chancellor most necessary, and upon this Process the Chancellor further
to proceed in this matter if Justice* Possessione^,
the case do so require by advice of any such Justice to make the person
stranger so grieved to have full Deliverance and Restitution of his Goods, etc.
and also of all the Costs, Expenses Costs, Expenses, Execution,
and Losses made and suffered by him in this behalf, and thereupon to make all
manner of execution upon the same out of the same in such sort as shall seem to
him necessary for such Deliverance and Restitution to be had, calling him to
any such Justice as aforesaid, statute 31 H 6. cap. 4. Aliens. First, note that
by this statute the Alien that complains must sue in the 2 R. 3. Assistant.
Chancery before the Chancellor assisted with one of the Justices. 2 R. 3. ^.

13 E. 4.
4 A Merchant A^ien bargained with one to carry certain Bales of Merchandises
to Hampton, the party took the Bales and carried them to another place, and
brake them up, and took out the Merchandises, and conver^ed it to his own use,
and the Alien complained to the Starchamber, Felony,
Counsel in the Star Chamber; the Chancellor that although this Fact be F^lony,
yet it shall be tried before the Counsel, and not at the common Law, because
the Complaintiff is a Merchant alien, and is come by safe Conduct, and it shall
be de ermined according to the Safe Conduct, Law of Nature, De ^oram hora,
Statutes, Juris Naturae, Law Merchant.
Law of Nature of the Chancery, and he may sue there from hour to hour, and from
day to day for the speed of Merchants; also he said, that strangers shall not
be bound by our statutes which are introduct. jura legis by stat^te that are
Deliberativa antiqui juris, viz. juris naturae. And although that by their
being in the Realm the King has Jurisdiction to compel them to abide right,
yet that shall be secundum legem naturae, which is called by some the Law
Merchant, which is an Universal Law through all the World, in came^a stellata,
1. 3. 2 4. 9. Denison. 2. b. D^nisen 5.

Safe Conduct, Enrolment, E. 4.
5 The Chancellor said, that whereas there is a statute that safe Conducts
in^olled, and the number of Mariners, and the name of the Vessel; yet if any
Alien have a safe Conduct, and have not those circumstances therein, the safe
Conduct notwithstanding shall be allowed, and so has been adjudged; for the
Aliens do say, Statutes, Notice, Forfeiture.
that they are not bound to know our statutes, and they do come into the Land by
Warrant of the Kings Seal and safe Conduct, and if it shall not be sufficient,
they are defrauded; but others says the statute which ordains for the
Forfeiture of Merchandise shall bind as well Aliens as others in camera
stellata, 13 E. 4, 10. b. Denisen 5.

13 E. 4.
6 Note that it was said in the Star Chamber that a Denizen shall not sue an
Alien before Denisen, Suits, Alien. 13 E. 4.

Safe Conduct, Robbery, Waive, Pursue the Law, King (...) In corpore, In bonis,
Covenant.


the Counsel, but an Alien may sue a Denizen, and it was said, that it is by
force of the statutes, 13 E. 4. 10 Denisen 26. Denison 5.

If any Alien having a safe Conduct be robbed, and the Goods waved by the
Felons, yet the Alien shall not be compelled to sue the Law against the Felon,
neither may the King have the Goods as a Waive, nor any other by the Kings
Grant, or by prescription, because the King has granted unto him salvum and
securum conductum tam in corpore quam in bonis, which is a Covenant between the
King and him, and he may sue the King upon the same, per omnes Justiciarios in
Camera stellata, 13 E. 4 10.

19 E. 4. League, Common Law, Real Actions, Enemy, Safe Conduct,
Note that an Alien born under any Prince which is in League with the King may
sue at the common Law all Actions of Debt and personal Actions, but not real
Actions; but if he be born under the obedience of the Kings Enemy, then the
Alien has no Action or Suit unless he come by safe conduct; and note that if
all England do make War with a foreign Prince which is in League with the
King, yet if the King do not assent thereunto it is not Open War.
open War, for the League must be broken by Embassage, or otherwise by the King,
19 E. 4. b Denison 16. and 20.

2 R. 3. Star Chamber, Robbery, Sea* Possessions, 27 E. 3.
A Merchant of Spain exhibited a Bill before the King and his Counsel in the
Star*chamber, against certain English men, and showed that he was robbed upon
the Sea by certain Britains, and that his Goods were brought into England, and
are come to the hands of the Defendants, and prayed Restitution according to
the statute de Anno 27 E. 3. cap. 13. and it was said by all the Justices that
the Complaintiff must prove that the King of Spain was in League League,
with the King at that time, and the taking of the Goods also, he must prove
that the first taker Kings obedience, Enemy, Restitution.
was under the Kings obedience, or else in amity with the King, and not the
Kings Enemy, for if the taker were the Kings Enemy, and robbed the Complaintiff
being the Kings Friend, yet those Goods being come to English men's hands shall
not be restored, Quia non est depredatio sed legalis captio prout inimicus
capit super immicum, in camera stellata, 2 R. 3. 2. 6. Denisen 8.

CHAP. VIII.
Certain Statutes giving special Power to the Lord Chancellor.
1 H. 5. Additions,
1. IN every original Writ of Action personal, Appeals and Indictments, in
which the Exigent shall be awarded to the names of the Defendants addition
shall be made to their Estate, Degree, or Mystery; and the Town, Hamlets, or
places, and the Countries in which they were or be conversant, and the Clerks
under Clerk,
whose names such Writs shall go forth written shall not leave out the Additions
upon pain to be punished, and to make Fine to the King Fine.
by discretion of the Chancellor, stat. de Anno 1 H. 5. cap. 5. Additions.

Stat. 2 H. 5.
2 If any person make Complaint duly in the Chancery, that any Murders,
Man-slaughters, Assemblies of people in great number in Murders, Fly,
manner of Insurrections, and Rebellions, Routs, is or be*fled, and withdrawn
in Woods, secret or unknown places, or elsewhere to the intent to avoid the
execution of the Law, upon such Complaint a Bi^l shall be sufficiently made for
the King, and the Chancellor after such Bill to him delivered (if he may be
duly informed that such Bill contains truth) shall have power according to
his discretion to make a Writ of Capias at the Kings suit to the Sheriff where
the Offenses are supposed to be done, ret. in Chanc. then they shall be put in
Award or Mainprise after the discretion of the Chancellor, and moreover he
shall send to inquire of such Stat. 8 H. 6. Certificate, 33 H. 6. This granted
by Pet. in Canc. English Bill. 33 H. 6. 1. part. Stat. 4 H. 7. Justice of Peace.
Offenses, and upon that shall be done as the Law requires: and if the parties
stand out, then a Proclamation shall be awarded, ret. in the Kings Bench, and
upon Default they shall stand convict and attainted, stat. Anno 2 H. 5. cap. 9.
Riots 5. This statute is made perpetual, and it is enacted that the Capias
shall not be awarded unless it be witnessed by two Witnesses of peace of the
County where such Riots be supposed, that the common voice and tame is of the
same Riots, stat. Anno 8 H. 6. cap. 14. Riots.

3 If any person be hurt or grieved in any thing, that the Justices of peace
may hear, determine or execute in any wise, he is commanded to make Complaint
to the Justices that dwell next to him, or to any of his fellows, and desire a
remedy, and if he have then no remedy if it be nigh such times as the Justices
of Assize come into that Shire, that he then show his Complaint to the same
Justices, and if he then have no remedy, or if the Complaint be made long
before the eoming of the Justices of Assize, and then he so grieved come unto
the King or to his Chancellor, and show his Grief, and the King shall send for
the said Justices to know the cause why his Subjects be not eased, and his Laws
executed, and if he find any of them in Default of executing of his Laws in
the Premises, he shall cause him so offending to be put out of the Commission,
and to be punished according to his demerits, stat. Anno 4 H. 7. cap. 12.
Proclam 3.

Stat. 11 H. 7. Poor People.
4 Poor people having cause of Action against any person, shall have by the
discretion of the Chancellor Writs Original, and Writs of sub poena, therefore
paying nothing to the Queen for the Seals, nor to any person for the writing of
them, and the Chancellor shall assign Clerks to write the same, and also
learned Counsel and Attou^nies for the same, without any reward to the King
thereof, stat. Anno 11 H. 7. cap. 12. Poor People.

5 If any Farmer of any lands belonging to the reparation of Rochester Bridge do
not like to give for a new Lease as another will, then he shall have for his
hettering or building such Recompense Stat. 18 Eliz. Rochester Bridge.
as shall be thought reasonable by Agreement between the Wardens and Assistants
and him, and in Default of their Grievances, such as shall be thought meet by
the Chancellor or Treasurer, stat. Anno 18 Eliz. cap. 17. Bridges 2.

St. 21 H. 8 St. 14 H 8 Merchant, Strangers, Search.
A statute was made concerning the exercise of Trades by strangers Deni sens in
Anno 14 H. 8. cap. 2. and there was a Decree and an Act made that search should
be made by all strangers being Artificers and Hous^^lders for Offenses against
that statute, and if they refuse, and the same proved before the Chancellor, or
before the chief persons of such Cities or Town, the Refuser shall use no
longer his Occupation, stat. Anno 21 H. 8. cap. 6. Aliens 4.

Stat. 33 H. 8. Fa^se token or letter.
6 If any person falsely or deceitfully obtain into his hands or possession any
Money, Goods, Chattels, Jewels, or other things of any other person by color
or means of any false token or counterfeit Letter made in any other man's name,
the Offender being convict by Witness taken before the Lord Chancellor, or by
Examination of Witnesses, or by Confession taken in the Star Chamber before the
Counsel, or before the Justices of Assize in their Circuits, or before the
Justices of P. in their General S ssions, or by Action in any Court of Record
shall have such correction and punishmeut by Imprisonment of his Body, setting
upon the Pillory or otherwise by corporal pain (except pains of Death) as shall
be appointed by the person before whom he shall be convict, stat. 33 H. 8. cap.
1.

37 H. 8. Tithes in London.
If any variance arise in London about the payment of Tithes, and upon a
Complaint made to the Mayor, he not end the same within two months, or if any
of the parties themselves grieved, then the Chancellor upon a Complaint to him
made within three months next following shall make an end of the same with
such Costs to be awarded as shall be thought convenient. stat. Anno 37 H. 8.
cap. 12. Tithes 9.

CHAP. IX.
Certain Statutes giving special Power absolute to the Lord Chancellor,
jointly to others.
Stat. 31 E. 3.
THe Chancellor and Treasurer taking to them Justices and other of the Kings
Counsel, such as to them shall seem meet, shall have power to ordain remedy
for the buying of Fish.
Stockfish, and Botulph, and Salmon of Barwick, and (...) Bristr^^^, and
elsewhere, to the Wines*
intent that the King and the people may the better be served, and have better
markets than they have had before this time* and that the ordinances by them
made in this party, be sirmly holden. Stat. de Callice. 31 E. 3. cap. 5.
Fishers 4.

Stat. 19 H. 7. Corporations. Ordinances.
2. No Master, Wardens, and Fellowships of Crafts or Mysteries, nor any rulers
of Guilds or Fraternities, take upon them to make any ordinances, or to execute
any acts by them heretofore made, in disheritance or diminution of the
Prerogative of the King, nor of any other, nor against the common proffits of
the people, but if the same acts or ordinances be examined and approved by the
Chancellor, Treasurer, or chief Justice, or three of them, or before both the
Justices of Assize in their circuit in the Shire, where such acts and
ordinanees be made, upon pain of forfeiture of 40 l. for every time that they
do the contrary. Stat. de Anno 19 H. 7. cap. 7. Corp. 2

Stat. 14. H. 8. Aliens.
3. If the Ward^ns, and Masters of Fellowships of handicrafts, within any City
or Borough, or Town Corporate, where such Wardens be, and in such where no
Wardens of handicrafts are, then if the Bailiffs, or Governors of the Boroughs
or Towns will wrongfully entreat any stranger, in executing of the Stat. de
Anno 14. H. 8. then the stranger so grieved, may by b^ll or information
complain to the Chancellor, or Treasurer of England, or to the Justices of
Assize in the County for the time being, which by their examination shall have
authority to hear and determine the same Complaint, and to award to the
Complainant such amends, as by their discretions shall be thought reasonable.
Stat. Anno 14. H. 8. cap. 2. Aliens 3.

4. The Tables to be set up in the City of Stat. 22 H. 8. Scavage, or Chevage.
London, touching Scavage within the same, shall be first viewed, examined, and
approved by the Chancellor and Treasurer, the President of the Counsel and the
Lord Privy seal, the Lord Steward and the two chief Justices, or by 4. of them
at the least* and by them subscribed, Stat. Anno 22 H. 8. cap. 8. Aliens.

5. If any Printers, or Sellers of Printed Stat. 25 H. 8. Prises of Books.
Books, do inhance their prises in sale of binding, at too high and
unreasonable prises, in such wise as complaint be made thereof unto the King,
or to the Chancellor or Treasurer, or either of the chief Justices, then they,
or two of them shall have authority to enquire thereof as well as by oaths of
1^ persons as otherwise by due examination by their discretions, and after the
same so found, then they, or two of them from time to time, shall have
authority to redress such inhaunsing of prises by their ^retions, and to limit
prises as well of the books, as for binding them, and moreover, that the
offender being convicted, forfeit for every book by them sold and inhaunsed 3.
s. 4 d. the one half to the King, the other to the party grieved, that will
complain. Stat. Anno 25 H. 8. cap. 15. books.

28 H. 8. Prices of Wines.
6. The Chancellor, Treasurer, President of the Counsel, Privy Seal, and the
two chief Justiees, or three of them, shall have authority by their discretion
to set prices of all kind of Wines, that is to say, of the prices of the But,
Tun, Pipe, Hogshead, Ponchen, Teirce, Barrel or Rundlet, when it shall be sold
in gross, so that they or any of them cause the prices by them set to be
written, and open Proclamation thereof to be made in Chancery, in Term time, or
eise in the City, Borough, or Town, where any such Wines shall be sold in
gross, 28. H. 8. cap. 14 Wines, 20.

Stat. 34 H. 8.
7. The L. Chancellor, Keeper of the Great Seal, Treasurer, President, Privy
Seal, and other of the Privy Couusell, the chief Justices, or three of them at
the least, whereof the Lord Chaneellor; Keeper, Treasurer, President or Privy
Seal to be one, upon complaint made in writing, shall have Authority to take
order with the bodies, lands, and goods of Banckerupts, for the payment of
their debts. Vide Stat. Anno 34 H. 8. cap. 4. Banckerupts.

Banckerupts.
And thus much of the Absolute power of the Lord Chancellor his Judicial
power; the which poor barren Treatise I have not presumed to collect, either
for instruction of hi Honor (from whose wisdom I have always thought nothing
can be hidden) or for ostentation of my reading and experience, (who do freely
acknowledge my self the most ignorant man of my profession) but to this end,
and with this intention have I done it, partly to provoke some good matter from
those learned Lawyers, and skillful Antiquaries that are Attendants uupon his
Lordship, and especially for satisfaction to his desire that did demand it, and
may command me.

Sic litabant Mola qui non habcbant Thuca.
FINIS.
An ANALYSIS.
IN the Office of the Chancellor of England are six things to be considered.

I. HIS ANTIQUITY in Office and not in name, which h^th been from the time of
the first Creation of Kings, and Rulers, And he was called AMONG the Hebrews,
Mazcre. AMONG the Grecians, Nomophilax. AMONG the Romans, Praetor.


In OFFICE and name, which has bin from the time of Charles the Great King of
France.

IN OFF CE and name in England, which has bin from about the time of King
Edward the Confessor.

II. The ETYMOLOGY of his name.

Either a Cancellando Iniqua Concessa Regis, viz. by cancelling or disallowing
the unjust Grants of the King, by withholding them from the Seal, until the
King may be better informed, according to the verse, (Et mandata pii principis
aequa fuit.

Iniquas leges, viz. by cancelling the rigor of extreme laws, in tempring them
with Conscience, according to the verse.

Hic est qui leges Regni cancellat iniquas.
RECORDS, viz. Of Cancelling such Records as ought to be made void, which may
be either by drawing of cross lines over such Records, and by entering of a
(vacat) in the Margent* declaring the cause of the Cancelling; Which may also
be either by Judgment given in the Court, for admitting such Record, or else by
personal agreement of such party or parties, as it only concerns. Or by
plucking the Records from the File. And this ought not to be done but by
authority of Act o^ Parliament.

Or ^ Cancellis, for that he fitteth in Judgment within certain limits or
bounds. etc.

III. His constitution, which has bin, and may be in two sorts, viz. By
Letters Patents, which has been but rarely used, and I find only three of them
of Record.

Walie^ Gray, Bishop of Chester, and Chancellor, by Patent dated Anno 7 Regis
Johannis.

Ralph Nevill, Bishop of Chichester, and Chancellor by several Patents, one
bearing date Anno 11 H. 3. the other Anno E7. ejusd. Regis.

One other in the time of H. 6.

BY DELIVERY of the Great Seal unto his hand and custody, which delivery is to
be entered of Record, wherein is to be noted, that the Keeper of the Great Seal
had the Seal delivered in diverse manners.

It was delivered to the Chancellor by the King, and immediately he took an
Oath for the faithful exercising of the Office of Chancellor, and then he
sealed Writs therewith alone.

It was delivered to the Keeper of the Great Sease without any Oath, and
therefore he did not commonly Seal therewith, but in presence of some of the
Masters of the Chancery.

IIII. H^S preheminences* viz.

Unto him are substituted all the Chancellors in England, Ireland, Wales and
Scotland, and a^l they that have charge of any the Kings Seals wheresoever,
beside the Lord Privy seal, By prescription.

The punishment of (Scandala magnatum) to be inflicted upon them that misreport
of him by the Statutes of W. 1. cap. 33. and of Anno 2 R. 2. ca. 5.

He may wear in his apparel, Velvet, Satin, and other Silks of any color,
except purpu^^, and any manner of Furs, except black Genets, of what estate or
degree soever he be by the stat* of 24. of H. the 8.

He must follow the Court, and at all times be near the King, by the Statute
called Articuli super Chartas, Anno 28. E. pr. cap. 5.

He may have three Chaplains qualified, whereof ever^ one may purchase
dispensation to have two Benefices, by the Statute de 21. H. 8. cap. 13.

To s^ay him it is Treason, declared by the Statute of 20 of Edw. the 3d. cap.
11.

If he be a Baron, or above, h^ shall sit in the Parliament, on the left side of
the Chamber, on the higher part of the form on the same side, above all Dukes,
except such as are soon, Uncle, Brother, Nephew, or Brothers or Sisters Son
to the King, and also above all Officers, except the Vicegerent. And if he be
no Baron, he shall sit at the uppermost part of the Sacks in the midst of the
Chamber, and in such degree he shall si^ in the Star Chamber, and in all other
Assemblies, and Conferences of Counsel, by the Statute Anno 31 H. 3. cap. 10.

He is a Conservor and Justice of the peace throughout England, by prescription.

He is the only Visitor of all Hospitalls, and Free-Chappels, which be of the
foundation of the King, or his Progenitors, by prescription.

He is Prolocutor in the higher house of Parliament, by prescription, etc.

V. Places of his Judicial Session, viz.

CHANCERY, where he is the only Judge assisted by the Master of the Ro^s, and
the Masters of the Chancery, and hears and determines causes of Law and
Conscience, as Chancellor.

COUNSEL chamber, where he is associated with others of the Privy Counsel,
and hears and determines canses of Estate, as a Privy Counselor.

STAR Chamber, where he is associated with the Lord Treasurer, President of
the Counsel, and Privy Seal, and associated with one Bishop, one Temporal
Lord of the counsel, and two Justices, and hears and determines, perjuries,
causes penal, and of Common peace, by the Statutes of Anno 3 H. 7. cap. 1. and
21 H. 8. cap. 20. as a special Judge.

EXCHEQUER chamber, where he is associated with the Treasurer; and associated
by the Justices, and other Sage persons, and examineth, and reverseth or
affirms judgments given in that Court by the Statute of 31 E. 3. cap. 12. as
a special Judge.

VI. HIS Authority and power, which is of two sorts, viz. As a Judge, and that
is either ORDINARY as in these.

Scire fac* or execution upon a Statute Merchant, taking acknowledgement of
Recognizances.

Scire fac. or execution upon a Recognizance knowledged in the Chancery.

Scire fac. to repeal Patents which are void or faulty.

Monstrance de droit, Petition de droit.

Traverse of Offices, and Inquisitions.

Pleas and Enterpleas, upon assignment of Dower.

Pleas and Enterpleas upon livery, and ouster le maine.

Pleas and Enterpleas upon partition.

Attachments upon contempts, in not executing of Writs and Process by Officers,
or upon signification of untrue or insufficient causes thereof, writs de
Corodio^, or Pencor habendo, unto Abbots, Priors and Bishops.

Andita querela, sued upon suits in the Chancery.

Prohibition to stay proceedings in the Court Christian, or Admiralty, and
consulation to be granted thereupon.

Originalls, or Bills by persons privileged in the Chancery.

Originals, or Bills against persons privileged there.

Writs of Privilege, sued by persons privileged, to remove suits in other
Courts into the Chancery.

AND DIVERSE other of like so^t.

ABSOLUTE, and by this power he orders and decrees matters of Conscience,
and the pleadings are in English; whereas in his ordinary power, he holds
plea of matters according to the form of Common Law, and the pleadings are in
Latin.

AS a MINISTER, GRANTING of pardons of Common Grace.

GRANTING and sealing of Commissions, OF patents and preservations, etc.

MAKING of Original Writs of Process, upon the Statute Staple, etc.

CONSTITUTING of certain Officers belonging to his Office.

GIVING of Oaths to Officers, And such like.

FINIS.

