A DECLARATION By Direction of the COMMITTEE AT YORK, TO Their deluded and
oppressed Contrymen.

ALSO The Letters, with the Propositions and Articles sent to the Earl of
Newcastle, upon which he entered this County, and his Answer thereunto.

With Observations thereupon.

Printed at York by Tho. Broad. 1645.

A Declaration by the Committee at York, to their deluded and oppressed
Contrymen.
WHen the Royal presence and the train of a number of Malignant Nobility was
lately among you, when Courtly, curious, and cunningly penned Language was
written, and uttered in your hearing, when you saw so many of the Gentry of
this County your Neighbors and Landlords flock to York, and adhere to, and
assist the conspirators and contrivers of that opposition and force against the
Parliament of England, which since has broken forth, and been manifested to
all the Kingdom. It is no great wonder though the Common sort were deceived
and came up in such flocks to Heworth-Moore to do service to the golden
Idol. But do but look a few years beyond that, and you may see several
oppressions upon the Subject by all manner of Monopolies and Extortions of
money; Laws trodden under foot, Justice set to sale in every Court, from the
highest Bench in Westminster Hall, to the Sessions and Commission of Sowers in
the Country. The purity of the Protestant Religion stained with Popish,
Arminian, and other new invented Doctrines, and that by Authority, and out of
Pulpits; and the true Worship of God turned into apish and popish inventions of
men: Popery grew fast and received favor, and the true Protestant Ministers
suppressed and disgraced. And Parliaments (which were the proper and only
remedy to help all this, and the rest of the diseases in the politic body)
not only abandoned, but by Proclamation declared a high crime, for any one to
say there should be a Parliament called, and there was none in fourteen
years; in which time the distempers of the Kingdom by such misguidance grew so
deadly, especially by the Scottish Army raised in defense of that Nation, and
brought into this to prevent inroades into their own, by the forces raised by
instigation of the Prelaticall party, that in the end this Sovereign
Parliament was summoned by due course of Law, and so established as never
Parliament was before, by the highest confirmation this Kingdom can give, and
not to be dissolved against their wills, unless by the sword of Traitors. When
this Parliament had sitten a while, and had been courted by granting several
convenient Laws to sweeten the bitterness was past: This bridle of Tyranny
and sovereign purge of the Commonwealth, and Churches Maladies, could no
longer be endured, by the Prelaticall and Malignant party, and that which no
Jesuiticall craft could dissolve, is resolved upon, the Sword must, and after
many bitter reviling words from York in Declarations and Answers against the
Parliament, (of which the Law says, No man ought to think dishonourably)
Within this unhappy County, (and by it) which will be an infamy to the Actors
for ever, notwithstanding all the applawces for it by the Court, as they had
many; the first allowed Arms were taken up, and the Commands of Parliament
disobeyed, and their Messengers and Officers with Scorn abused, and the
Judgment of that most Honorable Court which is the eye and reason of the
Commonwealth in the question of the Militia contemned, and the opinions of
private men admired and advanced, which the Laws of this Kingdom never
appointed, nor is of any value. When the King by the assistance of the
Malignant Gentry of this County whose names are hereafter mentioned, had in
order to these opinions of flattering aspiring Lawyers about the Throne, of
which it never wanted, more (then a good many) had seized upon the Militia of
this County, the King with some of that Militia departs into the other
neighbor Counties to do the like, and by the same Gentry the first Illegal
and unjust Assesment of eight thousand pound is put upon the Country to
maintain some part of that Militia left behind, to suppress the Laws, and
the rest of the Gentry, who obeyed the Judgment and Direction of the
Parliament; but this was opposed as a thing against Law, so much bragged on,
should be the square of Government, and an oppression which made but way for a
greater, as in short time it proved, rising from 8000. to 30000 l. by month,
and afterward to 80. thousand l. per mensem. When these Gentlemen's unlawful
powers assembled at York could not defend such their unjust proceedings, nor
their persons from the Justice of the Parliament, nor the forces raised to
suppress these trespasses and traiterous acts against the State and Law, they
conspire to call into the County the Earl of Newcastle, then under censure of
Parliament for High Treason, and a Semi-papian and an Athisticall person, as
was more declared afterward by that horrid crew he brought in with him, and
they press him by arguments of Service to the King and his own Honor to come
to their assistance, which was in truth to protect themselves against the
Justice of the Parliament. Newcastle entertaines the motion, upon terms of
horrible oppression to the Country, and to serve the Queen. And these
oppressors of their Country agree to all, and especially to that Proposition
about the Queen, and promise any further contribution to that good service.
And by a second Letter, magnify the Earl of Newcastle for his entertaining
the invitation, and make vows of honor and obedience to his Lordship, and tell
of their distresses for Loyalty to the King, when they are about traitorously
to destroy both the Law, and the Parliament, the fountain and bulwark both of
Law and Justice, and consequently the Kingdom, and so to make him a King of
bruites and not reasonable men. This Lord thus courted, checks at one Article,
omitted, which was the maine one to enrich his Popish Tyrannical Officers and
Minions with a full pay; and if that be granted, then his little Lordship is in
a huge disposition to be really the faithful Servant of these complotters and
enemies to the State, as he afterward proved, being the Leader, ( Judas like)
to these betrayers of Christ and his Cause, but are since fallen backward to
the ground as that Band of men did. At the Rendition of Pomfret Castle there
was found the Original Letters by which this bargain was made with the Earl
of Newcastle by the Conspiratours to sell their Country, and all that was of
worth in it to that Popish Commander and Army: which Letters being showed to
the Commitees for that County attending at York, and by them duly considered
of, it was agreed and thought fit that those Letters should be Printed, and a
Declaration upon them, that posterity might see who had been the chief
destroyers of their Country.

The Letters are these being examined by some of the Committee appointed for
that purpose, and the Originalls remain in safe hands to be seen by any man
that shall desire it.

My Lord,
IT is the desire of us, and the most of the Gentry of this County to crave
assistance from your Lordship in this time of Mr. Hotham's infesting the
Country; which favor we shall always acknowledge from your Lordship, and we
are the bolder in this business, because we know it to be a great Service to
his Majesty, by the preservation of this County, and will be much to your
Honor, to preserve in peace and safety.

My Lord, Your Lordship^ most humble Servants. York, Sept. 26. 1642. Savile*
George Wentwo^th William Savile Tho. Gower, Vi. Co. Henry Slingsby Peter
Middleton John Key. Iobn Ramsden Fardinando Leigh John Mallery Francis Nevill.
Tho. Ingram John Goodricke. Richard Hutton. William Ingram. Robert Rockley


Noble Gentlemen,
I Have received from you a Letter of invitation by the hands of Sir Mar.
Langdale, and Mr. Aldburgh, and shall (for the esteem and affection I bear in
general to the Country, being my native Country, and in particular to many of
you to whom I have the Honor to be known) be ready to contribute my best aid
and assistance in that work, since it is likely to conduce to his Majesty's
Service, and peace and quiet of all his good Subjects, and to conclude this
agreement, I have sent you enclosed certain Propositions, which by way of
Articles should be drawn, and signed and s^aled by you, and as many more as
you shall engage in that work, which I shall expect from you before I march.
And so presenting my Service to you all, I remain,

Newcastle, Sep. 30. 1642. Your most faithful Servant, W. N.

To the Right Honorable, and my Noble friends the Nobility and Gentry now
assembled at York for his Majesty's present service.
Propositions in answer to your Letter of Invitation.
FIrst, that I have all your consents and promises that the Army be paid
whilst they are in that County.

That an Assessement be laid upon the Country to enable you for that
undertaking, and that if money be not gotten in time, that I may have free
Billet for the Soldiers, for which Billet you are to engage your selves to the
Quarters, and that the Officers be paid according to his Majesty's present
establishment, out of that Assesment.

That there be some of the Gentry of that Country appointed as a Committee,
enabled by the rest of the Gentry, to agree and conclude of such further
Propositions as may happen to be necessary for this Service, and not here
mentioned, and to march along with the Army, whose council and assistance from
time to time I am resolved to use.

That I have assurance that all manner of Provisions fit for an Army, be
prepared and brought to the Army the first day it enters.

That since this Army was levied, a purpose to guard her Majesty's person, that
it shall not be held a breach of any engagement betwixt us, if I retire with
such numbers, as I shall think fit for that service.

W. N.

My Lord,
WE have received from your Lordship an Answer to our Letters of Invitation,
(Noble as your self) which shall we hope make you the Master of such a work
of Honor, as besides your great Service it will be to his Majesty, shall both
enoble your self farther and oblige us. We have signed and sent unto your
Lordship, Articles proportionable to your Lordships desire (as we conceive,)
besides a particular power to those Gentlemen now with you, more fully to
declare our selves. My Lord, believe this, That we suffer here no distresses,
but for our Loyalty to the King, and your Lordships favor to us will equally
oblige both; therefore, Good my Lord, make all possible speed to march hither,
or to send some force before, lest a little delay make all our endeavors
fruitless; and in the general, believe that their is nothing in the power of
us, or of this County, which shall not faithfully serve you, and more you
cannot expect from,

My Lord, Your most faithful and humble Servants. H. Cumberland Savile Tho.
Gower, Vi. co. William Savile Henry Griffith Henry Slingesby Edward Stanhope.
John Key John Mallery Ferdinando Leigh William Ingilby John Ramsden George
Wentworth Conyers Darcy Robert Strickland. William Wentworth. Ingram Hopton.
John Goodricke. William Wentworth. John Batty. Richard Hutton Francis Monckton
Robert Rockley W. Thornton


The Answer of the Nobility and Gentry of Yorkshire, assembled at York for His
Majesty's Service to the Propositions sent unto them by the Right Honorable
the Earl of Newcastle.
1. THat your Lordship shall have our consents and promises, the Army which
your Lordship shall bring with you into this County for the defense thereof,
shall be paid by this County.

2. There is an Assessement of eight thousand pounds already laid upon this
County, which shall be levied as soon as by your Lordships assistance we are
enabled to do it, and that till money be gotten in, your Soldiers shall have
free billet, for which we will engage our selves to the Quarters; and for the
payment of your Officers for the Army, it is referred to the Committee for this
County, who have Instructions and power to treat and conclude with your
Lordship in that particular.

3. There shall be a Committee of some of the Gentry of the County appointed,
and enabled by the rest to agree, and conclude of such further Propositions as
may happen to be necessary for this service, not here mentioned, and to march
along with your Lordships Army, whose council and assistance we desire your
Lordship may use, the names of which Committee we send your Lordship
herewithall, who are appointed to attend you at Newcastle, and to march along
with your Army, when you enter into the County.

4. That as soon as we have notice of your Lordships march, we will use all
possible means to bring to your Army all such provisions, as this Country can
afford.

5. We are tender of the safety of her Majesty's person, that we shall not
only consent to your Lordships performance of that service, but will also
contribute our utmost endeavors to assist your Lordship therein.

6. Lastly, we have appointed our Committee to be, Sir Edward Osborne, Baronet,
Sir Marmaduke Langdale Knight* Francis Tindall and Richard Aldburgh Esquires,
and given them Instructions and power to treat with your Lordship and to
conclude in such particulars as may further conduce to this Service, or in
these Propositions admit a doubtful interpretation,

H. Cumberland Savile Tho. Gower, Vi. co. George Wentworth Conyers Darey Robert
Strickland. William Savile Henry Griffith Henry Slingesby Edward Stanhope John
Key John Mallery Ferdinando Leigh William Ingilby John Ramsden John Savile.
William Wentworth. Ingram Hopton. John Goodricke William Wentworth. John Batty.
Richard Hutton Francis Monckton Robert Rockley Francis Nevill. Walter
Haukesworth.


My Lords and Gentlemen,
I am to give you many thanks for your favorable Letter by Mr. Aldburgh, and
the signing so far my desired Articles, which had no other end, then the better
to enable me to serve you. And I beseech you give me (...) as I intend
faithfully to serve you, so to deal clearly and freely with you, which I hold
a duty; The truth is, I am very sorry you pleased to leave out the Article for
the Officers pay, or coldly referred it to your Committee, being the principal
thing in all the Articles, for you know the Souldier^ is encouraged with
nothing but money, or hopes of it, and truly yesternight when I was going to
bed, there came Colonels and Lievtenant-Col. and said, they heard you had left
it out, and for their parts, that they must think, that if you were so
cantious not to grant it is paper, before we came in, they doubted very much of
it in money, when they were there, and that the workman was worthy of his hire,
and such like discontented words; so the truth is, rather then not come
cheerfully to serve you, I will not come at all, for I see beforehand I shall
either disband with a Mutiny, or fall of plundering without distinction,
either of which would be destructive to me: and besides, I hold my self free,
since my Articles are not signed for I never understood any of those Articles
to be referred to the Committee, but such things as we could not remember, and
the present occasion offered. Could I pay them, or his Majesty's you should not
have had such an Article, but since that cannot be, ^ou will pardon me in
telling you how I am capable to serve you* and how not, and so I rest in a huge
disposition to be really

Newcastle, Oct. 30. 1642. Your most faithful Servant, W. N.

Observation.
IT is plain out of the first Letter that these Gentlemen began with a false
Insinuation, to term themselves the most of the Gentry of Yorkshire, who are
not the fourth part of them. In it they call Captain Hothams coming to
Doncaster, which was by command of the Parliament of England to assist the Lord
Fairfax to set up the Militia, (an infesting the Country) They invite Athists,
Papists, and who ever will to come to join with them, the better to enable
them to oppose the resolutions of the Parliament, and call it great Service to
the King and preservation of the Country, which was the ruin of the Country
that bred them, and more service to the Pope then the King. That Lord so
invited, yields presently to that bait they call Honor, but inthralls them
with Articles to oppress the Country by Assessements which no Law warrants, by
Free Quarter which the known Laws forbid to be taken without Authority of
Parliament, and they pawn their cred(...) poor County shall pay for all, and
(...) did. They are careful to guard her Majesty's person, who had no care for
the five Members of Parliament. They tell that Lord, he shall be Master (as they
hope) of a work of Honor, etc. which was to burn Bradford, much of York, and
numbers of other houses; to rob, plunder, and imprison the well-affected of the
County. They would have his Lordship believe they suffer no distress but for
loyalty to the King, which was but a sconce for their own protection from the
Justice of Parliament* In the second Letter, They tell that Lord his favor to
them shall oblige the King, and promise there is nothing in the County shall
not faithfully serve him, so he will serve their turns, and in a great part
they perform it; their bodies, their estates, their wives, their daughters,
were his servants, and his servants servants too: nay, their consciences, the
Gospel, and true Ministers of it were made to serve that Papisticall crew. The
proud Haman, because he had all things but one granted him, by their Articles,
(which was his Officers pay) that not granted or coldly referred to a
Committee, without this also he lightly values all the rest, and will not come
to their assistance. Thus Countrymen you see how you and all yours, what ever
is dear to any of you, has been bought and sold by these Gentlemen, who in
stead of peace and preservation to the Country, have brought in War, Bloodshed
and ruin upon it; and in stead of Honor to his Lordship, both he and they
like blazing comets are gone out in a stinch, which will last for ever.

It was thought fit to publish in Print one Letter more, found in the same
place, which is the proper hand writing of Cap. John Htham, written to the
Enemy when he was the professed servant to the Parliament, Hear the Letter. My
Noble Lord,
I have found out a way to do his Majesty real Service, and to be your
Servant without scandal; for I confess nothing went hard, but that I could
not come in to your Lordship in such a condition as befitted him that you
esteem worthy your friendship. I shall desire you would by this Bearer send me
a safe conduct for form sake, not that I desire or care for it: if you could
write me but a word what my L. Fairfax has done, I could make great advantage
of it in this business, for I think you will see such a considerable party
brought to the King, as has not been yet; all which he is to thank you for. I
shall add no more because I shall wait on you so soon, but to desire the
countenance of your good opinion, to

Lincoln, April 15. 1643 Your most affectionate servant, John Hotham.




By this secret contrived treason of his against the Commonwealth, and for
which he suffered death is more discovered, and that righteous sentence cleared
and ratified.

FINIS.

