LOVE AND HONOR, Written by W. DAVENANT Knight. Presented by His Majesty's
Servants at the Blackfriars.

LONDON, Printed for Hum: Robinson at the Three Pigeons, and Hum: Moseley at
the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1649.

Dramatis Personae.
The old Duke of Savoy His brother The Duke of Millaine
Disguised like Ambassadors. Alvaro, Prince of Savoy Leonell, Prince of Parma
Prospero, a young Count Caladine, an old Counselor Vasco, a Collonell Altesto
Frivolo Tristan
Officers and Soldiers. Evandra, Heir of Millaine Melora Sister to Leonell An
old Widow Lelia, her Maid Boy Musicians Soldiers Servants
The Scaene Savoy.

LOVE AND HONOR.
Act 1. Scaena 1.
A Retreat being sounded as from far, Enter Vasco, Altesto, Frivolo. Vasco.
Hark boys? they sound us a retreat? this skirmish (sirs)
Was no rare pastime to continue at;
It Is saffer wrestling in a bed; give me
Henceforth your white faced foe, a plumpe fair enemy
That wears her head piece laced; I Am for a cambrick helmet, I.

Altesto. And yet these mighty men of Millain got
But little by the sport; some of them shall
Vouchsafe to wear a single arm heareafter,
Two wodden legs too, and limpe their days out
In an Hospital.

Frivolo How? an Hospital?

Vasco. A rode, a rode; your highway sir is now
Your only walk of state for your maimed soldier.
Your Hospitalls and pensions are reserved
For your maimed Mercer, decayed sons o'th shop,
That have been often crackd not in their crowns
Like us, but in their credit sir.

Frivolo. And placket squires, that have bin long diseased
In their Lords service; a score of ducats
Shall bribe them into place, where they may sleep,
And eat, and pray too, but with breath so much
Unwholesome, the air can hardly purify't
And make it fit to reach near heaven.

Altesto. Well, the surprise o'th cittadell, wherein
The Duke had placed his daughter, with the Ladies
Of her train, and treasure too, was a service
Of most rare work.

Vasco. Just when they sallied out
To cut our Rere in pieces, then steal in
By Ambush wisely laid, and make them all
Our prize, was miracle.

Frivolo. They say his daughter escaped, and fled, with her
As her best guard, one they call Leonell
Enter Tristan. Whom our Count Prospero pursued.

Vas. Tristan? Welcome; is all our pillage waggond
Shall it to night see Turin?

Tristan. Alls safe my lusty leader; our horse too
Have sounded a retreat; and the foe sneakes*
He walks with his hands in's pockets like a skipper
In a frost.

Vas. Well, let me reckon my estate;
First a widow prisoner.

Altesto. Mine Is a maid prisoner,
Young my Vasco, she is yet in her first blush,
And I Have dispatched her unto Turn too
My Mothers house, thy prisoner in her company,
They are acquainted.

Vasco. You have the luck; these bald chinnes are as familiar
With their good stars, as with spur-rowells,
Play with them, and turn'em which way they please;
I fought as well as he; and yet (forsooth)
His prisoner must be fair, and young, and mine
So old she might have given Hercules suck,
Now she sucks too, for she has no teeth left,
In one month she will cost me as much in cawdles
And sweet candy, as her ransom comes too.

Fri But you have other pillage Captain.

Vas Let me see, 3 Barbary horses with rich
Caparisons, 2 Chests o'th Generals cloths.

Alt. And I 2 chests o'th Generals plate.

Friv. In those I share Altesto.

Uasco How? plate? shall we encounter our sowe'd fish
And broyld Pullen in silver service rogues?
Like furred Magnificoes?

Frivolo. We shall Captain, but you may dip your morsel in good china earth.


Altest. All your plate Uasce, is the silver handle
Of your old prisoners franne.

Enter Prospero (wounded) and Evandra (her arms in a scarf Piniond.) Trist.
Here comes Prospero the valiant Count.

Uas. And with him the brave prize.

Pras. Evandra do not mourn, I that have made
You captive thus with hazard of my youth
And blood, shall think you now as worthy of
My care, as of my volour in the fight;
Can I esteem you less by being mine?

Evand. What have I done (unknown unto my heart)
That I should tempt your valor to so great
A (...) as my captivity? or are my crimes
Observed more than my prayers, that heaven shall leave
Me to become the scorn of victory?

Pros. It is the sad pre-eminence of your
Exemplar birth, and beauty, to conferr
Honor on him that is your conqueror.

Evan. Honor? is that the word that has so long
Betrayed the Emulous world, and foold the noblest race
Of men, into a vexed and angry death?
If 'twere a virtue 'twould not strive t'inthrall,
And thus distress the innocent.

Pros. I am the wars disciple, and since first
I had the growth to wear a sword, I nere
Was taught how to subdue by reason but
By strength. Altesto?

Altesto. My Lord.

Pros. Take here this Lady to your charge, conduct
Her unto Turin, and there guard her in
My house till my approach.

Altesto. I shall my Lord.

Pros. Let her be safe Altesto in thy care
On forfeiture of life, she is my prisoner
And the noblest in the field, the beauteous
Heir of Millaine; had not my niggard stars
Intended me but half a courtesy,
The Duke her Father had lamented now
Under the same fate.

Vasco. I could wish your Lordship would believe me,
A fitter man, to take charge of the Lady.

Pros. Why Captain?

Vas. You could not commit her to an Eunuch
With more safety; if the great Turk knew me
(Honest Achmet) he would trust me in's Seraglio
(By this hand) without defalking one grain beneath the waste.

Pros. Success has made you wanton Cap.

Uas. Besides (my Lord) I have taken an old Abesse
Prisoner, O such a Governesse for a
Young maid, she will read to her such homilies,
And teach her such receipts out of the Fathers,
How to cure the toothach, preserve plumms,
And boil Amber possits, will make her sir
In three days a very St.

Pros. Well you shall take my bounty too close by
The valley that does join to the neighbor grove
Lies conquered by my sword a Millain knight,
His wounds medcin'd, and stopped by the best art
I had, but by much loss of blood unable yet
To move, him, and his ransom I bestow on you,

Uas. I thank your Lordship

Pros. But use him nobly Uasco; for he hard
A courage that well merited his cause,
And fought with eager and with ssillfull, strength
To free that lady from my bonds, but the glad day was mine.

Vas. He shall be kindly used,
Only your sweet lordship must give me leave
When he pay's his ransom to weigh his gold,
Were he my father, sir, he must endure
The trial of my scales; follow Tristan.

Pros. Make haste; see him well waggond, and provide
A surgeon to attend his cure.
Ex Vas. Trist.
Evan. Sir, can you find no pity yet within
Your breast? you have already shown enough.
Of your stern fathers spirit, is there not
In all your heart so much of softnes as
Declares you had a mother too, must I
Be led a captive, land in a cruel land
Lament your victory?

Pros. Altesto, be are her from my sight? make haste?
I am not safe, when I converse with tears.
Exeunt Altesto, Evandra. I would ambition were not brave in war?
Or that the rage of Princes had not made
It lawful to subdue whom they dislike,
Or 'twere ignoble to inflict a misery,
As to indur't our selves; Frivolo, where
Did thou leave the prince?

Friv. In pursuit of the Duke, who since we hear
Recovered Millaine, which causs'd him sound us.
Drum march afar off A retreat, -- hark sir, his march leads hither;
It is his way to Turin.
Enter Calladine. The prince, the prince; my Lord Prospero
You have been sought for, the valiant prince
For this day's action has advunt'd you to
The public ear, and we your friends rejoiced.

Pros. I did but as his bold example gave
Me fire; I saw him conquer kill, and lead
In fetters sad Faces, which I (...)
Before, and I believed 'twas good; I wish
That heaven may think so too; I do converse
With books, but I have heard our enemies
(Although they wronged not me) must be so used.
Enter Alvaro, Soldiers stripping off his Corslet. Unbuckle Calladine, the day
is hott,
And our great business cooles like to their heates,
That fled to humbled Millaine, and have lest
Their fainting honor hovering over our crests,
Lead on my horse in triumph; I will march
On foot, he has performed his work, as he
Had equaled me in sense of what he did.

Call. Sir, Prospero the Count, whom your kind fears
Pros-kneeles kisses his hand So heartily inquired for in the retreat

Alva. Pass noble youth, and let me hold thee near
My heart, join thy stout breast to mine that we
May grow a while together in our love,
Yet when divided, be the same in thought
And act, this day then have begot an history,
And given our Savoy Chronicles a theme
To teach them boast, and be believed

Pros. Alvaro? my dread Prince; why should you lose
Your praise on me, that did but imitate
The faintest of your vigor, and your skill?
You bred me from my childhood to do things
That they call glorious, though (dull and much unlearnd)
I cannot teach the cause of what I do,
More than your example, and command.

Alva. Since thou gott'st strength to wear a sword, thou have
Been mine, and t'hath been drawn to execute
My will, and though (I know not why) thou wast
A verse to arts, and written labors of
The wise, yet discipline of war thou lov'dsts
And bring thee to a (...) steed, him thou
Would sit, and manage with such gentle rule
That our Idolatrous Philosophers
Believed thou had created, whom thou I caught'st

Pros. Your love will breed me envy sir; something.
I Have done (since you are pleased to vallew so
My weaker toils) which may perhaps deserve
Your fathers thanks, and yours, and's yet unknown
Unto you both, Evandra, heir of Millaine,
I have sought for, taken prisoner, and sent
To Turin, a reward for our just war.

Alva. Hah! the fair Evandra made prisoner?
And Prospero by he?

Pros Why should you think him whom you praised
So much, unfit for such a victory.

Alva. Now all the blessings of my faithful love
Are lost; she whom I doated on with my
Most chaste, and early apetite, is sent
In bonds, t'apease my cruel fathers wrath.

Call. My Lord, he loved her much though temp'rately
Conceald from general knowledge, and his friends.

Pros. Then mount my courser Frivolo, and try
If by the happy quickness of his speed,
Thou can recover her return, and use
Her with such fair respective homage as
May expiate my violent surprise.
Ex. Friv.
Alva. Fly, fly; I would thy nimble motion could
Oretake the arrow from the Assyrian bow,
Or swifter lightning whom our fight pursues
And is to slow to reach.

Pros. What have I done, that I should thus mistake
An act of valiant glory, for a deed
That argues an austere Ignoble rage?

Alv. Fair Evandra, the pide of Italy,
In whom the Graces met to rectify
Themselves, that had not cause enough to blush
Unless for pity they were not so good
As she; think now the Eastern spices sweet,
And that the blossoms of the spring perfume
The morning air; necessity must rule
Belief, lets strew our Altars with them now,
Since she is imprisond, stifled, and chok'd up
Like weeping Roses in a still, whose Inarticulate breath
Heaven through a purer sacrifice than all our orizons.

Pros. Is she not fitter then
For Turin, than for Millaine sir? I saw
You take prisoners, and in my fury had
Discretion to atchieve the best.

Alva. O thou have lost my heart; hence does proceed
This recreant act, that to thy savage courage
I could never join the temperature
Of sweet Philosophy; had thou been learnd,
And read the noble deeds of gentle knights,
Reason had checked thy rage, thy valor would
Have been more pitiful than to have lead
A virgin into harsh captivity.

Pros. I thought I had done well.

Alv. How! well? draw back that falsehood in thy breath
Again, or I will pierce thy heart, that thou.
May dye Impenitent.
Draws his sword, Call. stays him. Vnhand me Callandine, I Have already met
My better thoughts; why should I waste my wrath
On such a forester? wild as the woods,
Where he should graze with the brute heard, who though they want
Discoursive soul, are less inhumane far than he.

Pros. She was the daughter of our greatest enemy,
And so I used her sir.

Alva. A choleric Bear; or hungry Panther would
Have used her with more soft remorce; had I
Incounterd her in the mad heat of chase,
In all the fury of the fight, I would
Have taught my angry steed the easy and
The peaceful motion of a lamb,
She should have set his back, soft as the air,
And in her girdle bridle him, more curbed
Than in his soaming bitt, whilst I her slave,
Walked by, marking what hasty flowers sprung up,
Invited by her eye-beames from their cold roots;
And this would each true soldier do, that had
Refined his courage with the sober checks
Of sweet Philosophy.

Pros. Would you had taught me some Philosophy
Before I learned to fight.
Enter Frivolo. All hope is past; she was conveyed in one
Of your swift chariots sir, which it does seem
Altesto did unhappily oretake,
And she is ere this within our Turnt walls.

Pros. Such language and such news better become
The fatal birds of night, so Ravens croke
When they fly ore the mansions of the sick
And bode their deaths.

Alv. Prospero, see me no more,
Thou Art a disease unto my injurd sight:
Fly to some lustful coast, where none but Goats
And Satyrs live, where the name of virgin is
As strange as this thy cruelty, there thou
May hope to wander not contemned, should I
Behold thy face again, and let thee live,
My patience would become my vildest guilt.

Call. See, sir, he weeps; can you endure him mourn
And languish thus, whom heretofore you did
Embrace in the chief ranek of love, not moved
(Sir) with his tears?

Alv. No more than to behold
The pudled channel overflow; he saw
Her weep, and could indur't; the drops fell down
Me thinks, as when the pitteous Pelican
Wounds her remorsefull hreast.

Pros. Sir, have I in one hasty moment, so
Far merited my ruin that no means
Is left to win me to your former grace.

Alv. Never, unless thou could restore
Evandras liberty, she is ere this
Within my fathers reach, whose nature is
Severe, and mortal to her fathers blood,
An ancient vow he took, will make her destine.
So sad, I fear to think on it, poor Evandra.

Pros. I sent her in good conduct to my house,
Where is a cave, so art fully cenceld
Within my gardens verge, that not the suns
Most prying beams, not humane search
Can ere discover it, He hide her there,
Till time and apt convenience can dispose
Her unto Millain.

Alva. Fly then, loose not the sick hope with slow
Pursuit, fate keep her from my father.

Pros. I^ strive to groan away my breath, and die.
Exit Pros. Cornet flourish afarr off.
Frivo. Hark sir, the Duke your father sure
Does ride in triumph through the town, to meet
And celebrate your victory.

Alva. Give order that our troops march, march slowly on;
Our Drums should now in fable cases beat
Our colors soulded, and our Muskets be
Reverst, whilst our dejected pikes we traile,
But that I fear, it would breed inquiry in
My father of a cause, he must not know,
O Callandine Evandra is in bonds.
Exit. Enter Vasco, Tristan, Leonell wounded and led.
Vasco. Prepare the wagon Tristan, spread a matt in 't
And (do here) bid my Ancient tear of's collors
For a coverlet, it is thine sir, all our shift?

Trist All Is ready sir, ith bottom of the hill,
He shall used like a Queen when she lies in.

Vas. Softly Tristan, he moves as weakly as
His sinnewes were of spinners threads, so cut
And carved; he has made your skin, sir, only
Fit to be worn in summer; this Prospero
Is a Turk when is whinyards drawn, and shines in's eyes.

Leonell He used me nobly sir, when I had bled (could
My self past strength to conquer him, we
I hope to find such mercy in an Enemy,
Less I had fallen beneath the force of your
Alvaro, Prince of Piemont.

Vas. I there is a man; it is true, Lord Pros. poro vallant,
I think he dares meet the devil in Duel,
And give him two flashs of lightning odds, but
He wants that they call learning sir, Prince Alvaro;
Is (as they say) a philosopey man:
He takes of Rabins, and strange Hebrew roots;
Things we dull Soldiers hither learn then mention.

Trist. He can tell you sir how many showers fell
Since Noah's flood.

Vas. I, and how many cloakes those showers have wett.

Leonell. Have you no knowledge of the Lady sir
That was surpised from my protection by young Prospero?

Vas. Good; was ever creature of heavens making
So libidinous as paltry man? now
Has he a mind to the Lady? she sir,
Is safe in Turin, whither strait we mean
To lead you too.

Leon. Some comfort yet, it is decreed I must
Endure my bondage where she suffers here is,
Poor Evandra's was fater so niggardly
She could allow no more protection for
Thy beauty than my single fortitude?

Trist. Come move on sir, it will be late ere we
Shall reach the town.

Leon What other for tune had the bat tail?

Ves. We swadled your Duke home he and the rest
Of your bruised countymen have woundrous need
Of capon's grease.

Leon Strange giddiness of war; some men must groan
To further others mirth, what fury rules
Ore humane sense, that we should struggle to
Destroy in wounds, and rage, our life, that heaven
Decreed so short? in is a mystery
Too sad to be temembred by the wise,
That half mankind consume their noble blood,
In causes not beloved, or understood.
Exeunt.
Act. 2. Seane 1.
Exter Vasco, Frivolo, Tristan. Fri. You have heard the proclaimed law Vasco.

Vas. I would there were no law, or that no man
Were learned enough to read em, or that we had
Courage enough not to obey them

Trist. Frivolo, what law is this?

Friv. It is proclaimed all female prisoners
After a year should have free liberty
To return to Millaine, and ransomlesse.
Only a year is given to us the conquerors,
That those we took of birth, and dowry may
(If we can woo them to consent) marry us,
But we have no power to use constraint, nor to
Enforce a maidenhead, on pain of death.

Vas. My beldam has taken order with her maidenhead
Ten years ere I was borne.

Friv. In The mean time Tristan,
As a requital for our hopes, we must
Maintain them at our own charge?

Trist. Must not the men we took pay ransom?

Vas. Yes, yes, they pay: I have a Knight given me
By young Count Prospero shall sell his spurrs
Ere he escape free, I will pawn him till he
Be worn toth' title of a Squire.

Frivo. Thou art as cruel as a Constable
That Is waked with a quarrel out of his first sleep.

Vas. Hang him bold Caraian, he indites finely;
And will live as well by sending short Epistles
Or by th'sad whisper at your gamsters elbow
When the great by is drawn, as any bashful
Gallant of em all.

Trist. But what is the cause our Duke is so severe
Unto the heir of Millain (whom it is said
Shall suffer instant death) yet is thus kind
To others of her sex.

Frivo. She dies to satisfy
A vow he made in's youth, when those of Millain
Took his brother prisoner, and would not be
Appeaz'd without the for feiture of's head.

Trist. I am not yet instructed Frivolo,
Why should not then the rest we took die too?

Frivo. Evandra is a sacrifice for all;
His other mercy takes from th'crueltie
He shows on her.
Enter Altesto
Vas. From whence Altesto comes your loftiness?

Altest. Why, from the Duke; I had laid me
For breakfast a fine comfortable ginne.

Vas. What was it, a wench?

Altest. A rack Vasco, a rack;
A certain Instrument that will extend, and draw
Our sinnews into treble strings, and stretch
Our great shinne bones, till they become slender
As knitting needles, or a Spiders legs.

Vas. Did thou commit Treason? it is well thou have
A brain for any thing, the age requires
Parts, we cannot eat else; but quick, the cause.

Altest. 'Twas to discover where I left Evandra,
Whom Prospero delivered to my charge;
I answered a full truth, that I restored
Her to his hands, at his return to's house,
And this (as fortune would vouchsafe) the Duke
Believed without applying (Gentlemen)
The recreation of the rack.

Fri. But she is not yet found.

Altest. No, and the Duke believes her still In The Town.
Therefore a guard is placed at all the gates to hinder her escape.

Vasco. I do not like
This cutting off young wenches heads; it is thought
They cannot kiss hansomely without them.

Trist. But how does Prospero excuse her flight?

Altest. He says she is stolen away, but shows no manner how;
And the angry Duke, though he be precious in
His love, threatens him much.

Vas. Some Angel stole her from him, and Gentlemen
If I have any skill in Magic you
Shall see her three days hence pirking in a Cloud,
Southward of yonder Star; look up, just there;
With her Ivory Lute hanging at her back,
And working me a scarf of sky-colour'd Satin.

Altest. A halter (Vasco) to save the poor State
The charge of a penny, thou wilt have need on it.

Vas. What Is become of Melora, your fair prisoner?
You hear the Proclamation.

Altest. Yes, and am well pleased, I mean to woo, and marry her, she has
Twelve thousand crowns by good intelligence.

Vas. If she consent; but I am of the faith,
Such Suckets are but seldom swallowed by
Us wealthy Aldermen o'th Camp; a jointure
Is the word Altesto, and then you will show her
A young back with a Sword hanging over't,
Worse than a handsaw.

Altest. Just now I left her at my mothers house;
And sir Vasco, she looks, oh rogue, rogue!
A Flanders peake in the middle of her brow,
Which straight I spy, and shake, and melt, then speak
Fine language to her, and am dutious with
My Bonnet at her Instep thus --

Vas. Thou Have sound the way.

Altest. Then Vasco she moves back, discovering but
The very verge of both her picked toes,
But in white Shoes, and then I Am taken that
I stand like one of the Turks chidden mutes,
A girl in a Bongrace thus high may ravish me.

Fri. Alas poor Gentleman!

Altest But Vasco, her fiugers, by this good day,
I think they are smaller than thy point tags,
And she behaves them on the Virginass
So prettily, I Would wish no more of he ven,
Than once to hear her play Fortune my Foe:
Or John come kiss me now.

Vas. Those are tunes my old widow prisoner sings
With more division than a water work
When the maine pipe is half stopped.

Fri. You have a year allowed to woo her Vasco.

Trist. She Is rich; I knew her husband, he thrived much
By a monopoly he had of dead women's hair,
All Millaine talked of it; she kept another shop
Under St Maudlins wall, and quilted ushers Calves.

Vas. Well Gentlemen, let us waste no time, I Will to
My Barbers straight, purge, shave, and wash, for know
If cleanenesse and good looks will do it I Will teach
Her Grandameship to mump, and marry too,
Or my arts fail; Frivolo, you and Tristan
Follow me, I shall employ you both.

Altest. I am for Prospero, he sent to speak with me.
Exeunt. Enter Alvaro, Prospero (with a Key, and Lights.)
Pros. Sir, you have made me know my cruelty,
'Twas such incomely valor, that I blush
To name't, and trust me, could I sink low as
The Center whilst I kneel, still would I thus
Implore your pardon, and your love. Kneels

Alva. Arise, I have a memory so apt
To Advance my pity 'bove my anger when
It mentions thee, that I Will forget the cause
That made thy guilt, and me to mourn; but O,
This dismal place brings it again to thought,
This looks methinks like to the dark
And hidden dwelling of the winds, as yet
Unknown to men, where storms engender, and
The whirling blasts that trouble Nature till
She tremble at their force, and ruin all
The sumptuous piles of Art.

Pros. Necessity has caused this choice, till the
Severe inquiry of your Father be
Appeased, and we can shape her a disguise fit to
Convey her from the Town.

Alva. With soft and gentle summons call, that she
May clime unto the top, and verge o'th cave.

Prof. Evandra speak, ascend to us; I am
Your penitential Enemy, that come
To weep away my trespass at your feet.

Alva. Evandra, rise, break from this thick
And silent darkness, like the eldest light.
The Stage opens, Prospero lifts Evand. un.
Evan. Ha! my Lord the Prince?

Alva. O noble mind, what expiation can
Make fit this young and cruel Soldier for
Society of men, that has defir'd
The Genius of triumphant glorious war
With such a rape upon thy I berty?
Or what less hard than marble of
The Parian Rock, can thou believe my heart,
That nurc'd and bred him my Disciple in
The Camp, and yet could teach his valor no
More tenderness than injured Scythians use
When they are vexed to a revenge? but he
Has mourned for it, and sure Evandra thou
Art strangely pitiful, that do so long
Conceal an anger that would kill us both.

Evand. Sir, I am nobly recompensed, in that
You will vouchsafe me worthy of your grief,
And though I dye forgotten here (a poor
And luckless maid) lost like a blossom which
The injurious wind buries in dust, yet so
Much courtesy deserves to be remembered even in heaven.

Alva. Was this a subject fit to bear the pride
And insolent calamity of war?
As well had it become in the worlds youth
The Giant Race, to hunt with mighty spear
And iron shield, the soft and tender Ermine;
Evandra, I have loved thee much, and long.
Why do thou start, as if some jealous thought
Did whisper that my love devised this snare
To keep thee here within my power and reach?

Evand. I cannot think you are so cruel to
Your self, to afflict the thing that you esteem.

Alva. No beauteous maid, had I behold thy flight
In our stern exercise of wrath, I would
Have made the bloody field a garden fit
IN adorn the shows of a triumphant peace;
And every soldier like a reaper clothed,
Fitter to use his sickle than his sword.
Still thou recoyl'st like the chaste Indian plant, at the
That shrinks and curles his bashful leaves,
Approach of man.

Evan. I Have lost my reason, and I want the courage
To entertain you kindness as I ought.

Alva. Is it because my years a little have
Oregrowne my youth, or that the enmity
Our Fathers interchange begetts in thee
A factious hate, till't make thy duty sin?
But it is not possible thou can create
A thought will merit such a name.

Evan. The gentle business sir of love is fit
For hours more calm, and blessed than those
A captive can enjoy.

Alva. These are not words
To quiet me in sleep, and peaceful thoughts.

Pros. Nor shall I evermore relish delights
And triumphs of the court, or haughty joys
Of war and victory.

Alva. Evanara live, be yet some happiness
Unto thy self, and with the patience that
Becomes a maids divinity, relieve
Thy heart with easy hope of liberty,
Enforcing a content within this dark
And solitary cave, till I have power
With apt disguise to further thy escape,
Which shall be hastened with my ablest skill.
Believe me good Evandra, the honor of
My birth and soul shall warrant it.

Evan. You are a Prince renound, and precious for
Your faith, and courtesy.

Alva. Think not I Will use advantage, or constraint
Upon thy love, a virgins heart (I know)
Is sooner strok'd than checked into a kind
Surrender of her breast.

Evan. Sir, all the bounties that the heavens provide
For truth and clemency, fall on your still.

Alva. If thou suspect'st I Have not enough of cold
And holy temper to resist the flames
Of appetite, command that I shall see
Thee here no more, and my obedience strait
Shall be restraind within a sacred vow,
For I would have thy thoughts (Evandra) safe
As thy beauties are.

Evan. It were a crime
Greater (I hope) than I shall ere commit
To doubt such princely goodness can pervert it self.

Alva. Then I shall cherish oportunities
To hasten my return.

Evan. Not Angels sure when they converse, can meet
With less intent of sin, and more of joy?

Alva. Well, I must see thee often, thy wondrous eyes
Have softened all my spirits to a calm
And easy temper for thy sway, that I
Could change my corslet, and my iron vests
Of rugged war, to move in gentle pace,
Unto the tunefull whispers of thy Lute,
Still clothed in tender garments of thy work,
And for a plumed Helmet wear chapletts
Of flowers, in a mysterious order ranked
By thy white virgin hand, theu like thy neat
Ore'busie maid, bind up thy looser philetting,
And pleate in curles thy soft dishevelld hair.
I Will make my frequent visits here till thou
Confess how much I am subdued.

Evand. I am oppressed with fear, the watchful Duke
Your father should observe, unto this sad
Unusual place, your stolen approach, and then
My sorrows would be doubled in your danger.

Alva. Danger? how noble lovers smile at (such
A thought? it is love that only fortifies
And gives us mighty vigor to attempt
On others force, and suffer more than we
Inflict; would all the soldiers that I lead
In active war, were lovers too, though lean,
Feebled, and weakened with theit ladys frowns;
How when their valors stirrd, would they march strong,
Through hideous gulphs, through numerous herds
Of angry Lions, and consuming fire?
Knock within.
Evan. What doubtful noise is that?

Alva. It Is Colladine, I did appoint him here.
Stay Prospero, let him not enter yet;
O envious chance, must we depart so scone?
They put Evendra down in the cave. Descend like the bright officer of day,
Whilst darkened we thy beauteous absence mourn,
And every flower does weep till thy return?
Opens the door, lets in Calladine.
Pros. His looks declare there is hazard, and some haste.

Alv. What would thou? speak.

Call. The Duke your father (sir) is much perplexed;
He calls for Prospero, and it is feared,
Will torture him to find Evandra's flight.

Alva. He shall not yet appear; I will endure
His angers edge with venture of my self.
Stay till I send.
Exit.
Call. My Lord, I grieve to see your sorrows bear
So great a weight, as makes you groan unto
Your self; this silence, and fixation of
Your eyes, until unchanged objects cause
Them ache, is much unlike your wonted mind;
Suspect not but the Prince will qualify
His Father to a peace, and a more just
Interpretation of your worth.

Pros. Know Calladine, it is not Evandras bonds,
Nor all the torments that the incensed Duke
From cruelty or art can minister,
Have power to freeze, and fix me like a statue thus;
I have another cause that swells my heart,
Till 't grow too spacious for my breast.

Call. Alas sir! your favors have obliged me so
That I must share your grief, and 'twould perhaps
Afferd some remedy to share the cause.

Pro. I know not Calladine in the vast world
One I more love, or would so boldly trust;
But thou will think me mad.

Call. My Lord, I Will forget then my manners, and
My reason too.

Pro Come, thou shall know, I love --
How will thou smile to seem ambitious eyes
Look higher than the Eagle, when he soars
To elevate his sight? I love --

Call. Who is it you love?

Pro. Evandra; now mix pity in thy scorn.

Call. It Is sad the Prince and you should meet with so
Much violence in the same choice.

Pro. At first, in the rage of fight, I gazed on her,
With half discernings of her form, a mi^^
Of fury hung between us then, but since
That I have viewd her beauty with some care,
And seen how sweetly she demeanes her in
Calamity, I have orethrown my heart
With liking her too much.

Call. It will require great wisdom to persuade
In this, the cause is dangerous.

Pro. Would I had nere been born, then I had missed
The sight and memory of her, and my
Fond errors should have been as much unknown
As m' uncreated self.
Enter Altesto.
Alt. My Lord, your servant gave me entrance with
Command that I should speak with you.

Pro. It Is true; Altesto you have a maiden prisoner,
Called Melora; it is my request that you
Conduct her hither in disguise; though law
Newly proclaimd, allow no ransom for her,
You shall be paid your own demand.

Altest. I Will obey your Lordship, she shall attend
You straight; what use can he employ her to?

Prosp. Come Calladine, ease me with thy counsel.
Exeunt. Enter Vasco, Tristan, Frivolo, Lelia.
Vas. Is Lelia your own prisoner Tristan?

Trist. The powerful purchase of my sword.

Vas. What is she heir to? a brass thimble, and
A skeane of brown thread? she will not yield thee in
Algiers above a ducket being stripped;
And for her clothes they are fitter for a papermill
Than a Palace.

Fri. Let her serve your captive widow.

Vas. Why Tristan, that is a years wages for you;
It Is well thought on; will you serve Lelia?

Lel. I hope sir I shall be fit to serve.

Vas. Yes, serve for an Hospital, when the sins
Of the Camp are retired into your bones;
She Is vilely out of Linen.

Trist. How can I helped?

Vas. Let her make love to a Sexton, and steal shrowds.

Fri. Trust my knowledge Vasco, she is for thy turn,
Present her to thy widow, she may woo
In thy behalf, toste plum cakes for her Muskadine,
And brush her velvet hood on holy days.

Vas. Tristan convey her to her as my gift;
But Lelia you must speak notable words
Of me, first what a goodly man I am;
That I get Matrons at a hundred and ten
With double Twins, and how in time of war
I fill up the muster with mine own Issue.

Lel. Marry sir, heaven forbid.

Vas. Do You hear? this wench has been villanously
Ill bred; and I Will lay my life
She sings at her work too the holy caroll
O'th Ladies daughter converted in Paris;
She was of Paris properly, etc.

Trist. Fie Lelia, you must now take care, you are
Not now in the Camp, but in a civil Common wealth.

Lel. I shall endeavor sir to learn.

Vas. Nor must you persuade you Mistress rise
Too early to her beads, she may catch cold,
Having already a pestilent cough,
And so will dye before I marry her.

Lel. I hope I shall not be so mischievous.

Vas. Well Gentlemen, the fruitful hour is now
Drawn near that gives success, this morning must
Expose me to great charge.

Fri. Thou do not mean
To court her at her window with rare music?

Vas. No, she is very deaf, so that cost is saved.

Fri. What other charge? she has no teeth sit for
A dry banquet, and dancing she is past,
Unless with crutches in an Antimasque.

Vas. I must provide her Culleises, and Broths
That may stir metal in her, in this case
She is, know my good friends, I find
Her no more fit for the business of increase,
Than I am to be a Nun.

Trist. Thou will take care to trim thy person.

Vas. I came just now from consultation with
My Barber, who provides me a large maine,
A lock for the left side, so rarely hung
With Ribbanding of sundry colors sir,
Thou Wilt take it for the Rainebow newly crisp'd
And trimmed, Bucephalus nere wore the like.

Fri. When you have reached Sir Leonels Ransom,
And the rich widows wealth, we are forgot,
Like creatures of Japan, things hardly to
Be searched for in the Map.

Trist In one short month I shall not know his name.

Vas. It Is then because thou can not read, for thou
Shall find it fairly carved on each new Church
And Hospital, I mean to build apace,
And have my blew boys March through the streets
Two and two, provided for in gilded Primmers,
And their chops of mutton; go haste to the widows,
Present your Damsel, I Will be with you straight;
My captive Knight would speak with me.
Exeunt. Manet Vas. Enter Leonell.
Leon. I am bold sir to make free use of your
Most spacious rooms for benefit of air.

Vas. Sir you are welcome, it is a liberty
That I expect, and I joy much your wounds
So prosper in their cure.

Leon. You show your inclination kind and noble:
But is there of Evandra yet no news?
You promised to enquire whether her flight
Be true, or to what place she made escape.

Vas. No certainty is known, but all the Court
Troubled with doubts, shortly you will hear more.

Leo. If you could bring me sir to Prospero,
Or to the Prince, on some affairs that may
Perhaps advantage them, and my own good,
You shall oblige me much to serve you in
My better state of fortunes

Vas. I will endeavor it, and as you find
Me ready to assist all your requests,
I hope sir, you will see cause to pay your ransom
With what haste you can, for I would feign be able
To do good deeds, and we have many poor
In The town that want their charity, who have
A will as ready as their wealth.

Leon. Believe me you express a soul that has
Been bred, and exercised in holy thoughts.

Vas. Faith sir not much, only you know a man
Would joy to do some good whilst he is alive,
For after death our gifts I ever thought
Rather proceeded from a devout necessity,
Than any free desire.

Leon. It Is wisely urged.

Vas. It has been a maxim I have held long.

Leo. And it becomes you still; my ransom shall
Be suddenly prepared.

Vas. I thank you sir; follow, and I Will procure
You an address toth' prince or Prospero.
Exit.
Leon. If she were fled, her person is of so
Esteemed, and eminent a rate, that straight
Her instant residence must needs be known.
There is much art in these affairs; how will
She look on me, that in so great a cause
Could strike, or yield to angry fate? I will
Endure her scorns, as a deserved reward,
Nor should a lovers hopes grow cold because
The Influence that last did govern him,
Was sick, and cold, that destiny is gone,
The firmament contains more stars than one.
Exit.
Act. 3. Scaena 1.
Enter Leonell and Prospero, (with a light and a key.) Pros. It glads me to
behold your strength so well
Restored, and sir, I wish the fortune of
My sword, had met another cause, and enemy;
Your ransom I have paid, and so much prize
Evandra's happiness, that since you make it
Appear your company will render her
Some quietness, and joy, in this her sad
And solitary state, you shall both see, and stay with her.

Leon. From my first infancy I took my speech
And breeding in her fathers court, and by
My neerenes to her, both in deeds and place
In The day of fight, you may believe I am
Of quality enough to be esteemd and wellcom'd in her misery.

Pros. Your valor then did speak you more than all
The praise your modesty can urge,

Leon. My Lord, it is your gentleness to have
A courteous faith, but I am bold to think
My sight will comfort her so much that she
Will pay you thanks for giving so free trust
Unto my confidence.

Pros. My kindness to you I shall reserve
Till happier hours, this sir, is for her sake,
That she may have the benefit of your
Approach, retire a while within, that key
When I am gone, will open you a door,
That leads unto a cave. --
Exit Leonell. Melora? where art thou? this way, the light
Conducts thee; thou art safe.
Enter Melora.
Mel. How dark, and like the dusty hollownes
Of tombs where death inhabits, this appears?

Pros. Now you shall know the cause why I have bought
Your liberty, Evandra, daughter to
Your Millain duke, lies here imprisond by
The chance of battle, and thus hidden, and
Reserved, till we can free her by disguise.

Melor. O sad discovery of a sorrow worse
Than I endure, I hoped she had escaped.

Pros. I heard that thou were taken in her train,
But when the stories of thy beauty and
Thy virtues reached mine ear, I did believe
Thou had familiar knowledge of her face
And thoughts.

Mel. I know too much of her, to think that Heaven
Could thus permit her languish in a Cave.

Pro. None can resist their destiny; but good
Melora comfort her, and prithee for
Kind pity when your conversation shall
Beget some pleasant hour, mention my care,
And then my love; for know, she has so wrought
Upon my heart, that trust me I shall melt
Like Tapers overcharged with flame, and die;
Will thou implore in my behalf?

Melo. Your bounties have obliged me to perform
My best, else I were cruel sir.

Pro. Fear no surprise, you are secure, for twice.
To day, my house by stern Authority
Was searched, but vainly they suspect, and strive
To find this hidden dwelling, that no art
Can imitate for secrefie and depth.

Mel. will you be gone?

Pros. I Am sent for to the Palace where I Am told
I shall endure for this concealment more
Than natures strength can bear, but L've a soul
Dares welcome it with scorn.
Ent. Evand.
Mel. Lend me the light; look, there is Evandra sir.

Pre. It is, remember me, that I may live.
Exit.
Mel. This mingled passion of strange grief and joy,
I can no longer quietly contain;
Hail the most beauteous virtue of the world.

Evand. Loved Melora, what dismal chance, more than
My sorrow can digest, has brought thee here?

Mel. Why am I thought on, or inquired for as
A creature that deserves a life, whilst you
Remain within the house and arms of death?

Evan. I fear thou art a captive too.

Mel. Or else the tyranny of war had been
Too much unjust; were fit you languish thus,
And I like to a wanton bird should play
And wing the air at liberty? and yet
My ransome's freely paid.

Evan. Then though art now no prisoner?

Mel. A prisoner to you, or else my heart
Were dull, and rudely mannerd to permit
Evandra suffer here alone; this war
Has quickly nurc'd strange Ridles too of love.

Evan. Thou do complain with cause, it is in the Prince.

Mel. Another of your Enemies; too much
Of leisure I shall have t'acquaint you with
The accident that brought me to your sight.
Enter Leonell.
Evan. Melora, who is that?

Mel. Bless me how miracles increase to fright
Astonishment! sure there is Magic in
This place; Madam, my Brother Leonel.

Leon. Ha Melora? art thou here too? such mysteries
In change so soon ariv'd I have not read.

Evan. But what unheard of star directed thee
To see, and taste our miserable state?

Leon. Ere I begin the little history
Of the short time that thus has varied us,
Low as the earth I full to make you pitiful. Kneeles
For give the crime of destiny, not me,
That left me feeble as an Aguish girl
With the faint loss of blood, when I had took
Upon my youth and strength, the noblest cause
That ere imployd the anger of a man,
Your liberty; but Leve^ites, and Doves
Are valianter than I, for else what make
You in captivity?

Evan. Believe me sir, your passion is so great
I understand it not; pray rise, I know
You fought with all the forward will and might
That humane rage could show, but the success
Of valor they above dispose, that are
More wise and stronger than our selves.

Leon. Sure I could weep, but that my eyes
Have not enough of sunerall dew to melt
Away (...), pray pardon my neglect.
You Will find I am not courteous to my self.

Melora. The time compells distracted thoughts in all.

Evan. There is a bank within, though cold and bare,
Where never flower (in a despair of sun)
Durst fix his root, there we will fit, talk and
Compare our miseries; then sing like Philomel.
That wisely knows the darkness only fit
For mourning and complaint; lead there the light.
Exeunt. Enter Duke (with letters) Alvaro, Prospero, Calladine, attendants.
Duk. Evade me not with such fond circumstance,
Fit only to persuade the easiness
Of untaught babes; have I not here received
Her fathers letters, that petition her
Release? why should he sooth me thus with low
Demeanor in his phrase, if she were free?
Or if not in the town enclosed and hid,
Where would she sooner fly than to his arms?

Alva. Sir, give my duty boldness to believe
If she were here, and some good man (that now
Conceales her in his pittious fear) shall to
Assuage your wrath deliver her, you would
Nor mark her out for death?

Duk. No sir, how cheap then, and how frail will you
Suppose my vows? what need we trick,
And dress our Altars with such reverend care
Lets rather straight pervert their use, grease them
With gluttony, and feasts, defile and wash
Them with the riots of excessefull wine;
Is perjurie the least of guilt you can
Persuade me to commit?

Alva. I wish you would allow m' obedience leave
To utter truth; the vow you made was rash,
And not confirmed with oath, or church solemnity.

Pros. And I am taught the cruelties, or the
Revenge we threaten, heaven is pleased when they
Are never acted but forgot.

Duke. Her stern, and deathed father, when we sought
And wooed his mercy with humility,
More than dejected Hermites on their knees
Render to Saints, used not my brother with
Remorse, but snatched him from the world in all
His pride of youth, his wise, and ripened thoughts,
When he was fit to rule a nations fate,
And exercise mankind in what was bold,
And good, then shall I not revenge the best
Of all my blood, whilst I have here the chief of his.

Alva. Alas, this act sir, was not hirs, nor in
The justice of our reason is it possible
By derivation or descent to share a guilt.

Pros. Would I had lost the benefit of strength
When I surprizd her, to become the instrument
And pleasure of your rage.

Duke. How Count? so bold? hear me thou saucy child
And minion of the war, whom fortune, not
Success from virtue sprung, has listed to
A pride more dangerous than traitors thoughts,
Though I have searched thy house, and am defeated by
Some charm of my discovery, I still
Believe thou know her residence, and bring
Her to my sight, ere yet the Sun decline, or thou shall die.

Alva. I must not live to see it then, nor can
My business here on earth, entice me to
One minutes stay in my mortality,
When I behold your goodness so decaid.

Duke. Alvaro was that said like one that knows
His duty to a Father, and a Prince?

Alv. I would be heir unto your virtue sir,
As well as to your blood.

Duke. Have I outlived my courage, office, and
My reason too, tamely to suffer this?
I know thy false ambitious cunning well,
Thou fain would vex my weary soul away
That thou might reign, and triumph ore my tomb;
But hear, and tremble at my vow.

Call. Sir, for regard of heaven repent what you
Would speak, ere uttered it become too great
A sin for mercy to excuse.

Duke. No more fond Calladine, I am resolved,
Since thou art covetous to own his guilt,
He shall be safe, and thou endure his punishment;
Bring me Evandra here ere yet the day
Conceal his light, or the next darkness shall
Eternally be thine

Alv. If on my knees I can persuade you to
An easier doom, thus I endeavor it.

Pros. I beg not to entreat your rigor less,
But as 'twas first designed you would convert
It all on me.

Alva. That kindness was ill manner'd Prospero;
Do think thou art more worthy of the cause
When it is to be Evandra's Sacrifice?

Duke. Nere strive, thou shall have sufferance enough,
And gloriously, alone; hence from my fight
Thou birth ill gotten, and my marriage stain.

Alva. I Will keep my duty still, though not your love.
Ex. Alva. and Pro.
Call. Dread sir, call back your vow, and then the Prince,
Yet comfort him; what will the world esteem
Of such an act as time nere paraleld,
And no Posterity be so unkind as to believe?

Du. Thou may as well persuade th'assembled winds
From all their violence at Sea; lend me
Thine ear -- do this, but Calladine take heed
Thy prosecutions are not faint; I have
A younger son in Sicilly, renowned
And dear to Fame, him I will strive to plant
In The peoples hearts; as thou are Loyal follow me.
Exeunt. Enter Altesto, Frivolo, Vasco, (fantestically accouterd.)
Vas. Just in the posture as you see me Gentlemen,
Not a hair less in the Lock; and I believed
The heart of woman was not able to
Resist such amorous forms.

Altest. But she would none?

Vas. Name her the pleasures of the marriage bed,
She cries she is more taken with the grave,
'Cause there we are not waked with cough not aches.

Altest. Why sure she knows, for she looks as she had
Been long buried.

Vas. And then I used fine phrases,
And talked (what call you it?) of Hymen's Tapers,
Which she interprets sir, according to
Some modern Doctresse of her Sect, Hell fire,
A warmth (you know) we Soldiers do abhor.

Fri. It Is base to need it after death; we have
Been hardly bred, and can endure the cold. Enter Widow, and Lelia.

Vas. She comes, this is her breathing room, use your
Endeavors Gentlemen; tell her, her frowns
Already have so wrought, that my life now
Will nere be fit to come into a Lease.

Wid. Lelia a Chair, I cannot last; it is more
Than 58 years since I had hams to trudge.

Vas. I am your Guardian that come to visit you.

Wid. What need it sir? I practice no escape, I cannot fly.

Vas. No? were the window open
You would behave your self as nimbly on
Your wings as any witch in Europe.

Wid What says he Lelia, a witch?

Lel. He says we must one day all fly upward,
Heaven is the place we wish for.

Wid. It Is well said sir, for thither we must go,
Both old and young, no remedy.

Vas. As soon as you please if you are but marry me.

Wid. Does he talk of marriage?

Lel. He says, if you please for sooth.

Wi. Alas my vow of widowhood is not yet
Expired; if he comes some ten years hence --

Altest. About that time she will make a good wife
For an Antiquary to get Records on.

Frt. Although her skin be Parchment, it is not large
Enough to write her Annals in, sn'ath lived so long already.

Uas. How did you like the cullelse widow that I sent you last?

Wid. Why sir? It went down.

Uas. Though the Sea were turned to plum broth, it would all down;
I have measured her throat, it is wider (gent.)
And deeper than a well; alas the Duke
Considers not my charge, I Would rather boold
Too Young Giants, and allow each of them
A wolf in stead of a dog t'eat) their fragments.

Alt. Thou should get her month searched, I Will lay my life
Sh'ath new furnished her gummes with artificial teeth,
She could not grind so else.

Friv. Though you must seed her at your own cost, the proclamation
Believe me allows none but natural teeth.

Uas. When she is once in the fit of swallowing,
If a cap on float in her broth, why she
Considers it no more than a small be, or a May fly.

Lelia. You should bear up, you are too backward sir.

Uas. Say thou so wench; widow prepare your self,
For I must marry you to night, or else
You fast to morrow; if the Duke will not
Afford us fasting days, I shall make bold
To borrow em o'th Calendar; this night;
No longer time to delay a good deed.

Wid. Vh, uh, uh.

Altest. This cough (Vasco) is of some great antiquity.
How will thou sleep by her?

Frivo. A little Opium after supper, and let her cough like a
Cannon from a sort, I Will free thee from waking.

Vas. Come, come, provide; trim up your hood widow.
And air your petty coats in the sun, it is
A case of conscience Gent. we must
All marry, and live chaste.

Wid. Why sir, if we must needs.

Altest. I thought she would consent; good heart; it is
As towardly an old thing. Dear Vasco,
Provide us music, we will dance her to death:
Thou shall be her husband ere night, and her
Executor before morning.

Vas. Sooth Gent. that is all I desire,
Any thing, that is reason contents me.

Friv. Go, kiss her, by this hand a Brownist (is
More amorous; a notch'd premice a very
Aretine in comparison of thee.
Vasco kisses her.
Vas. By your leave widow.

Wid. Much good may't do you sir; these comforts come
But seldom after fourscore, the world (indeed)
Is grown so wicked that we never think
Of comforting one another.

Lel. I told you she would soften sir; alas,
A little raw, and modest at the first.

Altest. A very green pippin of the last years growth.

Vas. You shall find me a kind of sparrow widow,
A barley corn does as much as a potatoe.

Wid. Blessing on your heart sir, we should do good
Freely (as they say) without egging on.

Uas. Rise, and stir your feet, it is healthful for you.
They lift her up, There -- softly, -- so --

Altest. If one of the hairs of my eye brow lie
But in her way, she is gone, and falls like an
Elephant, whose legs are cut with a chain shot.

Friv. Her Os Sacrum needs a little Prop.

Vas. Why Gentlemen, there is nere a wench in Italy
Moves farther in a day, provide her litter
But easy, and her two mules well fed.
Courage widow; how is it now?

Wid. A certain stitch sir in my side, but it will away in time.

Vas. I you are young enough,
But given too much to hoyting, and to barley break,
Then dance naked till you take cold; good faith
You must look to it Lelia, take heed you air
Her wedding smock.

Altest. Let it be made of Catts skin furre:

Frivo. Or a watch man's rugge gown, but that her skin
Will wear it out too soon.

Vas. Frivolo, yo are too loud.

Frivo. I warrant thee I have measured her ears,
She hears in distance but an inch length.

Uas. You Will in, and set the house in order widow? I Will fetch a priest.

Wid. Truly sir, I Would feign ask my friends advice,
One that has seen but little of the world
Would be glad you know of counsel.

Vas. No counsel widow, nay, if you want metal
Let them called rashness, our youth will excuse all.

Wid. Well Sir, you know where marriages are made,
It Is not my fault; Lelia, provide a broom
And sweep away the rhume near the green Couch;
And (d' you hear) look for one of my cheek teeth
That dropped under the wanscore bed.

Lel. And shall I stopped forsooth with salt?

Wid. I, and fling't 'ith fire; you are weary sir?

Uas. No quite so lusty (widow) as your self,
But shall keep pace the journey being so short.
Enter Altesto.
Alt. Quick, in with her Uasco, whilst the fit holds.
Exeunt Widow, Uas. Lel. With cable and thong he drew her along,
so heavily to the Priest,
And vowed to untoe her, ere he did woo her,
make her up after who list.

Frivo. Ah Rogue, thou art a very Lark in the morning.

Altest. And what at night Frivolo?

Friv. A very owl.

Altest. Thou art a coxcombe, beyond all redemption
Of wit, less thou straight resolve to marry Lelia;
Thy friends will think the match so fit, none shall
Forbid the banes; I knew her mother too:
She Is wondrous rich in pewter, small wine caske,
And spits.

Friv. Yes, I have heard o'th wealthy Dowager,
She kept a the ch'd Nunnery in my quarter.
Enter Tristan.
Trist. Where Is Uasca Gentlemen? I am in haste.

Altest Why then for more dispatch answer you self.

Trist. The Duke has sent for him, by Calladine,
Who told me 'twas for business of import;
The Court is all disturbed, but for what use
He is designd, I cannot learn; where is he?

Altest. Follow, we will convey thee to him; strange luck;
Sir Leonells ransom, this widows wealth,
And now imployd at Court? Uasco thou art a gone man,
Usury, furrd gowns, long dinners, and short sleeps,
Thou art condemd to without help; or hope.
Exeunt. Enter Evandra, Melora, Leonell, (at one door) at the other Prospero,
(muffled and hid) A Table and lights set out, Evandra sits to read.
Leo. Sister, where is your tenderness? shall I
Be ever lost through your defect of will
And courage to present me to her care
In winning characters? tell her how long
With fervencie I have pursued my love.

Melo. Unhappy Leonell, why do thou tempt
Me with impossible desires how often
Have I solicited thy suit with a
Repulse? and she has charmed me by a vow
Never to mention's more, till her release.

Pros. False Leonell, did I for this assist
Thee to enjoy her loved society,
That thou should rival me, and have more fit
Convenience for thy wishes, than me self?
Melora is his sister too, what strange
New chances have these later hours produced?
I have no Advocate, nor am I hold
Enough to be mine own.

Leon. I see you love me not;
And since I am a trouble to your sight,
Ere long thou shall behold my face no more.

Pro. Thou art a Prophet to thy self, and I
Thy Priest to cut thee out in Sacrifice,
Although unworthy of Evandras deity.

Leon. Melora, can you show no kind remorse?

Mel. Alas, you do mistake my power and will;
Think on some other beauty, for the world
Has many that may make you fortunate.

Leon. None but Evandra governs in my breast.

Pro. Her thou shall nere enjoy; lend me thine ear --
Leads him aside.
Leon. Ha! Prospero?

Pro. False Knight; was this the cause
That made thee beg concealed admittance here
To practice love where I had planted mine?

Leon. My Lord I understood not of your love.

Pro. If thou art bold, and since thy vanquishment
Dare tempt a second hazard of my sword,
Go wait me on the garden mount, there I
Will order, though my heart is doubtful to
Enjoy Evandras love, thine never shall.

Leon. I will expect thee there, and fiercely long
To ravish from thy crest the honor that
I lent thee in our former fight.
Exit. Enter Alvaro.
Alva. Evandra, reach me thy fair hand that I
Seal on it my last farewell.

Evand. Ha, whither do you go?

Alva. Where shadows vanish when the worlds eye wincks,
Behind a cloud, and they are seen no more;
The place of absence where we meet (by all
The guess of learned thought) we know not whom,
Only a prompt delight we have in faith
Gives us the easy comfort of a hope,
That our necessity must rather praise than fear as false.

Evan. O horrid mystery! my tender senses are amazed* I feign
Would learn what it is dangerous to know.

Mel. Why do the stars neglect us thus? why should
We lose the noblest and the best of men?

Pro. Me thinks my spirits climb and life me to
A valiant envy of his sufferings.

Alva. That thou may live here safe till Prospero
Restore thee unto liberty and light,
I must to darkness go, hover in clouds,
Or in remote untroubled air, silent
As thoughts, or what is uncreated yet:
Or I must rest in some cold shade where is
No flowery spring, nor everlasting growth,
To ravish us with sent, and show, as our
Philosophy has dreamt, and rather seems
To wish than understand.

Evan. All this for me; you shall not dye; why will
You lay so cheap a value on your self,
To think the world should lose you for my sake,
Alas, a needless trivial Virgin that
Can never show in hopeful promise half
That excellence which you reveal in art?

Alv. It is decreed; Evandra thou may live
TO increase the small example we have lest
Of virtue, which has made thy breast her throne;
Time has begun to wear away my youth,
And all the good I can perform is to
Preserve the future hope of it in thee.

Evan. Melora, help, sorrow has filled my heart
With such a heaviness, that I must sink
Beneath its weight -- here let me lie, and mourn,
And chide that haughty destiny that thinks
Us so unworthy of their care.

Mel. My Lord the Prince, Is it no less than death
Of her, or you, can ease your Fathers wrath?

Alv. 'The doom is past, and the sad hour will want
No wings to hasten its approach; come hither Prospero.

Pro. It must not be; though I want phrase to show
My nature smooth, it shall appear in deeds.

Alv. I charge thee by our love, by all my care
That bred thee from thy childhood to a sense
Of honor, and the worthiest feats of war,
Thou keep Evandra safe till happier days
Conspire to give her liberty, use her
With such respective holiness as thou
Would do the relics of a Saint inshrind,
And teach thy rougher manners tenderness
Enough to merit her society.

Pro. What need this conjuration sir? I mean
To dye for her, that I may save your life;
A brave design, dissuade me not, though I
Fail often in choice of fitting enterprise,
I know this is becoming sir, and good.

Alva. Thou dye for her? alas poor Prospero
That will not satisfy, the shaft aims here,
Or if it would, I do not like thou should
Thus press into a cause that I reserve
To dignifie my self; urge it no more.

Pros. What am I fit for then, if not to die.

Eva. How am I worthy of this noble strife?

Alva. Evandra rise, that I may see some hope
And comfort in thy strength, before I take
My everlasting leave.

Evan. You have the voice of death already sir.

Mel. Dismal it sounds, like the last groan which men
In torture breath out with their soul.

Alva. I could have wished I might enjoy thee and
Be mortal still, mix in a love that should
Produce such noble virtues as would soon
Entice the Angels to live here, yet not
B'our conversation grow impain'd; but these
Are wishes made too high, and late to thrive.
For evermore farewell. --

Evan. O sir, where will you leave me then?

Alva. How pity moystens me? there in the Cave.

Evan. It is the mansion Sir of death, something
Horrid as midnight thoughts can form so frights
Me still, I tremble when I enter it.

Alva. Ha! what that is but humane dares disturb thy quietness?

Pro. Sir let me see, it dies if it be vulnerable.

Alva. Still you usurp my Business Prospero --
Bide there, I will go down my self.

Evan. Sir, 'twill not presently appear.

Alva. I will attend its saucy leisure then. descends the Cave.

Evan. Lock safe the door Melora with this Key.

Pro. What Is your design? mean you t'imprison him?

Evan. Discover (Prospero) the inside of
Thy breast; do thou affect the Prince?

Pro. Next to the absent blessings that our faith
Persuades us to, eternity of joys.

Evan. Why then will thou permit that he should taste
A long forgetfulness in a dark grave?
Let us invent some way to ease him of
This penance undeserved, and suffer it our selves.

Mel. O glorious maid! th's goodness will confer
A dignity for ever on our Sex.

Pro. I Am strangely taken with this virgins thoughts,
Let me embrace your hand upon my knee --
I thank you much, you have some mercy on
My dull unknowing youth, and can believe
Me fit for noble enterprise, though he
Unkindly did deny my suit: I Will to
The Duke and tempt his fury till he cause
My death, perhaps when his revenge has quenched
Her thirst with my warm blood, it may grow cold,
And kindly temperd to you both,
And then I Have fully satisfied the crime
Of your captivity, and his free sufferance.

Mel. This Soldier has a great and daring heart.

Pro. But how shall I enjoy her then? I scarce
Can understand the happiness it bears:
It Is odd ambition this, but yet it is brave,
He do it: besides, though I Am not learned to know
With certainty, yet I have hope I shall
Be sensible of all her visits to
My tomb, and every flower she strewes will there
Take growth as on my garden banks, whilst I
(Delighted spirit) walk and hover 'bout
Their leaves, comparing still their sent with hers;
O twill be wondrons brave! Lady, dispatch,
That I may go, and die.

Evan. Since you express your will, so kind, and violent,
That small provision there allotted to
Sustain my life, reach up, and straight convay
Into the cave, that he may find it out,
And not exchange the pain his father would
Inflict, for famishment.
Pros. takes from behind the Arras a bottle and bag, they open the Cave.
Pros. I had almost forgot false Leonell,
He waits me on the mount, I will be with
Him straight, and end his hopes by a long sleep
Ere I begin mine own.
Descends the Cave.
Evan. Once more Melora lock the door; now they
Are both secure, it is thou and I that must
Take solemn leave, and never meet in this
Our beauty, color, or our warmth again.

Melo. I am astonished at her excellence,
And scarce have humble grace enough to keep
Ambitious envy from my thoughts.

Evan. Why should these mighty spirits lay so vast
An obligation on our sex, and leave
Eternal blushes on our souls, 'cause we
In acts of kinder pity, and remorse
(The virtues sure, wherein we most excel)
Durst not adventure like to them?

Melo. The Prince deserves a liberal choice of lives
To ransom his; would mine would satisfy.

Evan. How Melora? I cannot think thou do
So faintly love my happiness, and my
Renown, to wish to hinder me of both.

Melo. Alas, the example is so good, I feign would follow it.

Evan. But there is reason that I suffer first.
I have a mourning weed within which thou
Shall dress, and teach me wear, then so
Apparelled like my cause, I Will walk to the Duke.

Melo. O leave me not behind, let me accompany
Your mourning too, perhaps my death may be
Accepted best, and you be thought more fit to live.

Evan. Thy inclinations have a noble sense,
Thou shall along; go, call thy brother in,
And call aloud, this hollownesse is such
He will not hear thee else.

Mel. Hoa, Leonell? my brother Leonell.
Enter Leonell
Leo. It Is strange, this Prospero appears not yet,
Sure he is faint, and's aguish courage comes
To him by fitts; what is your will?

Evan. If thou do love me Leonell (as thou
Have sworn, and with assertions most devout)
I know there is no strict command I can
Present, but thy obedience will perform.

Leo. Bring me to trial straight, if I prove weak
Or false, I am unworthy to appear
In the suns light, or evermore enjoy
The better influence of your eyes.

Evan. Give me confirmed assurance on your knee
That you will execute with real faith,
And punctual circumstance, what I injone.

Leo. Let me salute your hand, I breath on it my vow.

Evan. Now I Will inform thee Leonell; the Prince
And Prospero are both within the cave,
Shut and enclosed by us, where hourly thou
Through a small slender wicket shall't convay
Such food, as a disguised servant of
The house (who heretofore provided our
Relief) shall help thee to, take here this key
And not permit their passage forth, till I
Am gone t'ordaine by death their liberty
Secure, which I will suffer to appease the angry Duke.

Leon. Furies and Fiends cease on my senses straight;
What have I promised in the rashness of
My dull and inconsiderate love?

Evan. If thou do break thy vow the curses of
The Saints, and mine (which dying will not least
Afflict thy perjury) fall on thy heart.

Mel. Never be called my brother, nor assume
The honor of my valiant Fathers name.

Evan. Melora come, we are too slow in such
An act as will outlive all history.
Ex. Evan. and Mel.
Leon. O what a dull inhumane Lover am
I grown! that simply by a forward and
Unskilful duty can consent the Queen
And Lady of my life should be a Sacrifice
To hinder others deaths? this sure is such
A great example of a female fortitude
As must undo all men, and blushing make
Us steal from our unjust advancement ore
The world; tear off our saucy beards before
The scattering winds that give us the pre-eminence
Of Sex; when this is known let women sway
Counsels, and war, whilst feeble men obey.
Exit.
Act. 4. Scaena. 1.
Enter Calladine (in a night Gown,) and a Servant. Call. A Lady say thou in a
mourning Vest?
What should this early visit mean, ere yet
By full appearance of the Sun we can
Distinguish day from night?

Ser. Sir, she importunes much to speak with you,
Says her affair asks secrecy and haste.

Call. Retire a while without, and let her in.
Exit Ser. Enter Melora (in mourning) she unvailes, Since first my eyes had
judgment to discern
A mean from excellence, they nere beheld
A beauty so ore coming and exact;
What are the loved commands you would lay on me?
I not remember that I ever saw
A face I would more willingly obey;
If it were civil too I Would ask your name.

Mel. Believe me gentle Sir when that is known
You Will think me too unfortunate to live;
I am called Evandra.

Call. Ha! the Princess? wisely did Prospero
Preserve thee from my sight, thy beauty is
Too great and dangerous for youth to know
And be secure; though I nere saw her till
This blessed hour, yet Fame assisted me
T'imagine an Idea like her self;
But why have you forsaken your concealed
Abode, and thus adventure into th'view
Of men? I fear it is not safe.

Mel. It Is to employ your virtue sir; I know
You love the Prince, though not with so devout
A heart as mine; for that I may restore
Him unto liberty and's Fathers love,
I here present my self to cruel death.

Call. This is a valiant piety, a gratitude
That shows her mind more noble than her shape;
She is not known unto the Duke more than
By guessing Characters taken from report;
She must not dye; though lately his commands
Have singled my allegiance out, it is
Religious sure to fail in this.

Mel. Sir, expectation of the ills we must
Endure do more perplex us than the pain
It self. I crave you would not protract my sufferance.

Call. My thoughts have fashiond it unto my wish;
Is there not a captive called Melora,
(Most beautiful and young) that has of late
Familiar been to your society?

Mel. I fear he has discoverd me;
Do You know the Lady sir?

Call. Only by Prospero's report, and I
In charity desire her person safe;
Your death alone will satisfy the Duke.

Mel. My prayers have much endeavored that it may;
And Sir to assist your kind humanity
Receive this key, 'twill give you entrance where
She now remains a prisoner by my art;
It is a narrow Closset that ore looks
The Orchard grove; you know the house, it is Prospero's.

Call. I am familiar there with all the vaults,
And hidden passages.

Mel. Sir, for regard of honor suffer not
Her freedom from that place, till I am dead,
For she is so much delighted with this cause,
That with unwilling falsehood I was feign
To take advantage of her orizons,
And whilst she kneeling lengthned her discourse
With heaven, steal on this funeral habit, and
In haste close up the door to hinder her
Pursuit, where now she stays lamenting her
Enforced secure estate, and envying of
This danger which I chearefully embrace.

Call. My life shall warrant hers, be pleased to enter there,
And stay till I inform the Duke of your appearance and approach.

Melo. Most willingly; but still sir I implore your mercy would
Secure that Lady, and the Prince, how ere
The angry stars provide for me.

Call. It is no less unkind t'importune than
To doubt my care; there Lady, through that door --
Expect my sad return will be too soon.

Melo. Forgive me best Evandra, that I thus
Assume thy name, and have beguiled thee of
So brave a death, the motive that persuades me to it
Did not become thy knowledge nor my tongue.
Exit
Call. This Princess has a soul I could adore
Whilst it remains eclipsed on earth, nor shall
It yet reach heaven; both being utterly
Unknown, will make the plot with easy help
Succeed. Melora straight I will present
To Appease the fury of the Duke, and then
This Lady and the Prince are free; through blood
Is the best issue of our hopes; if fate
Ordain it thus, I shall prove fortunate.
Enter Frivolo, Tristan, Musicians, and Boy.
Altesto. Come boy, lift up your voice to you 'bay window.
Sing the Song I gave you last night, and firke
Your fidles bravely too, bear up the burden.

Boy. No morning red, and blushing fair, be through your glass, or curtains
spied,
But cloudy gray, as the short hair, of your old everlasting Bride.

Chor. So old, so wondrous old, in the nonage of Time,
Ere Adam wore beard, she was in her Prime.

Boy. Whose swarthy, dried westphalia hipps, are shrunk to mummie in her skin,
Whose gummes are empty, and her lips, like eyelids hairy and as thin.

Chor. So old so wondrous old, etc.

Boy. For Amorous sighs which virgins use, she coughs aloud from lungs decayed,
And with her palsy cannot choose but shake, like th'trembling of a maid.

Chor. So old, so wondrous old, etc.

Boy And when her nightly labor swells, to vast extent, her pregnant womb,
Midwives believe, that it foretells, a hopeful Timpany to come.

Chor. So old, so wondrous old, etc.

Boy. What need her husband then vex heaven, and for a plenteous offspring
beg,
Since all the Issue can be given, is that which runs in her leg.

Chor. So old, so wondrous old, etc.

Altest. Good morrow to the right worshipful leader Captain Vasco,
And to's his right reverend Bride.
Now gentlemen scrapers you may be gone:
Ex. Music. Enter Vasco (dressing himself.)
Vas. My good friends, a certain salt shower should have
Seasoned your feathers, had not my luck bin
To marry with one that consumes all her moisture
In thume, a mere Egyptian cloud for drowth.

Altest. But why so soon abroad? Vasco are these
A Bridegroomes hours? thou art as early up
As creditors in the Term.

Fri. Or Sergeants when
The needy gallant means to steal a journey.

Trist. And they prevent it by arresting his innocent horse.

Vas. Business at Court; but Gentlemen this is
A resurrection to me, beleev't
I Am risen from the dead, from bones more dusty
Than theirs that did begin their sleep beneath
A marble Coverlet some thousand years ago.
Enter Widow, and Lelia.
Altest. Alas poor Vasco! widows can strangely mortify.

Wid. Put Dates and Amber in the Gruell Lelia,
And let it boil long.

Lel. And shall I make the Poultice straight, and send
Your other hood forsooth to be new lined?

Wid. First stay till you have ripped my velvet muffe,
I Will have that lining serve.

Vas. She Is risen too; pure soul,
Devotion and Aches keep her still waking.

Wid. How do you Sir? we must comfort one another.

Vas. There is need often, no Mariner ere had
A wors^ ^ight in a storm.

Altest. (...) is usage Vasco will hardly mollify
Her Iron Chest, and make her bags open.

Vas. Nay, I Have taken order for her wealth if she
Would be so courteous now to die.

Altest. Believe me, you will find her very obstinate
Touching that point; it is true, a woman that
Had the least dram of kindness or of reason
Would for her husbands benefit depart
This transitory at a minutes warning,
Make a low courtsie, take her leave and die,
She listens. With less noise than flies forsake us in a frost.

Vas. I, you speak of kind reasonable women,
Alas she is of another mould; she'ld think it
A strange request if I should urge it to her,
Though it be evidently for my good.

Fri. What is it for her to dye once? alas,
She knows well she has eight lives more to come.

Altest. Frivolo says right. I think Captain 'twere fit
You make a motion to her; see how 'twill work.

Vas. Never Gentlemen; if her own good nature
Will not persuade her to it, let her e'ne live
Till she be thought so much a Ghost, that the state
Command her take a house in a Churchyard,
And never walk but at midnight.

Wid. What do they say Lelia?

Lel. Forsooth devising for your worships good.

Wid. Kind heart! me thinks you are not merry Sir.

Vas. Who, I? as joviall as a condemned man I.

Wid. Will you fit down and eat a little broth?

Vas. I shall be cawdled like a Haberdashers wife
That lies inn of her first child; but methinks
Upon a stricter view you look not well,
Your blood absents it self, are you not faint?

Altest. I, and her eyes shrink, and retire into
Their melancholy cells; your breath smells somewhat
Of earth too, but it is nor much.

Fri. By'rlady but take heed, my Grandam thus
Was taken spinning at her wheel, and died
So quickly (as they say) as one would wish.

Trist. I Have seen a Coarse look better in a shroud.
If you have any business now with heaven
'Twere fit your prayers were short, for I much fear
You Will not have breath enough to utter it.

Wid. It Is more than I feel; look I so ill Lelia?

Lel. As you were wont forsooth, most strange and uggly.

Wid. Come, lead me in: pray husband do not grieve,
It Is but a sit that ever takes me once
In fifty years: but weep hot, 'twill away.

Vas. Every tear shall be as big as a turnip
When I weep; the good pox comfort you, Wench
Follow the game close, still breath death to her.

Lel. Warrant you sir, I cannot do a better
Deed than put her in mind still of her end.
Exit Widow and Lelia.
Vas. Marry a widow, and be coffind up
With clouts and a skelliton? by this day,
I lay last night locked in surgeons box;
Compard unto her bed, a Pothecaries bing
Is a Venetian cowch, and Canopie.

Alte. Those that seek gold, must dig for it in mines.

Vas. Well my camp companions, what think you now
O'th court? I am sent for thither to take charge
Of what is yet the moitie of a miracle.
But you are all content to thrive, to jet
And strut like lustful Turkeys with your plumes spread.

Altest. It Is not amiss; my good Lord Frivilo,
I kiss your soft hands; noble sir keep on
Your Cordovan, I swear your glove is a
Preferment, 'bove the merit of my lips.

Fri. You cherish my ambition sir -- signieur

Tristan? your professed slave: I pray keep on
Your way, I Would rather build another wall
Than to dishonor you by taking this.

Trist. Believe it sir, both hands must be cut off
Ere I mistake to place you near the left.

Vas. This practice will do well, follow apace,
I must with speed to Caladine.
Exeunt. Enter Evandra, Caladine.
Evan. It Is strange, it seems he knows me not, and that
The falsely, kind Melora wears my name
He speaks as if her life he tendered more
Than mine, 't is a mistake I feign would cherish.

Call. I did not think the stock of nature could,
In this her colder age, be rich enough
To store the world with two such beauties that
Together take their growth, and flourishing,
And this unto my instant judgment seems
(If such amazeing forms admit of difference)
The more exact, but that the blood and style
Of Princess makes the other claim our reverence
As well as love, and for Alvaro's sake, I wish
I could procure that she might live.

Evan. I have considered what you told me sir,
And though the Princess through a fond excess
Of love, would hasten a calamity
That all the world must grieve and wonder at,
Yet I could give her reason an excuse,
For I my self to ease her sufferance
Could willingly endure the same.

Call. It ripens more, and swifter than my hopes
Design; you reach at an ambition Lady,
So great and good, my wonder interrupts
My language still, I cannot prais't enough.
Can such a virtuous courage dwell in your sex?

Evan. If you uprightly love her and the Prince,
(Whose care she is) straight lead me to the Duke,
And try how real my professions are.

Call. Forgive the office you invite me to,
Which by the hopes of my religion could
My life excuse, I should esteem't too cheap
An offering; this, Lady, is the fatal way --

Evan. Melora, now my fortune is above
Thy art, and I shall equal thee in love.
Exeunt. Enter Duke (with Letters) Vasco, Altesto, Frivolo, Tristan,
Attendants.
Duke. Again in low petitionarie style
He beggs me by these letters to release
His daughter, and does proffer sums so vaste
To ransom her, as would overcome the covetous:
But I have sent him such denial, with
Disdain, as must distract and break his heart.
Vasco, yo've heard how ill I am obeyed
By these persum'd smooth traitors of the Court,
And I have chosen you to show a duty
Fitting the stricter discipline of war,
To actuate all my will with instant diligence.

Vas. You must injoyne me sir commands that are
Most horrid, and unnatural, when I
Prove slow, or faint to execute.

Duke. If these your officers and friends become
Disloyal to your will, you may provide
The rack and tortures to enforce em to it.

Va. If their own appetites will not persuade.
There is small hope from punishment.
Mark sir, that whey-fac'd fellow in the red,
The Rack is his delight, and gives him as
Much ease, as when he is stretched with laziness
And a cool mornings sleep.

Duke. Is It possible!

Vas. I Have seen him suffer the Strapado thrice,
Hang in this politic posture in the air,
As he were studying to circumvent nature,
And no sooner down but calls for a wench.

Duk. I know you have the skill to govern them.
Be sure that Prospero's house be diggd until
The pinacles and the foundations meet.
Unless they deal by sorcery and charms,
I Will find these buried lovers out, and my
False son the Prince, that covets darkness more
Than blessed light, or my respect.

Vas. I do not like this business should concern
The Prince; although the rack be somewhat out
Of season with my old bones, for his sake
Enter Melora and Servant. I shall become a parcel traitor too.

Mel. I feared that Caladine delaying his
Return so long, might frustrate all my glory;
And how Evandra's skill might work with him
Was dangerous. I do not see her here.

Ser. Pray heaven my Master do not check my forwardness
To Obey your will; he meant you should keep home.

Melo. My presence here will make his benefit;
I told thee so before; trust my excuse in thy behalf.

Duk. What Ladye's that?

Melo. One that to pleasure you with a revenge,
Present my self to execution, with
As liberal joy, as to the marriage priest.
And when I name my self Evandra, you
Will know enough to satisfy your wrath.

Duke. Is the beloved Bird flown from the dark cage?
Their magic was not strong enough to hinder destiny,
And you will find small amorous pity in
My frozen age. My guard ceaze on her straight.
Enter a Guard, and bind her.
Altest. Vasco, this is Melora my prisoner?

Vas. Peace Devil, peace, thou will destroy brave mysteries.
A noble girl; I conceive all; now would
My gracious widow be burnt to char-coale
Ere she had brain, or nature for a plot
Like this; I could eat her, and her clothes too,
By this hand, her very shoes were a rare mess.

Melo. If you expect to find me here a lowly suitor,
It Is but to hasten sir your glad content
With a dispatch upon my life, and that
The Prince may be ^ton'd unto your love.

Duke. Her spirit seems to stir my manhood more
Than it astonisheth my sense. I am
Resolved to farther your desires (brave dame)
With all the help of cruelty and haste.
Enter Caladine and Evandra.
Call. Death slave, what make you here? the Princess too?
Why did you give her liberty?

Serve. She told me sir, it was with your consent.

Call. She has ore'reach'd my skill, I am undone.

Duke. Stay Caladine, another prize? come back
And render me that Ladies name.

Evan. He knows it not; my name's Evandra sir.

Mel. I fear I am deprived of my intent.

Duke. We must to Delphos sure t'untie these doubts
And wonders with an Oracle.

Evan. Do not believe that Lady sir, she has
Beguiled me of my name, and is so sick
And fond with an improper love, she would
Betray her self unto a pain, she knows
Not how to merit nor endure like me.

Mel. O Sir, I find her language is most apt
And powerful to persuade, but let your faith
Consider my affections too.

Evan. Why do thou let thy kindness wrong we thus,
Undoing thy Religion with thy love?

Mel. It Is you confer the Injury, that will
Not suffer me to dye in peace.

Vas. Rare wenches both; all this is for the Prince.

Duke. Though small inquiry would discover soon
Who justifies the truth, yet I will end
The difference so as shall afford you equal joy,
And not endanger a mistake in me;
Convey them to the Fort, they shall both die.
The Guard lays hold on them.
Vas. Has this Duke buried all his goodness in's
Reverge! sure he is libd, he has certainly
No masculine business about him.

Duke. Lead them away.

Call. I Will follow too, and mourn the obsequy
Ere ceremonious death make it complete.

Mel. Forgive this emulation (Madam) you
Shall know a cause that will invite you to it.

Evand. Poor Melora! I pity not my self but thee
Exeunt Call. Evand. Mel. and Guard.
Duke. Now let my Son, and's Minion Prospero
(Rebellious as himself) resign toth' Fiends
Their dark and hidden tenements again,
Come forth free and secure, for since they valued death
As a delight they shall not suffer it;
Go strait proclaim their next appearance safe,
For it will pleasure me they should stand by
To see, and not be able to resist, the justice of revenge.

Vas. Sure revenge is a strange kind of Lechery;
How it has alterd him!

Duke. Vasco, now the enchanted house may stand;
But be you here to morrow with some strength
To guard their execution from impediments
Of rage, or pity; they shall suffer early.
Exit.
Vas. I thank your grace for any employment.
Altesto, art thou a rogue?

Altest. A little (Sir) infected with your company.

Vas. Art thou so very a rogue, if I command.
Thee from the Duke, to cut off these Ladies heads,
Thou Wilt whet the Axe thy self, and doit with the
Dexterity of a Flemming?

Altest. I will see thy head in a leatherne case first,
Kicked in a footbal match from gole to gole.

Vas. Why I thank thee; what say you Frivolo,
Wenches and Surgeons have cost you dear,
Have you remorse enough to do it?

Fri. I Have a mind rather to rebel, break shops
Open, and make choice of my silks, without
Taking notice (sir) of the Mercers book.

Trist Such wholesome business would more take me too
Than cutting off poor Ladies heads, unless
Your fair widow (Vasco) come in my reach,
I could behead her for her left ear ring,
Though it be but an Agat set in Copper.

Vas. Come let us to bed; the Sun to morrow will
Rise black, or I shall think him a dull insensible
Planet, and deserves no more adoration than a farthing candle.
Exeunt. Enter Leonell, Alvaro, Prospero.
Leon. Sir, you have heard how she betrayed me to
A Vow, and with what cruel menacings
My Sister and her self petitiond heaven
T'assist their curses in a punishment
Upon my after-life, if I were perjured by
A breach of what my promise did assure.

Alva. It was a vow no less unkind than rare,
T'imprison us that had no cause nor will
To do a noble stranger injury;
But I have learnt a tame Philosophy,
Persuades me to forgive all but my self.

Pro. How comes the date of your strict vow expired,
And that you now afford us liberty?
Which if my memory be just, you said
She did enjoyne you should not be, ere she
Was gone to suffer death.

Leon. Sir, she is gone, my Sister too; one that
Attends by your command these hidden walks
In breathless haste just now distilled the poisonous news
Through my sick ear.

Alva. Gone? and to dye? adorned
(Me thinks) like to an ancient sacrifice
With flowers, which are not sure the issue of
The spring, but of her beauty, and her breath.

Pro. Would I had patience to endure calamities
Like this! but I Am forbid by my galld heart;
Why did you keep us limited and locked
In The Cave when we had power to hinder her
Departure, and her death? 'twas a bold crime.

Leon. Sir, I have hope I gaind your pardon when
I mentioned the misfortune of my vow.

Pro. I understand not such injurious vows:
Thou lov'dst her Leonel, and through the pride
Of envy could not yield, since thy own hopes
Grew faint, that mine should ere be prosperous;
Therefore with cunning willingness endured
Her desperate fally to the Duke.

Leon. That I did love her sir is a most true
And fitting glory to proclaim; but that
I Am guilty of so base a slander as
Your rashness has devised provokes me to
A rage that may prove dangerous: reclame
Your thoughts, and teach them more civility.

Pro. The Prince grows solemn with his grief, lest we
Disturb him let us retire aside, and I Will
Whisper such reasons to thee as shall want
No courage to be truths, though they inflame.
They walk aside.
Alva. Fountains that ever weep have in their tears
Some benefit, they cool the parched earth,
And cherish a perpetual growth; the sad
Arabian tree that still in Baulmy drops
Dissolves her life, does yield for others help
A medicine in those tears: but trivial man
Though he has sense to mourn, may weep and melt
His injured eyes to viewlesse air, yet all
The expense affords is vainly to discern
His mourning gives his sorrows life, and length,
But not the guiltless cause a remedy.
lies down.
Leon. My Lord, I stayed upon the garden Mount,
And in the heat of my impatience was
So kind, much to lament your tardinesse;
But now I must have leave to think one that
Delights to heap up wrongs, has fury more
To dare than do.

Pro. Were this a Temple, and the Prince
Employed in the reverend business of a Priest,
I could not suffer such a boast from one
That I have used with so much clemency
In fight -- defend thy life, or it is mine.
(They draw and fight)
Leon. Are you so masterly -- again -- I find
No lightning in your eyes, nor in your sword.

Pros. You have the skill, but I Will distemper it --

Alva. Hold, hold, eager and silly ministers
Of wrath, is this a time to bleed, when ere
The morning sun uncloud his pensive face,
There will be streams of blood let out enough
To make him drink till he be sick with sacrifice?
Give me thy sword. How Prospero? are my
Commands grown wearisome and cold --

Pros. There sir -- I Am still rebuked like to a boy.

Alva. How long shall I direct thy temper to
A gentle and a soft demean ere thou
Grow wise, and mild Enough to govern it?
Let me entreat you sir, to sheath your weapon too.

Leo. Sir, you are worthy to command; and know
I wear it for my guard, not insolence.

Pros. I am appointed all my actions still,
As my stupiditie made me not fit
To know, but suffer injuries.

Alva. Why do thou frown? the sullen wrinckles on
A lions brow carry a grace, 'cause they
Become a beast, but he that can discern
The nobleness of valor should be smooth
As Virgins in their bridal ornaments.

Pros. Sir, I am taught; how ere my senses are
Not so mistaken and so weak, but that
They know him false; he loved Evandra.

Alva. Is that a crime? thou told'st me in the cave
Thou lov'dst her too.

Pros. I nere durst tell you so,
Till you discerned my passions, and enforced
A true discovery of their hidden cause.

Alva. But I esteemed it for a virtue known,
And it indeerd thee more to my respect.
Pray tell me sir, did you love Evandra?
And with a heart sincere as she deserved?

Leon. Sir, the confession may be honor, but
No shame I did, and with a servencie
Upright as my Religion could produce.

Alva. O what a prompt and warm delight I feel
When others reason are inclined unto
My choice? it is strange the senseless world should so
Mistake the privilege of love, the best
Of objects! heaven affects plurallitie
Of worshipers, to adore and serve, whilst we
In that chief hope are glad of Rivalship;
And why should Ladies then that imitate
The upper beauty most to mortal view,
Be barred a numerous adresse? or we
Envy each others lawful, though ambitious aim?
Come, join your hands, and seal a friendship here,
Good as inviolate, lasting as truth.

Leo. You give my wishes sir, a full content.

Pros. I want the skill to promise sir, but I Will
Perform all your desires with noble says.

Alva. And now let me embrace you both, for we
Are lovers all, though when the morn must rise
To see and blush at th'actions of the world,
Like sad distressed Turtles we shall want
Our mate, then we may sit and mourn beneath
The willow that ore'shaddowes every brook,
There weep, till we are vanished quite in tears
To Increase the stream, whose senceless murmurings
Will be excused hereafter in our cause.

Pros. O that my heart would be the officer
Of death unto it self, and break without
My irreligious help; my life is tired.

Leo. And I have thoughts so wild, so much unsafe,
They would be sin in utterance, as in act.

Alva. Give me your hands; with a slow fun'rall pace
Weel move, to see this dismal Tragedy.
Let Us bear it bravely, like such lovers as
Have reason can persuade their courage to
Attempt things bold and fit; whilst there was hope,
We cherished it with proffer of our lives,
But now the strength of Armies cannot free
Her from my fathers wrath; nay, hand in hand --
To show this truth in loves Philosophy,
That as one object equally allures
The Ambition of our hope, so we not interchange
Malignant thoughts; but several lovers, like
Strange Rivers that to the same Ocean trace,
Do when their torrents meet, curle and embrace.
Exeunt.
Act. 5. Scaena. 1.
Enten 2. Ambassadors with letters, Caladine, Vasco, Altesto, Frivolo. Call.
Your Letters merit to have power on my
Respect and diligence; I shall afford
You both; but when I bring you to the Duke
It Is to be feared you will find the privilege
Of all my favor there is lost.

1 Emb. Access and audience Sir is all our hopes
Presume to get, the times befriend us not.

2 Emb. We had swift notice of these Ladies danger;
And Sir, how ere it prove, your wishes must
Oblige us to a lasting gratitude.

Altest. What are these strangers Vasco, that envy
Our sleep, and wake us before day?

Vas. Ambassadors from Millaine, whose hopes want
Some cordial water, for they are very sick.

Call. Vasco, it is the Dukes command that you
Assemble straight some strength from the cast Regiments
To guard the Palace yard.

Vas. What need it Sir? to my knowledge the two Ladits have no
Other weapons than Bodkins, and their nails
Closse pared; besides, a thread of Eglantine,
Or a small wood bine stalk, will setter them
As fast as Cables of a Galley-grosse.

Call. I but deliver what I had in charge.
My Lords Ambassadors this is your way.

1 Emb. These preparations are severe; I doubt
His mind will not be easily reclaimed.

2 Emb. You see the generous people like it not.
Exeunt. Emb. and Call.
Vas. Altesto, go and muster up from all
The Lanes and Alleys in the Town a troop
Of fine fleet rogues, such as will turn their backs
To a bullet and outrun it, yet love
Commotion too, I would have such Altesto,

Fri. Let me furnish you; hell shall not yield a Regiment
Of Fiends that will be more invisible
At the approach of Justice or Religion.

Altest. O for a tiny short trussed Bakes that
I knew; A Carman too, that died some three
Months since with eating meazled porke; they would
Have marched to such a war with cowlestaffe and
Batoone like Hercules.
Enter Tristan (leading the Widow) and Lelia.
Vas. How now? whither move you so fast, like a
Fleet snaile over a cabidge leaf, so early too?
She sleeps less than carriers, traitors, or Madmen.

Tri. She requests me to be the staff of her age.

Vas. But whither I pray?

Wid. Why sir, to see the show.

Vas. The show! the motion of Queen Guinivers death
Acted by puppets would please you as well;
The Jade too is as full of remorse as
A Bear that wants his supper.

Wid. I would have a safe place, where I may stand
And weep without having my handkerchiefe
Stolen away.

Lel. It is of pure Cambrick forsooth,
And made of her Grandmothers wedding Apron.

Wid. Yes truly, and wrought when I was a maid.

Altest. That Is an antiquity beyond all record.

Vas. Sir Tristan, be you sure you avoid
No throng; a crowd well shuffled, and close packed,
May do now a special courtesy;
Let her be squeezed, for she is as rotten as
A hollow tree that stands without a root.

Trist. My shoulder shall help too at a dead lift.

Fri. A Scaffold that were weakly built would serve.

Wid. We must make haste; farewell Lamb.
Exeunt. Trist. Wid. Lel.
Vas. Lamb, which my own translation renders calfe.

Altest. 'Twill be long ere thou grow up to a bull:
For few will venture to help thee to horns.

Vas. Well Gentlemen pity my case, I have
Endured another night would tire a Perdu,
More than a wet furrow and a great frost.

Fri. Will she not dye?

Vas. I have persuaded her, but still in vain;
And all the help the Laws afford us poor
Mistaken men, that marry gold instead
Of flesh, is a divorse, it must be thought
On suddenly; Altesto, haste to your charge.

Altest. Good morrow Cavaliers.

Vas. 'Twill be an hour yet before that greeting
Be in season; pray heaven Tristan remember the crowd.
Exeunt. Enter Alvaro, Prospero, Leonel. and Boy (to sing.)
Alva. This glorious hazard in thy sister (Leonel)
Does equally perplex my sufferance
With what the fair Evandra must endure.

Leo. You now have heard the cheerful Art she used
To be the first that should confirm her love
With prostitution of her virgin life.

Alva. But why for me? how poor they make me now,
That have betra'yd me to a debt the wealth
Of Saints (that are in kindness ever rich)
Is not of able value to discharge;
I love them both with equal flame, and I
Distinguish neithers beauty when compared;
It Is virtue and remorce give Ladies eminence
In the severe discretion of my heart.

Pro. I want the wisdom how to love; but I
Am sure I find I love, and it is too much

Alva. Come sing; would music had the power to give
A life, as it has had to move things dead.

Song.
O draw your Curtains and appear, Ere long, like sparks that upward fly,
We can but vainly say you were, So soon you will vanish from the eye.
And in what Star we both shall find (For sure you cannot divided be)
Is not to Lovers Art assigned, 'Twill puzzle wise Astrology.
Enter Evandra, and Melora, above. Evan. Who is it that assumes the office of
The dying Swan? all Music now (me thinks)
Is obsequy, and he that fings should sing his death.

Mel. The gentle and most valiant Prince, bold Prospero.

Evan. And there behold the faithful Leonell.

Leon. O pardon me that I have kept my vow.

Evan. Brave youth! I prize thy truth great as thy love;
We now are marked here, and enclosed for death,
So you have all a blessed liberty.

Alva. A liberty? we are more bound than slaves unto
The unwieldy oar; like harnessed cattle in
A Teeme, we draw a load of sorrow after us
That tires our strength.

Evan. There was no way but this
To keep you still among the living, who
Before endeavored nobly to procure
Our freedom with your deaths; do not repine
At destiny, all remedy is past.

Alva. A fatal truth; for we but now dejected on our knees
Did woo my Fathers mercy, and in vain.

Mel. Then strive not by untimely rage to help
And further our impossible release
With certain hazard of your selves; our last
Suit is, we may begin our willing death
As quietly as undisturbed sleep.

Evan. The silly crime of envy which unlearned
And haughty Lovers use, I shall prevent;
You Will want the object now, that makes you interchange
The vexed remembrance of each others claim.

Alva. Were you to live we could not share that guilt;
Though number make us three, wise love has given
Us all one peaceful heart.

Evan. O Melora! were it but timely now
To wish continuance of mortality,
Like them, we should not differ though the same
One virtue were our mutual hope and choice;
But you should chide her sir, for she has loved
Your happiness too much, vainly to lose
Her life when mine would satisfy.

Alva. Why Melora did thou undo my soul
With so strange courtesy? but why did you
Evandra? stay, o stay, leave us not yet.

Evan. The Guard are entered here, and now the last
And shortest of our hours is come; farewell
Brave Prince; brave Leonell farewell; farewell brave Prospero.

Mel. The gentle valiant Prince
Farewell; and valiant Leonell farewell;
Farewell the hardy Prospero Ex. from above.
Leon. and Pro. draw their swords.
Alva. Nay, stir not Gentlemen, it is in vain,
They are beyond all humane help; would you
Scale heaven, and cool the saucy Sun with your
Frail breath when he does scorch you with his beams?
For such is now the enterprise that strives
To rescue them from this high Fort.

Leon. Would I were in a Cannon charged, then straight
Shot out to batter it, and be no more.

Pro. Would all the stones might be ordained my food
Till I could eat their passage out.

Alva. These angry exaltations show but poor.

Pro. Sir, whither shall we go?

Alva To see them dye; but not like vain and colerick boys, to show
A fury that can hazard none but our
Disdained swords; yet still my worthy friends
There is an undertaking left, and such
As valiant lovers may perform; why should
The base and durty Guard be honored with
Our opposition or our blood? have we
Not grief enough to dye without their help?
Let us with fixed and watery eyes behold
These Ladies suffer, but with silence still,
Calmely like pinioned doves, and when we see
The fatal stroke is given, swell up our sad
And injured hearts until they break.

Leon. I do not find my self unapt for this.

Pro. My breast contains an angry lump that is
Too stubborn for a quiet bravery;
He that shall strike Evandras life shall feel
Me till he sink low as the hollownesse where Devils dwell.

Alva. This way; let us avoid the gazing multitude.
Exeunt. Enter Duke, Caladine, Vasco, 2 Ambassadors, and Attendants.
Du. Have you unto your Officers given charge
To guard the passage from the Fort unto
The Palace yard with bold well-governed men?

Vas. All is directed Sir as you command;
But for their government, if it be to be had
In prisons, galleys, or stews, you may
Trust them with a mutiny.

Call. His resolution's fi'xd, and there remains
No comfortable sign to flatter hope.

Du. My Lords Ambassadors sit down; and though
You now behold a Prince that rather loves
To be thought cruel than to break his vow,
Do not believe to be severely just
Is tyranny; you shall have fair admittance,
Yet your request unkindly ought to be
Denied; and though your Master (when the chance
Of war rendered my brother in his power)
Stole in the dark his noble life, and durst
Not give the wrathful act a general view;
I Am not ashamed to publish my revenge,
It shall be openly performed, to show
I not suspect men's censure or dislike.

1 Emb. Sir, he that ministers revenge may hurt
And damage others, but can bring no good
Or real profit to himself.

2 Emb. And with your Highness leave, we think it were
More wise to mulct our Masters treasure, which
Shall be exhausted freely to your own
Proportion and content, so you will take
His Daughter and her loved companion from
The danger of this day.
Enter Evandra, Melora, Guard, at one door: Alvaro, Prospero, Leonell, at the
other.
Du. I will not sell my brothers blood;
The prisoners approach; make room; ere long
They shall enjoy the liberty of souls;
Vasco, lend me thine ear.
whispers.
Alva. How beautiful is sorrow when it dwells
Within these Ladies eyes? so comely, that it makes
Felicity in others seem deformed.
I wish my patience may be strong enough.

Leon. I now begin to doubt I am not fit
To see their hazard and indur't.

Pro. Nor I; my loyalty already stird
Beyond the temperate suff'rance of a man.

Du. Thou see the Prince wears trouble in his locks;
Though any opposition he can make
Be but impertinent and weak, yet charge
Thy Officers, if he endeavor to
Disturb my will, imprison him in the Fort.

Vas. I shall observe him Sir; I do not like
This employment; the Prince will find no
Enemies in all my tribe.

Du. If you have any words from Millaine that
Imports their knowledge, ere they dye, be brief
My Lords Ambassadors; I give you leave
To whisper your affair, or if you please,
To make it public to the world.

1 Emb. Your cruel resolutions sir, have so
Confined our liberality, that all
We shall deliver to Evandra now
Is but her Fathers and her Countries tears,
And those we can by deputation pay
To the indang'ring of our eyes.

2 Emb. And to Melora, that in kindness thus
Has shared her destiny, we do confer
The worlds eternal wonder and applause.

Evan. It will deprive me of some joy in death, to think
My Father needs must suffer by a vain
Unprofitable grief, and it is the last
Request I make, that he would wisely now
Forget my obsequies and name.

Mel. And my desires make suit, that those who shall
Hereafter write the business of this day
May not believe I suffer for the hope
Of glorious Fame, but for a secret in my hidden love.

1 Emb. Question your justice Sir, must they both dye?

Du. Both; and I think my payment is but short,
When I consider well the measure of
My brothers worth, with their unvalu'd Sex,
And wish some man that boasts your masters blood
Were singly here to undergo their fate,
It would more pleasure my revenge, but since
There is no hope in that desire, away, lead them to death.

Leon. Stay Sir, reprieve them but one minutes space
Until you hear a stranger speak.

Alva. What means this noble youth?

Du. Be sudden in thy speech, for my revenge brooks no delay.

Leon. If I produce a man allied unto this Family you so abhor,
Great as your self in title and descent,
Will you with solemn vow confirm their liberty,
And take his life to satisfy your wrath?

Du. By the honor of a Princes faith I will;
And such a miracle would ravish me.

Leon. I dare believe your vow, you were so just
Though cruel in your last, and know my joys
Must take the privilege to boast you now
Have lost the power to make them dye.

Duk. It shall be wonderful if that prove true.

Leo. I am not Leonell the Millaine Knight,
But Leonell the Duke of Parmas Son,
Heir to his fortune and his fame.

Evan. O Melora! thy brother will reveal
Himself and quite undo our glorious strife.

Leo. By this you find I am to Millaine near
Allied; but more to tempt your fury on
My life, know 'twas my valiant Father took
Your brother prisoner, and presented him
Where he received his death; my Father that
So often has humbled you in war, and made
His victories triumph almost upon
The ruins of your State.

Alva. So young, and filled with thoughts so excellent,
That they surprise my wonder more than love!
Well may thou worship, Prospero, but dare not envy him.

Pro. B'ing your Disciple Sir,
I Am better taught; but it is no crime to wish
Fortune had made me Heir of Parma and
Not him, then I had died for them.

Vas. This is some comfort yet; I Am for the Ladies.

Call. But 'thath not given our sorrows a full cure.

Du. Sir you are boldest with your self; but you
Shall see I need no provocation to
Observe my vow; unbind the Ladies there,
And bear him straight to death.

1 Emb. Stay Sir, he must not dye.

Du. How? age and grief makes thee a fool, and mad.

1 Em. He must not Sir, if your revenge be wise,
And fix your anger where it is most deserved;
Takes off a false beard. Behold Millaine himself your Enemy;
Live princely youth, and let my years (which time
Would soon determine) be the ransom of
My chiefest blood; Evandra do not weep.

Evan. O Sir, there was less use of me; why would
You with this danger on your self destroy
That noble fame I virtuously pursued?

Mel. Our hope of endless glory now is lost.

Alva. Sure heaven intends more blessings to this day.

Du. I have achieved my wishes in full height;
This was a justice sir, more than I could
Expect from my own Stars; free Leonell
And let him suffer the prepared stroke.

2 Emb. First hear me speak, and fir how ever you will
Interpret the discretion of my words
I am resolved he shall not dye, nor none
Of these, though all in your command and power.

Vas. Say thou so old Shaver? make but that good,
The maids of Savoy shall everlastingly
Pay thee tribute in dainty gloves and Nosegays
To stick in thy girdle.

Du. This were a mystery would please indeed.

2 Emb. Look on me well: I am your brother Sir;
(Pulls off a false beard) And though ten years I have been hidden from
Your sight, this noble Duke has used me so,
I cannot call it banishment, but the
Retired and quiet happiness of life.

Alva. How wisely have the heavens contrived this joy!

1 Emb. And though his fortune in the war, which made
Your Armies ever flourish with success,
Taught me prevent my Countries ruin by
Detaining him from your employment there,
Yet he enjoyed all the delights that solitude
Affords: and when he chose his happiness
In Books and deep Discourses of the learned,
I searched the most remote and knowing world
For men to furnish his desires.

2 Emb. It is acknowledged sir, and with a bounteous thanks.

Duk. How welcome are these miracles? let me
Embrace thee as the greatest joy that since
My birth I have received. O my loved brother,
Thou see though absent I Have been faithful to
Thy virtues, and thy memory.

2. Emb. But sir, too strict a master of your vow;
Yet it is a fault my gratitude should more
Admire with thankfulness, than chide.

Duk. This happy day deserves a place supreme
And eminent in the Kallander.

2. Emb. First I will give into your courteous arms
The Duke of Millaine sir, good and renoun'd;
And now the bold and princely Leonell;
Then Alvaro my honored nephew that
Deserves the best of humane praise and love.
The Duke embraces them.
Alva. Dread sir, that every one may share the joy
And blessings of this precious hour, let me
Restore poor Prospero into your breast.

Duk. He shall be cherished and his faults forgiven.

Pros. I shall deserve it sir in future deeds
Of honor, and of loyal faith; how I
Am raped to see those wonders strangely thrive?

Vas. What think you of the stars now Caladine?
Do these small twinkling Gentlewomen
Look to their business well? have they a care of us?

Call. It is beyond our merit or our hope.

Vas. I Will buy me an optic, study Astrology,
And visit them every fair night ore my house leds.

Duk. The chiefest happiness of virtue is
The Increase, which to procure, with Hymen's help
We Will knit, and intermingle lovers hearts.
Come my Alvaro, I Will bestow thee straight.

Melo. A little patience sir, and hear me speak
Before you give what lawfully is mine.

Duk. Indeed thou do deserve him by thy love.

Mel. In love Evandras interest justly
Does equal mine, but I appeal unto
His vow, which sure her goodness will assist.

Alva. And my religion shall persuade me keep;
But where (Melora) was it made?

Melo. Within my fathers court, when five years since
(Disguised you stole to see a triumph there)
You promised if our houses enmity
Were ever reconciled, the church should join our hands.

Leon. Sir, What my sister speaks I Am witness to,
And hope this day shall end our parents strife
In a kind peace.

Duk. Which thus I do confirm;
Take him Melora, with him all the joys
Thy virtues or our prayers can procure.

Alva. Did thou for this with kind Evandra strive
Who should encounter danger first? although
Thy beauty's changed, it is not lost; I now
Remember thee, and my vows prophecy.
Embrace.
1. Emb. Now my best Evandra give me thy hand;
And hear receive it valiant Leonell;
That I may ratify the faith I gave,
If ere this war expired she should be thine.

Duke. Then he may challenge present interest,
For we may meet to hear voices and lutes,
But never more the angry Drum.

Evan. Alvaro's virtues sir, and yours, have both
An equal claim; persons I nere admired
So much to make a difference in my choice;
Therefore my fathers promise, and my love
Have made me yours.

Leon. I am orecharg'd with my felicity.

Alv. To Evandra, gladness be still renewed,
Who since I see so worthily bestowed,
My love is quieted in everlasting rest.

Evan. And mine by your exact, and perfect choice.

Pros. These glad archievements are so well deserved,
I not malign your loyes; I Will to the war
And fight to win you a perpetual peace.
Vasco takes Millaine aside.
Vas. I Am bold to crave acquaintance with your grace,
And to begin it with a suit.

1 Emb. It shall be granted Sir.

Vas. I have married your Graces Countrywoman,
And was a little (sir) mistaken in her age,
Would you would procure us a divorce.

1 Emb. If you can make it appear she is too old.

Vas. She writes a hundred and ten (Sir) next grass.

1 Emb. It Is a fair age; well Sir, you shall have a divorce,
And what the profits of her dowry would
Have been, I will my self bestow on you.

Vas. Such another good day makes us all mad.

Du. Come, to the Temple, and let us join those hearts.
That with such pious courage have endured
The trial of a noble constant faith,
Whom tortures nor the frowns of death could move.
This happy day we will consecrate to love.
Exeunt.
FINIS.
PROLOGUE
But that the Tyran custom bears such sway,
We would present no Prologue to our Play,
Since we have learned in Prologues all the scope
Is with weak words to strengthen weaker hope,
When with sad solemn phrase we court each ear
Not to observe, but pardon what you hear:
Or if there were but one so strangely wise
Whose judgment strives to please, and trust his
Him at an easy charge we could provoke (eyes,
To a kind doom with this grave long old cloak.
Now for the over-subtle few, who raise
Themselves a trivial fame by a dispraise,
Our bold opinion is, they may descry
Some easy wit, but much more cruelty.
EPILOGUE.
Troth Gentlemen you must vouchsafe a while
TO excuse my mirth, I cannot choose but smile,
And it is to think, how like a subtle spy
Our Poet waits below to hear his destiny;
Just in the Entry as you pass, the place
Where first you mention your dislike or grace:
Pray whisper softly that he may not hear,
Or else such words as shall not blast his ear.

