AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT.

For the speedy raising of fourteen thousand pounds, and furnishing of one, or
more Magazine, or Magazines of Arms and Ammunition, and other necessary
charges.

For and concerning the raising of Horse, and other Military Forces, within the
Hamblets of the Tower, The City of Westminster, the Borough of Southwarke, and
other parts of the Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, within the Forts and Lines
of Communication and Parishes adjacent, mentioned in the Weekly Bill of
Mortallity.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament that this Ordinance be forthwith printed
and published.

H. Elsynge. Cler Parl. D. Com.



LONDON, Printed by L. N. for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop
in the Middle Temple. October 12. 1643.

Die Lune September. 4. 1643.
And Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the speedy raising
of Moneys, and furnishing of one, or more Magazine, or Magazines of Arms and
Ammunition, and other necessary charges, for and concerning the raising of
Horse, and other Military Forces within the Hamblets of the Tower, the City of
Westminster, the Borough of Southwarke, and other parts of the Counties of
Middlesex and Surrey, within the Forts and Lines of Communication, and Parishes
adjacent mentioned in the weekly Bill of Mortality.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, finding that there is for the
present an urgent necessity for the speedy raising and levying a considerable
sum of Money, for the providing of one or more Magazin or Magazins of Arms
and Ammunition, and for other necessary charges, for and concerning the raising
and payment of Horse and other Military forces within the Hamblets of the Tower
of London, and Liberties thereof, the City of Westminster, and Liberties
thereof, the Borough of Southwarke and Liberties thereof, and all other parts
and places of the Counties of Middlesex and Surrey within the Forts or Lines of
Communication, and Parishes adjacent, mentioned in the weekly Bill of
Mortality, the just defense of Religion, the Privileges of Parliament, the
Laws and Liberties of the Subject and safety of the City of London, and of the
parts and places a foresaid, and consequently of the whole Kingdom, (calling
and requiring for their utmost aid herein.) Have hereby ordained and declared;
and be it hereby ordained and declared by the said Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, that for the intents
and purposes aforementioned the several and respective sums of money,
hereafter in this Ordinance expressed, shall be respectively charged, rated,
taxed, and levied upon the several Divisions, Limits, and Places hereafter
mentioned, according to the Proportions and distributions in this Ordinance
expressed, That is to say, upon the said Hamblets of the Tower of London and
Liberties, the sum of four thousand pounds, upon the City of Westminster and
Liberties thereof, and other the Liberties, Parishes, and Places adjacent in
the County of Middlesex within the Forts and Lines of Communication, and other
adjacent Parishes and Places within the said County of Middlesex, and mentioned
in the weekly Bill of Mortality, the sum of six thousand pounds, upon the
Borough of Southwark and Liberties thereof, and all Parishes and places
adjacent within the Forts or Lines of Communication, within the County of
Surrey, and other Parishes and places within the said County of Surrey,
mentioned in the said weekly Bill of Mortality, the sum of four thousand
pounds.

And be it further Ordained, That all and every person and persons whatsoever,
residing or inhabiting within any the places or divisions aforementioned, for
every estate Real or Personal, that every such person or persons, or any
other, has to his or their use in trust, or otherwise shall pay toward the
said sums his and their proportionable part, and proportion of such sum or
sums of Money as by virtue of this Ordinance shall be so imposed, charged,
set or assessed, as aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning
thereof. And that the respective Subcommittees of the respective places above
mentioned, appointed by the Committee of the Militia of London, according to
the Ordinance of Parliament, dated the eighteenth of July last, shall have full
power and authority within their several and respective limits and divisions
to direct their Warrants to such number of persons as they shall think fit,
thereby nominating and appointing them to be Assessors within their respective
limits and divisions aforesaid, which persons so nominated and appointed, shall
hereby have full power and authority to assesse, tax, or rate, all and every
such person and persons according to the true meaning of these presents: And
the said respective Sub-committees shall hereby have full power and authority
within their respective limits and divisions, to nominate and appoint
Collectors, to gather and receive the money so assessed, which Collectors so
nominated and appointed, shall and may collect and gather the moneys so
assessed, as aforesaid, and pay the same at the several places, where the said
several Sub-committees shall appoint, to the respective Treasurers hereafter
mentioned, viz. The Collectors for the Hamblets of the Tower of London and
Liberties thereof; to William Mellish Esquire, who is hereby nominated and
appointed to be Treasurer for the same Hamblets and Liberties: And the
Collectors of the said City of Westminster, and other places above mentioned,
to John Honor, Cent. who is hereby by nominated and appointed to be Treasurer
of the same division. And the Collectors for the said Borough of Southwarke and
places above mentioned in the said County of Surrey to Joseph Collier Grocer,
who is hereby nominated and appointed Treasurer for the same Division, which
said respective Treasurers are hereby authorized to issue out the said moneys
so gathered and received, according to such Warrants or Directions as shall be
given by the said respective Sub-committees; provided always, That no moneys
be issued out by the said Treasurer for the Hamblets of the Tower of London,
and Liberties thereof, but by order, made at the usual place and time of
meeting of the said Committee, by a full Committee consisting of seven persons
at the least, whereof Foulke Wormelaiton, (...) Loton, Edward Lole, (...) or
any two of them, to be then and there personally present and subscribing
thereunto: And that no moneys be issued out by the said Treasurer for the said
City of Westminster, and other places adjacent before mentioned, by order made
at the usual place of meeting of the said Committee, by a full Committee
consisting of seven persons at the least, whereof M. William Ball, M. Josias
Barners, M. Lawrence Swetnam, M. Edward Carter, M. William Haberfield, M.
William Hooper, and M. William Dashwood, or any two of them to be then and
there personally present and subscribing thereunto. And that no moneys be
issued out by the said Treasurer for the said Borough of Southwarke and places
before mentioned, but by order made at the usual place and time of meeting of
the said Committee, by a full Committee consisting of seven persons at the
least, whereof M. Richard Wright, M. Cornelius Cook, M. George Snelling, M.
Edmund Austin, M. William Hickox, M. Richard Walker, M. Sammuel Lynne, and M.
Robert Terry, or any two of them, to be then and there personally present and
subscribing thereunto.

And the said Lords and Commons do hereby further ordain and declare, That
every such person or persons so Rated and Assessed, by virtue hereof shall pay
to the said respective Collectors two parts in three parts to be divided of all
and every such sum or sums of money, so to be rated or assessed on him or
them as aforesaid within three days next after notice or demand made by the
persons to be appointed for the collecting and receiving thereof, and the other
third part thereof within the space of one month next after the publication
hereof.

And whereas diverse sums of money be paid weekly, and other sums of money
for the making and erecting of Fortifications, Posts and Chains, and Courts of
Guards, within the respective Divisions before mentioned are collected and not
accounted for, and other parts thereof remain arreate not yet collected. The
said Lords and Commons do hereby Ordain and Declare. That all such persons
who have collected any of the said moneys, shall immediately upon demand make
their accounts and payments thereof to the Sub-Committees of that Division
wherein such collection has been made; which Subcommittee has hereby power to
appoint Collectors to gather the said arreares, and the said Committee to
dispose thereof to such uses and purposes as such Assessements have been made
for: and if any person or persons having received moneys for the use above
mentioned, and shall refuse to account for and pay the same in manner before
expressed: or if any person or persons Assessed or to be Assessed for the
raising of the several sums of money herein mentioned shall fail in the
payment thereof, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Collectors, and every of them respectively (calling to their assistance any of
the Trained Bands, Constables or others) to levy double the sum or sums so
Assessed, or to be Assessed by way of distress upon his or their goods and
chattels, and shall and may sell the same distress or distresses for the
services aforesaid, and the overplus to be returned to the owner of the
distress taken. And in case no sufficient distresses can be found within the
respective Divisions aforesaid; then upon certificate to be made in that
behalf, by the respective Sub-committees of the said Divisions, unto the
Committee of the House of Commons, for examinations, sitting at Westminster: or
to the Committee of the Militia of London, or any three of them; the said
Committee for Examinations or Committee for the Militia, or any three of them,
shall and may commit such person or persons to safe custody, without bail or
mainprize, wheresoever he or they shall be found; whether within the said
respective Divisions, or without. And the estate or estates of him or them,
shall and may be sequestered by the Committee of Sequestrations of such City,
County, or Place, where the same estate or estates shall be found, to be
employed within the respective Divisions, where such assessements on him or
them as aforesaid was made, for the services and purposes aforementioned,
until the sum or sums so assessed shall be fully satisfied. And the said
Lords and Commons do hereby further ordain and declare. That no person or
persons so assessed, or to be assessed as aforesaid, shall remove his or their
goods from any place or places within any the Divisions aforesaid, to any other
place or places without the aforesaid Forts, or lines of Communication; by
color of any license or pretense whatsoever; unless the same person or
persons do produce and deliver unto the Officer or Officers of the several
Courts of guard for the time being, atrue Schedule of the goods so to be
removed; together with a Certificate in writing under the hands of the
Sub-Committee of that Division from whence the same goods shall be removed;
mentioning that the owner of the said goods has fully satisfied and answered
all impositions, rated, imposed, or set upon him. And if any person or persons
shall endeavor to do the contrary, shall be esteemed as a party disaffected to
the Commonwealth; and forfeit the goods so to be removed. And it shall and may
be law full to and for any person or persons whatsoever, to seize the same; and
to certify the same unto the said respective Sub-Committees of the said
several Divisions.

And be it by the said Lords and Commons further ordained; That all Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments of all and every person and persons whatsoever, of
what degree or quality whatsoever; or in whose possession the same are, within
the Divisions aforesaid, shall be rated, charged, and chargeable for, and
toward the raising and payment of the said sum or sums of money set and
charged by this Ordinance: Yet nevertheless with this limitation and
provision, that if the land be let or set, to, or near the yearly value
thereof, in the possession of any Tennant for life, lives, or years, or at
will; such person, or persons, to whom the rent thereof belongs, to be solely
charged therewith. But if the same be let at any easy or small rent, or under
value, then the sum taxed, to be apportioned between the party or parties,
to whom the rent belongs, and the Tennant or Occupier of the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, as the Taxers of Assessors shall think meet. And
if any such Tennant or Occupier of lands, tenements, or hereditaments, shall or
may be changed with any sum of money; that it shall and may be lawful, to
and for such Tennants or Occupier, to detain the same, from, or out of his
rent, due or next payable for the same land. And for the better encouragement
of the said respective Collectors and Treasurers, it is ordained, That three
pence in the pound shall be allowed for every sum of money which shall be
collected and paid to the said Treasurers according to this Ordinance; whereof
two pence shall be to the Collectors, and one penny to the Treasurer. And be it
by the said Lords and Commons further ordained, That if any Assessor or
Collector shall refuse the said service, or prove negligent or faulty therein;
the said Sub-Committee for the respective Divisions or Limits, where such
Assessor or Collector shall refuse, or be so negligent or faulty, shall have
power to commit such Assessors or Collectors to prison: or to set such fine
upon him or them as they shall think fit, not exceeding the sum of twenty
pounds upon the Assessor, or five pounds upon the Collector; the same to
belevied by distress and sale of such offenders goods to the uses herein
mentioned, in such sort as is herein before appointed.

And be it lastly, by the said Lords and Commons further ordained, that all and
every the respective Committees, Assessors, and Collectors of the respective
Divisions aforesaid, and all that shall assist them in the premises, shall be
protected by both Houses of Parliament: Provided that this Ordinance, or any
thing therein contained, shall not extend to the Peers or Members of either
house, or the assistants of the House of Peers, or necessary attendants of
either House.

FINIS.

