An Exact ACCOUNT Of the Late Engagement Between the French King's Forces, and
those of the Grand Seignior before CANDIA, On the 25th of June 1669.

As it came in a LETTER from the Duke de Navailles the French General.

With a LIST of the SLAIN and WOVNDED.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1669.

An Exact Account Of the late Engagement between the French King 's Forces, and
those of the Grand Seignior before Candia, on the 25th of June, 1669.
THe Fleet appointed for the Transportation of the Succors sent by His Most
Christian Majesty for the Relief of Candia, under the Command of the Duke de
Navailles General of the Landforces, set Sail from Thoulon the Fifth of June
1669, about 4 in the Afternoon. The 17th following they were joined by 14
Venetian Ships having on board them Horses, etc. for that Expedition; and came
all to an Anchor in the Bay of this City the 19th, where His Majesty's Fleet
receiving the usual Salutes from the Town, answered them by the Admiral only.
The Duke de Beaufort, the Duke de Navailles, Monsieur Colbert (Brother of the
Minister of State) and other Officers of the Army Embarked themselves in a
Chaloupe to discover the Enemies Posts, which, as to the Situation of their
Camp at the Sabionera, and St. Andre, they found to agree with the Draught sent
thence to the Count the April before; Save only that the Enemy had made some
advance especially toward the side of the Bastion St. Andre, of which indeed
they were now become Masters, and had raised a Battery of two Pieces of Canon,
to annoy all Vessels passing in, or out of the Port.

Whilst they were thus Viewing, and considering the Place, they could perceive
a small Bark, with Venetian Colors come from the Port, and make toward the
Fleet, which it seems had on board her the Sieur Castellan (Kinsman to him that
Commands a Brigade in the Army, and now employed as an Engineer) especially of
late; for the Defense of the Bastion of the Sabionera.

He was sent by the Captain General of the Republic to Complement the Admiral
the Duke de Navailles, and the rest of the Officers of the Army in the Name of
the Garrison, and to inform them of the true state of the Place, and the
extremity it was reduced to; bringing also with him a Design of the same for
better Demonstration. He freely declared, They had no other hopes of Preserving
the Place, but the Expectation of these Succors; and, that he had express
Orders from the Captain General, to desire 3000 Men to Mount the Guard that
very night, lest the Enemy, upon their Arrival, should resolve upon a General
Assault, and carry the place, before their Forces could come a shore.

This did a little surprise the Duke de Navalleis, who was loath to adventure
the Landing of part of his Men, and therefore thought best, that himself, and
some of the Principal Officers of his Army should first take a view of the Town
that night, and afterward as he saw occasion take care for the Landing his Men.

This he Communicated to the Admiral, and accordingly about 11 of the Clock
with Monsieur de Champ and some other Officers went on board the same Barque,
that brought Monsieur Castellan, for his more particular information.

On the Morrow morning being the 21th. The Duke de Navailles having well
weighed all things, and finding the State of the Place to be no better then
what Monsieur Castellan had reported, The Enemy entrenched, their Cannon
mounted upon the Bastion St. Andre, whence they played continually upon the
first Retrenchments which there being little ground left, was not in a
Condition to make any considerable defense, and that the second Retrenchment
which the besieged had begun to cast up behind it could not possibly be
finished time enough to prevent their gaining a mine, (which he was assured was
underneath the first Retrenchment) of which if the Enemy were once possessed,
the whole place would lie open to them, and endanger the loss of the Garrison.

This he thought might reflect upon the honor of the Arms of the King his
Master, that the place should be taken in sight of the succors without
attempting something toward its relief, (the Admiral concurring with him in
the same opinion) they resolved upon a speedy Landing of all their forces,
which they began to put in Execution that very night, so that in 2 or 3 days
they had all their men ashore.

The 22d 4 of the Kings Musketeers and a Quartermaster of Horse, who had
orders to go and provide quarters in the Town, adventuring to enter the Port
by day, 3 of the Musketeers were killed by the Enemies Canon from the Bastion
of St. Andre, and the Quartermaster at the same time lost one of his hands.

The 23d the Admiral entered the Town and viewed the Posts, the Generals
calling a Council of Officers concluded there was no other expedient for the
preserving the Town, then by a General assault immediately to be made upon the
Enemy, before they could receive any recruits from Morea or fortify themselves
in their Trenches. Moreover by this means they might surprise them are they
could gather their Cavalry together, which was now dismounted and dispersed up
and down the Country.

These considerations confirmed the resolution of the assault which was to be
made upon the Sabionera side, as having a greater convenience of sallying out
of that quarter then that of St. Andre, and accordingly on the 24th at night,
or the 25th by break of day endeavor to beat the Enemy from their works and to
raise them. This was the opinion of our General and Officers and approved of
by the Venetians.

It was thought nevertheless too great an undertaking for our strength alone,
being from all hands informed the Enemy had 7 or 8000 men in that quarter,
wherefore he required of the Captain General to furnish us with all the men he
possibly could.

The great desire our General had to prosecute this design, in order to the
saving of the place, and the confidence he had of his own Forces, with their
promise of a supply, encouraged him to set upon the Sabionera, though it were
entrenched, and of greater strength then the body wherewith he intended to
attempt it. And therefore desired the Captain General to assign him 5 or 600
Pyoneers to slight the Enemies works, and nail down their Cannon, and that at
the same time a brisk sally might be made upon the side of the St. Andre to
keep them in play there, that they might not succor the Sabionera. All which
the Captain General promised punctually to perform.

The Admiral also who would needs have a part in this Action, engaged to land
1500 of his men from his Ships, and to lead them himself though he submitted to
receive orders from the Generals (Monsieur Colbert being appointed his Marshall
of the Camp) and to cause his men of war to be brought within Musket shot of
St. Andre and to keep playing upon the Enemies Camp with his Cannon from their
Ships, being unwilling to be a witness only to this glorious enterprise without
running all the risques that should attend it.

But the Venetians who at first promised us 4 or 500 horse and 3000 foot to
join with ours, showing the impossibility of affording any, took upon them
nevertheless to divert the Enemy at St. Andre, and by a stout salley which they
would make under the favor of our Cannon from the Ships to enter the Fort it
self.

The 24th at night the Admiral having landed his seamen sent notice thereof to
the Duke de Navailles assuring him of their good disposition, each Company
being commanded by the Captain of that vessel out of which they were taken,
and that now he wanted only orders to draw them out, and to fall upon the Enemy.

The General returned him answer by the Baron de St. Mark that it was too
great a danger for a person of his quality to expose himself to, whom he also
desired to use all arguments to dissuade him, urging the great importance the
safety of his person was to his Majesty's Service, and the pa^ticular good of
the design now in hand, but all his instances could not prevail upon him to
alter his resolution.

That night the D. de Navailles went to take a view of the Rere of the Enemies
Camp, where he resolved to make his Onset, and in his return visited the Fort
Demetrius, by which he intended to issue out his Troops, and having disposed
his Battalia, he acquainted the Captain General, the D. of Beaufort, Monsieur
S. Andre Montbrun with the Order, desiring they would with all freedom give
their opinion upon it, (an affair of so great importance to Christendom,
requiring to be well weighed,) which when understood, they unanimously approved
it to have been so well laid, that there was nothing to be added or altered.

It being now near day, the D. de Navailles began to draw out his men out of
the Town, with the greatest silence imaginable in the Order agreed upon before,
which was as follows.

Four hundred men were drawn out of each body, 50 Grenadiers placed in the
Front of them, and brought up by 3 Troops of horse commanded by Monsieur
Dampier.

These were followed by the Regiments of Gaures, Saint Valier, Lorrain, and
Britany, 4 Troops of horse upon their wings, and brought up by the Regiments of
Montague, Jonsac, and Grance.

The Regiments of Harcourt, Conti, Lignieres, Momp^zat and Vendosme made up the
Reserve commanded by Monsieur de Choiseville, 4 Squadrons of horse marching
upon their wings, and were Posted between the Enemies two Camps, to cut off all
relief that might come from S. Andre to the Sabionera, they were about to
attacque.

There were also 50 of the Kings Musketeers and 100 reformed Officers placed
between the first and second line to be ready upon any emergency.

The Forces that came from on board the Ships were ordered to make their sally
on the left side of the Trench of the Sabionera.

Whilst the Army was drawing out the D. de Navailles caused two breaches to be
made to sally out of the Trench, by one of which 500 men should attacque them
in the Front, the rest to divide themselves into two bodies, and flank the two
Batteries, but with express Order not to stir till they knew the Camp was
engaged, and in case they gained the Batteries, which in all likelihood they
would, there to range themselves, and not to advance a foot without fresh
Orders.

After silence commanded, which was punctually observed, though in a strange
and uneven Country, we marched in this excellent order till we came within a
very small distance of the Enemy, and ranged our selves in Battalia in a little
place leading into their Camp, without ever being discovered.

The day was also propitious to our designs, our last Troops being scarce come
up to their Lines, when we could discern the enemies Camp.

Our commanded men who were then within half Musket shot of the Enemy were
fired upon by their Musquettiers, and our General discovering two Redoubts at
the head of the Quarters, caused them to be set upon by the Forces commanded by
Monsieur Dampier, who seconded by the Guards immediately carried them with
great resolution, putting all to the sword that made any resistance.

At the same time the Enemies Lines were assaulted and taken by the Regiments
of S. Valier and Lorrain, whilst the commanded men fell in upon the Rere of
the Trench, Monsieur Castellan seconding them in the head of the Company of
Guards under his Command, with infinite execution and slaughter of the Enemy,
possessed themselves of them: here our Troops fell to plundering, though it
were prohibited upon pain of death, and entering the enemies Huts slew great
numbers, whom they surprised before they could get into a posture of defense.

Hitherto every thing succeeded according to our desires, though we had not
above 300 men from on board the ships, and few or none of the Venetians, so
that this handful of men routed this numerous enemy, amongst whom was so great
consternation, that they threw themselves headlong into the Sea when they were
Masters of the Batteries and Canon.

The Enemy thus beaten from their Camp, drew up upon an Ascent on our right
hand, whence viewing our small numbers on the left, scarce 300 Seamen
advancing, notwithstanding all the importunity of the Admiral and Monsieur
Colbert, with a hideous shout, rallied to charge us in those Trenches they had
so lately abandoned; but our General perceiving their intent sustained the
charge, and forced them twice to a confused retreat, not without a considerable
loss; but they being a sort of people that quickly rally, were presently upon
us again, with as much eagerness as formerly they fled: Our General then put
himself in the head of the Company of Guards, and causing the Squadron of S.
Esteve to follow, received them so warmly, that we became Masters of the upper
ground they had taken.

But then there happened an unlucky accident, the Powder Grenades etc. of a
Battery possessed by the Guards taking fire, the soldiers fearing there had
been a Mine, dispersed the whole Battalion, running to the right and left in
that disorder that Monsieur Castellan had much ado to make them to rally.

The 300 from on board the Ships, terrified with this accident, deserted their
Posts, and by all the endeavors could possibly be used would not be brought
back to the fight.

The General and Monsieur Colbert seeing this disaster came up with our first
Battalions in the head of 50 of the Kings Musketeers on foot, where with this
small body they performed things beyond all imagination.

This misfortune gave such encouragement to the Turks that they attacqued our
men afresh with vigor enough, who were so sh^ken with the violence of the
assault and number (...) Enemy that the greatest part began to retreat without
(...) and had not our General with great resolution in the head of a small
troop of horse he had newly rallyed together, maintained a Curtain that
favored our retreat, the Enemy had prevailed upon this disorder to our very
great disadvantage.

In the mean time the body of the Reserve, was surrounded with several
Companies, powered in upon them from St. Andre, between whom there was a slight
skirmish but of no long continuance, which our men not being able to sustain,
though infinitely Encouraged thereunto by the Messieurs le Bret and Choyseul,
who had both their horses killed under them, Followed the Example of the
Seamen, and made a disorderly retreat.

This completed the loss of that Advantage, we so long had in our hands, and
the Enemy fearing our retreat might betray them into an Ambush, had not Courage
enough to pursue, retaining still such a dread of our forces though retreated
in disorder, that our General assisted only by the Messieurs Tulladet, and
Argellon, and 4 or 5 Gentlemen of his own family that never deserted him, made
good so orderly a retreat, that the Enemy durst not attempt this small number,
but discharging a great volley of small shot upon them, our Generals horse was
hurt in two places, and himself received a shot on his Armor but without hurt
to his body.

The Admiral the Duke de Beaufort abandoned by all his men fell in this
action, without any person about him but what were killed or wounded; among the
former was Monsieur Bourgneuf, the later Monsieur Hoquette, who had his Foot
shot off at the Ancle by a Musket bullet.

This glorious Action, So happily begun, and carried on with that excellent
conduct, however unfortunate in the disorder, might nevertheless have been
esteemed a succesfull and advantageous enterprise, were it not for the
invaluable loss of our Admiral, and those other Noble persons that fell with
him.

The advice from the Enemies Camp speaks the loss on their side to have been
very considerable, above 1800 men having been killed, drowned, and taken
Prisoners.

A Particular List of the Slain and Wounded.
Principal Officers Slain.
THe Duke de Beaufort, Admiral of France. The Sieur de Rozan, brother to the
Marquess Blanquefort, Master of the Camp. Marquis de Fabert, Master of the
Camp. Monsieur de Bourgneuf, Aid de Camp.
Principal Officers and Persons of note wounded.
Monsieur Castellan dangerously. Monsieur Lignieres Mareshal of the Camp
dangerously. Monsieur Molier Captain of the Cavalry. The Chevalier de Bouillon.
Monsieur Montaigue Colonel. Monsieur de Cauuisson. Monsieur le Gaure. Marquess
d'Uxelles Aid de Camp. Monsieur de la Hoquette, Aid de Camp. Monsieur de
Montbrun, not St. Andre Montbrun. Vicount de Casse 3 wounds on the head with a
Cimitar. Du Cles, Captain of the Duke de Navailles Guards, wounded with an
Arrow in his head. Mr. de la Much d'Origni, Engineer. The Little Chevalier de
Vendosme, received 3 shots in his Armor, the Bullets of two pierced to his very
Shirt, without hurting him.
Officers in the several Regiments killed and Wounded.
In Monsieur Castellan's Brigade of Foot.
1 Captain, 1 Lieutenant, Monsieur Guenengau, Voluntier, killed. 1 Ensign
wounded.
In Mr. de Rozans Regiment.
1 Lieutenant wounded.
In Mr. de Grances Regimen^
1 Major, 1 Lieutenant, killed. 1 Captain, 1 Lieutenant, hurt.
In Monsieur de Jonzac's Regim^^t
1 Major killed. 1 Lieutenant Colonel, 1 Captain, 3 Lieutenants ^u^t.
In Monsieur de Vendosmes Regiment,
1 Lieutenant killed. 1 Major, 1 Captain hurt.
In Monsieur St. Valier's Regiment.
2 Captains killed. Monsieur St. Valier, 1 Major, 2 Captains, 2 Lieutenants
hurt.
In Mr. de Montpeyroux's Regiment.
1 Lieutenant hurt.
In Monsieur Dampiers's Regiment.
4 Captains hurt.
In Monsieur de Harcourt's Regiment.
1 Captain, 1 Lieutenant killed. 5 Captains, 2 Lieutenants hurt.
In Monsieur de Conty's Regiment.
1 Lieutenant killed. 1 Captain hurt.
Reformed Officers.
In the Navarre Brigade.
1 Lieutenant killed.
In the Lorrain Brigade.
2 Majors (...) Captain killed. 3 Captains, 2 L^^^^^nants hurt.
In the Bretagne Brigade.
1 Captain killed. 1 Colonel, 1 Captain, 1 Lieutenant hurt.
In the Piedmont Brigade.
2 Captains, 1 Lieutenant killed.
In the Brigade of Normandy.
3 Captains, 1 Lieutenant killed.
In the Brigade of Picardy.
4 Captains, 5 Lieutenants killed.
Horse.
In Monsieur de Choyseul's Brigade.
3 Captains, 3 Lieutenants hurt.
In Monsieur de St. Esteue's.
1 Captain, 1 Lieutenant hurt.
In Monsieur de Sommieures.
2 Lieutenants killed. 2 Lieutenants hurt.
Private Soldiers killed and wounded 5 or 600 Men, besides Prisoners. Of the
Enemy were killed, drowned, and taken Prisoners, about 1800.
FINIS.

