A PLEA FOR THE Non-Conformists, GIVING The true State of the Dissenters Case.
And how far the Conformists Separation from the Church of Rome, for their
Popish Superstitions and Traditions introduced into the Service of God,
justifies the Non-Conformists Separation from them for the same.

In a Letter to Dr. Benjamin Calamy, upon his Sermon, called, Scrupulous
Conscience, inviting hereto.

To which is added, A Parallel Scheme of the Pagan Papal and Christian Rites
and Ceremonies. With a Narrative of the Sufferings underwent for Writing,
Printing and Publisher hereof.

By Thomas De Laune

Could we prevail with the People diligently to examine the Merits of the Cause
[and equally to hear both Parties upon the different determination of the
Guides on both sides] our Church would every day gain more ground amongst all
wise men;

Dr. Calamy's Scrup. Consc. page 24, 25. Nihil Sine, Nihil Contra, Nihil
Praeter, Nihil Ultra divinam Scripturam a^mittendum esse;

Pet. Mart. on 2 Samuel 6, p 212. Prove. 31. 8, 9. Open thy Mouth, plead the Cause
of the Poor, and such as are (...) for Destruction.

Romans 2. 1. Wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy (...) thou that
judge, (...) the same things.

Esaias 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony

Mark 7. ^3. making the Word of God of none Effect through your Tradition.

Mit. 19. 8. From the beginning it was not so.

1 King. 18. 21. How long halt we between two Opinions? If the Lord be God,
follow him, but if Baal, follow him.

London, Printed for the Author, 1684.

A Royal Witness to the Dissenters Cause.
Being some Gleanings of some of those Weighty and worthy Sayings of the late
King, in his Conference with the Popish Marquess of Worcester, 1646. in Ragland
Castle, out of Certamen Religiosum.
1st. In behalf of the Scripture, which the Papists slight for their Tradition.

2dly. Against their Primitive Antiquity, which they adore and fetch their vain
Worship from.

1st. FOr the Scripture, he says, p. 11^. That the Scripture is the Rule by
which all Differences may be composed; it is the Light wherein we must walk,
the Foo^ of our Souls, an Antidote that expels any Infection, the only Sword
that kills the Enemy, the only Plaster that can cure our Wounds, the only
Documents to attain Eternal Life. And p. 116. That the Evidences which are in
Scripture cannot be manifested but out of the same Scripture, and quotes for
the same, Ironaeas lib. 3. 12.

2 dly. Against their Antiquities, p. 111. Our Savior Christ says, We must
not so much hearken to what has been said by them of old time, Mat. 5. 38, 39.
as to that which he shall tell you. Where Auditis dictum esse Antiquitatis is
expelled, and Ego dico vobis is come in its place. And speaking of that King of
Phrigia, that was about to be baptized, ask't the Bishop What was become of all
his Ancestors? He told him they were gone to He^l, flang away, and said,
Thither then will I go unto them; says, No less wise are they who had rather
err with their Fathers and Councils, than recti^ie their Understandings by the
Word of God, and square their Faith according to its Rules.

And speaking of the Fathers, says, p. 114. I discover no Fathers Nakedness,
but deplore their Infirmities, that we should not trust in Arms of Flesh.
Tertullian says he was a Montanist, Cyprian, a Rebaptist or Anabaptist;
Origins an Antropomo^p^ist, Jerome, a Monogonist, Nazianzen, an Angalist,
Eusebius, an Arrian: St. Austin had writ so many Errors, that he writ a Book of
Retractations, that they have often contradicted one another, and sometimes
themselves.

That it was no strange thing to see Error triumph in Antiquity, and flourish
their Ensigns of Universality, Succession, etc. in the face of Truth; and
nothing so familiar of old as to besmear the face of Truth with spots of
Novelty; for this was Jeremiah's case, Jer. 44. 16* 17. etc.

If you vaunt never so much of your Roman Catholick-Church, we can tell you,
out of St. John* That she is become the Synagogue of Satan; neither is it
impossible but the House of Prayers may be made a Den of Thieves. You call us
Heretics; we answer you with St. Paul, Acts 2^. 14. In the way you call
Heresy, worship we the God of our Fathers, believing all things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets.

And the better to testify his Piety and Compassion to peaceable Dissenters,
(having himself found the Inconveniency of the contrary) speaks to his Son, our
present King, in his (...), p. 217. thus, viz.

My counsel and charge to you is, That you beware of exasperating any Factions
by the Crosness and Asperity of some men's Passions* Humors or private Opinions
^mployed by you, grounded only upon Differences in lesser matters, which are
but the Skirts and Suburbs of Religion, wherein a Charitable Co^nivance and
Christian Toleration often dissipates their strength, when rougher Opposition
fortisies.

And p. 164. That his Prerogative is best showed and exercise in remitting,
rather than exacting the Rigor of the Law, there being nothing worse tha^
legal Tyran^y.

The CONTENTS
Of the principal things contained in this Letter to Doctor Calamy (bringing
forth the Merits of the Cause, as the Dr. desires) under the Conformists
Objections and Non-Conformists Answers are as follows, viz. 1. Obj. THe first
Objection the Conformists make against the Non-Conformists, is, That they have
no ground conscientiously to scruple at the Rites and Ceremonies of their
Church, because they are none of them forbidden in the Scripture; upon which
single Point (they say) stands the whole of the Controversy, page 3, 4. Answ.
To which the Non-Conformists return to them the same Ans^er they themselves
give the Papists, to the same Objection against them, viz. That what is not
contained in our only RULE OF FAITH, THE BIBLE, is to be rejected, p. 6, 7, 8.
2. Obj. That the Non-Conformists have no reason to s^ruple, much less to
separate from their Church for such small indifferent things, as the Rites and
Ceremonies in the Liturgy, which they affirm to be so, p. 9, 10. Answ. To which
they say, That the Rites and Ceremonies in Gods Worship are not small
indifferent things, either in Gods account, p. 13, 14. nor in their own
account, as their Principles from their own Pens evidence, and their Practices
declare, viz. by their imposing them as absolutely necessary, upon the Penalty
of Life, Liberty and Estate, yea, Soul also, though themselves do grant, that
the enjoining ind^fferent or unnecessary things as Necessary, is an adding to
Gods Word, Will Worship and vain Worship, p. 11, 12, 13. 3. Obj. That they have
no cause to separate upon the account of Rites and Ceremonies, as though they
were Popish Novel^ies, because they are all of them founded in Primitive
Antiquity, before Popery was known in the World; both which they possitively
Affirm, p. 14, 15. Answ. To which they Reply, 1st. That Primitive Antiquity
without Scripture Authority, ought to be no Rule, by their own grant, p. 16.
2dly. That in that Antiquity is found many gross Errors and Heresies (many of
which are enumerated) to which we shall be obliged, as well as to the other, if
that be to be the Rule, p. 17. 3dly. As to matter of fact they say, These Rites
and Ceremonies in the Liturgy (so severely imposed upon Dissenters) upon a due
search are not to be found in Primitive Antiquity, before Popery was known in
the World, as they make good in 28 Particulars, viz. Kneeling at Altar,
Surplice, Cross in Baptism, Confirmation or Bishoping, Baptizing Children for
Regeneration, upon the deed done, Gossips, Liturgies, Letanies, Responses,
Collects, Antiphones, Kyrieeleisons, Psalms and Lessons, Epistles and Gospels,
Singing Service, Altars, Festivals, Restraining Marriage to fixed Canonical
Times and Hours, Bowing at Altar, Ecclesiastical Order, Consecration of
Churches, Organs, Rogation-Week, Priests Garments, Wednesday, Friday and
Saturday Fasts, Vigils, Apost. Creed, Athanasius 's Creed, from p. 18. to 29.
4thly. That they symbolize and are expressly founded in Popery, which they make
good from many particulars, by diverse Arguments and Authorities, as well as by
their own Grants and Acknowledgements, from p. 29, to 64. viz. 1st. From the
Former Instances, being the Ordination of Popes and their Councils, p. 30.
2dly. By Confession of Parties, p. 31, 32. 3dly. By comparing their Divine [or
Mass] Service and ours together, 1st. As to the Times when (...) be performed,
p. 33, 34. 2dly. In the divine Service it self, p. 35. 3dly. In their Rites and
Ceremonies, Places of Worship, Priesthood: 4thly. Ordination of Priests, p. 36,
37. 5thly. Imposing and persecuting Dissenters, contrary to their own grants,
from p. 46, to 52. Confirmed by History, and sealed to by the Witness of our
old Non-Conformists, from p. 53, to 64. 4, 5. Obj. The two last Objections
charges the Dissenters from the Religion established by Law, to be guilty of
Disobedience to lawful Authority, Sedition, Faction, Tumult, Riot, Plotting,
etc. To both which they modestly defend and justify themselves, from p. 65, to
the end. The Conclusion sums up the matter, and improves it. The Author many
times personates the Dissenters for the Sense sake, wherein you must bear with
him.
You have then the Scheme of the Pagan, Papal and Christian Rites and
Ceremonies. And lastly, the Narrative of the Suferings undergone for Printing
and Publishing hereof.

A PLEA FOR THE Nonconformists, etc.
SIR;
IN your Discourse about a scrupulous Conscience, preached first at
Alderman-Bury, then at Bow-Church, about five or six Months since, and since
by you printed, you are pleased not only to put forth your Endeavors by
several Arguments, to gain and reduce the Dissenters to the Communion of the
Church of England; but (the better to show your moderation and tenderness, as
one that would not force and compel, but convince and satisfy a scrupulous
Conscience) do also offer to them several Christian Rules and Directions to
effect the same; amongst which are these that follow, viz.

Page 24, 25.
When any private Christian is troubled and perplexed with fears, and scruples,
that concern his Duty or the Worship of God, he ought in the first place to
have Recourse to the public Guides and Ministers of Religion, who are
appointed by God, and are best fitted to direct and conduct him; I say, to come
to them, not only to dispute and argue with them, and partly to oppose them,
but with all Modesty to propound their Doubts, meekly to hearken and receive
Instruction, humbly begging of God to open their Understanding, that they may
see and embrace the Truth, taking great care that no evil Affection, love of a
Party or carnal Interest, influence or bias their Judgment.

We do not by this desire men to pin their Faith upon the Priests sleeve, or to
put out their own Eyes, that they might be better guided and managed by them,
but only diligently to attend to their Reasons and Arguments, and give some due
Regard and Deference to their Authority; for it may not be so absurd, as may by
some be imagined, for the common People to take upon Trust from their lawful
Teachers, what they are not competent Judges of themselves. But the difficulty
here is, How shall a private Christian govern himself, when the very Guides and
Ministers of Religion determine differently concerning these Matters in
question amongst us, some warranting and allowing them, others as much
disapproving them? By what Rule shall he choose his Guide? [To which you Reply.]

As for those who scruple at Conformity, and are tolerably able to judge for
themselves, let not such rely barely upon the Authority either of one or the
other; all we desire of them is, that they would equally hear both sides, that
they would think the Ministers of the Church of England have some Sense and
Conscience too, as well as other men, and are able to say somewhat for what
they do themselves, or require of others, and laying aside all Prejudices,
Favor to, or Admiration of Men's Persons, they would weigh and consider the
Arguments that may be propounded to them, being Diffident of their own
Apprehensions, and Indifferent to either part of the Question, that they would
think it no shame to change their Mind, when they see good Reason for it.

Could we thus prevail with the People diligently to examine the Merits of the
Cause, our Church would every day gain more Ground amongst all Wise Men; for we
care not how much Knowledge and Understanding our People have, so they be but
humble and modest with it; nor do we desire men to become our Proselites any
further than we give them good Scripture and Reason for it.

Upon reading whereof (being sent me by a Friend) I did betake my self to a
serious Search, and impartial Consideration of the Controversies, and the
Arguments tendered on both sides, (many of the learned Guides, as you well
observe, being of such different Minds herein) and more particularly have I
weighed those Arguments mentioned by your self in that Discourse (in
Conjunction with what the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, the Learned Dr. More, and
others, have spoken to the same purpose); together with what is, or supposed
may be said in Answer thereto. And from this Christian Encouragement and
Invitation from your self, have presumed, though a Stranger to you, to present
it to you, with a disposition (as you advise) meekly to hearken to, and receive
Instruction or Conviction from your self, or any of the Learned, trusting that
you shall find no evil Affection, love of a Party, or carnal Interest, shall
influence or bias my Judgment, or that I shall think it any shame to change my
Mind, when better Reason is offered for my Conviction.

Resting confident in your Condor and Ingenuity, that what you have said herein
to draw forth the Scruples of any Dissenter, is not to lay a Bait thereby to
catch him in any Snare, or to take any legal Advantage upon him for his
dissatisfaction to the Religion by Law established (which is hedged with so
many legal Penalties;) But out of a Noble Christian Principle, that you may
have an Opportunity to discover, with how much meekness of Wisdom and
demonstration of Truth you can treat, convince and satisfy a Gainsayer, having
so generously declared, That you do not desire men should become your
Proselites, further than you give them good Reason and Scripture for it;
Club-Law being none of the Arguments you treat a scrupulous or tender
Conscience with.

The Arguments and Objections are these that follow:
Objection. 1.
The first Objection we shall mention, as brought against the Nonconformity
and Separation of the Dissenters from the Church of England, is this, -- That
they have no Reason or Because what they are offended at, are not forbidden in
the Scriptures.
Cause upon a Conscientious Account so to do, because the principal things they
take offense at, are not forbidden in the Scriptures; and till they can produce
a Scripture to the Negative, as a Negative Article of Faith, that says we are
not to do so, or so, Kneel at the Communion, Cross in Baptism, keep Holy Days,
use Liturgies, Letanies, etc. they can have no cause of just scruple.

And thus, Sir, you are pleased to Argue, viz. That there Scrupulous
Conscience, p. 30.
can be no Transgression, but by either omitting what the Law Commands, or doing
what the Law forbids: For Instance; If a man can show where Kneeling at the
Sacrament is forbidden in Scripture, where sitting is required, where praying
by a Form is forbid, and extemporary Prayers are enjoined, then indeed the
Dispute would soon be at an end; But if neither the one nor the other can be
found, as most certainly they cannot, then Kneeling at the Sacrament, and
Reading prayers out of a Book, must be reckoned amongst things lawful, and then
there is no need of scrupling them, because they may be done without sin; nay
where they are required by our Superiors, it is our Duty to submit to them,
because it is our duty to obey them in all lawful things. This way of Arguing
(you say) is very plain and convincing.

And to the same purpose we have Dr. Stillingfleet in his late Dr. Still. in
his Answ. to several late Treatises, p. 180, 181.
Answers to several of the Dissenters, affirming, that those are Schismatics
that Deny submission to the Government of the Church of England; and he tells
us in plain terms, assuredly, that the Reasons of this Denial do not signify a
Button; those (says he) who separate from the Church of England make this
their fundamental principle as to Worship (wherein the difference lies) that
nothing is lawful in the Worship of God, but what he has expressly commanded;
We say all things are lawful which are not frobidden, and UPON THIS SINGLE
POINT stands the whole Controversy of Separation as to the Constitution of our
Church.

Here Is the Objection in words at length, and which you will find to be no
other then what the Papists make to the Church of England upon the same
occasion, which I shall transcribe in their own words, and the Answers of your
own Party to it, which I hope will be esteemed a fair and satisfactory way of
Reply.

In his discourse ^o^cerning the I^o ^^ry of Rome, ^. 175. s. 16.
Dr. Stillingfleet giving us an accout of his Popish Adversaries Plea, and how
he Returned the Negative Articles to be proved by him, makes to him this Answer.

But the strangest Effort of all the rest, is what he has reserved to the last
place, viz. That the Charge of Idolatry against them must be vain and
groundless, because if I be pressed Close, I shall deny any one of these
Negative Points to be divine Truths, viz. That honor is not to be given to the
Images of Christ and his Saints; that what appears to be Bread in the
Eucharist, is not the Body of Christ; that it is not lawful to Invocate Saints
to pray for us -- [These are the Jesuits words, requiring the Doctor to prove
those Negatives, upon which single Point he puts the stress of his Argument.]
Then follows his Answer, which I pray you to mind well, because it is the
Answer you must take to the like Question from us, viz.

But the Answer to this is so easy, that it will not require much time to
dispatch it. For I do assert it to be an Article of my faith that God alone is
to be worshipped with Divine and Religious Worship: And he that cannot hence
infer, that no Created Being is to be worshipped, has the name of Reasonable
Creature given him to no purpose. What need we make Negative Articles of Faith,
where the Affirmative do necessarily imply them? If I believe that the
Scripture is my only Rule of Faith, as I most firmly do; Will any man that
considers what he says, require me to make Negative Articles of Faith, that
the Pope is not, Tradition is not, Councils are not, a private Spirit is not?
for all these things are necessarily Implied therein. And so for all particular
Doctrines rejected by us upon this principle, we do not make them Negative
points of Faith, but we therefore refuse the Belief of them, because not
contained IN OUR ONLY RULE OF FAITH: On this account we reject the Pope's
Supremacy, Transubstantiation, Infallibility of the present Church in
Delivering Points of Faith, Purgatory, and other FOPPERIES imposed upon the
Belief of Christians; So that the short Resolution of our Faith is this, That
we ought to believe Nothing as an Article of Faith, but what God has Revealed,
and the complete Revelation of God's will to us is contained in the BIBLE, etc.

Answer to the Objection.
And what could have been spoken wi^h fuller Evidence and greater Demonstration
of Truth: Therefore as joining issue with the Doctor, that upon this single
point stands the whole Controversy of Separation, as to the Constitution of
their Churches, viz. That nothing is lawful in the Worship of God, but what he
has expressly commanded, (as say the Dissenters) and not all things lawful
which are not forbidden, as say the Advocates for the Church of England, let
his own words decide the matter, and forever determine the Case. For what need
the Dissenters (as the Doctor affirms on their behalf) make Negative Articles
of Faith, where the Affirmative does necessarily imply them; If they do believe
with the Doctor, that the Scripture is their ONLY Rule of Faith, as they most
firmly declare to do, will any man that considers what he says, require them
to make Negative Articles of their Faith, that Popes, Councils, Private
Spirits, Traditions, are not, and so for all particular Doctrines rejected by
them upon this principle: They do not with the Doctor, make them Negative
points of faith, but they therefore (with him) refuse the Belief of them,
BECAUSE NOT CONTAINED IN OUR ONLY RULE OF FAITH. On this account they do (with
the Doctor) Reject the Pope's Supremacy, Transubstantiation, Infallibility of
the Church of Rome in Delivering points of Faith, viz, Purgatory, and other
Fopperies, (as Salt, Oil, Spittle, Exorcisms, Conjurations, baptizing of Bells,
etc.) And upon the same account do they Reject what the Protestants have
received either from Pagans or Papists, as to National, Provincial, Diocesan
and Parochial Churches, Because not Contained in our ONLY RULE of Faith. As
also of the Government of the Church of Christ by Lord Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Chancellors, Officials, etc.
Because not contained in our ONLY RULE of Faith. In like manner do the
Dissenters also Reject the Consecrating of Churches, Chapels, Cathedrals,
Priests Garments, Altars, Liturgies, Singing Service, Letanies, Bowings,
Crossings, Cringings, Holy Days, Fasts, Feasts, Vigils, because not one word
of any of them is contained in our only Rule of Faith; So that the short
Resolution of the Dissenters and the Doctor's Faith in this great Point is
this, that they ought to believe nothing as an Article of Faith, but what God
has revealed, and that the Complete Revelation of Gods Will to us, is
contained in the BIBLE.

Therefore Christ having in the Affirmative completely Revealed to us his mind
and will in the Bible, both as to the Doctrine and Discipline of his Church, we
need not go to Pope, Council, Tradition, or any other for Additions to either,
nor trouble our selves to make Negative Articles of Faith and Practice, which
would be as Ridiculous as Endless.

And this we hope the Doctor and all his Party will take for good Pay, and that
you your self, Sir, amongst the rest, will join Issue, and acknowledge, That
this way of Arguing is very plain and convincing.

But this being so well performed by the Doctor, what shall we say that so
wise, so learned, and so great a man as Dr. Stillingfleet should forgot himself
so far, as to make head and run counter against his own Argument, and to that
degree, as to pawn the whole Controversy upon that single point which he had
so infallibly and indisputably resolved, which indeed is very strange and
wonderful; but yet upon serious Thoughts we shall find it but a fulfilling of
that Word of the Lord, Isa. 29. 14, etc.
viz. I will do a mavelous Work amongst this People, even a mavelous Work
and a Wonder [But what is that?] Why the Wisdom of their Wise men shall perish,
and the Understanding of the Prudent men shall be hid [But when shall that be?]
viz. When they teach for Doctrines the Commands [or the fear or Worship] of God
for the Precepts of men. Our very case, and whereof we Verse. 13.
have frequent and continual experience. For with what Evidence and
Demonstration of Truth will the Papists argue against and censure the Heathen
for their Idolatries, and yet at the same time be guilty of the same thing
themselves, and expose themselves to the Censure of the Heathen on the one
side, and the Protestants on the other.

How wisely, how spiritually will Protestants dispute with, handle and judge
the Papists, for leaving the Word of God for Fables [for their Will Worship,
False-Worship, Idolatry, etc.] and yet at the same time be guilty of Will
Worship themselves, exposing themselves to the Censure both of Papist and
Nonconformist? Of which we might give you diverse Instances both of the one and
of the other; and whereof take one or two.

Dr. Stillingfleet Idolatry of Rome p. 22.
This very Jesuit who disputes with the Doctor, falls out in a most severe
Censure of the Pagans for their most damnable Diabolical Idolatry in
Worshipping their inferior Deities, as Venus, Mars, Bacchus, Vulcan, and the
like Rabble of Devils, (as he calls them) who were their Damons, Hero's, or
Intercessors to their superior Deity, Jupiter; not being aware (which also the
Doctor improves against him) that they were guilty of the same Crime themselves
in setting up their See p. 4, 5. and p. 159, 160.
Inferior Deities, the Virgin Mary, St. Peter, St* Paul, and a hundred more as
Mediators and Intercessors to the Supreme, and to whom, as the Doctor observes,
they pay divine Honor and Worship, bowing and kneeling before them, and their
Images also; which he proves against them to be no less Diabolical Idolatry.

Page 17.
The Jesuit being quick-sighted, returns smartly upon the Doctor, That whilst
he judges their bowing and kneeling before their Images to be Idolatry, how can
he justify their bowing and kneeling before the consecrated Elements, bowing
at [the Altar, East] Name of Jesus, Putting off their Hats, etc. which the
Jesuit on the one hand, and the Dissenters on the other hand improve against
him.

Primitive Rule of Reformation, p. 11, 12.
And so whilst Dr. Pierce severely censures the Papists for varying from the
primitive Pattern in their Superstitions and Abominations, Because it was not
so from the beginning, Sergent the Jesuit returns his own Argument smartly upon
him for doing the same thing, in many particulars, and which the Dissenter also
does for the same, viz. for varying in so many things from the primitive
Pattern, whilst he judges others for the same.

To which we might add diverse Instances, both as to Papists and Protestants,
especially in those three Points, Idolatry, Imposition and Persecution.

So that as it has been generally observed, the Papists Arguments againsts the
Heathen, the Protestants Arguments against the Papists, are most substantial
Arguments against themselves, when their practice gives their principle the
Lie, and so rendering themselves altogether inexcusable, as faith the Text;
Therefore Romans 2. 1, 2, 3.
thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge; for wherein thou
judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou that judge do the same
things. But be sure that the Judgment of God is according to Truth, against
them which commit such things. And think thou this, O man, that judge them
which do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment
of God? etc.

Objection. 2. Because they are (...) things.
Another Objection that is brought against the Dissenters, is, Because they
separate from the Church of England for ^eer Nicities, for little things, which
in their own Nature are indifferent.

Scrupulous Conscience, Page 5.
To that purpose you are pleased to express your self, viz. A scrupulous
Conscience is conversant about things in their own nature Indifferent; and it
consists,

Either in strictly tying up our selves to some things which God has no where
commanded; as the Pharisees made great Conscience of Washing before they did
eat, and abundance of other unnecessary Rights and Vsages they had of men's own
inventing and devising, which they as Religiously, nay* more Carefully observed
than the indisputable Commands of God himself:

Or in a Conscientious abstaining from some things (...) not forbid, nor any
ways unlawful. Touch not, tas^^ not, (...) not, doubting and fearing where no
fear is, thinking that (...) as much offend God by eating some kind of Meats,
(...) Garments, as they should do, were they guilty of (...) Adultery. Which is
the case of many amongst (...) Scrupulosity about little matters, seem more
(...) ^uster^, than other good and honest Christians are, or (...) need or
ought to be.

Page 6. ibid.
And a little further you add -- A (...) Conscience therefore starts and
boggles where there is no real (...) or Mischief; is afraid of omitting or
doing what may be omitted or done without sin. Which I know not how better to
illustrate than by those unaccountable Antipathies or Prejudices that some men
have against some sort of Meats or living Creatures, which have not the least
harm or burt in them, yet are so offensive and dreadful to such Persons, that
they fly from them as they would from a Tiger or Bear, and avoid them as they
would do the Plague or Poison. Just thus do some men run out of the Church at
the sight of a Surplice, as if they had been soared by the Apparition of a
Ghost.

Resolution of Conscience, p. 38.
A late piece called, A Resolution of Conscience, etc. (supposed to be Dr.
Mores) affirms thus much; 1. That the Government of our Church by Bishops. 2.
The Liturgy or Set forms of Prayer, Admin^stration of Sacraments. 3. Certain
Rites of the Church, particularly the Surplice, the Cross in B^ptism, the
Gesture of Kneeling at the Communion, the Ring in Marriage, the Observation of
the Churches Holy*days. All which (faith he) I take for granted are Indifferent
in their own Nature, that there is nothing of Viciousness or Immorality in any
of them to make them unlawful. I know no body (says he) so unreasonable as
not to* Grant this.

Mr. Will. Allens Catholieism, page ^10.
Mr. William Allen in his late piece called Catholicism, says to the same
purpose, That the Ceremonies of the Church of England are not enjoined as
things of Divine Appointment, but only as of an Indifferent Nature, and
therefore there is no reason to s^r^ple them, And again says, That the
Ceremonies and Service of the Church, or use of things in or about Gods
Worship, which are not of the Essence of it, nor ^s'd under the Nation of being
Commanded by God, but professedly used as things Indifferent in their own
Nature, and only as matters of humane (...) cannot justly be charged to be
false Worship.

Protestant Reconciler, ^ part, page 35.
The Author of the Portestant Reconciler tells us, That it is (...) the Church
of England, that the Ceremonies used (...) by that Church Imposed on her
Members, are in their own (...) things Indifferent, thus; (says he) In the
Preface to the Book of Common Prayer it is determined, that the particular
forms of Divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies to be used therein, are
in (...) own Nature things Indifferent. Dr. Stillingfleet, and many more, spoke
the same thing.

Protest* Recon -- Prefac. p. 4.
So that by [Indifferent] they would have us to understand things of a Middle
Nature, that are neither good or bad of themselves, otherwise then as enjoined
for Order or Prudence by Superiors, and alterable at pleasure; therefore King
James opposes them to Necessary things, which are enjoined Ibid. part 1.
by positive Scripture; and so the Protestant Reconciler Defines them, telling
us thus: The Ceremonies which are Imposed by our Church, as they have nothing
sinful in their Nature, for which Inferiors should Refuse submission to them,
so have they nothing of real goodness, nothing of positive Order, Decency or
Reverence for which they ought to be Commanded.

Answer to the Objection.
This we are told in words and pretense, the better to gild the Pill, to make
it go down the glibber; but if you look more narrowly into the matter, you will
find, that you your selves, as well as the Dissenters, have justly another
sense of them, and that the Church of England does both use and Impose them as
necessary things, (whatever they import in their own nature.)

For First, are they not things Consecrated and Dedicated to holy uses, in the
worship and service of God, which makes Hooker Heal. Pol. l. 5. p. 70. sect. 69.
them cease to be Indifferent? Hooker says, F^astival days are Clothed with
outward Robes of Holiness, and that places and times of Divine Worship are so
too, and the Cross a holy Sign.

Dr. Burges
Dr. Burges says, Ceremonies may be called the Worship of God, the Professors
of Leyden call only such things, persons, times and places holy, as are
Consecrated and Dedicated to God, but so in their Esteem and our also is their
Dioce^an Episcopacy and Priesthood, their Churches, Liturgies, Kneeling,
Bowing, Crossing, Festivals, Ecclesiastical Courts, and Excommunications, etc.

Secondly, They are not Indifferent, but necessary things (in your esteem) as
appears by the Declaration of (...) Commissioners at the Savoy upon the King's
first (...) overruling the Arguments of their Dissenting (...) ^leading Prot.
Reconc. 1 part, p. 3^. ^. 8.
for Reformation and Tenderness, which say^ (...) Apostle has Commanded that
all things be done (...) there may be conformity, let there be (...) a (...)
that purpose; and thence they inferred, that (...) will move to pity, and
relieve those that (...) truly (...) and scrupulous, that we must not break
Gods Command^ (...) Charity to them, and therefore we must not perform public
services indec^ntly and disorderly for the sake of tender Consciences. And all
this said to justify the Refusal, to abate the Imposition of Ceremonies,
especially those three then contended about, Surplice, Sign of the Cross, and
Kneeling at the Communion.

So that here they are made necessary, and a Command of God urged to enforce
them, viz. That things be done decently and in order, (though by the way) no
other Command Bellar. de effect. Sacram. l. 2. cap. 31.
then Bellarmine urges to Establish the whole Popish Service and Ceremonies of
the Church of Rome, viz. by this Precept of the Apostle.

And thirdly, Do not they as necessary things Impose, and enforce them with all
severity imaginable, by Excommunications of Dissenters, thereby knocking the
Fly on the Neighbors head with a Hatchet, to the knocking out his Brains, as
says Dr. Tailor, destroying them in their Liberties, Estates, yea, Lives also,
which surely must not be for trifles, but necessary things.

Prot. Reconc. 1 part. p. 38, 39, 41, etc.
Yet so hardy and hold to do all this (as the Protestant Reconciler worthily
observes to them) to the Reproaching the wisdom and faithfulness of Christ, and
the Primitive Churches, for want of such decency and order (for they had no
such) The Wisdom of the Church of England, who have declared that their Rites
and Ceremonies are in their own Nature things Indifferent, and may be altered
and changed; as also that they had their Beginning from the Institution of Man.
The Wisdom of King James, and King Charles, who have both of them declared them
to be esteemed unnecessary, as being but indifferent things, and not Commanded
by God, and therefore alterable at pleasure. But especially (says our Author)
hereby become guilty of adding to the Word of God of Will Worship, of teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of men, of Imposing these things as necessary
parts of Worship, and so of worshipping God in vain, as (...) will appear by
what the best Assertors of the (...) of the Church of England have declared in
this Mr. Faulkner, (...) 359.
(...) Mr. Faulkner's Assertion, in saying hereupon, We (...) the Word of God,
when we teach any thing to be commanded or forbidden by the Law of God, which
indeed is not there commanded or forbidden. And Bishop S^nderson, That then men
Bishop Sanderson Sermon. on Matthew. 15. 9. p. 8, ^, 10.
teach for Doctrines the Commandments of men, when they teach any thing to be
absolutely unlawful, which God has not forbidden in his Word; and if any man
shall wear a Surplice, or Kneel, or Cross with an opinion of necessity, and for
Conscience Sake toward God, as though God's service could not be rightly
performed without them; yea, although the Church had not performed them,
doubtless the use of these Ceremonies, by reason of such his opinion, should be
superstition to him.

And Dr. Patrick in the Friendly Debate -- Then (say they) VVill-worship is
erected, when any thing is to be enjoined to be done, Friendly Debate, p. 115.
or not done, as if it were the Will and Command of God he should be so served,
when it is a mere Constitution of the Will of Man. Then do we make Ceremonies
to be parts of divine Worship, when we suppose them to be so necessary, that
the doing of them would be a thing pleasing to God, and the omitting of them
the contrary, although there were no humane Law which required the doing of
them. And secondly, when we suppose them unalterable and obligatory so the
Consciences of all Christians, for this supposes an equal necessity with that
of divine Institution.

All which so fully speaks the Sense of the Dissenters, that there needs no
better Answer to be given, than what they themselves have put into their
Mouths. But, says Mr. Allen, in Contradiction to his Brethern, That things
that are not Catholocism, p. 259.
used as Commanded by God (taking for granted they had not so urged them) and
only as Matters of humane prudence cannot (he says be charged to be
Will Worship. But for his better Information, we would refer him to the
Protestant Reconciler, and the many Authorities urged by their own Pens to
clear the same, with this Addition as to Jeroboam's Case, who varied but in
four particulars as to the Service and Ceremonies of Worship, viz. the place of
Worship, (Dan and ^ethel, i^^^ead of Jerusalem,) 2. the Signs of Divine (...)
Golden Calves instead of the Cherubims,) 3. (...) of the Feast (15 of the 8
Month, instead of the 7th) (...) administering, (making of Priests) All (...)
think, were but Circumstantials about (...) not under the notion of being
Commanded (...) (as Mr. Allen observes of our Ceremonies (...) of humane
prudence; and for which (...) much to say to the Dissenters in that day, who
(...) separated Arrow against Idolatry, p. 4^ to 74.
from him for the same (2 Chronicles. 11. 16. (...) 13. and 14.) as Mr. Anisworth in
his Plea for Jeroboam most notably observes, who kept in the mean time to the
Articles of Faith, and fundamental Ordinances of Religion, and worshipping with
Reverence the God of his Fathers, making Alterations in things merely
Ceremonial, whereof no express Law forbidding, and being variable, as time,
place and person gave occasion.

Jeroboam's Rites and Services, and ours compared.
But however, Jeroboam might ^ince the matter, and make light of it, as others
do in like circumstances; yet God, being a jealous God, would not admit of such
Innovation, and varying from his pure Worship, but Reproves these for desperate
Idolatry, and Reputes it no other than the Worshipping of Devils, 2 Chronicles. 11.
15. His Supremacy in the Kingdom not being able to bear him out in altering the
Ordinances of the Service of God; and so doing things out of his own heart, 1
King. 12. 33. it became his Sin, and made Israel to sin, thereby doing evil
above all that went before him, having made other Gods and Molten Images, to
provoke the Lord to Anger, 1 Kings 14. 9. Casting him behind his back:
Therefore the Lord threatens in the next Verses, in these words; Behold I will
bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off Jeroboam, him that
pisseth against the Wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, and will
take away the Remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man takes away Dung, till
it be all gone. Him that Dies of Jeroboam in the City, shall the Dogs (...)
and him that Dies in the Fields, shall the Fowls of the Air ^at, for the Lord
has spoken it. And which all came to pass accordingly.

Which pregnant Instance the Judicious will, I doubt not, (...) consider that
these prudent and in indifferent (...) Religious Worship (as they are (...) to
(...) minced and extenuated, may be of the (...) with Jeroboam's Idolatry. With
this (...) varied but in four, and these in above (...) wherein they have
presumed to swerve from (...) to Gods Word and Worship.

Objection. 3. These Rites are of Primitive Antiquity, not of ^opish Novelty.
Another (...) this, and none of the least, viz. That Dissenters (...) to
separate from the Church of England for Symbolizing with Romish Rites and
Ceremonies, because they only retain and practice such Rites and Ceremonies
which were practiced by Antiquity, before Popery took place in the World.

To this purpose you are pleased to say in your Scrupulous Page 30.
Conscience -- Now our first Reformers here in England did not go about to
invent a new species of Government, to devise new Rites and Ceremonies, and a
new form of Worship, such as should be least excepted against, and then obtrude
it upon this Nation, as was done at Geneva, and some other places; but they
wisely considered, if they did but reject what the Romanists had added to the
Faith and Worship of Christians, lay aside their Novel Inventions, Usurpations,
and unwritten Traditions, there would remain the pure, simple, Primitive
Christianity, such as it was before the Roman Church was thus degenerated; nor
have we any thing of Popery left amongst us, but what the Papists had left
amongst them of Primative Religion and Worship.

Thus says the Resolution of the Case of Conscience, Resolu. of that Case of
Consc. page 3.
That the Rites of the Church of England* are exceeding few, and those plain and
easy, grave and manly, founded on the practice of the Church long before
Popery appeared upon the Stage of the World. And again,

As to our Churches prescribing a Liturgy of Set-forms of Prayer, and
Administration of Sacraments, and other public Offices, it is easy to show,
that Symbolizing with the Church of Rome herein, is so far from being culpable,
and much more from being a just ground of Separation from our Church, that it
is highly commendable; for as herein our Church no less symbolizeth with the
Primitive Church, than with that of Rome, as she is now Constituted.

N. Fratri and Amic^, Resp. ad Art. 12.
And Dr. Saravia, who says thus: Satis est modestis and (...) Christianis
satisfacere, qui ita recesserunt a Superstitionibus and Idolatria Romanae
Ecclesiae, ut probates ab Orthodoxis Patribus mores non rejicient; That it may
be a sufficient satisfaction to modest and pious Christians, that there is such
(...) from the Superstitions and Idolatry of the Church of (...) to reject the
approved Customs of the Orthodox Fathers.

Histor. Account* page 16. Page 14.
These our Rites and Ceremonies (says (...) are retained and kept out of due
Reverence to (...) again* These Ceremonies were retained or Imposed (...) and
Equity of the Reformation, by (...) see they did not break Communion with them
for (...) things, or that they left the Church Rome no further, than they left
the Ancient Church.

The Doctor further assures us, That as to Discipline, respecting the
Government of the Church by Bishops, is to be made good by a Universal
Tradition, universally received since the Apostles times, as the Apostolical
Government, viz. Diocesan Bishops.

Resol. of the Case. p. 38.
As to the Government of our Churches by Bishops (says the Resolver) this is
so far from being an unlawful Symbolizing with the Church of Rome, that we have
most clear evidence of its being a symbolizing with her in an Apostolical
Institution.

Answ. to the 3d Objection.
Thus have you the Objection in words at length, to which, in each part, the
Dissenters do say, or may be supposed to say, as follows.

In the first place, If it be taken for granted that the Pattern is fetched
from those times, and not from the Popish times, viz. Rome in its Apostasy, we
would inquire these two things: 1. By what Rule or Reason they should be a
pattern to us, so as to have their Rites and Services Imposed upon us for our
Ritual? And (2) whether there were not great Errors and Superstitions in those
times, as well as the succeeding Ages?

The Rites of those Primitive times not to be imposed (...) us.
First, Why should our first Reformers any more impose the Rites and Customs of
those times upon us, than any other? Why were we more obliged to accept of the
Ecclesiastical Laws of Constantine, than his Civil, as Doctor Tailor well urges?

Duct. Dub. (...) sect. 3.
That the Fathers met at Laodicea, at Antioch, at Nice, at Gangra* ^ 1000 or
1300 years ago, should have any Authority ^ver us in England so many Ages
after, is so infinitely unreasonable, (...) but the Fearful and Unbelievers,
the Scrupulo^^, and (...) (...) of a slavish Nature, and are in bondage (...)
and know not how to stand in the Liberty by which (...) them free, will account
themselves in (...) upon this account the Rulers of the Church, will (...)
just, warrantable Canon, we are to obey in (...) they have power to Command:
But the (...) for being in the OLD CODES of the Church, (...) than the LAWS OF
CONSTANTINE.

No, they (...) higher, or else it will not do. To the first Primitive
Christianity, and Religion in the first Primitive times given as by Christ and
his Apostles. For Dr. Stillingfleet has well instructed us, if we believe the
Scriptures are the ONLY RVLE of FAITH; then it follows, Councils and Fathers,
Traditions and private Spirits are no more our Rule than the Pope himself; and
therefore with the Doctor, we refuse the Belief of all the Additions,
Inventions, Traditions, because not contained in our only Rule of Faith: To the
La^, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to that, it is because
there is no Light in them.

But secondly, do we not find these very times abounding Those Primitive times
abounded with corruptions.
very much with Error and Superstiti^n? Which is an Argument we should not
receive them for our Pattern more tha^ others; whereof I shall give you some
Instances from their M^gd* Cent. 3. p. 262, 263, etc.
Naevi, or Errors, mentioned by the Centurists, viz*. That Origin asserted two
Christ's, denied his Godhead, the Head of Origin corrupt.
the Arians and Pelagians, holding (as Jerome says) very desperately about the
Spirit, and very corruptly about Angels, Devils, Creation, Providence, Original
Sin, Church Government, and the Resurrection, and Sacrificing for the Dead.
Orig. l. 3. in Jo. Baptism takes away Sin, and that there must be a Baptism
after the Resurrection. They also say of Cyprian, That Cyprian affirmed the
Church of Rome to be the Mother Church; that there ought to be one High Priest
over the Church; and that the principal Church is Peter's Chair, Cyprian
Corrupt.
from whence the Unity of the Priesthood arises; and that upon Peter the Church
is founded: That he was a violent Impugner of Priests Marriages; held, that
Sins are done away by Alms and good Works: That the person Baptizing in the
very Act conferreth the Holy Spirit; that Chrysm and Exorcism are absolutely
necessary; and that there should be Austin Corrupt.
Sacrifices for the Dead, though some suppose many of these things were foisted
in by the Papists.

De confess. l. 9. c. 3. Ep. con. Aer^. Her. 75.
St. Austin prays for the dead, the Soul of his Mother Monica.

St. Ambrose for the Soul of Theodosius.

St. Gregory for the Soul of Trajan.

E^chir. c. 110.
St. Austin says, Prayers avail not unto all alike, who are departed;
therefore when the Sacrifices of the Altar, or of Alms, are offered Chrysostom
and others corrupt*
for all them who are baptized, and are defunct, for the good, they are
Thanksgivings; for the not very bad, they are Propitiations; for the very bad,
though not help the dead, yet comfort to the living.

1 Cor. 16. Hom. 41. De Civ. Dei, l. 22. c. 8.
Chrysostom was for offering Prayers for the dead with Alms and Oblations.

Austin, a great friend to Relics, affirming great Miracles wrought by them.

Contr. Vigil. Ep. 2.
Jerome, a great defender of Relics, and Adoration of them* Constantine, a
great admirer of Relics.

Apost. of later times, upon 1 Timothy 4. 1*
Mr. Mede says, That Primitive Christians canonized Saints, and honored the
Relics in Imitation of the Gentiles, their Daemon-worship, thereby to allure
them, which, says he, laid the foundation of Antichrist's (...), and
Idolatrick Apostasy.

More of the corruptions of those Times.
They had Sufflation, Trine Immersion, Exorcism, Chrysm, white Garments, Milk,
Honey to the new baptized, giving the Eucharist to the Infant, from the 4 to
the 12 Century, mingling Water with the Sacramental Wine, the Eulogiae, etc. To
which head you may add the Royal Witness in the beginning.

So that from the consideration of the Errors and Superstitions, abounding in
these times, there is no ground why our first Reformers should propose them for
our Pattern; for if in one thing, why not in another?

But in the next place I presume upon a fair Examination of particulars, these
two things will appear, 1. That we in the Church of England do not in our
Rites, Services and Ceremonies symbolize with Antiquity. And, 2. that we do
wholly symbolize in most, if not in all of them, with Popery.

Our Rites do not symbolize with Antiquity, as urged.
1. It is manifest that our first Reformers, as we are told, did not make such
a perfect piece from pure primitive Antiquity in the first Reformation, and
forming of our Liturgy, which contains so much the Rites, Services, and
Ceremonies of the Church; for if so, there had been no such need to make so
many Alterations, and reform so often, and in so many things the Reformation.
And that they have so done, the Author of the Protestant Reconciler gives us
this Account.

Protest. Reconc. 1 part, Postscript.
It is certain (says he) that our Church has already altered her Liturgy at
several times, and in several parts, viz. the Lessons, Festivals, Ceremonies,
Rubric, Collects, Prayers, the Form of Administration of Sacraments, the
Catechism, Confirmation, Marriage, Visitation of the sick, the Burial of the
dead, and Commination. All which he has demonstrated in each particular, and
from thence he makes these three Remarks:

1. That the pretense of still retaining and imposing the present Ceremonies
out of due Reverence to Antiquity, is false and hypocritical.

2. That it cannot justly be pretended that these Ceremonies are retained and
imposed to manifest the Justice and Equity of the Reformation, by letting their
Enemies see they did not break Communion with them for mere indifferent things,
or that we left the Church of Rome no further than she left Antiquity.

3. Hence it appears how senselesly it is alleged that we cannot abate or
change these Ceremonies, because they have been once received and owned by the
Church.

Instances given to prove their Novelty.
BUT, in the next place, the descending into particulars will give a fuller and
clearer demonstration of our not symbolizing with Antiquity in all our Rites
and Ceremonies.

FIRST, Because so many of them are Novel, and so many disowned by Antiquity.
And so much which has been really from Antiquity, has been disowned by us, and
blotted out of the Liturgy.

First, That most of them are novel, or disowned by Antiquity. We shall begin
with those three principal Cemonies, about which there was so much contention
at the Savoy, viz. Kneeling, Surplice, and the Cross in Baptism.

Kneeling at the Altar.
1. That of Kneeling at the Altar, or at the Sacrament of the Supper is put
amongst the rest of the Ancient Ceremonies, before any such thing as Popery was
in the World, which is Novel, and but of yesterday, never known before
Transubstantiation, nor with us Protestants received till Edward the Sixth's
second Common Prayer, for in the first it was not. Peter Martyr says, Propter
Transubstantiationem and realem presentiam invecta est in Ecclesiam; That to
maintain Transubstantiation and real Presence, it was brought into the Church.

Decret. lib. 3. tit. 1. cap. 10. Hospin. de Orig. Temp. l. 2. c. 2 Socrates,
l. 5.
We are told in the Decretal, that Pope Honorius, Anno 1214. ordained Kneeling
at the Sacrament. And his Predecessor Innocent the 3d Transubstantiation. It is
said, That in Tertullian and Chrysostom's time, they were said to stand at the
Altar, when they partook of the Supper. Socrates says, They took it in a Table
Gesture, eating it at their Love Feasts; And Paraeus asserts the same.

Part 1. p. 298.
Hereupon the Protestant Reconciler tells us, To restrain this kneeling posture
at the receipt of the Sacrament, out of due Reverence to Antiquity, when no
such posture was used by Antiquity, I fear cannot be well excused from
Falsehood, or from imposing on the People.

2. Surplice.
Secondly, As to the Surplice, the Fathers used it not, tho it is clear the
Pagans did, from whom the Papists had it, and we from them.

Salmasius, as well as Petavius his Adversary, do own that in the Primitive
Times the Presbyters did not wear any distinct Habit from the People.

The Reply to Dr. Morton.
Caelestius Reproves the French Bishops, who began it as a Novelty, which
tended to Superstition, and made way to Mockery, and Deceiving of the faithful.

The Surplice was brought into the Church by Pope Adrian Anno 796. Unreas.
Separa. p. 38.


Dr. Stillingfleet tells us, That as for the Surplice in Parish Churches, it is
not of that consequence as to bear a dispute one way or other. Unreas. of
Separation, p 38.

3. Cross in Baptism.
AS to the Sign of the Cross in Baptism upon the Forehead only, we read of no
such Rite amongst the Ancients, though the 30th Canon of the Church tells, It
is an honorable Badge, and a lawful Ceremony, by which the Child is dedicated
to the service of Christ, and which Rite was held in the Primitive Church, both
Greeks and Latins, with one consent and great applause.

It is true, the Ancients after Baptisin did sign the baptized with a Cross
upon his head and breast, and anointed him with Chrysm, as a distinct Order
from Baptism; but no such Signing in the act of Baptism, as part of that
Ordinance.

In Edward the sixth's time the Reformers did, as the first Service Book makes
mention, sign the Elements three times with the Sign of the Cross, and also the
Child upon the Forehead and Breast when the Godfathers named his Name, and
afterward in Confirmation again in the breast and forehead; but all this is
laid aside, and a new thing taken up, which is neither to be found in
Antiquity, nor in the first Pattern of our Reformers.

4. Confirmation.
As to the order and office of Confirmation in the Rubric and Liturgy, it is
another thing than the Ancients used. That was to be done with Chrysm by the
hands of a Bishop, with two Crosses, one on the Breast, the other on the
Forehead, immediately after Baptism was administered (and as a distinct
Ordinance from it) but this is to be performed by the hands of a Bishop,
without any Chrysm or Consignation when they come to years of discretion.

And as there does not appear any Warranty from Antiquity Why Confirmation not
Scriptural. Archbishop Cranmore.
for this Confirmation, so neither is there any direction in Scripture for it,
as Archb. Cranmore does fully acknowledge, whereof we have an account from Dr.
Burnet out of a Manuscript, written with the Bishops own hand, by way of
Question Cotton's Library Cleop. E. 5.
and Answer, as he found it in Cotton's Library, Cleop. E. 5.

Quest. Whether Confirmation be instituted by Christ?

Answ. There is no place in Scripture that declares this Sacrament to be
instituted by Christ.

1. Because the places alleged for the same be no Institutions, but Acts and
Deeds of the Apostles.

2. Because those Acts were done by a special gift given to the Apostles for
the Confirmation of Gods Word at that time.

3. Because the same especial Gift does not now remain with the Successors of
the Apostlest

Quest. What is the external Sign?

Answ. The Church uses Chrysma, but the Scripture makes no mention thereof.

Baptizing of Infants.
As for the Office of Baptizing of Infants, as enjoined in the Liturgy for
Regeneration upon the Deed done, and to be performed by Goslips, who are to
profess Faith and Repentance in the Infants name and stead, is generally
sc^upled and disowned by the Dissenters (as savouring too much of Popery)
though the greatest part of them do baptize their Infants.

And as for the Antiquity of the practice, if any credit may be given to many
learned Paedobaptists, it will not appear; whereof take these following
Instances:

Disswasive against Popery, p. 117.
The learned Dr. Tailor tells us in his Disswasive against Popery, That there
is a Tradition to baptize Infants, relies but upon two Witnesses, Origin and
Austin; and the latter having received it from the former, it relies wholly
upon a single testimony, which is but a pitiful Argument to prove a Tradition
Apostolical. He is the first that spoke it, but Tertullian that was before him,
seems to speak against it, which he would not have done, if it had been a
Tradition Apostolical. And that it was not so (says the Bishop) it is but too
certain, if there be any truth in the words of Ludovicus Vives, saying, that
anciently none were baptized, but persons of riper years. He says thus in his
Com. on August. l. 1. c. 27. whose words are as follows, viz.

Ludovicue Vives Com. on Aug. l. 1. c. 27.
None were baptized of old, but those who were of Age, who did not only
understand what the Mystery of the Water meant, but desired the same; the
perfect Image whereof (says he) we have yet in our Infant Baptism; for it is
asked of the Infant, Will thou be baptized? for whom the Sureties answer, I
will.

The Doctor adds, That the Parents of Austin, Jerome, Amhrose, although
Christians, did not baptize their Children till they were 30 years of Age; and
that it will be very considerable in the Example, and of great Efficacy for the
destroying the supposed necessity of derivation of Infants Baptism from the
Apostles.

Grotius on Mat* 19. 14.
Hugo Grotius (in Annot on Mat. 19. 14.) says, It was no small Evidence that
Baptism of Infants many 100 years was not ordinary in the Greek Church, because
not only Constantine the Great, the Son of Helena, a zealous Christian, but
also Gregory Nazianzen, who was the Son of a Christian Bishop, and brought up
long by him, was not baptized till he came to years, as is (says he) related
in his Life.

Daille.
Daille, the learned Frenchman, tell us, That in ancient times they often
deferred the Baptism of Infants, as appears (says he) by the History of
Constantine, Theodos^us, Valentinian, Gratian, and in St. Ambrose; and also by
the Orations of Gregory Nazianzen, and St. Basil on this subject. And some of
the Fathers have been of opinion, that it is ^it it should be deferred: But
whence is it (says he) that the very mentioning hereof is scarce to be endured
at this day? Use of the Fathers, l. 2. p. 149.

Dr. Field says, That very many that were born of Christian Dr. Field.
Parents, besides those that were converted from Paganism, put off their Baptism
for a long time, insomuch that many were made Bishops before they were
baptized. On the Church, p. 729.

Mr. Baxter.
Mr. Baxter, a great Asserter and Defender of Infant Baptism, does ingenuously
own, after his long search into Antiquity, thus much; I will confess that the
words of Tertullian and Nazianzen show, that it was long before all were agreed
of the very time, or of the necessity of baptizing of Infants before any use of
Reason, in case they were like to live to Maturity; More Proofs, p. 279.

As for Baptizing Infants with Sureties, Fidejussors, or ^. Godfathers and
Godmothers.
Gossips, as the Liturgy enjoins; and such an Essential part of the Ordinance
(owning that the baptized Persons are required to repent and believe, and that
Infants are capable (...) do neither, but that they do both by their Sureties)
appears also, if the learned are to be credited, to be no less a Novelty, as
the Centurists declare, Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 6* p. 419. De susceptoribus certi
nihil Invenias; that is, you can find nothing certain of Godfathers in that
Age. But that it came in the 5th Century, Cen. 5. c. 4. p. 656. Adhibitos
interdum and susceptores; sou Patrinos ex Autoribus hujus temporis liquet; that
is, the Authors of the 5th Century mention Sureties, or Godfathers: Upon which
Dr. Tailor says,

I know God might, if he would, have appointed Godfathers Dr. Tailor.
to give Answer in the behalf of Children, and to be Fidejussors for them; but
we cannot find any authority or ground that he has; and if he had, that it is
to be supposed he would have given them Commission to have transacted the
solemnity with better Cir^umstances, and have given Answers with more Truth,
for the Question is asked of Believing in the present; and if the Godfather
answers in the Name of the Child. I DO BELIEVE; it is Notorious, they speak
false and ridiculous, for the Infant is not capable of Believing; and if he
were, he were also capable of dissenting; and how then do they know his mind?
And thefore (says he) Tertullian and Nazianzen gave advice, that the baptizing
of Infants should be deferred till they could give an account of their own
Faith.

Walafrid Strab* de Reb. Eccl. ^. 26.
Walafridus Strabo, who lived about the year 840. says, (De rebus eccl. c.
26.) That in the first times the grace of Baptism was wont to be given to them
only, who were come to that Integrity of mind and body, that they could know
and understand what profit was to be gotten by Baptism; what was to be
confessed and believed; what, lastly, was to be observed by them that are
newborn in Christ, and confirms it by Austin's own Confession of himself
continuing a Catechumen long before he was baptized. But afterward (says he)
Christians understanding Original Sin, and least their Children should perish
without any means of Grace, had them (he says) baptized by the decree of the
Council of Africa; and then adds, how Godfathers and Godmothers were invented.

Bohemius, l. 2. de Gent. Mor*
Johannis Bohemius, lib. 2. de Gent. Moribus, says, It was in times past the
Custom to administer Baptism only to those that were instructed in the Faith,
and seven times in the week, before Easter and Penticost, catechized; but
afterward, when it was thought and adjudged needful to eternal Life to be
baptized, it was ordained that Newborn Children should be baptized, and
Godfathers were appointed, who should make Confession, and Renounce the Devil
on their behalf.

7. Liturgy*
As for the Liturgy, it is another thing than can be found among the Ancients.
Is it not clear, that in the 3d Century, they had no Directory or Book to pray
by, as Tertullian in his Apology mentions?

Tertul. Apol. 9. c. 30. Ep. 121.
We look up to Heaven with our hands stretched forth, as being innocent and
bear-headed, as not ashamed to make our Prayers sine Monitore, without a
Directory, as coming from the free motion of our own hearts.

Platina tells us, that in Celestine's time there was no other parts of the
Mass, but the Reading of the Epistles and ^ospels, which was Anno 435. Platina.
in Celest. 1.

Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr, in the second Century, fully shows the manner of Christian
Service in his time -- The Ancient Christians (says he) had their Meetings on
the Sunday, they began with Prayers for the Church, especially for the
Inlightend, which were baptized; then the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles
are read as time permits; then a Sermon unto the People, and exhorts them all
unto the Imitation of the best things; then all do rise up, and pour forth
their prayers again; when their prayers are ended, Bread, and Wine mixed with
Water, are brought forth, which being taken, he who has the Charge goes
before the People with an earnest voice in praising God and thanksgiving, and
the People do answer with a loud voice, Amen. Then the Deacons divide the holy
Signs unto them all which are present, and carry the same unto the absent:
this, says he, we call (...) thanksgiving, whereof none may partake, unless he
believe the true Doctrine, and be washed in the laver unto Regeneration and
Remission of sins, and live so as Christ has directed. After this is a
gathering of Alms. And p. 7. He who instructed the People, prayed according to
his ability* Here was no Liturgy or Common Prayers mentioned.

Walafr. Strabo.
Walafrid Strabo, who wrote in the 9th Century, says in his Book de Rebus
Ecclesiae -- All which is done now with a multitude of Prayers, Lessons, Songs,
and Cons^^rations, which the Apostles, and those who next followed them, did
with prayers and remembrance of the Lords sufferings even as he commanded.

Socrates Hist. l. 5. chapter 21.
Socrates says, That among all the Christians in that Age, scarce two were to
be found that used the same words in Prayer.

Pope Gregory the first made a new form of Service, which Pope Gregory.
they call the Mass* and did add many Ceremonies that were not in use before; So
that Platina says, The whole Institution of the Mass was Invented by him, we
in England had ours from Gregory, who by his Minister Austin first founded the
Church, and introduced most of the Rites, Service and Ceremonies.

Their was another Mass, which was called the Mass of Ambrose, Jacob. de
Voragine ^n vita Greg.
a ridiculous thing, which they afterward fathered upon him different from
Gregory's, whereof we read in after times, and there was great contention which
Mass should be received into the Churches. Which when Pope Adrian (who was Anno
796.) saw, he was put to his shifts, and said, he would refer it ^o the Will of
God, whether he would by any visible sign Approve the Mass* of Gregory, (...)
of Ambrose* So these two Books ^ere (...) together upon the A^^ar, in St.
Peter's Church, and (...) called upon God to show which of the two be approved;
the Doers were shut all Night, and the next Morning when they returned into the
Church, the Book of Ambrose was found lying, as it was laid down, and the other
was all torn and dispersed through the Church: The Pope makes the Comment,
that the Mass of Ambrose should lie untouched, and the Mass of Gregory should
be used through the World; And so ^e did Authorize and Command, that it should
be used in all Churches and Chapels, which Charles the Great did second;
Commanding that only to be used, and Ambroses to be Burnt.

8. Letanies.
Gregory the first, Ordained the Letanies or Supplications, says Platina.

9. Responses.
The Responses and Gradual was given by Pope Gregory, says Pol. Virgil.

10. Collects*
The Collects Ordinary, as says Durandus, were Ordained by Pope Gregory: the
other Collects added by sundry Popes, as Cassandar in Liturgia, cap. 21.

11. Offices, Antiphones
He made the Offices of the Church, and disposed the Nights and Days
Antiphones, or Singing-Service; he polished the Rites of the Mass, and renewed
its Canon; he made the Introitus to the Mass, with the Particles; he Commanded
the Kyrieeleison and Hallelujah to be Sung. He ordered the 12. Kyrieeleison.
singing of Psalms, the Letanies and Processions. Balaeus Cent. 1. p. 62. sect.
32.

13. Psalms and Lessons.
The Prescript Number of Psalms and Lessons was brought into the Church by
Gregory the 7 th. Anno 1073. says Durandus.

14. Epistles, Gospels.
The Epistles and Gospels Platina gives to Pope Damasus, Anno 384. Pope
Anastasius brought in Standing at the Gospel, Anno 400. as says Platina and
Pol. Virgil.

15. Singing Service.
Austin (Confess. lib. 9.) shows that the Latin Church had no Singing-Service;
that was brought into our Ceremonies, says Polidore Virgil, from the old
Heathen (de Invent. Rer. lib. 6. c. 2.) who were wont to Sacrifice with
Symphony, witness Livies, l. 9.

16. Altars.
The Primitive Church had no Altars: Pope Sylvester was the first Author of
their Consecration, Bellar. de Verb. Dei, l. 4. c. 3. Anno 334. Then
consequently no Bowing to them, nor Kneeling before them, being all Novels.

17. Festivals. Magd. Cent. 2. ^. 6. p. 119.
As little can you find the English Festivals in Antiquity.

The Centurists tells us, Observandum est Apostolos and Apostolicos viros,
neque de Paschate, neque de aliis quibuscunque festivitatibus legem aliquam
constituisse; It is to be observed that neither the Apostles, nor any
Apostolic men have given us any Law for the observation of Easter, or any
other Feast whatsoever, Magd. Cent. 2. Chap 6. p. 119.

Cent. 3. 137.
They also tell us out of Origin, That it was not lawful for Christians to
observe the Feasts or Solemnities either of Jews or Gentiles, Cent. 3. p. 137.

The Council of Laodicea in the 37 Can. forbad the Heathenish or Jewish Feast.
Non oportet a Judaeis vel Hereticis Feriatica quae mittuntur accipere, nec cum
eis dies agere Feriatos.

The Canons of the Ancient Councils forbad to keep the Pagan Feasts, and to
deck their Houses with green Boughs and Bay leaves, as they did in the Kalends
of January, Con. Affr. Can. 2. Tolet. 4. Can. 5. Brac. 2. c. 7.

The Festivals observed by the Ancients were not accounted more holy than other
days. Jerome on Matthew. 5. says, Non quod celebrior sit dies illa qua
conv^nimus.

The Waldenses, The Ancient Fathers of the Protestants, held, that they were to
rest from labor upon no day but the Lord's day. Aeneas Sylvius.

18. The Ecclesiastical Rites and Geremonies of Marriage.
The Rites and Geremonies of Marriage, as expressed in the Office of Marriage
in the Liturgy, do not appear to have been in use in those Primitive times. It
being decreed by Pope Julius and Ser^^ius* about the middle of the 4 th
Century, That all Marriage should pass the Benediction of a Priest upon penalty
of Sa^riledge; The Office being taken from the Papists, and those very
Restraints laid upon Marriage, at what seasons People may Marty, and when not,
are taken out of the Romish Pope Clement.
Rubric. Pope Clement having ordained, that from Septuage sima, till Easter;
from Rogation, till Whitsunday; and from Advent to Epiphany, Marriage should be
prohibited; and which Doctrine of Devils is translated from their Rubric to
ours.

19. Bowing at the Altar and to the East.
As for Bowing to the Altar, and to the East, and at Entrance into Churches and
Temples, they are Reverences which seem to be fetched from an Elder date, viz.
from the Pagan Idolaters, and from whom the superstitious. Ancients and Papists
had them, and we from them. Dr. Willer in his Synop. Papisi p. 492, 493. says*
That Bowing at the Altar, and Name of Jesus, are superstitious Idolatries*

As for Ecclesiastical Orders and Officers of the Lord Archbishops, 20.
Ecclesiastical Orders.
Lord* Bishops, Deans* Archdeacons, (...) and the Supremacy exercised one over
another in the Church of England; they are so far from having the stamp of
Primitive Antiquity, that they are not to be found therein, at least for the
three or four first Centuries.

Dr. Stillingfleet in his Irenicum, p. 177. tells us after this manner, viz.
That whether any shall succed the Apostles in superiority of Power over
Presbyters, or all remain governing the Church in an equality of Power, is no
where determined by the Will of Christ in the Scripture, which contains his
ROYAL LAW, and therefore we have no reason to look upon it as any thing flowing
from the Power and Authority of Christ as Mediator, and so not necessar^ly
binding to Christians.

And further assures us, That Episcopal men cannot show by the word of God
neither by the practice of the Apostles, nor so much as by the PRIMITIVE
CHURCH, that a Minister of Jesus Christ has had any superintendency over
several private Churches, or that a Bishop has ordained Ministers by his sole
and pure Authority, as is now practiced in England; or that he who is not
naturally Invested with any Authority, should have the power to Delegate
others, and much more Secular persons.

And if any would be better satisfied herein, there are two late pieces, which
may fully do it, viz. one by Dr. Owen, in a Book called, The Order and
Communion of Evangelical Churches; and the other in a Book called, No Evidence
for Diocesan Churches and Bishops in the primitive times.

The Primitive Fathers were against dedicating of Churches to Saints and
Angels. 21. Dedication of Churches to Angels and Saints.


Austin says, If we build a Church of Stones or Wood unto any most excellent
Angel, are we not accursed and anathematized from the Truth, and from the
Church of God, because then we give unto a Creature that service which is due
unto God only? Cont. Maxim. lib. 1. Arg. 11. de Spir. Sancto.

Erasmus upon Austin 's words, has in the Margent marked thus -- This is done
now to each one of the Divi or Saints, viz. not a Church erected without such a
Dedication.

Pope Vitellia^us brought in Organs, and other Musical Instruments ^2. Organs.
into the Church about the 8 th Century, Bell* de bon. oper. lib. 1. c. 7.

23. Rogation-week.
Rogation-week, or Gauge-days, were Ordained by Pope Leo 444. as says Platina,
Massaeus, and Polidor Virgil.

24. Priests Garments.
Pope Zacharias, in the year 737, Ordained Priests Gowns, Tippets, and
Four-corned Caps. Chron. Achil. Faseicul. Temp.

25. Wed. Frid. and Sat. Fasts.
Pope Boniface Ordained Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays Fasts, as says
Platina.

26. Vigils.
And that Anno 425, Pope Boniface Ordained Vigils or Saints Eves Fasts, as
Polidor Virgil and Pantaleon affirm.

27. Apostles Creed.
To which is called the Apostles Creed, was not as now in our Liturgy known in
the Primitive times, but has past great alterations.

1. It is manifest the Fathers in the first Ages do give us the Creed in other
words, not one of them giving us this Form for above 300 years after Christ.
Ignatius, Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian, write the Churches Faith, but none of
them in this form.

2. We have Bishop Usher, that great searcher into Antiquity, giving us an
account of the Additions made to it (in his Dissert. de Symbol. p. 16.) viz.
[Maker of Heaven and Earth] was a new Addition, not in the ancient Copies. (2.)
[Conceived] is added; the old form is, Born of the Holy Ghost. (3.) the word
[Dead] is added. (4.) [Descended into Hell] is added. (5.) the Name of [God
Almighty] to the Articles of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God. (6.)
[Catholick] is added to Holy Church. (7.) [Communion of Saints] is added. And
(8.) [Life everlasting] is added. And which Additions, faith Bishop Usher were
not made at once, but at several times. And the Bishop affirms, that the Nicene
was as Confidently, and more Anciently called the Apostles Creed.

28. The Athana^i^n Creed.
As for the Athanasian Creed, Quicunque vult, etc. fathered upon Athanasius,
Bishop of Alexandria, in the 4th Age; It appears to be otherwise, and to have
no such stamp of Primitive Antiquity, as Dr. Burnet (Hist. of Reform. Part 2.
B. 1. p. 167.) informs us, viz. That they went according to the Received
opinion, that Athanasius was the Author of that Creed, which is now found not
to have been Compiled till near three Ages after him.

What was of Primitive Antiquity, left out of the Liturgy.
Secondly, It does appear that what was of pure Antiquity, and in use in those
first Centuries, viz. 2, 3 and 4, are either not used, or blotted out of the
Liturgies, having been heretofore in use.

The Protestant Reconciler, Part 1. Chap. 8. from page 261. to 299 gives an
account of the Ancient Rites and Ceremonies in use amongst the Ancient Churches
and Fathers, now laid aside, viz. Love Feasts; Kiss of Charity; Deaconesses;
Praying standing from Easter till Whit sunday; Dipping or Plunging the
Baptized, yea, the Trine Immersion; Deferring Baptison till Easter and
Whitsunday; Exorcism; Sufflation; Anointing the Sick; Chrism; White Garment;
Milk and Honey to the New Baptized; giving the Eucharist to the Infant, from
the 3d to the 12th Century; mingling Water with the Sacramental Wine; All
eating of one Loaf in the Supper; to send the Eulogiae or Broken Bread to the
absent; to receive standing, or in a Table Gesture; to pray for the Dead, etc.
All which are Rejected. And many of these, though in the first Common Prayer in
Edward the Sixth's time laid aside, as the said Author, p. 298. tells us,
concluding thus:

Prot. Re^onc. p. 298.
Hence we may see how vainly it is pretended, that these Ceremonies were
retained or imposed to manifest the Justice and Equity of the Reformation, by
letting their Enemies see, they did not break Communion with them for mere
Indifferent things, or that they left the Church of Rome no farther than she
left the ancient Church, as says Dr. Stillingfleet. When it is manifest, says
he, that we left off praying for departed Saints, the Unction of the Sick, the
mixing Water with the Sacramental Wine, the Chrysm, Exorcism, the anointing the
baptized Person, Crossing the Breast, and at the Consecration of the Eucharist,
and the baptismal Water, with many other things which were retained in the
ancient Church, and in the Liturgy of Edw. 6.

Thus you see, that notwithstanding the great cry of Symbolizing with Primitive
Antiquity, and not at all with Rome, that the latter appears to be as true as
the other is false, their Litnrgies, Rites and Ceremonies, being (as said) a
Composition of Pagan, Papal Inventions, with some Novel Additions of their own*
and Primitive Antiquity almost wholly excluded. And it is very observable to
consider what Alterations have been made in Edw. the Sixth's Liturgy, to
gratify the Papists, as omitting that Clause of the Letany, FROM THE BISHOP OF
ROME AND ALL HIS DETESTABLE ENORMITIES; and that in the Commination, CURSED BE
THE WORSHIPPERS OF IMAGES; and have left out that Exhortation which is
condemned as a most vile abomination in their usual Masses, where People Gaze,
but do not Communicate.

2 dly, That we do symbolize with Popery.
Secondly, In the next place it will appear (that as we do not Symbolize with
Antiquity in our Rites and Ceremonies) that we do symbolize in most, if not in
all of them, with Popery, though so positively denied by the learned.

Which is manifest, first, by the several particulars before 1. Former
instances.
mentioned; for as the Church of England does not symbolize with Primitive
Antiquity therein, as it is plain they do not, (if our Authors speak true) so
they do fully symbolize with Popish Novelty, as the proofs make manifest, both
in Kneeling at the Altar, Cross in Baptism, Surplice, etc.

2 dly, By confession of Parties.
Secondly, This symbolizing with Popery in our Rites and Ceremonies, appears by
what is fully owned and acknowledged by Parties themselves.

The principal part of Worship, (both as to matter and manner) performed in the
Church of England, is contained in the Rubric or Service Book, by Law
established; which in the beginning of the Reformation in H. 8. time, was no
other than the Romish Liturgy, some parts only being translated into English,
(viz. the Creed, Paternoster, Ten Commandments Fullers Eccl. Hist. Book 7. p.
385.
and Letany. Edw. 6. went further* translating it all into English, yet
retaining the same Service word for word, except some alterations; for so Mr.
Fox tells us in the King and Councils Letter to the Devonshire men, about the
alteration of their Mass Book, who by the Instigation of their Priests, had
been stirred up to Rebellion; wherein it is thus told them, as recorded, Act.
and Mon. 2 Vol. p. 1189.

As for the Service in the English tongue, it perchance seems to you a New
Service; and yet indeed it is NO OTHER BUT THE OLD, THE SELF-SAME WORDS in
English, for NOTHING is altered, but to speak with Knowledge, that which was
spoken with Ignorance, only a few things taken out so fond, that it had been a
shame to have heard them in English.

Some alterations were made afterward in the 2 d of Edw* 6. and some by Q
Elizabeth, and some few by King James; but the Body and Essentials of it
continued, and was preserved, for so faith K. Charles the 2 d.

14 Chap. 2^*
In his Preface to the Common Prayer, annexed to the Act of Uniformity, in these
words:

That we find that in the Reigns of several Princes, since the Reformation, the
Church upon just and weighty Considerations her thereunto moving, has yielded
to make such alterations in some particulars, as in their respective times were
thought convenient, yet so as the main Body and Essentials of it (as well in
the chiefest materials, as in the frame and order thereof) have still continued
the same unto this day, and do yet stand firm and unshaken, notwithstanding all
vain attempts, and impetuous assaults made against it by such MEN AS ARE GIVEN
TO CHANGE.

Calderwoods Chapter History, p. 256.
In Confirmation whereof, you have the testimony of King James, as Mr.
Calderwood in his History of the Church of Scotland informs us, who tells us,
that King James in the 8th Session of the General Assembly held at Edinburgh,
Aug. 4. 1590. said these words in his Speech to them, viz The Kirk of Geneva
keep Pasch and Yule, whereof no Constitution. And as for our Neighbor Kirk of
England, their Service is an evil said Mass in English; they want nothing of
the Mass but the liftings, but that the Kirk of Scotland was the sincerest in
the World.

So that you have the Acknowledgment and Grant of three Kings to the truth
hereof; that the public Worship and Service of the Protestant Church of
England contained in the English Liturgy, and practiced in the Church, is the
same in the main Body and Essentials, chiefest Materials, Frame and Order with
that of the Popish; and whoever will take the pains to search into the Popish
Breviary, Ritual, Missal, and Pontificial, which four comprehend their whole
Liturgy, will find* though there may be some alterations and variations, in
several particulars; yet as the King grants, the substance and chiefest
materials and order is the same, and that ours is taken out of theirs, viz.
Collects, Mattins, Eversongs, Epistles, Gospels, Creeds, Letanies,
Consecration, Administration of Sacraments, Baptism of Infants, with Gossips to
answer for them, Kneeling at the Altar, Confiteor, Absolution, Confirmation,
Burial, Matrimony, Visitation of the Sick, Ordination of Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. And which will appear particularly by what follows.

Mist. of Iniquity, l. 2. chapter 22. p. 468.
Dr. Moore in his Mystery of Iniquity* ^ib. 2. chapter 22. p. 468 says thus* For
undoubtedly our Her^ieal Reformers did not, as is the use of some act, out of
peevishnes^ and spite, and please their own humor and impetuosity of Spirit,
as being part of the chaste Spouse of Christ, the true Apostolic Church, the
Mother of us all, deals as a Mother with all those that profess themselves in
any sense Children of Christ's Church, and therefore would not have them,
divided more than needs; whence it is, that out of a spirit of Charity and
tender Kindness, she has in some things in themselves Indifferent, (and what
Indifferent things they are you have heard) humbly condescended to symbolize
with that lapsed Lady of Rome, to bring off her abused Paramours to the pure
Worship of God; which Condescension, as is well known, took good effect for
some space of Years, and the Catholics joined in public prayer and service
with us [and well they might, being as our three Kings have granted so much
their own, only in the English tongue] till that Harlot that makes nothing of
having her Children divided, forcibly rent off the English Roman Catholic from
so reasonable and Christian a Communion; and yet, says he, does not our Church
cease to use this charitable Courtship and sweet Condescension toward them
still, [viz. yet symbolizing with her] to win them off to such a Worship as is
every way as graceful as their own?

Dr. Stillingfleet in his Irenicum, c. 7. s. 5. p. 123.
Dr. Stillingfleet in his Irenicum, speaks to this purpose, viz. That the great
reason why our first Reformers did so far comply with the Papists, it was to
gain, and lay a bait for them, and which he hopes was never intended to be a
Hook for the Protestants.

3 dly, By comparing their Divine Service and ours together.
Thirdly, Will not the Symbolizing with Popery appear, more particularly, by
comparing our Divine Service in the Common Prayer and Rubric, with their
Divine Service in their Mass Book and Rubric; and how much we have taken them
for our pattern, and follow their direction in the particulars following, viz.

First, In the time when Divine Service, and public Worship is to be performed.

Secondly, In the Divine Service it self, which is to be performed.

Thirdly, In the Rites and Ceremonies performed in Divine Service and Worship.

1 st. As to the times of Worship.
First, As to the times of Worship, their Breviary and Calendar do divide the
year into Feasts, Vigils, Fasts, and Working-days: So do we take ours directly
from them, dividing our Calendar by theirs, both as to Feasts, Vigils, Fasts,
Working-days. It is true, they have more Feasts than we, but all ours are found
in theirs, and taken from them, as our Ritual makes manifest. For Instance:

1. Their Feasts are divided into Movables and fixed: So are ours. Their
Movable-Feasts and Holy days are,

Movable Feasts.
1. Their Easter Day, on which the rest depend, is always the first Sunday
after the first full Moon, which happens next after the 21 st. of March; and if
the full Moon happens upon a Sunday, Easter Day is the Sunday after, with a
Vigil before: So ours from them expressly. 2. Their Advent-Sunday is always the
nearest Sunday to the Feast of St. Andrew, whether before or after, and to four
Sundays after: So ours directly. 3. Their Septuagesima-Sunday, 9 Weeks before
Easter: So ours. 4. Their Sexagesima-Sunday, 8 Weeks before Easter: So ours. 5.
Their Quinquagesima-Sund. 7 Weeks before Easter: So ours. 6. Their
Quadragesima-Sunday 6 Weeks before Easter: So ours. 7. Their Rogation-Sunday, 5
Weeks after Easter: So ours. 8. Their Ascention-day is 40 Days after Easter: So
ours. 9. Their Whitsunday, with a Vigil, 7 Weeks after Easter: So ours. 10.
Their Trinity-Sunday is 8 Weeks after Easter: So ours. And 24 Sundays after
Trinity.
2. Their Fixed Feasts are as follows, viz.

Fixed Feasts.
1. The Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ, the first of January. 2. The
Epiphany, 6 January. 3. Their Conversion of St. Paul, 25 January. 4. Their
Purification of the blessed Virgin, with a Vigil, 2 February. 5. Their St.
Matthias, 24 Feb. with a Vigil before it. 6. Their Anunciation of the Virgin,
25 March, and Vigil 7. Their St. Mark, 25 April. 8. Their St. Philip and Jacob,
1 May. 9. Their St. Barnabas, 11 June. 10. Their Nativity of St. John Baptist,
24 June and Vigil. 11. Their St. Peter, the 29 June and Vigil. 12. Their St.
James, the 25 July and Vigil. 13. Their St. Bartholomew, 24 August and Vigil.
14. Their St. Matthew, 21 September and Vigil. 15. Their St. Michael, 29 Sept
-- So ours; to which we add, And all Angels -- 16. Their St. Luke, 18 October
and Vigil. 17. Their St. Simon and Jude, 28 October and Vigil. 18. Their
All Saints, 1 November and Vigil. 19. Their St. Andrew, 30 November and Vigil.
20. Their St. Thomas, 21 December and Vigil. 21. Their Nativity of our Lord, 25
December and Vigil. 22. Their St. Stephen, 26 December. 23. Their St. John the
Evangelist, 27 December. 24. Their St. Innocents, 28 December. 25. Their Monday
and Tuesday in Easter-week. 26. Their Monday and Tuesday in Whitson-week. So
are ours directly.
Their Days of Fasting.
Fasting days.
1. Their Forty days of Lent. 2. Their Ember-days, at the four seasons, being
Wednesday, Friday, Saturday, after the first Sunday in Lent the Feast of
Pentecost, September the 14. and December the 13. 3. Their three Rogation days,
being the Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays before Holy Thursday, or the
Ascension of our Lord. 4. And all the Fridays in the year. So are ours in like
manner.
Thus do we symbolize expressly, or rather take them for our Ritual and Pattern,
as to the times of Worship, ours being but a Transcript of theirs, and which
they practiced so many 100 years before us. And of all which, not one word of
Direction in all the New Testament. If it be said, who has Required all these
Feasts, Fasts, Holy Days, etc. at our hands? Must we not say, our Sovereign
Lord the Pope, who Ordained all this service for us, to the denying the
Soveraignity of Christ, as though he was not the only Lawgiver, being wiser
than what is written.

If we must keep Holy Days for all the Apostles, and the other Saints of the
Pope's making, why not for the Patriarchs and Prophets? why not for St. Enoch,
St. Seth, St. Noah, St. Abraham, St. Lot, St. Moses, St. Job, St. David, St.
Samuel, St. Esaias, St. Jeremy, etc.?

2 dly, As to the Divine Service it self.
Secondly, In the Divine Service it self, which is to be performed at the
prefixed times aforesaid. Which they have divided into Mattins and Evensongs,
and so we, after their Example, and appropriated to the particular Feasts,
Fasts, Vigils, Offices of Baptism, Supper, Marriage, Burial, Confirmation,
Visitation of Sick, Churching of Women, etc. So we directly.

The substance or matter of their Divine Service consists in Collects, or short
Prayers, Confessions, Absolutions, Prescript Lessons of Psalms, Epistles,
Gospels, Prophets, Apocrypha, Letanies, Anthems, or Canticles, and Comminations
appropriated to the several Offices abovesaid. All which is the substance or
matter of our Divine Service, in all parts of it appropriated and applied to
the several and respective Offices aforesaid. It is true, there may be some
variation in the Collects, and Lessons, Letanies and Anthems, though many times
the very same word for word, and to the days and occasions they appointed them.
These six Canticles are word for word from the Mass*Book, viz. Benedicite omnia
opera. 2. Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel. 3. Magnificat anima mea. 4. Nunc
Dimittis. 5. Quicunque vult. 6. Te Deum laudamus, with Gloria patri, as they
have directed to be repeated often, and after every Psalm; and Gloria in
excelsis, and Pater noster to be often repeated in every Office and Exercise.

Thirdly, In Rites and Ceremonies.
Do they kneel at Confession and Absolution? So we.

3 dly, In Rites and Ceremonies.
Do they Repeat the Paternoster, kneeling, after the Priest? So we.

Do they stand at Gloria Patri? So we.

Do they stand up and repeat the Apostl's Creed? So we.

Do they repeat after the Minister the Kiryeelyson, Christeelyson, kneeling? So
we.

Do they upon the reading or singing Quicunque vult, or Athanasius Creed,
stand? So we.

Do they upon saying or singing Letanies, make Responses by the People? So we.

Do they kneel at the Altar when they partake of the Eucharist, or Lords
Supper? So we.

Do they upon the Rehearsal of the Ten Commandments kneel, asking mercy and
grace after every Command? So we.

Do the Priest and People read the Psalms alternately, verse by verse? So we.

Do they sit at reading the Lessons? So we.

Do they uncover themselves in the Churches? So we.

Do they sing their Anthems, and Canticles, and Psalms, and Prayers with
Music, Vocal and Instrumental, as Organs, Flutes, Viols, etc. So we in our
Cathedrals.

Do they bow to the East, and Name of Jesus? So we. Of all which not one word
in all the New Testament.

4 thly, As to the places of Worship.
Fourthly, Is there not a symbolizing with Popery in the Places of Worship?

The Places of our Worship are either such as were built and consecrated by the
Papists, which we took from them, retaining the Saints Names they were
dedicated to, as St. Mary, St. Peter, St. Paul, All Saints, or such places as
we have built by their Example, posited East and West. Consecrated and
dedicated to some Saint or Angel, and which we take to be more Holy than any
other place, as they did, and give great Reverence by uncovering the Head, and
bending the Knee, and upon entrance into it, bowing to the East and Altar
placed therein. And keep the annual Feast of Dedication, Wake or Paganalia, as
the Papists and the Heathen before them did. Of all which, not one word in all
the New Testament.

5 thly, In the Priesthood.
Fifthly, Do we not also symbolize with them in the Priesthood, who are
principally to minister in those places of Worship?

1. Orders.
Have they superior Priests, viz. Bishops and Archbishops, in the room of the
Heathen-Flamins and Arch-Flamins for Sacerdotal Service in Provinces and
Diocesses? So have we.

2. Distinctions.
Have they Inferior Priests, distinguished by Dignities, Names and Services, as
Deans, Chapters, Prebends, Archdeacons, to minister in Cathedrals; and
Parsons, Vicars and Curates to officiate in Parishes? So we.

3. Habits.
Have they proper distinguishing Habits for their Clergy, and particular
Vestments for their holy Ministrations, as Albs, Surplices, Chasubles, Amicts,
Gowns, Copes, Maniples, Zones, etc.? So we.

Of all which, not one word in all the New Testament.

That we do Symbolize with them in the Ordination of the Priesthood, take a
brief Parallel of the Pontificials, viz. the Romish and the English.
Romish Pontificial.
1. 4. Ordination.
Tempora Ordinationum sunt, etc. The times of Ordination are the Sabbaths, in
omnibus quatuor temporibus, Romans Pontif. de Ordinibus conferendis.

2. Ordinationes sacrorum Ordinum, the Ordination of holy Orders shall be in
the times appointed, and in the Cathedral Church, with the Canons of the said
Church being present thereat, shall be publicly celebrated in the time of
Divine Service, Ibid.

3. They are taken to the Order of Presbyters who have continued in the Office
of a Deacon ^t least a whole year, except for the profit and necessity of the
Church it shall otherwise seem good unto the Bishop, Ibid.

4. Episcopus autem Sacerdotibus. But the Bishop, Priests being adjoined to
him, and other prudent men, skilful in the divine, Law, and exercised in
Ecclesiastical Functions; shall diligently examine the Person's Age -- of him
that is to be ordained.

5. Nullus dd Ordinem -- None shall be admitted to the Order of a Deacon before
he be 23 years old, nor to the Order of Presbytery before the 25th year of his
Age.

6. Archia-Diaconis offerens -- The Archdeacon presenting those who are to be
promoted to the Order of Deacons, (each of them being decently habited) unto
the Bishop, sitting in his Seat before the Altar, says, Reverend Father --

7. The Bishop shall ask, Do you know them to be worthy? The Archdeacon shall
answer, As much as humane Frailty suffers me to know, I know and tes^ifie that
they are worthy.

8. The Bishop shall speak to the Clergy and People, If any one has ought
against these Persons, let him come forth, and with Confidence speak for God
and before God.

9. Lastly, the Bishop takes and delivers to them all the Book of the Gospel,
saying, Receive the power of reading the Gospel in the Church of God.

10. The Bishop shall say, the Ministers and Chaplains answering, Lord have
mercy upon us; O God, the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon us; O God, the Son,
Redeemer of the World, have mercy upon us; that it may please thee to bless,
sanctify and consecrate these Elect. R. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

11. They sing one and the same Hymn, only the one is in Latin, the other in
English Veni Creator Spiritus,
Mentes tuarum visita, etc.


12. The Bishop shall lay his hands upon the head of each of them, kneeling
upon their knees before him, saying to every one, Receive the Holy Ghost, whose
sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins thou do retain,
they are retained.

13. The Peace of God be always with you, the Blessing of God Almighty, the
Father, Son and holy Ghost descend upon you.

English Pontificial
1. WE daclare, That no Deacons or Ministers be Ordained, but only upon the
Sundays immediately following Jejuna quatuor temporum, commonly called,
Ember-weeks, Co^sti^. and Can. Eccl. Can. 31.

2. And this be done in the Cathedral or Parish Church; where the Bishop
resideth, and in the time of divine Service, in the presence not only of the
Archdeacon, but of the Dean. Ibid.

3. And here it must be declared unto the Deacon, that he must continue in that
Office the space of a whole year, except for reasonable causes it shall
otherwise seem good unto the Bishop. The Book of Ordering Priests and Deacons.

4. The Bishop, before he admit any Person to holy Orders, shall diligently
examine him in the presence of those Ministers that shall assist him at the
Imposition of hands, Can* 35.

5. None shall be admitted a Deacon, except he be 23 years of Age, and every
man which is admitted a Priest shall be full 24 years old: The Preface to the
manner and form of making Priests and Deacons.

6. The Archdeacon or his Deputy shall present unto the Bishop (sitting in his
Chair, near to the holy Table) such as desire to be ordained Deacons (each of
them being decently habited) saying these words, Reverend Father --

7. The Bishop shall say -- Take heed that the Persons whom you present unto us
be apt and meet for their Learning -- The Archdeacon shall answer, I have
enquired of them, and also examined them, and think them so to be.

8. Then the Bishop shall say to the People -- Brethren, if there be any of you
who knows any Impediment or notable Crime in any of these Persons, let him
come forth in the Name of God, and show what it is.

9. Then the Bishop shall deliver to every one of them the New Testament
saying, Take thee Authority to read the Gospel in the Church of God.

10. The Bishop, with the Clergy and People, shall sing or say the Letany; O
God, the Father of Heaven have mercy on miserable Sinners; O God the Son,
Redeemer of the World, have mercy on us; that it may please thee to bless these
thy Servants. Respon. We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

11. They sing one and the same Hymn, only the one is in Latin, the other in
English Come Holy Ghost, our Souls inspire,
And enlighten with Celestial fire.


12. The Bishop shall lay his hands severally upon the heads of every one that
receive the Order of Priesthood, the Receivers humbly kneeling upon their
Knees, and the Bishop saying, Receive the Holy Chost, whose sins thou do
forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins thou do Retain, they are retained.

13. The Peace of God -- And the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, be amongst you, and remain with you always.

Of all which Progress, not one word in all the New Testament.

AND as a further Confirmation of our Symbolizing with Popery in our Rites and
Service, take a few Instances.

First, That the Papists not only so long approved our Liturgy, and kept their
Communion in our Church in that Worship, as before Remark't from Dr. More; but
also, that the Popes themselves have offered to Confirm the same, as Doctor
Morton's Appeal discovers; and that Pope Pius the 4 th, and Explicat. Quest.
illust. 4. p. 46. and 112.
Gregory 13. offered to Queen Elizabeth to Confirm the English Liturgy, as
Camden in the Life of Queen Elizabeth testifies. Dr. Boys produces the Pope's
Letter, and Bristow's Approbation in his 39 th Motive.

And that the Jesuit, Dr. Carryer, says, That the Common Prayer and Catechism
contain nothing contrary to the Romish Service. Mountague asserts, that our
Service is the same in most things with the Church of Rome, and that the
Differences are not so great, that we should make any separation.

Common Prayer Book Unmasked, p. 9.
Two famous Instances more we have mentioned in a Book, called, The Common
Prayer Book Unmasked, p. 9. One of a Jesuit, who coming not many years since to
the Service at Paul's, declared he liked it exceeding well; neither had he any
Exception to it, but that it was not done by their Priests.

The other that upon the Pope's Bull that Interdicted Queen Elizabeth,
Secretary Walsingham, procured two Persons to come into England from the Pope,
to whom he showed the London and Canterbury Service, (in their Cathedrals) in
all the Pomp of it; who thereupon declared, that they wondered the Pope should
be so ill informed and advised to interdict a Prince, whose Service and
Ceremonies so symboliz'd with his own; and therefore returning to Rome, they
possessed the Pope, that they saw no Service, Ceremonies or Orders in England,
but might very well serve in Rome; whereupon the Bull was Recalled.

Objection. 4.
As to the taking of Collects out of the Mass Book, it is said by the Resolver,
p. 43. That if those prayers are good, which he affirms to be very good, then
such a symbolizing, he says, cannot make them bad.

Answer.
To which it is Replied, that the goodness or badness of Worship and Service,
as to the matter and form, is to be measured not by our Fancies, but the Rule
of God's Word: But we do not find any such pattern of shreds of Prayers or
Collects, to be said or sung, though such things Pope Gregory found in the
Ritual of Numa Pompilius, which were said or sung in their Processions to their
Gods. The Al^aron, Talmud and Apocripha may have, as we suppose, good things in
things, as well as the Pagan and Papal Mass-books; must we therefore put them
into our Prayers?

Therefore this kind of collecting we must, by his favor, judge bad, because
not to be found in Christ's, but in the Heathen and Antichristian Platform, and
as not being of divine, but mere human Invention; and therefore having been
abused to Idolatry, ought to be rejected by us, because we are commanded not to
take off the Babylonish Materials, A Corner, nor a Foundation*stone, Jer. 51.
26. Nor to make such a Linseywoolsey Medley in Gods Worship, Lev. 19. 19. Nor
to swear by the Lord and by Malchim, Zeph. 15. being reqired to take heed to
our selves, that we be not ensnared, and that we do not inquire, saying, How
did these Nations serve their Gods? even so will we do likewise: We are
commanded not to do so unto the Lord our God: But that whatsoever God commands,
that we are to observe and do, not adding thereto, or diminishing therefrom,
Deuteronomy. 12. 30, etc.

The learned Maccovius, upon Lev. 19. 19. says, That the sacred Rites of
Idolaters, though they be things in themselves indifferent, are not to be
retained, because all Conformity with Idolators is to be avoided; as also says
Zanchy, Junius, Calvin, Beza, Mollerus, Danaeus, yea, Lyra, though a Papist.

Objection.
But what do you say to the Lords Prayer? must we forbear that too, because we
find it in their Mass Book, though so positively enjoined by Christ to use it,
who bids us expressly, Luke 11. 2. that when we pray, we should say, Our Father,
etc.? Therefore whoever will pray it, or neglect it, we must pray that very
set-form of Prayer, in those very words, when we pray.

Answer.
To which we say, that it is a great Mistake to suppose, that Christ hereby in
this Scripture has appointed this to be a Set-form to be prayed by all in these
prescript words, when we pray unto God; for then it would be unlawful to use
any other words than these herein expressed in our Prayers; and that the
Disciples and Apostles finned in using other words in those then Prayers we
read of in Scripture; and so does the Church of England in forming so many
Collects and Prayers.

Secondly, The Church of Rome and England also are great transgressors, to
presume to vary from Christ's Precept, in altering or adding to the form of
words expressed by Christ in this 11 of Luke, for so they have done -- they
say, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them who trespass against us:
when there are no such words in Christ's Prayer; his words are, Forgive us our
Sins (or Debs, (...)) for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us. And
add also the Doxology, which is not in this Prayer, Luke 11. But you will say, as
to the Doxology, it is expressed by Christ at the end of the same Prayer in his
Sermon on the Mount, Matthew. 6. It is very true, it is so, where he delivers
this Prayer not as a Set-form, but a Pattern of Prayer, AFTER THIS MANNER PRAY
YE, (...), to this purpose; and which is an Explanation of what he says, Luke
11. 2. when you pray, say, Our Father; that is, after this manner: and which
can only be a warrant to the Church of England, or any other, to make such
alterations; Christ no more intending to tie the Disciple, who desired to be
instructed how to pray to this form of words, nor any other Disciple, than he
did the 12 Disciples, when he sent them out to preach with this word of
Command, Matthew. 10. 7. Preach, saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; that
they should thereby be tied to those very words in their Preaching (and preach
nothing else): but as this was given as a Text or Theme to preach by, so the
other to pray by. The Disciple who proposes the question, verse. 1. desires that
they might be taught to pray, as John taught his Disciples; but such a set-form
of Prayer we find not, that John in his teachings gave to his Disciples;
neither do we find that any of Christ's Disciples or Apostles did pray this very
Prayer, to which our Expositors do agree.

Grotius says on Luke 11. 2. That Christ herein teaches us a Compendium of
those things we are to pray for, at that time they were not bound to the use of
so many words and syllables. As also Tertullian, Cyprian, Musculus, Cornelins
Alapide; and Austin himself says, Liberum est, It is free for us to ask the
same things in the Lords Prayer, Aliis, atque aliis verbis, sometimes one way,
sometimes another.

Does not Paul tell us expressly, He knew not What to pray for, but as the
Spirit gave him utterance? Romans 8. But he did know what to pray for, if this
was to be his prescript form.

Tertullian says, They prayed, sine Monitor^, without a Monitor [or
Common-Prayer-Book] And Socrates tells us, That among all the Christians of
that Age, scarce two were to be found that used the same words in Prayer.

Chrysostom on Romans 8. Homil. 14. says, With other Gifts they had the Gift of
Prayer, which was also called, the Spirit; and he who had this Gift did pray
for the whole Multitude, for what was expedient unto the Church; and also did
instruct others to Pray.

And though we find neither Christ nor his Apostles impose this nor any other
Form of Prayer to be used by us, (but that we pray in the Spirit, and praise in
the Spirit, and that God being a Spirit, seeks and accepts such
Worshippers) yet we find the Popes and their Councils imposing this and other
Lyturgical Forms.

The Council of Toledo, Anno 618. decreed in the 9th Canon, That every day,
both in public and private Worship, none of the Clergy omit the Lords Prayer,
under pain of Deposition; since (say they) Christ has prescribed this Saying,
When you pray, say, Our Father, etc. And how formally and carnally, if not
Idolatrously, has the Paternoster been muttered over by the superstitious
Papists ever since?

And may we not enquire, whether in the following Particulars we do not
symbolize with the Romish Worship herein?

1. First, By enjoining and imposing this as a Set-Form, as they do, without
the sanction of any sacred Text to warrant our so doing.

2. Secondly, By an often Repetition of the same Form in the same Exercise,
three or four times at least, insomuch that in Cathedral Services it is said or
sung ten or twelve times a day, contrary to Christ's express words, viz. That
when we Pray, we should not make vain Repetitions, as the Heathen do; for they
think that they shall be heard for their much speaking, Mat. 6. 7.

3. Thirdly, By enjoining the whole Congregation, both men and women, to repeat
the same after the Priest, though no such Direction by Christ; nay, he forbids
Women to pray or prophecy in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 34. etc.

4. Fourthly, In singing this Prayer in Cathedrals, by Responses of Priest and
People with Music, without the least divine Authority for such Song-Praying.

Objection*
The Resolver goes oh, p. 43. Our Brethron, [surely] will allow of reading the
Scriptures, as they do, viz. Epistles, Gospels, Psalms.

Answer*
To which we say, We do surely allow of reading the Scriptures, but not as they
do, especially in those Epistles, Gospels and Psalms, which are given us in the
Liturgy, for the following Reasons:

First, Because the Epistles, Gospels and Psalms, in the Service Book, are
mis-translated, being taken from the corrupt vulgar Latine-Bible, which is so
extreme faulty, and so much complained of by the learned, both Protestants and
others.

Secondly* Because what they call Epistles and Gospels are so curtal'd and
mangled, that they become quite another thing than the Evangelists intended in
the Gospels, or the Apostles in their Epistles, altogether ruining the scope
and connexions in diverse places, as may be instanced in numerous particulars,
if need were.

Thirdly, Because they have been the Inventions of the Popes, who have so
adulterated Christ's pure Worship and Service, to patch up their Idolatrous
Mass-Service, which Gregory (called) the Great completed, as before, fixing
and appropriating the Epistles, Gospels and Psalms to the Mattins and
Even-Songs, throughout the Year, as the Romish Calendar, whose Copy ('it is
suspected) we imitate, writes after.

Fourthly, That whilst it is supposed we may be instructed in the Lessons
ordered to be read upon the (so called) Sundays and Holy Days, through the
whole Bible, they have omitted so much of the Canonical Scriptures, as the
greatest part of Leviticus, Ruth, Chronicles, Nehemiah, Esther, Canticles,
Lamentations, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Nahum, Zephaniah, Haggai, The second
Epistle to the Thessalonians, the second and third of John, and most part of
the Revelation; instead of which, several parts of Apocryphal Writings are
read, which are esteemed by the Learned, to be fabulous, and savouring of the
too much adored Vanities of Gentilism.

Fifthly, Because they have omitted all the Original Titles or Inscriptions of
the Psalms, which are part of the holy Scriptures, which have so great a
tendency to unfold the mysteries in the Psalms, and instead of them retain the
Popish Latino Titles, printed over our English Psalms.

Sixthly, because of those additions which are made to the Scriptures therein
as to the 14 Psalm, 3 whole verses which are not in any of the Original Copies,
and Gloria patri to the Conclusion of several Psalms, ordering it to be said at
the reading of every Psalm, contrary to Deuteronomy 4. 2. Prove. 30. 6. Rev. 22. 18.

Seventhly, because the Epistles and Gospels are ordered to be sung as well as
said, without the least warrant or direction from the Scriptures.

Eighthly, because it is ordered in the Rubric to sit at the reading of the
Epistles, and to stand up to bow and scrape, and Respond at the Gospel, without
any warrant or direction from the Scriptures.

Ninthly, because of the disorderly chopping and interchanging of Scriptures,
by way of Colloquy, betwixt the Priest and People, viz. The Lord be with thee,
must the Priest say: And with thy Spirit, must the People say: Open our Lips,
must the Priest say: And let our Mouths show forth thy praise, must the People
say. And bandying so often the Kyrieeleison and Christeeleison, Lord have mercy
upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, betwixt Priest and People: for which no
Rule of direction from Gods Word, but expressly found in the Mass Book.

How faulty the Liturgy appeared in many of these things, to many learned
Episcopal Divines, is manifest by that Paper which was drawn up Anno 1641.
Touching Innovations in Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England,
together with Considerations upon the Common Prayer; and subscribed by
Archbishop Usher, Dr. Williams Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Prideaux, after B. of
Worcester, Dr. Browning, after B. of Exeter, Dr. Hacket, afterward Bishop of
Coventry and Litchfield, Dr. Ward, Dr. Featly, etc. and presented to the then
Parliament; wherein they gave 35 Exceptions against several things in the
Liturgy. And amongst others, against the corrupt Translation of the Epistles,
and Gospels, and Psalms; against the Apocryphy enjoined to be read in the
Lessons; against singing of Service; against adding Gloria Patri to the Psalms;
against the Hymns taken out of the Mass Book, viz. Benedicite omnia opera, etc.
against Priests Vestments, enjoined as were used, 2d. E. 6. against the sign of
the Cross in Baptism, which they say might as well be omitted as the Oil which
was heretofore its concomitant before they went always together; against
prohibiting times of Marriage, etc.

Objection.
Another Objection which should have been spoken to before, and which we he
(...) add, is this, viz. That it may well be supposed, that the Nonconformists
are very humerous in their groundless and unnecessary scruples, whilst they are
offended with the Church for that her Ancient and Reverend Practice of Bowing
at the Name of Jesus, enjoined in the 18 th Canon; and for which they have that
positive direction and Command, Phil. 2. 10. to warrant it.

Answer.
It is very true, they are indeed offended at that piece they conceive) of
voluntary Humility and Will Worship, because there is no more ground for Bowing
at the mentioning of that Name, either from that or any other Scripture, than
for Crossing our selves when that Name is named.

For, first, if it be a Command (as supposed) universally to bow at the
mentioning those Syllables, and that Name Jesus, then are all both in Heaven,
Earth, and under the Earth, Mer, Angels and Devils obliged thereto, whenever
that Name is mentioned; be it either by a Wicked man's blasphemously swearing by
it, or a drunken Priests profanely muttering it, or the mentioning Jesus the
Son of Syrach, or Bar Jesus the Conjurer.

And, secondly, if the supposed Command must be understood to relate to the
naming the Name of our Blessed Redeemer; it must then be considered which of
his Names must be meant, because he has many Names in Scripture, as Christ,
Immanuel, Jehovah, Wonderful, the Everlasting Father, Savior, Redeemer, Son of
God, Prince of Peace, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, etc. Any of which being
much more properly to be understood here, than this of Jesus, because it is at
the name of Jesus, viz. some Name of his, and not the Name Jesus that is to be
bowed to.

Thirdly, Neither can that Name be supposed to be meant here, because it
relates to a name the Father gave him after his Death, Suffering and
Exaltation, as the words make manifest; and therefore not that name Jesus,
which was given him at his Circumcision, before his said Suffering and
Exaltation.

Neither, fourthly, can this sense be admitted as a literal Command, that all
must bow the Knee at that Name, because at the same time all and every one
which make that reverence with the knee, are enjoined with their mouths, to
declare that he is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father, for they are
joined together; and why is not one perfor^^d ^s well as the other?

Therefore, fifthly, It does necessarily respect another thing, than
Reverencing the syllables of a Name, viz. that Power, Authority and
Soveraignity which the Father gave him in Glory, as a Reward of his Suffering,
which he himself declared after his Resurrection, Mat. 28. That all Power was
given him in Heaven and Earth, Ephesians. 28. This bowing in the Name of Christ in
this place, being by the Prophet, Isa 45. 23, 24. explained a Subjection of all
to the universal Authority that he shall exercise. Name often signifying Power
in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 26. 19. Genesis 6. 4. Psalm. 44. 5. 20. 1. 7. And therefore is
this very Subjection mentioned in the Text of a universal bowing the Knee to
his Authority, referred to the Judgment day, when all, both Men, Angels and
Devils must be subject to him, Romans 14. 11. And it is observable that the words
are (...), In the Name, not at the Name of Jesus, viz. In his Power and
Authority, being not a Command, but a Prophecy when it shall be fulfilled and
accomplished, when there shall be that universal subjection to the Soveraignity
of Christ, That every Tongue shall confess, that he is Lord, to the Glory of
God the Father, as the after words mention. And which shall be, when he shall
exert that Power that is inherent in him, to subject all Nations to his
Authority, when he takes to himself his great Power, and reigns, when the
Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, when upon his
Vesture and his Thigh shall a Name be written, KING of Kings, and LORD of
Lords; and when all shall be gathered before him in the Judgment Day; Which I
conceive is the true genuine sense and meaning of these words, and no such
thing as a superstitious bowing at the Syllables of that Name, intended, which
has been so universally practiced and enjoined to the just Offense of the
Conscientious, who have not an implicit Faith to believe as the Church believes.

Imposition and Persecution.
Fifthly, Their symbolizing with Popery in Impositions and Persecutions of
Dissenters.

Have and ^o the Papists violently impose their Rites, Services and Ceremonies,
and cruelly prosecute and persecure the Dissenters by Confiscations,
Imprisonments, and Death it self? Do not we by our Sanguinary Laws and
Executions of them do the very same, and whereof not one word of warrant in all
the New Testament? And how agreeable such a practice is to the Lamb-like Nature
of Christ's, and his Disciples and Followers, as also the Doctrines and
Sentiments of many of your own Worthies, as well as the Suffrage of several of
our Kings and Parliaments, judge you.

Bish. Jewels Apology, page 543.
And whereof I beg leave to give you the following Instances, (viz.) we shall
begin with the famous Jewel, who notes it out of Chrysostom, Homil. on Mat.
19. Does the Sheep ever persecute the Wolf? no, but the Wolf the Sheep; so Cain
persecuted Abel, not Abel, Cain; so Ishmael persecuted Isaac, not Isaac,
Ishmael; so the Jews, Christ, not Christ the Jews; so Heretics the Christians,
not Christians, Heretics; Whereby (says Jewel) he plainly implies, That
Persecution for Conscience sake is a very Unchristian or ANTICHRISTIAN Sympton.
And smartly again in the same Homily -- He that is a Persecutor is no Sheep of
Christ's, but a Wolf, which, says he, a Man should make any man afraid to feel
any persecutive motion arise in his breast, as being Indications of a Cainish,
Imaelitish and Wolfish Nature, and a certain sign that he is none of the Sheep
of Christ.

Dr. Moore.
The learned Dr. Moore, in his Preface to the Mystery of Godliness, has many
plain and pertinent passages to this point, asserting, That it is an
Antichristian use of Church Government to direct it to the upholding of useless
or mischievous Opinions, scandalous Ceremonies and ensnaring Inventions of men.
And what is it (says he) but a Notorious Specimen of Pride, thus to force
others to acknowledge, by making them profess to be of their Opinion? And what
but Injustice and barbarous Cruelty to afflict men for what they cannot help,
and in what they do not sin? And what but plain Rebellion against God to wrest
his Scepter out of his hand, by which he rules in the Consciences of men, and
to usurp this Empire to themselves? And again, lastly, says he, A mutual
Agreement in bearing with one another Dissents in the Non-fundamentals of
Religion, is really a greater Ornament of Christianity, than the most exact
Uniformity imaginable, it being an eminent Exercise of Charity, the flower of
all Christian Graces, and the best way, I think, at the long-run, to make the
Church as uniform as can justly be desired, Thus far the Dr.

To this purpose also the great Chillingworth in his 4th Mr. Chillingworth.
Chapter, Sect. 16. speaks thus: This presumptuous Imposing of the senses of man
upon the words of God, and the special senses of men upon the general words of
God, and laying them upon men's Consciences together, under the equal penalty of
Death and Damnation. This vain conceit that we can speak of the things of God,
better than in the words of God: This Deifying our own Interpretations, and
tyrannous Enforcing them upon others; This restraining of the Word of God from
that latitude and generality, and the Understandings of men from that liberty
wherein Christ and his Apostles left them, is and has been the only foundation
of all the Schisms of the Church, and that which makes them Immortal, the
common Incendiary of Christendom, and that which tears in pieces, not the Coat,
but the Bowels and Members of Christ, Ridents Turta, nec dolente Judaeo: Take
away these walls of separation, and all will quickly be one; take away this
persecuting, burning, cursing, damning of men, for not subscribing to the words
of them as the words of God; let those leave claiming Infallibility who have no
title to it; and let them who in words disclaim it, disclaim it also in their
Actions: In a word, take away Tyranny, which is the Devils Instrument to
support Errors, and Superstitions, and Impieties in the several parts of the
world, which could not otherwise long withstand the power of Truth; I say take
away Tyranny, and restore Christians to their just and full liberty of
Captivating their understandings to Scripture only, and as Rivers when they
have a free passage run all to the Ocean; so it may well be hoped by Gods
blessing, that Universal liberty thus Moderated, may quickly reduce Christendom
to Peace and Unity. These thoughts of Peace, says he, I am persuaded come from
the God of Peace, and to his blessing I commend them.

This Book of Mr. Chillingworths was Licensed by R. Bailey Vicechancellor of
Oxford, Dr. Purideaux Reg. Profess. Dr. Dr. Stillingfleet.
Fell, and Dr. Stradling.

And Dr. Stillingfleet most excellently in his Irenicum to the same purpose,
tells us in the Preface, That Christ who came to take away the Insupportable
Yoke of the Jewish Ceremonies, certainly did never intend to gall the Necks of
Disciples with an other instead of it, and it would be strange the Church would
require more than Christ himself did, and make more conditions of Communion
then our Savior did of Discipleship.

The Grand Commission the Apostles were sent out wit, hwas only to teach what
Christ had commanded them, not the least intimation of any power given them to
impose or require any thing beyond what he himself had spoken to them, or they
were derected to by the immediate guidance of the Spirit of God; And again
Declares thus, that without controversy the main of all the Distractions,
Confusions, and Divisions of the Christian World, has been by Adding other
Conditions of Church Communion then Christ has done.

And speaking of the Grand Reasor our first Compilers of the Common Prayer had
in taking in so much of the Popish Service, which was to gain over the Papists
to them, Desires that their Charity therein to the Papists may not be a Breach
of Charity to the protestants: his words are these,

And Certainly those holy men who did s^ek by any means to Draw in others at
such a Distance from their Principles as the Papists were, did never intend by
what they did for that end to Exclude any Truly Tender Consciences from their
Communion; That which they laid as a Bait for them, was never intended by them
as a Hook for those of their own Profession.

Dr. Tailor.
Dr. Tailor in his Ductor Dubitantium tells us wittily, that for a Trifling
Cause to Cut off a man (which our Lay Chancollors so familiarly do) from the
Communion of the Church is to do as the man in the Fable, espying a Fly upon
his Neighbors Forehead, went to beat it off with a Hatchet, and so struck out
his Brains.

Dr. Tillotson.
Dr. Tillotson in his Sermon before the Parliament on Luke 9. 55. page 156. You
know not what manner of Spirit you are of? Which is as if he had said, you own
your selves to be my Disciples, but do you Consider what Spirit now Acts and
Governs you, not that surely which my Doctrine Designs to mold and fashion you
into, which is not (says he) a Furious and Persecuting and Destructive Spirit,
but mild and gentle and saving. Tender of the Lives and Interests of men even
of those who are our Greatest Enemies, you are to consider that you are not now
under the Rough and Sour Dispensation of the Law, but under the Calm and
Peaceable Institution of the Gospel, To which the Spirit of Elias though a good
man would be altogether unsuitable, but under the Gospel intolerable, for that
designs universal love and peace and good will, and now no difference of
Religion, no pretense of zeal for God and Christ, can warrant and justify thy
pasionate and sierce thy vindicative and Exterminating Spirit.

To these we might add the Worthy Sayings of Bishop Usher, Davenant, Hall,
which the Late Worthy Author of the Protestant Reconciler, has furnished us
with and many more but let these Suffice only for a Conclusion: Take a passage
Lord Castlemain.
of the Lord Castlemains, A Great papist Husband to the Duchess of Cleveland, in
his Book against Dr. Floyd.

Sure says he, these Men that persecute Others are Beside themselves, for, if
they should go but to Reckon themselves up together, with all their Adherence,
they would find they are not the Sixth part of the Reformed people in England;
and Adds, Page 18. That they have not much Reason to Reproach the Roman
Catholics for the Parisian Massacre, that of Ireland, and the Gun-powder-Plot
on the 5th of November 1605. Since that these Massacres were Committed, only
upon those Persons whom Rome had Anathematized, and Proscribed as Heretics and
Apostates* and it was never known, That Rome persecuted (as the Bishops do)
those who Adhere to the same Doctrine and Faith with themselves, and
Established an Inquisition against the Bigots among them, nor against the
Professors of the Strictest Piety.

And again tells us in another place, to this purpose, That however the
Prelates Complain of the Bloody Persecution under Q. Mary, that it is Manifest
their persecution Exceeds it, for under her (Says he) there were not more then
Two or Three Hundred actually put to Death, Whereas under their persecution
there has above Treble that Number Been Stifled, Destroyed, and Ruined in their
Estates Li^es and Liberties, being (as is most Remarkable) Men for the most
part of the same Spirit and principle, with those Protestants who Suffered
under the Prelates in Q. Mary's Time.

In the next place, as a farther Witness against Imposition and Persecution;
take the following Declared Sense, and Suffrage of several of our Kings, viz.

Bid L. 1. chapter 26. tells us, That King Ethelbert Declared after he Professed
the Christian Religion, that he would compel none; Having been instructed that
it was contrary to the Christian Religion, which ought to be vollentary not
compulsive.

King James affirmed, that for Concord there is no nearer way then diligently
to separate things necessary from unnecessary, and bestow all our labor, that
we may agree in the things necessary, and that in things unnecessary, which are
most of the Rites and Ceremonies, there may be a Christian Liberty allowed.
Apud Cause. Ep. ad. Car. Perron.

King Charles 1st. In his Declaration, Anno 1641. Says thus: As for
Differences amongst our selves for matters indifferent in their own Nature
concerning Religion, we shall in tenderness to any number of our loving
Subjects very willingly comply with the advice of our Parliament, that some Law
may be made for the Exemption of Tender Consciences, from punishment or
Persecution for such Ceremonies, and in such Cases which by the judgment of
most men are held to be matters indifferent.

His present Majesty in his Declaration from Breda, April 4. Speaks thus! We do
declare a Liberty to Tender Consciences, and that no man shall be disquieted or
called in question for Differences in Opinion, which do not disturb the peace
of the Kingdom.

Which was also the Declared Sense of most of the Nobility and Gentry at that
time to which they subscribed their Names.

The which he often inculcates, viz. Declar. oct. 25. 1660. When do again
Remember what we have formerly said from Breda, for the liberty of Tender
Consciences.

And again in his speech, May 8th. 1661. I do vallew my self much upon keeping
my Word, upon making good what ever I Promised to my subjects: The which the
Chancellor repeates.

And again, July 8th. 1661. Remynds his Promise, as also what the Lords had
promised to the same purpose at that time before mentioned, which his Maty
calls an honest generous and Christian Declaration, signd by the most Eminent
Sufferors amongst them; Telling them he would not have it be in any man's power
to charge him or them with the Breach of their words or promises, which he
says, would be no good ingredient for the future Security.

And again in his Declaration, 26 Dec. 1662. We will remember the
Confirmations we have made of them, upon several Occasions in Parliament, and
as also these things are still fresh in our Memory, so are we still firm in
the Resolution of performing them to the full. And we do conceive our selves so
far engaged in honor, and in what we own to the Peace of our Dominion; which
we profess we can never think secure whilst there shall be a Color left to the
Malicious and dissafected, to inflame the minds of so many multitudes upon the
Score of Conscience, with despair of ever ob^aneing effect of our promises for
their Ease.

His Majesty's Speech to both Houses; Feb. 10. 1667. Declares thus, viz. One
thing more I hold my self Obliged to recommend unto you at this Cresent, which
is that you would seriously think of some Course to beget a better Union and
Composure in the minds of my Protestant Subjects in matters of Religion,
whereby they may be induced, not only to submit quietly to the Government, but
also cheerfully give their assistance to the Support of it; And,

In his Declaration of Indulgence, March 15. 1671. Says That it was evident by
the sad experience of twelve years, that here was very little fruit of all
those forcible Courses, and many frequent ways of Coercion that we have used
for the reducing of all erring or dissenting persons; And thereupon granted his
Indulgence.

Again in his Speech to both Houses 1678. Says thus: I meet you here with the
most earnest desire, that man can have to Unite the minds of all my Subjects
both to me, and one to another, and Resolve it shall be your Fault if the
Success be not suitable to my Desires.

Hereupon the Parliament, Jen. 10. 1680. From their own inclination, known
Experience as well as in Obedience to his Gracious Direction, did for the
Relieving and better Uniting all his Protestant Subjects; Declare in their Vote
Nemine Contradicente, That it is the Opinion of this House that the Prosecution
of Protestant Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at this time grievous to the
Subject, a Weakening the Protestant Intrest, an Encouragement to Popery, and
Dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom. And No. 6. 1680. Resolved Nemine
Contradicente, That (...) is the Opinion of this House that the Acts of
Parliament made in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth and K. James against Popish
Recusants, ought not to be extended against Protestant Dissenters, having
diverse Laws under Consideration, as his Majesty directed for the Releiving,
Composing and Uniting the Protestants: A Bill having passed both Houses for
Repealing the 35th of Elizabeth.

Thus you see that Imposition and Persecution for Conscience, does not only
Symbolize with Antichrist, but is in the highest contradiction to the Name,
Nature, Gospel, and followers of Christ, a violent infringer of the Law, and
light of nature [of doing to others as he would be done unto] as well as the
Royal Law of loving our Neighbor as our selves, and in utter enmity, not only
to these, worthy Sentiments of our Learned and Great Men, but of our Latter
Kings and Parliaments.

As a farther Ratification and Confirmation that our English Service and
Ceremony was from the Popish Race and Succession; Take this following
Historical Account; Given us by some Eminent Writers, and Famous Sons of the
Church of England.

Cambden in the Life of Q. Elizabeth.
Cambden in the Life of Queen Elizabeth; assures us, That the Change of
Religion was not in her time Suddenly* made but by Little and little, by
Degrees, for the Roman Religion Continued in the same State it was; First, a
full Month and more, After the Death of Q. Mary, The 27th of December it was
Tolerated to have the Epistles, and Gospels, the Tens Commandments, the
Symbol, the Letany, and the Lords Prayer, in the Vulgar Tongue; The Twenty
Second of March the Parliament being Assembled, the Order of Ewd. 6. was
Re-established, and by Act of the same the whole use of the Lords Supper
Granted under both kinds; The 24th of June by the Authority of that which
Concerned the Uniformity of public Prayers, and Administration of the
Sacrament, the Sacrifice of the Mass was abolished, and the Liturgy in the
English Tongue more and more Established, In the Month of July, the Oath of
Allegiance was Proposed to the Bishops, and other Persons; And in August,
Images were thrown out of the Temples and Churches, and Broken and Burnt.

Thus far Cambden Gives us the Steps Queen Elizabeth took in the Reformation,
what She cast off by degrees, and so Consequently, what she Retained, Which was
the Rest of the Popish Rites and Ceremonies, and which She had a Great Love to,
and Liking of which was the Reason there was no Greater Alteration.

Dr. Burnets History of Reformation.
Whereof we have this Account from Dr. Burnit in his History of Reformation.

Queen Elizabeth Received some Impressions in her Fathers Reign, in Favor of
such Old Rites as he had still Retained, and in her own Nature, Loving State,
and some Magnificence in Religion (as well as in every thing else) She thought
that in her Brothers Reign they had Stripped it too much of External Ornaments,
and had made their Doctrine too Narrow in some Points, therefore She intended
to have some things Explained in more General Terms, that so all Parties might
be Comprehended by them, She Inclined to keep up Images in Churches, and to
have the Manner of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament, Left in some General
Words, That those who Believed the Corporal Presence might not be Drawn away
from the Church, by too Nice an Explanation of it. So far Dr. Burner.

In Pursuance of these Resolves the Queen Attemps the Accomodating matters of
Religion, so unto the Romish Clergy as to take them into the Communion of the
Church of England, as Dr. Heylin affirms; She so Effectually Compassed that for
several years the Papists Continued in the Communion of the Church, and when
they did forsake it it was not because they Approved not of our Liturgy, but
upon politic Considerations, and because the Counsel of Trent had commanded
it, and Pope Pius the 5th had Excommunicated the Queen, and Discharged her
Subjects from their Allegiance, and made the Going, or not Going to Church, a
Sign Distinctive to Difference; A Roman Catholic from an English Protestant.

Concerning which, take Dr. Heilins own words in his History of Queen Elizabeth.

There past another Act for Recommending and Imposing the Book of Common Prayer
and Administration of the Sacraments according to such Alteration and
Correction as were made therein by thoso who were Appointed to Revise it, as
before is said; in the persuance of which Service, there was great care taken
for the Expunging all such passages in it, as might give any Scandal or
Offense, to the Popish party, or be urged by them in their Excuse for their not
coming to Church, and joining with the rest of the Congregation in Gods Public
Worship. In the Letany first made and published by K. Henry the Eighth, and
afterward continued in the two Liturgies of K. Edward, the sixth; There was a
Prayer to be delivered from the Tyranny and all the detestable enormities of
the Bishops of Rome, which was thought fit to be Expunged as giving matter of
Scandal and Dissatsfaction to all that Party or that otherwise wished well to
that Religion. In the first Liturgy of K. Edward, The Sacrament of the Lords
Body was Delivered with this Benediction; That is to say, The Body of our Lord
Jesus, which was given for the preservation of thy Body, and Soul, to Life
Everlasting; etc. The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Which being thought
by Calvin and his Disciples, to give some Countenance to the Cross and Carnal
Presence of Christ in the Pacrament (which passes by the Name of
Transubstantiation in the School of Rome,) was Altered into this Form into the
said Liturgy, That is to say, Take and Eat this in Remembrance that Christ dyed
for thee, and feed on him in thy heart by Faith with thansgiving; Take and
Drink this, etc. But the Revisors of the Book joined both Forms together, least
under color of Rejecting a Carnal, they might be thought also to Deny such a
Real Presence as was Defended in the writing of the Ancient Fathers, upon which
ground she Expunged also a whole Rubric at the end of the Communion Service,
by which it was declared, that kneeling at the Participation of the Sacrament
were required for no other Reason then for the Signification of the humble and
grateful Acknowledgment of the Benefits of Christ, given therein unto the
worthy Receiver* and to avoid that profanation and disorder which otherwise
might have ensued, and not for giving any Adoration to the Sacramental Bread
and Wine there Bodily Received, or in regard of any Real or Essential presence
of Christ's Body and Blood, and to come close to the Church of Rome, it was
ordered by the Queens Injunctions; That the Sacrametal Bread which the Book
Required only to be made of the finest Flower should be made round in fashion
of the Wafers used in the time of Q. Mary.

She also ordered that the Lords Table should be placed where the Altar stood
that the Accustomed Reverence should be made at the Name of Jesus.

Music Retained in the Church, and all the Old Festivals, observed with their
several Eves, by which Complyances and Expunging of the passage before
mentioned, the Book was made so passable amongst the Papists, that for ten
years they generally Repaired to their Parish Churches without doubt or scruple
as is affirmed not only by Sir Edward Cook in his Speech against Garnet. and
his Charge given at the Assizes held at Norwich, but also by the Queen her self
in a Letter to Sir Francis Walsingham then her Ambassador in France.

The same Confessed by Sanders also, in his Book De Schismat^, and therefore
Dr. Heilin in a few Pages after, adds, viz. And now we may behold the Face of
the Church of England, as it was first settled and Established under Q.
Elizabeth, the Government of the Church by Archbishops, and Bishops, etc. The
Liturgy Conform to the Primitive Pattorn [viz. of Popery] and all the Rites and
Ceremonies therein Prescribed, Accomodated to the Honor of God, and Increase of
Piety, the Festivals Preserved in their former Dignity, Observed with all their
Distinct Offices Peculiar to them, and Celebrated with a Religious Concorse of
all sorts of People, the Weekly Fasts viz. Weenesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays,
The holy time of Lent, The Embring Weeks, Together with the fast of the
Rogation; Severally kept by a forbeara^ce of all kind of Flesh, not now by
Virtue of the Statute as in the Time of King Edw. but as appointed by the
Church in her public Callender before the Book of Common Prayer [So
Correspondant with Rome.] The Sacrament of the Lords Supper Celebratited in
most Reverend Manner. The hoby Table Seated in the Place of the Altar. The
people making their due Reverence at their first Entrance into the Church,
Kneeling at the Communion; The Confession and the Public Prayers, standing up
at the Creed, the Gospels, and the Gloria Patri, and Using the Accustomed
Reverence at the Name of Jesus, Music Retained in all the Churches, in which,
provision had been made for the Maintenance of it; or where the people could be
Trained up, at least to plain Song, all which particulars were either
Established by the Laws, or Commanded by the Queens Injunctions; or otherwise
Retained, by Virtue of some Ancient Vsuages, not by Law Prohibited; nor is it
much to be admired, that such a general Conformity to those Cntient, (viz.
(Popish) Vsuages was constantly Observed in all Cathedrals, and the most part
of the Parish Churches; considering how well they were Presidented by the Court
it self, in which the Liturgy was Officiated every day, both Morning and
Evening, not only in the public Chapel, but the private Closet, Celebrated in
the Chapel with Organs, and other Musical Instruments, and the most Excellent
Voices of Men and Children, that could be got in all the Kingdom, the Gentlemen
and Children in their Surplices, and the Priests in Copes as often as they
Attended the Divine Service at the Holy Altar, The Altar furnished with Rich
Plate, Two fair Guilt Candlesticks, with Tapers in them, and a Massy Crucifix
of Silver in the midst thereof, which last remained there for some years, till
it was Broke in pieces by Pa^h the Fool (no wisor man daring to undertake such
a Desperate Service) at the Sollictation of Sir Frances Knoles, the Queens near
Kinsman, by the Caries, and one who openly appeared in Favor of the Shism at
Frankford; the Ancient Ceremonies accustomably observed by the Knights of the
Garter; in their Adoration toward the Altar, abolished by King Edward the 6th,
and revived by Queen Mary, whereby this Queen Retained as formerly in her
Fahers Time, for which she Received both Thanks and Honor from the very
Enemies, [viz. the Papists] as appears by Hardings Epistle Dedicatory, before
his answer to the Apology, So far Dr. Heilin.

Thus from what the Sons of the Church Cambden, and Burnet, and Heilin have
Affirmed.

It Is Apparent that Queen Elizabeth had a Natural propensity to favor the
Papists, and that this was Discovered by her making the Terms of Communion much
more easy to the Papists in K. Edw. Time, whereby she became the more
Difficult and Arduous to the Protestant Dissenters, and whom she Rigorously
Prosecuted for their Dissents; Cambden Informs us, That about the year 1583.
The Queen [Who held it for a Maxim, that she ought not to be more Remiss in
Ecclesiastical Affairs] advancing Whitgift from the Sea of Worcester to that of
Canterbury; above all Commanded him to Re-establish the Discipline of the
Church of England, that as then lay Dismembered by the connivency of Prelates,
The Obstinacy of Innovators, and by the Power of some Great Ones, whilst some
Ministers using to their own fancy, new Rites of Services in their private
houses, utterly Condemning the Liturgy, and the Appointed Manner of
Administering the Sacrament, as being in many things contrary to the Scripture,
and therefore many refused to go to Church, to Abolish which things, and to
reduce them in unity, Whitgift propounded three Articles to the Ministers by
them to be Subscribed, but [adds Cambden] It Is ^^credible what Controversies
and Disputations arose upon this, what Troubles Whitgift suffered of certain
Noble Men, etc. How the said Whitgift vexed the poor Dissenters, what Letters
were writ to him from the Counsel and Treasurer Cicil upon their complaints,
and his Answers, you have at large in a late piece called the Harmony between
the old and present Nonconformists, some small part of the Councils Letter to
the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London.
abridgment thereof take as follows, not unworthy of your notice, viz. in a
Letter sent unto the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London, from her
Majesty's Council, September 20. 1584.

We have heard of late times sundry complaints against a great number of
Preachers, whereby some were de^rived of their Livings; some suspended from
their Ministry, and Preaching; especially such who instruct the people against
your Spiritual Courts; advancing their profits by such kind of proceedings, and
particularly the lamentable estate of the Church in the County of Essex, Where
there is a great number of Zealous and Learned Preachers suspended from their
Cures the vacancy of their place for the most part without any Ministry, or
Preaching, Prayers, and Saments, and in some places of Certain appointed to
those void Rooms being persons neither of Learning, nor of good Names, and in
other places of the Country, a great number notoriously unfit Chargable with
Ignorance, and with great enormous faults, as Drunkenness, filthiness of Life,
Gamsters at Cards, hunting of Ale Houses, and such like, against whom we hear
not of any Proceedig, but that they are quietly suffered to the Slander of the
Church, to the offense of good people, yea, to the famishing them for want of
good teaching, and thereby dangerous to the subverting of many Weaklings from
their duties to God and Her Majesty, by secret Jesuits and Counterfiet Papists,
etc.

Treasurer Burleighs Letter to Arch Bishop Whitgift.
And in a Letter to the Archbishop, by the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, Dated July
5. 1584. it is said;

It may please your Grace, I am sorry to Trouble you so often as I do; But I am
more Troubled my self, not only with many private Petitions of Sundary
Ministers Recommended from Persons of Credit, for peaceable persons, yet
greatly Troubled, but also am I daily now Charged by Counselors and Public
Persons to neglect my duty in not staying these your Graces Proceedings, so
vehement, and so general against Ministers and Preachers, as the Papists,
thereby are greatly Encouraged, and evil dsposed persons animated and thereby
the Queens Majesty's Safety Endangered, With these kind of Arguments I am daily
Assaulted, and now my Lord, I am come to the sight of an Instrument of 24
Articles of great length and Curiosity, formed in a Romish Style; to Examine
all manner of Ministers in this time without Distinction of persons; Which
Articles are Intituted, A pud Lambeth, May 1581. To be Executed ex officio
mero, etc. Which Articles I find so Curiously Penned, so full of Branches and
Circumstances, and I think the Inquisitors of Spain use not so many questions
to Comprehend and to Trap their Preys, I know the Canonists can defend these
with all their Particles, but surely under your Graces Correction, This
Judicial and Canonical Sifting of poor Ministers is not to Edify and Reform,
and in Charity I think they ought not to answer to all these Nice Points,
except they were very Notorious Offenders in Papistry or Heresy, I write with
the Testimony of a Good Conscience, etc. This kind of Proceeding is too much
Savouring the Romish Inquisition, and is rather a Device to seek for Offenders,
then to Reform any; and in another Letter adds, seeking rather by
Excommunication to urge (...) to Accuse themselves, and then punish them:

Arch Bishops reply.
The Archbishop makes a large reply, In it Says thus -- I have taken upon me
the defense of the Religion and Rites of this Church of England, to appease the
Sects of Schisms, therein to Reduce all the Ministry thereof to Uniformity and
due Obedience; Herein I intend to be constant and not to Waver with every Wind,
The which also my place my person, my duty, the Law, Her Majesty, and the
Goodness of the Cause does Require of me, and wherein your Lordship and Others
all things considered ought in duty to Assist and Countenance me; It is strange
that a man in my place dealing with so good Warranties as I do, should be so
encountered, and for not yielding, should be accounted wilful, but I must be
Contented, Vincit qui patitur -- And if my friends herein forsake me, I trust
God will not, neither the Law, her Majesty, who has laid the Charge on me, and
are able to protect me.

Many were the Severe Laws made against the Nonconformists, which were put in
Execution with Great Cruelty, To the Suspending, Imprisoning and Executing many
of the Faithful Servants of Christ in this Queens Reign* whereof Fuller in his
Ecclesiastical History gives a particular Account. The High Commision Court
(that grand Grievance) Set up also by her.

In the next place I shall give you some Confirmation of the Truth of the
prevalency of Popery under a Protestant Mask, in the Rites and Ceremonies
imposed in these and succeeding times, by the witness Bourn by several Eminent
Dissenters, which we find upon Record in several Books, viz. A Book called the
Register, another the Abridgment which was a Book Delivered to King James by
the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese Anno 1605.

In the Register page 3. We have the 24 Articles agreed in the Synod, and
Confirmed by the Queen, Exhibited to Mr. Edward Dering, and his Answers
thereto, Anno 1573. whereof Receive his Answer to the first Article, The
Article was whether the Book Entitled the Book of Common Service allowed by
public Authority in this Realm is to be allowed in the Church of God, by Gods
Word or no? To which he replied, That

The Similitude that this Book has with the Form of Prayer which the Papists
used, I think declineth from the Equity of those Laws, Deuteronomy. 7. 25, 12, 30, 18,
4. Which Thing our Fathers so much Regarded in the Primitive Church, that their
Books are full of great Complaints against all Similitude to be had with the
Gentles, yea the Second Council of Bracca made a Decree, that no Christian
should have either Bay Leaves or Green Boughs in their houses, because the
Gentles so Accustomed, and at this day, all Reformed Churches in France,
Polonia, Helvetia, Scotland and other places have changed that Form of Prayers
which Prudency of all Ages, if we shall Condemn the Rebuke of the Apostle I
think will Teach us, 1 Cor. 14. 36. Came the Word of God out from you, or came
it unto you only.

Secondly, We have the Psalms, Venite, Benedictus, Magnificat, nunc Demittis,
usual in our Ministry of which we can give no good reason, nor I see no cause
why we should more leave out Ave Maria, and because of parting the Scriptures
again into the Epistles and Gospels (which was not heard of before the days of
Popery) I dare not Avow that this is that Reverend handling of the Scriptures,
and the right dividing of the Word of Truth which Saint Paul Requires, 2 Timothy
2. 15.

Thirdly, The great Inconveniency which has followed this Book while it has
Maintained an Unlearned Ministry, and made it thought sufficient to have the
Service Read wherein we have made the Spirit of God to speak in vain, 1 Timothy 3.
12. which Requires the Ministers of the Gospel to be apt to Teach and to exhort
and Reprove, Tit. 1. 9. This is an other Cause why I cannot Subscribe unto the
Book, that it has all things answerable to the Word of God.

But the Abridgment is much more full, bringing Arguments from the Scripture,
The Fathers, the Old Reformers, and our own Old Protestant Doctors against it
whereof I shall give this following Account.

First, It is contrary to the Word of God to use such Ceremonies in the Worship
of God as man has devised if they be notoriously known to have been of old, and
still to be abused unto Idolatry and Superstition by the Papists, especially if
the same be now of no necessary use in the Church, where note that the
Ceremonial part of the English Service that is like unto that of the Romish, is
what has been abused by the Papists to Idolatry or Superstition but yet are not
so necessary to Divine Worship, but that the Worship may be Complete, Devout
and orderly without them, which appears says they.

First by the Second Commandment which forbids all provocation unto Spiritual
Fornication, as the 7th does unto that which is Carnal:

Secondly, By the Commandment and Direction God has given us in his Word to
Separate our selves from Idolaters, and be as unlike to them, as may be,
especially in their Religions, Observations and Ceremonies, to abolish not only
all Idols, and that so as we may best show our utmost Detestation to them, and
root out the very memory of them.

Thirdly, By the Equity and Reasons of these Commandments which we find set
down in Holy Scripture, viz. 1. The detestation which the Lord our God (being a
Jealous God) bears unto Idolatry, and all the Instruments and Tokens thereof,
as unto Spiritual Whoredom.

Secondly, That it cannot be said sincerely we have Repented of the Idolatry of
our Forefathers, unless we be ashamed of, and cast away with Detestation all
the Instruments and Monuments of it. Thirdly, That we shall be in danger to be
Corrupted in the Substance of Religion and Purity of Doctrine; and even to fall
back again to Idolatry, if we Conform our selves to Idolaterous Ceremonies,
yea, if we show not all Detestation unto them. Fourthly, That our Conformity
with Idolators in their Ceremonies wherein they Repose the greatest part of
their Religion, will be a special means to harden them in Superstition.
Fifthly, That seeing the Pope is revealed to be that Great Antichrist, and his
Idolatry troubles the Church at this day more than any other, and our people
Converse more with Papists, then with any other Idolators, there is more danger
in the Retaining of the Ceremonies and Relics of Popery, then of any other
Idolatry whatsoever.

By the Judgment of the Godly Learned of all Churches, and Ages, who have
Constantly Taught and given Testimony of this Truth, That Christians are Bound
to cast off the Ceremonies and Religious Customs of Pagans, Jews, Idolators and
Heretics, and Carefully to shun all Conformity with them therein.

In the Council of Nice it was Decreed, That Christians might not keep the
Feast of Easter at that Time nor in that manner the Jews did, let us say they,
in nothing agree with that most detestable rout of the Jews.

And in another Council That none should fast on the Lords Day, because the
Manachees had taken up that day to fast in, That such Altars as were set up in
the Country, and Highways in Memory of the Martyrs, should be Abolished, and
that Solemn Requests should be made to the Emperor, that all Relics and
Monuments of Idolatry might be utterly Destroyed; and this Decree we find Cited
by Dr. Fulk.

In another Council, That Christians should not Celebrate Feasts on the Birth
days of Martyrs, because that was the manner of the Heathens. Tertullian is
large and vehement in this point.

As says he, We may give nothing to the Service of an Idol, so may you borrow
nothing from the Service of an Idol, if it be against Religion to sit at Table
in any Idols Temple, What is it to be seen in the Habit of an Idol? Thou that
art Christian must hate those things, the Authors, and Inventers, whereof, thou
can not choose but hate.

Austin himself Says, if you would win Pagans leave all their Solemnities, for
sake their Toys.

The Judgment of the Church of Scotland in their Letter to the Bishops of
England 1556. from a General Assembly at Edenborough, thus writ if Surplice,
Corner Cap, and Tipper, have been Badges of Idolators in the very Act of
Idolatry, what have the Preachers of Christian Liberty, and the open Rebukers
of Superstition to do with the dress of the Romish Beast, And in the Confession
of their Faith sworn to by them, and the Kings Majesty also; We find these
words. and Detest all his Ceremonies and False Doctrines of the Roman
Antichrist added to the Ministration of the True Sacraments, We Detest all his
vain Rites, Signs and Traditions brought into the Church without the Word of
God; Mr. Rogers that Holy Martyr would not Consent to a Cannon that was to be
made in K. Edwards Days for the Clergies Conformity in Cap, Tippet, and the
rest of the Apparel, unless it, might be Decreed, that the Papists for a
Difference between them and others might be Constrained to wear upon their
Sleves A Challice with a House upon it.

Bishop Pilkington misliked, that in our Liturgy we are so like the Papists in
Marriage, and many other things this faith he is our fault generally that we
differ not from them in all our Ministry.

Bishop Bilson Defending the Reformed Churches against a Slander of the
Papists, Approvingly Reports thus of them, The Reformed Churches Says he,
are so far from Admitting the full do of your Heresies, that by no means they
can digest one Dram of your Ceremonies.

Dr. Humphrey Says, That we aught to Refuse to Conform our Selves to the
Enemies of God, in any of their Ceremonies, Professing plainly his Desire, and
hope of the utter Abolishing of the Ceremhnies af all the Monuments of Popish
Superstition, that yet Remain in our Church.

Dr. Fulk Says, That if a man mislike our Form of Service, as not differing
sufficiently from yours, he Shows his greatest Zeal in Detestation of your
Idolatry, and Blasphemy; And again we abhor sath he, whatsoever has but a Show
of Popery.

Dr. Stu^liff makes this one of his Principal Arguments against the Papists,
that they have derived most of their Ceremonies and Customs from the Jews and
Pagans; To the same Purpose Mr. Greenham and Mr. Marbury.

That Agreeing with us, most of the Reformed Divines do hold.

1. That those Laws that we have Alleged out of the Old Testement against the
Monument of Idolatry, do bind us as much as they did the Jews, and from them
they Conclude as we have done, That all Relics of Popish and heathenish
Superstition are to be Banished out of the Church of Christ; of this Judgment
are Calvin, Martyr, Grineus, Wolphins Vrsinus Machabeus, Zanchius, Simetrus,
Zepperus, our own Book of Homilies, Dr. Fulk and others.

2. That Hezekiah Josiah and the rest of the Godly Kings of Juda which showed
most Zeal in Abolishing those things which had been abused by Idolatry, did no
more then they were bound by the Law of God to do, And that from their Example,
the Argument holds strong against the Monuments of Idolatry, now because all
Christians are Bound to Imitate their Zeal therein; Of this Judgment was
Augustine, Calvin, Martyr, Wolphins, Eevator, Zanchius, Bishop Jewil, Bilson,
Dr. Fulck, Dr. Raynold, Dr. Andrews, Mr, Perkins, and Others.

3. That the Retaining of Popish Ceremonies, will certainly be a means to
endanger the Doctrine that we profess, and to bring the People back to Popery;
this was the judgment of the People of Saxony and them of Humburgh and of
Luther.

4. That the Retaining of the Ceremonies of Idolaters will Cause them to insult
over our Religion, as if it could not stand without help from them, and to
harden them in their likeing of their own Idolatry, this Reason has be used
against Conformity with the Jews by Constantine the Emperor and by all the
Fathers in the first Counsel of Nice, and against Conformity with the Papists,
Begentiis, Musculus, Bishop Jewel, and Others.

5. We are Confirmed in this our Persuasion, that it is unlawful to Retain the
Ceremonies of the Papists by Experience of the Great hurt they have done, and
do Daily in the Church, for we find that some of the Learnedest of the English
Papists, Namely, Martial, Bristow, and he that penned the petition for the
Papists which Dr. Stutliff and Mr. Powel have Answered, have by this Argument
Justified their Church and Religion, that we have borrowed our Ceremonies from
them, yea some of them, as Harding, Martial, and he that Writ the Astrological
Epistle for our English Papists have professed, that this was to them an
Evident Argument, that Q. Elizabeth did in her Conscience like well of their
Religion, because She liked and maintained their Ceremonies, and the
Superstitious Multitude do usually defend the Blessing of themselves, with
Crossing their Breasts and Foreheads, by our Crossing our Children in Baptism:
So far the Abridgment. And to which we may add this further Testimony,
following, viz.

Altas Damas. p. 612, 613. tells us, That from three Romish Channels was the
English Service raked together, namely, 1st. The Breviary, out of which the
Common Prayers are taken; 2dly, The R^tual, or Book of Rites, out of which the
Administration of Sacraments, Burial, Matrimony, Visitation of the Sick are
taken; 3dly, The Mass Book, out of which the Cons^cration of the Lords Supper,
Collects, Gospels and Epistles are taken.

Bishop Hall in his Quo Vadis says, That his Eyes and Ears can witness with
what applause the Catholics entertained the new translated Liturgy of our
Church.

Mr. Thomas Gage in his English American, chap. 22. p. 205* thus expresses
himself, I conti^ued twelve Months at my Vnoles House at Gatton, searching
(though unknown to my Uncle and Kindred) into the Doctrine and Truth of the
Gospel professed in England, for which cause I made many Journies to London,
and then privately I resorted to some Churches and especially to Paul's Church,
to see the Service performed, and to hear the Word of God preached, but so that
I might not be seen, known or discovered by and Papist* When in Paul's Church, I
heard the Organs, and the Music, and the Prayers, and the Collects, and saw
the Ceremonies at the Altar, I remembered Rome again, and perceived little
difference betwixt the two Churches: I searched further into the Common Prayer,
and carried with me a Bible into the Country on purpose to compare the Prayers,
Epistles, and Gospels with a Mass Book, which there I had at command, and I
found no difference, but only English and Latin; which made me wonder, and to
acknowledge, that much remained still of Rome in the Church of England; and
that I feared my Calling was not right.

And p. 209. tells us, That upon his return afterward to Rome, that Father
Fitz Herbert told him, that the Common Prayer Book (which was composed for
Scotland) was by Archbishop Laud sent to Rome to be first viewed and approved
by the Pope and Cardinals, and who upon the perusal did approve thereof, and
liked very well for Protestants to be trained in such a form of Prayer and
Service, etc.

Great Cerus Panegyer. Missae. cap. 11. 12. alleges against the Reformed
Churches; the English Service Book for their Popish Holy Days, the Book of
Canons for the Sign of the Cross, and Kneeling at the Altar, and for the whole
Hierarchy, etc.

Cornelpis Scultingius in his Hyerarchica Anicrists, cites whole Leaves out of
Whitegift for the defense of their Hierarchy.

Stapleton Reflect. against Whitaker, Cont. 2. Qu. 3. Art. 3. uses Whitegift's
Argument to uphold their Discipline, and professes they are built upon one
Foundation.

They further say, as Paep. Sapp. Anno 1604. Reas. of Relig. 13* That from
their Treasure-House, the Religion now established in England, has learned the
form of Christening, Marrying, Churching of Women, visiting the Sick, Burying
the Dead, etc. as their Book (say they) translated out of ours declares.

Curtain, Of Chapter Power, p. 40. says, That he heard one of the Jesuits say,
that it was his hopes, that our Service and Ceremonies would return us again to
Rome.

Another Objection is this, That whilst they separate for indifferent, and
about disputable things, they do violate a known plain positive Scripture,
which enjoins the Inferiors to be obedient and subject to their Superiors.

The Protestant Reconciler, 2 part, urges it as an Objection brought against
the Diffenters, compared with 1 part, p. 198. That seeing God has enjoined all
Persons to obey those that have the Rule over them, Heb. 13. 17* and submit
themselves, and to be subject to the higher Powers, as to the Ordinance of God,
and that for Conscience sake. He that can satisfy his Conscience in his
Refusal so to do, must show some Law of God as evidently forbidding his
Obedience to what Superiors do enjoin* as do these Scriptures command OBEDIENCE
to them in ALL LAWFUL THINGS.

And you tell us in your Scrupulous Conscience, page 33. That these things of a
public Nature belong only to our Superiors and Governors; and if they appoint
what is unfit, indecent and inconvenient, they only are accountable for it; It
is not the fault of those that join in such Worship, or yield to such
Injunctions (NOT PLAINLY SINFUL) for the of Peace and Order. And the late most
terrible Thunderclap from the Bench* giving the Dissenters in charge to the
Grand Jury, as such Despisers of Authority, who had sinned the unpardonable sin,
not to be forgiven them.

To which we say, That it is most certain that Obedience is due from Inferiors
to Superiors, for Conscience sake, and for the Lord's sake. But then that is
limited to be only in the Lord; for if they who are his Ministers, command any
thing not agreeable to his Word, and plainly Sinful, though they may call them
Indifferent things, State Policy, Order and Decency, we are justified with the
Midwives, in disobeying the King's command, Exodus 1. 17. and Readiness Guard, in
refusing Obedience to the King, 1 Samuel 22. 17. and Daniel and the three Children
in disobeying the King, Dan. 3. 6. and with Peter and John, who refused to
forbear preaching Christ at the Rulers command, telling them, It was beete to
obey God than Man. Though this absolute obedience to Superiors (as you will find)
is an Argument principally urged by men who have the Magistrate on their side,
and their own Profit and Advantage concerned, then Obedience to them is cried
up to be better than Sacrifice, and fall foul upon the Conscientious, as
Disobedient, Seditious and Rebellious. So Celsus the Heathen, reproaches the
Christians for their forsaking their public Assemblies, getting into Corners,
disobeying Authority. So all the time of Popery were the Waldenses,
Wicklivists, Lollards and Protestants, branded with Seditions, Disobedience to
Authority, impugning the King and Queen's proceedings. And how does Bonner lay
the 13 Romans to the Martyrs, to require their Obedience and Subjection to all
their Mumsimus's and Sumsimus's? But if the Tide be turned, and the Magistrate
on the other side, then the same men cry out against Imposition and
Persecution, as it was with the Arians and Orthodox, under the several Emperors
of different minds; the 13 Romans was in those days used as the Dutch-man's
Breeches to serve all occasions, and always improved to establish and enforce
the present Impositions by the Power and Religion which was uppermost. This
reproves all our worthy Witnesses, the Waldenses, Wicklivists, Lollards, etc.
who bore up for Christ against all their Sanguinary Laws, Prohibitions and
Commands, and those who opposed Jeroboam's Calf-Worship. This would establish
the Religion of the present Power, be it either Judaism, Turcism, Popery, etc.
and a conformity to it. But it is said, you intend this subjection to Superiors,
only in lawful things, things not plainly sinful. Then if the Inferior be to
judge what is Unlawful, and plainly Sinful, the Controversy is at an end. If
they command lawful things, they command no other than God has commanded, which
makes it lawful, then Obedience (as due) is given to God. If they command in
the things of God any other than lawful, or what he has required, they have no
Authority so to do; and we Sin not in Disobedience by your own Rule, if they
command sinful or unlawful things.

As to those things of an Indifferent Nature, or things not possitively
forbidden, under which is included all the Rites and Ceremonies enjoyed by man,
whereof no Word of God for. We know of no such things; all the Rites, Services
and Ceremonies to be observed and enjoined in Gods Worship, being necessary
things, and no negative Articles of Faith, as before.

Objection.
Object. But is it not manifest, that Persons who presume to separate from the
Religion established by Law, are usually of turbulent, seditious, factious
Spirits? otherwise what means those sensible Impressions that have lately been
made upon Authority, expressed by the public Declaration, manifold Addresses,
and Pulpit Alarms, reflecting upon them as to the PLOT, and the Severity used
by putting the Penal Laws in execution against this sort of People in City and
Country?

Answer.
Its very true that Press and Pulpit, late Declaration, Weekly Addresses, and
severe Usage both in City and Country speaks this Language. But it is not
therefore true, that the Dissenters are guilty of Sedition, Treason and
Rebellion, because the Truth and Innocence of Gods Church and People (as
traduced to Authority) have been so falsely and maliciously branded and handled
all along, which may be some Relief to them under their present Trials and
Sufferings; Suggestions, Calumnies and Outcrys being no Proofs.

Did not the Church of old pathetically complain of the very same Usage? The
Mouth of the Wicked and Deceitful are opened against me, they have spoken
against me with a Lying Tongue, they compassed me about with words of Hatred,
and fought against me without a cause, Psalm. 109. 2, 3. So no new thing.

And again, They that hate me without a cause, are more than the Nairs of my
Head; they that would destroy me, being my Enemies wronfully, are mighty* for
lo, they lie in wait for my Soul; the mighty are gathered against me, not for
my Transgression, not for my Sin, they run and prepare themselves without my
fault, Psalm 69. 4. 59. 34.

And further, Mine Enemies (says the Church) reproach me all the day; and they
that are mad against me, are sworn aagainst me [it seems they wanted not
perjured Informers in those days.] Therefore prays,

Let not them who are my Enemies wrongfully rejoyee over me, neither let them
wink with the Eye, that hate me without a cause; for they speak not Peace, but
devise deceitful Matters against them that are quiet in the Land.

Was not the Slander, wherewith the Adversaries of the Church reproacht them in
Ezra's and Nehemiah's time, viz. (that for their peaceable attending upon the
Lord, they were esteemed) A Rebellious and Factious People, and hurtful to
Kings, moving Sedition, Ezra 4. 15. Neh. 6. 6.

And was not this the Accusation of wicked Haman against Gods People, that
because they dissented from the Religion established by Law; having Laws
contrary to the Kings Laws, therefore as Seditious and Rebellious they ought to
be cut off, and not suffered to live, Esth. 3. 8, etc.

Were not the three eminent Dissenters in Nebuchadnezar's time so treated for
their Nonconformity to the Religion established Law, and as Turbulent,
Stubborn, Factious, Disobedient and Rebellious, cast into the Fiery Furnace?
Dan. 3. And afterward, Daniel upon the same score slung to the Lions, though
his God and his Innocence pleaded his Cause against his malicious Treppaning
Adversaries [that could only in the matter of his God get the Advantage against
him] My God (says he) has sent his Angels and shut the Lions Mouths:
forasmuch as before him Innocence was found in me, also before thee, O King,
have I done no hurt, Dan. 3. 21, etc. And what became of their malicious
Accusers, afterward you there understand.

Luke 20. 21* etc.
Neither did our Savior himself, who was so meek, gentle and innocent, so
harmless and inoffensive, meet with other measure, being directly so dealt with.

Did not the Treppanners assault him? For is it not said, They watched him* and
sent forth Spies, which should feign themselves just Men, that they might take
hold of his words, that they might deliver him unto the Power and Authority of
the Governor. And they asked him, saying, Master, we know that thou say and
teach rightly; neither acceptest thou the Persons of any, but teach the
Way of God truly. Is it lawful for us to give Tribute unto Caesar, or not?
There was the catching Question. And to which, though by his Practice, working
a Miracle to pay Tribute, Mat. 17. 27. and his present Answer, he stopped their
Mouths; yet it would not serve his turn, but stoutly do they accuse him of the
very Sedition and Treason They designed to make him guilty of. And they began
to accuse him, saying, We found this Fellow perverting the Nation, and
forbidding to give Tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself is Christ, a
King, and they were not Caesar's Friends who said otherwise, Luke 23. 2, etc.
Upon which he was cast, condemned and put to Death, and the Inscription wrote
over him (to justify his Crucifixion) was, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Though he was altogether Innocent, having done no violence, Neither was Guilt
found in his Mouth, but under all their Mischief and Spite with Meekness and
Patience committed himself to him who judges Righteously: Giving us therein
also an Example how we should behave our selves under like Circumstances.

And so they dealt with his Followers afterward; did they not draw Jason and
the Brethren unto the Rulers of the City? crying, These that have turned the
World up side down, are come hither also. And these do all contrary to the
Decrees of Caesar, saying, There is another King, one JESUS; and they troubled
the Rulers of the People when they heard these things, Acts 17. 6, 7.

And so they laid many and grievous things against Paul, which they could not
prove, viz. That he was a Pestilent Fellow, a Mover of Sedition throughout the
World, Acts 25. 7. and 24. 5 And what was this for, but the preaching and
practicing the Precepts and Doctrine of the Gospel, to make men holy and happy?

And did they not so deal with the Christians in the days after the Apostles,
as Justin Martyr's and Tertullian's Apologies, and Origen's Defense against
Celsus make manifest? How all manner of Evil is charged against the Dissenters
in those days ^alsly? How Vicious and Seditious in their Conventicles? What
Despisers of Dignities? What Enemies to C^sar? And whatever public Evil or
Calamity be^ell, it must be laid to the Christians charge, and to the Lions
they must go, right or wrong, for the same. If Ner^ has a mind to burn Rome, it
is but laying it to the Christians charge, and that is enough

And was it not just so they dealt with our Forefathers, the Waldenses,
Wicklivists, Lollards, and the Protestants in the Marian days, as Turbulent,
Factious, Seditious, Resisters of Authority, etc.?

And may we not truly say, as it was then, so it is now? And may not you your
selves, who so carry it to your dissenting Brethren, expect the same measure
from that Generation of men, if they should get an advantage again in this
Nation? as our Savior tells you, Mat. 7. 1, 2.

It is no new thing, you-see, to have Innocence and Truth falsely and
injuriously charged, and treated as Sedition and Treasor.

And may not the dissenting Party, notwithstanding all the Rage, Noise and
Clamor, the many Provocations by malicious Prosecutions, invading of
Properties, Privileges, etc. Worrying of Informers and Soldiers, Fines,
Confiscations, Imprisonments, the Deaths, both in City and Country these two
and Twenty Years, challenge the worst of their Enemies to come forth and
produce any one thing wherein the Dissenters (as Dissenters) are justly to be
charged with Sedition, Treason or Rebellion, [in this Nation] but that under
all they have behaved themselves meekly, patiently and submissively, as becomes
their holy Profession?

And as for this horrid Slander of being all engaged in a late Plot, [their
Principles leading thereto;] it is like all the rest. If to have been under the
highest Provocations, and in the Exercise of the greatest Patience under them,
renders them guilty, it may be something: Otherwise, if Proofs be necessary to
make People guilty, why have not the Witnesses appeared? But this is but a
pretense; for have they not suffered long before any Plot was talked of?

But as to this, it is said, Have not several been imprisoned, some fled, and
others executed about the Plot?

That several have been imprisoned, some fled and some executed, who have been
reputed Non-Conformists, is very true; and so have many more of the
Conformists, I presume, four for one of the other: Will it therefore be a fair
way of Arguing, Because so many of the Conformists are said to be in the Plot,
therefore all the Conformists of the Nation are guilty, and ought to be
severely handled. I remember it was thought a very unfair way of proceeding of
old, because Coll. Wagstaff transgressed in the West, that therefore my Lord of
Kingstone must be punished in the North; nay, the whole party decimated for the
same.

If some of the Non-Conformists are found Tardy upon good Proof, let them
suffer the Penalty of the Law; but let not the Innocent be judged and punished
with the Guilty, muchless let not the Principle of Nonconformity be judged,
because some have miscarried under that Profession; for by that Rule may not
the purest state of the Church, both in the Old and New Testament, be censured
and judged, who had their Chora's, Judasses and Diatrophesses amongst them? His
Majesty in his Speech to both Houses, gives us a good Rule hereupon, viz. Let
us look forward and not backward, and never think of what is past, except men
put us in mind, by repeating faults we had forgot; and then let us remember no
more than what concerns those very Persons.

But have they not appeared of late years very zealous and forward in Elections
of Parliament Men, and other public Officers in City and Country?

It is true, they have so, and so have the Conformists also, ten for one to
their Number, both in City and Country; but what Transgression is that? What
Law have they broke in Voting according to their Consciences, by endeavoring
to bring such into Trust and Authority, as they have judged most Able and
Honest to serve their Country, in a time when we are told by the King and four
Parliaments of a POPISH-PLOT to subvert the Government, and to Ruin us in all
our concerns?

But this as to Heresy, Schism, Treason, Rebellion, and Plotting (that are
charged upon us) I do ingeniously and fully so far own and acknowledge in my
own behalf, and in all others that I know of this despised reproached Number,
that if to worship the God of our Fathers in the way of his own appointment,
believing all things which are written in the Law and Prophets, be esteemed
Heresy, we are Heretics, [as K. Charles the first answered the Popish
Marquess, as before.]

Prim. Rule of Reformation.
That if in Dr. Pierce's words (to justify the Schism and Separation from
Rome) To have recourse to the Scriptures, consulting those Oracles, how things
stood from the beginning, and only separating from them, we find Separatists
from the Primitive Church and Truth; we make Asec^^^ion that we may not partake
of the [English] Roman Schism, and answering the Lords express Command, Come
out from amongst them, be ye sepanate, etc. 2 Cor. 6. Rev. 18. 4. be to be
esteemed Sedition, Schism and Separation, we are Seditious, Schismatics and
Separatists.

If to own the Soveraignity of Christ (by whom all things were created, and by
whom all things consist, who to this end dyed, rose again and revived, that he
might be Lord both of quick and dead, to whom the Father has given all Power,
both in Heaven and Earth, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) and Powers and
Potentates as under him, in Conscience to him, to whom you own every Knee must
bow* and the King is but next and immediately under him, supreme Head and
Governor in all Causes Ecclesiastical and Civil, it being also stamped upon our
Coin, Christ^ Auspice Regn^ [Christ the Kingdom's happy Guide*] If the owning
and asserting his Soveraignity in chief, be Treason and Rebellion, we own we
are such Traitors and Rebels.

If in our Places and Stations, to endeavor the Defense of the English
Government, Laws, Liberties and Properties, and to keep out the Popes foreign
usurped Power, who has heretofore so tyrannized over Prince and People, both as
to their Bodies and souls, in these Nations, and to which, all who have taken
the Oath of Allegiance are so solemnly engaged, be to be esteemed Plotting and
Plotters, we own our selves guilty of that Plot.

The CONCLUSION.
THus, Sir, you have at your Friendly Call and Invitation, a fair and impartial
Examination of the Merits of the Cause, giving you the different Sentiments of
the Guides on both sides, in the most material Objections made by the one, and
the candid Answers of the other, and how far your own Principles and Practice
in separating from Superstitious, Idolatrous and Persecuting Bloody Rome,
justifies in many things, their Principles, as well as Practice, in separation
from you walking in their steps. The substance whereof, for a conclusion I
shall briefly sum up, with some Reflections thereon in the following Queries,
(viz.)

1. Quaery If your Answer to the Papists Costerus Inst. Christ. l. 2o. c. 1o.
Haec Sacris Literis non prohiberi atque ^ine peccato fieri possit, quia ubi non
est Lex ibi nec prevaricatio.
calling for your Negative Proof from the Scriptures, against their Molatrous
Foppish and unwritten Traditions be good against them, viz. That there needs no
Negative Proof to disprove them, because they are not contained in OUR ONLY
RVLE OF FAITH, THE BIBLE, as page 5. Then whether the same Answer is not good
from the Dissenters, when you ask them the very same Question (which carries it
in the whole of the Controversy, ^s Dr. Stillingfleet observes, p. 4) viz.
That there needs no Negative Proofs to disprove all the Rites, Services and
Ceremonies inquestion, because none of them are contained in our ONLY RULE OF
FAITH, where they say, They no more ^^nd National Provincial Dioc^san Churches
(your Government by) Lord Archbishops and Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons,
Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Chancellors, Officials, your Consecration of Churches
and Priests, your Priests Garments, Altars, Liturgies, Singing-Service,
Letanies, Bowing, Crossing, Kneeling at Sacrament, Holy Days, Fasts, Feasts,
Vigils; Then, the Popish Holy Water, Salt, Oil, Spittle, Baptizing of Bells,
Exorcisms, Conjurations, Bowing to Images and Altars, and other such li^e
Fopperies* page 6, 7, 8.

2. Query. If your own Pens do declare, that to enjoin unnecessary or
indifferent things, viz. things not contained in the Scripture, in Gods Worship
and Service, as necessary, ought to be reputed an adding to Gods Word, a
teaching for Doctrine the Commands of men, Superstition, Will Worship, or
worshipping God in vein, as page 12. then how can you avoid the same charge
brought against you by the Dissenters, when you, (as sel^-judged and condemned)
do the same things? For are not your Rites and Ceremonies confessed by you to
be Indifferent things, as page 9, 10. imposed upon Dissenters, as absolutely
necessary to the Excommunicating, or as much as lies in you, daming their
Souls, ruining their Bodies and Estates, who conscientiously scruple and refuse
them, as page ^1, 12, 13.

3. Quaery. If you do declare the Rites, Services, and Ceremonies in the
Liturgy are of Primitive Antiquity, and not of Popish Novelty, as page 14, 15.
and that you have left (or separated from) the Church of Rome, because they
have left Primitive Antiquity, and therefore the Dissenters have no cause to
boggle at, or scruple them as Popish. But if it appear to be quite otherwise,
as* the Examination of each particular seems to demonstrate, as p. 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, etc. viz That they are not of Primitive Antiquity, but of Popish
Novelty, and all of them fe^ch't from the Institution of Popes and Popish
Councils, and Canons, and not from Jesus Christ and his New Testament Canons:
If so, then first, Whether you do not betray much Rashness and Weakness, (not
to say with the Protestant Reconciler, one of your own) Falsehood and
Hypocrisy? And, Secondly, Whether you do not thereby justify the Dissenters
Separation from you, as warrantable, because they separate from you for being
in the practice of Popish Superstition and unwritten Tradition, because they
are expressly commanded by Christ, To separate and come out from such
unwarrantable Practices, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Rev. 18. 4. Lest
partaking of such Sins, they share of the threatened Judgments? It being very
dishonorable as well as dangerous to halt betwixt two. If God be God, he (but
if Baal, he) is to be served and followed.

To which purpose we find in that most remarkable Letter of Bishop Hall to Dr.
Laud, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, that which is very instructive upon
this account, whereof therefore, I shall presume to give you this following
part of it, viz. Resolve (says he) one way, and know at last what you do hold,
and what you should cast off, either your Wings or your Teeth; and lo^thing
this Bate, like Nature, be either ^ Bird or a Beast: If you must begin, why not
now? it is dangerous deferring that whose Want is deadly, and whose Opportunity
is doubtful. God cries out with ^eh^, Who is on my side? Who? Look at least
out of your Window to him, and in a resolute Courage cast down this Jezebel,
etc. Thus far the good Bishop; which is a good caution against Indifferency and
Luke warmness in the service of Christ, agreeable to our Savior, Rev. 3. to
Laodicea, I would thou were either cold or hot, etc.

4. Quaery. If your selves have judged Popish Imposition and Persecution for
Conscience, to be Antichristian, Wolfish and Beastly, wholly contrary to
Christianity, and the Lamb like Nature of Christ; and that it is Injustice and
barbarous Cruelty to afflict men for what they cannot help, and a plain
Rebellion against God, by wresting his Scepter and usurping his Empire over
Conscience, out of his hand, the Principle it self being so much decryed by so
many of your great men, as well King's as Parliaments, as page 51, 52.

Then whether you doing the same thing, viz. Imposing upon the Consciences of
your Brethren, and persecuting them with so much Cruelty, to the ruining, as
much as lies in you, both their Souls, Bodies, Liberties and Estates, be not to
be Self-judged with a Witness? 2 dly, Does it not greatly justify the former
Popish Cruelties (and make way for new ones) over Protestants, as well as
contract their Guilt, appearing thus in their Spirit and Practice, as Christ
told the persecuting Jews in that day, that they thereby filled up the measure
of their Fathers, etc. and brought the guilt of the former Blood upon
themselves, even from the Blood of Righteous Abel, etc.?

Thirdly, Is it not wonderful Contradiction to abet, succor and relieve the
French Pres^yterian Dissenters, under their cruel Persecutions for their
Nonconformity, and yet at the same time to exercise all that Cruelty, Ruin and
Destruction to the English Presbyterian Nonconformists, like the Scribes and
Pharisees, who built the Tombs of the Prophets, and at the same time killed the
Prophets.

And, Fourthly, Whether you do not hereby raise a mighty cry of Christ's poor
Lambs (appointed by you to the Slaughter) against you to their Lord and Master,
and who may thereupon say to you, as to persecuting Saul of Old, Why do you
Persecute me, it is hard for you to kick against the Pricks?

But it is possible you may say, That the Persecution is not from you, but
barely the prosecution of the Laws we transgress, which if we break we must
thank our selves, and not complain of you.

So said Bonner of old to the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, and so said the
Scribes and Pharisees of Christ, They had a Law, and by their Law he ought to
dye. But you know it is a Maxim in the English Law, 28 H. 8. That if any Law,
Vsuage or Custom be contrary to God's Law, they are null and void in
themselves. And how much such Laws so rigorously put in force against the
Dissenters, are against both the Law of God and Nature, you have by your own
Pens decided, and do also know what the proper Interpreters of the Law have
said of them, viz. that Protestant Dissenters are not intended by them, but the
Popish only, as page 47, 48, 49, 50.

And as for the severe Penalties inflicted upon Dissenters as Seditious and
Riotous for their Assembling together to worship God, as though they thereby
infringed the Law, and violated the public Peace; and for which they have in
these three last Years suffered in their Estates and Trades, at least two
Millions (as supposed) contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of those
Statutes, if the Maxim of the Law be true, that the Intention makes the legal
Trespass, both as to TREASON, Felony, Murder and Riot, Twenty Three Years
Experience evidencing their quiet and peaceable Behavior, and that they have
been as far from Sedition and Riot (as the Law defines) as any in the Nation.

Lamb. ^jrenarcha* p. 175. chapter 4.
Lambard our great English Lawyer, defining a Riot, tells us, It is where three
or more Persons be disorderly assembled in Armor, with an intent to commit
with Force and Violence an unlawful act; and that great Numbers being assembled
together make no Riot, till such a Riotous Intent be known; quoting these
following Statutes, so defining it, 13 H. 4. c. 7. 2 H. 5. c. 8. 4 H. 7. c. 13.
2 Ed. 3. c. 3. 2 R. 2. c. 6.

But have you disowned and witnessed against the Cruelties exercised? and done
what you could to prevent them? or rather with Edom stood on the other side?
Obed. v* 11. and help'^ forward your Brethren's Affliction, and by your
Presses, Pulpits and Addresses, and cruel Courts, furthered it all that lies in
you.

5. Quaery. If you declare, that it is no sinful separation to separate from
those who separate from Truth and true Chruch, but a Duty to God and our
selves, to free us from Sin and Suffering, as page 71. Then if you your selves
have made a separation from the Truth and true Church, you not only reproach
your own Separation from Rome, but justify your Brethrens from you, as
warrantable by your own Principles; Who art thou that judge another, and do
the same things, etc.?

6. Quaery. If by your own, as well as Scripture Rules, it is no Sedition nor
Contempt to Authority, not to obey the unlawful Commands of Magistrates in the
things of God, as page 64, 65, 66. Then whether your dissenting Brethren are
not most injuriously dealt with by you, for that great Outcry gone out against
them from your Pulpits and Presses, for Sedition and Rebellion? when it is only
in the matter of their God you have to accuse them, and for their saying with
the Apostles, It is better to obey God than Men, there being in truth no more
Sedition nor Rebellion to be found either in their Principles or Practice, than
your own.

7. Quaery. If all this be true, then whether it does not very much explain
that usual saying, That Popery is rather to be chosen than Presbytery; and that
it is better to be a Papist than a Presbyter?

Thus, Sir, you have something which the Dissenters have to say for themselves,
hoping i^ shall not be ^udge^ either Unreasonable or Unseasonable, to present
to you this their just Defense, and give you thus the Merits of the Cause, not
only from your Call so to do (and a Silence thereupon might either bespeak
consenting Guilt, or prevent a satisfying Reply to our Conscientious Scruples)
but also the many severe Pressures and Sufferings we ^le under from you for our
Nonconformity, which may plead some excuse for this modest Plea; And Loosers
being admitted the liberty of Speech, as Sick men to groan, and the Afflicted
to cry; Therefore may we not hope for a fair Admission of our Plaint for
present, as better Usage for the future, since we have not to do with savage
Indians, not brutish Irish Massacring-Cut-Throats, worse than Canibals (to whom
all Reason, Right and Truth is unaccessable) but with our own Country men,
Neighbors, Fellow-Citizens, Acquaintance, Relations, Gentlemen, Scholars, with
men professing the same Protestant Religion with our selves, and with so many
who have offered Reasons and Arguments to us, and may therefore hope they will
receive it from us (how else can they answer our Scruples) and not stop our
Mouths with Goals, Pillories and Halters (say what they please to render us
and our Principles obnoxious, and refuse and reject our just Defense, it being
below common Ingennity to challenge an Adversary to the Field, and when he
appears, cause him to be disarmed, gagged and bound, and then manfully cudgel
him, and boast of a Conquest, far be it from us so to think) and particularly
since you your selves lie under the same Censure of Schism, Heresy and
Sedition from the Popish party, as we from you, and have given the same
Arguments to justify your Separation from them, as we from you, so that there
wants nothing but Demonstration, Candor and Charity to set all honest
Protestants to rights.

But especially living under a Prince, who has expressed so much tender
Regard, and so many Promises to tender Consciences, who live peaceably, and who
is of that Sagacity and Prudence to judge whether it will be more for his
Interest and Profit to root up and destroy such an innocent peaceable and
profitable People, and suffer their substance to be taken from them (as some
wicked Hamans may suggest and provoke) or with the Eastern Mo narchs (in like
case) to let such cruel Harpyes and bloody Incendiaries against the Innocent
Nonconformists of the day, feel his just Rebukes, as Esth. 7. 10. 8. 11, etc.
Dan. 3. 29. 6. 24. And as to enrich the Treasury, whether it is not like to be
more effectual and more just, to do it with Popish Emoluments yet remaining in
the Nation, and to take up where H. 8. left, and make through work of it?

Lastly, To conclude; be pleased in your own words to be exhorted, That laying
aside all Prejudices, Favor to, or Admiration of Men's Persons, evil Affection,
love of a Party, or carnal Interest to bias your Judgment, you would
impartially weigh and consider the Arguments herein proposed, being diffident
of your own Apprehension, and indifferent to either part of the Question; and
think it no shame to change your mind when better Reason is offered you; for
the dissenters desire none to be their Proselites any further than they give
Scripture and Reason for it; Resting very confident that if they could prevail
with People equally to hear both sides, and diligently to examine to Merits of
the Cause, their Churches would every day gain more ground amongst all wise
men; so says also

Your Friend and Servant, Thomas De Laune.

ekon tou therou OR The IMAGE of the BEAST, Showing, by a Parallel Scheme, what
a CONFORMIST the Church of ROME is to the PAGAN, and what a NONCONFORMIST to
the CHRISTIAN CHURCH, in i'ts Rites, Service and Ceremonys, the better to
Exemplify the True and False CHURCH.

By T. D.

Obed. 6. How are the hidden things of Esau sought out?

Dan. 3. 17. 18. Our God whom we Serve, is able to Deliver us, and he will
Deliver us: But if not, be it known that we will not Serve your Gods, Nor
Worship the Golden Image that ye have set up.

Rev. 14. 9. And the Angel said with a Loud Voice, If any man worship the Beast
and his Image, and Recive his mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, the same
shall Drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, which shall be poured out without
Mixture, in the Cup of his Indignation.

Printed in the Year, 1684.

READER.
YOu have here a brief and I hope Satifactory account (from many Learned
Authoritys) of the Rise and Origanal of many of the Rites and Ceremonys now in
Question (which have and do occasion so much trouble, and distress) the only
right way to end disputes, and which was the method Christ took with the
Pharisees, Mat, 19. 8. And which Dr. Pierce so wisely observes from him, in
confuting the Papists. Whereby it is easily discerned what is from above and
what from beneath, what from God, and what from Man. This proves their Rise,
and Birth, to be many hundred Years before Christ, therefore not from him for
Christian Service.

The learned Causabon in his Original of Idolatry (Writ in French and collected
(as his Epist tells us) from Elasopolitanes Commentaryes, Translated by Mr.
Darcy) Says P. 73.

That the maine and principal parts of the Mass are digested and brought in by
Numa Pompilius, [the 2 King of the Romans, a great Magician about 700 years
before Christ, P. 37.] The farthar Additions were Invented, by other Roman
Pontifs, and especially by a Monk called Gregory, the 1 st of that* Name, who
attained the Papacy being Instructed in Pythagoricall Magic and Philosephy,
having also studied the Laws of King Tullus Hostilius successor to Numa, and
to the end he might Perpetuate his Name, Instituted div ers additions to the
Mass, etc.

You have therefore (for your better Information) this parallel Scheme here
presented to you, of the Pagan and Papal, Rites and Ceremonys, where you find
the great Harmony and agreement thatis between them theirin (The Child being
not more like the Father, then Rome Papal is to Rome Pagan, in its
Ecclesiastical Rites and Service) and therefore is it not significantly by the
Holy Ghost ^liled the Image of the Beast? Rev. 13. 14, 15. etc. And did it not
prove the healing the deadly wound giv^^ to the Dragonical Beast? verse 4. And
who you will find not to be in greater Conformity to the Pagan, then in
Nonconformity to the Christan Church, of which you have a brief Prospect from
the Scripture. The true Standard to try and judge all Images and Idols by.

But you will say, why do you give the Heathen the Denomination of a Church, Is
that proper? Yes why not? Do not you read of the Church of Evildoers? Ps. 26.
And Synagogue of Satan? Rev. 2. And I know no reason why Rome Pagan the Mother,
may not be so called as well as Rome Papal, the Daughter, who fetches so much
of her Ecclesiastical Policy, Church Rites, Services, and Ceremonys, from
her; But did not Pagan Rome kill Christ, and disown Christianity which Papal
Rome did not? It is trve Rome Pagan, did Murder Christ in his person, and so
does Rome Papal in his members, which is kiling him a fresh, and tho in words
they seem with Judas to say hail Mr. And kiss him, with a Jesu Jesu, yet in
works they deny, betray, ^ell, and Crucify, him and by Blasphemous Traditions,
and Impious Superstitions, make void his whole Law, usurp his Throne and
Authority, sit in the Temple of God as God, changing times, Laws, Ordinances.

As to the Authoritys to justefy each Particular, which you might have expected
under eachhead, I must referr you to a larger Piece, treating theirof, which
loath it very distinctly, this being but in Epitome of it, though in the general
you may understand the following Authors have been consulted hereupon, viz.
Plutarch in Numa, Tacitus, Titus Livius Decad, Pliny Alex ab, Alexander, Blund
De Rom triumph, Durandus, Darcys translation of Cousabon, Dr. Moors, Mistry of
Iniquity. And that late worthy and most Excelent piece called Pagana (...) etc.

Thine in the Service of Truth.

(...) OR The IMAGE of the BEAST.
Showing by a Parallel Scheme what a Conformist the Church of Rome is to the
Pagan, and what a Nonconformist to the Christian Church, in it is Rites Services
and Ceremonies.
The Dragonical or Pagan Church Consists in, viz. The Beastly Papal Church
is conformable to the Pagan in The Christian Church consistoth in, viz. 1. It Is
Head. 1. It Is Head. 1. It Is Head. The Emperor of Rome presiding by the Policy
of Hell, over all Ecclesiastical affairs as well as Civil, was called Pontifex
Maximus or high Priest; to whom was given Divine Honor and prostration at his
Feet: And as head of the Church or high Priest had first Fruits. Annates
Oblations, etc. paid him and also a Purpurate Synod or Princes in Purple to
assist him. The Pope of Rome presiding by the Policy of Hell, over all
Ecclesiastical affairs; clayming the Civil also is called Pontifex Maximus or
high Priest; to whom Divine Honor is given and prostration at his Feet: And as
Head of the Church and High Priest has first Fruits. Annates and Oblations,
etc. paid him; And a Purpurate Synod, viz. Cardinals in Purple to assist him.
Neither Emperor, Pope no^ King, but Christ himself to whom the Father has
committed it, having purchased it also with his own blood, who as High Priest
and King is the alone Author and Institutor, of it is Order, Rule and Worship,
with all things that belong thereto, and necessary to be Observed therein. To
whom Divine Honor is duly paid: God blessed for ever the Government upon his
Shoulders, without any Catholic Vicar to assist. Secondly it is Members.
Secondly it is Members. Secondly it is Members. The Members and parts of the
Church were the parts of the Empire, as divided into ten parts; Horns or
Kingdoms. And those ten Kingdoms distributed into Nations, Provinces, Diocese
and Cures, under respective Governors. Civil-Military, and Ecclesiastical. The
Members and parts of this Catholic Church, are the parts of the Empire, as
divided into ten Horns or ten Kingdoms. And those ten Kingdoms distributed
into Nations, Provinces, and Diocese, and Parishes, for the better
Administration of Papal Juris diction. The Members of the Christian Church are
not any Empire, Region, City Diocese, or Province, but only such of the
faithful, or believers in all parts of the World, who are called to visible
Saintship and orderly put together into distinct Congregations, as Christ has
directed in the New Testament.

3dly, The Gods they Worship. 3dly, The Gods they Worship. 3dly, in Worshipping
the true God, only and truly. Besides their Supreme God Jupiter, or Jove,
whose name they derived from Jehovah; the Governor of Heaven and Earth, They
had diverse inferior Deities, Gods and Goddesses, whom they divinely worshipped,
viz. Diva Vesta, (Juno or Luna) the Queen of Heaven (and Mother of God) with
Saturn, Mars, Venus, Mercury, Phoebus Beacchus, Vulcan, to whom they as their
Numens Heroes or Intercessors built Temples, erected Alatrs and Statues.
Dedicated Feasts, and called the days by their names; They had Doemons
Ethereal, and Tutular Gods and Goddesses, to be applied to, by several
Vocations, Country's, Cities, Families, Orders, Sick Persons; As Divus Neptunus
for Mariners, Divus pan for Shepherds, Divus Pales for Husbandmen, Diva Flora
for the Curtisan, Diva Diana for the Huntsmen, Divus Esculapius for the
Physician, Divus Bacchus for the Good fellow, Divus Mercurius for Tradsmen;
They had gods for every Family, Country City, Decease, as Cant, sicat, Era,
etc. Besides in the Pontifex Maximus, and Synod, was placed the right of
Apotheosis, or God making, viz. to create and Inrole some deceased, worthy in
the number of the Gods to whom Temples, Altars, Orders, and Statues were
appointed, and Festivals in their names celebrated. Besides the Supreme God
Jehovah, the Governor of Heaven and Earth they pretend to Worship, they have
diverse inferior Deities, Gods and Goddesses whom they divinely Worship, viz.
Diva or Sancta Maria the Queen of Heaven (and Mother of God) with Divus Petrus.
St. Paul, St. John, St. Thomas, St. Stephen, St. Andrew, etc. To whom they as
their Numens, or Intercessors, build Temples, erect Altars, dedicate Feasts,
paying also so much reverance to the Pagan Gods, as to keep up their Names in
the Day's of the Week, viz. Sunday, Monday, Tusday, Wedensday, Thursday,
Friday, Saturday. They have also Tutular and Ethereal Gods, and Goddesses, to
be applied to by several Vocations, Countries, Citys, Families, Orders,
Sick-Persons, as Divus or St. Nicolas for the Mariner, St. Windoline for the
Shepherd, St. John Baptist for the Husbandmen, St. Magdaline for the Curtisan,
St. Hubart for the Huntsman, St. Crispian for the Shoemaker, etc. The City,
Country, Family, and Physic Gods are innumerable. St. George for England, St.
Denis for France, St. Mark for Venice. etc. Gods almost for every Disease,
Besides the God making power, that is in the Pope and Cardinals to canonize
what deceased worthy, they please and to appoint them Temples, Altars, Orders,
Festivals. Though there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth
(as there be Gods many, and Lords many) But to us there is but one God, the
Father of whom are all things and we in him. And one Lord Jesus, by whom are
all things and we by him; 1 Cor. 5. 6. Make no mention of the names of other
Gods, neither let it be heard out of thy Mouth, Ex. 23. 13. Thou snalt have no
other Gods besides me, thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, or any
likeness of any thing that is in Heaveu above, or Earth beneath. Thou shall not
bow down thy self to them, nor serve them; for I the Lord thy God am a Jealous
God; Ex. 20. 4, 5. What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are
the Temple of the living God? Wherefore come out from amongst them, and be ye
separate says the Lord and touch not the unclean thing, etc. The things which
the Gentles Sacrifice; they Sacrifice to Devils and not to God; and I would not
that you should have Fellowship with Devils; 1 Cor. 10. 20. Rev. 18. 4. 2 Cor.
6. 16.

4thly. The places of their Worship. 4dly, The places of their Worship. 4dly,
In it is Worship, respecting place. Temples or Fanes both rich and magnificent,
they built in the names, and dedicated to the honor of their Gods; As the
Temple of Jupiter, the Capital of Rome was dedicated to him. Vesta the Q. of
Heaven, and Mother of God, had a Temple, and Nunnery, dedicated to her; And so
had all the rest of the Gods. Saturn, Mars, Venus, Diana, Minerva, Neptune,
Apollo, etc. Yea, one to all the gods called PANTHEON. They build their Temples
East, and West, Worshipping toward the East. By their Auguri, and Auruspices,
With many Frayers, Ceremonies, and Solemnitys. they consecrated first the
Ground, and then the Temple, upon which it was built: Altars were erected in
them, and sumptiously adorned, and Statues placed in them with lighted Candels
which they Worshipped: A Feast of Dedicaiton was Annualy kept to the Honor of
the Demon, the Temple was dedicated to, which after their Rligious Rites were
over, was spent in Revelling and Jollity: And This as Gods House, they paid
great Reverence to. They Enjoyed the Temples of the Heathen, only new
consecrated and dedicated them to their own Gods to whom they gave new Nams at
their Christnings, As St. Saviors for Jupiters, St. Mary's for Vestas Temple,
And so for the rest of their Gods, St. Peter's for Apollos St. Paul for the
Temple of Diana (so it was at London) St. Nicolas, for Neptunes, And all
Saints, for PANTHEON. They build new Temples, East and West, and Worship as the
Heathens did toward the East: And do by their Priests consecrate first the
Ground, Then the Temple, upon which it stands; Altars are erected in them, and
sumptiously adorned, and Statues, placed on them with lighted Candels, which
they Worship; a Feast of Dedication is annually kept to the Honor of the
Saint, the Temple is consecrated to, which is spent with Revelling and Jollity.
And this as Gods House they pay great Reverence to. There having been no conse
crated place, or holy Ground since the dissolution of the Temple, by Gods
appointment to build Temples, or holy places for Worship. The true Worshipers,
who worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, are truly his Chnrch, and House,
where ever they meet, be it in Wood, Field, House, or Barn; so says the
Apostle, with all who in every place call upon the Lord Jesus Christ our Lord;
1 Cor. 1. 2. Whose House are ye. Heb. 3. 8. The most high dwelling, not with
Temples made with Hands as says the Prophet; What House will ye build me? Or
what is the place of my Rest? Who Filles Heaven and Earth, Act. 7. 48, 49. No
Altars and Candels Worshipping East and West, or Feasts of Dedications in
Christ's Church, being all Pagan and Papal inventions.

5ly* The times of their Worship. 5dly, The times of their Worship. 5thly, In
respect to the time of Worship* They divided their days into Fasti feast days,
Profaesti Working days, and Intercisi hafe holy days; The feast days they
dedicated, in the Names; and to the Honor They divided their days into Feasts,
Fasts, Vigils, and Working days (as their Calendar mentions) their Feasts
dedicated in the Names, the* And to the honor of The firist day of the Week is
the Christians Sabbath, and the only standing time for Rest, and Worship to be
Observed Holy unto the Lord; The other six days being appointed

of their Gods werev ery many, some of their Capital Feasts were these, viz.
Their Saturnalia, kept several days together in December, with Eul-game, Mrs.
of Misrule, Mascarading; and all Debocheries, adorning their Temples, and
Houses with green Leaves, and Boughs, The Epiphony, (from the appearing of
their Gods) Their Proserpinalia, or Feasts of Candles. In February Their
Palelia, or Shepherds Feast on Midsumer-day, Their Florialia on May Day, with
great Jollity by the young People of both sexes, scattering Boughs and Flowers,
and Dancing about May-poles, Their Ambervalia, or Procession, when they begged
a Blessing on their Gods, upon their Fields and Fruits; The Feast Easter to
that Goddess in April. They had their Bacchanalia, their Ceralia, their Venalia
and their Panathenea, a Feast to all their Gods. Canonical hours for
Sacrifice, and Devotion, and a Jubilee, or year of Rest their Saints (or Gods)
are very many, some of their Capital Feasts are these, viz. Christmas (their
Saturnalia) Observed directly, both in time and manner as there is was, with
Eule-games, Mrs. of Misrule, Mascarad's, Debocheries, adorning their Houses,
and Temples, with green Leaves and Boughs. The Epiphony Feast, as there is. Also
Candlemas the purification of the Virgin Mary. In February, as their
Proserpinalia, or Candle Feast. There St. John Baptist on Midsomer-day, as their
Palelia, Also Philip and Jacob on May Day, kept as their Floras Feast, time,
and manner, Also procession, or Perambulation, in Rogation Week, time and
manner with their Ambervalia; Also the Feast of Easter, time, name, and manner,
They have their Whitsonales, for their Bacchanalia, Their Allsaints, for their
Panathenea, Canonical hours for Service, and a year of Jubilee for Rest. for
Labor, As the forth Commandment Orders, viz. Remember to keep Holy the Seventh
Day, Six Days shall thou Labor and do all thy Work. The Pope that changer of
times says, Thou shall Labor but Three or Four Days; the rest are his Holy
days. No set times* either for Feasts, Fasts or Vigils are appointed by Christ,
which are only to be Observed as accasion is Administered. All their Holy days,
and Festivals, celeberated in Honor of the Papal and Pagan Gods, Numens, or
Demons, are an abomination to the Lord, and a great oppression to the Nations.
God requiring but a 7th part of time for his public Worship and Service; and
they exact half, if not two Thirds of it for the Worship and Sevice of their
Idols.

6thly, Their Priesthood. 6thly, Their Priesthood. 6thly, In it is Ministry.
They had Superior Priests, viz. Flamins and Arch-flamins, for Sacerdotall
service in their Provinces, and Diocese, and Inferior Priests, distinguished by
dignified names, Tonsures, Orders, Habits, the dignifyed Priests, were those
who attended on the Capital Temples, as the proper Priests of Jupiter,
Appollo, Minerva, Vesta, Diana, Venus, Cybel, some of which were called Dialia,
Martialia, Querinalia, Augures, Saliens, Fecialls* Their Priests were either
superior, viz. Bishops and Archbishops, for Sacerdotall service in Provinces,
and Diocese, or Inferior, distingushed, by dignifyed Names, Tonsures, Orders,
Habits, the dignified clergy were those who attended the Capital, or
Cathedral Churches, as Deans, Chaptrs, Prebends, Arch Deacons, And the more
inferior Priests, who have care of Sacred Celebrations, in the cures, or
Parishes, calledi Cureats, Parsons, In Christ Church there are only two sorts
of Offices, and Officers, (by his New Testament appointment) viz. Elders, and
Deacons, the Elders, to administer Ordinances, and Govern the Church. And
Deacons, to make Provision for, to visit, and take care of the Poor, none of
the Minestry, distinguished from the Layety, by Habits, or Tonsuers, which are
all Pagan, and Papal, Inventions, and Abominations. The prohibition of

And more inferior Priests who had the care of the sacred Celebrations* in the
cures called Curiones, there were proper Habits, for all the Priesthood, and
particular Vestments, for their Divine Service, viz. Albes, Tunicles, Amicts,
they had Tonsures, and shavings, so the Priests of Isis, Diana, Jupiter, diverse
orders of Priests, whereof most Caelebate, to whom Marriage was prohibited as
the Priests of Vesta, Minerva, Appollo, and those of Cybil, whowere castrated,
Elected, and concecra ted according to the Ritual of Numa, and put in to their
cures, by the Pontifex, maintained, according to their Ecclesiastical
constitution, the Pontifs, by Annates, Oblations, and the Priests by Benesices,
Offerings, Obsequies, etc. Vicars, Deacons, answearing their Curiones, they
have proper Habits for the Clergy, and particular Vestments for their holy
ministrations, viz. Surplices, or Albes, Chasubles, or Tunicles, Vailes, or
Amicts, to which they add Coaps, Ephods, Miniples, Zones, etc. They have
Tonsuers, or Shaveings of their Orders, and most whereof Caelebiate, to whom
marriage is forbiden, Elected, and consecrated, according to the Popes canons,
and put into their Cures, by his Authority, maintained according to their
Ecclesiastical customs, the Popes by A^nates, Oblations, etc. The Priests by
Benefices, Offerings, Oblations, Obseques etc. Marriage being a Doct^^ne of
Devils, Elected and Consecrated according to Christ's cannons, by the particular
Congrigations, where in they serve Christ, and according to Christ's Law, and
primitive practice, are maintained by the vollentary contribution of the Flocks
they feed, and Ride, having no Benefices or forced maintenance of Tithes to
live upon.

7thly, Their Rites and Ceremonies. 7thly, Their Rites and Ceremonies* 7thly,
Their Rites and Ceremonies. Their principal service comprehending most of their
Rits and ceremonys, was called the Mass, whereof ten principal parts, viz 1.
The Asperges, which was their Sprinkling with holy water at the Temple door,
all that attended that service for sanctification, 2dly, The Procession, when
the Priest in his Vest, shaven crown, Taper in his hand, carried about Shrines,
with supplication, and thanksgiveing, with Music. 3dly, Triming Altars, with
Clothes, Lights, and Images. 4dly, The Confiteor, making Confession, and
Supplication to the Gods. 5dly, The Vertegines viz. Antic postures, and
gestures, of the Priest at the Alter. There principal service comprehending
most of their Rites and Ceremonies, is called the Mass, where we find, 1. The
Asperges, or Sprinkling with holywater, at the Temple door, for sanctification,
all that attend the service. 2ly, The procession, wherein the Priest in his
Vest, shaven crown Taper, in hand, carries about the Relics or Shrines, with
Supplication, and Singing, with Music. 3ly, Adorning the Altars, with Cloths,
Lights, Images. 4ly, The confeteor or confession, 5ly, The Vertegines viz.
Windings turnings, and lifting up of the Priests hands* 6ly, Their Church
Music, vocal and Instrumental, their No such things in Christ's service, by
his appointment, as Liturgys, Letanys, Church music, Organs, Flutes, Vials,
Singing of prayers, Anthems or collects, no burning Incence, Odours, Tapers,
Candles, upon Altars, no cringings crossings, Kneelings, at Altars. bowing to
the East, but praying in the Spirit, and praising in the Spirit, And receiving
the Lords Super, the Bread and the Wine, according to his Institution, without
all their Pagan and Papal inventions and Superstitions.

6ly, The Church Music, Vocal, and iustrnmentall putting up Canticles, Paeans,
Collects to their Gods, with Organs, Flutes, Vials, etc. 7thly, The Thurall
part, Offering, Insence, Odours, and Perfumes. 8thly, The Offertory, viz.
Oblations, and Offerings. 9thly, The Round host, or small round Loaves, given
to the Communicants. 10 ly, The conclusion, with It^ missa est pronounced by
the Priest they had many Curvations, or bowings, fastings, flagellations or,
whipings, lying-wonders, by Sorcery, and miraculous Appearing of their Gods*
Dirges, worshipping toward the East. putting up Songs, Collects, An. thems, etc.
With Organs, Flutes, Vials, voices. 7ly, Offering Insence with Odours, and
perfumes. 8ly, The Offertory or offerings. 9ly, The wafer or round Host, given
to the Comunicants. 10 ly, the conclusion with ite missa est pronounced by the
priest, they have curvations, Flagellations, penances, Lying wonders, dirges,
worshipping toward the East, They have also several additions, to the Mass, as
Letanys Epistles, Gospels, Canons, Tracts, Kiss-pix, crosses, Kneelings, etc.

8thly, Their Imposition, and Persecution. 8thly, Imposition and persecution.
8thly, In it is Love Meekness. They violently impose their service, and
Ceremonies, not suffering the Dissenting Christians, to buy or sell;
persecuting them to confiscation and to Blood. They violently Impose their
Service, and Ceremonys, not suffering the Dissenters to buy, or sell, but
perse^^te them to confiscation and Blood. No forcible Imposition of Christ's
Service, no Persecution, corporal mulects, and punishments, upon Dissenters, or
gainsayers, but the exercise of all Love, Patience, and long suffering, with
Gentleness toward them*

FINIS.
A NARRATIVE OF THE SUFFERINGS OF THOMAS DELAVNE, For Writing, Printing and
Publishing a late Book, Called, A PLEA FOR THE NONCONFORMISTS, With some modest
Reflections thereon. Directed to Doctor Calamy; in Obedience to whose Call,
that Work was undertaken.

By THOMAS DELAVNE

Gal. 4. 16. Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth?

Eccl. 5. 8. If thou see the Oppression of the Poor, and Violent Perverting
of Judgment and Justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter; for he that
is higher then the highest regards.

1 Pet. 3. 14: If you Suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are ye; and be not a
fraid of their terrors, neither be ye troubled.

Printed for the Author. 1684.

A NARRATIVE OF THE SUFFERINGS OF THOMAS DELAVNE, etc.
SIr, I am concerned to acquaint you with my Case, and because possibly some
affairs that are more considerable to you, may have Diverted you from any
inquiry, respecting a Prisoner (whose compliance to you made him so) I will
give you a brief account of the whole, and entreat you to give me some
Resolution to some certain things which I shall propose; which if fairly
Resolved, will in my Opinion prove a considerable step to convince a great many
Scrupulous Consciences, or else give a check to Pulpit and Press-Chalenges; and
mollify the hearts of such as so ruinously and severely prosecute them for such
Scruples as are invincible by any other medium then what you direct to, viz.
Our only RULE of faith, the BIBLE.

My Case is briefly thus.
On the Twenty-ninth of November last, late in the Evening, I was Apprehended
by one Robert Stephens a Messenger to the Press; And by him carried before Sr.
Thomas Genner, now Recorder of London, who asked me diverse Questions, the most
material of which are mentioned in the following Letter sent afterward to him:
By the same Recorder I was sent to the Compter in Woodstreet, where I had most
wretched Accomondation; I was turned in amongst the Common-side Prisoners,
where a hard Bench was my Bed, and two Bricks my Pillow; and not suffered to
see some of my Acquaintance that were Prisoners there, as Dissenters.

Next Morning Mr. Stephens got me called to the Lodge, and to his praise be it
spoken, narrowly searched me for Papers, but found none for his purpose, and so
left me to be turned in again; but a little while after I was sent by a fresh
Warrant to Newgate. The Copy of which follows. To the Keeper of Newgate or his
Deputy.
London ss.
You are hereby required to receive into your Custody the Body of Thomas
Delaune, and him safely keep, until he shall be Delivered by due Course of
Law; for that it appeared before me, by his own Confession, that he is the
Author and Penman of a certain Pamphlet Entitled A Plea for the
Nonconformists, and has caused many hundred Sheets thereof to be Printed,
wherein are contained several Seditious and dangerous matters against the
Government, and for that he refused to find Sureties to appear at the next
Sessions of the Peace, to be held for the City of London at the Old-Bayly, and
to be of the good behavior in the mean time, and for your so doing this shall
be your Warrant. Given under my Hand and Seal, this XXXth day of November. Anno
Caroli Secundi nunc Angi, etc. 35. Annoq. Dom. 1683.

Tho. Jenner, Record.




By virtue of that warrant I was committed to Newgate, and Lodged amongst
Felons, whose horrid Company made a perfect representation of that horible
place which you describe when you mention Hell. But after two days and nights,
without any Refreshment, the unusualness of that society and place having
impaird my health, the constitution of which at the best is very Tender, and
Crazy, but I am now in the press-yard, a place of some sobriety, tho still a
Prison.

Some few days after I sent the following Letter to Sr. Thomas Jenner, and on
the Eighth of December by my Wife another to you, the words of the former were
these. To Sr. Thomas Jenner Knight, Recorder of London.
Sr. You know I was Committed Prisoner first to the Compter in Woodstreet, then
to Newgate, by your warrant. In my Mittimus it is said that I refused to give
Bail, which is a mistake, for being asked by you whether I would give Bail
then? I said I could not, it being so late at Night, when I had no opportunity
to send to such as would Bail me, and being asked whether I would give Bail the
next Morning? I say I knew not whether 'I could or not, because I was not
certain whether such to whom I might have made Application, would do it or not:
This was no Sullenness, nor Obstinacy in me, but what my Real apprehentions
then were. Some Friends of mine, Freemen of these City, went afterward to be
my Bail, but they were told you were not at home. They made thereupon an
application to Sr. William Turner, who referd them to you.

It is said in the Warrant that I confessed I was the Author of a Libel,
Entitled A Plea for the Nonconformists; wherein are contained things dangerous
to the Government, which thus much and no further is true: I confessed before
you that I delivered a Manuscript of my own writing to one John How, with that
Title, in order to be Printed, and that if the Print agreed with the Manuscript
I would own it, otherwise I could not, because the misplacing of a Stop, the
misprinting of a Lettor, or Syllable, or some other Errators of the Press,
would alter the sense even to contradiction of what was intended to be
discussed; which was not as my Indictment wors it, (in a form of aggravating
terms) but in order to a plain disquisition of such things as Dr. Calamy from
Pulpit and Press, invited Dissenters to inquire into, as you may see in his
Book, called A Discourse of a Scrupulous Conscience. There is nothing of
matters Relating to the Civil State, in what I am Charged with, for I am not
concerned with that, but if the Guid's of the Church (as Dr. Calamy calls the
Benificed men of the Church of England) will make public Chalenges, they
should receive Objections without punishing the Objectors, whose (Supposed)
Crime is only for obeying them; and that you know Sr. is disagreeable to
Justice.

If any thing I have done falls within the lash of English Laws, Fiat Justitia.
But I am satisfied I have done nothing in this point unbecoming an honest
Subject, a Scholar, a Gentleman, and which is worth all, a Christian. I Commit
the whole matter, with Respect to this Dispute, to that Supreme Legislator, who
is without Exception just, and who will judge all that are S ubordinate to him,
which is all from Sr. your Servant

Thomas Delaune.


To Dr. Benjamin Calamy, These,
Sr. In your Printed Cermon, Entitled Scrupulous Conscience; you know you gave
a fair invitation to such as differ from you, to examine what each party (viz.
Conformists and Nonconformists) say for themselves, with respect to the Rites
and Ceremonys which the Guides of the Church impose on their Members, and by
Penal Laws upon their Protestant fellow Pubjects, the Nonconformists: Without
doubt your call to such, pre-supposed a Reply, by which you expected that there
may be either an Opportunity given to you and your Brethren, to Rectify what
Scrupulous Consciences Misunderstand, or that there may be some Relaxation
procured of the severity they undergo, if their Dissent appears to be warranted
by that only Rule of Faith which Dr. Stillingfleet and other Eminent
Conformists call the BIBLE.

If you did not expect an Answer, or thought that none (for fear of the Act of
Uniformity, etc.) would make any return to your Call, what can a man of Reason
judge, but that it was a Florid Declamation, or a Triumphant Harangue, a mere
mockery and ensnareing of poor Scrupulous Consciences, when they must be so
muzled that they must not Exhibit the Causes of their Doubts. Sir you know
that it is unequal to Gag the Respondent, when the Oponents mo^th is at liberty;
or to Manacle the assaulted, when the Challenger Flourishes a Manacing Sword.

Upon that public Call of yours, I adventured to examine (with the most
diligent search I could make) what each of the said parties say for themselves,
and this not out of any Litigious principle (that Pruritus Disputandi) now too
fatally grown Epidemical; but to give such as are Concerned occasion to
investigate these disputed matters to the very foundation, to the clearing up
of truth in a juncture when it can never be more Seasonable. What was digested,
was intened to be sent you in a Manuscript with some modest Inferences and
inquiries, but upon Recollection I judged it would more Answer your End, viz.
Public Information, to have such Arguments, as are producible by the
Dissenters, as Public as the Invitation you gave them from Pulpit and Press:
It being equal that the Answer should be as spreading as the Objections.

I am far from the Vanity of pretending to be your Competitor in the faculties
of the Schools: I cannot judge of them any otherwise then as unserviceable to
Christian Religion, unless Tinctured with that Grace Derivative only from the
Sanctifier of all Gifts, which I hope you partake of.

I am one of the meanest of the Flock, yet not below the regards of the
Sheepherd of Souls, who is no Respecter of Persons, and whose Example such as
call themselves his Ambassadors ought to follow. And therefore though some who
pin their faith upon Canonical Sleeves, may censure me, for opposing (or if I
may use a Millitary metaphor, taking up the Gantlet against a man of your
figure) yet I can take up my satisfaction in this, that it was not Pride, nor a
popular Itch, much less the love of a Brison, influenced me to become an
Answerer of your Scrupulous Consciences.

I could heartily wish (as a mercy to these Nations) that all Religious
Differences were Composed by Evangilioal Rules, and that all who own the Name
of Christ, would serve him with one heart, and with one soul, and not tear each
other to pieces, which by consequence must expose them as a Prey to such as
gape for their Destruction.

If the Sanctions of Christ in the Old and New Testament ought to regulate the
modes of his Worship, and that we are under an indispensible Obligation to Obey
that Magna Charta of Heaven, then let us either quit the name of Christians, or
act according to the Supreme Lawgivers unrepealable Statutes, quite exploding
what is undeniably borrowed from the Pompilian or Pontifical Canons.

Some Sheets have been Printed off, of what I intended to present to you, but
the Messenger of the Press interupted the procedure, and got me Committed to
Newgate where I am now confined. There is nothing done, nor was intended to be
done, but a fair Examination of those things yonr Sermon invited to, which I
had thought (if esteemed Criminal) should fall rather within the Cognizance of
Divines, then the men of Law. For methinks the Pandects should not be the
Oracles of Religion; and that temporal Statutes should be so Civil as to give
precedence to the sacred Records.

It Is possible that inquirers into Religion will look upon it, as a
preposterous proceeding, and disagreeable to the Nature of the Christian Faith,
to force doubting persons by penaltyes to Embrace it; for that can never make
them good Converts, but Hypocrites. May they not say that it is a horid
disparagement to the self-evidencing Light of the Gospel, if it cannot stop the
mouths of the Gainsayers any other way then by the Rigid Execution of Acts of
State? I cannot find that Christ or his Disciples ever Church-cursed or
Newgated Scrupulous Consciences to Conformity.

My Confinement is for accepting your invitation to hear both sides, and I
appeal to you, whether it be Candid to punish me for Obeying a Guide of the
Church? I look upon you (in honor) Obliged to procure my Sheets (yet
unfinished) a public Pasport, and to me my Liberty: Else I must conclude it
unfair, and that if the irresistible Logic of Goals grows Al*amode, it will
make the Reformation some pretend to, suspected to be very little Meritorious
of theat Name.

Religion is a Sacred thing, and has been most horribly abused by such as have
superadded their own inventions, or those Traditional Fopperies, received from
our Deceived and Superstitious Ancestors. I am satisfied, you as well as Dr.
Stillingfleet will own (or there is no debating with you) that the Scripture is
our only Rule of Faith. If so, pray let your Scrupulous Consciences be won to
Conformity, by that. All Men are not of Equal Capacity to apprehend things
doubtful, for if they had been so, there had beed no necesity of Preachers;
and the Methods of convincing Men, is as plainly laid down in the Bible as any
thing there, viz. By plain demonstrative Arguments, meek and winning
Persuasions, not the Sylogisms of Prisons Pillories, etc.

I Beseech you in the fear of God, and as you will answer it to our great Lord
and Master Jesus Christ, that without respect to any other end then the good of
Souls (as the profession you take Obliges you to) that you would Treat
Scupulous Consciences as you would be dealt withal your self: If they have no
reason for their Dissent, and will without ground suffer Imprisonments, with
all the Ruinous Concomitants of so dismal a Circumstance; it is certain that
Bedlam is more fit for them, then such places of Confinement as are appointed
for men in their wits; and by consequence it is pity to be so severe with such
Simpletons. But if you will allow them any Modicum of Reason, then I appeal to
all the Guid's of the Church, whether it be not more consonant to the precepts
of our Sovereign Legislator, to confute them by his Rules, rather then by such
Coercive methods which his Majesty judged Ineffectual in his Declaration of
indulgence March 1672?

As Truth seeks no Corners nor Suborners, and as Real Beauty will not be
beholden to the Artificial dawbings of a Pencil, so the Christian Religion
(where professed in its naked Simplicity) needs no other argument to beget
Proselites then its own Lovely and Illustrious Features, altogether plain,
honest, and every way Amiable, void of all Meretricious Gawdery, or that
Majestical Pomp which pleases only the External Sense.

I have no malignity against any Person whatsoever, much less against your
Church, or any of its Members; all I desire is, that Scrupulous Consciences,
who trouble not the peace of the Nation, should be dealt withal (at least) as
weak Brethren, according to Romans 14. 1. and not Ruined by Penaltys for not
Swallowing what is imposed under the notion of Decency and Order, tho Excentrick
to the Scheme we have of it in our only Rule of Faith. Sr. I entreat you to
excuse this Trouble from a Stranger who would fain be convinced by something
more like Divinity then Negate, where any Message from you shall be welcome, to

Your Humble Servant Thomas Delaune.
From the Press-yand Newgate the 8 th of December. 1683.



To this Letter, Delivered by my Wife, I received an Answer to this effect,
That if I had been Imprisoned upon the account of Answering your Book, you
would do me any kindness that became you: But not hearing from you, I sent the
following Letter by my Wife. January Die Nono, 1683. Reverende Vir;
QVod semel atque iter^m Concionatus eras, Typisque mandaveras de Dubitanti
Conscientia, quotquot Diversae sint sententiae circa quosdam Ritus ac
Ceremonias, ad utriusque partis Rations Examinandas, satis public vocitaverat.

Tacentibus alijs, in illa re, tibi parebam; non litigand Causa (imparnim est
Congressus inter te, tantum virum and me tantillum) sed uthujus-modi Litem
adimendi, sicuti praeceperas, adhibeatur occasio.

Si propter tale (duntaxat) obsequium, me paenas daturum, nescio quot quibusve
modis, decretum fuerit; Nunquid nova vincendi ratio, sacris paginis inaudita,
apud quosdam Antesignanos exoritur?

Quid de his rebus sentiendum esse videatur, ex sacro Codice ac probatis
Scriptoribus disquirere proposui, (te Cunctos vaciliantes tam acriter
invitante) ex illo Lumine semitarum, ex lla Lucerna (Psalm. 119. 105.) Rations
aliquot hauseraml adversus varios ac Multiplices Errores, qui in Ecclesiant
Irrepserunt.

Easola de causa usque ad Carcerem, ubi nihil amabile est, adactus sum. Vtrum
Istiusmodi Argumenta valuerint ad vestrae Concienis (...) probandas sub Judice
Supremo lis sit. Anve tali modo ullus ex dubitantibus in spirituale Cogi
potuerit, Ovile, Judex esto.

Nihil adversus Regiam Majestatem, nihil de Regimine Civili, nihil contra
Monarchiae pacem asseritur. De Rituum ac Ceremoniarum origin, deque rebus quae
specie veritatis, Etiamsi parum recte, in dubitantes Objiciuntur, sola
dissertatioest.

Quid de me Curia decreverit nescio. Fiat summi Patris Voluntas, Vniversis qui
salutis humanae largitorem secundum verbum ejus Colunt Pacem internam ac
externam in hoc, ae^ernamque in futuro seculo Precatur.

Thomas De Laune.
Vt Responsumaliquod, quod Theologum decet per dilectiss^mam meam Conjugem, uti
promisisti remittas, obse^ro.






The English of which is thus. January the 9th 1683. Reverend Sir.
What you once and again preached and then printed, respecting a Doubtful
Conscience, has loudly enough called all such as were Dissatisfied about some
Rites and Ceremonys, to Examine the Reasons on both sides.

Others being silent I obeyed you in that particular, not merely to wrangle
(for the Encounter is unequal, betwixt a Man so Eminent as you are, and so mean
a Person as I am) but that an occassion may be given, in compliance to what you
desired to conclude Controversys of this nature.

If merely for such Obedience I must be punished I know not how, nor in what
manner, is there not a new way of conquering [Scrupulous Consciences] unheard
of in the Holy Scriptures, Started by some certain Ringleaders?

I purposed from Holy Writ and approved Writers, to Examine what we ought to
judge of these things. From that light of our paths, from that Lamhorn, Psalm.
119. 105. I gathered some Reasons against those various and multiplied Errors
which have crept into the Church.

For that only thing am I brought to a Prison, where there is nothing amiable.

Whether Arguments of that kind will prevail to prove the Suppositions in your
Sermon, Let the Supreme Judge Determine.

Or whether any of the doubting persons can that way be Compelled into the
Spiritual Sheepfold, judge you?

There Is nothing against the Kings Majesty, nothing about the Civil Government,
nothing against the Peace of this Monarchy, there asserted.

The only dispute is about the original of Rites and Ceremonys, and of some
things which under a show of Truth, though not Righteously, are charged upon
Doubting persons.

What the Court will do with me I know not, the will of the Supreme Father be
done. Inward and outward peace in this, and Everlasting Peace in the World to
come, to all such as worship the Savior of mankind according to his word, is
Prayed for, by.

THO. DELAUNE.
I Desire you to Return me some Answer becoming a Divine, by my Beloved Wife,
as you have promised.






To this Letter you answered by word of Mouth to my Wife, (for I had no answer
in writing,) that you looked upon your self Vnconcerned, as not being mentioned
in the sheets you saw with the Recorder: To satisfy which doubt I sent you a
Third Letter, with the First sheet of the Book I am imprisoned for; which was a
plain Demonstration that it was an answer to your Call, you know the Letter was
thus. January the 14th. 1683. Sir,
Whereas, in Answer to my two Letters you said to my Wife, that my Papers no
way concerned you, viz. Such as I am indicted for; To satisfy you, with respect
to that matter, I here send you the first Sheet, and leave you to consider,
whether in pure generousity you are not obliged to procure a Prisoner (whose
Obedience to you made him so) his liberty. I am Sir.

your humble servant, THO. DELAUNE.




I appeal to your Consience, whether I had not some reason to expect some
return to these Applications?

But I had none to any purpose, and that too but in a few words by my wife: I
had some thoughts that you would have performed the Office of a Divine, in
visiting me in my place of Confinement; either to Argue me out of my Doubts,
which your promised SCRIPTURE and REASON, not a Mittimus and Newgate could
easily do. To the former I can yield -- To the latter, it seems, I must -- This
is a severe kind of Logic, and will probably dispute me out of this World, as
it did Mr. Bampfield and Mr. Ralphson lately, who were my dear and excellent
Companions in Trouble -- and whose absence I cannot but bemoan, as having lost
in them a Society that was truly pious, truly sweet, and truly amiable: But I
hope the God of mercy will supply the want, by a more immediate influence of
Comfort, then what can be obtained at second hand.

On the tenth of December two Bills were found against Mr. Ralphson and me, by
the Grand Jury of London, whose Names are as follows. Tho. Vernon. Tho.
Goddard. Will. Gore. Will. Wills. Rand. Manning. John Martin. Richard Hows.
Tho. Hodges. Joseph Woolhead. Josias Ewth. John Pain. William Fazakerly. Jos.
Sparrow. Joh. Reendal. David Pool. Ri. Beauchamp. Rob. Minories.


On the 13 th day of the same Month, we were called to the Sessions House in
the Old-Bayly; And then our Indictments were read in English, to which we
pleaded not Guilty. We desired Copies of the said Indictments, and time to make
our Defense till next Sessions; which the Court after some pause granted. The
substance of the Indictment against me was thus -- Iuratores pro Domino Rege
supar Sacram suum presentant quod. Tho Delaune nuper Delondon Gener ligeanc su,
etc. In plain English thus, as to the material part of it.

The Jurors for our Lord the King, upon their Oath Present, that Thomas Delaune
late of London Gent. Not regarding his due Allegiance, but contriving and
intending to disquiet and disturb the peace and common Tranquillity of this
Kingdom of England, etc. To bring the said Lord the King into the greatest hate
and contempt of his Subjects -- Machinating and farther intending to move stir
up and procure Sedition and Rebellion, and to disparage and Scandalize the Book
of Common Prayer, etc.

On the 30th day of November in the 35th of the King, at London in the parish
of St. Botolph without Bishops Gate, in the Ward of Bishops-Gate aforesaid; by
Force and Arms, etc. Unlawfully, Seditiously and Maliciously, did Write,
Print, and Publish, and Caused to be Written, Printed and Published, a certain
False, Seditious and Scandalous Libel, of and concerning the said Lord the
King, and the Book of Common Prayer, aforesaid, Entitled a Plea for the
NONCONFORMISTS.

In which said Libel are contained these false, Fictions, and Scandalous
sentences following, viz.

The Church of Rome and England also, are great Transgressors, to presume to
vary from Christ's precept, in altering or adding to the form of words expressed
by Christ, in this 11 of Luke. for so they have done: They say forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them who trespass against us; when there are nosuch
words in Christ prayer, his words are, forgive us our Sins or Debts, for we
also forgive every one that is indebted to us, and (says the Indictment again)
in another part of the said Libell are contained these false, Fictions,
Seditious, and scandalous Sentences following, viz. And may we not say that in
these following particulars we do Symbolize with Idolatrous Rome herein? First,
by injoyning and imposing this (here the Indictment makes an Innuendo) viz.
Meaning the Book of Common Prayer aforesaid) as a set form as they do with
penaltys, contrary to the Scripture. Secondly, by an often Repetition of the
same form in the same exercise three or or four times at least, in so much,
that in Cathedral Churches it is said or sung ten or twelve times a day,
contrary to Christ's Express words, that when we pray, we do not make vain
Repetitions as the Heathens do, for they think they shall be heard for their
much Speaking. Thirdly, by injoyning the whole congregation, Men and Women, to
repeat the same after the Priest, though no such Directions by Christ. Nay he
forbids Women to pray or prophecy in the Church. Fourthly, in Singing this
Prayer in the Cathedrals by Responses of People, without the least warrant from
Christ for such Song-praying [Then the Indictment ends with a fearful
Aggravation, that is] in contempt of the King, and to the evil and most
pernicious example of all such other Dlinquents in the like case, and against
the peace of the said Lord now King, his Crown and Dignity, etc.

The Copy of the Indictment signed Wagstaffe.


On the 16 th of January we were called again to the Sessions House, but there
being some Trials that proved very tedious, we were not brought on.

The next day we were called to the outter Bar, after the attendance of diverse
hours in a place not very lovely, and in the sharpest Winter that you have
known, which I likely proved the orignal of that indisposition which carried my
two friends beyond the Jurisdiction of Sessions, Bale-Docks, or Press-yards, to
a glorious mansion of rest.

Then a Jury was sworn to pass upon us, whose names were. James Wood. James
Smith. Bernerd Mynn. Thomas Jenny. Kenelme Smith. Matthew Walker. Thomas
Medcalf. John Harbing. Samuel Seal. Laurence Weld. John Callow. Richard
Johnson.


I desired my Indictment should be read in Latin, which was done. Then the
Gentlemen of Law, aggravated things with there usual Rethorick -- one of them,
(I think the Attorney General) was pleased to say that the Prisoner that stood
there before (for Mr. Raphson was tried before me) did labor to undermine the
state, and that man (meaning me) would undermine the Church: So that to Incence
the Jury against us, he said, here is CHURCH and STATE struck at. Which Sr. was
very improbable to be true, for it is wonderful that any Church or State so
potent as this is, should fear two such underminers, as that Extravagant
harangue termed us. For my part I cannot be righteously charged with any attemp
against either, unless my obedience to you, be so: And then if I be guilty, you
that tempted me to it, can never prove your self innocent.

Being desired to speak what I had to say for my self, I spoke the following
words, which one that knew me took in Shorthand, though without my knowledge.

My Lord, Last Sessions I pleaded not Guilty, that is not Guilty Modo et forma,
for I designed not vi et Armis, to raise Rebellion, Sedition, etc. I detest
such things; he that Swears in that Respect against me, must be perjured -- The
inst ances in the Indictment relate to no such thing. My Lord, I pray you to
trouble no Witnesses about me, I will not prevaricate. I have written some Papers
Entitled A Plea for the Nonconformists, not Instigated by the feigned
formalitys in the Indictment; but it was at the Loud Challenge of Dr. Calamy,
one of the Kings Chaplains, in his Discourse about a Scrupulous Consciences,
Dedicated to your Lordship, wherein he called upon doubting Persons to examine
what could be said on both sides, which I did; Now since public Chalenges are
made to be Answered; to punish me for Obeying a Guide of the Church, is hard,
very hard.

I desire that the entire Paragraphs may be read, from which the Crimes Charged
against me are inferred. If fragments only be produced against me, from which no
perfect sense can be deduced; I shall be unfairly dealt with: The Coherence of
Sense in a Continued Discourse, not Scraps and Broken-pieces of Sentences, can
demonstrate the Scope of an Argument.

If what I have written be True, it is no Crime, unless Truth be made a Crime;
if false, let Dr. Calamy, or any of the Guides of your Church Confute me [as he
promised, p. 25. of his Sermon aforesaid] by good Scripture and good Reason,
then I Will submit. If the latter Method be not taken, (I must Repeat it) it is
very hard, my Lord, it is very hard.

Herethe chief Justice interupted me, addressing himself to the Jury, and
expounded that part of the Indictment which I excepted against, saying, it was
only for forms sake, and that any breach of the peace in the sense of the Law,
may be said to be vi and Armis, by force and arms, with some other expressions
to that purpose -- To the Latter which I acknowledged, he said, after a Torrent
of Aggravations, Gentlemen, if you believe that man (pointing to me) viz. In
what I had confessed in writing the Nonconformists Plea, you must find him
Guilty, viz. of the whole Indictment. And which they readily did accordingly.

The next day, (viz.) the 18 th, I received my Sentence. The very same with Mr.
Ralphson, viz. (As it is recorded.) Ad General. Quarterial. Session. Pacis Dom.
Regis tent. pro Civitat. London per Adjornament. apud Justice Hall in le
Old-Bayly London, die Mercurii Scil. Decimo Sexto die January, Anno. R. Regis
Caroli Secundi nunc Angl. etc. 35.

Thomas Delaune Convict pro Illicite Scribend. Imprimend, et publicand. Libel.
Seditios. dert concernen. librum Communis praecationis. Fin. 100. Marc. Et
Committit, etc. Et ulterius quousque Inven. bon. de se been gerend. per spacium
Vnius Anni Integri extunc prox. Sequen. Et quod libel. seditios. cum igne
Combust. Sint Apud Excambium Regal. In London. Et si Del. Sol. 6S.

Wagstaffe.


Thomas Delaune, Find 100 Marks, and to be kept Prisoner, etc. [which etc. they
interpret till he pay his Fine] and to find good Security for his good
behavior for one whole year after-wards, and that the said Books, and
seditious Libels by him published, shall be burnt with not with water you must
note.
Fire, before the Royal Exchange in London. And if he be discharged to pay To
the Hangman for the Faggots I suppose.
six Shillings.

Signed Wagstaffe.




The Recorder asked me some questions then, (viz.) Whether I was in Orders? I
told him I was never in any Ecclesiastical Orders, nor never Preached among any
People. That I was bred a Scholar, and had been a Schoolmaster, and kept a
Grammar School till forced from it by the present prosecutions, etc.

The Court told both Mr. Ralphson and me, that in respect to our Education, as
Scholars, we should not be Pillory'd, though ('it was said) we deserved it.

We were sent back to our place of Confinement, and the next Execution day, our
Books were burnt, as the Sentence ordered it, WITH FIRE in the place aforesaid,
and we continue here; but since I writ this, Mr. Ralphson had a Supersedeas by
Death to a better place.

Thus Sir, you have a series of my Circumstances; I will make no Complaints of
the usage I had, when forced, as aforesaid, to Lodge amongst a Rabble of
wretches, whose society seemed to me to be a Hell upon Earth, as before; nor of
my other hardships, as Confinement, loss of Employment, loss of Health, etc.
But if you have any sense of Humanity in you, you will Recollect your self, and
procure me my Freedom, (being not able to pay the Fine) lost by obedience to
your public Call. Sir, I must tell you plainly, that you discovered in your
very dedication to Sr. Gorge Jefferies, now chief Justice, a kind of Doubt, to
say no more, Respecting your Cause.

You say there (P. 2. Ep. Ded.) How many it (viz. your Sermon) will anger and
displease, I am not at all concerned, and tho I may be thought by some ill
advised in publishing such a Sermon, yet, every one of your Mind.
will commend and justify my discretion in prefixing your name before it: For so
great an awe have Meaning Protestant Dissenters
the Enemies of our Church and Government of your Loyalty and Fidelity to both,
that they will Not dare Loudly to condemn what you are pleased to Protect, they
will be justly Afraid of Quarrelling with me, when they know I have Engaged
you on my side.

From these Expressions I must conclude (If you are in earnest) that you care
not how much you offend your weak Brother. The Apostle Paul was of another
mind, Romans 15. 1. etc. We then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmitys of
the weak, and not to please our selves; let every one of us please his
Neighbor for his good to Edification. Pray consider this, and what follows in
the same Chapter: And 1 Cor. 8. 12. But when you sin so against the Brethren
and wound their weak Consciences, ye sin against Christ. ver. 13. Wherefore if
meat make my Bro her to offend, I will eat no flesh while the World stands,
lest I make my Brother to offend: And 1 These. 5. 14. the same Evangelical
Doctor, exhorts you, To Comfort the feeble minded, Support the weak, and to be
patient toward all men. And Gal. 6. 1. To restore the faulty in the Spirit of
Meekness.

What a Superlative, what a true Christian Compliance is here! Worth the
imitation of the Guides of your Church! This Apostle would rather make a
perpetual fast from flesh, then offend his Weak Brother. And I am apt to think
no flourishes of Pulpit-Rhetorick ever dropped from him, to grieve his Weak
Brethren, and that he never shrouded his writings, or preachings, under the
terrible Patronage of such men as you Represent Sr. Gorge Jefferies to be. I
have a kind of fancy that your said Patron, now Lord Chief Justice, as he is a
Gentleman in Eminent place, and of a piercing Judgment, Srong Memory, and of
fluent Oratory, could not but look through the Superficial Addresses of that
Dedication.

In the second place, a Man so dignified as he is, must certainly take it as an
affront to his title of Lord Chief Justice, that you should say that men will
be Justly afraid of quarrelling with you, when they know you have Engaged him
on your side. That same word [Affraid] denotes a Championlike Courage in you;
that no body should dare to come near you; and withal, a Reflection on the
justice of your Patron, that he will take your part Right or Wrong. As to the
word [Quarrelling] I know no body that has assaulted you in any more perilous
Attaque, then in Examining the Merits of the Cause as you Preached, and by the
same Sermon (transfigur'd from the Press) invited men to do.

No Force and Arms were used against you by me, but Pen, Ink and a few Papers.
The Indictment makes this a very formidable kind of Artillery.

But to bring the matter a little closer, I must desire you will please to take
notice of this Heinous Charge given in against me, and how made good in the
Indictment, and how severely handled both by the Juryes and Court thereupon.

The charge, as you have heard, is for intending to disturb the Public Peace,
To bring the King into the greatest Hate and Contempt of his Subjects, to stir
up and procure Sedition and Rebellion: a high and Heinous Charge indeed! But
how is this made good? viz. By my disparaging the Book of Common Prayer. But
how does that appear? viz. By the force of Arms used Unlawfully, Seditiously,
and Maliciously, to Write, Print and Publish a Seditious and Scandalous Libel,
Concerning our Lord the King and the Book of Common Prayer, Entitled A Plea
for the Nonconformists. But wherein does it appear by any thing which is writ
in that Book, that this Heinous Charge is made good? viz. By their pregnant
instances, produced out of the Book expressed in the Indictment.

The which therefore, since we must suppose they are the most Heinous and
Dangerous passages to be found therein, and most proper and significant to make
good the Charge, I shall for your information, and that you may the better
judge how the Charge is proved against me, give you the entire paragraph out of
which the instances were picked, which I must beg the justice of you to Read;
and which I could not with all my Entreatys Obtain of the Court, tho so
necessary (as you will find) to come to the right sense, (and for greater
Illustration; I shall distinguish the instances of the Indictment in a
different Character) know therefore that I having (in the Plea for the
Nonconformists) from p. 14. at your desire, been giving an account what the
Nonconformists Answer to that great Objection; that all things they scruple in
the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, are not Popish Novelties, but of
Primitive Antiquity, (as you say) and having distinctly gone through most of
them, giving their Reasons why they are not of Primitive Antiquity, but of
Popish Novelty, and containd in the Mass Book -- This Objection came to be
started, p. 40. But what do you say to the Lords Prayer? must we forbear that
too, because we find it in the Mass Book; tho so publicly enjoined by Christ
to use it, as a stinted form, Luke 11. 2. That when we pray, we should say, Our
Father, etc.? To which the Nonconformists say, that it is a great mistake to
suppose that Christ hereby in this Scripture, has appointed this to be a set
form, to be prayed by all in these prescript words, when we pray unto God, for
then it would be unlawful to use any other words, then these herein expressed,
in our prayers, and that the Disciples and Apostles sinned in using other words
in those their prayers we read of in Scripture, and so does the Church of
England, in forming so many Collects and Prayers; And. p. 41. 42.

Secondly, The Church of Rome and England are great Transgressors, to presume
to vary from Christ precepts, in altering or adding Indictment.
to the form of words expressed by Christ in this 11 Luke. For so they have
done, they say, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them who Trespass
against us, when there are no such words in Christ's Prayer, his words are,
forgive us our Sins, our Debts opheilemata for we also forgive every one that
is Indebted to us. Which, says the Indictment, are false, sictious, and
scandalous sentences, but it shows not wherein.

And also the Doxology, which is not in this Prayer in Lake 11. [viz. For thine
is the Kingdom and the Power and the Glory for ever and ever, Amen.] But you will
say, as to the Doxology, it is expressed by Christ at the end of the same
prayer in his Sermon on the Mount, Mat. 6. It is very True, it is so, where he
delivers this prayer not as a set form, but a pattern of prayer: After this
manner Pray ye hovto's -- to this purpose, and which is an Explication of what
he says, Luke 11. 2. when you pray, say, Our Father etc. That is, after this
manner, and which can only be a warrant to the; Church of England, or any
other, to make such alterations Christ no more intending to tie the Disciple
who desired to be instructed how to pray, to this form of words (nor any other
Disciple) then he did the twelve Disciples when he sent them out to Preach with
thisword of Command, Math. 10. 7. Preach, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand; that they should thereby be tied to those very words in their Preaching
(and Preach nothing else) but as this was given as a Text or Theme to Preach
by, so the other to pray by: The Disciple who proposes the question, Verse. 1.
Desires that they may be taught to pray as John taught his Disciples; but such
a set form of Prayer we find not that John in his Teachings gave to his
Disciples, neither do we find that any of Christ's Disciples or Apostles did
pray this very prayer, to which our Expositors do agree.

Grotivs, says on Luke the 11. 2. That Christ herein Teaches us a Compendium
of those things we are to pray for; at that time (says he) they were not bound
to the use of so may Words and Syllables: As also Tertullian, Cyprian,
Musculus, Cornelius Alapide: and Austin himself (upon the place) who says
Liberum est, it is free for us to ask the same thing in the Lords Prayer, Aliis
atque aliis verbis, sometime one way, and sometimes another.

Does not Paul tell us expressly, he knew not what to pray for, but as the
Spirit gave him utterance, Romans 8. But he did know what to pray for if this was
to be his prescript form.

Tertullian says, they prayed Sine Monitore, without a Monitor (or
Common Prayer Book) and Socrates tells us that among all the Christians of that
age scarce two were to befound that used the same words in Prayer, Chrysostom
on Romans 8. Homil. 14. says, With other gifts they had the gift of Prayer,
which was also called the Spirit, but he who had the gift, did pray for the
whole multitude, for that was Expedient unto the Church, and also did instruct
others to Pray.

And though we find neither Christ, nor his Apostles, impose this or any other
form of Prayer to be used by us (but that we Pray in the Spirit, and Praise in
the Spirits; and that God being a Spirit, seeks and accepts such
worshipers) yet we find the Popes and their Councils imposing this and other
Lyturgical forms.

The Council of Toledo, Anno. 618. Decreed in the Ninth Canon, that every day
both in public and private worship, none of the Clergy omit the Lords Prayer,
under pain of Deposition; since (say they) Christ has prescribed this, saying,
When you pray say, Our Father, etc. And how formally and carnally, has the
Paternoster been muttered over by the superstitious Papists, ever since.

And may we not enquire, whether in the following particulars we do not
Symbolize with the Romish worship herein, which the Indictment injuriously
words thus.

And may we not say that in these following particulars [for may we not enquire
whether in the following particulars] we do Symbolize with Idolatrous Rome
herein] "For we do not Symbolize with the Romish herein,] [meaning] says the
indictment with an Innuendo] the Book of Common Prayer, whereas it only relates
to the Lords prayer.

First. By enjoining and imposing this, as a set form, without the Sanction of
any sacred Text to warant it, [which the Indictment words, contrary to the
Scriptures]

Secondly. By an often repetition of the same form in the same exercise, three
or four times at least, insomuch that in Cathedral Services, it is said, or
sung, ten or twelve times in a day, contrary to Christ's express words, that
when we pray, we should not make vain repetitions as the Heathens do, for they
think they shall he heard for their much speaking, Mat. 6. 7.

Thirdly. By enjoining the whole Congregation, both men and women, to repeat
the same after the Priest, tho no such direction by Christ; nay he forbids
women to pray, or Prophecy, in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 34. etc.

Fourthly. In singing this prayer in Cathedralls by Responses of Priests and
People, with music, without the least Divine Authority for such Song-Praying.

Which the indictment says are fictions, seditious, and scandalous sentences
(but show not wherein,) Thus have you the whole paragraph and what is picked
out of it, to make good the charge; whereby you will easily discern,

1 Query.
Whether I have done otherwise therein then given you at your Call, a true and
modest account of the Nonconformists Arguments, why the Lords Prayer is not a
stinted set form of Prayer as supposed, but a pattern to pray by, which is done
by several Arguments, viz.

1. From the practices of both Churches, Rome and England, who have both
altered and added to it, which they ought not to have done (no not so much as
one Syllable) if so intended by Christ.

2ly, From the practices of the Ancients, and Opinions of many Learned
Commentators upon the place.

3ly, Because neither Christ nor his Apostles have so enjoined and practiced it
as a stinted form.

4ly, Because the Church of Rome, without Scripture Authority, have so impose
and practiced it; and therefore are those Queries, Whether for us so to impose
it with penaltys, and to make often Repetitions of it, with Responses of Priest
and People, and to sing it with Music, is not without Scripture warrant, and a
Symbolizing with Rome therein? and where is the Sedition, Rebellion, breaking
the Public peace by force, and Arms in all this?

2 Query.
2ly, Whether the picking out part, and leaving out the greater part, changing
of words, and inverting of sense, is not most Injurious dealing? for what is it
not, which may not be made of any man's sayings and writings, if such a liberty
may be taken? For may it not with such a latitude be proved by Scripture, that
there is no God, or any such Blasphemy or Immorallity?

3 Query.
3ly, Whether the Grand Jury, in honesty and good Conscience, could find this
Bill upon their Oaths, and the Petty Jury cast me upon it, and the Court past
Sentence upon me thereupon, without admitting the whole Paragraph to be Read,
and Considered, as so was earnestly desired by me?

4 Query.
4ly, If this writing of mine, was only occasioned and drawn forth at you Call,
as your Book evidenceth, and as declared to the Court; then does not that
heinous Charge of a Malicious and Seditious contriving, intending, and
Machinating Sedition, and Rebellion, and violating Public peace, fall to the
Ground?

5 ly. If this part of the Nonconformists Plea be true, where is the Crime?
Must I be made guilty, and punished for speaking the Truth? And if you were so
satisfied, why did not you Interpose to prevent a precipitate Sentence and
Verdict, and preserve an Innocent person? If it appeared otherwise to you, Why
did you not by word and writing endeavor my Conviction, and show me my Error,
and Mistake before the Sessions, that I might publicly, have owned and taken
the Shame, as my three Letters with so much Importunity press't upon you; and
that I was neither Obstinate, nor Incorrigible, you have again and again
under my hand? And what an open Ear I had to receive conviction from Reason and
Scripture, the Mediums you proposed to Treat a Scrupulous Conscience with, and
thereby to have acquitted your self from being a Decoy to inveagle into the
Snare, and then leave them, but wholly to reject both, and silently to suffer me
to be crushed, is worse dealing, and less Charity then the Guides of the Church
put forth in Q. Marys days, who failed not of Prison visits and endeavors, to
convice the Heretics [as they called them] before they were delivered to the
Secular Powers for Destruction.

6. Query.
6ly, Whether from this Liberty that is taken in Indictments (as in Chancery
Bills) to say the worst of things which may be said against any, and assign the
matter of fact to prove it foreign thereto, yet that the Jurys finding the
matter of fact, must render a man Guilty of the whole Indictment, both matter
and form, seems very hard, and no other then turning Judgment into Wormwood
and Hemlock, and a bringing Legal proceeding, into great contempt?

For instance, if a man is charged in an Indictment that he contrary to his
Allegiance, and not having the fear of God before his Eyes, but being moved by
the Instigation of the Devil, did such a day, in such a place, bring the King
into greatest Hate and Contempt amongst his Subjects, and did most Maliciously
and Seditiously, etc. against the Public peace, by force and Arms, Read a
Chapter in the Bible in English before several People (which was Crime enough
heretofore, however it is now) that the proving and confessing the matter of
fact, (or any of the like nature) as foreign from the Crimes urged, must
according to our Court-proceedings, bring him in Guilty of the whole
Indictment, in order to be senetnced accordingly.

But ought not a Jury before they bring in their verdict upon Oath, as they
would acquit themselves of the horid sin of perjury, Examine and have
sufficient pooof to make good those Luxuriant Cutthroat forms? And whether
such matter of fact, either by the Righteous Law of God and Man, can render a
man Culpable of so Heinous a charge of Malice, Sedition, Rebellion, bringing
the King into Hatred and Contempt, breaking the Public peace by force and
arms, before they make him Guilty thereof, and cause him to be punished for the
same?

Thus Sr. you have a naked account of my Case, and if you Please, or any other
of the Church Guides, to examine the respective Circumstances it, of or apply
that sovereign Medium of good Scripture and good Reason to Convince me, you or
they will satisfy the world that ye are honest Guides of the Church, and reduce
many to your Communion, as well as*

Your humble servant, Thomas De-Laune.


Candid Reader;
THe Absen^^ of the Author, and his not Revising the Sheets, has occasioned
some literal Escapes, and some few Errors injurious to the Sense, which you are
desired to excuse and amend; yet they are not so Intolerable, but that an
accurate Peruser will find them to be the Mistakes of the Press, not the Author
s.

ERRATA.
Page 2 line 1 read pertly for party. p 6 l 31 r Revelling f Reviling. p 49 l 4
^ with f wit. p 51 l 10 r present for cresent. p 56 l 36 r Ancient f Cntient. p
57 l (...) r Solicitation, l 12 r Schism, l 15 r were f whereby. p 58 l 26 r
proceeding* (...) l 13 r Host f House, l 16 r says, l 21 r Dose. l 23 r ought.
p 64 l 17 r Hamburou^^^ l 22 r been, l 25 r Brentjus. p 65 l 4 r Altar, l 30 r
there was much f much, l 39 ^ Gretseras f Great Ceras. p 66 l 3 r Cornelius f
Cornelpis, and Anicrisis for Anicri^^^ p 67 l 12 r better f beet. p 68 l 11 r
enjoined f enjoyed. p 78 l 17 r page 73 f 71, and l 26 r p. 66, 67, 68, for 64,
65, 66. p 80 l 21 read the Merits for to Merits.

In the NARRATIVE.
Page 2 line 16 read by for die. p 5 l 17 r here f here is, p 22 l 32 r public, l
49 (...) Luxuriant, l 48 r of it for.


