A DECLARATION OF THE Lords, and Gentry, And others of the Provinces of
Lemster, and Munster, in the Realm of Ireland, of their intenti ons toward the
English and Scottish Protestants, inhabiting in that Kingdom, with a most
perni tious Oath which they would have them take, if to live amongst them,
tending in effect to make all Papists:

With an Order of the late Lords Justices of Ireland, Sir John Burlase, and Sir
Henry Tichbourne, and Counsel of Ireland, inhibiting the taking the solemn
League and Covenant, for Reformation and defense of Religion, the honor and
happiness of the King, and the peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland.

With a Proclamation by them set forth, according to the aforesaid ORDER:

With the Copy of a Letter written by the direction of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, in the Parliament of that Kingdom Assembled, to several Commanders
and Officers of his Majesty's Army, and others in the Kingdom of Ireland,
requiring obedience to the said Proclamation, with the substance of an Oath
agreed upon lately at Dublin in Ireland, against the taking of the solemn
League and Covenant.

Published according to Order.

Printed by R.W. for Christopher Meredith. 1644.

A Declaration of the Lords, Gentry, and others of the Province of Lemster, and
Munster of their intentions toward the English, and Scottish Protestants
inhabiting in this Kingdom.
WHereas we are informed, that it is generally conceived and believed, by the
English and Scottish Protestants, Inhabitants of this Kingdom, that we the
Lords, Gentry, and others of the said Kingdom, have taken Arms, and raised
forces for the extirpating, and banishing them out of this Kingdom, thereby to
acquire to our selves their goods and estates, we therefore desire to be
rightly understood, for we hereby delare that we never consented nor intended,
nor never will intend nor condescend to any such act, but do utterly disclaim
therein, but that each man known to be a moderate conformable Protestant, may
as well as the Roman Catholic respectively, and enjoy their freedom of their
own Religion, and peaceably, and quietly enjoy their own estates, so far
forth as they or any of them shall join with us in this act following:

I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, and all the Angels and Saints in
heaven, and by the contents of this Bible, promise, vow, swear, and protest to
bear faith and true Alleagiance to our Sovereign Lord King Charles, and the
heirs and successors of his body begotten, and will defend him and them as far
as I may with my life, power and estate, against all persons that shall attempt
any thing against his or their persons, honors, estates, or dignities, and
that I will in exposing my self, power and estate, join with the Irish Army, or
any other, to recover his Royal prerogatives forcibly wrested from him by the
Puritans in the houses of Parliament in England, and to maintain the same
against all others that shall directly, or indirectly endeavor to suppress,
or do any act contrary to real government, as also to maintain Episcopal
jurisdictions, and the lawfulness thereof, in the Church power, privileges of
Prelates, the lawful rights and privileges of the Subjects, and I will do no
act or thing directly, or indirectly to prejudice the public exercise of the
Roman Catholic Religion in any of his Majesty's dominions, and that I will
join with, and be assisting to the members in the Common weal, for redress to
be had of the grievances and pressures thereof in such manner and form as
shall be thought fit by a lawful parliament, and to my power, and as far as I
may, I will oppose and bring to condign punishment even to the loss of life
and Liberty, and estate all such as shall either by force or practice,
Councels, Plots, Conspiracies, or otherwise do, or attempt any thing to the
contrary of any Article, Clause, or thing in this present Oath, Vow, and
Protestation contained, and neither for hope of reward or fear of punishment,
nor any respect whatsoever, shall relinquish this Oath and Protestation: So
help you God.

This Declaration, and Oath was entered in the Counsel Book Kilking, and this
is a true Copy thereof, witness my hand this ninth of May, 1644. Hierome
Greenc. Cler. Counsel Kilking.

By the Lords Justices and Counsel.
John Burlase, Henry Tichburne.

Whereas we have lately seen a Printed Paper entitled a Solemn League and
Covenant for Reformation, and defense of Religion, the honor, and happiness
of the King, and the Peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, which seems to have been Printed at London on the 9. of
October, 1643. And forasmuch, as in the said League and Covenant there are
diverse things contained not only tending to a seditious combination against
his Majesty but also contrary to the principal Laws of this Kingdom, no oath
ought to be tendered to, or taken by any person or persons whatsoever in this
Kingdom, but before a Judge or other person thereunto Lawfully authorized by
his Majesty, as for that the said League and Covenant is now endeavored to be
set on foot in this Kingdom without his Majesty's privity, contrary to the
Liberty and freedom of the Subject, to be by any such League or Covenant
preengaged, and so that the setting on foot at this time in this Kingdom the
said League or Covenant without his Majesty's allowance, may not only beget
much distractions, and unquietnes amongst his Majesty's good Subjects, but also
may prove very penal to all those who shall presume to tender or take the same;
we therefore for prevention of such mischiefs; do in his Majesty's name
strictly charge and command all his Majesty's good Subjects, of what degree or
quality soever within this Kingdom, upon their alleagiance to his Majesty, that
they presume not to enter in, or take the said League, Covenant, or Oath; and
we do hereby likewise inhibit and forbid, all his Majesty's Subjects in this
Kingdom, to impose, adminster, or tender the said Oath, League, or Covenant;
and if notwithstanding this our Proclamation any person shall presume to impose,
tender, or take the said League or Covenant, we shall proceed against him or
them with all severity according to the known Laws of the Land.

Given at his Majesty's Castle at Dublin the 18. day of December, 1643. Rich.
Bolton, Chancel: Lo. Dublin, Ormonde, Roscomond, Edw. Brabason, Anthony
Medenses, Charles Lambert, Geo. Shurley, Gerart Lowther, Tho. Rotherham, Fer.
Willougby, Thomas Lucas, James Ware, George Wentworth.

God save the King.
The Copy of a Letter written by direction of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled, to several Commanders and
Officers of his Majesty's Army, and others in the Kingdom of Ireland.
AFter our very hearty commendations, the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament in this his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland have commanded to signify
unto you, that they have lately seen a Printed, Paper entitled a solemn
League and Covenant for Reformation, and defense of Religion, the honor and
happiness of the King, and the Peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, which seems to have been Printed at London, on
the 9. of October, 1643. that they also have seen a printed Proclamation dated
the 18. of December. 1643. and set out by the Right Honorable the late Lords
Justices, and Council, expressing diverse great and weighty reasons against the
said League and Covenant, and therefore commanding all his Majesty's good
subjects, of what degree or quality soever within this Kingdom, upon their
allegiance to his Majesty, that they presume not to enter into, or take the
said League, Covenant, or Oath, and inhibiting and forbidding all his Majesty's
subjects in this Kingdom to impose, administer, or tender the said League, Oath
or Covenant, that upon serious debate, and consideration taken by the Lords,
and Commons of the said League and Covenant, and Proclamation, they find the
said Proclamation to have bin set out with great wisdom and reason, and do
highly commend the deep judgment of the said Lords Justices and Counsels
therein; and as both Houses does fully concur therein, in all the parts
thereof, so they have expressly commanded us to signify the same unto you, and
in their name to let you know, that it is their express pleasure, that you and
all the Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers of his Majesty's Army, and all
other his Majesty's Subjects in this Kingdom whom it may concern, do render
all due obedience and observation to the said Proclamation in all the parts
thereof, and this being to no other end we remain.

Your very loving friends, Ric. Bolton Council: Maur. Eustace Speaker of the
house of Commons.
Dublin Castle 28. day of April, 1644.
The Substance of the Oath agreed upon and subscribed, as is reported by the
Lord Archbishop of Dublin, the Lord Bishop of Mead, the Lord Bishop of
Limricke, Deane Jones, and all the Beneficed Ministers in Dublin, to be a
religious Oath, and agreed upon by all the Judges not to be against law, except
Justice Mayort, who is reported to have declared it to be against Law, and
contrary to the Liberty, and freedom of the Subject, on or about Thursday the
6. of June 1644, at which time all the Judges in the Kingdom, except the Lord
Chancellor, was the Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and Master Justice
Rives in the Common please, Master Justice Mayort, and in the Exchequer Baron
Hilton.
You shall swear to maintain the Kings Majesty's Armies, Castles, Forts, and
Garrisons, against all opposition and insurrection, Foreign or Domesticke, to
the utmost of your power, and that you will not enter into, or take the League
or Covenant, or Oath Printed at London the 9. of October, 1643. nor any other
League, Oath or Covenant to that effect: So God you help.

FINIS.

