THE FOUNDATIONS OF FREEDOM, VINDICATED: OR, THE REASONS OF WILLIAM ASHURST
Esquire, Against the Paper, styled, THE PEOPLES AGREEMENT, Examined and
discussed.

Wherein it appears, that the particulars proposed in the said Paper, are no
foundations of Tyranny and Slavery; nor destructive to Religion, Liberty, Laws,
and Government, as is pretended; But foundations of Freedom for this poor
deluded and enslaved Kingdom.

By WILLIAM COKAYNE, a wel-wisher to Englands freedoms; but an Opposer of
Tyranny and Oppression in any whomsoever.

Every man seems just in his own cause; but his Neighbor comes after and
tries him.

LONDON. Printed for John Harris, 1649.

To the Reader.
REasons against Agreement, however besmeared with golden phrases, are too much
(I fear) studied by such whose endeavors are to keep us in bondage, under an
Arbitrary Government, where will must be undisputable law; whose finger will
prove heavier than their Fathers loins; as in part appears by the Reasons
against Agreement: which title, had it there stayed, had most suited the
subject, whose seeming sugered words are mixed with wormwood, promising
fairness, but viperously stinging the poor despised Army, as endeavoring to
enslave and ruin the Kingdom, which (under God) they have so often miraculously
preserved; to alienate the Peoples affections from them, instead of a reward
answerable to their long and tedious miseries, and to divide them amongst
themselves, thereby to obtain, what neither violence of protested Enemies, nor
subtle devices of pretended Friends, could yet do: endeavoring to starve
them, for want of pay, as not worthy of their wages, when done their work, or
to live under and amongst those they have sacrificed their lives for: But as
God has hitherto owned and honored their undertakings, so I trust will,
maugre the malice of all Calumniators.

I doubt not but the Gentleman is already Answered, by abler Judgments; yet
(being thereto importuned) as concerned with others in the Kingdoms freedoms,
I have (though the unworthiest of thousands) cast in this small mite, which of
it prove like the stone from from David's ^^^^* let God have the honor. All I
desire, from (...) Reader is impartiality, who not being overpoised in a regal
balance, may without forestalledness weigh what is written; and if in any
thing I err from right principles, to convince me by sound reason; and I shall
be induced easily to close with him, and freely renounce what I have written.

Farewell.
REASONS against the foundations of Freedom, or the agreement of the people,
Examined.
I Shall now proceed to the Reasons, which for the most part, are but his own
suppositions, fighting with his shadow, and putting down the fabric himself
reared: For

First, he says, it proposes that the People, may agree to alter, etc. But
how such conclusions can be squeazed from it, I see not; seeing what is
written, is but propounded to the Parliaments considerations, and as they see
cause to Act; and if we way not declare our pressures, as also propound ways
of redress to our Trustees, what are we but perfect slaves? And is there the
like equality, in taking away men's Estates and Lives, as in altering the choice
of Members? where the divisions are so unequally distributed, as to have ten or
twelve in some Countries, and but four in others, not inferior to those; but I
cannot much blame him, for so strongly pleading the interest of that County,
himself is a member of; And what president or ground can it be to any, be they
few or many to attempt such things he mentions, from what is propounded by the
people, and assented unto, and acted by the Supreme Judicature in the Kingdom
the Parliament? And its no wonder he fears mutation, (all men being mutable)
having so fresh a president, from those who should be the Kingdoms supporters,
as no Addresses, Addresses, and no Addresses, Vote out, in, and our again, not
acting by Fancy, or sudden Apprehensions; but forced through the prevalency of
corrupt interests in some, which also became a midwife to that Monster, viz. a
Treaty with a conquered Eenemy.

it is unreasonable, etc. If the inconveniences be not sufficiently discovered,
by the many thousands slain, in these unnatural bloody Wars, with the
persecutions and oppressions of old, acted under this so much applauded
Government, to the ruin of thousands; what would we have more to do it? And
has not eight years time been sufficient to debate it, and find out remedies
for it? though the Gentleman wants patience in other matters, yet it seems he
has patience enough, to see the Kingdom by groaning under Tyranny and
Oppression, almost ready to give up her last breath; but seeing the disease,
through delay, is become gangrenous; and, through overly daubing, corrupt at
heart; its high time to seek out a sharp Surgeon, and lance to the bottom,
yea, and cut off too, by impartial Justice, rather then destroy the whole
Body; which are reasons sufficient for so great a work.

from King, Lords, Protestations, Experience, former Wars, and Kingdoms
distractions. Are Kings, and Kingly Government of divine Institution? Its true,
Government is, but whether by Kings, or otherwise, is of man, a humane
Ordinance; and not by a holy unction from God, by peculiar immediate command
from God, but elected by a People; So that the same Power which sets up, may
pull down, when the cause is Just; the right understanding whereof, as also the
vast difference between Isreal's Kings and ours, would remove the veil from the
peoples eyes, that they would not so much adore the name and person of a King,
especially when we see their ambitious nature mounts them up so high, that
nothing will content, unless all must be their slaves: As for the Lords, when
either themselves, or the author, have cleared their rightful sitting in the
Supreme Judicature of the Kingdom, for, and over those, who never called nor
entrusted them, (being merely the Kings creatures) it might with more color
have been objected. And what if the Parliament protested to maintain such a
Government? I suppose it was before they had that experience, of the evil of
it they now have, and must their Protestations be of more weight now, then the
Kingdoms safety, and Peoples freedoms; so as to restore those to their former
Dignities, who have left no means unassayed to enslave and ruin us? And to
reflect back upon your hundred years of experience: under what Government was
the Marian Persecutions, your Butchers and Bonner, your Ship and Pole Moneys,
with thousands other Monopolizes and Oppression, under which this poor Nation
has so long groaned? And does not experience tell us, that almost every Age
has had a new Religion established by humane Law? and yet all of them
persecuting the Saints; and was it not at present, posting after them, (though
under a new garb) with no less rigor and violence, then their Predecessors,
had not divine providence prevented? And what if in former Wars, the people
were willing to purchase Peace with slavery, must we also? we have reason
rather, to be more wise and cautelous, by their, and our own experienced
miseries, and to look now to our so deare-bought freedoms, since the effect
of this is tyranny, and that produces war, as the author himself implies;
And I may also add further, that in these distracted times, we have no need
of such nation, and Army-dividings, as these reasons will produce.

Is the taking away the power and Privileges of Parliament. viz. by
establishing a byenniall Parliament instead of a trienniall, with fuller power
then ever, or at least was ever yet acted; but the mystery is, viz. because
they may not have an arbytrary power, without and against law, and that they,
and their attendants may not be free from law, and to protect whom they please;
it seems we have brought our hogs to a fair market, and fought to good
purpose, against a tyrannical King, to set up the same again, with an
addition of an arbitrary tyrannical Parliament. It Is true, we have sworn to
maintain their power and Privileges, but was it not like the Bishops oath,
etc. to swear to we know not what? it being never declared what those were,
but what themselves said was, we must defend, and so were led like blind
bayards to the water, if not as fools to the slaughter, therefore it is we
desire to know their limits, that we may know which to defend; which being
clearly done, I doubt not, but we may subscribe to the paper, or most of it,
without palpable or notorious perjury. But suppose we have sworn to maintain
that which will be our slavery and ruin, must such oaths be prosecuted? I
suppose your present Ministry will teach you better. And for the change of the
constitution, I answer: IF it appear, that part of it was usurpation, as
indeed it was, it is time to rectify it, that for fear of swearing to
something but like a Parliament, we may not swear to that which is more then we
ever called or entrusted; and to say truly with the Poet,

Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens vitare Charybdin. in perpetuum; and to provide for
future, that we may not be at uncertainties; and that they may not, after the
example of Scotland, adjourne for two years, to act the like Designs, which no
doubt was the intention of those that moved it, which will take away those
fears of having two at once: neither can any party pretend from this to be a
Parliament, unless elected as propounded, seeing it propounds a certain way,
time for elections, and for the beginnings and endings of future Parliaments,
or Representatives.

as well; although they have clearly forfeited their freedom, by these
unnatural wars, in opposing the Parliament, which others also may do;
though formerly assisted the Parliament: witness Hothams, and others; if now
oppose what the Parliament settles for the Kingdoms good, which is that the
paper propounds, and so not done by a few, neither will it be slavery to any,
except delinquents, and such who are biased on other as rotten principles,
that they had rather expose the nation to slavery and ruin, then be frustrated
in their own designs.

divide the Parliaments friends, yea Parliament it self, by Covenanters and
Non-Covenantor: yea such as was most cordial and have proved most
isntrumental for the Kingdoms safety; without giving them any hopes of future
security, yet rather of persecution and oppression; banishment at best, if not
submit, yet then thought the only way for the Nations good.

Is but a repeating the same things over again, viz. that no power is intended
to be above this Representative: and what need there? seeing this is granted (
Reas. the 3.) to be the supreme Judicature; can it be supreme, and yet have one
above it? if objected; that it must consist of KING, Lords, and Commons: I ask
then, why did this present Parliament act without, yea and against the KING,
yea and Lords too; and declared they might, and would so do? I do not say
they are fallen from their primitive principles, that thus object, let others
judge; and why will not their Laws bind? the Paper propounds all to be bound
by them; except they expressly violate this agreement, the clear expressing
whereof will remove that objection of every man being Judge, for any man that
has eyes, can judge when the Sun shines, when not; and what is said of
forceable opposition, is no more than may be said, against any Government what
ever: suppose a better could be found out, witness the Cavaliers; which will
not take away the lawful power of this, or any of their under Officers, any
more than of others.

Is toleration of Popery; men are left to be of any Religion, or no Religion. I
quere what Religion compulsion makes men of, but that the State is, be it what
it will, true or false, of any as the State turns, so they, and so
consequently are of no Religion. And where, or when did Christ give any such
power to the Magistrate to compel men to Religion? if not, is it not an high
contempt against him, for men to devise a way of their own, as if his were
insufficient to do his own work? is it not to make Christ unfaithful, and
our selves wiser than he, so that the more its abhorred by good men, the more
edium they cast on Christ; and if this be not Blasphemy, I know not what that
word [(...)] denotes: If your Ministers be the Apostles Successors, (as they
pretend) let them use the Apostles weapons, and not turn the Sword of the
Spirit, into a Sword of Steel: And whereas he says, the Paper was made by a
Jesuit, or the KING's old Counselors, and it tends to take away the Regal
power, is a contradiction; a riddle cannot be unfolded.

Is the Irish Wars, etc. If this Parliament had authority to begin them; may
they not be prosecuted by the same power, when its dissolved? unless their
power die with them, I mean what they have done during their sitting, when
dissolved; then to what purpose are they? unless to keep us in a fools
paradise for a season; and return us again to our old slavery, and all
because the KING will not assent: if the War was lawful, it may be
prosecuted by a new Parliament; if not, why begun?

Is the Scots interest; which if it stand in opposition to our Freedoms; it
seems we must couch and return to our old slavery, rather than hazard their
frowns, so that our freedoms must depend on the Scots; and what we may expect
from them, let the last Summer judge, which was acted not by a few, but their
Supreme power the Parliament; so that it seems Parliaments may err, and be
opposed also, and that the People may judge of it, (which serves to Answer part
of his 8. Reason.) else why did we justify them that opposed and suppressed
the Parliaments force to exalt them? and if those who were freed from slavery,
by means of that now so much despised Army, shall attempt to second their
Brethren for King and Presbytery, (which, I hope, they will not) I doubt not
but they will meet with the like entertainment.

Because it destroys the Cause we have fought for, and does the Enemies work,
etc. The Enemies work was to set up an arbitrary King, and to destroy not
only this, but all future Parliaments against which we engaged, and not to set
up the same tyranny in King and Parliament; all the Paper proposes, is a
dissolving this Parliament (not by force, but willingly) to give way for
another, that the People may be free, who did not choose Trustees to be their
perpetual Lords; and if it was so high an attempt in the King to impose upon
Parliament Privileges, being the supreme power; is it not much more to King
and Parliament to impose upon the Peoples Liberties, who under God, are the
original of all just power, as the Parliament declares; so that the power and
privileges both of King and Parliament are from the People; therefore if they
stand for their just freedom against tyranny, whether of King, or Parliament,
its no doing the Enemies work. And for being Treason, etc. what was done, was
by Parliaments power; but suppose it had not, the People being original of all
just power, and salus populi, the supreme Law; if the Parliament had deserted
them, and adhered to the KING's interest, as many did, they might have oppugned
both, unless we be bound to sit still while our Masters tread upon our necks
to mount the chair of tyranny, yea cut our throats; I know not what Law the
Author may have for it, I am sure neither the Law of God, nor nature will
warrant it; I suppose those of the Scots who opposed their Supreme power, and
joined with our Armies, will teach us something; so that this is but a bone
cast among the Army, to divide and break them; that their Enemies may with
more facility act their cursed designs to enslave both them, and us.

Is but a repetition of most of the rest (to blind the Readers eyes, by
multiplying words) to which I refer the Reader,

I have done with his Reasons, but shall touch some of his strings in his
General Observations, especially that of the Priests, who as they have blown
the coals of contention in our late Wars, so are still active to preserve
their own corrupt interest, interweaving themselves with the Magistrate, not
being able to stand upon their own bottomes, dare not trust Christ from whom
they pretend their Commission: I shall leave his profession to his own
Conscience, whether his tongue and heart agree, and the Reader to these lines,
to try on what basis he stands.

I come now to his General Observations upon the particulars prepared for the
new Representative, viz. no Death but for Murder, no Imprisonment for Debt, no
Tithes, no restriction of Trade, no Lawyers nor Laws but in English, and
Twelve men in every Hundred to end all Differences; but seeing he leaves some
of them untoucht, I shall also:

And first, I shall not take upon me to assert that none ought to Die but for
Murder, but that punishments should be more equal to offenses, were meet, and
not to take away men's lives for such trivial matters, as in some Cases by our
Laws; whereas God in the rigor of the Jewish Law never required it, which is
to make our selves wiser than God; and certainly the reasons, why our Laws are
so ineffectuall; but rather harden men in their exorbitancies, is the
inequality of them; in exacting what God never required: and undoubtedly we
might expect a greater blessing upon them, if they were more equally
proportioned to Offenses; but here I observe, that he would insinuate to the
People, as though the Paper propounded to have Laws made in favor, to
encourage men in such enormities as he mentions, which is a gross (I say, not
a willing) mistake, whereas an equality of punishments to offenses, is only
desired; Equity being the rule we should act by: neither does it propose to
take away the Law, but to have it in our own Language, that every man may know
the Law he is bound by; and what evil can that be to any, except to the
Lawyers, who make a prey of the Peoples ignorance, and therefore would still
keep us under that slavery? for, what greater slavery can People be under then
to be bound by Laws they cannot understand, but must take them on trust, from
such as make a Trade of it? And if we had fewer Lawyers, and more Hundred
Courts, we might have more honesty and justice, and not so many poor People
ruined through tedious delays, sometimes two, three, four, yea six years,
before they can have justice, and happily not then neither: And if our Laws
were in English, we should not need fear so much ignorant Juries, which might
also be chosen of men responsible enough, if miscarried; Neither is it
absolutely required that they should supply the Places of Sheriffs, Justices,
etc. but left to the Parliaments to appoint as they see needful; only a free
Election is desired.

But the great business is the Ministers, and their great Diana the Tithes;
who being in like condition with the unjust Steward, if displaced cannot dig,
and are ashamed to beg, must be wise in their generation, (as the Children of
this world are) to uphold their repute: and having by that craft got their
livings, will rather set the whole Nation on fire, and in confusion, than lose
the hopes of their gain: hence they intermix themselves with the powers of the
earth (like the trees of Daniels Image) making use of that old Antichristian
engine, which like prompt Scholars, they have learned from their grand Tutours,
the Bishops, viz. no Bishop, no King; which is now metamorphized into that ugly
monster, no Minister, no Magistrate, no Tithes, no Landlords Rents; advice to
support their tottering Babel, and mouldering pomp; whereas nothing is more
evident, then that a Magistracy has and may stand entire without them; and the
Ministry of Christ without, and in opposition to the Magistracy; which
demonstrates them to be none of his sending, that cannot act without a power
from man; but they well know that if they can instill that principle into the
Magistrate, they have made all sure, viz. that thou they must stand and fall
together: wherefore I wish our present Powers, may beware of such Doctrines,
and not suffer themselves to be so deluded by such self-seeking Gospel
merchandizers, and no longer endeavor to mix clay and iron together, lest when
the present Ministers follow their Fathers the Bishops, they bring the present
powers into the Kings condition. It Is not desired that the Magistrates would
take them away, i.e. suppress them; but to let them stand upon their own
bottoms to act by his power (they say) sent them, that so they may manifest the
truth of their Office; and to be content with his wages, for what greater
dishonor can they do to Christ than distrust him; if he sent them, he is able
to defend them, (being neither asleep, nor in a journey) and provide for them;
(that they need not play the Sons of Eli) without, yea against all the powers
of the world; whereas by their own confession, if the Magistrate provide not
for them, they must starve, neither have they any power to act but from him;
which is true, for the power they expect and cry so loud for, is of Man, not of
God, who will not have men brought into his fold, by the head and shoulders;
but by the Word of truth, spiritual weapons; which demonstrates them to be the
States, the Magistrates, Ministers; not Christ's, though the Gentleman is so
much offended that they have their right titles: for from whom I receive power
to act, and pay for my work, his Servant I am; for my part I have nothing to
say against them that will have such Servants, Lords rather, much good may they
do them; but its meet then that they should maintain them, and not force
others to do it; for, what greater oppression can People be under, than be
forced to maintain other men's Servants, to live idly, when neither receive,
nor expect benefit by them in the ways they act; It Is true, that the Scripture
speaks of Ministers, but that they are the men, sub judice lis est: and that
they should live of the Gospel is true, but that its left to the Magistrate to
proportion is as untrue, and without the least color of Scripture, and least
of all that its Tithes, unless we be still under Moses and the Law, and deny
Christ to be come in the flesh, which though their tongues confess their deeds
deny, and so their actions give their tongues the lie: and therefore of all men
they deserve the least to be tolerated, who cry out so much against it, and
themselves come under the same condemnation. But now they have got a new trick
for their Tithes, a jus humanum; now they see their jus divinum will not serve;
which was their old pillar, (till their deceit was found out) and all that
withheld them, yea the Impropriators, were judged Sacrilegious; though now
content, yea glad they are so disposed of, being the only way to preserve them
a share: and whether each man best deserve his own, I leave them to judge who
take most pains for them: and when a man has laid out his Estate to improve
his Lands, another must have the Profits, (for my own part, I have none to
pay, and therefore plead not for my self.) And how Impropriators may be
satisfied, I leave to the Parliament, who by their own wisdoms, and such
ways as (no doubt) will be propounded, I presume will give the Gentleman and
others satisfaction.

And now I have done both with his Reasons and Observations, and shall (with
him) leave all to the Readers judgment, and think he might have spared his
own, there being no such thing as he pretends, but contrariwise a Magistrate
and Government with as full a legal power as ever, a Minister and Maintenance
of Christ's appointing, not man's, such means to bring men to piety, and purity
in Religion Christ has commanded, but no tyrannical Magistracy, no Arbitrary
government, no Lordly Prelacy, no usurping Tythmonger Presbytery, no Whips,
Fines, Imprisonments, and such like Antichristian engines to force men to a
State-religion, whereby they may be made of any Religion, and indeed of no
Religion, but changing with wind and tide, are in sum notorious Hypocrites,
and being so proselyted become threefold worse then Children of Hell.

FINIS.

