TO THE Right Honorable the COUNCIL of STATE, THE REMONSTRANCE OF Don Alonso
de Cardenas of the Council of His Catholic Majesty, and His Ambassador in
ENGLAND.
Right Honorable,
HAving according to the Command of my Master his said Catholic Majesty,
lately presented unto your Honors, a Remonstrance on the behalf of several
Spaniards his Subjects; thereby demanding speedy payment of the Sum of 50464
pounds, with the interest and damages for forbearance, due unto them from the
Parliament of England, and therein desiring your ultimate Resolution.

To which there has as yet been no answer given according to desire.

But instead thereof have received from your Honors several complaints made
by several English Subjects.

Whereof, one is a complaint made by one Huet Leate of a supposed damage done
to his Father and others, by the taking of the Ship Vineyard in the year 1605.
to the value of 8690 pounds sterling, by three Frigots set out by Merchants of
Sardinia; in which as a private man, the Conde del Real had his share.

And for which, as is pretended, although the Complainners had several
sentences for satisfaction in the Courts of Justice in Spain; yet to this day,
there has no satisfaction been made.

And in an Order made by the Honorable House of Parliament of the fifth of
April past; there is besides the said Complaint mention made of other
Complaints of like nature, made by Colonel Manwaring, Hawes and Partners, and
the Adventurers of the Isle of Providence.

Which I conceive, to be no satisfaction to my aforesaid reasonable Demands,
nor ought to come at this time to obstruct the payment of the said 50464 pounds
and damages, unless it be intended, that the Comerce, and Traffic between
the Subjects of England, and the Subjects of the Crown of Spain, should be
utterly overthrown; which I shall, as briefly as a Case of so great
concernment will give me leave Remonstrate unto you.

And first in the General.
IT is to be observed, that the Complaints are of much antiquity, one of them
being long before the last War between Spain and England; and it cannot be
upon any grounds of reason imagined, that when the Peace was concluded between
the Crowns, there should be a latitude left for the Subjects to be at Wars, as
in case of private, Letters of Reprizall granted to private men, for the making
of themselves good upon the Subjects of that Prince which did wrong.

But it must be reasonably concluded, that eiher the Complainers, were before
satisfied, or else they might have humbly Petitioned their Prince, for
satisfaction to be made them before the Peace concluded.

Besides their has been since that time several private Letters of Reprizall
granted to several the Subjects of England, for damages done by them, by the
Subjects of the Crown of Spain; and for which, as was pretended by them, they
could not receive satisfaction by the Justice of Spain; And had it been true,
that the Complainers had received the damage pretended they might as well have
had Letters of Reprizall, or might have joined with others, that were damnified
in like nature, in their Letters of Reprizall.

Besides which it is great reason, that private quarrels and differences
between Crowns and their Subjects in amity should not be perpetuated to
posterity: otherwise it is not possible that Peace made and concluded between
them, should be kept and continued; for the private quarrels between the
Subjects must in time make a general quarrel, between the Nations; and
Complaints of this nature, may by the same reason be grounded on injuries done
by the Subjects of either Nation, as well twice or thrice forty years, as from
forty four years, which is the antiquity of this Complaint, and may occasion
His Catholic Majesty, to look back to the pretenses in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and higher times, to the assurance of daily and new wrongs, and
perpetual differences between the Subjects of either Nation, and mutual
justification of them by fore passed injuries; the instances whereof cannot be
wanting, where there is a will to do wrong.

Which I press the rather since the date of the present pretended injury, is
beyond that time, which by the Custom and Law of most Christian Nations, is a
time immemoriall, which extends but to forty years.

And it is great reason there should be a time prefixed for all men to
prosecute their differences to a period, otherwise, no man can call himself
Master of an Estate, since it is impossible for men in all times to have their
witnesses and papers ready to justify themselves.

Which reason holds strongly in the case before you, for what an impossibility
is it for the stranger who was not privy to the wrong done, and knows neither
parties, matter, or time to answer pretenses of this nature.

And to this purpose, I conceive the Five and twentieth Article of the peace
concluded between the Crowns was drawn; wherein it is provided in these words,
that if any thing shall be attempted or done by the Subjects of either, the
attempters, and such as do offend therein only shall be punished, and none
other.

I shall not trouble your Honors with the many objections of weight that might
be made to the papers of the said Huet Leate, delivered in to your Honors:
there being many passages therein which were after sentence, and are only
allegations exparte, which if material, could not in justice be taken into
consideration without a new and full examination of both sides, and a review of
the whole process which past in Spain, and upon which the sentences (which the
said Huet Leate pretends and alleges to have obtained in his behalf, and
against the Conde Real) have been given.

But J shall state the point short, and clear upon what is confessed.
ANd touching the particular complaint of Leate, It appears by his own
Petition, that by the Courts of Law in Spain, Justice was done as far as was
possible; for there was two sentences against the Conde Real, and the execution
if it took no effect, was not the default of Justice or Law, but because the
Conde del Real was insolvent, he having no Estate (for his person could no more
by the Laws of Spain be touched for debt then an Earls in England) and except
Courts of Justice shall not only give judgment) but also pay the debt, I know
not what more could be desired from the Crown of Spain, and the Law of that
Kingdom then was performed.

And I hope it shall be no national quarrel or crime for one of the Nobility
to become insolvent, and not able to pay his debts, to whomsoever due.

For the other cases of Col. Manwaring, and the Adventurers to the Isle of
Providence, there is nothing of weight that may deserve an answer; for it
appears by their Petition and allegations, that they know the parties that did
the supposed injury, but it does not appear that ever they took any legal
course, either in Spain, Dunkerk, or elsewhere, against the supposed
offenders, and justice was denied them.

Now since themselves omitted to take that course, when the fact was fresh, and
the parties and witnesses on both sides living, it cannot be justice to charge
a stranger to answer for that he never knew, nor heard of.

Besides it is plainly repugnant to the Articles of the Peace, which provides
that no other shall be answerable for the offense then the party, or parties
offending as aforesaid.

For which reason, and because I will not trouble the business, nor your
Honors with new proofs in the cases before mentioned, but take the matter as
it naturally rises from their own papers, now before you, and the Parliament,
and your Lordships Orders.

And also of the case of Manwaring, which was long handled in the Parliament,
and by order of Parliament, referred to a trial in the Admiralty Court, where
the said Manwaring and his Consorts had the help of civil Lawyers, and common
Lawyers, and all possible favor, and yet sentence given against them, and the
Spaniards given for free. Now if in the Parliament they were not found faulty,
nor to be any way responsible for damages to Manwaring, and Company and
afterward absolved and acquitted by sentence at Law as others, were formerly
in the said Court at the suite of Manwaring, how can any thing be now imputed
to these men or their goods.

And for Letters of mark to be granted against the persons or goods of
strangers which are landed here, 2. R. 2.1.
and have paid Custom. It is without example, and against Law; for that all
strangers that come to Trade in this Kingdom, are under the safe-gard and
protection of the King. And though a King or State does, or may give Letters of
Reprizall against Ships or Goods, super alto mare, yet it was never seen that
any such were ever granted against any goods, in any Kings or Parliaments
Protection and Custody.

Nor shall I insist upon that (although it may be very clear) that the Master
employed in the Ship belonging to the Adventurers of the Isle of Providence,
was Commissioned from the Adventurers, to take and spoil the Subjects of my
Master, as they have done, and although they should pretend they did it beyond
the line, yet it is against the 1. and 2. Article of the last Treaty.

All which I conceive to be sufficiently satisfactory for the taking off the
pretenses of the complainers, were there nothing else in the case.

But the Parliament taking notice that there was store of Plate, Cochenill, and
other goods brought into Southhampton, belonging to strangers in the Ship,
santa clara did, by Order dated the 26. of August, 1642. Reciting. That whereas
the said Ship and Lading, being of a great value, in silver and other
Commodities, was brought into the Port of Southampton, from the West Indies,
without the consent of the Proprietors, and that therefore it concerned the
High Court of Parliament, both in Honor and justice, to take special care
that no Subjects of any foreign State might be wronged by the miscarriage of
any Subjects of this Kingdom.

It was therefore ordered by both Houses of Parliament, that the matter should
be strictly examined, and that the silver and other goods should be put into
safe hands, appointed in the said Order, there to remain secure to be delivered
out to the true Proprietors when it should be known, unto whom the Bullion
Coin and Goods did belong.

All which did very much suite with the Gravity and Justice of so high a Court,
and was much for the Honor of the English Nation.

And hereupon being in some hopes that the Plate and Goods would have remained
in specie, for the Proprietors until several Orders and Votes were made by
the House of Commons, whereby first the silver amounting to thirty thousand
four hundred sixty four pounds, was appointed to be coined and disposed of.

Next, ten thousand pounds more was directed to be borrowed on the Cochenill.

And then all the Goods were to be sold by the Candle, and secured by public
Faith, unless the Proprietors and Owners, would lend 20000 l. which they did,
viz. 15000 l. by the Proprietors, and 5000 l. by the Owners.

And lastly ordered, That the said twenty Thousand pounds, together with the
aforesaid Thirty Thousand four hundred sixty four pounds, should stand instead
of bail for all suits and claims in the Court of Admiralty.

I shall not mention unto your Honors, wherein these latter Orders and Votes
of the House of Commons, differ from the former recited Order made by both
Houses.

But shall only take the advantage by them and the former passages to lift the
case before you, out of the reach of the Complainers pretenses.

For by what has bin said before, the question is not so much, whither (in
case the complainers pretenses were true) they ought to be repaired out of the
moneys now in the Parliaments hands.

As whither my Masters Subjects ought not by the same rule be repaired in
Spain, in case the complainers should have recovered by a legal course.

To conclude, If the pretended injuiries had been true, it had been much for
the Honor of the Parliament, to have lift the complainers to the ordinary
course for their recovery, and not to have given them leave to trouble this
business, in regard of the Parliaments promise and engagement, that the goods
should be preserved and secured for the proprietors.

But in case the complainers pretenses should be admitted, then my Masters
Subjects are tied up by the aforesaid Actions of the Parliament, from
recovering the damage they have and shall sustain, and are made liable to the
satisfying of the pretended damage, which I hope your Honors will not
conceive just for the reasons rehearsed, and the Laws grants Articles and
Privileges following.

It is concluded and accorded, 1. Article of the last Treaty. 2 Article
etc. there shall be a good sincere, etc. a league and peace to endure for
ever, to be observed and kept as well by Land as Sea, etc.

To prevent all misunderstanding. It is more clearly declared, that no
damages and depredations shall be done unto his Catholic Majesty's Subjects,
as well on this side as beyond the line.

Strangers may come to this Kingdom and buy and sell freely, 9. E. 3.1.
and whosoever does them disturbance shall pay double damage.

All Strangers may bring Gold and Silver, 27. E. 3.4.
and shall not be unduly disturbed.

That no Merchant Stranger, 27. E. 3.17.
be impeached for another trespass, or for another Debt whereof he is not
Debtor, Pledge, nor Maine-partner.

All Strangers that come to Trade in this Kingdom, 2. R. 2.1.
are under the safeguard and protection of the King, and who does them
disturbance shall pay double damage.

And by the Charter granted to Merchants strangers, called Charta mercatoria
confirmed by so many Kings, and lastly by this Parliament, it is expressed,
folia 31. quod ipsi aut eorum bonae seu mercimonia infra idem regnu et
potestatem pro aliquo debito de quo fide jusores aut principales debitores non
extiterint nec pro aliqua transgressione facta seu facienda, per aliquos quam
ipses non arrestantur nec graventur.

And by the 25. Article of the Peace, That if during this Peace any thing be
attempted, or done by Subjects of either, the attemptors and such as do offend
therein only, shall be punished and no other.

And lastly, the Orders of the 26. August and 1. September 1642. whereby the
Honor and Justice of Parliament, is so deeply engaged for the restoring of the
said money.

The Orders of 26. and 27. of August 1642. to bring up the Plate that so it may
be kept to the use of the true owners, to be restored so soon as the
Parliament shall be informed to whom the same shall belong.

An Order of the 7. Sept. 1642. That silver be coined to the end the
proprietors may have the proceed of the said Silver so soon as they shall make
there right appear.

I needed not to have set forth more to your Honors for the clearing of this
present case, then the said Laws of this Kingdom, Articles of the Peace,
Charta mercatoria, and the special Orders of both Houses of Parliament.

But least the importunity of the pretenders should prevail in the seizing, or
applying any of these moneys for their damages (and that by the same rule
these Subjects of the King my Master, should obtain seizure upon the goods of
the Subjects of this Nation in his Dominions for their satisfaction, whereby
free Comerce might cease, or Trade be quite overthrown) I have been the larger
in my exemplifications, that if any breach or distractions in Trade, shall
succeed by the carriage of this business, it may appear to all the world, that
it has not proceeded from any thing intended by the King my Master, nor from
me, nor His Subjects, nor accordingly to be imputed to him.

Wherefore, and for what has so plainly been Remonstrated unto you on the
behalf of my Master His Catholic Majesty's Subjects; I shall desire their
further attendance, in making any more defense to the claims and pretense of
the said Huet Leate, Col. Manwaring, Hawes and the Adventurers to the Isle of
Providence may be spared.

And according to my Commission given me from my said Master, I shall once more
desire, that there may be speedy payment made of said the 50464. pounds,
together with interest due for the forbearance thereof unto my Masters Subjects,
Petitioning your Honors for the same, or that I may receive your positive
answer, that I may return it and my Masters Subjects left to seek Justice in
some other place.

All which, I do the more earnestly press, for that it is now near two years
since that the first Letters came to my hands from His said Majesty, Commanding
me to use my utmost diligence in the premises.

And in case I should not prevail to return sudden answer, that according
to the great and crying necessity of His said Subjects, Justice may be done
them in Spain.

All which notwithstanding, in hopes that in some reasonable time there would
be some compliance in the satisfaction of the said moneys whereby a good
understanding might be preserved betwixt the two Nations.

I have hitherto adventured, to answer with excuses builte upon the many urgent
occasions, that have since intervened in the affairs of England; whereby the
business could not be intended by the Parliament.

But since my Masters Commands upon me are such, that excuses will not longer
be admitted; Wherefore I now again as before, earnestly desire a punctual, and
sudden performance of the premises, or a possitive answer; wherein I may rest
from using any further diligence to your Honors concerning the Premises.

FINIS.

