THE Coffee-House DIALOGUE Examined and Refuted: By some Neighbors in the
Country, Well-wishers to the Kingdoms Interest.
Coffee-man. YOur Servant Good Mr. B. it is News to see you here.


Mr. B. Say you so Sir? Truly I had not come now, were it not to peruse a Paper
I have heard much Condemned, being Entitled A Coffee House Dialogue, etc, pray
have it you?


Coff. Yes Sir, Yonder Gentlemen are Reading it, if you please to step thither,
you may see it, they are Neighbors.


B. Good Morrow, Neighbors, If you please, I will make bold with that Paper
when you have read it.


Neighbors. And welcome Neighbor B. or, if you please I will begin it, and
Read it to you.


B. With all my Heart if you please. He reads it, and having done asks his
Opinion,


Neighbors. Well Sir, what think ye of it?


B. Troth, I as much Condemn it as the rest, I conceive it only a Trick to get
money, though they abuse the Kingdom by so doing, for which I will give you my
Reasons, which are these (the pretended Lawyer alleges) several things
mentioned by Mr. Y. which are palpable absurdities, of his own Invention; which
are these, to pay Debts without Money, make London Streets Navigable Rivers, to
Harbor the Kings Ships on the top of a Hill, under a pretense to secure them
from Wind and Weather, are all the mere Capritious Humors of his own Windmill
pate: as for the Register by him mentioned, none but a Dough-baked Lawyer would
deny the Advantages thereby accruing: But to tell you the Truth, our Lawyer
deserves what I could wish him, which is, an Hours Discourse with the person
who by him is (incognito) thus abused, and you would soon find who were the
most reasonable man.


Neighbors. I but Neighbor, you see the Person whose part you take, uses a
great many Tricks to makes Words pass for Oracles, by saying do you understand
me; P'shau, telling him he was a Chairman and the like.


B. By your leave Neighbors, let me tell ye it is an easy thing for a Painter
to disguise a man with the shape of a Munky, as they have done him by alleging
things, I am sure he would blush to own, and laugh to think; he which makes him
speak all that Balderdash, he never thought could speak no better sense
himself, as whoever Reads may blush to see so weak, nonsensical Arguments urged
by a Barrister which may be confuted by a Peddler.

First, Is it probable a person of his Judgment should ever brag he was a
Chairman, as our Nicholas Nemo alleges.

Secondly, That he should pretend to understand there was a Plot before all the
World else.

Thirdly, To pretend a knowledge of a Min he never see before, and to Condemn
the Clergy in General, a sad parcel of Compacted lies, so ridiculous as would
make him seem as much a Sot as our Half Witted Author, did not the World know
him much better than they are ever like to know the other.


Neighbors. But Neighbor B. we do believe all you have said, and say
moreover, we believe the Author ^^es in taxing him with the Root of the Follyes
therein mentioned, which are not worth rehearsal, being so grandly idle as in
particular to tax him with showing the Word without Doors, a thing which we are
Confident he scorns to foul his Fingers withal.


B. Gramercy Neighbors, now you come to the Touch, my Friend being
intermeddled withal, who meddles with no body being now acquitted, give me
leave to show you the Antic Author in his several Monky Posture, and I have
done.

And First our Young Barrister, or rather Sucking Barrister, if he must be a
Barrister, Pleads thus, the Question between us, is not what has and may be
done, but what has and may be justly done: Quoth he, thus he must argue every
thing that both been done, has been justly done, which, is like his Logic^^
quoth our Ignoramus he (...) said nothing to the purose, When he can prove
William and Henry justly excluded Robert, the Reason alleged, because William
was not an honest man, not because Robert was dishonest, and then Winds it up
with a What think ye, was not this a brave Fellow to be in Print (thus far Don
Quixott, who will needs Fight with the Windmill of his own Brain, for want of
better employment: and allege one man's Writings to cut another man's Throat,
making a man Right or Wrong, Vindicate what he Detests and Abhors, he would be
loath to do the like by another Bastard, now if our Young Barrow Hog, Barrister
I mean, can prove Mr. Y. ever vindicated this Libell, our Dispute is ended: if
he dare not affirm it, let him go like a Noddy, as he is; But by the way, the
Question is, first, Whether Robert were excl^^ed? if he were, by whom? if it be
answered as it needs must, by a Parliament, Pray who shall we Credit, our
Lawyer or the Parliament whether the Thing were Just or Unjust, if he be a man
of such Parts as to inform the Pillar of the Kingdom in Matter of Justice,
certainly such a man deserves to be Comptroller General of all Public
Proceedings, rather than a Chairman, as without sense he (not for want of
Folly, calls Mr. Y.


Neighbors. Troth Neighbor B. your Arguments are undeniable Truths, Pray
lett's have some more of them; for certainly, none who is a Well-wisher to the
Welfare of the Kingdom, but would gladly hear them with delight.


B. Neighbors, I was never cut out to meddle with States affairs, I had rather
Mind my Plough at home: But this I say, since, as he affirms it for a Truth the
D. is a Papist, certainly Queen Mary's days are not forgot yet, and God forbid
they should be ever renewed: He pretends it a hard Case the D. should be denied
the Liberty of every ordinary Subject, in Case of Conformity: But in plain
Terms, who can trust to any thing in that Case, so long as the Notable old
Shaver at Rome, can Absolve who he will, for what Crimes he pleases. I will
assure you this, let our Young Prate-a^pace say what he will, for my own part;
I will neither meddle nor make. But let the Superior Power freely Act in their
own Sphere, and what they do I will never dispute, whether it be Lawful or
Unlawful, since it is my Duty to Obey, not to Rule. I will accordingly take
their Words for Law, notwithstanding our Young Braggadocio pretends to know
more Law then they. If they should thinck fit either Enact Laws for, or against
the Ds. Person or Estate, I should as certainly Believe what they Acted, was
done as much according to Law, as if our Young Lawyer had been their Oracle,
which God forbid: This, Gentlemen and Neighbors, is the real Sentiment of what
I not only think, but Resolve to stand by in Spite of our Young Novicely
Lawyer.


Neighbors. Well spoke neighbor B. we are all of the same Mind, and until our
Lawyer can find better Reasons, we shall be hardly induced to alter our settled
Opinion: so Honest Neighbor we bid you good buy.


B. Farewell, Neighbors, Heartily.


FINIS.

