A PROPOSAL, To prevent further Decay in Harbors, etc. without Charge. TO THE
HONORABLE THE COMMONS of England, in Parliament Assembled.
Your Petitioner Robert Colepepyr, Gentleman, Humbly Prays,
That he may more largely Treat of the Decays of our Harbors, Havens and
Ports, and touching their Preservation, than is shown in his late Petition for
that Service; or in the Bill for the same, now depending before this Honorable
House.

THe many Petitions to this Honorable House for Bills, to deepen and cleanse
Harbors and Havens, seems to prove Decay in the same: And I apprehend the
Sands that cause such Decay, are brought by Land-flouds and Tides: And left on
our Bars. Because the Sea does Ebb before our Harbors and Channels; and by
such abatement in depth, of that wide Expansion without the Harbors Mouth, the
Ebbs are kept to good Motion in the Harbors, and Channels, and often have
greater Motion there than in the Sea, (viz.) when the Winds are Low; but
especially in Calms at Low Water: For then the Sea has no Motion, but a small
swell against the Shore and back again.

If the lower-end of the Channel or Harbor, be originally so wide, that the
Influx and Efflux cannot scower the same; or has been worn so wide by Storms:
Then Sands may be brought from the better proportioned Parts of a Channel, to
such lower-end, and may there settle and remain. But how well soever a whole
Channel is proportioned to the strength of Influx and Efflux; Yet the strength
of Efflux must wholly cease where it falls into the Sea: Because the same is
much wider than any Channel.

Then whatever quantities of fresh and Salt Waters, may Descend or Ebb from
great Wastes or Channels; yet the same, when Issued out of the Channel, can have
but such Motion, as then and there attends the Sea. Wherefore I conclude, all
Waters that are quiet, or have little Motion, do drop Sand; either within their
Channel, or just without it. And that strength of Influx and Efflux, that
cannot keep Sand from settling, while the same is in small Motion, can never
raise that Sand again, and carry it away after it is settled.

The Influx and Efflux, in quiet Weather, seem therefore to disperse no Sand
from Bars that lie without our Out-falls; But on the contrary, such Bars then
grow higher, and are only taken down by Storms. For Example: Some Sand Banks
that lie under Land Shelter remain dry, except some few Tides in a Stream; yet
other Banks that lie more Exposed to Storms, are Drowned every Tide; and in
this Example it matters not whether Sands lie quiet by means of land Shelter,
or from calm Weather.

Whence the Efflux that is most serviceable to out-fall Bars, only carries all
Sand beyond the out-fall; yet there makes an unpassible Bar of the same, if
Storms help not; So the service such out lying Bars have from Efflux, is by
laying all Sand in reach of Storms. And those out-lying Bars that are most
Exposed to Storms, will always be found lowest, in Seas of the same depth. But
a strong Efflux does carry out Sand from a Channel Bar, and Deepen, and
Cleanse Channels and Harbors, even in calm Weather. Which Efflux together with
Tides, and such Storms as can blow in those Parts, seem the only means to
remove those Evils, and make a lasting depth there: Because the Tendency of
Winds and Water, does effect the same.

Therefore any Works that lessen or obstruct Influx, Efflux and Winds, in
Channels and Harbors; do seem to cause those Evils there. And also cause Sand
to remain and increase on an out-lying Bar; Where greater Efflux would lay
such Bar more in reach of Storms. Whence it seems fit we should leave fighting
against those strong Elements, by any new Works; especially where good
Navigations and Land-Drains may be otherwise obtained, and at far less Charge.

The greatest Influx and Efflux we ever had, did widen our respective Channels
and out-falls to the breadth such Waters wanted; which breadth generally
remains where our Bars lie. Therefore the Imbankment of salt Wastes do abate
the strength of Influx and Efflux, and disable them to scower those wide
Passages, and maintain such depth there as greater Waters did.

To show what Imbankments are so prejudicial, and where Imbankments may be
made: I say the salt Wastes in a Channel do deepen any Bar or shallow part of a
Harbor; when such Wastes are drowned, before, it is high Water over that Bar,
or shallow Part. For then those Wastes draw a constant Influx and Efflux over
the same: Therefore the Imbankment of such Wastes do seem to loose Water on
those Bars and shallow Parts. But the ends of a Sand Bar that lie dry at Ebb,
may be raised to the height of marsh Land; and the same, or any high Salts
found there, may be Imbanked of with benefit to Navigation. For then the salt
Wastes or Basin within, will the better scower and deepen the remainder, or
middle part of that Bar. And the ends of a Bar may be so raised by stopping
of bottom Water, yet more than two Inches at a time needs not to be stopped,
nor will the Charge thereof be considerable; when hereafter this Honorable
House shall see fit to mend Navigations by such Works.

Such benefit by Imbankments on Bars seems certain; For all side Imbankments
do deepen the Channel wherever the same are made, and force the Tides higher up
in the Country, and mend the depth there; and so the Navigation receives
benefit by all side Imbankments. But if such Imbankments Inn Wastes that lie
within a Bar, and that would be drowned before it is high Water thereon; then
the Imbankment lessens Influx and Efflux, and so looses Water on the Bar, and
thereby does much more Damage, than benefit to Navigation.

That side Imbankments should gain depth of Water in one Place, and loose it in
another, is a very different Operation from the same Work, and seems not
discovered in former times; because such Imbankments were then recommended as
generally beneficial to Navigation. From whence the Government did encourage or
permit Imbankments, without ascertaining where the same might be made. Which
mistake in the Government, with the Interest of Imbankers, have damnified many
Harbors, and wholly lost some. Yet if any should doubt whether the Decays of
our Navigations come from such Imbankments, The same seems also proved by Fact:
For our Imbankments and Complaints of Decay have both been greater of late
Years than formerly; and Rye Harbor did Decay gradually as Imbankments were
made, and that Corporation did prove the same to the Committee of this
Honorable House, to whom their Petition touching their Harbor was referred.

Offensive Imbankments on Channel sides, seem by Permission of the Government,
and from an Expectation of public Benefit. And though the Government might
mistake as before shown: Yet the Gentlemen possessed of those Imbanked Lands,
have been at great Risque and Charge for the same.

The Imbankment of all remaining Sea Wastes, may be Prohibited by Act of
Parliament, when such Wastes are drowned before it is high Water in the Harbor,
and on the Bar without or below such Wastes. And so our Harbors, Havens, Ports
and Bars may be kept from growing worse, by any Imbankments to be made; and
that without Charge, or doubt of Success. For I propose no Works for this
Benefit; but hope to obtain the same, only by such Prohibition of this
Honorable House as above.

Since the said offensive Imbankments on Channel sides, and also other
Imbankments made by Stops cross the Channels, have been made by advice of
Gentlemen, whose Judgments were best esteemed in their time, and my self
unknown. I did therefore formerly pray the worthy Sir Henry Shere, to give his
thoughts of these observations by Certificate: which Certificate he permits me
to Print at the end of this Proposal. And have further to Inform, That three of
his Majesty's Surveyors (after view of our Coast) agree with me touching the
said Imbankments; but in regard their Report (being long on other occasions) is
now before the Committee for Rye Harbor, I therefore pray leave to referr to
the same.

If the Gentlemen who advised the said Imbankments, could now see their ill
Consequences; I am Confident they would also readily agree with me. And if the
proposed Bill pass not into an Act this Sessions, I apprehend five hundred
Acres more of Sea Wastes will be Imbank'd out of the Indraught of Rye Harbor,
before this Honorable House shall meet next. And it is probable many other
Harbors may be so damnified.

Our strength at Sea, conduces much to our security against any Neighboring
Nation, that may out-number us in Land Forces; and will remain a security while
we are Masters there. And Sea Men are for the use of our Navy, yet by the loss
of mean Harbors, and impair of better, we lessen our Breed of those Men; and
many more are Drowned by loss of Water on our Bars and Flats, at the Mouths of
our better Channels.

If any other Nation use Endeavors to increase it is Naval Force, to become our
Superior at Sea; Then the offensive Imbankers seem to assist them therein;
(yet with no ill intent) for without good Ports, our Island and Shipping are a
feeble Defense. It shall suffice me to mention but this one Public Evil
attending those offensive Imbankments; yet many more might be enumerated.

Till the Obstructions are removed out of the main Channel of Rye Harbor, that
Harbor cannot be improved; nor can Three Fathom of Water at low Ebb be gained
on a new out-fall Bar in those Parts; as by my Petition to this Honorable
House (and now before the Committee for Rye Harbor) is proposed. But if a Bill
shall hereafter be brought in, and open that Channel, the same may probably
make five Fathoms of Water at low Ebb in Rye Harbor; and if so, I will then
hope to show that Tides and Storms will be enough on my side, to make three
Fathom at Ebb, on such Bar as will settle without my new out-fall. And I the
rather expect such depth, because Rye Corporation prove three Fathom of Water
now in their Harbor at low Ebb, and that seven Fathom has been there
formerly; as by their Proofs before the said Committee may appear.

I presume this Honorable House had rather preserve our Navigations from
growing worse without Charge, than at present expend Public Money on their
Improvements. Therefore I will say no more now touching these Services,

Robert Colepepyr.

May the 30th School.
AT the desire of Mr. Colepepyr, I do hereby Certify whom it may concern; That
I have perused several of his Papers and Proposals, Printed and others, on the
Subject of his Memorials, touching the remedies of those many Evils the Nation
suffers, through the loss of Water, on our Coast and in Rivers; wherein there
seems to me to be contained many rational and well grounded Observations about
the Decay and Impediments of the Navigation of this Kingdom, by the loss of
Water in our Rivers, and the growing of Bars, Banks and Shelves in our Havens,
in sundry places on the Coast, to the great prejudice of the general Commerce
and Water Carriage of the Nation. By which Papers and Proposals, and my
frequent Conversation with him on those Subjects, I observe him (according to
my poor abilities to Judge,) to be a Person both well instructed in the Theory,
and grounded in the Practice and Experience of such Works: Discoursing rightly
about the Causes of the said Evils to our Navigation, and Practicably of the
Remedies. Which useful Qualities of the said Mr. Colepepyr, may, I humbly
conceive, entitle him to Public Encouragement.

Witness my Hand, Henry Shere.


