THE HINGE OF FAITH AND RELIGION; OR, A Proof of the Deity against Atheists and
Profane Persons, by Reason, and the Testimony of Holy Scripture: the Divinity
of which is demonstrated,

By L. Cappel, Doctor and Professor in Divinity.

Translated out of French By Philip Marinel, M. A. and Fellow of
Pembroke-College in Oxford.

Printed for Thomas Dring, at the George near St- Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street. 1660.

To the WORSHIPFUL St-JOHN CHERNOCK, Esquire.
IT was not any desire I had to appear in Public, that incited me to set forth
these Dr. Cappel's last Works in English: I am conscious enough to my self of
my defects. Neither would I have ventured ever to let this Translation see the
light; but that some Friends persuaded me, that this piece against Atheism was
very seasonable in these Times, where almost every body (through our late
unhappy Distractions, and Toleration of the wildest Phansies in matter of
Divine Worship) is to seek for his Religion. And it is to be feared, that many,
who profess outwardly the Principles of Religion, have yet no sound
apprehensions of the main Foundation of it, viz. Of the Deity: which they (I
mean, most part of the Common people) seldom think of: or, if they do, they
have such conceptions of it, as that it would make a man of Reason think, he is
not of the same kind. So grossly, and so absurdly, they do talk of the
Almighty, and of those matters in Religion, which Natural Reason teaches: that
I have often been in the mind, to think with an ancient Philosopher, that the
Forms of Asses, and Hogs, did now and then animate those Bodies, which are
framed in the shape of a Man, and which are common amongst us. But I have since
perceived, that these things (for I knew not what other names to give them)
were apt to be taught; that they indeed had Reason, and that really they were
men, and therefore had Souls to save: which, I am sure, they cannot do, unless
they have a right apprehension of the Deity; in these places especially, where
they have means enough afforded them to effect this. This small Treatise will,
I am sure, (if read seriously, and without prejudice) help such ignorant people
very much. But it is not the main end, for which it was intended. It is wholly
to confute a company of Ruffling Fellows, who call themselves the Strong Wits,
forsooth! and that with an Emphasis too: who think it is a piece of Gallantry
to deny a God, and a Providence, and who indeed would have it so, for the
Reasons alleged in the first Chapter of this Book. They shall find here
satisfaction enough; if they do but take the leisure to peruse it. I am not
ignorant, that there have been many pieces made by sundry Learned men upon this
subject: but I never read, or heard of any, who has handled it in this Method,
and so clearly. And, since I am utterly incapable to express, and set forth the
Praises and Elogies due to the worthy Author, I will rather choose to bury
them in silence, and let him gain it himself, in his Book: the Translation of
which I undertook at first, but to satisfy a Friend's desire. I have done it
as well as I could, and to a sincere end, and therefore I do not much fear to
be blamed. As for the Publication of it, your own incitement, Honored Sir, was
a sufficient Motive to attempt it: and I do here humbly present it to you, as a
Testimony of that Gratitude I am bound to pay you, for those manifold favors
you have Honored me withal; and as a Token of that Respect I ow unto your
Piety and Virtue, which is the Nobility God has eminently endowed you with;
besides that of Blood, that your Illustrious Ancestors have conferred on you.
Whom I beseech the Almighty to protect and preserve in all prosperity in this
life, and in the life to come to give you an immortal Crown of Glory; And
remain,

Honored Sir, Your most humble, most obedient, and obliged Servant, P.M.

THE AUTHORS PREFACE TO THE READER.
THIS small Treatise is not compiled with any Hopes to reduce wholly those,
against whom I argue. For such persons are not recalled by Disputations,
Discourses, or Humane Reasonings. That they may be healed and converted, God
himself must speak, must scourge, and terrify them, with his revengefull
Judgments. The sin of such Persons is like that of Sodom and Gomorrah, viz,
Pride, Fullness of Bread, and Abundance of Idleness. (Ezech. xvi. 49.) They most
especially are troubled with this Disease, who live in this World, according to
their own desires, who abound with the Goods of this present World, who are
overwhelmed with the Wealth, Honors, Sweets, and Pleasures of this Life: For
the turning away of the Simple shall slay them, and the Prosperity of Fools
shall destroy them; Prove. i. 32.

Whilst they enjoy this Prosperity, and have their ease and quiet, they avert
their thoughts from God; the Remembrance of whom would but make them sad, and
would much trouble their Repose, since they cannot promise to themselves any
good from him, who loves Virtue, Justice, and Holiness, which in no ways is
consistent with that kind of Life, which they have chosen, to pass it in
Pleasure, Delicateness, and Effeminacy.

Then do they stop their Ears, as the Serpent against the Charms of the
Charmer, they leave off to be wise, and to do good; therefore they are not
capable of receiving Instruction, and they would be very angry to acknowledge
their Error; because, if so, they must be bound to amend their Lives, which is
that they will not do, finding it wonderfully sweet and delicious. But when
they are met with by Death, and that they be a grapling with her, when she
does overpower them, or when by some notorious, wonderful, and exemplary
Judgment of God, they are fallen from their Greatness, Wealth, Goods, and
Pleasures, and are reduced to the State of Job, or the Prodigal Son in the
Gospel: then sometimes they may be healed, then their affrighted Conscience
does awake them from their deep slumber; then at sometimes they open their eyes
to the acknowledgement, and detestation of their Error. Without this, they are
like those, who, being sick of a Lethargy, may be pinched, spoken to, etc. yet
never budg, nor will not awake; because they take more pleasure in their sleep,
and drowsiness, which at last lays them in their Grave.

This Treatise is rather intended to these ends: viz.

First, To keep from this horrible Precipice those, that have some Natural bent
and inclination that way. For the general, and Natural Corruption of man is to
them an hidden Master, and Teacher of Atheism, which now and then suggests
these thoughts into their hearts; Who has told you that there is a God, whom
you never saw? And, Where have they learned it, who taught you this? What
greater assurance of this have they themselves? And, Whence did it proceed?

Secondly, It is to uphold their Faith, in whom these thoughts have taken some
Impression.

Thirdly, To show the mistake of those, who think, that, setting aside the
Revelation of the word of God, those persons ( viz. The Atheists) are not void
of Reason, and speak not without some warrant. For it is here showed, that they
oppose Reason, and belly it in diverse manners.

Finally, This is to beat down, in some manner, the vainglory, and the profane
mockings of those persons, who laugh at the simplicity (as they think) of the
World, which is of so light a belief, (as they call it) as to give credit to
those Writings, which are called the Bible, without any more warrant of their
Belief, then the common Report, or an hearsay, or else the Testimony of some
men, that take upon them the Authority to give to these Sacred Writings the
Credit, which it has amongst us, and yet cannot in any other ways show, upon
what their Testimony is grounded; and thereby do weaken the Faith of those, who
are taught to attribute more then mere Reason to the Testimony of these Books
and Sacred Writers. For here it is showed against the Atheists, that they make
themselves absurd and ridiculous in doubting, without any appearance of Reason,
of the Authority of these Sacred Books.

It is now three years ago, since this Treatise was dictated to some young
Divines in this place, without any other Design, then their own satisfaction;
and this was also done at their Request, and to be to them as a Basis and
Foundation of their Faith and Religion. For it is that by which we must begin,
That there is a God: which many do not know, but because they have heard other
say so, without having pondered and examined upon what ground this Common
belief is seated. But since that time, after this small piece had been viewed
and approved by able Masters, to whose Judgment I (as it is my duty) do
submit: I, by their persuasions, have thought that this, being made public,
cannot do any harm to any, and may profit some. And this the rather; that I
might evidence, that we ought to serve God to the utmost of our abilities, in
maintaining his cause against his most furious Adversaries; and that those of
our Coat, and Profession, are not such, as some would willingly make the world
believe them to be, viz. Enemies of God, and of his Truth, since we do (as much
as in us lies) establish the grounds of it: clean contrary to those of their
Profession, who, feigning to lay this Foundation firm, do in effect overthrow
it; setting it upon rotten Pillars, and by a secret intelligence with those
enemies, against which they seem to fight, do betray, and abandon that Truth,
whereof they would have men believe them to be the Assertours. If, by the
reading of this small Treatise, (which cannot much divert the Readers from
their other employments) any find themselves edified, and strengthened in the
faith and belief of this so important Article, which is the Ground of Religion;
I shall have attained my end, and will believe that my Meditation on this point
has not been vain. And to God, who directs by his Wisdom the thoughts of men
to his own Glory, and for his own Work, be ascribed all Honor, Praise, and
Glory, for ever. Amen.

ATHEISM CONVICTED, AND PROFANENESS CONFUTED, By the Light of Right Reason
and by the Testimony of GOD and MEN.
CHAP. I. The reach of Atheism, its first spring, diverse Branches of this
Notorious Infidelity.
IT is a strange and wonderful thing, that (seeing the Knowledge of divine and
Celestial matters is far greater and clearer in most of men that are upon the
face of the Earth then ever it was) we see nevertheless more Atheists and
profane persons then ever were, even among the Heathen, which do appear by the
stupendous wickedness, and abominable Corruption of good manners, which is at
this day so common among Christians, being most true which the Apostle says,
That many do acknowledge God with their Lips, but by their works do deny him.

The spring of this Evil, is the unlimited Love of the Wealth, Pleasures,
Commodities, honors and dignities of this present World. For men being hurried
by their Passions toward these things, and nevertheless having a natural
Resentment of a Deity, and some Knowledge of the Difference between Good and
Evil, Vice and Virtue, and of the Punishments and Rewards which they do justly
deserve (which is to them as most bitter Gall, and Wormwood, and does deprive
them of the pleasure and content which they do take in glutting themselves with
these false and deceiving Goods) do endeavor to quench in themselves this
strong persuasion they have of a Deity, or at the least do frame false Opinions
of him and of his Nature, that they may go on with more looseness, less
Remorse, and more pleasure in the Execution of their evil desires, and to
fortify themselves in this Opinion they do seek, and gather all the Reasons
and Arguments, which the subtillnesse of their Wits and Parts can furnish them
withal.

Now there are two sorts of Atheists, the first are formally and openly so, The
second are close and reserved. Again of these first, there are two kinds, The
first of which acknowledge and profess that there is no God, and even do upon
all occasions, endeavor to make others believe the same: the other sort is of
those which persuade themselves that there is no God, and notwithstanding dare
not vent that Opinion openly either for fear of the Justice of men which does
most justly chastise and punish this horrible Impiety, or for shame of the
World which does abhor and detest such Monsters as these.

Now they, whose profaneness is not so open, do indeed acknowledge a Deity, but
they have erroneous Opinions of it, which cannot consist with the Reality of
its Nature. The God of such persons is nothing else but an Idol, a False God,
and only a Phantasme of the Deity, now he that has but this is not far from
Atheism.

Of all these Opinions some are more gross and less agreeing with the Nature of
the Deity, the other are more subtle and harder to be apprehended, which
nevertheless do oppugn its Nature, and cannot really agree with the true Deity.

Of the former is the Tenet of Epicurus who did acknowledge a Deity, but such a
one as had nothing to do with the World, and had neither made it, nor did
govern it, and was without any care what was done in it. Next to this was the
Opinion of the Peripateticks, who did hold that there was a first matter, but
to whom they did attribute only the moving of the Primum mobile, and a general
and undeterminated Action without any Cognizance or Government of particular
things, who was neither the efficient cause of this world, which they did
assert had been from all Eternity without any Beginning. The same also was the
Opinion of the Heathen, who did believe a Plurality of Gods, either Independent
one upon another, or generated and procreated the one by the other, to which
also they attributed humane Passions and Affections, as Anger, Envy, Carnal
Lusts, Joy, and Sorrow.

The second sort of false Opinions, more cunning and subtle, is of those who
cannot think that God is infinitely just, or infinitely merciful, but believe
that he pardons Sin without punishing of it, and that he does punish it only
because it is his pleasure, seeing that he could abstain from the punishing of
it if he would, and that he could (if he pleased) be unwilling to punish it.
Which Opinion carries this with it, that Good and Evil are not so in their
Nature, but only as it pleases God to command the one, and forbid the other,
and hence it follows that he could forbid the Good and command the Evil, and
this does transform God in the Principle of the ancient and abominable
Heretic Manes, who because of the difference of Good and Evil, did constitute
two Principles of them, the one good and the other evil; nay, these do worse
then him, since they holding one Principle, make it susceptible of both, viz
Good and Evil.

Those also that will not acknowledge that God is such as he has revealed, and
made himself known in his word, viz. One in three distinct persons, and by his
Eternal word Jesus Christ his Son, who was incarnate, and dyed for to save the
world, such are those ancient Heretics who have resisted the most holy and
most happy Trinity, and our Saviors Incarnation, together with the Disciples
and followers of Mahomet, who is by them preferred before Christ. For all such
persons under a false pretense they have of maintaining the Unity of God, do
annihilate him as much as in them lies, in crying down his Power and Eternal
Wisdom, which are the Son and the Holy Ghost, and would have them to be only
bare names, phantasmes or mere creatures.

There might be added many other opinions, Ancient and Modern, as namely that
of old, of the Anthropomorphites that thought God to be corporeal, and that he
was furnished with Arms, Legs, and Eyes like a man: From whom do not go very
far those who erect Images of the Holy Trinity to adore and serve it. All such
Opinions are entirely unworthy, and alienated from the Infinite Excellency of
God, do beget in the Spirits of men a false apprehension, and a mere Phantasme
of the Deity, and do avert men from the true Fear, Respect, Obedience, Piety,
and Honor, which his Creatures are bound to pay him.

There is also another Rise and Root of this Profaneness, and as it is more
hid and subtle, so it is more general and common, viz. of those who do indeed
acknowledge a Deity, and have no erroneous opinions of its Nature, but
nevertheless would be very glad, and willingly could wish that there were no
God, and that for the same end and reason, as those have, who endeavor to
persuade themselves that there is none, to wit, that they may more licentiously
follow their evil desires, and Concupiscences.

And this Wickedness is so common, that there are none but the truly faithful,
and those who are regenerated by the Spirit of God, that are wholly free from
this, and also to these somt mes such thoughts come into their Hearts when they
are tempted and enticed by their own Lusts, which is like a Spring of Gall
spouting on high with which they are defiled, which they resist as much as they
can by the efficacy of the Spirit of God.

CHAP. II. Two Ways of Convincing Atheism, viz. by Arguments and Authority.
I. Argument, Drawn from this, viz. That the World has had a Beginning.
THere are two ways of handling a subject, the first to prove positively that
it is, and what it is, the second to confute that which may be brought against
it. We purpose to our selves here only to prove against Atheists, that there is
a God, and not to answer to all the perverseness and subtilty of humane reason
(ingenious and prone to its own Ruin) can bring to persuade it self the
contrary, because that as there are common Truths so clear and evident that no
Sophisme or Paralogisme can make us to swerve from it, though (it may be) we
cannot dissolve and untie the Knot of the Sophisme; so this truth, that there
is a God, being well and solidly proved and demonstrated, there will be no
Argument (though never so artificial) that shall make us to decline it, albeit
we could not clearly see which way we might dis-intangle our selves and come
out from these Labyrinths. Unless we perchance were of the number of those (of
whom we have heretofore spoken) who should be very willing that there were no
God: For we gladly believe, and easily persuade our selves, that which we
desire; we our selves give weight and strength to those Arguments which do
enforce it upon us, and contrarily weaken, as much as in us lies, those that
oppose them. Hence comes to pass, that this day so many give ear to
Atheistical Doctors, and are easily persuaded to credit their abominable
discourses, which is prejudicial to themselves, and an Argument of the
weakness of their cause, for it is no wonder easily to believe that which is
vehemently desired.

Now there are two ways of proving a thing. The first by Reason, The second,
by Testimony and Authority. The last is more curt and easy, but sometimes more
doubtful and less certain, and that it may be made valid, and firm, it must be
demonstrated, that he who gives this Testimony first, knows and understands
well what he says. Secondly, That he is true and faithful, and that he is
neither able or willing to lie and deceive, and that there is no reason to
suspect him of ignorance and malice, and in this case the proof is certain and
evident. And of this kind of Testimony we shall say something toward the end
of this Discourse.

The Deity may be proved by many Reasons of which we shall select some of the
most common, upon which we nevertheless will not more enlarge, then it shall
suffice to show the force and validity of them.

Among all those Reasons that prove a Deity, this may be the first. To wit,
That this World necessarily has had a Beginning, and consequently a Maker,
(which has produced it, and has given it its Being) which cannot be supposed
to have been any other but God.

There are two Ways of proving a thing by Reason. First is, That which
Philosophers call a Priori, in coming down from the Cause to the Effects, and
demonstrating the Effects by the Causes. The second a Posteriori, ascending
from the Effects to the Cause, and proving the Cause by the Effects. This first
kind of Demonstration cannot be here admitted, for there is nothing above or
before God by which its Being may be demonstrated, it cannot therefore be
proved but by his Effects only. And here we may take notice of Epicurus his
mistake, who did acknowledge a Deity but which was neither the Cause of this
Universe, nor did any wise Govern it. For from whence could he know or
acknowledge a Deity, but from the Consideration of this World as its Effect?
Such an Opinion as this he could not get by Revelation, seeing that according
to his Tenent, it did not take notice or meddle with men's affairs, and besides
that he would not admit any such Revelations. From whence it is clear, that it
has only been an Artifice of this Philosopher to shun the hatred and
detestation of men which he had incurred if he had wholly and openly denied the
Deity.

The Deity therefore can neither be known nor proved, but by the due
Consideration of its effects, from which diverse Reasons may be drawn, and from
this first way, the Deity may be thus inferred.

Nothing can produce its own self, for if it was so, then that thing should be
before it was, which is absurd, and implies a Contradiction: It necessarily then
follows, that either the World has been from Eternity without any Beginning,
or else that it has had a Beginning: For there is no Medium betwixt these
Terms, It has not been, nor could be from Everlasting, and without a
Beginning; which might be proved by Diverse Arguments, but we will content our
selves with two or three. The first of which is, That if the world were
Eternal, there should be not only one Number but many, yea almost infinite
Numbers really, and actually infinite, which cannot be, and is manifestly
Repugnant to Reason; For there, is not, or can be conceived any number, let it
be never so great, but that there may be added to it, not only an Unite, but
any other Number whatsoever, let this Number be imagined to be so great as it
can.

And that which is yet more unconceiveable, goes beyond all Absurdities, and
implies a manifest Contradiction is, that there should be many Numbers really,
and actually infinite, which should be lesser or greater then some others that
are supposed to be infinite, which is absurd. To the infinite nothing can be
added; all infinite things consequently ought to be equal. Now if this World is
Eternal, the Heavens have turned from all Eternity, and if they have always
turned without any Beginning of this Circumvolution; there has hitherto been a
Number actually infinite of their Revolutions, because ascending from this
days Revolution, we shall never find an end of these Revolutions, since they
are supposed to have had no Beginning: So in this Eternity there has been an
infinite number of years (since there has been an infinite Number of these
Revolutions) each of which does make a year now, so it is that there are more
Months then years, more days then Months, more hours then days, and more
minutes then hours, so that (as I have said) there has been in this Eternity
diverse Numbers, each of which is actually infinite, and nevertheless some are
greater then others. Likewise upon this supposition there has been an
infinite number of Trees and plants succeeding the one to the other by that
perpetual vicissitude which is perceived in Nature. Now in a Tree there are
many greater Branches upon one stock, many lesser Branches upon greater
Branches, and finally more Leaves then Branches: And consequently the number of
Trees, Branches, and Leaves, will be actually infinite, and nevertheless the
number of Leaves shall be greater then that of the Branches, and the number of
Branches greater then that of the stocks. The same may be said of men and of
all other bodies which consist of many parts, for in a man there are more
fingers then arms, more hairs then heads, etc.

Moreover in this supposed Eternity, there has been an infinite number of
days, and an infinite number of nights, now the day precedes the night, or the
night the day in respect of each Hemisphere, which we take it matters not, for
it will always follow that in this Eternity, there has been a number actually
infinite either of nights or of days, which shall be lesser or greater then
another infinite number by an Unit, for necessarily in either of the
Hemispheres there are more days then nights by one, and more nights then days
by one.

Moreover the Generation of men, and the manner of it, as we do apprehend it,
contradicts the Eternity of the World. And that first, because if the World is
eternal, an infinite number of men have been before these that live this day
upon the face of the Earth; and an infinite number also of those who lived a
thousand years ago, and infinite those who are supposed to have lived ten
thousand years ago, and so consequently to the infinite; so that there are
infinite numbers that are infinite, which nevertheless are less then some
others also infinite. For to the infinite number of those who have preceded ten
thousand years ago, we must of necessity add those who have been since these
ten thousand years.

Secondly, in the generation of men this is a general note, that men who this
day are living (taken not each one apart but every one together) have more
Fathers then Grandfathers, more Grandfathers then great-Grand-fathers, for each
man has his own Father, but many men have the same Grandfather, and the same
Grandfather has many more Children of his Children then the Father; so that
going upwards we shall see the number of Praedecessors to diminish, from whence
it is necessarily concluded, that at last we must come to a first Father, who
had no Ancestors, but is the Origin and spring of all the rest. Which
Foundation being laid, it must necessarily follow, that there was an infinite
time in which there was no Generation of men; or that the World has existed
for an infinite time without any men before the production of this first, now
neither can be asserted or maintained with the least appearance of Reason. For
how should this man have thought of generating after he had existed from
Eternity without Generating? The same question cannot be moved against us of
God, why, and how he should have thought of creating the World after that he
had existed for an infinite number of Ages without creating: for the Eternity
of God is not a successive time, as the pretended Eternity of the World is,
where necessarily some moments follow the others, since Gods Eternity is
always indivisible, and where there is neither A prius or posterius, first or
second.

Moreover, The History of things past is repugnant to this pretended Eternity
of the World, for if it had existed from the very Depth of Eternity, so that
there have been always men upon the Earth, whence does it come to pass, that
ascending to, and looking over things past, we cannot find any Monument or
Remembrance of things done above five or six thousand years ago? Experience
teaches us, that the longer a man lives, the more does he take notice of the
Events that befall in his life time: By so much the more as Commonalties and
Corporations do last, by so much do they polish and refine themselves, and do
also leave more Monuments of their Actions. If therefore the World and its
Inhabitants were only but from fifty thousand years ago, we should have at this
day some Monuments of their Histories very clear and distinct, at least from
above ten thousand years since (especially) that the World being existent;
according to our Hypothesis of five thousand years, and a little above, we only
have Monuments of Histories that are evident but from two thousand years.

That which can be excepted against the forementioned Argument is, that there
have been Deluges, and Universal Inundations, that have abolished all the
preceding Monuments, and all men that then were existent, besides one or two,
or such a small number to Replenish the Earth. But that they may solve the
forenamed Argument, they must assert that there have been infinite Inundations
of the like Nature (otherwise we shall always ascend to a man that was in the
Beginning, the spring and Rise of all the rest, who existed from Eternity
without generating) which Hypothesis is liable to many inconveniences, and may
be evinced with many strong Arguments. Besides that those give themselves a
great deal of Liberty, who will conclude an infinite number of Inundations from
that which (as we do all agree) did once come to pass.

Moreover if we grant Inundations of the same Nature, we must also acknowledge
a Deity, which must govern and guide them, otherwise how can it come to pass
that from each one of these deluges, there should be some men preserved to
people the Earth again, for if they did happen by chance only, we cannot
imagine but that some of them, yea the most part of them should have wholly
abolished and Raced from the face of the Earth, all men and beasts without any
exception, since it is granted by the History of this of which we do agree,
that men and beasts have been preserved by a singular, and admirable Providence
of the Deity, without which, man could not have escaped it without a great
deal of danger; much less preserve with himself all parts of Beafts. For to
assert with Ovid in his Metamorphosis drawn from other Pagan Fables, That
beafts have formed themselves out of the mud after this Inundation, is not to
speak like a Philosopher, or a Rational man: Such as those would appear to be
who do oppugn a Deity. Add to this, that if the like Inundations had
frequently happened, there should without doubt have remained some Memory of
them. And the first that should have escaped it, would have transferred the
Monument of it to their issue, and these to them that should have succeeded
them, and so from hand to hand we should have Records of many like Inundations
which is very false.

Finally, This Argument which the Atheists do assume, drawn from the Eternity
of the World may be retorted against them, for if a thing Corporeal, Finite,
Material, so gross, and so imperfect as this World is, can nevertheless have
been, and subsisted from all Eternity, as now it is existent; how much more is
it according to right Reason to constitute a spiritual, immateriall, infinite,
and eternal Essence, subsisting of it self which is nothing else but the
Deity? For by how much the more things are immateriall and spiritual, by so
much the greater activity have they, and consequently are more able to subsist
and last longer, as is seen in Souls, Angels, and Spirits.

Moreover we see that this World is corruptible almost in all its parts, which
are in perpetual vicissitudes and changes of being and not being, which does
argue that it draws toward its end, and that finally it will be dissolved,
for the whole participates of the Nature of its parts, and cannot be contrary
to them, now how can that have been from all Eternity, and without any
Beginning, that draws to an end, and that at last will come to it? For if
hitherto it has endured infinitely, it may do the same for the future, if it
cannot last for the future, it is clearly evident that it cannot have been
from all Eternity. If then the World has neither been, nor can be supposed to
have existed from all Eternity, it has necessarily had a Beginning, and since
nothing can produce it self, we must conclude, That it has been produced by
some one that has had no Beginning, but has been from all Eternity, who is no
other but God himself; otherwise we must affirm that this Architect of the
world has been produced by some other, and this also by another, and so to the
infinite, which is grossly absurd.

Those do not much more further the Atheists cause, who from all Eternity do
constitute a confused Chaos, and a first matter of this World from which it
has been extracted. For first, It is a thing beyond imagination that that
which is only a mere Power without any form, such as the first matter is
supposed to be, has, or can have of it self so much strength as to have
subsisted from Eternity, or that a consused and indigested matter, such as the
Chaos is imagined to be, could have existed infinitely in an equal Consusion.
Besides, those that are of this Opinion, as Plato, etc. have been forced to
acknowledge a Workman and Architect supreamly wise and industrious, viz. The
deity which has extracted this order, which we now see out of the Confusion of
this Chaos, and has reduced that Power of the first Matter into Act, who has
formed so wonderful a Workmanship out of so confused a Matter, which had it
not been for such an infinite power as this is, it might have for ever remained
in its Disorder and Confusion: for why should it have been otherwise, and why
should have Order sprung out of Disorder in such or such a moment, rather then
at any other time, unless it were by the means of a superior power, and a
free Agent who has composed it according to his Will? As of a massy Clay, no
vessel can be formed without the industrious and artificial hand of the
Potter.

For as to this new and admirable Philosopher, greater Mathematician then
Naturalist, who will renovate the Doctrine of Democritus's Atoms (moving
themselves not in a Vacuum and infinite space, but in us I know not what
Quintessence hitherto ignored, which runs and passes between them as small
leaves and strawes, through the Thorns of a thick Hedge) who requires that
there may be assigned him a certain matter, and he will demonstrate, that out
of it may come forth, and form it self such a World as this is. When he has
put forth his demonstrations upon that Point, it will be seen whether this his
Promise is as well grounded as that of his Master Archimedes, who desired that
there might be assigned him a fixed and immovable point, and he would remove
the Earth and all the World out of its place, and transport it into another.

CHAP. III. The second Argument against Athiesme, Drawn from the Order and
Disposition of this World.
IT is a Difference, seen and noted by all, between Casual things, and those
which proceed from Prudence and Reason, that in those things which are
Fortuitous, and Casual, neither Order, nor Disposition is perceived: but only
a confused mixture of things; in the other is deprehended, Order, and Right
disposition, and a certain Symmetry and composition, from which does proceed an
Agreeable, and Gracious Beauty; and the more the Workman is industrious, able,
and expert, the more is seen in his Works, Order, and due Disposition; as for
example, other are the Magnificent buildings of great Kings, and the small
Cottages seen in Country Villages, or those pastimes of Children, who presume
to build Castles and Houses, of small pieces of brick, and chips of wood.

In the Composure and Edifice of this great Universe, and of the liltle World,
Man; one must needs be very blind, who does not perceive in it an Order, a
Disposition, and Composition of Proportions, and Symmetry, in all it is parts,
which is exceeding admirable, and has ravished out of themselves those among
the very Heathens, who have narrowly considered it, and has forced them to
acknowledge a Deity, from which this Order is proceeded.

Such an Order and Disposition, and these so wonderful Proportions can neither
be an effect, or Production of a blind and fortuitous fate: but, we must in
this acknowledge a Wisdom, Prudence, and Industry, above any man's reach of
apprehension, that has so wisely ordered these things. For any Man to say,
that they have always continued so, without any beginning, and that therefore
they have no Creator, is that which we have Confuted in the preceding Chapter,
and moreover, it is that which can neither be comprehended, nor imagined; that
so admirable an Order should not proceed from any cause, and were not the
product of Superior Wisdom. Now, what can be this Wisdom, but the Deity it
self? for any man to refer this to a Virtue Physical, Irrational, and sui
nescia, diffused, and scattered thorough this great Mass of the World, as
those Philosophers, which, in another sense, did imagine, that there was a soul
of the World, almost like that Power we see seeds to have, in producing Plants,
Trees, and Animalls, is an error, want of right reasoning, and Petitio
Principii, for that virtue we deprehend in seeds, could not produce effects so
wonderful in the composition and Symmetry of all parts of bodies which spring
from thence, unless it was directed by a Superior cause, most wise, and full
of admirable industry. Since a thing that is irrational, and inanimate, cannot
be a fit subject of so mavelous a Wisdom, and so admirable an industry.

Again, this imaginary soul of the World, so diffused thorough this vast body,
must constitute an Animal (as man, who is composed of body and soul) or not.
If it does not make an Animal, it does not inform this great and Massy body;
but has it is Subsistency by it self, if it subsists by it self; here is by
their own Concession, and Confession, a thing im material, Incorporeall, that
is infinitely wise, and infinitely Powerful, since it produces so so many,
and so wonderful effects; and what is that but the Deity of which is our
dispute? for, this soul which is so wise, and mighty, must of necessity have
been from all Eternity; and must have made and ordered this World as it is
efficient cause, and yet it must be separated from it, since it is not the
form that does animate it, as the soul does the body of Man. Now, what needs
rather to assert that there is such an efficient cause, all wise, and all
mighty, which has from all Eternity, made and composed this World, and so to
cast ones self upon the manifold, and unavoidable absurdities, that do
necessarily follow the assertion of the Eternity of the World, then with us,
and the truth, to constitute such a cause as has made this World, since only a
certain space of time, and by that to disintangle ones self from those
Labyrinths and inevitable absurdities.

If they say, that this supposed soul of the World does inform its matter,
and does constitute a natural composure, such as the soul, and body does
constitute a Man, then this world must needs be a great, vast, and Monstrous
Animal, which is composed of parts that are not organicall (as the limbs, and
parts of a humane body are) and must have some correspondency and proportion
with the form, and the soul which animates them, which is a frantic, and
wild imagination; unworthy, not only of Philosophers (such as these would be
thought to be) but even of men, of mean and low capacities; but moreover, this
only follows, that according to this supposition, and concession of the
Atheists, we have here a great, and almost infinite Animal, Eternal,
Almighty, and all wise, from which all things that are seen are produced, as so
many effects of its wisdom and Power. Now, how near comes such an imagination
to that which we say is the Deity? but that it is much more consonant to
reason, and to that Dignity and Majesty of this wisdom, and Power to place it
(as we do) by it self, and separated from the matter, immense, infinite,
subsisting of it self, and by it self, then with them to affirm, that it
informs so vile and gross a matter, as this of the world is, and to shut it
up within the precincts of this world, without being, or subsisting out of it.
For, this is to make it finite, and Limited, in respect of its extension; now,
if in this respect it is finite, and limited, why then not also in respect of
its duration? So, that according to the Tenet of those persons, we must at last
come again to this, that this world has made it self, or rather is risen out
of nothing, without the help of any cause, and that in a certain time, which
is a very wild, and absurd imagination. And if this wisdom and Power is
infinite, in respect of its duration, being eternal (as they say it is) why
shall it not also be infinite in respect of its extension? and if they say it
is infinite as to its extension, it exists, and subsists without this world,
and out of it, which necessarily we must affirm to be finite, seeing there is
no body (no more then number) actually infinite. So are they compelled to
avouch a Wisdom, and Power immateriall, infinite in all its acceptions, as well
in respect of its extension, as of its duration, subsisting of it self, and
from all Eternity, and separated from all matter, which is nothing else but
that which every one means by a Deity. And here we may take notice of the
impertinency and absurdity of the opinion of Democritus, and of Epicurus after
him, that would have had this world to have been framed by a fortuitous
concourse of Atoms, moving themselves casually, in an infinite Vacuum, and in
an infite space of time also; for, besides the absurdity, there is, in
imagining to ones self, small indivisible bodies, which, nevertheless have
little hooks, by which they catch one another, and so concur together in the
produceing of any thing, as those people did fancy, and besides that, it is
unimaginable, that in so minute, bodies, such as those are, there should be
found various, and infinite qualities, which we deprehend in the bodies
composed of them; or, if they be without any quality, that out of their
concourse there should spring forth so many, and so various qualities; there is
yet this very palpable absurdity, which is, that out of so fortuitous and
casual concourse, which is not directed by any Superior intellect, there
should be produced a work so admirable, as the world is, all the parts of which
are conformed with such a Harmony and Symmetry, that it confounds the thoughts
of those who do sedulously consider it, and so constant a duration of this
order in the perpetual succession of bodies, which we see are formed by
nature, and again, that if by this fortuitous concourse, the world has been so
made by the same motion of those Atoms, it may likewise be dissolved, and so we
must imagine in an Eternity, an infinite number of worlds made, and again
dissolved, successively, one after another, by the motion, and fortuitous
concourse of Atoms, and by this is destroyed the pretended Eternity of this
world: for the defending of which, the Atheists do so much trouble themselves.

CHAP. IIII. A third Argument, Drawn from the Difference, which is between Vice
and Virtue.
AS in the works of Nature, there is that Symmetry, and wonderful disposition;
so well managed, so constant and regular, (of which has been spoken in the
precedent chapter) that it does clearly evidence to us, an admirable and
infinite wisdom, which is the Author of it; so also in humane things, even in
the actions of men, and in the products and emergencies of their intellects and
wills, we may plainly see an Order and Symmetry, so wonderful, that it cannot
be conceived to be a product of fate, from which nothing but confusion does
proceed.

This Principally does appear in the wisdom and subtlety of a man's Spirit, and
in the effects of these faculties of his Soul, or in the rectitude of his
actions, flowing from the practical part of his soul, which is called Moral
virtue, both of which do point at something of Divine in Man, and which cannot
have its birth from a fortuitous and blinder cause, that is supposed to act
without Knowledge, and from this also is drawn another Argument against
Atheism, of which we will treat in its place.

To this Virtue and Moral good, Evil, Sin, and Vices are opposed, which
opposition does not wholly depend on man's Free Will, (for things of this Nature
easily do change and vary) but this difference of Good and Evil, Vice and
Virtue is fixed and altogether immutable, and is so deeply tooted in the heart
of man, who does naturally know it, that all the men in the World cannot alter
it, and it will be known by them even in despite of themselves; for the most
barbarous and desperate, although they be Virtues grand Adversaries, cannot but
often admire its Excellency, and highly value it where she is found, and
although they many times know not the Vice, which resides in their hearts, and
the evil Actions which they (blinded by their Passions) do commit, yet they
will with facility deprehend it in others, and detest and condemn it, if
especially it turns against their interest, and to their prejudice: And as all
acknowledge the Beauty and Excellency of Virtue, and the deformity of its
contrary, Vice; so all agree in this, that the former calls for the Love,
Praise, and Commendation of men: Contrarily, that the latter is worthy of the
bitterest hatred, and of all men's detestations, and ought to draw after it
self severe punishments, as its due, from thence we draw another Argument
against Atheism.

This difference of Good and Evil is not a mere Fancy and Opinion, but
Essentially real as in natural things, Black and White, Light, and Darkness;
Neither does it proceed from any custom, that by degrees has gained upon men's
minds, for that which comes by custom does grow by little and little, and is
weaker in the bud then afterward, may be altered easily, and insensibly turns
to nothing, which is not seen in the difference of Good and Evil, which has
always been deeply rooted in all men's Hearts at all times, and more strong
persuasions were there of it in the Beginning then now in this age, where the
Corruption of men is stronger then ever.

And this cannot be abolished by any contrary Custom, for it always remains
the same in it self. The Laws of Magistrates, or the Moral Precepts of
Philosophers, have not given to Virtue its Being, they have only apprehended it
in the Actions, and Deportments of men, and according to their apprehensions
they have framed their Precepts and Laws to rule the lives of men, and to
hinder them from Vice its contrary. As we may say of Aristotle, That he has
not merely invented out of his own Brain the Rules and Precepts of
Argumentation, but only has framed them upon the Remarks which he has made of
all men's Discourses and Arguments. And upon these Remarkes, has compiled his
Organon, where the Rules of Argumentation are laid, which are neither mutable
or arbitrary, but certain and unchangeable, effected upon the right and
Natural Reason common to all men.

This Virtue has its Rise and Foundation in Man's Nature, as he is Rational,
and endowed with that Will and Understanding which ought to have the Supremacy
over the Affections, and to hold them in their Right Compass, and this does
consist in the Symmetry, and proportion which is in the Rational Souls
Faculties, from this does spring forth the Beauty and Excellency of virtue,
which does compel the most barbarous to admire it; as in Bodies and Works,
either artificial or natural, their Beauty proceeds from the due Position of
all their parts, for the one is no more Arbitrary or Imaginary then the other,
but both are True and Real, that of Virtue being so much the more glorious, as
the spiritual exceed the Corporeal in worth and dignity.

This Virtue as we have described it, cannot proceed from a blind fate, or
fortuitous cause which can produce nothing well regulated, but ought to have a
most certain, constant, and invariable Cause, which has in it self all manner
of virtues in the highest Degree, which is the most perfect pattern, and the
exactest model of all humane Virtues, and which is the Author and efficient
cause of it in man, seeing it cannot come from any other principle, which (if
it were supposed) would be much lesser then its Effect, for there is nothing in
all that man can imagine in Nature, more divine and excellent then Virtue, by
which man is not only infinitely more excellent then beasts, but is in some
manner deified, and in some respects surpasses himself. And here we need not
to constitute two Principles, with the Manichees, the one of all good, the
other of all evil, one only being sufficient: for, as the straight line is the
rule of it self, and of the oblique, so this pattern and Model of all Virtue
and perfection, which is the Deity, is the rule of all human virtues, and by it
is known its contrary, viz. Vice, which of it self has no more need of a
Principle, or efficient cause; then darkness which only proceeds from the
privation and absence of light. The Spirit of Man being so wavering, and
unconstant, cannot be so good a rule of this most excellent and glorious
virtue, as it is of it self.

Again, that knowledge of the difference of good and evil, which all men have
so deeply and naturally inprinted in their souls, does not simply proceed from
any Tradition, or Institution, there being several barbarous Nations, who,
having no such Institutions, nevertheless acknowledge, and admire virtue, and
highly detest vice: many also who want those Traditions, or, may be, are taught
the contrary to this Truth, do often (notwithstanding their bad education)
acknowledge the difference between vice and virtue. Now, from whence can
proceed so strong, lively, and constant impression in the soul of man, but
from some Superior cause, which has engraved this in the Creation of it. Which
cause can be none else but the Deity, there being none but it above man to
effect this.

CHAP. V. The fourth Argument, Drawn from the disorder which is seen in Man,
which Disorder, of necessity has a beginning and an ending.
WE have in the preceding Chapters drawn two Arguments against Atheism, the
one from the order of Nature, and the other from Man. We will now draw one from
the disorder which is in both. Virtue is indeed proper to Man, as he is
rational, and by it he chiefly differs from brutes, which are not capable of
it; but, yet it is not natural, or essential to him (for then man should
never sin) but accidental, from which he has departed himself; witness the
great corruption of manners which we see in the World, which of necessity has
had some beginning, and cannot have existed from everlasting, for disorder is a
perturbation of order, and a confusion introducted since in men's natures; and
that disorder and confusion cannot possibly be Eternal, is evidenced from
this, that to be without a beginning, is one of the greatest perfections that
can be imagined. And truly, experience teaches, that the more we go on
forward, we see corruption to be greater and greater, and wonderfully to
increase; for, corruption and all evil, is at this day much rifer then it was
a hundred years ago, and was greater a hundred years ago, then it was one
hundred years before, which a Heathen has very well noted about sixteen
hundred years ago, in these Verses.

Aetas parentum pejor Avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
And so going upwards, corruption will be found sensibly to diminish, until we
come unto a first beginning. If then Vice has had its first rise in Man, man
cannot be from everlasting; and this World of necessity has had a beginning,
from this, viz. (that the World was Created) we have heretofore proved a Deity
that Created it; for the beginning of this corruption cannot be so far
stretched upwards, but that an infinite space of time preceded necessarily the
beginning of this corruption. Now, if man could for an infinite space of time
remain uncorrupted, why could not he continue so still? Add to it, that if
Vice and Corruption has begun, after an infinite time of uprightness, it may
justly be asked, whether it has begun in one man only, or in all men at once.
Which of these two questions be asserted, it matters not, in the assertion of
either, there is a very gross absurdity. For, if they say that it began in one
man only, we may ask again, why it begun in one rather then in another? and if
one was the first Author of Vice, why the rest did not suddenly dispatch him,
for fear that he might infect, and spoil the rest; as at this day we see
Magistrates putting the wicked to death, that they may not by their ill
example, draw the rest to their exorbitancies. And if all have at once, it is a
thing beyond imagination, how it could be so after infinite time of their
persevering in Virtue and uprightness, chiefly if there is no other Governor
of this Universe, then the fatal order of Nature, as the Atheists say, which;
doubtlessely should always have remained the same, as it was before in an
infinite space of time, and there cannot be given, or imagined, any reason of
so sudden, and universal a change. The same cannot be objected to us, who
hold, that the World and Man have had a beginning; who, though he was Created
by God pure, and without Vice, was not therefore immutable (there being nothing
immutable, to speak properly, but that which is Eternal) and therefore he
being naturally mutable, it is no wonder, if some time after he has suffered
some change and alteration.

We have said that Corruption grows more and more, but, yet it cannot grow to
the infinite: both because evil being a defect, and imperfection; it cannot be
infinite, because to be infinite does denote perfection; and also for that, if
evil should grow to be infinite, the Society of men could not subsist, but
should be at last wholly abolished, and the humane kind annihilated by this
evil, all men at last coming to kill and destroy one another, which again is
against the pretended Eternity of the World, and opinion of the Atheists, who
say, that as this world has no beginning, so it ought to endure for ever. And
the World being made for Man, and all things in it ministering to him; if humane
kind should come wholly to perish, as we have showed it would come to pass,
if evil grew infinitely, the root of the World would of necessity totally
perish, being deprived of its Principal end, which is the service and good of
man. It is easy for those that consider diligently the works of Nature, to see
in them a wonderful order, and a firm constancy, but it is also easy to
deprehend in them besides, and against this order a manifest disorder, and as
it were an extravagancy, or exorbitancy of nature, for, if there is in Nature a
regulated and constant vicissitude of the seasons of the year, following one
another, the Spring after the Winter, and Summer after the Spring; there is in
it also a manifest alteration of these seasons, as excessive cold in Summer,
extraordinary heat in Winter, one season intrenches upon another; a Winter we
many times see in the spring, and a Summer-in Autumn. If rain and snow, ice
and mists, and dewes, have their regulated times for the production of the
fruits of the Earth, and to furnish Man and all Animalls with food, yet also,
often we see them confused, and altered, hence proceed droughts, and
extraordinary moisture, which spoil the fruits of the Earth, and bring famine,
and want of all things along with them; hence also proceeds the corruption of
the air, from which proceeds plagues, and diverse kinds of epidemicall
diseases, hence proceed thunders and tempests, earthquakes, and stupendous
inundations, and a thousand other disorders which are daily seen in nature.

Now its necessary that such disorders should have their bounds and limits,
otherwise what should hinder disorder from growing to the infinite, and all
things from returning to their first Chaos, for to say, that these disorders
have their natural causes from which they proceed, that is very true, but it
does not solve the question, and doubt; for, if there is not some Superior
Power, and wisdom above nature, that does rule and direct all these disorders
and exorbitances of Nature, it will inevitably follow, that Nature will be
turned upside down, and wholly confounded, and indeed, it is not difficult to
perceive, that these disorders are regulated and governed by an immense wisdom,
and directed by an evident justice, and manifest goodness, in token of
vengeance against the sins of the one, and of bounty for the reward and
recompense of others, and to refer the administration of these things to a
fate, and blind fortune, is to deceive ones self wilfully, and to put out ones
eyes on purpose to see nothing.

For example, what reason is there to referr to a blind fate, the deluge of
Noah, the subversion of Sodom and Gomorrah, the seven years famine of Egypt,
its manifold plagues, the pestilences in King David's days, the drought in
Elias times, and a thousand like, that happen, and may every day be seen in the
World? This disorder then, so regulated, as well as the firm and constant order
of nature, is an Argument of a Deity most wise and Powerful, and Superior to
it, which has established this order in it, and which does manage and contain
these disorders in their certain bounds, and does direct them wisely, justly,
and mercifully, for the punishment of the one, and the blessing of the other.

CHAP. VI. The fifth Argument drawn from a Providence that over-ruleth all
humane things.
WE have in the two last preceding Chapters, proved a Deity from the order and
disorder, which is remarked in the nature of this great World, the same may be
done from the order and disorder which is seen in the little world, man, whom
we do not now consider as a Physical, or natural body, but as he is a moral
creature, and endued with reason, in which respect we may see in him order, and
disorder, but yet altogether most wisely regulated, and from these both is
drawn another Argument to prove the Deity.

And here first we must consider, that although all men be of the same nature,
we see nevertheless in them a wonderful, and almost infinite variety, not only
of faces and proportions of bodies, but also, and principally, of manners, of
opinions, of manner of living, and of languages, and also a distinction by
families, bodies, politic Comonalties, States, Republics, Kingdoms, Empires
and Monarchies, all which distinctions and varieties are not seen in other
animals of the same kind. This so wonderful variety and distinction can
proceed but from an infinite Wisdom, which is above it, which has been the
cause of all these diversities, in so admirable an uniformity of Nature;
chiefly, seeing that in these varieties there is a singular Symmetry, and
disposition of all things so various.

For to fly for the solution of this to a fate and fortune, which has by mere
chance happened upon this order, it is a wilful blindness, for order and
disposition cannot proceed from that which has none, and which, to say truth,
is naught but a Chimaera, and which has no virtue, or efficacy, by which it
may act, or produce any thing.

And above all, we are in all these varieties to consider that of speech, which
is so great in persons who have all the same use of reason, which demonstrateth
it self by words, and all the same organs of the voice, from whence according
to reason, should proceed the same Language, the witness of all our
conceptions, as we see in other Animalls, that all those that are of the same
kind have the same voice, by which they express their passions, and the
motions of their affection.

For to referr this to the free will of men, who would have it so, and have of
themselves framed so many and so various idioms, there is no probability, for
what reasonable end could they propose to themselves in such a design,
especially since this diversity of Languages does greatly hinder the mutual
commerce and communication of one with another, by which the Society of all
humane kind, (to which nature its self has framed us, and powerfully
enclines us) is wonderfully interrupted and hindered, so that there is no
reason, or likelihood, that men would consent of themselves to a diversity so
prejudicial to them, and contrary to the end toward which they all naturally
tend, which is a mutual Society and Communication.

Moreover, this diversity either has been in an infinite space of time, if the
World has had no beginning, or else this said variety has had some beginning;
there is no reason to say that it has had no beginning, yet being repugnant to
the uniformity of Nature, which is in all men; to say also, that it has had
some beginning, there is no reason. For, why should men (after an infinite
space of time, in which they are supposed to have all spoken one and the same
Language) have changed in an instant their idiom, without any reason, or
necessity, and against the end to which they all naturally do tend.

It is then necessary to acknowledge here a Power, and Superior Wisdom, that,
for certain reasons, best known to it self, beyond, and against the intention
of men, has brought to pass this admirable variety of idioms, each one of
which has its elegancies proper and peculiar to its self, and which men could
not have foreseen, or conceived in their minds, this very thing surpassing
far all that ordinary wisdom which is seen in men, the wisest of which cannot
with all his wit and industry frame a Language, in which there may be found so
much elegancy, and grace, as there is in either of those that are now in use in
the World, which manifestly evinces; that a Wisdom, more then humane, and
truly divine, has so wisely distributed in each of these Idioms all the words
that make it up, with all the flourishes and elegancies which we see in them.

The distinction of men in Bodies, Commonalties, States, Republics, Kingdoms,
Empires, and Monarchies, does necessarily bring us to the acknowledgement of
this Providence and Deity, and likewise shows the World not to be Eternal.

It is a thing that Nature teaches, viz. that Fathers ought to command,
govern, and have the care of their children, and Grandfathers of their
Grandchildren, and so confequently, that Ancestors have, and take the care of
their Progeny, and if this order was unchangeable, and duly kept among men,
that might in some manner be referred to the regulated dispensations of Nature,
and there would be in it nothing strange, or extraordinary, but it is quite
otherwise in the Government which is among men; for, those that Command, and
are at the Helm of a State, are not always (nay, almost never,) the
Grandfathers, or Ancestors of them over whom they Rule, and are for the most
part in no ways allied by blood to them, therefore in this we must acknowledge
that there is something else besides the right of Nature, which has given them
this Power and Authority of Ruling, which also must be very extraordinary,
otherwise they could not be so obeyed by those who Naturally (as not being
descended from them) are in no wise their subjects. We may not enervate the
strength of this Argument, by saying, that a voluntary, and merely arbitrary
servitude, without any reason at all, has by chance so subjected men one to
the other; but we must in this acknowledge, that a supreme and most divine
Wisdom, has enriched some men above others with gifts and faculties fit for
Government, which have made them to be admired and respected by those who have
subjected themselves to them. And in truth, Experience, and the Monuments of
History teach us, That the first Founder of Kingdoms, Empires, and Monarchies
were men noted for the Heroic and extraordinary Virtues they had more then the
rest, by which they have gained to themselves the admiration, Respect, and
Obedience of those that in this were their inferiors.

So it is said of Nimrod, that first erected the ancientest Monarchy in the
World, That he was a great and mighty Hunter before the Lord, that is, That he
was indeed more illustrius and glorious then the rest, being endowed with many
rare qualifications for Government, and in which he did surpass the rest. So
was Cyrus the Author of the Persians Monarchy, so was Alexander the Great, That
erected that of the Grecians, and so were Caesar and Augustus which built the
Romans Empire, and likewise the Scripture takes notice of all those that
undertook the Rule of the Children of Israel, that God did raise the spirit of
such and such a one.

And of Saul himself their first King, that God did change his Heart into that
of another man's, to let us know that these men have been endowed with most
excellent, Heroical, and extraordinary Virtues above the rest, that so they
might command them, and that a Deity has had the management of all this, and
has directed and excited them. And so by Analogy it is of all others, that
have at first undertaken to rule any other Nation, People, or Commonwealth.
Moreover there being in the World so many diverse Corporations, and so variously
Ruled and Governed, yet justly and with a great Order, there shines in this
variety and multiplicity of Governments, the luster of a wonderful Wisdom
which cannot proceed from the Prudence and VVisdome of any particular person
that governs them, for this Power can extend it self no further then on their
own Subjects, and therefore necessarily comes from some superior wisdom which
is above all these Corporations and Commonweales, and which has so wisely
directed and ordered them. This same Power or Deity is also necessary to give
to every one of those Corporations their regulated and certain limits, and
duration in the constitution and determination of which this self same wisdom
does appear.

So we read that Moses in the 32. Chapter of Deuteronomy. and the 8th, verse, does
attribute to God the several habitations of all Nations upon the face of the
Earth: When God divided to the Nations their Inheritance, when he separated
the Sons of Adam, he set the Bounds of the people according to the number of
the Children of Israel.

Moreover, Such a diversity of States, Kingdoms and Mooarchies cannot have
existed from everlasting, and without a Beginning, for the same reasons by
which we have in the beginning opposed, and laid down the Eternity of the
world, and if they have had some Beginning, so the men that are Governors of
them have had a Beginning also, and so consequently the world which is made
altogether for man, and if the world has had a Beginning, there is a Creatorof
it, viz. The Deity.

The distinction of Possessions and Heritages which we see among men does
likewise make us to acknowledge a Deity, and so does wholly evert the Eternity
of the World. Men are not as Bruites, which poslesse nothing, and live upon
that they meet with, and which the Earth brings forth of it self, for man
posseses something, so as that it pertains not to another, whether they be
moveable or not, Lands, Fields, or whatever Possessions they be.

The bodies-Politick, and Commonalties have also their own Limits and
Distinctions from other bodies, so States, Republics, Empires, Kingdoms, and
Monarchies, have each one of them their Limits, within which Bounds their
Possessions are contained, which evidently shows, that men have divided the
Earth between themselves, since that they have and possess each one a part of
it. Now if they have divided it, then there was a time when it was not divided,
and if men have in a certain time begun to divide the Earth, it follows that
they have not been always upon the Earth, for what should they have done upon
the Earth for an infinite space of time without dividing of it? and if they had
always been upon the Earth, why did they at last think of dividing it? And if
they have began to divide the Earth, then of necessity there has been a
Beginning of their Beings, and a first Root of them all, it being impossible
that they should have been upon the face of the Earth from all Eternity, and in
the same number as they are now, as heretofore has been plainly showed. So
from this Division of the Earth, it appears that this World is not eternal,
and therefore that since it has a Beginning, it has also an Author, to wit
God.

Now in this Partition of Lands, Goods, and worldly possessions between men,
its necessary that a wise, just, and powerful Providence intervene to rule
over all this, that every one may have his share, otherwise in such a Partition
there could be but a horrible and stupendous Confusion and Disorder which
would also destroy it self; for the Coveteousnesse of men being infinite, and
without any Limits or Bounds, each man would get as much as he could to
himself, even to the disadvantage of any one, unless there was any one gave
them a stint, and set the limits to every man's possession, such as he judges
convenient.

And indeed, Whosoever shall seriously consider, how the Earth is divided in
several parcells, according to the diversity of Nations, Peoples, Languages,
Empires, and Kingdoms, and how in every State or Commonwealth, each one of
their Bodies and Commonalties have their proper and peculiar portions, and in
each Commonalcy each one his possessions and Heritages, doubtless in this he
shall find a wonderful Harmony, and an admirable disposition, which cannot
proceed from Fate and Fortune; but indubitably is from a supreme Wisdom,
which has so managed and disposed of these things, and given to every one so
much as it judged fit, as a dying Father does justly and wisely give to every
one of his Children their Portions to avoid the Suits and Quarrels that might
arise among them.

This distinction of Heritages and Possessions does not proceed from the Fancy
and mere Will of man (see the forecited passage of Moses for that) but is
grounded upon Justice and Reason, it proceeds I say from that Reason by which
man is above bruits, and is the Foundation of all those virtues which make him
so wonderful and excellent above beasts, for without the distinction of Mine
and Thine, there could not be amongst men any Operation of Virtue. The Earth of
it self brings forth, and affords to all living Creatures all that is
necessary for them to keep them alive, Man only excepted; therefore they have
nothing of their own, but live in common with what they meet withal, but as
for man, if he will supply his necessary wants, he must labor, till the Earth,
and in sundry manners seek out of it that which is profitable to, or necessary
for him: And to this end he is endowed with Reason, which guides and instructs
him in his undertakings. Now it is just, and consonant to Reason, that every
one should enjoy the fruits of his Labors, and possess the incoms of them:
Add to this, that man comes naked into the World, and has need of Clothes to
cover himself, as well for decency, as to protect him from the injuries of
Weather, and therefore needs a house also to shelter himself, and of several
Utensills to supply the needs of this Life, which obliges him to betake
himself to diverse kinds of Handy-crafts, and Workmanships, the possession and
disposition of which ought to belong to those that made them.

Moreover, Man in this differs from Beasts, in that he ought not to follow his
Lusts loosely without Rule or measure, but ought to be tied to one woman by an
indissoluble Bond, and this Nature has taught to all Peoples and Nations, even
the most wild and barbarous, all which of them do practice Marriage as a
Doctrine taught them by Nature and Reason: it follows then that the breeding
and education of the Children which are born from Marriage, ought rather to be
given them by their Fathers and Mothers then by any others.

From all these forementioned, it appears that the distinction of Mine and
Thine, and the difference of Possessions of Goods and Heritages, proceeds from
an immutable and Natural Right grounded in Reason, Equity, and Justice, and
not an arbitrary thing merely depending upon the Fancy of men that would have
it so, whence the impertinency of Plate is evident, who would in his Common
Wealth have all things, even Women and Children common, for besides that, in
this state of sin which man is now involved in, such a thing is both absurd and
impossible, and would introduce in the society of men a monstrous confusion of
things, I say that even if there were no sins in man, and that he was in his
first are of purity, it could not with any pretense of Reason have place any
where, as before it has been showed.

Now in this difference of Mine and Thine, which is, and ought to be among men,
and without which their society cannot subsist, is ground the Exercise of all
Virtues, as of Justice, Temperance, Truth, Fidelity, Magnanimity, Liberality,
etc. This being so, we must necessarily acknowledge a Providence and infinite
Wisdom which has endowed man with this Reason, and ground of this difference
of Mine and Thine, and so consequently of all Moral Virtues which all do
acknowledge to be the most glorious, admirable, and excellent things in all the
world, and which could never have had for its Author, Fate, or change, or any
irrational thing, such as necessarily the order of Nature is, unless it be
ruled and governed by a superior wisdom.

If the order which is seen in the Actions of men, and in the regulating of
their states, is a sufficient argument to enforce us to the acknowledgement of
a Providence which over rules them, as it has been before showed, the disorder
which we evidently see among them, is no less valid and clear to demonstrate
this same Providence, which is always employed in regulating and amending of
it. Now as Order in the forenamed Actions does consist in Virtue, and the
Exercise of it, so the disorder consists in vices and crimes which are contrary
to Virtue, and as it was concluded before, that unless there was a Providence
to contain within certain bounds the disorders which are seen in Nature, all
this Mass of the World would presently be in a confusion, and would be
resolved in its first Chaos, so we must confess that the disorder in the lives
and actions of men is so enormous, and great, that unless it were bridled by
Providence, the Society of men could not subsist, and would be nothing else
then mere robberies, and like enormities, every man endeavoring as much as in
him could lie to fulfill his lusts to the prejudice of any body, and by what
means soever he could devise.

This disorder is regulated and suppressed two manner of ways: First by Laws,
and Politic constitutions, the Authority and Power of Magistrates, both
Supreme and inferior, and besides this, by a Power and imperceptible instinct
of Providence. And in this Constitution of Laws, and humane Policies, we must
of necessity acknowledge a Providence, that directs them, and makes them strong
and valid in the spirits of men, for otherwise, who is it that would obey them,
seeing men's corruption of humors and manners, to which these Sanctions are
directly opposite? Against this, it may be, it will be objected, that necessity
has compelled and obliged men, to make such Laws, and to submit to them,
because otherwise the Society of men could not subsist, and that they would
devour and kill one another. It Is true indeed, that this consideration has
been a Powerful motive to this, but yet it is not this alone which has been
the cause of enacting Laws and Constituting Governments in the World. For,
among these Laws there are some, which though they do only provide for the
safety necessary for Society and communication, as all the Laws against
Murder, Theft, Perjury, or false witnesses; yet there are others, which
concern only honesty, Civility, and temperance, as Man is a rational creature;
and concerning Piety toward God, and the charity and humanity which we have
one toward another, as those concerning the Honor due from the children to
their Parents, against adultery, and other excesses, and villainies of this
nature, and concerning the cult due to the Deity, and the exercise of charity
and humanity toward men, which clearly evidences, that there is something else
then this necessity here objected to us, that has induced men to frame and
obey such Laws, to wit, a Deity, the pattern and model of all virtues, and
which has made man to his image and likeness, endowing him with reason, by
which he might follow, and imitate them. Add to this, that if this necessity
alone had compelled men to that, they had themselves by a common consent and
advice framed these Laws, and had constituted Magistrates to keep them only,
reserving the full Power and Authority to change them, add to them, or to take
and diminish from them, and so to privilegiate whom they pleased, and to
exclude them at their will, as it is done in Commonweals, where the people is
Governor, as in Democracies. But, albeit there was heretofore, and are yet some
such like Commonwealths, yet there has always been, and are now many more
bodies and Commonalties that are Governed Monarchically, the Laws of which
have not been erected by little and little, according to the several
accasions, by the votes and suffrages of the people, as at Rome, or Athens, but
by some wise Lawgiver, which being compiled, have ever since been embraced for
their apparent Justice and equity. And the most ancient Lawgiver of all those
of whom mention is made in Histories, Moses, raised manifestly by God, to give
Laws unto his People, and after him there have been in many corners of the
World many wise Legislators, that have given Laws to the bodies, and
Comonalties of which they were members; which shows, that necessity alone has
not brought men to the making of Laws, and setting of Magistrates over them,
but that a wise and Supreme Providence has intervened, and stirred, and
directed the Lawgivers to this settlement, and has used the consideration of
the necessity, there is of Laws to make people to submit to them: And which
has every where, in every State raised some one or other more noble then the
rest, for the singular virtues which was known he was endowed withal, to
undertake the Government, the Custody and Preservation of Laws, and even whose
will in the Beginning, was a Rule and a Law, and this was, that men might enjoy
in him an Image of that supreme wisdom and Power which guides and overswaieth
all this World. This Providence which manifests it self so in the curbing
of evil and disorder by the means of Laws and Magistrates, both supreme and
inferior, which he has settled for the Preservation of humane Society, is also
plainly perceived, if we consider the secret motions of it by which men are
contained within the limits of their duty, and appears yet more in this, that
many particular persons being overcome by their evil passions, and neglecting
the fear and reverence they owe to the Laws, do openly transgress against
it, and People themselves many time rise against their Supreme Magistrate, to
dispossess them of their Authority. For, since the fear of the Laws and
Magistrates alone is not capable to restrain men's Corruptions, and their
pronenesse to evil, as it appears by so many sad examples and events, we must
needs say, and confess, that there is some Power stronger, that all that, and
which is far above all these Powers, which does secretly bridle, and restrain
these passions within us; as also our vehement inclinations to evil,
otherwise, without this curb, we should run on our courses with a strange
impetuosity, and turn all things up-side-down, and wholly disannull the society
of men. For, why should not all commit the same extravagancies and enormities
that some are guilty of, unless there were some secret thing that restrains
them within themselves? and, why should not all commonalties together mutiny
against their Magistrates and Governors, as some do, save only for this bridle
that holds them in. Now, if all did so, it is evident, that no Society could in
any wise subsist; we must then acknowledge from this, that there is a
Providence which curbs this violent affection, which man has toward evil,
and hinders him to execute all that he would do, that so the Society and
communication which is between men, may be preserved, and that the Deity may be
Glorified, in the acknowledgement they are bound to pay him for it.

If Providence does evidence it self in the restraint of evil, that it may not
grow to the infinite, it appears no less, in that it does direct, and converts
it to good, and in extracting order out of confusion, and light from darkness.
The order of humane actions appears in their justice and equity, the disorder
in injustice.

Now it is evident how great a disorder there is in all the actions and
deportments of men, witness the injustice, and palpable wickedness which is
seen among them; but, nevertheless, in this horrible confusion, and disorder,
one may perceive a wonderful order, which appears in the events of Justice,
Goodness, and Truth, which proceed from this confusion. For example, who does
not see from the injustice of Joseph's brethren, selling him to those that went
to Egypt, a wonderful effect of goodness, in the preservation of all Jacob's
family during the famine. And, in the expedition of Nebuchodonosor against the
Jews, and Jerusalem, which proceeded from the unbounded ambition of this man,
an example of Gods Justice, in chastising of this People, and finally, from the
injustice and wickedness of the Jews and the Priests against our Lord, issue
forth a wonderful effect of goodness, which is the Salvation of mankind. It
would be too long to mark and quote all the like examples in which the justice
and vengeance of God against the sins of men, or his goodness and bounty
toward the other, does manifest it self by the Ministry of wicked men,
against their intentions and designs, who do think nothing less then this,
which is an evident testimony that there is a wise and Powerful Providence,
which far surpasses all the Counsel, of men, and which bows and inclines
their hearts, to what it pleases, and does wisely guide their thoughts, and
their hands to execute (though unwittingly) his good, wise, just, and boly
will. For, to attribute unto chance and hazard, all those events, in which
appears such a wisdom, Justice, truth, and goodness, would be the same, as if
one should father upon a blind man a piece where all the glorious,
wonderfullest, and fairest draughts, whether of Limning, or writing should
appear, and one must be more blind then fortune it self to believe or think
so. This Providence appears no less in the casual effects and events which
every day happen in the World, in which appear also the effects of Justice,
goodness, and truth, which could not be without the direction of a Providence,
which guides all these events, and makes them turn always to the end it has
propounded it self, and those that take occasion to deny the Providence,
because there are confusions and disorders among men, and to think that all is
done by chance, and do not perceive amidst these confusions the order that may
be seen in them, are just like little children, who not understanding the play
at Chess, and seeing two excellent gamesters play, would judge, to see the men
here and there upon the board, that there were nothing there but disorder and
confusion, because they do not understand how each has reference to another,
nor the reason why they are so placed, and as the ignorance of these children
does not prove that the Chess-men are not well ordered, so, neither those that
will not acknowledge the wonderful effects of Justice, goodness, wisdom, and
truth of God, which appears in the confusion, and disorder of humane actions,
do by their incredulity, prove that they are not directed and guided by a
wonderful and inperceptible wisdom.

CHAP. VII. The Mistakes, and Childish oversights of Epicurus, who, though he
acknowledges a Deity, yet denies its Providence.
THe Disciples of Epicurus of these times, would not stick much to confess,
and grant, that there is a God, so that it were also granted them, that he does
not meddle with the Affairs of this World; for, that which leads them to this,
is, the fear they have to be evil entreated by this Deity, if it takes any
notice of their actions: but, because they plainly see the coherence and
indissoluble tie of these two things, viz. That if there is a God, he does also
take notice of the Affairs done in the World; and so reciprocally, if there is
a Providence, that Providence is a God Almighty, Good, Just, and Wise, they not
daring to promise themselves any good from this Deity; here they leave their
Master, and boldly deny both God and Providence too. And, although that it may
seem here superfluous to confute Epicurus opinion, who acknowledges a Deity,
but no Providence, since, that in this point his Disciples, which are now, do
not follow him, nevertheless it will not be amiss to show in this very thing
the puerile mistake of their Master, that it may appear that they have no
great reason to follow him in other things, who in this mistakes, and faulters
so grossly.

Epicurus then might justly be asked this question, why, if there is a God, he
does not take notice of the things of this World? And, whether it is because it
is a thing too low, and vile, and unworthy his greatness and Majesty, or, is it
because he cannot, or that he will not do it, because it would disturb his
quiet and tranquillity. There is no reason in either of these. And, as to the
first, If there was in this World no order, but only a total confusion, and
disorder, it would not be reasonable to attribute to God and his conduct this
disorder and confusion: but, this World (as well the great, as the little one)
being (as we have showed before) Governed with such a wonderful order, and
composed with such a ravishing Symmetry, which cannot proceed but from a Wisdom
altogether unspeakable, is it a thing below the greatness, wisdom, and
Almighty Power of God, to have so admirably framed, and composed all these
things and to preserve and keep them always in this order? By what is known
the skill of an Artificer, but by the fair Composure and greatness of his
work: The work then of Creation and Providence being (as indeed they are) so
great and so wonderful, are they unworthy the Greatness and wisdom of God.
And what can we conceive greater or more wonderful, and consequently more
worthy of him. And indeed the works of Redemption are yet far more admirable
and full of a wisdom, goodness and power more conspicuous, but hence it does
no ways follow, but that the works of Creation, and Providence are to be
attributed to him espeally. Seeing that they are the Basis and Foundation of
the work of Redemption, and because they are the Subject matter of it, for man
should not have been saved and redeemed unless he had been first created, and
unless he was conducted and gnided by God in this World. Nor may it be here
objected, that the Earth and mud, and a thousand Excrements of Sea and Land,
are things too vile and base to be handled, by so clean hands as those of God,
and to be an effect of his so mighty and glorious Power.

For first, Is there not in the World things of a nobler and purer matter then
those, the Heavens and those wonderful Torches that shine in them, their
Powers and Influences are they too low, vile, and abject things to be mann^ged
and governed by him, or to be produced by him? Let then these persons find us
out, and show some matter more glorious, noble, and luminous. And as to those
vile things which they object to us, it would be indeed below the great Majesty
and purity of God, that they should be created and extracted out of this
Essence, or that they should make a part of it, and therefore they have not
their Rise from thence (they are made of nothing by his Almighty Power) neither
make they any part of it. And if God had a Body, Hands, and Fingers, as we
have, one might rationally doubt whether it would be fit for him to touch with
his most sacred and most pure hands, any matter so vile and base, being that it
is not beseeming the Majesty of a King to handle and remove the Earth and Mud
as a Potter does his Clay, or as a Groom the dung from a Stable: But being as
he is, incorporeall, and altogether a spirit, his Essence is in so wise
contaminated with these things, much less is then the Sun and his Beams is
soyled with the Dunghills and Carcasses upon which they act and disperse
themselves, much less yet then the Souls Essence is tainted with this body
which it animates, nor with its part and excrements which it moves and agitates
by its Operation and Virtue.

But, I will ask, Is virtue a thing unworthy of Gods cognizance and care, that
he may recompense and reward it? contrariwise, what is there in the World more
Noble, and more resembling the Deity? In what is man so like to God, as in
living holyly and virtuously? shall we esteem it a thing unbeseeming God, to
love, cherish, and reward virtue, and virtuous men; and consequently, that he
knows, sees, and takes care of them? what shall he love then, and to what
shall he take pleasure, unless he loves virtue, and those that endeavor after
it? And, as for vice, and vicious men, does not God hate them? yes certainly,
unless we will transform him in that wicked Principle of the Manichees and
make of God a Devil; and hating vice and vicious men, shall we think that he
leaves them unpunished, and that he does not care to show by his chastisements,
his hatred of, and displeasure against them; would not this be to make men
believe, that vice and virtue are things indifferent to him, and that he cares
for either alike. Briefly, the Conduct, Government, and Superintendency of so
many Peoples, Nations, States, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and Monarchies, which
are upon the face of the Earth, their Generation, their Succession one to
another (as well as the succession of particular men) and the diverse, and so
admirable events, which are seen in them, and in which one may perceive so
wonderful a Wisdom, even in their very disorders (as we have showed before) is
it a thing too low, and vile, and unworthy the care, and intermedling of God?
Who is it then shall do all these things, and to whom will this be better
attributed? To hazard, and to blind fortune? But, we have showed, that so
admirable an order, which marks out unto us a wonderful wisdom, cannot be the
product, and effect of a thing, so brutish and blind as fate is. So then, it
is evident, that it is not a thing unbefitting the greatness of God, to take
upon him the care and Government of this World, but contrariwise, that there is
nothing more beseeming his Wisdom, Power, Justice and goodness.

Let us see whether it is a thing that he cannot, or that he will not do. If
God is, he must needs have subsisted of all Eternity, without any beginning.
For, who should have given him his being? He could not have created himself,
nor be made out of nothing, without any cause, and no first, or Superior cause
can challenge the Creation of him, for there is nothing before, or superior to
God. And if he has existed from all Eternity, he is then infinite, in respect
of his duration. And if he has an infinite duration, his Power is also
infinite; and if he is infinitely Powerful, this World, which (though very
great) is notwithstanding finite, and is not so great, but that it can have
been made, or created by him, or ruled and Governed by an infinite Power, such
as his is. Moreover, this God, which Epicurus acknowledges, is not he to be
placed above all the visible Heavens? yes, for it would be below him, and his
greatness, to place, or confine him within this Worlds compass, and amongst
visible things. In whatsoever place then that we are upon the Earth either in
this, or the other hemisphere, as the Heavens do always compass us about, so we
must conceive, that God is above all these visible Heavens, and not in some
part of them only. God then encloses on every side all these Heavens above,
where he is granted to be, and consequently, although his Essence should not
extend it self infinitely above them all, and that in the ultramundane space
there was some limits of his being (which is false, and contradicts the
infinity of his Essence and Power) yet should he be much greater then this
visible World, and so should have always Power and strength enough, for to
move, guide, and Govern this World. He wants then no Power to do this.

Has he then no mind to do it? yes, certainly he has, for why would not he
Govern it, since he can do it? We have but just now showed, that it is not a
thing below him, but rather much beseeming, and worthy of his Majesty's care.
Why then would not he Govern it, is it because he has no Right to it, or Power
over it, and that being just, he will not encroach out his jurisdiction? Who
then shall have Right and Authority over this World, unless it be God. Shall
we imagine with the Manichees, that there is another Principle which has this
Right, or, that has his share in it? This would be to constitute two Gods, and
albeit another had a share in the Government of this World (which is false,
and impossible, yet God always must have his part also) and so by this
concession, we must turn to the party of those extravagant and detestable
Heretics, with their two Principles, justling and fighting against one
another, and one still endeavoring to overcome the other. Seeing then that God
has Right and Power over this World, why would not he Govern it? Is it
because that would give him too much trouble, would perturbate his repose, and
diminish his felicity? It is that indeed which Epicurus says, but with what
ground, or appearance of reason? God being endowed with an infinite Power and
Wisdom, cannot he without labor or pain Govern this World, since that so
great as it is, yet it is still infinitely below God. The heavens, and those
glorious bodies that are fixed to them, are not wearied with turning always
above us, nor of acting by their influences in these sublunary bodies, for the
production of all things that are; and shall we believe that the Deity, which
is a Spirit Almighty, and All-wise, should toil, or weary himself in
sustaining, maintaining, conducting, and governing this World, which is so
small, in comparison of him, that it is less then nothing. Men, in their
thoughts, Counsels, and designs, and in the deliberations they take, for the
regulating, and managing of their Affairs, or those of the public, do weary
themselves, and thence grow sad, and irksome to their own selves (which
perturbates their content) because they are corporeal, and that the motions of
their souls are made through the help of the organs of the body, which by the
motion and agitation of the animal spirits, do sometimes stretch, raise, and
bend themselves too much, and so as it were they break, and split themselves,
or else they weary and hurt themselves, by being too eager and intent on what
they do; and these spirits also dissipate themselves, so that they need an
often reiterated rest, to repair the loss of these dissipated spirits. But
God being a pure Spirit, without any mixture of body or matter, is never weary
in his thoughts, purposes, and designs, neither does he discourse after the
manner of men, drawing a conclusion from the Premises, neither does he think of
one thing, and then of another, for there is not in him (I mean in his wisdom
and intelligence, no more then in the Eternity of his duration) neither first
nor second prius and posterius, but all these thoughts, designs, counsels, and
resolutions, are in him but one single and pure act, by which he sees, knows,
understands, wills, and orders all things; his most pure, and perfect
simplicity (which agrees with so excellent and infinite a Nature) requires
that, and it implies a contradiction, that there should be in his Essence any
variableness, or shadow of turning; we do conceive the Essence of God, his
virtues, and properties, his wisdom, power, understanding, his will, that is to
say, his Counsels, and designs, as by so many images, forms, and distinct
conceptions, because that being corporeal, and finite, and he a Spirit,
altogether infinite, we cannot see, nor comprehend what God is in himself, but
we know well nevertheless, that Gods perfection, and simplicity does not admit
of so many things wholly different one from another; neither does it imply that
they be in his Essence formaliter (as the Scholemen say) but eminenter, and
causaliter, as we hold that the Sun is not in his substance and Essence hot as
the fire is, but only as he is the cause of heat every where. It is then a very
low thought of God, to imagine, that he labors in thinking, or designing any
thing, or that he wearies himself in acting, and from thence, that he grows
melancholy, and sad, and that this troubles his repose, and content, and in
some manner abates from his felicity.

Whence then did proceed this Philosophers so low and base thought and
imagination, unworthy his great parts. It seems to me indeed, that it was
rather an evasion, then any certain and fixed opinion of his. That is, that he
not daring (as I have said before) to deny flatly and plainly all manner of
Deities, for fear of being persecuted, hated, and detested by the World,
laughed at, hissed, and neglected by honest men, and men of parts, he has
yielded to the commonly received opinion concerning the Deity, but has
debarred him from any knowledge of, or care for the World, which is that which
all his Disciples and followers would have granted to them. And when he was
asked, why he denied that the Deity had any such knowledge, or care, he has
waved this question, by this evasion, that then God would have too much trouble
upon him, and that it would disquiet him, and would something diminish of his
happiness and tranquillity, And when it has been objected to him, that then it
is a vain and unprofitable thing to serve and honor this Deity; that he might
not seem altogether profane, in granting, that Gods service is superfluous,
and unprofitable, he has eluded this question, by saying, that although we
receive nothing from the Deity for all the service we do him, yet it is to be
served and adored, as being in it self most glorious and excellent, and as
such it ought to be honored and adored by us, as we honor, and have in great
esteem, those Kings and Princes that are strangers, although we do not expect
any reward from them, nor fear their punishments. And upon this, to give some
color to his Witty, but profane answer, he has built many sublime
speculations of the excellency of the nature of God, of his immutability, of
his perfection, that he needs nothing out of himself, having in himself all
manner of perfections, which make him perfectly happy and contented. And,
because quiet and tranquillity of spirit does conduce much to, yea, does almost
wholly make up the happiness of man, he would in no way deprive God of it, but
has exalted it highly both in God and in men, and held that this said
tranquillity consisted in virtue, and in the exercise thereof, and has enlarged
upon these Noble speculations much more then any other of those heathen
Philosophers that were before him: and by these he has got both the admiration
and commendation of men; and all this was, that his opinion might be received,
and pass for current amongst the refinedst wits: But all this was, that he
might establish his assertion, viz. That God has neither care nor knowledge of
humane things, as not having need himself for the perfecting of his happiness,
of contentment and tranquillity, or the enjoyment of any of these visible
things, without which he may very well be, and the care and Government of which
would rather be a care and tediousness to him, then any pleasure and
contentment. Now it is very true that God is perfect, yea, much more perfect
then ever this man believed him to be, and that for his happiness and
perfection he has no need of any Terrestrial, Worldly, and visible things,
and that he was very well without them in an infinite number of ages, before
the World began. Neither has he created all these for any need that he had of
them, or that by them he might add something to his happiness; but incited by
his own goodness, that he might communicate out of himself, as much as might
be his goodness, virtues, and perfections.

Which is an argument of his perfection, to be not only good and happy in
himself, but also to be willing to do good to others, in communicating to them
something of his goodness and perfections. We see a shadow and image of this in
those persons which are virtuous and liberal, who, not being contented to be
rich, and to abound themselves, do communicate to others as much as in them
lies of their virtues and riches, which all naturally do esteem to be a great
perfection.

This great, but profane Philosopher, has not considered, or at least would
not do it, that this, ( viz. Communication) being a virtue most commendable in
man, he was not to alienate it from God, but attribute it to him as a quality
and property most consonant to the excellency of his nature, and from thence he
was to conclude, that this World was the production and workmanship of God,
(according to this his propriety) and that he had in his hands the ruling and
Government of it; being it is in no wise rational, that the Creation,
Subsistence, Preservation, Conduct and Administration of so admirable a piece
of workmanship, should properly belong to any other but him.

And albeit some will say in his favor, that it was so far from him to be an
enemy to virtue, and a friend to vice, that he has extolled it the most of
any, and has made it to seem more glorious then ever it was thought she was
before; that which he has done, was in effect nothing else then to make a
veil to cover his profaneness, and by his doing so, make his poison to be
swallowed down with more ease, by the fine wits which he has entangled and
caught by his discourses: for this spot and stain will never be taken away,
viz. That he taught that we must not hope any thing from God, or fear him who
did not meddle with any thing we have to do in this World. By which doctrine he
does cry down Prayer, Invocations, and Thanksgiving to the Deity (which is the
very heart and marrow of true Religion and Piety) yea, the very fear and
respect, and love which we owe to God. For, what fear, and respect, and love,
can we have toward a Deity, which, by their tenants we cannot know, because it
has neither made the World, nor Governs it and which has no commerce with
Man; there being no other way to come to the knowledge of a Deity, then either
the consideration of the World, and of the works of God in it, or the
Revelation that he may make to us of himself, in his own Word. And therefore,
all that Epicurus and his followers can say, touching the Service and Honor
due to God, is in effect, nothing but a slight evasion which they framed, that
they might avoid the envy and hatred of men against their impiety, at which
cults and services (as in no wise agreeing to their maxims) they did laugh
within themselves, as Cicero does report, that the ancient Augurs did laugh
among themselves at their Doctrine of the Auspicia, though they did recommend
it to the simple people as a Divine thing.

Which the Disciples of Epicurus have verified sufficiently by their practice,
in which there was little or no respect rendered by them to the Deity, witness
a Latin Poet in these Verses.

Parcus deorum cultor, and infrequens
Jusanientis dum sapientiae
Consultus err.
CHAP. VIII. The sixth Argument, Drawn from the Immortality of the soul.
THose that do deny a Deity, do also consequently deny that there is another
life after this, and that man's soul is immortal, and will acknowledge neither
Paradise, nor Hell, nor Angels, nor Devils, and these things indeed are so
firmly conjoined together, that whosoever denies, or affirms one of them,
ought also to affirm, or deny the rest. So that the Sadduces among the Jews,
who denied that there was either Angel, Spirit, or Resurrection, were in
effect right Epicures, and Atheists, like those of these times, who for the
fear of the Laws, and shame of the World, not daring openly to say what they
think, make an outward Profession of the Religion which is Publicly received
in the Land or State, of which they are members, though they really believe
nothing of it, but laugh and gibe at it secretly, and hold it to be a mere
tale.

The Reason of this impiety and Profaneness, is that which we have noted in the
beginning, viz. That these persons are wholly sensual and carnal, bewitched
with the pleasures and sweets of this World, in which they constitute their
supreme good and happiness; which is that that makes them to hold for Fables
all that is said of another Life after this, and the Happiness and Misery
which attends men there. They hold also that the Soul dies and perishes with
the Body, neither will they acknowledge that there are any Angels or Devils,
that so they may not be forced to confess that the Soul is immortal, and
that there is an Eternal punishment of the wicked after this Life, and by this
means they do deny also the Deity and his Providence. For they plainly perceive
that if there is a God, he is a just Judge, and a Revenger of the sins and
iniquities of men, and that the God of Epicurus is in effect nothing but an
Idol and a vain imagination. From the Deity they cannot expect or promise to
themselves any favor; since that they do not love and cherish Virtue, but only
desire to satisfy their evil Concupiscences in which they think the Summum
bonum is contained, which is that, that makes them to deny the Deity, the
Immortality of the Soul, and another Life where there is a Hell, and a
Paradise, their Conscience telling them, that they cannot have a part in the
Paradise, and that Hell, if there is any, is for them and their like.

On the other side, if the Soul is immortal there is another Life, and in it
a place of pleasure or sorrow for man, there are also Angels Copartners of this
Joy, and Devils the Executioners of these Supplices, and above all, a God who
does justly reward the one, and punish the other: For if the Soul is immortal
being, as it is, naturally very active, it cannot be always without any
sentiment, and remain so forever, for that would be little less then death, it
must needs then follow that it participates of some joy and content, or that it
is tormented and has an infinite share of sorrow, and that for the Reward of
that good or evil, vice or virtue, to which it has been addicted in this
Life; for we have showed heretofore that Virtue is worthy of Commendation and
Reward, and Vice of shame and of sorrow. Which not being sufficiently according
to their merits rewarded in this Life; it must needs be rewarded in the other:
otherwise both vice and virtue should be deprived of their due, which is
against Nature and Right Reason. And this is to grant a Paradise and a Hell.
And if the Soul is immortal, there is no reason to deny that there are
Angels and Devils; since either of them are immateriall, spiritual and
incorporeall substances. And indeed nothing makes these men to deny that there
are Angels, and Devils, but that if they grant this, they must also confess,
that the soul is immortal, and so that there is a Heaven and a Hell, which is
that which they so much fear and tremble at.

Now it may be proved, both by testimony and by reason, that the soul is
immortal, by the Testimony, I say, of all men, that are, or have ever been
upon the face of the Earth; for, if the records of Antiquity be looked into,
and History, both Ancient and Modern be read, it will be found that there never
was yet, neither at this day is there any People, or Nation, whether civilized
or not, which does not acknowledge that the soul of man does subsist, and
lives after the death of the body: but of the strength of this proof we will
speak hereafter; as for the arguments that prove the immortality of the Soul,
they cannot be a priori, for there is none but God that is the cause of it,
whose existency we are now about to demonstrate. These arguments then must be
taken a posteriori, and we must prove this immortality by the effects of the
Soul, and indeed they are such effects, so great and admirable, as cannot
proceed from a mortal and material cause; Now its effects and operations are
either internal in the soul it self (and those either in the Intellect, as
Knowledge, or in the Will, as the Virtues) or external, as the Speech and the
motions of the body, and the parts of it, whence do proceed the wonderful and
stupendous works of liberal, and mechanical arts. In all the things that are
seen in this great World there are several degrees of the excellency of
things, the one being above the other, by which, as by so many Ladders, we
ascend at last to the knowledge of immateriall and eternal things, the lower
degree of these is of insensible things, that have neither Life nor Motion, as
Stones, Metalls, etc. The second is of those that have some life by which they
grow, and are nourished, etc. The third is of those, that besides this kind of
life have a sensitive faculty, and local motion by which they are carried
from one place to another, as all the Animalls. Amongst which there are
several degrees of perfection. For there are some of them that have only the
sense of feeling, as Oysters; some, besides the sense of feeling, have the
sense of tasting also, as Bees, and many other Insects: Others again have the
senses of smelling and hearing, as the Moles or Wants. And finally, these are
the most perfect Animalls, which have the five external senses, and among
these there are some that excel in one sense, some in another: as the Eagles,
which have a very quick and sharp sight, and the Vultures, Wolves, and Dogs
have a very exqisite faculty of smelling. These Senses do receive in them the
Spcies and Ideas of the material qualities that are inherent in their
Subjects, from these senses they are afterward conveyed to the Imagination or
common sense, which receives them, and from which does straightwaies proceed
the knowledge of the things themselves. By this Knowledge they are induced to
hate, or fly from; to love, or pursue after these very things, and to move
toward, or remove from them. But all this Knowledge, which consists and is
seated in the Imagination, is only of singular and individual things, and they
are also material, because the qualities, which are the Objects of the senses,
are all material, and have quantity for their Subject and foundation: Above
all this is man endowed with Reason, of which all other Animalls are deprived,
and by which he does things much more wonderful then they altogether can. For
by it he knows not only singular, individual, and immateriall things, but
also those that are universal: And by it he discourses, makes Arguments,
draws and deduces one thing from another, does dive into the Nature of things,
and seeks after their Causes from whence the Sciences are raised, and the
knowledge of Philosophy and of all its parts is attained to: to which we can
find nothing like among the other Animalls. By this same Reason he abstracts
quantity from matter (by a mental abstraction) be it either Quantit as
Concreta or Discreta, as they term it, Viz. Numbers, Superficies, Geometrical
Bodies, and does consider their sever all kinds, figures, qualities,
properties, proportions analogicall, etc. from whence do proceed the
Mathematical sciences so wonderful in all their kinds, whether they be simple
and absolute, as Arithmetic and Geometry; or compound, as Astronomy, Optics,
Music, etc. from the knowledge of which proceed so wonderful effects, that
they even ravish out of themselves the very Artists in those Sciences. By this
same Reason man does consider the time and place, and all things that are done
in them, and not only those that are present; or that are done, or happen
before his eyes, but also those things that are past, which he does keep in his
Memory, and keeps a Register of them; and often judges of those things that are
to come, which he does often foresee by a Moral conjecture, he knows also
the place, not only of his Birth, and where he dwells, viz. his house, and
that which is round about it, but also all the Country round about, even of all
the world so great as it is; for he conceives it in his mind, and gets a
certain and true Idea of it, and by the means of all these things he acquireth
so exquisite a wisdom and prudence, that he is known to be admirable, not only
in the administration of his household affairs, but also of those of entire
Corporations, Commonalties, Cities, States, Commonwealths, Kingdoms and
Monarchies: to which there is nothing like in any other of the Animalls.

By this same Reason man comprehends that which is infinite; conceiving in
his mind that which has no limits, either in respect of quantity, time or
place: for he apprehends that there is not so great a number, but may be made
greater, and that to the infinite: And that there is neither line, superficies,
body, or place so great, but that it may be extended further, and that
infinitely.

And that there is neither time, nor duration of great length; but that it may
be conceived infinite, either in regard of that which was before, or which is
to follow after. And so in some sort he comprehends Eternity and Immensity,
which could not be, unless his Soul was in some Respect infinite, at least in
respect of its duration, that is to say, unless it was indeed mortal, and
immateriall.

Finally, By this same Reason, man conceives and comprehends the things
immateriall as Spirits and Intelligences, and even the Deity it self, and does
consider their Properties, qualities, virtues, aftections, and actions, and
reflecting upon its own self, and by her proper actions and operations, she
knows and judges that she is, and ought to be Immortal, Immateriall, and
spiritual, which could not be effected by her, unless that in deed she was
such. By this Reason man is capable of Virtue, which is its own effect
produced in its Will; by which Virtue man does chiefly appear to be more
excellent then Brutes, and comes nearer to the Deity, of which Virtue is a
lively Image. Virtue, which is praised and commended by men, and by the Deity
it self, to which is most justly due that Recompense and Reward, which is but
seldom paid to her in this Life. For who knows not, that the most honest and
virtuous men are often despised and of no Esteem, and commonly hated,
persecuted and tormented by the rest of men: Which is the cause, that many
Heathen of old, perceiving how unjustly and ill Virtue was entreated, and not
being able to comprehend how a wise and just Providence could or should suffer
this, have rather denied the Providence, and committed the managing of humane
affairs to chance and fortune, then to tax the Deity of this Error, which
(they thought) could not be avoided, if this Providence had any thing to do in
this World. Whereas they should have rather acknowledged the Immortality of the
Soul, and that there is another Life then this, in which man is to receive
that just Recompense due to his works, which is more conformable to Reason,
then to deny the Providence and Deity. This Virtue then which is so excellent,
and which does in some sort Deifie men, and is by all acknowledged to be such,
cannot be an effect or production of a gross and corruptible matter, but
rather of a spiritual and immortal Essence. As to the Effects of reason,
which show themselves externally and out the Soul, there is first the Speech,
by which man expresses his Conceptions, Passions, and Affections, and makes it
self to be understood by others, which speech is a proper and incommunicable
Effect. And this faculty is found to be in no other then in man, so that the
Jewish Philosophers have always defined a Rational Animal to be a Speaking
Animal: for though some Birds may be taught to speak, their Speech is nothing
but a brutish imitation, void and destitute of all Reason, and which is in no
ways guided by it: and though some Animalls have a voice by which they
express their desire, and internal motions, that comes nothing near the
speech of man, by which he expresses so distinctly, and in every particular
all his Conceptions: therefore the voice of Brutes is an effect proceeding from
a much inferior Cause, and altogether of another Nature, then that from which
proceeds the speech of man.

The motions of man's body and of all its parts which proceed from the Will, and
are guided by Reason, are such, so various, and wonderful in respect of those
of Beasts, that they give a plain evidence that the Body of man, so
artificially made and fitted to so many motions, is the dwelling of a more
excellent Guest, then that which carries and moves the body of Beasts: for
these admirable works and effects of both Liberal and Mechanical Arts being
seriously considered, do argue a cause altogether spiritual and divine, and
are not the Effects of a corruptible matter. For, I pray, for example, what
wonderful thing is Writing, which with so few Characters does express an
infinite number of words so different, which serve not only for every
particular Langnage, but for every Tongue under Heaven? And what a wonder is
it, that the Hands and Fingers are so artificially made and fitted to infinite
forts of Motions necessary for the Exercise of all the Arts, and for the
working of all those things that are in a manner infinite? In which thing we
must acknowledge a wisdom altogether divine, which has so wisely framed this
humane Body, and grant that there is an immortal and spiritual faculty, which
directs and guides all these so different, and almost infinite motions. Time
would be wanting to any that would decipher the Wonders and Excellencies of
Limning, Sculpture, Music, and of all other Arts, both Liberal and
Mechanical, the effects of which are so admirable, that man wonders at his own
self, and is almost swallowed up with the admiration of his works. By all that
has been said, it is easy to see what an infinite distance there is between
the Soul of Man and that of Beasts, since the effects of both are so diverse,
and that there is no Reason to say that the one as well as the other is
material, corruptible, or mortal. Those that have observed and collected the
various effects of the imaginative faculty of Brutes, of their industry and
foresight of things, of some appearance of Virtue, etc. that they might make
them run parallel with those which proceed from man's Reason, to show by this,
that the Soul of the one is not of another Nature then the Soul of the other;
and that bring for Examples, the quickness and vivacity of the Apes and
Elephants, and their aptness to be taught to do any thing one would have them
to do; Also the Labor and Industry of Bees, by which they frame their Lodges,
and make the Wax and Honey; The Economy and foresight of Amets, the chastity
of Doves, and Turtles, the watchfullness, order, and obedience of Cranes, (such
as is the Author of a dialogue entitled Brother Anselme, where he brings an
Ass disputing against this Monk, and proving to him, that all the advantages,
privileges, prerogatives, and excellencies, that man pretends to have above
beasts, are equalled, if not surpassed, by all those things that we see of
their nature) such persons I say have not said or written these things
seriously, but rather to show the vivacity of their wit, and the Knowledge that
they had of the Nature of brutes, or if they have done it seriously and
deliberately, and on purpose to make good the Mortality of the Soul, and to
plead the Atheists Cause (as it seems that this forementioned Author has
done, because that after he has pleaded at large the Cause of Beasts against
man, and ingeniously confuted, as he thinks, all the arguments that can be
brought to prove its excellency above that of beasts, at last he yields, and
flies to one argument taken from the death of the Son of God, which he has
suffered only for man, and to which the beasts have no part: an argument very
strong, but which is of no value among Atheists, and profane persons, and at
which they laugh in themselves, as being foolish and ridiculous) these I say
show themselves in this to be more brutish and ignorant then this Ass, which
they make to dispute so subtilely: there being in effect no comparison betwixt
these pretended wonders and excellencies of beasts, and those which are really
seen in man; which in this goes infinitely beyond them, and in respect of which
all the rest are as a phantasme, or mere nothing.

Chap. IX. The seventh Argument, Drawn from the good and evil Conscience of
men.
It is a certain thing, and daily experience teaches us, and the Records of
Antiquity do witness, that every man (unless he is altogether barbarous and
brutish) has a conscience of the good and evil that he does. For he knows
very well, when he has done well or ill: and if he has done ill, his
Conscience accuses him, and if he has committed any enormous crimes, his
Conscience does affright him, and gives him no rest, but does continually
torment him, fills his soul with anguish, and sometimes, yea very often, does
cast him into despair. Of the truth of this no one can doubt, since History is
altogether full of examples of the like nature. These be the Furies of the
Heathen Poets, who with their whips, scorpions, and torches, do incessantly
pursue and torment the wicked, and this is no other but Prometheus's Vulture,
which does constantly gnaw man's heart, and the Worm that dies not, which is
mentioned in Scripture.

These fears and terrors do not proceed from the sear of the punishment that
men may inflict upon them, and those men themselves are perplexed with them,
which fear nothing from men, as the Tyrants, and other wicked men, and all
those that are in great Authority among men, as Dionysius, the Tyrant of
Sicily, made his great favorite to acknowledge this, by hanging a sword just
over his head; and Caligula also, who did hide himself under his bed-clothes
whenever he heard the thunder. And that which is to be much noted is this,
that very often they are then more affrightned by alarums of their conscience;
when they are near their end, and have as it were one foot in the grave, and
have no reason to fear any thing from men's part, all which is a clear evidence
that they dread another Judge, and fear some other punishment, and that they
acknowledge there is another life then this, in which there is something to be
feared, or hoped for. It is a poor and simple evasion to say, or imagine, that
these fears and terrors proceed from a false opinion that men are persuaded
to, viz. That there is another life; for, if this persuasion was salse, and
without any foundation, how can it be so prevalent over men's spirits, as that
(for what they can do) they cannot be persuaded to the contrary, though (I say)
they do with all their hearts desire that it were false.

It is a very easy thing to persuade our selves with that which we desire, but
it is not easy to persuade a thing, which is wholly contrary to that which we
desire and wish, and especially to persuade it universally, to all, without any
exception; for, whose Authority at any time might have been so great, as to
make us believe this without any reason? or, who should have been so very
subtle, as to back this with reasons, which deceive all the World, and even
those that desire to discover the falsity of them? and how is it, that, if the
opinion of the Atheists is true in this, and their reasons and arguments so
good and solid, they do not make all the World believe them, and do not show
clearly how vain is the contrary opinion, and the reasons for it: for though
they make some believe it, they be such as have overwhelmed and drowned their
reason in carnal delights and pleasures, and who are like a Malefactor, who
makes himself drunk in the prison, whilst the Sentence is pronouncing against
him. But all their reason and subtileness will never persuade it to those that
are perplexed, and tormented within themselves by the guilt of their crimes,
and they themselves very often are not free from the scourges of these Furies,
which in spite of them do sometimes give them terrible checks, which is an
invincible argument of this great truth, naturally imprinted in the hearts of
men, that there is a just Judge, and a severe Revenger of their sins, which he
never leaves unpunished. It is also a poor evasion to say, that such are not
bred in the Schole of Epicurus, whose followers and disciples laugh at these
phantasmes and Chimeras. For first, experience shows, that they themselves
are not exempted from these terrors of conscience: and (I think) they will
grant Caligula, and such like Monsters were of their tribe, who yet have felt
these compunctions and terrors.

Secondly, every one, through the corruption of his Nature, and his strong
inclinations to evil is to himself a Master of Epicurism, and a professor of
Atheism, and would (if he could) persuade this to himself, that so he might
with more freedom let the reins loose to all his passions. And though it may be
those that have these alarums and terrors, are not open and professed
Atheists, yet they are so in their will and desires, and nevertheless they
cannot do so much as to free themselves from these fears, and to loose the
opinion they have of a Deity, and of a Providence which will avenge it self of
their crimes, which doubtless they could easily do, since they defire and
endeavor after it, if this opinion was false and vain, and did proceed from
nothing but from a vain institution, or the phansy of some that should at
first have taught it. And it is much to be wondered at, if the opinion of the
Atheists be true, how those that have rid Common wealths of Tyrants, and
oppressors, have been commended by all, have had their Statues erected, and
Panegyricks have been composed to praise them, and extol them unto Heaven;
whereas, if Epicurus in Athens, or Lucretius in Rome, had ascended the Theater,
to persuade men to their opinion, and to free them from these Tyrannical,
insulting, and by them pretended Panicall terrors of Conscience, which do
perplex and torment the souls of men; instead of being applauded, they had
been stoned, and branded with the execrations and curse of every one.

And although all those that are laden with vices, and enormous crimes, are not
vexed, or tormented by these Furies, yet this is not an argument to evince,
that therefore these terrors are vain (no more then because all here below do
not receive the just punishment due to their crimes, is an argument that there
is no Providence that takes notice of them) but is rather a clear evidence of
the sottishness and brutishness of men, which drown their reason in the torrent
of their vices: and the remorses and worm of conscience in the rest, are sure
proofs and effects of the Deity, which never leaves it self without a witness
in man, whose conscience is his own accuser, witness, judge, and executioner
altogether.

If man knows, and is certain of the evil that he does, and if his conscience
accuses and affrights him, he knows also, and is very certain of the good he
does: and that knowledge that he has of his innocence, and good life, does
cause in him a great rest and quietness, and a wonderful tranquillity of
mind, which he values and esteems more, and which makes him more happy and
content then wicked men are with the enjoyment of all their goods, honors,
pleasures, and riches. And of this felicity and content, which honest men do
partake of more then the wicked men, the writings of heathen Philosophers
themselves are full, without excepting even Epicurus, who has been forced to
acknowledge this truth, which is a strong argument, that virtue has a more
real and nobler recompense in it self, then that happiness which is pretended
to consist in the goods, honors, pleasures of this life; and that it carries
along with it self its own reward, and expects another somewhere else then in
this life (and that cannot be altogether the praise and esteem of men, and the
posterities romembrance of their good works, because most commonly virtue and
virtuous men are deprived of this) which shows unto us its excellency above
vice, and an infinite distance between her and evil. Moreover, when men are
wrongfully and unjustly blamed, their goods, life, and laudable actions
calumniated, and their persons abused and diffamed, they justify and defend
themselves as much as they can, and passionately and vehemently endeavor to
prove their innocence; and this very thing do the Atheists, against whom we
dispute, if they are at any time calumniated, or blamed without a cause. Why
this, I pray, unless there was a vast difference between good and evil, vice
and virtue, unless the one was worthy of praise, the other of disgraces; the
one of punishment, the other of reward? I say, what need they care to be
praised, or vilified, if these praises, or disgraces are in effect but
imaginary things, without any real ground, and if all this does confist but
merely in fancy and opinion?

These pretended strong wits should laugh at all the ill opinion that men can
have of them for their crimes, and should not put themselves to the trouble of
making any Apologies then when they are wrongfully accused, for why should one
trouble himself for a false imagination, that has no real and solid
foundation? And this is an Argument to prove, that those men, maugre
themselves, are forced to acknowledge, even against their own Maxims, what a
vast difference there is between good and evil, vice and virtue, the
recompense due to the one, and the punishments which the other does deserve.

Again, experience teaches us, that when men are violently and unjustly
oppressed, without any means or hopes to revenge themselves, they have recourse
to the Deity, from whose Justice they expect and promise to themselves the
revenge of that wrong which is done to them. Which Tertullian does remark very
well in his Apologetick against the Heathen, and says, that if any one of them
was oppressed, he did cry out, Deus videt and Deus reddet; God sees, and God
will render it: and that in saying so, he did not look toward the Capitol,
where was the Temple of Jupiter: but toward Gods Throne; and he adds, that it
is an evidence of a Soul really Christian.

For, this motion does not proceed from a preconceived opinion of a Deity,
which has been imprinted in a man's soul by education: but which proceeds from
his conscience, and from the bottom of his heart, and from the judgment of his
best and purest reason. which dictates, and suggests to him, yea, makes him in
effect to acknowledge, that there is a Deity and Providence, which sees from
above the wrongs that are done here below, and takes notice of them to the end
that they may be revenged, and innocence defended. For it would be a poor
refuge, and a small comfort, to have then, and in such a case, recourse unto a
false persuasion, which should have no other foundation then the authority and
institution of a man, that should have invented, and given for current so gross
a falsehood, such as the Atheists would have the opinion of the Deity to be. It
is true indeed, that in things where we have no interest, we are sometimes
persuaded by those persons that are eminent, either in learning, or Authority,
and do believe things, the falsehood of which we cannot easily discover: but in
those things that do so nearly relate to us, that are so important, and that do
excite in us so violent motions and passions, we do not rest upon those
persuasions, that have so groundless a foundation.

By all this it does appear, that man has not only an acquired, but also a
natural knowledge of the Deity and Providence, and of the real and essential
difference there is between good and evil, vice and virtue; his own conscience
and reason dictating and persuading him both the one and the other.

Again, experience shows us, that man has a natural knowledge, and resentment
of the Deity and his Providence: for, when he is surprised in a moment by a
manifest, evident, and unavoidable danger of death; as if a bouse falls upon
him in an instant, or that he sall into a precipice, etc. he lifts up presently
his heart and mind toward Heaven, and in this extremity, and distress, has
his recourse to the Deity, and prays unto it, that it would aid and succor
him, and casts himself in the arms of his protection, as a child does in the
arms of his father.

Likewise the firmness, constancy, and quietness of mind of the
truly-faithfull, and Christians, when they did depart from this World; as also
the constancy of the holy Martyrs of the Lord Jesus; and the hope, which they
have of a better life, is an evident testimony of this truth. For then, and in
that place, it is not a time to sooth ones self, and feed ones hopes with
Fables. And how could the imagination of a mere Chimara cause in them so
wonderful a resolution, and so great tranquillity of mind? If the persuasion
of a Deity did merely proceed from Institution, and Authority, which should
make us believe it without any ground of Reason, it would not doubtless make so
deep an impression in our Souls, and would quickly vanish of it self at deaths
encounter.

Chap. X The eighth Reason, drawn from Wizards, Magicians, Enchantours, and
from all the Heathens Idolatry and Superstition.
IT is a certain thing, which the experience of our days, and that of all ages
does averr, which the Monuments of History, both ancient and modern, confirm,
and that the Writings, as well of Heathens as Christians, certify; That there
are, and have been at all times in the World, Witches, Magicians, Diviners,
Enchantours, and such like notoriously-wicked people; that have a familiar
communication, and a frequent commerce with the Devils: by whose help and power
they do many strange and prodigious things, above and beyond all human wisdom.
All which consequently does infer, that these things proceed from a
supernatural, and immaterial cause; such as the Demons be.

The Laws made, and promulgated in all welgoverned States and Commonwealths,
as well that of the Jews by Moses, as those of the Christians, and of the
Heathens themselves, do evidence this to us. The executions and supplices,
which justice does frequently inflict upon such persons; their Processes; the
Relations and Informations, that are made about them, do assure as of this, and
leave no doubt of it. The damnable curiosity of many persons, which every day
have recourse to such as they, to know, see, and do those things, that cannot
be done by any other means, does also confirm this. The writings of the
Heathens, as well Greeks as Romans, are full of instances of such persons, and
of their effects, which are stupendous and wonderful. So that a man must
wholly renounce his reason, and believe nothing of those things that are done,
if he will not also believe that there are such persons; which is true and
manifest by all those kinds of Testimonies, and Monuments, which may induce us
to believe any thing.

Now, if there are any Witches, Enchantours, etc. it necessarily follows, that
there are Demons, by whose help and power they cause these prodigious effects
to come to pass, which men do wonder at, and look upon with horror and
amazement; it being not possible, that these things should be done by any
humane Power. The Histories therefore, and writings of all Nations, and even of
the Heathen themselves, are full of examples of the Devils apparitions, and of
their strange effects.

The Sybills, so much taken notice of among the Heathen, are a clear testimony
of this; seeing their Predictions could not proceed but from a Deity, or from
some Demon that did possess them. Now, if there are any Demons, (as cannot be
denied) it follows, that there is a Deity above them, which does restrain them
so, as that they shall not overthrow all things by their might: for they have
strength and malice enough to do it.

The Sacred and Ecclesiastical History, which is in this conformable to daily
experience, teaches us, that there have been in former ages, and that there
are now persons possessed by Devils; which is evident, and clear, and plainly
appears by the strange effects, which proceed from them. This same Sacred
History lets us know, that there have been Magicians and Enchantours; as it
appears by the History of Moses, and the Magicians of Egypt; by the History of
Saul, who went to consult with a woman who had a Familiar spirit; and by that
of the maid, of whom mention is made in the book of the Acts of the Apostles.
But of the truth recorded in these Sacred writings something may be spoken
hereafter.

The books, which since have been written of these Diabolical and Magical Arts,
and which are to be got too easily, even among Christians, whose damnable
curiosityleads them to this: The public profession of such Magical Arts,
which has been sometimes tolerated in some of the most samous Universities of
Christendom, to the great dishonor of Christianity. The common distinction of
black and white Magic, which has been invented by some ancient Philosophers
of the Sects of Plato and Pythagoras, who would have found a way, by which they
might have subjected the good Demons to them, and reconcile them to
themselves, and which has from them passed to the Jewish Cabalists, and from
them to the Christians: are an invincible argument that there are Magicians and
Demons. The certain and averred Relations of the Northern Countries, and of
both the Indies, do testify, that all those places do swarm with them, and
that there is scarce one, which has not his Demon, and Familiar spirit. That
Aignan of the people called Toupinambous, and the Demons, which preside over
other Barbaro us people, and which do torment and perplex them most greivously,
is a sufficient argument, that they be none, but evil spirits. And it is to be
noted, that where there is none, or very small knowledge of the true God, there
it is, where the Devils have more power over men, and where they do also most
commonly appear; as having in those places a greater Liberty from God, who
gives them power to Tyrannize and domineer over those, who know not their
Creator and Benefactour.

The Religion of those of China, and of most part of the Indians is naught
else, but an open profession that they make of adoring the Devil, whom they
reverence and honor, that he may do them no harm; thinking that the Deity has
no need of such services, and that, (being perfectly good) it will never do
them any hurt, and will (without all these services) do them good, whenever
they need it.

The multitude of Gods, which anciently the Greek and Roman Heathens did adore,
and that distinction which they made of them, in deos majorum and minorum
gentium, of Gods, Demigods, Heroes of diverse sorts, Satyrs, Fauns, Pans,
Aegypans, Nymphs of all sorts, Joves, Vejoves; all this in effect was nothing,
but a distinction of Demons, which did veil themselves under these names, and
so caused themselves to be adored by men. And their books are full of these
Demons, and all, or the most part of their superstitions, were brought up by
the commands of these false Gods, which did speak, and had society with these
superstitious persons, and which were adored by them, as if indeed they had
been Gods. Their Oracles also so famous among them, and so much taken notice of
in diverse places, are so many Testimonies of this truth, that there are
Demons, and immaterial spirits: these Oracles being nothing else, then the
utterings of these evil spirits, by which they did maintain the Heathens in
their superstitions and Idolatries.

All these things do plainly show, that there are 'Daemons, and consequently a
Deity, which is above them; as heretofore it has been demonstrated.

CHAP. XI. Wherein are answered all the Objections, that are brought against
the foregoing Argument.
MAN, who is ingenious enough in his own destruction, does here endeavor to
deceive himself, and to enervate the strength of the forementioned argument.
There are some that think that all things that are reported of Witches and
Magicians, and of all their wonderful and prodigious Effects, are old wives
Fables, and mere inventions, and the ground of their opinion is; because (say
they) notwithstanding that they have desired and looked after such things, and
having for these ends made their addresses to those that were reputed famous,
and notable Magicians, and Witches, and having desired and solicited them (with
promises of great Rewards) to show them something extraordinary and strange,
they could never obtain it of them, notwithstanding all their entreaties; but
these men do not consider that (if what they say is true) it is a plot of
Satan; who, to confirm them in their erroneous Opinion, and by these means to
make them surer to himself, has declined to satisfy their curiosity on
purpose: being rather willing to have such perfect Atheists, then to deterr
them, and make them quit their Errors, by affrighting and amazing them with
those things that they had seen. Others say, that there are many fabulous
things reported of such persons, and of their Effects, and of the Apparitions
of Spirits, and from this they take an occasion not to believe any thing that
is said of them, as if they were all forgeries. But, although there be many
things falsely reported of them, and that many do delight in inventing such
things, we may not therefore conclude, that all things that are said of them
are false, and that there are no such persons, nor Demons. Nay, we may
conclude to the contrary, that such stories could not be raised, if there was
no ground for them: For who would believe any such things; if there had never
been any apparitions of Spirits, nor any strange Effects caused by Witches. For
falsehood is in some manner a consequent of Truth, and can find no admittance
in men's beliefs; but under some color of Truth. Unless there were a Physical
Virtue in Plants, Stones, Metals, and Natural bodies, to produce several
wonderful effects, there could not be so many Fables of their Powers, as we
read in Solinus, Pliny, and such Writers. One must indeed, with judgment and
discretion, discern in such things that which is fabulous and untrue from those
that are averred and attested by Experience and irrefragable Witnesses; of
which we have an infinite number, but one may not therefore presently condemn
all things that are said and writ by credible persons, without making any
difference between that which is false, and that which is true: Especially,
when such men have no by-end in relating these things For, if it were so, we
might not upon the same account believe, that there ever were such men as
Regnault and Roland, because there have been many Romances and Tales made of
them.

Those, who are the Wizards Patrons think to excuse them; First, By saying,
that all things, which are told of their Sabbaths, (or Conventicles) and of all
those things that are done there, is naught, but a mere imagination, and a
troubled brain, and no real truth; which they maintain to have been verified,
in that there have been some, who believing and maintaining, that they have
been so transported, and reporting what they had seen and done; have for all
that been found lying in their Beds at that very time, or lying as if they had
been dead, altogether insensible, and in an Ecstasy: Whence they conclude that
all those transports are merely imaginary.

Secondly, As to those harms they think to do, (as for example, to raise
storms, and to send the Vermin into fields and houses, to cause a Rot to fall
upon the cattle, and to inflict grievous diseases upon those men, that they
bewitch) their Abettors think to excuse them, in saying, that the Devil,
foreseeing these things to come, persuades these execrable people, that they
are the cause of all these things, and that they do all by their Sorceries and
charms; although there is no power or virtue in the charms themselves. But
first, by saying thus, they grant that, which we would have, viz. that there
are Demons; whence we infer, that there is also a God to restrain them, and
they must of necessity grant it: For how can those people, without the help of
the Devil, foresee those storms and tempests, those Vermin, and those
Mortalities to come? And if they did prophecy those things by natural causes,
why should they endeavor to make them come to pass by their Sorceries? why
should they fancy to themselves, that their Charms are the cause of them? Add
to this, that these storms and Tempests are most commonly so terrible and
furious, and the Effects of them so strange and wonderful; that it plainly
appears, that these things do not proceed merely from Natural Causes; but that
there is with them something supernatural, which gives them their so strange
vigor and motion.

And as to those harms which these persons confess themselves to be guilty of:
Albeit their Enchantments had not that power, as to cause them, it cannot
therefore follow that they are not guilty, because they will and intend to do
it: and to this purpose they make Compact with the Devil to help them: This
evil purpose joined with this Compact renders them wholly inexcusable. Even as
he is not to be pardoned, who, not thinking himself able to kill his Enemy,
does implore the help of another to effect it. These Sorceries therefore, being
the signs of the Compact they have made with the Devil, and sufficient proofs
of their ill Will, and of the endeavors to bring it to pass, do render them
wholly guilty; and the less strength and Physical Virtue their Sortileges
have, the more clearly its seen, that there is some supernatural Cause, that
produces these Effects, which Cause can be none other, but the Devil, with
whom they have made an agreement to do it. And if there is some Physical Virtue
in any of those things, that they use, to cause strange diseases, and those
Plagues, which they afflict men withal, they must needs have been taught to
use them by the Devil; they not being able to know these Virtues by any Study
or Experience, or the power of any thing they use in their Sorceries; being
that they be all, or most of them, rude, illiterate, ignorant, and stupid
persons.

But, besides this, we must necessarily grant, that Satan has a great power
over the 'Diviners and Magicians, who do prophecy and reveal things to come,
and things occult; which they cannot do by any art, and which cannot be known
to them, but by the help of the Devils. The like does appear in those,
monstrous and strange things, which those that make their addresses to these
Magicians, do see, feel, and hear. For these things cannot be by any art
effected, but proceed merely from the power and efficacy of the Demons.

As to the ecstasies of Witches, during which they really think themselves to be
carried to their Sabbaths (or meetings) and there to see, feel, and do many
strange and monstrous things; although their transport was not real and
corporeal, but only an imagined one: (to which many Relations of the Reality of
them, and which also are verified, are directly contrary) they nevertheless are
highly guilty; because such Ecstasies, and all those things they think they do
and see at that time, proceeding from the Devil, with whom they have made a
Contract, cannot have their Rise from any Physical and ordinary cause; since
that Natural Causes do not operate at man's will and pleasure. For those
Ecstasies come to them when they lift, and do not at all happen, unless they
have a mind to it.

Finally, there are some, who pretend, that whatsoever wonders are spoken of
Witches, Diviners, Magicians, and possessed persons, do or may proceed from
Natural Causes. And there are subtle men, and great Philosophers, which have
employed all their parts and abilities to demonstrate this; and to this end do
instance in several wonderful effects, which proceed merely from Physical
Causes.

It is very true, that in Natural bodies there are wonderful qualities, and
proprieties, both manifest and occult; which produce Effects to the amazement
of those that are ignorant of their Causes. And those, that have diligently
enquired into the secrets of Nature, have written something of Natural Magic,
where they muster many examples of such strange effects and proprieties; but
all that they have writ comes nothing near to that, which the Witches,
Magicians and Diviners do bring to pass, and in this we must acknowledge, that
those people have another guess Master then these; viz, The Devil himself. For
such people, (being all, or most of them, Rude, Illiterate, and unexperienced
men) cannot have learned of themselves to do these wonderful things by any
acquired Knowledge of the Virtues and Proprieties of Natural things, of which
they cannot discourse; nor render any pertinent Reason. Which does evidently
show, that what they do is not by any profound Knowledge, that they have of the
occult virtues of Natural things, but that all these things proceed from the
ministry and help of the Devil: who does not teach them these Virtues of
Natural things neither, but only employ them as persons, with whom he has made
a Contract, to the end they may practice such wicked things, the causes of
which they knew not at all.

All Natural Bodies are so composed, that they have qualities and proprieties,
by which they do act, one on the other, or do mutually suffer some
alterations, the one by the other; whence the natural Sympathies and
Antipathies do arise. From these virtues and proprieties proceed all the
alterations and changes transmutations and effects, which are seen in nature:
And if one could exactly know all these virtues and qualities, and should apply
them exactly agentia patientibus, he would doubtless produce very strange
Effects, and wonderful to those, that should be ignorant of their Causes. All
which the Devils knowing exactly, and being able to do these things, they (I
say) having an (almost-perfect) knowledge of Nature, and of the Qualities,
Virtues, Proprieties of natural things, and applying them fitly by their
activity and motion, which is not at all perceptible to us; it is no wonder, if
they do, by the hands of Witches, Diviners, and Magicians, so many strange
things, which make men to wonder at them, even to an amazement.

It is commonly held, and, it may be, not without reason; That all the
operation of Demons does consist in their local motion. By which, First, they
are carried from place to place, though never so far distant, almost in a
moment, or imperceptible space of time: Secondly, they move, and transport
Physical bodies, though never so great, or heavy, with an incredible strength:
Thirdly, They mix and compound diverse bodies together by their strength and
power: Fourthly, they mix, and, as it were, incorporate themselves in those
bodies, and thereby make them to act as they please: Fifthly, they stupisie,
diminish, strengthen, augment, and animate, the virtues and proprieties of all
things. For, they knowing all the virtues, and Proprieties of all bodies, and
being able, through their activity and local motion, to apply quodlibet agens
cuilibet patienti, they easily do all those things, which are reported of the
Diviners, Wizards, and Magicians. And in this sense we may say, that all these
things are done by Natural Causes; because (as it has been said before) they
are done by the application of Natural Causes: but this application of Causes
Natural is not, nor cannot be done by the Magicians and Diviners without the
help of Devils. First, because the said persons, being commonly rude,
illiterate, and ignorant men, they cannot have any knowledge of these Natural
things: and Secondly, though they had an hundred times more knowledge and
experience, then indeed they have, yet it should not be sufficient to produce
those Effects. And again, had they such a knowledge, yet could not they apply
agentia patientibus, with that promptness and ability, which is requisite in
the production of those Effects. So that we may conclude, that it is necessary
that the Demons should have some influence in the production of these Effects.

For example, By what Natural Cause can a Diviner know those things which are
hidden, and the which he reveals, and which have been done in a time, and
place utterly unknown to any, but the Authors of those actions, as the
revealing of Murders, Poysonings, Adulteries, Rapes, Thefts, etc? and by what
natural cause could the two horsemen, in the shape of Castor and Pollux, bring
tidings to the Romans, in their public place, of the Victory their Consul had
gained in Macedonia but a few hours before? And by what natural means can a
footman go in few hours four or five hundred miles, which the best Posts can
scarce do in many days? and a thousand like wonderful effects? So then, it
appears (from that we have shown, that they are Witches, and Magicians, which
do these things) that they are Devils, which are the true causes of these
effects, and whose Instruments the Witches are.

Now, if there are evil spirits, there is no reason to deny, that there are
good ones too. For good does precede the evil; evil being nothing, but the
corruption of goodness. Whence it necessarily follows, that these evil
spirits were good at first; but that they have corrupted themselves afterward.
And, if there are good and evil Angels, we must conclude, that there is a Deity
above them, from which they have had their being, and which does conduct the
one, and restrain the other. For, were it not so, that incessant jarring, and
contrariety, which would be among them, would necessarily cause the ruin and
subversion of all the World, and of all the bodies, over which they have so
much power. Again, what reason is there to deny there is a Deity, if it is once
granted, that there are good and bad Angels, which are spiritual, immaterial,
invisible, immortal, powerful, and intelligent substances? For above these
there is naught, but the Deity; of whose Nature they do very much participate,
and which does excel them only, in that it is Infinite, Immense, and Eternal.

Again, if there are evil Spirits, or Devils, there is an Hell, where they are
placed, which is their prison, and the prison of those wicked and abominable
ones, which do follow, and imitate them in their wickedness. And, if there are
good Angels, there is a Paradise for their Mansion, and for the dwelling of
those good and virtuous persons, which are like unto them: and above all a God,
a righteous Judge, which avengeth the one, and rewards the other.

CHAP. XII. The ninth Argument, drawn from the Universal Consent of the World,
That there is a Deity.
THe second kind of Reasoning against the Atheists is from Authority, or
Record: which is twofold, Divine or Humane. I call that Divine Testimony,
which is drawn from the holy Writ: I call that Humane, but yet unquestionable,
Testimony, the Consent of all the men in the world; all of which do naturally
acknowledge, that there is a Deity and Providence. And here we must take
notice, First, that the most ancient Philosophers, and the most eminent and
illustrious persons in Learning and Virtue, of whom any mention is made in
History, have acknowledged a Divine Providence, which sees, knows, and rules
all things, rewards the one, and punishes the other. Secondly, all the People,
and Nations of the Earth, which are; or ever have been, have acknowledged this
same truth? Which is evident, because there was never any, that has not
professed some Religion, or instead of it an open and manifest communion, and a
familiar conversation with evil spirits; as these savage and brutish Nations
have, viz. the Toupinambous, Margajas, Caribes, Cannibales, Patagons, and the
like, and those Septentrional Nations, which are nearer to our Arctick Pole, in
Europe, Asia, and the New world, as it appears by the Relations of them, which
at this day are common and vulgar.

Now we have proved heretofore, that, if there are Devils, there is a Deity;
and consequently those Nations, acknowledging that there are Demons, by that
commerce which they have with them, do also tacitly acknowledge, and are
forced to grant, that there is a Deity. Every Religion also does imply, that
there is a Deity: For it is wholly employed in the service and adoration of it,
and to make it propitious, and merciful to men, and to obtain from it, either
the fruition of those things that are desired, or an immunity from those evils
that are feared, or suffered either in this life, or in the other: and this is
done either by Prayers, Invocations, Acknowledgements, Thanksgivings; or by
Sacrifices, and other Ceremonies. This is the end of all Religions.

Since therefore, that there has been no People, or Nation, whether civilized,
(as in old time, the Heathen Romans, and Graecians, the Chaldaeans,
Babylonians, Assyrians, and Persians, Syrians, Phaenicians, Aegrptians) or
barbarous, (as the Scythians, Africans, and infinite others) that has not had,
and professed some Religion; it is evident, that all have with one consent
acknowledged a Divine Providence.

As to the strength and validity of this Argument, it is (as has been said)
not to be doubted of, especially, if it may be shown, that there is no just
Cause or Reason to doubt of this Testimony. Let Us then see, whether any may
justly doubt of it. One may be induced to believe a false opinion three manner
of ways:

First, By affection, and desire, that we have it should be so.

Secondly, By Authority.

Thirdly, By specious and deceiving Arguments. But none of these ways can
agree with that, which is now in question.

As to the first, There is such a Connection between the Intellect and the Will,
that as the Will always follows the Dictates of the Understanding, so it does
desire that which the Intellect judges to be good. So also we easily persuade
our selves that, which we desire with Passion: man being inclined by this
desire to seek all the Reasons that may be to persuade himself of the truth
and goodness of that which he desires, and giving weight unto them by this
strong and vehement affection.

But here it cannot be said, that men persuade themselves that there is a God,
because they do desire it; but contrariwise the most part of men would, that
there were none, because they fear him as a Judge. There is therefore much more
Reason to suspect, that the opinion of the Atheists is false, and justly to
object against them, that they persuade themselves there is none, because they
so ardently wish that it were so; and that this their so vehement desire makes
them to receive the most weak Reasons for good and solid demonstrations.

As to Authority, one sometimes may believe a thing upon the mere Respect, that
he has to the persons that say it, and that, either because such persons are
sufficient and able, and that he believes them to be so, or because of that
eminent power and Authority in which they are, which has only place in those
things, which one cares not much whether they be true or not, and where he sees
no Reasons to the contrary.

It cannot be said, that men have been induced to believe a Deity and
Providence by the bare Authority and Respect that some persons had, which had
no ground or Reason for what they said For who is he, that hathso universally
been known to be of such Sufficiency, Knowledge, and Ability, as to persuade
men, only by the bare Respect they had of him, to believe a thing so great, and
that does so much concern them? For, besides that Aristotle, or Plato, who is
acknowledged to have been the greatest and learned Philosopher that ever was,
is not so much as known by name to the thousandst part of the World, it is
certain, that none that believes there is a Deity will confess, that he
believes it, because such a one said it; but only because he has an inward
persuasion of this Truth by some Reasons, which he knows and understands well
himself; although very often times he cannot express them.

And as for Eminency and Dignity, there was never yet any, that has ruled over
all the World, and who might have had the power to command or persuade men to
believe a Deity. Besides, that the Belief, which proceeds this way, ought to be
of things, which we care not much, whether they be true or not; which cannot be
said of the Deity and Providence, there being nothing more important, or that
does more highly concern men.

But perhaps it may be objected, That this opinion has spread it self by
Tradition from Fathers to Children, etc. and so is come to us. Now it is very
true, that the first man, Adam, has taught this truth to his Children, and
they to theirs, etc. and by these means this Truth has been believed over all
the World.

But first, although he has so taught his posterity, we may not therefore
conclude, that all have believed him: for there have always been wicked ones,
that have not cared for their Fathers admonitions, and those also have not
taken pains to make their Children to believe it; so that this pretended
Tradition has been in many places interrupted, and neglected. So that we must
confess, that this universal belief of a Deity has another cause then
Tradition, or mere Institution. Add to it, that this thing is of too much
concernment to be believed upon the bare word of our Fathers: which indeed may
give an occasion to seek after this truth, and incline our minds to believe it;
but cannot be the only true ground of so firmly-inherent a belief.

Secondly, As to those, against whom we dispute, which hold the Eternity of the
world; how can they, (keeping still to this proposition, viz, That the world is
Eternal) Object, That this opinion has its Rise from mere Tradition. For I
will ask them, Whether they think that this Opinion is Eternal, as well as the
world? or whether it has had some beginning again? If this opinion is Eternal,
I will ask, Whether it was generally received among all men, or received of
some only? If they say, That it has always been Universal, it follows, that
it is natural, and therefore a true opinion, and theirs consequently false. If
this Opinion has not been Universal, but yet was from all Eternity received
among some, it follows that it is at least as true an opinion as theirs is;
since it has had followers, and has been received from all Eternity as well
as theirs.

But these two Opinions being contrary one to another, they cannot both be
equally true, nor consequently equally Eternal: and so necessarily the one is
true, and the other false; the one Prior, the other Posterior: truth being
always before falsehood, which is a disguising of Truth and an aberration from
it.

Here then will they say, that their Opinion is the first, and Eternal, the
other having followed long time after. If this is true, then it follows, that
all men Universally, in an infinite number of Ages, have constantly held this
opinion, That there is no God: how then is it come into the minds of men to
hold the contrary to that, which they had always held and believed? And how
could any one imagine that he could persuade this to any one? Yea, how is it
possible, that men should now hold a contrary opinion, but that they have
acknowledged by strong Reasons, that the other opinion was false?

So then we cannot conclude, neither according to their Hypothesis, nor
accoding to ours, that this universal belief of the Deity is a mere Tradition
and proceeds from Institution; but it must necessarily be concluded, that it
proceeds from that men have unanswerable Arguments for it, upon which both it
and its evidence is grounded.

But the Atheists would willingly reply, that those arguments are but captious
and weak, and have no solidity in them. But there is no reason to think so.
For, how is it possible, that a mere Phantasm or shadow, without any real
solidity, should have deceived all the men in the whole world: and that so
constantly, since so many ages; that there has been none found among so many
men, that has demonstrated as yet the pretended vanity and weakness of these
Arguments?

Is it possible, that none has been found among so many wonderfully-learned
men, of which History makes mention; that has evidenced the pretended falsehood
of this opinion, and demonstrated how weak and vain those Arguments are, on
which this our opinion is grounded; and by these means free the World from the
checks and terrors, which the conscience of their crimes causes in them, when
they consider and perceive that there is a Divine Providence? This doubtless
would have found place enough in the belief of men.

But, it may be, it will be said, that Epicurus, and his followers, and some
others before him, have done this, teaching Atheism, and the Reasons that may
persuade to it.

Now, those Persons have indeed had wit enough, and very good Reasons, to jear
at all the vain superstitions, foolish and extravagant opinions of the Religion
of the Heathen, at the impertinent and fabulous Stories, that they made of
their Gods, of the multitude of them, and at the false imagination they had of
the state of the dead in Hell, or in the Elysian fields.

But it will not be found, nor confessed, that they have strong and solid
Reasons, to prove, that there is no Providence. And those profane ones of our
days, who think they have refined Atheism to the height, will be found as
short in their Arguments, if they are examined by the rules of right Reason:
and it will be found, that the Reason, why they are estecmed and counted
excellent Wits, is not so much because of the strength of their Arguments, as
because nothing is either too hot or too cold for them, and that there is no
absurdity, though it be never so great, which they do not easily swallow, like
to the strong stomachs of Ostriches, which do digest any thing that is given
them.

And here we should enter upon the examination of their pretended Reasons, and
compare theirs and ours, which we have brought against them; that there might
be a Judgment given, which are the most solid and firm: but this would engage
us to another Treatise, whereupon we have not now a design to enter; but will
examine some of them toward the end of this book. That, which has been said
hitherto against them, being well weighed and considered, will be found so
agreeable to right Reason, that, if their opinion is true, they must dispute
otherwise then by Reason, and must be far above it, and so consequently must
be much more then men.

But, albeit their Reasons were of equal weight with ours, (which is not so)
yet have we much advantage on our side.

1. Because, besides these Reasons, we have this universal consent, which they
have not.

2. Because, though there were no God, yet there is no danger, and little or no
loss to believe and serve one: but, if there is one, the Atheists, for not
believing and serving him, are in great danger to have Hell for their portion.

One thing may be objected against this Universal Consent of all Nations, viz.
That there are errors and false opinions, which yet nevertheless have been
believed, and received by most, or all the Nations of the Earth: as for
example; Idolatry, Multiplicity of the Gods of the Heathen, and in the most
civilized Nations, and People, (as among the Graecians and Romans,) Whoredom,
and the sin against Nature, have scarce been accounted vices; and there have
been whole Nations, and People, where Robbery, and Theft, especially if it was
committed upon those of another Nation, was not looked upon as crime or sin.

But, The answer to this is not difficult:

For First, these errors, though very general, have not been so constant and
universal, as the belief of a Deity. For Christianism has abolished the
Paganism in a very considerable part of the World, and was once more universal
then it is now. And the Mohammedan, Jenish and Christian Religions, all of which
hold, there is one only God, compared with the rest of the World, which yet
remains plunged in Heathenish Idolatry, do almost, or, it may be, altogether
comprehend the half of those men, which are upon the face of the Earth. Now,
the opinion of one only God, so as the Christians, Mahometans, and Jews do
hold, it is far more contrary to Atheism, then the Pagan Idolatry. How is it
then, if Atheistical opinions be true, that the opinion of the Jews,
Christians, and Mahometans, has so much prevailed over that of the Heathen,
which comes much nearer to Atheism? Especially, since the Christian Religion,
which has preceded that of the Mahometans, was propagated only by the patience
and sufferings of the Professors of it, which every where have been exposed
and abandoned to the rage, fury, and persecution of the Heathen.

The Heathenish Idolatry, and Superstition, is an opinion much more suitable to
our carnal sense, and which corrupted man does love, and cherish much more,
then the apprehension, which the Christians and Mahometans have of one God.
Therefore (as we have noted heretofore) its no wonder, that this error had
spread it self very much: since we persuade our selves very willingly and
easily of those things, which we earnestly desire, and wish for. But this same
flesh is wholly repugnant to the belief of a Deity, that judges and Governs
the World, and renders to every man according to what he had done. How comes it
then to pass, that the opinion, which we have of one only God, has prevailed
against the Heathenish Idolatry and Superstition, and does yet maintain it self
against so many Atheists as are at this day: since that we arm and defend our
selves, as much as we can, against those things, which we fear and dread?

Thirdly, The Heathenish Idolatry, and Superstition, is an alteration and
corruption of the opinion of a Deity, and does necessarily presuppose it, as
its ground, and basis. And this alteration (as I said just now) is wonderfully
more accommodated to our fleshly and sensual corruptions, then the belief of an
only God. It is therefore no wonder, if the opinion of a Deity, being so
universally received, and so deeply rooted in the heart of man, the Heathenish
Idolatry, and Superstition (which pleases the flesh) has spread it self also
so much as it has. But the opinion of a Deity is not a corruption, or
alteration of Atheism. It is quite contrary. And this belief of a Deity does
not please the flesh, as Atheism does. Therefore the belief of a Deity could
not have so universally won the spirits of men, but by its own proper strength
and virtue, which consists in Truth, which is stronger then all things. And
it is much to be wondered at, (and the Atheists, will never give a pertinent
Reason of it) why, if Atheism be true, it has not been so universally
received, as its contrary; but contrariwise, and almost every where, even among
the Heathen, it has been abhorred, and detested of all. As to those other
enormities, of Whoredom, Thefts, and the sin against Nature, and the like;
besides, that the most honest persons, in every Nation, have acknowledged in
these actions a great deal of filthiness, and injustice, when they have spoken
of them in good earnest (though the corrupted and base pleasures of the flesh,
and the depraved sense of their lusts, had so blinded their understanding, that
they let themselves loose to all these vices, without any great remorse) it is
not of these errors, as of the belief of a Deity: for these vices please, and
entice sensuality, and therefore men are easily persuaded to them; but the
belief of a Deity is wholly repugnant to sensuality, which would persuade it
self the contrary if it could: and nevertheless this opinion has forced men's
understandings to assent to it; which could not be done, but by the mere
strength of truth it self.

From what has been said before, it is plain and evident, that this so
universal, and constant consent of all men, (who hold, and believe, even in
spite of themselves, that there is a God, and a Providence) is an indubitable
Argument of this truth, and an evidence of the deprivation of man, by which he
is fallen from his first Nature, and Principles, by which he was joined and
united to God; unto whom he was conformable in Truth, Justice, and Holiness, as
one created to his own Image: and from which he is now separated, and
alienated, through his Injustice, Pollution, and Perverseness, which does
incline him to deny this Providence, which he fears as his Judge.

And in this Infidelity of Man, God would not leave himself without a
Witness; but has lively engraved, and imprinted himself in his Works: so
that man, maugre himself, is forced in those things to acknowledge this Deity.

And this is to convince man of his error, and to make good the Justice of his
proceedings, and the righteousness of his Judgments against their impiety.

And, from what has been said, appears the strength of this Testimony, against
which nothing, which is considerable, can be objected: as being a Testimony,
not only Humane, or proceeding from the fancy, or will of man; but in effect a
Divine one, as being the mere motion of Nature, and the dictate of Reason, and
wherein this Proverb is verified; Vox Populi, Vox Dei.

But let us pass from this Humane Testimony to that which is directly Divine.

CHAP. XIII. The last Argument, Drawn from the Testimony of the Holy
Scriptures; the Divinity of which is proved against the Atheists.
ABove all these Proofs and Reasons, which have been brought heretofore against
Atheism, is that, which is drawn from the Testimony of the Holy Scriptures,
contained in the Books of the Old and New Testaments; which teach and inculcate
to us nothing else, then an only true God, maker of Heaven and Earth, what he
is, his Virtues, his Perfections, his Proprieties and Attributes, his Works, as
well of the Creation of the World, and his Governing of it, as also those of
man's Redemption, his Counsels, Designs, the Decrees of his Will concerning
Humane kind, the Salvation of the one, the Condemnation of the others; also the
Honor, Respect, Service, and Adoration, which we are bound to pay unto him,
and which he does also require of us, what we ought to fear, or to expect, and
hope from him: in sum the true and only means to be perfectly and eternally
happy; which is that which all men do naturally desire, and wish for, and at
which all their actions do aim.

So that, if these Sacred Books are true, and not forged, and invented by the
Artifice or malice of wily and deceitful men, it is evident and not to be
doubted, that there is a God, and that he is such an one as is there described
to us.

To which the Atheists reply nothing, but this. Who, say they, will warrant us,
that what those Writers say is true, and that their design has not been to
impose upon our beliefs, and deceive us? Moses, say they, says very much, but
proves nothing; intimating that he is a Tale-teller; and that he will be
believed upon his bare word. And one of them has said, That our Lord Jesus
Christ, to give the more weight to his Doctrine, has called himself (but
falsely) the Son of God, yea God himself. Those persons imagine, and will have
the World believe, that these Divine writers are such as Numa Pompilius, who
did attribute his Books and Laws to the Deity of the Nymph Aegeria, with whom
he pretended to have familiar Conversation; or as Mahcmeth, who says, that he
received his Alcoran from the Angel Gabriel.

It Is not my design to proceed very far in this point and to prove at large
against such persons the Divinity of the Holy Scriptures. It Is too large a
subject for the narrow bounds of this small treatrse, besides, it would be
Actum agere, since that all those of the Holy Fathers of the Church; or Learned
Divines, which have lived since these 200 years, which have demonstrated the
truth of Christian Religion against the Heathenish, and other Sects which have
been raised since, have ever begun this way; this being the very Basis, Hinge,
and Foundation of true Religion, which is, (whether on purpose, or not I know
not) basely betrayed to the Atheists, by those; who pretend that the Scripture
has no authority over us, but only as those, who call themselves the Church,
give it that power and validity. For, setting aside the Scripture, these
persons, who call themselves the Church, cannot demonstrate their pretended
infallibility, nor prove, and persuade the world, that they ought to be
believed upon their bare word whatever they say: as the Divinity of the
Scriptures may be demonstrated to profane persons upon their own Authority, and
by themselves.

I will only, for the ending of this small Treatise, bring some general
Considerations, by which one may see the foolishness and vanity of this
frivolous exception of the Atheists, and of their false accusations, in saying
that the Holy Scripture is nothing but a dream and invention of men, without
certain ground of Truth.

There are then 4 principal things, which show the impertinency of this
exception. 1. The quality and condition. 2. The number and diversity. 3. The
Scope and end of these Sacred Writers. And finally, The Nature and quality of
the things they write. These things being well considered, it will appear, that
those things, which those men have writ, are not Tales and Deceits, and things,
which they have feigned to make the world believe them. I will speak of these
four things very briefly, leaving those things for any man to amplify upon.

As to the first, Those that make it their business to deceive, and make Fables
and Forgeries, are, for the most part, subtle, cunning, wary, and knavish
persons, and withal, of a low, or mean Condition: But great and high spirits,
magnanimous and Heroical Souls, Kings, great Princes, and Monarchs, Persons of
rare and exquisite Learning, and of sublime wisdom, never stoop to so low and
unworthy an employment, as that of Juglers and deceivers. And those, that are
rude, ignorant, and illiterate, and of too low and abject condition, are not
fit or able to invent such things, and to give so much color to their
forgeries, as to make them to be believed and received for current. Now among
the Sacred writers there are some of these two sorts. There are Kings and
Princes, great Captains and Conquerours, and emment Persons in Dignity and
Authority, in Learning and incomparable Wisdom.

You have there a Joshuah, one of the greatest and most eminent Captains and
Conquerours that ever was. You have there David, one of the bravest, most
generous, and glorious Kings; and most eminent for his Valor, Battles, Feats
of Arms, and Victories, that ever was seen. You have there Solomon, the most
Rich, Magnificent, Illustrious, and Wisest King that ever was in the World. You
have Daniel, the first and chiefest Officer in the Court of the greatest
Monarchy in the World; in whom there was found more of true, high, and sublime
Wisdom, then in all those Wise men of that Nation, and Monarchy, in which he
was an Officer. You have Mordecai, and Nehemiah, great and mighty Persons, and
of the chiefest in the Court of the Kings of Persia, which relate unto us their
own History. You have Job, a great, rich, and mighty Person in his time; yet
greater in in Goodness, Patience, and incomparable Fortitude: who relates to us
his own History, and those incomparable Discourses held between him and his
Friends, upon the occasion of his Afflictions. Briefly, you have Moses, the
most ancient of all these Writers, bred in the King of Egypt's Court, learned
in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians: who were accounted for their Wisdom above
all the other Nations of the Earth; but since, you have him endowed and filled
with an higher and more admirable Wisdom, which appears every where in his
Writings: Who being compared with the greatest, wisest, and most renowned
Legislatours of the Heathen, they are less then Children to him, albeit they
have learnt in his Schole what they have best and more glorious.

Can persons of this Nature and Temper, of that Quality and Condition, of so
great and eminent Courage, so noble and so glorious, so wise and prudent; can
they (I say) debase themselves so much, as to busy themselves in writing
Forgeries? Or, is it probable; that they would follow, and confirm, and
entertain other men's Impostures? Have Caesar and Alexander, Scipio and Cato,
Aristotle and Plato, and other like Persons, eminent for Learning, Wisdom,
Virtue, Greatness, Riches, and Worldly Power amongst the Heathens, employed
themselves in this vile Trade of imposing on men's beliefs, and writing of Tales?

On the other side, you have among the Authors and Penmen of the New
Testament, our Lord Jesut Christ, the first of all, and from whom all the rest
have learned, who (unless he were in effect that, which he himself says to be,
viz. The Son of God) was but the Son of a poor, and of a very mean woman, of
the lowest rank of the people. His Disciples and Apostles were, mostof them,
poor Fishermen; simple, rude, illiterate, and ignorant persons, (as such kind
of people use to be, and as it appears by their own History in the Gospel)
before they were endowed with that Wisdom from above, which came from Heaven.
Are such kind of persons fit to seduce and deceive all the World by their
pretended Impostures, and that in spite of the most strong and violent
Resistance, that all the powers of the Earth have made against it, by the most
bloody and horrible Persecutions, and by the Learning and subtility of the
greatest Philosophers, who have hindered the Propagation of Christian Religion
as much, as they possibly could?

What great Cunning and Subtility, what strong Reasons and powerful
Persuasions, could proceed from Spirits so dejected, from so vile and abject
persons, from men so much despised? And how have they been able to overreach,
and abuse all the World, and to captivate all Imaginations of men of whatsoever
Age, Sex, Quality, and Condition to the Obedience of Christ? And how could such
men beat down and wholly subvert Paganism, which was so deeply rooted in the
Hearts of men, and upheld by the Authority of all the Supreme Powers of the
Earth? And, more then this, to persuade men to resolve with joy to loose their
Goods, Honors, Estates, Esteem, and Reputation; yea, to loose their Life it
self; and all that they had dearest here below, yea, even to endure the most
Horrible, and Exquisite Torments of the Body, (as we see in the Examples of
Martyrs of all Ages, Sexes, and Conditions, of all Nations, and People, in all
places through the world, and that for a long time) for maintaining of a
Ridiculous and Absurd Story (if we believe the Atheists) upon the hopes of a
pretended Imaginary Felicity after this Life; of which Happiness they give no
other Caution, then the promises of this pretended Son of a Carpentar?

How is it possible, that such persons should imagine, that they could
persuade, and draw the World to their Opinions, and delude them with their
Dreams.

We must then acknowledge in this the invincible strength of Truth, and the
finger and might of God, which has acted, and stretched forth its self in this
so wonderful a work. The quality then, and the condition of these Holy Penmen,
does not argue; that they be Fables contained in their Writings, and that they
are Impostours, and Deluders. And so much for the first point, which might be
much more enlarged.

As to the second, Which is the number and diversity of these Writers, it
seldom, or never at all, happens, that many men, without any Communication,
one with another, do conspire, and agree to maintain, and uphold one and the
same falsehood. For the mind of man, through the unlimited Love, that it has
toward it self, is wonderfully various, and does not agree with the Thoughts,
Inventions, and Imaginations of others, every one being willing to flatter
himself, and to be thought as good and industrious in his Inventions as
another. Whence those Compilers of Romances in our days have all their several
Inventions; and there is scarce any, that prosecutes the Invention and Design
of another. But the Sacred Writers are many in number, very much different as
to time, and place. Since Moses to the Apostles times, there are almost two
thousand years: during which space of time, sometimes in one age, sometimes in
another, and in diverse places, and persons of different degrees, conditions,
and qualities, Kings, Princes, Lords, Captains, Courtiers, Doctors, simple and
ignorant people, Fishermen, Artists, Publicans, all agree in maintaining, and
defending that pretended falsehood, that there is an only God, maker of Heaven
and Earth, etc. and give us the History of a small, but most wonderful, and
illustrious Nation, (which does yet subsist, dispersed all over the world with
so exact a connection, since its first beginning, for the space of two thousand
years. And these accounts which they give us, are so constant, and uniform, and
so agreeable one to the other, that nothing in them is contradictory, or belies
the other.

Now, so admirable, and constant an agreement, in so many heads, and persons so
different, and separated by times, ages, places; in so many and so strange
things, far above the reach of Humane Reason, cannot be the effect or product
of a false and lying Spirit, which commonly betrays himself, and his own
inventions and lies. How much more is it impossible, that so many persons
should agree so well in these things, if they are Inventions and Fables?
Besides, the end and scope of these Scriptures does plainly evidence the
falsehood of this imputation, viz. That these Writers sayings are but Fables.

Those, that go about to deceive the World, and to promulgate their absurd
Dreams and Inventions, do it commonly, or altogether, for one of these ends;
either to get honor, pleasure, profit, or riches, for themselves, or for
theirs; as are all Juglers, and cunning fellows: or to make some sport, and to
have the name and reputation of eloquent persons, and brave wits; as Jesters,
those that compile Romances, and the like pieces. Others, through vanity, and
self-conceitedness, that they may get admiration, praise, and esteem from men,
do maintain some Paradoxes, and new, strange, and monstrous opinions; as many
did among the Heathen Philosophers, and as the Heretics amongst Christians
have done, which never intended their inventions, and absurdities to any good
end, as the Public good, or the concernment of humane kind, or to induce men
to follow virtue, and show them the way to true happiness.

I believe, that no man in his wits will say, that the Sacred Histories of the
Old and New Testament are Romances, invented to delight men, and to gain the
Writers the credit of worldly-eloquent persons, and of that politenesse of Wit,
which is accounted so among men. The style, and manner of writing these Books,
is far different from that of the Romances; and all the circumstances of time,
places, and persons, are so punctually observed, and every where so agreeing,
that one must be barbarous, and wild, or altogether stupid, and besotted, that
does not perceive the wonderful, and infinite difference there is betwixt
these Sacred Histories and the fabulous Romances. Besides, that those, who make
Romances, compile them so (if they are able men) as that there is some
likelihood in what they relate, and shun (as much as they can) the prodigious
Fictions of Amadis. Nevertheless, they clearly evidence, that they do not
desire to be believed in those things, which they relate; but that their design
is to charm (by the elegancy of the style, their ingenious inventions, and the
likelihood of those things) the eyes of the mind, and to make it see those
things, which really are not, and to delight their Readers by this pleasant
cheat. But the Penmen of the Sacred Histories do propose them, as things
certain, true, and indubitable, and desire that they may be believed for such.
Which would be a gross folly in them, and a thing unworthy men of parts; if
they were Romances, forged and invented on purpose. Besides, that the style of
these Writings is very mean, and popular, and far from the way of writing of
those, whose design it is to abuse, and deceive the World. Neither will it be
proved, that the Authors of these Sacred Books have endeavored to entrap and
deceive men by their fictions, and inventions of honors, pleasures, estates, or
riches.

Neither Moses, or Joshua, have endeavored to leave the conduct of the Jewish
Commonwealth to their children. Moses had no need to leave Pharaoh's Court, to
enjoy Honor and Riches; since, if he had staid there, he might have been
reputed the Son of the Daughter of Pharach.

David has not, by his Writings and Psalms, acquired that glory and power,
which he had: but has got it by his Valor, by the Wars which he made, and the
favor, and blessing of God, who has protected and directed him. What needed
he, being a great and mighty King, to busy himself in composing of those
Psalms; if they be but mere empty inventions? What humane end could he propose
to himself in this.

Solomon, his son, has not acquired, nor sought after that Honor, Glory, and
Riches, (which he has possessed in greater measure, then all the rest of the
Kings of the Earth, Jin the composition of the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and
Canticles. He enjoyed all these things, before he writ any thing of these Books:
and, in his Ecclesiastes, he shows plainly enough the little, or no esteem he
had of them.

Have Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezechiel, and the twelve small Prophets, sought by
their Writings the goods, honors, and pleasures of this World? They, who have
been for this thing hated, derided, persecuted, and put to death: and this not
contrary to their design and expectation, and against their will; for they
submitted willingly, and have undergone all those evils in obedience to this
God, who sent them.

Did our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, follow and endeavor after these
things? No, but quite contrariwise they do exhort and persuade their Disciples
and followers, not to love or seek them: and rather to expect the crosses,
tribulations, and persecutions of the World, for the Profession of that
Doctrine they taught them.

Shall we say, that vanity, and desire of glory have led these Persons to this,
that they might gain the reputation of men of Parts, and of subtle Persons.
Nothing less. Could the Apostles, who were poor fishermen, rude, illiterate,
and ignorant persons, aspire to this Glory, and could they expect this credit
from the men of their times, or from posterity? Besides, that their Writings
are full of the contempt they had, and would every one of their Disciples to
have, of such a glory.

Solomon has not sought for this by his Writings: before he writ he had that
great Wisdom, which has gained him the reputation of the most Learned, and
Wise of all the men that went before him. And he has had this credit and
reputation; not by holding, or putting forth Paradoxes, and extravagant
Opinions, invented by him, against the common Tenants of other men: but by a
true and right Wisdom, and an admirable Knowledge, which in effect he had of
the Nature of all things. David and Joshua had acquired Glory and Credit enough
by their Archievements, without affecting this by their Writings, and
maintaining Fantastical Opinions. If Moses would have sought after worldly
glory, he would rather have acquired it by the Wisdom of the Egyptians, in
which he had been instructed, and which was then in great repute in the World;
then by inventing new Opinions, and Doctrines. Daniel had enough of the
Learning of the Chaldeans, which he knew well, to gain esteem and reputation
amongst men, without broaching a new, unheard of, and strange Doctrine.

So then, it is evident, that the desire of vainglory has not induced these
Holy VVriters to tell us Dreams, and Phantasms of their brain. What then is
it? Is it the affection to the Public good, and their desire they had to
profit men, that has moved them to tell us their new inventions, and stories
of their own making? Sometimes indeed Fictions are used in Moral and Politic
documents. Aesop's Fables are all of this nature. And many times Orators do
use such Fictions in their Orations; as that of Menenius Agrippa, of the
dissension there was between the belly and the other parts of the body. And the
Scripture it self uses these sometimes; as that of the Son of Geaeon, of the
Trees that chose themselves a King. Parables also are a kind of instructing,
Moral Fiction; as that of Gad to David, of the Poor man and his Sheep. And of
such Parables are the Gospels full; and in the Discourses of our Lord Jesus
Christ they are very frequent. But these things have nothing common, nor do not
relate to that, of which we treat now. The question is, Whether the Histories
of the Old and New Testament are Tales, and Fables; or whether they be
Relations of things, that have really and truly came to pass.

Those, who do write Apologues, Parables, etc. do not write them for true
Histories: they show plainly enough, that they speak such things merely to
instruct, and not for things, that have really happened. But the Sacred Writers
do give us their Histories for the true Narrations of things, which really came
to pass.

And this is evident, because they do note all the crcumstances, and
particularities, which are observed in true Histories, and by which we are wont
to discern Romances, and Poetical Fictions from true Narrations.

They would have us to hold, and believe those Narrations for very truths, and
things, which have really and certainly happened. To what end should this be if
their Narrations are but Dreams? Do those good VVriters, that will instruct and
profit, use such means? In no wise. And although one would write some Moraliz'd
Romance, to instruct men; yet would not he publish it for a true History.
Besides, that we have noted before, that these Sacred Histories have none of
the style and garb of Romances.

And as to the Doctrines, Sayings, and Sentences, of which the Sacred Books are
full, will the Atheists say, that they are Paradoxes, wild and extravagant
opinions? If it is so, I will ask them, To what good end could such things have
been forged and invented? For we have showed heretofore, that they could not be
invented to any ill intent, or pernicious design. If they are mere Inventions,
and that there is no reality in them, to what good end can they have been
invented?

Moreover, these Sacred Authors do propose these Doctrines, that men may
steadfastly believe them, and that they may be held for undoubted truths; can
there be any good or reasonable end in this, if these things are in effect but
Extravagancies?

Will they say, that these Persons, being willing to win men to the exercise
of Virtue, Justice, Temperance, Fortitude, Truth, Faithfullness, Friendship,
Charity, Patience, Honor, Respect, Obedience, Observation of the Laws of
Humane Society, etc. did think that the persuasion (though a false one) of a
God, Creator, and Governor of this Universe, Judge, Avenger, and Remuneratour
of the good and evil; and that the examples (though but fictitious and false)
of Vices and Virtues, which are rewarded, or punished by a Providence, would be
a Powerful motive to induce men to attain this end? And that this is it, which
has made them to invent this opinion of a Providence, with all the
consequences of it, and to compile all these Stories to Patronize Vices and
Virtues? Almost as Horace does pretend (in that Epistle which begins, Trojani
belli Scriptorem, Maxim L^lli,) that Homer, in his Iliad and Odyssea, does
tell us all these fine Tales, and Stories, to serve as Moral documents unto
all men. It is very true, that the belief of a God, such as he is represented
to us in the Sacred Writings, is the true, and only means, and the most strong
and efficacious motive, to induce men to true Virtue, as it appears by the
Examples of the Lives of the truely-faithfull under both the Testaments: in
comparison of which the most splendid Virtue of the Heathen is but dross and
dung; As an exact comparison of them would easily verify. And the first
Christian Fathers, that have writ against the vanity of the Heathen, showed
this evidently; as Tertullian, Minutius Felix, and others. But it is also very
true, that, if this persuasion of a Deity and Providence, such as it is
represented to us by the Christian Religion, was false and imaginary, it could
not produce such an effect, as to induce men to exercise the true Virtue.

And we may not Object, that an opinion, though false, if it be believed for
true and certain, does produce the same effect, as if it were really true; as
many Examples do testify.

For those false impressions, which the mind receives, do last but for a little
while. They deceive only for a small time. It is as paint upon a face, which
for a time does give some luster; but abides not. But this belief of a Deity,
and Providence, is stable, and as constant, and unalterable, as the Heavens.
And it is not a Fiction of the Holy Writers: For those, that never heard of
them. or saw their Writings, have had, and yet have, this persuasion; for we
have showed heretofore, that all men in all ages were persuaded, there was a
Deity, and a Providence.

There is also too manifest, and palpable a difference, between the Fables and
Poetical Fictions of Homer, and the Narrations of Holy Writ. It was not Homer's
intention, (if his design was such, as Horace tells us it was, viz. to
instruct, and please men by his Fables) that we should take his Fables for
Truths: Nor has he divulged these Fictions for true Histories; but composed
only a fine Moraliz'd Romance.

But (as we have said) the Sacred Writers do tell us their Histories, as
certain, and indubitable things. And as to the false Deities of Homer, and to
all those things he tells of them, I think, that there is none of the strong
Wits at this day dares maintain without blushing, but that, which the
Christian Religion does teach of a God, Creator, Preserver, Judge and
Governor of all this Universe; of his Cult and Service; and of the means to
attain to true happiness by Jesus Christ alone, is far more agreeable to the
Deity, (if there is any) and also more conformable to right Reason, then all
the fabulous Tales of the false Gods of Homer; yea, then what he has best, and
more refined concerning the Deity.

So then, it is unreasonable to say of the Sacred VVriters of the Old and New
Testament, that they have invented, or got from some others, that preceded
them, the things, that they reach us in their VVritings. All manner of reason
is against this. To these I will add some few remarks, which may serve as a
Model for any one, who will treat of this matter more at large, as well it may
be done.

CHAP. XIV. Wherein there follow some more Proofs of the Divinity of the Holy
Scriptures.
THose things, which are contained in Scripture, are twofold, viz. Doctrines,
and Histories. Neither of these can proceed from man's or Devils inventions.
The Doctrines also are two fold: 1. Dogmata; so properly called, because they
are delivered, as the objects of our faith and knowledge: as that there is a
God, a Jesus Christ Son of God, Savior and Redeemer of the World. 2. Moral
Doctrines; which are conversant in the regulating of life, and exercise of
Virtue.

These Doctrines, which respect Faith and Knowledge, are so high, so sublime,
so excellent, so admirable, so profound and abstruse, especially those
Mysteries of the Trinity, Incarnation, and Redemption; that the Soul of man is
not at all capable to comprehend them, so as to have invented, or divined such
things: and they are so contrary to the humor, nature, and Genius of the
Devil; that he could not, nor would not, have thought or invented any such
things, much less would he have taught them unto men. And if these things are
false, good Angels would not have invented them; such a Fiction, being wholly
repugnant to their integrity.

And as to the Moral Precepts, they contain so exact, perfect, and incomparable
a form of holiness (to which all the Virtues of the most noted Heathen
Philosophers comes nothing near) that sinful and corrupted man, as he is
naturally inclined to evil, could not have invented so perfect a Rule to live
by, as that which is showed unto us there. Much less is the Devil Author of
chese things who is so great an enemy to all Virtue and Holiness, that he would
not have recommended -or taught it unto men.

Besides, if Damons are granted to be, it must be consequently acknowledged,
That there is a God; as has been showed before. Whence it appears that these
things proceed necessarily from Divine Revelation.

As to the Narrations and Histories, they are so tied and connexed unto the
Doctrines, that they cannot be separated one from another. So that, if the
Histories are true, and no forged things; the Doctrines, which are annexed to
them, must needs also be true. For in every part of them you have a God,
Creator, and Governor of Heaven and Earth, represented to you, who does see,
conduct, and order all things; a Judge of men, who punishes and chastises the
one, and does reward and recompense the others; who works wonders above and
beyond all Natures Power; who styles, and in effect shows himself to be such,
as he is there described, viz. Eternal, Infinite, Immortal, Invisible,
Incomprehensible, Almighty, Wise, Good, Just, and Merciful etc. We see in
the New Testament a man ( Jesus Christ, our Lord) stiling himself The Son of
God, and The Savior of the World, showing and evidencing by his Miracles, that
he was indeed such a one; dying for men's salvation, arising again, ascending
into Heaven, and there sitting at the right hand of God his Father, and sending
from thence the Holy Spirit upon his Apostles. There he is seen ministered to by
Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed in the World, and by the strength of
his Spirit bearing down all Heathenish Idolatry, and Superstition, demolishing
the empire of the Devil, and triumphing gloriously over Satan, and over all
his Power.

These Narrations are not Fables artificially invented, as those of Homer, and
those of the Old and New Romances of all sorts; but are true Histories, and
genuine Relations of things, which have really and certainly came to pass, so
as they are there related to us.

Which appears, First by the Connection, and admirable contexture of these
Relations, which do strengthen, follow, and maintain one another with so exact
and just an agreement, that there is nothing there unjoynted, or that does belly
any other matter therein contained. Which in so great a multitude, and variety
of Narrations, so well continued with all their Circumstances of Times, Places,
and Persons, (and of which we do see many Traces, and Footsteps, in the most
authentical and certain Monuments of Antiquity) and so well continued by so
many Ages from the Beginning of the World to our Lord Jesus, for the space of
four thousand years (add to this the connection and coherence there is between
the Relations and Doctrines of the New Testament with those of the Old) cannot
have been compiled, nor so admirably invented by any humane Industry, though
such a Writer had been as subtle, and ingenious as it may be; although one man
alone (which is not true) had undertaken to write and continue such a design,
which he had before invented out of his own brain. Much less could it be, that
so many, and so different Writers, as to Time, and Place; some in the Desert,
others in Judea, others in Babylon, others in Samaria; (two Kingdoms so
contrary, and Enemies one to the other) some Jews, other Christians, (two
people so different) in such a wonderful variety of matters, and so differing
arguments of their Writings; as are Histories, Laws, Political and
Ecclesiastical Ordinances, Moral Precepts, Prophesies of many kinds, Epistles,
Discourses, Disputes, of so differing styles, the one low, genuine, and
popular; the other figurate, and sublime, (to which all humane Eloquence cannot
attain) the one terse and polished, the other harsh and unpleasing: it is (I
say) impossible, that so many, and so different heads, which have neither seen,
known, nor combined together, should have so well agreed in all points to
divulge, and put forth, and give credit to a Fable so well continued, and to
suit so wonderfully all the Narrations, Doctrines, and Precepts, which they lay
there before us.

Secondly it appears, That these are not sabulous Narrations and Tales, made to
deceive the World; because the Nation of the Jews, the Origin and History of
which is held forth to us in the Old Testament, and is continued for the space
of two thousand years, and which is almost all the subject matter of all the
Books of the Old Testament, and makes a good part of the Books of the New
Testament, is, and does subsist yet at this day scattered upon the face of the
Earth, even so, as their own Prophets had foretold them. Their Sanctions,
Customs, Ceremonies, and Religion, the very same, as was prescribed to them by
their Lawgiver Moses, and by the Prophets. It cannot be denied, that Jesus
Christ, and his Apostles, have been, and have Preached in the World; since that
their Doctrine and their Writings are received, and held by so many millions of
Christians, which have been for these 1600. years upon the Earth, known, and
noted among men. But, it may be it will be objected, that the ground and basis
of these Histories is true; and has some reality in it; that there have been a
Moses, Joshua, Judges, and Kings of Israel, a David, a Solomon, etc. but that
these Histories have been sluffed, and garnished with Fictitious Tales; as
Homer's Iliad, and Odyssea: the Foundation of which is Historical, since that
once Troy, Priam, Hector, Achilles, had a real being; but they have not done
all that Homer tells and writes of them: and as the Romances of Roland and
Regnault, who once were, but never did that which the Romances, written of
them, tell us. So the Miracles and Wonders of Egypt, of the Desert, of Joshua,
of the Judges, of the Kings, of Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, are Ornaments
invented by these Writers, to set an higher value on what they present there to
us.

Let us see, whether there is any ground of Reason in this.

First, Moses writes himself his own History, and that of the people of the
Jews, which he had drawn from Egypt, and led through the Desert for the space
of forty years, with so incomparable an ingenuity, and so far from suspicion
of fraud or deceit; that he notes there his own defects and faults, and does
not bestow the most Honorable charges of this People, the Priesthood, or
Royalty, upon any of his Posterity. And, a little before his death, he makes a
long Sermon to them (which is all the Book of Deuteronomy) where he represents
to them all things, that had befallen them in the Desert, and a little before
their going out of Egypt, just in the same manner, as he relates it in the
Books of Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers.

Was it then any time, place, and likelihood, that they could be made to
believe forged Tales? and could he take them to witness those things, which
they never saw, nor knew?

Will it be said, That he never made this Sermon? That we only suppose it to be
so? That he has not writ these Books? Or, That these Writings, so replenished
of Fabulous Stories, have been hid for a long time, and have not been published
of a great while after he was dead; when the Memory of those things, which
happened at the going out of Egypt, and in the Desert, was past and abolished
in this people, which was very glad, and content to receive, and believe these
fine Tales, as tending to the Honor of their Nation? Or, else will it be
objected, That some body after his death has framed, and published these Books
under his Name.

First, This is objected, without the least Color, Appearance, or Ground in
Reason.

Secondly, This is against the Testimony of the most ancient Monuments of
History, which father these Books upon none other then Moses, and accuse no
body of having compiled them for him. Diodorus Siculus writes, that Moses gave
the Jews their Laws, and that he received them from the God called Jaoh, which
is the proper Name of God, (...).

Thirdly, The Author of those Books does not flatter that Nation; but
represent it to us, as the most perverse and stiff-necked in the World.

Fourthly, How could these pretended impostures have so universally, in so many
Ages, taken so deep a rooting in the spirit of this Nation?

Fifthly, The best part of their Laws, and Political and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, are grounded, and have their Foundation upon these Narrations,
which these men do pretend to be fabulous: These, I say, are wholly built upon
them; as the Passover, the Feast of Tabernacles, the Jubilee, the year of
Release, etc.

Again, The Tabernacle, so splendid, so ingeniously and artificially erected,
so divine and admirable, (by whose Model, and Pattern, Solomon, that glorious
and magnificent King, has afterward builded his Temple) that stupendous and
wonderful piece of workmanship, (to which the most sumptuous Buildings, which
the Vanity, Power, and Riches of the most potent Monarchs have erected, is
nothing comparable) with all its Services, and the Order of its Ceremonies,
which is so admirable; where all the Mysteries of Christian Faith, and
Religion, are seen pourtraied, and, as it were, drawn to the Life: (as we know
it by the Relation, which the Sacred Writers of the New Testament do make, and,
in their imitation, the Fathers and Doctors of the Church) could this be an
Invention and Chimara of Moses's own fancying, or of some body else after him?
Could he have divined so many Ages before all that our Lord Jesus Christ should
do, teach, and suffer for the Salvation of men, and accordingly erect this
Tabernacle with all its Ceremonies, and Appertenances, which were so perfect
and accomplished a Model of these things?

Now, since there is no ground to doubt, that Moses has invented these things,
which he writes of the Children of Israel's deliverance, of their going out of
Egypt, or their going through the Red Sea, of their Adventures through the
Desert for the space of forty years; since he relates these things, himself,
to a multitude of six hundred thousand men, which could have given him the lie,
if he had forged these things: Why should not he be believed in all those
things, which he recites to us, in the Histories of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
his Children, of the Deluge, of the Tower of Babel, of Sodom, and (to go yet
higher) of the Creation of the World? What is in all this more incredible, then
the History of the Children of Israel in Egypt, and in the Desert? The same may
be said of all that, which is recited to us in the Books of Joshua, of the
Judges, and of the Kings: for all this is not more incredible, then this
History of Egypt. and of the Desert; and it has an indissoluble connection with
all the Narrations of Moses. And why shall we esteem them past belief, since
they are represented to us, as the Works and Effects of a God, which is
Eternal, Infinite, Almighty, All-good, All-wise, Infinitely-exalted above
Nature; seeing it is he, who has given its being to Nature? And that we have
showed by so many preceding Arguments, that above this Nature there ought to be
such a Deity, the Cause and Rise of it.

Again, It cannot be denied, but that Moses, and the Prophets, have promised,
and foretold, that the Messiah should come: and he came. The Jews expected
him; they thinking that his time was come, or near at hand. For to this very
day they are forced to confess, that that time is past by above fifteen hundred
years. And when they are urged upon this Confession, they have presently
recourse to a pitiful, and impertinent evasion; to wit, that this time has
been prolonged, because of their sins, and that the coming of the Messiah has
been retarded upon this account: although they are not able to show what great
sin they have committed, that may have been the cause of this delay, and of so
signal a Desolation in their Nation. And the Apostles, and Christians, do
evidently prove, that this promised Messiah is come in the time prefixed by
their Prophets; and that this is Jesus Christ, whom they have rejected upon no
other account, but that they falsely imagined to themselves, that the Messiah
was to be a Great and Potent Monarch, who was to free them from the slavery
they suffered under the Romans, and give them Domination over all other People
of the Earth; An imagination quite contrary to the intention of the Spirit of
God, which the Prophets were inspired withal.

Neither can it be denied, but that Moses, and the Prophets, and Jesus Christ,
and his Apostles after them, have foretold the destruction of Jerusalem, and
of the Temple by the Romans, and that miserable Dispersion of the Jewish
Nation, wherein they have been for so many Ages; their Rejection; their
Exclusion from the Covenants of God; and the Vocation of the Gentiles in their
stead, and their being brought to the Service of the God of Abrabam, Isaac, and
Jacob, who is Creator of Heaven and Earth; with the utter abolishing of all
the Heathenish Superftition. All which has came to pass since these sixteen
hundred years, as it was foretold by them: which is an invincible Argument,
that these Predictions were not made at adventure; neither can they be any
product of Humane Wit, which cannot dive so far into Future Events, nor
foretell so certainly and constantly, by so many different person, those
wonderful Effects, which so many Ages since have came to pass.

To these we might add the Miracles of Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles, which
the Jews themselves, though they be their sworn enemies, do not deny: although
they falsely and foolishly impute them to I know not what imaginary Virtue of
the Name of God, (...), which they say was discovered by Jesus Christ, and
stolen by him out of their Temple; and partly to the Efficacy and Illusion of
Demons, and Magical Arts, of which they say they had knowledge: which is the
foolish and ridiculous Exception of these desperate persons, which choose
rather to speak all manner of Impertinencies, then to confess the Truth.

The admirable Virtue and Efficacy of the Doctrine of the Gospel, which, by so
weak Instruments as were the Apostles, and their first Successors,
notwithstanding all the Contradiction, Opposition, and Persecution of the
World, has been received in the World, and has abolished all the Heathenish
Idolatry, and Superstition; which has produced so wonderful, and exemplary
Righteousness, Uprightness, Integrity, and Holiness of Life in the Primitive
Christians; which has ravished into Admiration their Persecutours themselves;
and which has made men to resolve to lose voluntarily all that is sweet,
pleasing, agreeable, and most charming the flesh in this Life, and to suffer
all that, which is most harsh, and horrible, for the hope of another Life after
this: This Power, I say, and this so wonderful Efficacy of the Christian
Doctrine in the Professors of it, is a Proof, and an invincible Argument of
the Divinity of it, and that it cannot be a Fiction, or Invention of man's
brain. And so consequently, that since this Doctrine is no where else
Originally to be found, then in the Writings of the Old and New Teftament, it
must needs be, that these first Penmen have received it from God, who has
revealed it to men, to teach and publish it to other men; that it might induce
them to that Holiness, Uprightness, and Integrity of Life, to that Patience,
and Forbearance, Humility, and incomparable Goodness, which it has caused in
those men, who have received it: and thereby bring them to the fruition of that
Eternal Life, and Felicity, which it promises.

And, if it has not always, and at all times, and most especially at this
day, produced these so admirable Effects, in all those that make Profession of
it, it is not for any defect, that is in the Doctrine: but it is the fault of
those, that make Profession of it, who have not that true Faith and Persuasion,
which they profess to have. But nevertheless there will always be found
amongst true Christians more Holiness, Justice, Uprightness, Righteousness, and
Integrity of Life, more Humility, Patience, Courage, Virtue, and Constancy,
more true Piety, and Charity, then in any other Religion in the World, and then
can ever be found amongst those, that teach and follow Atheism, which we
oppose: whose Profession is quite contrary to this, and has no other end, then
to carry men to all kinds of Vice, Filthiness, Dissolution, and Injustice.

These Proofs and Arguments of the Divinity of the Holy Scriptures might be
enlarged, and amplified, many others might be here added, and great Volumes
might be writ on this Subject, and it may be, that some after us will undertake
this task: But this suffices for our purpose, and it is enough to shut the
mouth of the Profane; that is, to reduce them to say naught, but fooleries, and
impertinencies, and to show themselves altogether ridiculous, and absurd in
disputing against so many invincible Arguments of the Divinity of the Holy
Scriptures.

Now, as to those that call themselves the Church, and who, upon this account,
do pretend, that we cannot, nor ought not, to give credit to the Scripture; but
because they give it this Testimony, That it is Divine: If they will be
believed, they must necessarily do two things.

First, They must show, that all the foregoing Arguments are invalid, and of
no moment, and are in no wise capable to persuade to any man the Divinity of
the Scriptures: yea, they must even say, That there is nothing at all in the
Scriptures, which is able to make us to discern the Divinity and Truth of them.

Secondly, They must show, that, as for their part, they have in themselves
Reasons, Proofs, and Arguments, much stronger, clearer, and evident, more
demonstrative, and uncontrollable, to evince, that they are more Divine and
Infallible then the Scriptures: and that therefore they ought rather to be
believed in whatsoever they say, then any thing, that is taught in these Books;
as being in themselves incomparably more Infallible and Divine, then this
Volume of Holy Writ, which is contained in the Books of the Old and New
Testament.

Now I suppose, that they would not undertake to demonstrate these two things:
and if they would come to the trial of it, they should find themselves very
busy, and their Proofs would be found invalid, their Arguments and Reasonings
very weak, yea none at all. For, although they had confuted these Reasons,
which we have here mentioned: where will they find any stronger, or more
invincible to prove, that they are more Divine, then the Holy Scriptures? For,
for them to force men to believe them upon their bare word, without any reason
showed why we should believe them, that they are Infallible, it is to deal too
injustly, and too unworthily to abuse the patience and credulity of men. And to
say, as they do, That we ought to believe them to be Infallible; because our
Lord has said to St. Peter, I prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and, I
will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; grant even this, (which we
deny them) that the sense of these words was such, as they would have it to be;
yet it is always to acknowledge by this, that we are persuaded of the Divinity
of the Scriptures, where these words are found, before we can ever be certain
of the Infallibility of those, to whom they pretend these words are directed.
And therefore the belief, which we have of the Divinity of the Scriptures, is
not grounded upon the Testimony of those, to whom they would have us believe
the Scripture renders, in the forecited words, so clear and solemn testimony
of Infallibility. It is therefore an ill-grounded and vain presumption in them
to say, That the Scripture can have no more credit with us then Aesop's Fables,
or Mahomet's Alcoran, if it were not for the Testimony they give, that it is
Divine: since that they themselves draw from it, and from its Testimony (as
they do pretend) all the Infallibility they so much boast of.

But let this be said only by the by, for the maintaining more strongly the
Divinity of the Holy Scriptures against the Atheists, which those men, by such
an Assertion, do wholly subvert, and thereby expose, at unawares, the Christian
Religion to the profane mockings of the Atheists, who will ask these Gentlemen,
with reason enough, that they demonstrate to them, by good and solid Reasons,
and concluding Arguments, their pretended Infallibility, which ought to oblige
all the World to believe the Testimony they render to the Scripture, That it is
Divine; and that therefore all, that is therein contained and taught, ought to
be certainly believed, as a most firm Truth. And let them, that give them so
much credit, as to build their Faith upon their bare word, acknowledge, that
this is no better then to bring themselves insensibly to direct Atheism.

CHAP. XV. Wherein is contained a Confutation of the Atheists Arguments.
WE must now examine the Reasons of these persons, to see whether they can
out-ballance those, which we have alleged against them. And in this we are
forced to be brief. For, seeing that we are not (God be thanked) bred in the
Schole of such people, and having no converse with them, and they not putting
to light their Arguments in their defense; either for shame, or for fear, or
cowardliness; (unworthy that greatness of Wit and Parts, which they boast to
have above all men, whom they count in this point worse then children) or
rather, because they are conscious of their own weakness: I cannot divine their
thoughts, nor what these pretended strong Reasons should be, upon which they
ground themselves. And I am forced to mention only three, which some may use
in their own defense, and which may come in many men's thoughts.

The First is taken from the Eternity of the World, which they think must needs
have existed from everlasting; because there is not any thing, that can be
produced out of Nothing, and cannot (as they think) return into Nothing;
according to the saying of some one of their Masters, Ex nihilo nihil, in
nihilum nil posse redire.

The Second, That there are so many Exorbitances in Nature; as the Monsters: so
many Disorders in it, so many things of no Use, and against Reason; either in
the Constitutions of the Bodies of Plants and Animals, or in the disposition of
the World, and of the Earth; as great Rocks in a fair Meadow, or in a fertile
Field, or the Rain falling unprofitably upon the Sea, upon the Sands of Lybia,
and upon the Rocks; and a thousand like things. So, that it seems, that these
things do not proceed from some wise Providence, that has so disposed of them;
but from the Fate and Hazard, that has ordered them so at an adventure. There
are so many Evils, Disasters, Mishaps, which befall those, that do less deserve
it; so much Good and Prosperity, which happens to those, that do better
deserve all manner of supplices; so much Wickedness, which remains unpunished:
All which could not come to pass, if the World was guided by a Providence.

And Finally, That there are in all the Religions of the World so many strange
and absurd Opinions and practices, so contrary to right Reason, and to true
Wisdom, that we must acknowledge, they are not grounded in the truth. Of all
which absurdities the Atheism (as they say) is free.

As to the First of these Arguments, which is the chiefest they have; If the
Deity had a limited power, strength, and power, as the strength and power of
Nature is, then they would have reason to say, that there is not any thing,
which can be made of Nothing; there being an infinite distance between mere
Nothing, and that which Is. And therefore Naturally Nothing can be produced out
of Nothing; and so it is, that in all the productions of Nature there is always
some certain matter, which is the Subject of it, and from the power of which
all those Forms, which we see to succeed one to the other, are educed. But God,
being necessarily Infinite, is it any ways against Reason, (yea, is not it
very agreeable to Reason?) that by his Virtue and Power, which is Infinite, and
without any limits, he should create out of Nothing Something, that may
replenish this Vacuum, or Infinite distance, which is between being Something
and Nothing?

The Effect of a Finite Power ought to be Finite; but that of an Infinite one
may, and ought to be Infinite also. Now the Production of the World is
extracted out of Nothing, by the Infinite Power of God; I say, that it is an
Infinite Effect, not in respect of its Subject, which is Finite; (there being
no body which can be actually Infinite) but in regard of its Production, and
the means of it, as it is a product from a mere Nothing, which has no
Intrinsecal Cause, or Virtue, there being none such in Nothing; but by an
Extrinsecal virtue, which is unlimited; and such necessarily is God.

For God, being without any beginning or ending, (otherwise he could not be
God) it must of necessity follow, that to subsist of himself from all Eternity
to all Eternity, by an infinite space of time, (so as we can comprehend
Eternity) he has in himself a Virtue, and Power, altogether Infinite, and
unlimited; by which Power he has been able to Create, and in effect has
Created out of Nothing this World: which although it is very great, and in a
manner infinite in respect of us, is nevertheless very small, and less then a
point in respect of God: who in respect of the extent of Places, and Spaces, is
also Infinite; as he is in respect of Time, and Duration. Not, that there can
be attributed to God (to speak properly) any Time, or Place; for in Time and
Place there is pars extra partem, and prius and posterius; whereas in the
Eternity of God there is no prius and posterius. Neither in his Immensity is
there pars extra partem: for he has no Extension, as Bodies have; for there is
no Quantity in God. But because we are corporeal, and do reason by the help of
corporeal senses, we do conceive the Eternity and Immensity of God under that,
which we call Time and Place; as if Eternity was an Infinite Time, and
Immensity a Place and Space Infinite; though Reason in effect does judge, that
there cannot be any Place, or Time actually Infinite.

God then, being of necessity actually Infinite, and his Power also Infinite,
and since the World cannot have existed from all Eternity, as we have
heretofore demonstrated, it must needs follow; That it has been Created by him
out of Nothing: and there is no Reason to wonder at this, since his Power is
Infinite. So we have laid their stout Achilles down.

There are some Christian Philosophers, that dare not say, That the World is
from all Eternity; because the Scripture does expressly signify to us its
Beginning and Creation: but they hold nevertheless, that the World could have
been created by God from all Eternity, if it had pleased him so to do: because
an Effect may be of the same standing with its Cause; as the Light is as
ancient as the Sun, and the print of ones foot on the sand may be as old as the
foot, which stamped it. But the Arguments, by which we have evidenced, That the
World is not Eternal, do absolutely convince us of this Truth; and consequently
that it was not Created ab aterno.

And the Reason, Why God cannot have created the World ab aeterno, is, not for
any want of Power to do this; but because such an Effect cannot be, nor cannot
have had anexistence without a Beginning. And God, being (as he is)
Infinitely-wise, will not do that which implies a Contradiction. And it does
not in any ways avail to object, That his Son was generated from everlasting.
For the Son of God is a true God, of the same Essence and Nature with his
Father, Coeternal, and Infinite as God is, in whom there is no prius and
posterius: but the World is finite, and cannot be otherwise then finite;
because it is corporeal, and cannot be absolutely eternal.

And, if it is asked, Why the World has been Created but five or six thousand
years ago, I answer, that it is, Because God would have it so, who knows by his
Wisdom the Reasons of it, which it does not belong to us to seek after,
neither ought we to fathom this Abyss. And although it had been Created fifty
thousand, yea, five hundred thousand millions of years before; yet has it had
a Beginning. And if this were granted, yet it can no ways further the cause of
the Atheists, who would have the World to be without a Beginning, and who
prevail not, unless the World is really existent from all Eternity. And we may
not question whence proceeded this will in God to Create the World: for it is
not any will, which he had in any time. He has willed and decreed from all
Eternity to Create the World then, and in that moment of time, (that we may so
say) which seemed good unto him, and when that time is come, he has executed
this his will. When I say, In that point and moment of time, which pleased him;
that must be understood in regard of the Eternity, which has preceded the
World; for in Eternity there is not (to speak properly) any points or moments
of Time, there being in it no prius and posterius: But this ought to be
understood in respect of the Existency of the World, which ought necessarily
to have had a Beginning: since it cannot be from all Eternity; as it has been
demonstrated. And it is to no purpose to Object, That if this was so, then
there would be some change in God, who should have at that time, and no sooner
Created the World. For the World is not in God, but out of him; and is not an
Extract or Product of his Essence, but of Nothing; and so the change is not in
God, but out of God: because the World, which was not before, has began to
exist in a certain Time which time (as I have said) we ought to consider in the
existency of the World, and has begun with it: for in Eternity there is no
Time properly so called. And so much for the first Argument.

For the Second, We have heretofore showed, That these pretended disorders and
exorbitancies, which are seen in Nature, and in Humane actions, and events, do
in no wise favor the cause of the Atheists: yea, we have from this drawn an
Argument against them, because we must acknowledge in this not a blind Fate,
and Fortune; but a wise, and superior Cause, which does regulate these
disorders, and limits them; otherwise all things would return in an horrible
and monstrous confusion. And, although we cannot always perceive the reason of
this disorder, so wonderfully guided, we may not therefore conclude, That it is
not guided. A common Soldier does not always understand the reason of his
Generals Orders and Commands; which yet if he should be so bold as to censure,
or to accuse his General of insufficiency, he should render himself criminal,
and would betray his ignorance: such are these people, who do censure the works
of God, and do attribute them to a blind Fate, because they cannot see into the
counsels of him, who has so determined of these things. The Prosperity of the
Wicked, and the Afflictions of the Righteous and Good men, was not an Argument
even to the Heathen themselves, That all things were guided by a blind Fate and
hazard: they themselves in this have acknowledged and demonstrated, That there
is a Providence, which does so dispose of these things. And God in his word
does yet more clearly, evidently, and distinctly, then they, give us the
Reasons of his Justice, Wisdom, and Bounty in this his conduct, against which
all the Reasonings of the Atheists break themselves, as a Wave against a Rock:
and therefore there is no need to enlarge upon this subject; since the best
Philosophy, and the evidences of Revelation, teach us in this point, that from
this conduct we ought rather to conclude, That there is another life after
this, then to deny the Providence, and Deity.

So now we come to the Third Argument. It is certain, that the absurd and
extravagant Opinions of the Heathen, concerning the Multitude and Diversity of
their false Gods, the Service they did to them, the Fabulous Stories, which
they made of them, and upon which all their Religion was grounded, have given
to Epicurus, and some others with him, matter enough of laughter, and to jear
their Impertinencies, to deride their vain Superstitions, and despise all their
Religion. Yea, it has been a stumbling block to them, and has given them
occasion to become Atheists; being destitute of the Divine Revelation, which
affords to us the right knowledge, which we ought to have of the Deity. In
which they are not therefore excusable, seeing that they could by the use of
right Reason (as well as other Philosophers, wiser then themselves) acknowledge
and confess one only God, and that the Cult, which is due to him, ought to
have been somewhat else, then the Heathenish Superstitions. And we do not deny,
but that in other false Religions, yea, even in the Sects and Heresies which
are among Christians, there are very extravagant, and absurd, and wild Opinions
and Practices in the matter of Religion: and it may be, that these
extravagancies, wild practices and opinions, in these last days of the
Christian Church, have given an occasion to Atheism to diffuse it self, and to
multiply amongst Christians. And such absurdities do serve to foment, and
increase it; as the Author of the Relation of the Religion of the Western
World has very well and judiciously remarked, speaking of the common and
ordinary Profaness of the Italians.

But to this objection I answer two things. First, That true Christianity has
no such Extravagancies, as can startle those, who make a right use of their
Reason. Secondly, That Atheism is incomparably more irrational, and more to be
detested then any of those Extravagancies, which they with Reason do reject.
There is nothing in the true and pure Christian Religion, which the word of God
only has taught us, which can, or ought to offend any person of good sense
and judgment. Only the Mystery of the Trinity, and that of the Incarnation,
is indeed above our apprehension, and carnal sense, which cannot comprehend the
Quomodo of it; but yet, as both these are simply proposed, and laid open to us,
and as we may gather them from the Revelation, which God has made to us of
them in his word, they are such, as that they are not against pure and right
Reason, enlightened by this Revelation; though it cannot fathom the depth of
them. And what wonder is it, if our Reason, which is short, weak, and blind,
even about Natural things, (that the greatest of Philosophers has compared it
to the sight of Owls at midday) cannot reach so far, as perfectly to
apprehend, and understand so high a Mystery, which is all that is most sublime
in the Divine Nature, which of it self is Spiritual, Immaterial, Infinite,
Eternal, Invisible, and Incomprehensible? It is far a greater wonder, if the
Opinion of the Atheists is true, who acknowledge neither God, nor Angel, nor
Spirit; that so high, so wonderful and sublime a thought, should have entered
into the spirit of man, wallowing in the mud, and who cannot, nor ought not,
(according to their Opinion) to raise himself above corporeal senses; being (as
they think) altogether corporeal and sensual. How comes it to pass, that so
wonderful Wisdom, which shines in all the Dogmes of Christian Religion, and
particularly appears in these two Mysteries, which are so wonderfully linked
with the rest of the Doctrine; how is it (I say) that this can be the product
of such a vile, and low soul, as they would have the soul of man to be; which
is (as they think) composed of little Atoms, and Indivisible Bodies, or which
is nothing but a little refined Air, which by Death vanishes into nothing?

As to Atheism, it is so far from being free from Extravagancies and
Absurdities, that it is altogether full of them; as it appears evidently by
what we have said before: wherein we have convinced by many Arguments this
monstrous Opinion. Against which Arguments nothing but Extravagancies,
Absurdities, and Impertinencies, can be excepted.

What Madness, and Extravagancy, is it to imagine with Epicurus, that this
World is framed, and composed, by the fortuitous concourse of Atoms, or small
Indivisible Bodies? Or, with some others, to imagine, that it is without any
beginning or ending, the same at this day, as it was 600000. millions of years
before: which Opinion draws after it all the imaginable Absurdities, and
Contradictions, that may be; as it has been showed before? And what an
Impertinency is it, to attribute the Government of this admirable work, and the
Conduct of this World, and of the Affairs of all Humane kind, to two blind and
opposite Governors, viz. the insensible Fate and the temerary Hazard, and
inconsiderate Fortune, in which there is not a whit of Understanding, Prudence,
or Knowledge? What Absurdity, and Impertinency, is it to attribute more sense,
and understanding, to the most stupid of men, and to the least of all Animals,
then to that, which does move and conduct all this great Fabric? For what is
Fate in it self, but a Chimaera, wanting all true existence? And what is the
pretended satal order of Nature, but a brutish thing, and sui nescia?

There are not, to say truth, in the Atheists Profession any of these
ridiculous, absurd, impertinent and wild extravagancies, practices, and uses,
which the ignorance, temerity, and superstition of men has introduced in most
of the false Religions; but that, which is more wild, and monstrous in them is,
that they (as much as in them lies,) abolish and extinguish out of the world,
all true Religion and piety, and drown men in impiety, profaness, and
irreligion, which comprehends in it all sorts of imaginable Monstrosities. For
what is a man, that has no sense, knowledge, nor fear, reverence, nor love,
nor respect for the Deity, but the most abominable monster, that can be
imagined? What honesty, good, what virtue, or civility, can be hoped for, or
expected from a man, that thinks, that all the difference there is between good
and evil, vice and virtue, is naught else, but an imagination, and depends
merely from man's fancy, which would have it so, and not from the most perfect,
immutable, and eternal pattern of the Deity, the only model of all perfection,
as well moral as Physical? Is not it evident, that this Maxim, and opinion of
the Atheists leads men directly to all kind of vice, pollution, evil, and
Injustice, to which their concupiscence, and the pleasure of their carnal
sense, may carry them, without any remorse of conscience, or fear of any other
punishment, then that which may be inflicted on them by men; which if any one
of them shall hope, or think, to escape, he will let himself loose to
whatsoever his sense shall dictate to him? For, according to their Principles,
Reason, which dictates this to be good, and that to be evil, (setting aside the
consideration of the Deity, which is the pattern of Good) is nothing else
according to their opinion, but a mere fantasy, which may be changed, and
which obliges none, but to what they please to do. And does not this lead
directly to the overthrowing of all humane society, and to the subversion of
all estates, bodies, and commonalties in the whole world and so to the
confusion and ruin of all humane kind, and to the most horrible Chaos, that
ever was feigned or imagined?

That God, who is Gracious and Just, who resideth in the highest Heaven, grant
in his great Compassions, that those, who fear and reverence him, may be kept
from this abominable precipice. Let him open the eyes of those, who are led
blindfold by their sensuality, and the vanity of their corrupted Reason in
this dangerous Abyss, that they may see, and know, how terrible this Precipice
is. Let him give Repentance and Acknowledgment of their error to the one, and
Wisdom to the other, that so they may never fall into it; and to overy one the
right knowledge, fear, and reverence of his Holy Name, that he may be praised,
served, and glorified by all, as Honor, Fear, and Reverence, is most due unto
him by all men eternally. Amen.

FINIS.

