JUDGES JUDGED out of their own mouths. OR The QUESTION Resolved by MAGNA
CHARTA, etc. Who have been Englands Enemies, Kings Seducers, and Peoples
Destroyers, from Hen. 3. to Hen. 8. and before and since.

Stated by Sr. EDWARD COKE, Kn^. late L. Chief Justice of England.

Expostulated, and put to the Vote of the People, by J. JONES, Gent.

Whereunto is added Eight Observable Points of Law, Executable by Justices of
Peace.

Abusum ego, non usum forensem damn.

Ex legibus illis quae non in tempus aliquod, sea perpetua utilitatis causa in
aeternum latae sunt, null: abrogari debet, nisi quam aut u sus cearguit, aut
status aliquis Reipublica inutilem fecit.

Tit. Live. lib. 4. dec. 4. LONDON, Printed by W. Bently, and are to be sold by
E. Dod, and N. Ekins, at the Gun in Ivy-Lane. MDCL.

To the Right HONORABLE, HONORABLE; Right WORSHIPFUL, And Well-beloved, the
COMMONS, and PEOPLE of England Universally.
BEcause Magna Char. Printed in English, An. 1564. and bound up with other
Statutes at large (too Voluminous, and costly for the generality to read, or
buy) does yield less profit than has been long necessary; I have presumed at
the instance of some, to Dedicate this Treatise to you all, as it concerns
the good of all that be, or would be good, and the hurt of none that have left
any unhurt: wherein you shall find so many Chap. of Mag. Char. Confir. Char.
Art. super Char. and other Statutes at large, corroborating the same; and the
L. C. Exposition thereupon, with some Expostulations, and Queres of mine own,
as I thought requisite, or convenient for these times. The rest of the Charter,
concerning the Church, (yet unsettled) or the Kings Tenures, (otherways disposed
of) I have omitted as useless; desiring that thus much may prove useful to all
undertakers of Reformation, as well Martial, as Civil.

Whose Servant (to my power) I shall ever be, and continue with due
faithfulness, and humility. Jo. Jones.

The Great CHARTER of the LIBERTIES of ENGLAND, Granted to the People of the
same, By King HENRY the third; And accorded between him and them in diverse
full Parliaments, as follows, viz.
HENRY, by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of
Normandy, and Guyen, and Earl of Angeow. To all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, Sheriffs, Provosts, Officers; And to all Bailiffs, and
our faithful Subjects, which shall see this present Charter, greeting.

Know ye, that We, to the honor of Almighty God, and for the salvation of the
souls of our Progenitors, and Successors, Kings of England, to the
advancement of holy church, and amendment of our Realm of England; of Our mere
free will, have given and granted to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls, Barons, and to all Freemen of this Realm of England for evermore.

First, We have granted to God, and by this present Charter have confirmed for
Us, Cap. 1. Liberties.
and our Heirs for evermore; That the church of England shall be free, and
shall have all her whole rights, and liberties inviolable: We have granted
also, and given to all Freemen of our Realm, for Us, and Our Heirs for
evermore, these Liberties underwritten, to have and to hold, to them, and to
their heirs, of Us, and Our heirs, for evermore.

Here be four rehearsals (says the Lord Coke) of four notable causes of the
making this Law. Lord Coke upon Mag. Chart. Fol. 1.
First, for the honor of God. Secondly, for the health of the Kings soul.
Thirdly, For the exaltation of the church. Fourthly, for the amendment of the
Kingdom. And all granted to all subjects, and their heirs, from the King and
his heirs for evermore; That the great Charter might live, and take effect in
all successions of ages for ever.

Expost and Quer.
The last of these causes which the L. C. in his Preamble calls the ends for
which this Charter was made, being for the amendment of the Realm, was (says
the L. C. upon the first chapter of confirmatio Chart. fol. 529.) to amend
great mischiefs, and inconveniences, which oppressed the whole Realm before the
making of both Charters, viz. This, and the Charter of the Forest, which
(says the L. C. in his Preface) were declarative Acts of the old Common Law of
the Land, and no introductives of any new Law. If the mischiefs, and
inconveniences of the Realm were great before the said Acts were made to
declare the Laws of the land, which formerly the lawyers reserved to
themselves, till then undeclared? Were there not greater since those Acts were
made, and the Laws thereby declared, and since the accord of King and People,
to keep the same inviolable, when, and as often as they were violated by Kings,
and their Counsel, learned in the Laws? As hereafter shall appear.

We, Cap. 8. Debt. Debtors. Suerties.
nor Our Bailiffs shall not seize any lands, or rent, for any debt, as long as
the present goods, and chattels of the debtors do suffice to pay the debt, and
the debtor himself be ready to satisfy: Therefore shall neither the pledges of
the debtor be distrained, as long as the principle debtor is sufficient for
payment of the debt; and if the principal debtor fail in payment of the debt,
having naught wherewith to pay, or will not, where he is able enough; Then the
pledges shall answer for the debt; and if they will, they shall have the lands,
and rents of the debtor, until they be satisfied of that which they before paid
for him, except that the debtor can show himself to be acquitted against the
suerties. We (says the Lord Coke) spoken in the politic capacity of a King,
L. Coke upon M. C. fol. 19.
extends to his Successors. And by Bailiffs, are meant Sheriffs, who write
Baliva mea, etc. And by the words shall not seiz is expressed the Kings Grace,
who by the Common Law had Execution against his Debtors bodies, lands, and
goods. And by the Statute of 33. Hen. 8. cap. 9. The Sheriff is to inquire etc.
and to extend all Lands, Goods, Chattels. etc. and (...) take and imprison the
Bodies, as by that Stat. appears, and as the daily practice shows.

Expost and Quer.
If We extend to Successors, even to King Hen. 8. Why not longer? If Magna
Charta was to live for ever, Why not hitherto? If the King of his Grace
remitted by this Act the execution which the Common Law gave him before against
his Debtors, Bodies, Lands, and Goods, in case of having naught wherewith to
pay, through decay of their estates by unavoidable necessities; then the Kings
Debtors obtained of the Kings Grace as much Liberty for their bodies, as this
King gave to all his free subjects by the 29th of this Act, viz. No Free man
etc. And for his Estate, as much as the proverb says; Where nothing is to be
bad, the King loses his due. If the King did not remit so much by this Act,
then did he gain thereby more than he gave, contrary to the opinion of all
Lawyers, that say, All Acts of Parliament are to be expounded for the benefit
of the Subject. And what, and how did he gain? but contrary to his Honor, much
more to his Grace, when two more of his subjects were hedged in by this Act, as
Pledges to pay for his undone Debtor, and to undo themselves and their
families by the bargain. And (their estates being too little to pay their own
debts) their Creditours must see the King first served our of the same, to
their no small prejudice, if not undoing, whereby many are injured through one
man's occasion. If therefore this Act ought to be construed for the honor of
the King, and benefit of the subject (as I believe it ought, and the L. C.
says, others have thought so) it follows, That the Statute of the 33. Hen.
8.9. was made (as many more were before and since) against Mag. Chart. and not
only against Kings honor, and grace, but also their Oaths, to the undoing of
multitudes of their subjects, which was ungracious for their Counsel learned in
the Laws, to give advice, or assent to the making such Laws, or when made, to
allow them, much more to maintain them; being that all Judges are to receive
Mag. Chart. for a Plea against all Statutes made against it. And all Judgments
given against Mag. Chart. are, and ought to be void; (as appears in the L. C.
preamble) And all such Statutes as were made before the 42. of Ed. 3. against
Mag. Chart. were then replealed: and (as I conceive) all made so since, are
repealed by the Petition of Right, 3. Car. that restored Mag. Char. to its
primitive vigor, and consequently enervated all its opponents.

The City of London shall have the old Liberties, Cap. 9. London etc.
and customs which it has been used to have. Moreover We will, and grant, that
all other Cities, Buroughs, Towns, and the Bar ons of the five Ports, and all
other Ports, shall have their Liberties, and Free-customs. This Chapter (says
the Lord Coke) is excellently interpreted by an ancient Author (quoting the
Mirror in the Margent) who says, L. C. upon M. C. fol. 20.
that by this Chapter, the Citizens of London ought to have their Franchizes,
whereof they are inheritable by loyal Title, of the gift, and confirmation of
the Kings, which they have not forfetted by any abuse; and that they shall have
their Franchizes, and Customs, which are sufferable by right, and not
repugnant to law: And the same interpretation serves for the Cinque Ports, and
other places.

Expost and Quer.
Does not this Charter, and chapter sufficiently declare, and Lawyers, (though
unwillingly, yet plainly) confess, that London and the rest, had old Liberties
and customs, and that they are inheritable thereof, and ought still to have
the same, so long and so far, as not repugnant to Law, (which I conceive to be
this Law, and not any that have been made since against it?) And do not the
several Charters of London, and other Cities and Towns, obtained since this
Law, declare further what those Liberties, and Customs were? And if the Kings
learned Council have consented that he should grant, or Professors of the Law
advised Londoners, or any other Citizens, to ask things repugnant to this Law,
and prevailed with both parties? Have they not misled both parties? And though
they have so done often; yet in this case, does not the Statute of the 19th of
Henry 7. chap. 7. help the offenders with less danger than the forfeiture of
their Customs, and Liberties, if they offend especially but in those points,
which their lawyers so much misadvised them to ask, and the Kings, him to grant?

Common Pleas shall not follow Our Court, Ca. 11. Common. Pleas.
but shall be holden in some place certain. Before this Statute (says the Lord
Coke) Common Pleas might have been holden in the King's Bench, L. C. upon M.C.
fol. 22, 23.
and all Writs returnable unto the same Bench; And because the Court was holden
coram Rege, and followed the Kings Court, and removable at the Kings will, the
Returns were Ubicumque suerimus in Anglia whereupon many discontinuances
ensued, and great trouble of Jurors, charges of Parties, and delay of Justice;
for this cause this Statute was made, etc. And Pleas of the Crown were divided
into high Treason, Misprision of Treason, Petty Treason, Felony, etc. and
limited to this Court, because contra coronam, and dignitatem, etc. So that of
these (the Lord Coke says) the Common Pleas cannot hold Plea. But to show that
Common Pleas may be holden in the King's Bench, he says. That the King is out
of this Statute, and may sue in that Court. Secondly, if a man be in Custodia,
any other may lay upon him any Action of debt, covenant, or the like personal
Action, because that he that is in Custodia, ought to have the privilege of
that Court And this Act takes not away the Privilege of any Court. Thirdly,
any Action that is Quare vi and Armis, where the King is to have a Fine, may be
sued in this Court. Fourthly, Replevins may be removed thither. Fifthly, (says
the Lord Coke) Albeit originally the King's Bench be restrained by this Act, to
hold Plea of any Real action yet by a mean, they may; as when removed by writ
of Error from Common Pleas, thither for necessity, lest any party that has
right should be without remedy, or that there should be a failer of Justice;
and therefore Statutes are always to be expounded so, that there should be no
failer of Justice.

Expost and Quer.
Do not the L. C. words, viz. ( Before this Statute, etc.) imply, that after the
Statute, Common Pleas ought not to be holden in the Kins-Bench, nor all Writs
be returnable into the same Beach? Does the Register, or Natura brevium
therefore show any Writ for debt returnable to the King's Bench? Does not Fitz.
H. natura brevium fol. 119. h. and k. declare that there is no Writ in Law for
debt, but a Justicies, which is a judicial Commission to the Sheriff to
determine the matter, Ne amplius inde clamorem audiamuus: So that the
King's Bench ought not to be troubled with the matter at all? or if an Original
returnable to the Common Pleas? Does not that Original declare it self to be a
Summons? And does not Mr Kitchen in his Ret. brev. fol. 4. Tit. com. bank,
declare, that Summons, Atachment, and Distringas, succestively distant fifteen
days one after another, is the only Process at Common Law? The Kings-Beach, and
Common Pleas ought to practice by the Common Law, declared by Mag. Chart. and
accord of the King and People; declared and enjoined to be observed inviolable,
and immutable for ever. Did ever any Judge of the King's Bench, or Common Pleas,
advise, or consent to the making any Statute, or Law to the contrary, (being
sworn to execute and maintain Mag. Chart. as anon shall appear all were, or
ought to be) and was not perjured? Did, or does any Judge of any Court of
Record, observe any such Law being so made; or practice, or suffer to be
practiced (where he has authority) any suits or proceedings contrary to Mag.
Chart. and was, and is he not perjured? Does not the practice of the
King's Bench still show, that thence does issue no other Writ for debt, than a
Bill of Middlesex, or Latitar, which express themselves to be for Trespass? Are
not those Writs still returnable ubicunque suerimus, and the King's Bench
therefore still removeable at the Kings will? whereupon (as says the L. Coke)
many discontinuances ensue, and great trouble of Jurours, charges of Parties,
and delay of Justice: for which causes (he says) this Statute was made. How
does this Statute (if therefore made) prevent such discontinuances, trouble,
charges, and delay of Justice, but by declaring, that Common Pleas shall not
follow the King's Bench? How contradictorie to himself is the L. Coke then, when
he labors to make Common Pleas lawful to be holden in the King's Bench? And
if (as he says) the Pleas of the Crown were divided into high Treason,
Misprision of Treason, Petty Treason, Fellonie, etc. and limited to the
King's Bench, because cont. Coron. and dign. Regis; so that of these (says he)
the Common Pleas cannot hold Plea. By what Justice can he desire to hold
Common-Pl^as in the King's Bench; unless because more gainful, (as when he was
supplanted by his successor, under color of preferment, from the Common Pleas
to the Kings-Beach, he passionately expressed the difference, saying, That he
was called from the warm kitchen, to the cold hall:) and that therefore he
desired to reduce Justice to his desire, rather than his desire to Justice? But
let us examine his Arguments for that purpose. First, (says he) The King is
out of this Stature. How? out of this Statute, which above all other, the King
was sworn to observe, and obey, and to violate was perjurie, and punishable in
all men without regard of persons, and no less in the Lo. C. to say and write
otherwise? But (says he) the King might sue in his Bench. And so might he in
any Court of Record which he pleased; for all such Courts are called his, and
have power under him, to administer Justice to all men, according to their
Commissions and Charters, as well as the Kings Bench; and therefore he had his
Atturneys, and Sollicitours, attending many such Courts. Secondly, (says he)
if a man be in custodia, any other may lay upon him any action of debt etc.
because (says he) that he that is in custodia, ought to have the privilege of
that Court. Now if a man be in custodia for Fellonie, etc. and an Action for
Debt, etc. be laid upon him, shall his privilege in being in custodia keep him
from hanging (if he deserve it) till he pay the debt? or if he be hanged, and
have any goods, shall the Creditour be paid his debt out of the same; or if he
have any lands, out of the Escheat? I believe not. If a man be not in custodia,
but a Justice of Peace, or a Grand-Juror, attending Sessions in Cumberland or
Cornwall, what privilege of this Court does he need? If he be arrested there,
upon a Writ of trespass, when he is guilty of none, is he not more disgraced
than privileged by this Court? when he is forced to appear in this Court for
trespass, and nothing declared against him for any such matter, ought he not to
be dismissed for that matter, with costs, and damages, answerable to his
disgrace and expenses, though arrested at the Kings suit? Shall the King do any
man wrong? how then does the Maxim hold, that he cannot? Shall this Court abuse
his name, to wrong his Subject? Is not Injustice, Perjurie in a Judge sworn to
do Justice? Is not all against Mag. Chart. and truth, which is, God himself? If
not so dismissed, shall a declaration be admitted against him upon an Original
for debt, where neither such Writ, nor cause belong? And shall the Defendant be
enforced to wait upon his Bail for trespass, to answer that Declaration? is not
that more Injustice? And moreover, if that Writ, or the Return thereof be
forged, (as all, or most Originals directed to the Sheriffs of London or
Middlesex, are; as well by Clerks of this Court, and so filed upon Record here as
by Attorneys in the Common Pleas, there;) shall that Declaration be admitted to
say, that the Defendant is in custodia, (which is false;) and be made a Record,
which would be accounted the next truth to Gospel? And shall not the Defendant
be admitted to plead Mag. Chapter against the jurisdiction of the Court, and such
lying Records? If not; is not all this more Injustice and Perjurie? Shall
Judges give Judgments upon fal^e Records (except to burn them, and punish the
makers, and causers) and shall not they be counted, and called false Judges,
and Perjurers; and their judgments false judgments and perjuries? Shall they,
that commit Debtors into their Marshals custody, upon such judgments by their
privilege (as they call it,) say that this Statute does nor take away such
privileges, when the Lo. C. himself says, that all Statutes ought to be
expounded so, that there should be no failer of justice; and this Statute,
being M. Chapter (chief of all Statutes) and all its Confirmations say, that equal
justice ought to be done to all men, without regard of persons? What Statute or
custom did, or can give any privilege to any Court to the contrary? What
benefit of privilege has the Debtor, that is so committed by this Court, and
its privilege, but his undoing, and his families, and often his untimely death
by famine, and misery? Is not that so occasioned by the rigor, and illegalitie
of this Court, an offense of the highest nature, of Munther and Perjurie? Who
gains any thing by this privilege, but the Court, and their Marshal in
extorted Fees, to the damage of both Creditor and Debtor, and often the ruin
of both or either? Why therefore does the L. C. call it a privilege to the
party in Custody, when it appears to be no benefir, but prejudice unto him,
and that more aggravated, to have more Actions laid upon him for more debts
occasioned (perhaps) by his imprisonment? What law, or reason requires any
privilege to any man for debt, since this Statute in the 29 chapter, freeth
all men's bodies from imprisonment, until they be lawfully tried by their
Peers? and no law, but an abortive Statute made 25. Ed. 3. cap. 17. and
repealed in the 42 of the same King (as aforesaid) gave an Arrest against
Debtors but Merchants and Accomptants? and a Statute made in the said 25 year
of the said King, gave the Creditors two parts of all their Debtors lands, and
all they goods (except the beasts of their plough) for satisfaction of their
debts, which Statute is still in force, and daily executed accordingly? As for
Accomptants, Debtors, and Tennants to the King, that are so indeed, if the
Court of Exchequer be thought proper for them; why should others that are not
such indeed, be sheltered to defend or countenanced to offend under that
pretense? And as for Members of any Court, why ought not they to sue, and be
sued by their Atturneys in other Courts than their own, since it is unnatural
for any body to suffer any of its Members (though never so corrupt) to be put
to any smart, which it may avoid? And may not, nay ought not every just Court
avoid such suits, and the suspicion of their injustice by entertaining them,
and proceeding therein, by leaving them to the justice of other Courts of
competent judicature, as all other Courts do leave their Members to the mercy
of the Courts at Westminster? or may not, nay ought not all Courts of
judicature within their jurisdictions, determine the causes of all such Members
of the Courts at Westminster, as shall be found, and arrested within their
jurisdictions, notwithstanding any Writs of privilege, or other Writs to
remove them, before they be determined; rather than the Courts at Westminster
may send for the Members of every Court, to be justified by them? For who can
say, he has ever found any justice there against any privileged man? And how
many that be no Members of any Court there indeed, are so countenanced, as
subordinate to some ill Member, or other there, and have their Law for nothing,
to bring Fees and gain to one or other of those courts, out of honestmens
purses and Estates, against whom they can show no color of right any where,
but where they know they shall be favored, and their Adversaries oppressed? And
how many men of good Estates have been, and daily are, not only oppressed, but
undone by that means? Thirdly, for Trespass, vi and Armis; Is it but a
common-Plea, and consequently proper to all courts of Record, and rather to be
tried within that jurisdiction where the offense is committed, than elsewhere?
And has not the King his Fines imposed and levied by the authority of all such
courts, as well as by the King's Bench? Fourthly, for Replevins, may they not as
well be removed to, and determined by the Common Pleas, as in the King's Bench?
Fifthly, what means the Lord by his words, viz. [Originally restrained] but
that the King's Bench is restrained from having any original Writs Returnable
thither in Real Pleas,? And is it not as much restrained from originals in
Personal Pleas, that are as Common Pleas, as Real, by this Statute? Or by what
other Statute, Law, or President, is it enabled to have any originals
returnable to it for debt, when the Register and Ret. brevium have no such
Presidents, as aforesaid? Is not therefore all the practice of the King's Bench
for debt, unjust, and perjurious, as aforesaid? and moreover a faint Action,
etc. as the prisoners for debt in that Court have lately set forth by their
Petition to the Lord General, and his Officers concerning this matter.

A Freeman shall not be ameirced for a small fault, Caput 14. Ameirciaments.
but after the quantity of the fault, and for a greater fault, after the
manner thereof, saving to him his contenement, or Freehold: And a Merchant
shall be likewise ameirced, saving to him his Merchandise: And any other
Villain than Durs, shall be likewise ameirced, saving his Wainage, if he fall
into Our mercy: And none of the said Ameirciaments shall be assessed. but by
the caths of honest men of the Visionage: Carls, and Barons shall not be
ameirced, but by their Peers, and after the quantity of their trespass. No man
of the Church shall be ameirced after the rate of his spiritual benefice, but
after the rate of his lay teuement, and the quantity of his trespass. A
Freeman here, Lord Cook upon Magna Charta fol. 27.
has a special understanding (says the L. C.) and is taken for a Freeholder;
and this appears by this clause, Salvo contenemento suo. viz. Saving his
Freehold, etc. This Act extends to Ameirciaments, not to Fines imposed by
any Court of Justice, etc. Freemen are not intended to officers, or ministers,
or officers of justice, etc. The Writ of Moderata misericordia, gives remedy
to the Party that is excessively ameirced, etc. Albeit the Law of England is a
Law of mercy, yet it is now turned to a shadow; for where by the wisdom of the
Law, these Ameirciaments were instituted, to deter both Domandants from unjust
suits, and Defendants from unjust defenses, which was the cause in former times
of fewer suits, etc.

If amerciaments were instituted to deter Plantiffs from unjust suits, Expost
and Quer.
and Defendants from unjust defenses; and were the causes of fewer suits in
former times; how comes the Law turned to a shadow in the Lord Cokes time?
when in the King's Bench, and Cmmon-Pleas, am erciaments were as frequent, and
grievous as in any other time, and suits no fewer, nay more numerous than
before, (as Records of both Courts declare) unless he means that all the Writs
in the Register, and Natura brevium, both original, and judicial, (whereby
suits were determined amongst neighbors friendly at home) became useless,
since Habeas corpus, etc. carried all to Westminster? And that there injustice
shaddowed under the name and habit of justice, remunerated the litigious
supporters of her being, with such shares of her spoils, that though she
trebled their amerciaments, she made them always gainers; unless when to
satisfy their revenge, rather than their purses, they commuted their moneys
for counsels, and countenances, to undo the opposers of their malice, whereby
both parties became loosers, and often ruined; and injustice only remained the
gainer, and increased her kingdom (as the Devil does his) by such suitors; and
made more suits for Westminster, than all the Courts of Errors, and their
Judges, Lawyers, and Attorneys there, shall wear out while they live, without
extraordinary helps of their servants.

No town, or Freeman shall be distrained to make Bridges, or banks, C. 15.
Bridge. Banks.
but such as of old time, and of right have been accustomed to make them in the
time of King Henry our Grandfather.

No Banks shall be defended henceforth, C. 16. Banks.
but such as were in defense in the time of King Henry our Grandfather, by the
same places, and the same hounds, as were wont to be in his time.

Both the next precedent chapters sufficiently expound themselves, so that the
Lord Coke speaks no more to this matter, but that the Mirror says, That
diver Rivers and their Banks were in his time appropriated, and blocked up by
diverse persons, to debar common-fishings, which were wont to be used there in
the time of King H. 2. And I believe, there are many more so done, more lately,
which Commissioners for Sewers shall do well to look to.

No Sheriff, C. 17. Pleas Crown
Constable, Escheator, Coroner, or any other our Bailiffs, shall hold Pleas of
the Crown. One mischief before this Statute, L. Coke upon M. C. 30.
was (says the Lord Coke) That no Court, but the Kings chief Court, could
command Bishops to give their clergy to such as ought to have it: another cause
was, That the life of a man ought to be tried before Judges of learning, and
experience of the Laws of the Realm; for Ignorantia Judicis, est saepenumero
calamitas innocentis. These are the reasons that the Lord Coke alleges, why
some Pleas of the Crown were taken from Sheriffs, Castellans, Escheators,
Coronors, and Bailiffs, under which names (says he) are comprehended all
inferior Judges, Justices, and Courts of Justice: albeit (says he) it be
provided by the 9th chap. of Mag. Charta, That the Barons of the five Ports
should have all their Liberties and Customs. These general words (says he
again) must be understood of such Liberti^s and Customs, as are not afterward
in the same Charter by express words taken away, and assumed to the Crown.

Might not the Kings inferior Courts command ordinary Ministers to give men
their Clergy? Expost and Quer.
And might not that serve before Magna Charta, as it is usual since? For
seldom, or never in our memories, did Bishops themselves attend any court for
that service: and now, should they be necessary only for that employment? So
the Kings Court would be only to command them: but if Bishops may be spared,
why may not that Court for that cause? And if by this Charter the King resumed
some Pleas of the crown from those that formerly had them; dor^^ et follow,
that he resumed all Ple^^ from those that formerly had them? And if under the
name of Bailiffs be comprehended all Judges, and Justices, are not the Judges
of the Common Pleas and Barons of the Exchecquer so comprehended? And are none
of them of such learning and experience in the Laws of the Realm, to try the
life of a man, as Judges of the King's Bench? Or else, why are they sent for
Goal-deliveries, as well as Judges of the King's Bench are? Was it not provided by
the 9. chapter of Mag. Charta, That London, and other Cities, Buroughs and
Towns, as well as the Barons of the five Ports, and other Ports should have
their Liberties and Free-Customs? Are all these now resumed by this 17. chap?
Who can understand so? Or what means the L. C. by his riddles? Shall Magna
Charta contradict it self, though the Lord C. would, and does here and
elsewhere? Are not Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, usual for Trial of men's
lives, where Judges of the King's Bench cannot reach, or dare not go? Does not
London and other Corporations execute their Charters by their Recorders, when
the King's Bench gives them leave; and then do not the Judges of the King's Bench
grant that such Judges may be as learned, and experienced in the Laws as
themselves, for the Trying of men's lives? Are not men's lives Tryable for matter
of Fact, and not of Law, (except Treasons that reach to thoughts?) Are not
Jurors the Judges of matters of Fact? What great learning, or experience in Law
is requisite for a Judge to pronounce the sentence of death, where the verdict
has determined the life? But how many true men have been hanged, and thieves
saved by Judges interposing, and obtruding their pestifferous pretended
learning and experience in the Laws between the weak consciences of ignorant
Jurors, and the truth? which kind of Jurors they make Sheriffs return for such
purposes, when they may have such returned as know the Facts, and have sounder
learning and experience in express Law than themselves.

All Wears from henceforth be utterly put down by Thames, C. 23. Wear^, etc.
and Medway, and throughout all England, but only by the Seacoasts. It was
specially given in charge by the Justices in Air (says the Lord C.) that all
Juries should inquire of all such as Fished with wears and Dams: L. C. upon M.
C. fol. 38.
and it appears (says he) by Glandvil lib. 9. c. 11. That when any thing is
unjustly occupied within the Kings demesne, or obstructed in public ways; or
Rivers, turned off their right channels, or Citie-streets built upon; and in
general, as often as any nuisance to the Kings holding, or his Highway, or to
any City, is committed; That is a purpresture, viz. an Enclosure, whereby one
in chroacheth, or makes that several to himself, which ought to be common to
all, or many; and every public River, or stream, the Kings High way.

If Wears be nusances (as I am sure they are) throughout England, Expost and
Quer.
and Wales; and if Commissioners for Sewers, and Justices of Peace for want of
them, be sufficiently authorized to reform such wrongs, and do not, because
chief doers thereof, or sharers in the unlawful gain made thereof themselves:
why not Justices in Eyer employed to execute their charge, for the general
amendment thereof, for the public good?

One Measure of Wine shall be throughout our Realm, C. 29. Measures, etc.
and one measure of Corn, viz. according to the Quarter of London and
Haberjects, that is to say, two yards within the list, and as it is of Weights,
so shall it be of Measures. This Act concerning Measures, L. Cok^ upon M. C.
fol. 49.
and Weights, that there should be one Measure, and one Weight through England,
is grounded upon the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 25. v. 13, 14. And this by Authority of
Parliaments has been often enacted, but never effected.

If Weights and Measures throughout England ought to be one, Expost and Quer.
and that not only by the Law of God (as the Lord C. instanceth) but also by
this Charter of Agreement between the King and the People; Why did not the Lord
C. (being chief Justice of England) sworn to do Law, and Justice too, and
between King and People, (as partly before did, and hereafter further shall
appear he was, or ought to have been) see this point of Justice, (so highly
required by the Law of God, and so mutually agreed upon by the Kings of this
Land, and their Subjects) duly executed?

Nothing shall henceforth be given for a Writ of Inquisition, Ca. 16.
Inquisition.
nor taken of him that prays the Inquisition of Life, or Member, but it shall
be granted freely. A Writ of Inquisition, L. C. upon M. C. fol. 42.
viz. De odio and atia, anciently called De bono and malo, etc. which the
Common Law gave a man that was imprisoned, though it were for the most odious
cause, for the death of a man, for which (without the Kings Writ) he could not
be bailed; Yet the Law favoring the Liberty and Freedom of a man from
Imprisonment, etc. until the Justices in Air should come, at what time he was
to be tried; he might sue out this Writ directed to the Sheriff, etc.

If a Writ De odio and atia was given by the Common Law, Expost and Quer.
to a man Imprisoned for the most odious cause, even for the death of a man;
and if the Common Law favored the Liberty of a man Imprisoned, so that he
should be Bailed for such a Fact, until Justices in Air should Try him; Why
not such a Writ still? Since odium (which the Lord C. defines to be hatred)
and atia (malice) and Prisoners for those causes are no scanter now, than in
former times? And why not Justices in Air (made since competent Judges by
Commission without Writs) to determine such matters, which before they could
but inquire of by Writs (as the Lord C. says elsewhere, though he says here
to try them,) employed for that service? And now if it be Lawful for a Judge
of the King's Bench to determine a debt, and to grant an Habeas Corpus for
money, to bring the Prisoner before him to put in Bail; Why should he take
money for the Writ, and refuse sufficient Bail tendered after Oath made of their
sufficiency, without the plantiffs consent? Nay after acceptance of the Bail,
Why refuse to File it?

No Freeman shall be taken, Ca 2.9. No Free man etc.
or imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold, or Liberties, or Free Customs,
or be Outlawed, or Exiled, or any way otherwise destroyed; nor we shall not
pass upon him, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the
Land; we shall sell to no man, we shall deny, or defer to no man, either
Justice, or Right. Freeman extends to Villains both Sexes, Lord Coke upon Mag.
Chart. Fol. 46 etc.
etc. Upon this Chapter, as out of a root, many fruitful branches of the Law
of England have sprung. It contains nine several Branches: First, That no man
be taken or imprisoned, but by the Law of the Land; viz. The Common Law,
Statute Law, or Customs of England, etc. Secondly, No man shall be disseised,
viz. put out of his Freehold, that is, Land, Livelihood, or Liberties, or free
Customs, such as belong to him by his free Birthright; unless it be by the
lawful judgment, and verdict of his equals, or by the Law of the Land, that
is (to speak it once for all) by the Due course, and process of the Law.
Thirdly, no man shall be Outlawed, or put off the Law, viz. Deprived of the
benefit of it, unless he be Outlawed by the Law of the Land. Fourthly, No man
shall be exiled, etc. unless according to the Law of the Land. Fifthly, No man
shall be destroyed etc. unless by verdict, or according to the Law of the Land.
Sixthly, No man shall be condemned, etc. but by the judgment of his equals, or
according to the Law of the Land. Seventhly, We shall sell to no man, Justice,
or right. Eighthly, We shall deny no man Justice or right. And Ninthly, We
shall defer no man Justice or Right, etc.

First, Expost and Quer.
If no man ought to be taken, or imprisoned but by the Law of the Land, viz.
the Common Law, Statute Law, and Customs of England? is it not cleared by our
Expostulations before upon the 11. Chapter, that Debtors are taken, and
imprisoned in the King's Bench, contrary to the Common Law of England, declared
by Mag. Chart. contrary to the chief Statute of England, which is Mag. Char.
and which the Lord Coke says, should live (as was accorded by King and people)
for ever? And contrary to the Custom of England declared by Mag. Charta, and
also by the Lord Coke, not to extend to the imprisonment of any Debtours, but
only the Kings. And are not Debtors, other than the Kings, so imprisoned, as
well elsewhere, as in the King's Bench? Secondly, if no man shall be disseised,
viz. put out of his Freehold; that is to say, His Livelihood, Liberties, or
Free-Customs, such as belong to him by his Birthright; unless it be by the
lawful judgment, and verdict of his equals, or by the Law of the Land, that
is to say, (once for all) by Due course, and Process of Law. Are not Debtors
disseised of their Livelihood, Liberty, and Freedom which belonged unto them
as their Freehold by Birth right, when they are imprisoned in London,
Westminster, or elsewhere, by Arrests, and Actions for Debt, whether due, or
not, upon mere suggestions of Adversaries, not so much to Judges, as to
Catch-pols, without any judgment, or verdict of their equals, and without Due
course, or Process of Law, which should be Summons, Attachment, and Distringas,
before any Arrest, as aforesaid? Are they not taken in the Country from their
Ploughs, which are their Livelihood, and their Countries, and their Freehold by
Birthright; by vagant Bum-baylies, and imprisoned there, till they give bail
to appear at Westminster; and thence, instead of being remanded home to their
sweet Farmhouses, large fields, and industrious Agricultures; are they not sent
to stinking Goals, close dungeons, and idle Monk-cels, whereby they are allowed
little more ground to walk upon while they live, than might serve them to lie
under, when they are dead? Are not all the Corporations of England, and their
free-chosen Officers, (that should do them justice at home) disseised of their
Freeholds by Birthright, and Charters, before and since Mag. Char. when they
are prevented of the administration of justice in execution of their Offices to
which they were sworn, (and heritable successively from their Ancestors by
Custom long before Mag. Char. and since confirmed by the same, and by Charters
dated before, and since) by Certioraries, Habeas Corpus, etc. before Judgment;
and pretense of Errors after; and though never any proved, or assigned, yet the
causes never remanded, but detained at Westminster, where the usual correction
of pretended Errors, is not by making any thing that is crooked, straight; but
all that is straight, crooked; so that both Plantiffs, and Defendants give
their titles for lost in a mist commonly; but he that has the wrongful
possession, and money, holds it; and he that has the right, and no money,
goes to his grave without it? Are not all the People of England disseised of
their Freehold, Liberties, Franchises, and Free customs, when they are deprived
of that justice which they ought to have administered amongst them at home, by
virtue of the Kings Writs (original for Enquiries, and judicial for
Determinations) directed to Sheriffs of their own choice, in their own
Counties, or Stewards of Hundreds, and Court-Barons, in their precincts, where
the Freeholders themselves are Judges themselves, by ancient Common Laws, and
Customs of England, before Mag. Char. and by it declared, and confirmed unto
them as aforesaid? Can Writs of trespass executed for debt; or Capiases,
grounded upon counterfeited Originals, be construed by any Law, to be due
Process of Law? Thirdly, Are men lawfully Outlawed upon Exigents for debt,
grounded upon a repealed Statute? and are not all Debtors that are Outlawed, so
Outlawed? Are men lawfully Outlawed, that are Outlawed upon Exigents, grounded
upon Summonitus, or Non est inventus, counterfeitly returned by Attorneys, who
at the time of the return were no Sheriffs, or competent officers? and are not
all, or most Debtors, and Trespassers, that are Outlawed in London and
Middlesex, so Outlawed? Are men lawfully Outlawed upon any Exigents, that are
Outlawed without the judgment of the Coroners of the County wherein they are
Outlawed? Are the Coroners of any County now adays, present at every, or any
County, when, and where men are Outlawed? Are not their names nevertheless
returned as Judges of every Outlary unknown to them, for the most part, or all?
Are not those Returns false, and forged? and are such proceedings, the due
course, and Process of Law? How many thousands of the Freemen of England are
Outlawed yearly, by such means? and how many of them undone, before they can
reverse them? How many are imprisoned thereupon, and have all their estates
seized for the King, by Sheriffs chosen without the consent of the People? and
often such as purchase their Offices, to gain by such means? How many
Outlawries yearly are so clandestinely carried, that the parties so Outlawed,
can hear nothing thereof, before they be imprisoned, and their estates
destroyed as aforesaid? How many are further damnified by such Outlawries,
procured of purpose, to debar them of their just suits in all Courts, until
they reverse them? How chargeable are reversals thereof? What lawfulness is it,
or what honor, for the Courts at Westminster, to make unlawful prosit of such
unlawful practices? Cannot the Judges at Westminster be contented to have
counterfeit Returns of their Originals in London and Middlesex, but they must
also have the like Returns of their Exigents throughout the Kingdom? Are not
such Returns false, and perjurious in the Sheriffs that make them? Is it not
sufficient for Judges, to perjure themselves, but that they must animate others
to do so too, by not punishing them, when they know that practice? Are not the
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, and all the Coroners of the Kingdom made
liable by this practice to Actions of the Case, and to pay costs and damages
to the parties grieved? Are such Judges, Lawyers, etc. for the Peace, or Profit
of the Commonwealth, that beget, foment, or suffer the causes of such Actions,
causelessly, but for their own ends and gains? Are such Courts to be called, or
counted Courts of Justice, that maintain any Actions, or Arrests upon unjust
grounds, or color of any mis-begotten Laws, contrary to Mag. Charta? Are not
Assaults, Batteries, Rescues, Riots, and Homicides, frequent upon such Arrests?
Are not many men's lives lost, and more hazzarded, and their estates ruined
thereby? And if a Catch-poll be killed for making, or attempting such unlawful
Arrest, do not the Judges use to adjudge it wilful Murder, though the wronged
party does but endeavor his justifiable defense? And have they not begotten a
Statute for officers to plead the General issue, by color of which they
justify themselves, and their creatures, and condemn the guiltless? Are not
the causers of Murder, as worthy to be hanged, as the doers? Are not they that
maintain such Arrests, to the same ends as their Predecessors, Imps of the same
generation? Why therefore their advice desired, or received in such matters?
Are not the Releases of Errors, which Prisoners are forced to seal before they
can be enlarged, rather proofs of their guiltiness, than acquittances of such
practitioners? Are not their Errors manifest to be wilful, and gainful only
to themselves, and hurtful to the Commonwealth? are such Errors, or
Proceedings, to be called Due courses, or Process of Law? Then (to speak once
for all) is not the Due course, and Process of Law obstructed, and perverted?
and a wrong course practiced, full of Errors, Lies, Forgeries, Perjuries, etc.
(as already appears, and better shall hereafter) and cannot Law be executed
without such practices? Does not Mag. Char. and all its confirmations, show how
it may? Are not they sufficient lights, and guids for the Due course, Process,
and Proceedings which ought to be observed, in the right execution of Law? And
does not the Lord Coke confess them to be such, and that they never misguided
any man, that certainly knew them, and truly followed them? Fol. 526. Fourthly,
If no man shall be exiled, etc. Are not Debtors exiled from their Native Soils
in Cumberland, or Cornwall, and from all their wordly comforts, of Wifes,
Children, Families, Friends, and Estates, both Real, and Personal when called,
and forced by Habeas corpus etc. to attend Duke Humsrey in Paul's, or Judge Owen
in Westminster (as good dead as any Judges living) to hear or dispatch Suits by
the Law of the Land in any way of Justice, while the Suitors money lasts; or to
relieve them with any Alms, when their Purses are spent? And if at last sent to
the Fleet, or Marshalsey, where they be pent up as aforesaid; are they not
worse Exiled than into Turkey, where they may have more Liberty of Land and
Sea, and live in less Slavery than under Goalers in England, and have more
hopes to return home again (like Sir Thomas Shirley, and many others) than from
these Hells, whence few find Redemption? Had Henry of Bullingbrook been
Imprisoned for Debt here, (as such now are) when he was banished to France
could he have hoped to be King of England, except he had made all his Judges,
and Goalers, the best sharers of all his Usurpations, as all the cheating
Prisoners in these places do theirs, as they and their Creditors can best tell,
by dear, and daily experience? Fifthly, If no man shall be destroyed, etc.
unless by Verdict, etc. Are not all Prisoners for Debt, who are first forced
themselves to destroy their small Estates to buy bread to eat in Idleness, and
to pay Fees to Goalers, etc. and at last to Famish in the Fleet, or Marshalsey,
etc. destroyed both in Lives, and Estates, and their Families to boot, without
any Verdict given, or intended for their Lives? Nay are not all the Freemen of
England, that are, or may be subject to Debts, consequently subject to the like
destruction? And worthy so long as they suffer the Laws of England, (contained
in the glorious Fabric of the Great Charter of the Liberties of England, built
by their Ancestors for a perpetual Monument of their care of their Posterity,
and their Liberties for ever) to be thus destroyed by an Hypocritical
Generation of Pharisaical Pretenders to the only knowledge of these Laws,
which by that pretense, they thus pervert, to destroy all honest men whom it
should save, and to save all whom it should destroy or punish; and that for
unlawful respects, and considerations tending only to their own profits, and
ends. Sixthly, If no man shall be condemned, etc. but by the judgment of his
equals according to the Laws of the Land; Are not all Debtors that are Famished
as aforesaid, Condemned for their Lives in effect, though but for their Debts
in appearance, without any Verdict of their equals, so intended, contrary to
the Law of the Land? Seventhly, do not all the Judges at Westminster, sell
Justice, when they sell Prisoners for Debt, their Writs of Habeas Corpus, etc.
for money, when the King would have all his Writs of Grace to be given to his
Subjects Gratis, and no Judge to take any Fee, or Reward for any thing but of
himself? Eighthly, Do they not deny Justice when they deny such Writs Gratis?
Ninthly, Do they not defer Justice, when they detain poor men that are Bailable
in Prison, while they have sufficient men ready to tender for their Bail, till
they be forced to borrow money of other friends, and to send far, and stay long
before they can receive it to loose their Bail in the interim, and be forced to
seek others; by which delays, their Goalers Fees increase, and their Dyer,
Lodging, and Expenses draw charges, which they might have saved to find Bread
for their Wives and Children at home; who perhaps are forced to fast by that
means, and to sell, or pawn their Cows, or Clothes for this money, this
damnable money, thus extorted by a Judge, for scribbling his Infamous name to a
Writ, which does but wrap a man, and his cause, faster in his clouches? O
Merciless, Miserable, Mercinary Judge! that can neither give, nor lend so
little as his name, to so much goodness in Policy, (if not in Charity) to give
a man Liberty to breath, and take leave of his Home, upon security of more
advantage both to Court, and Party, than his imprisonment to return to his
Pinfold. Radamanth himself abhors such foolish covetousness. Do they not
defer Justice, when by their Writs they cause Indictments, Informations, and
just Suits Commenced in other competent, and more proper Courts in all parts of
the Kingdom, to be removed to Westminster, and there detained without any Trial
these 40 years? How many thousands of Papists, and heinous Malefactors that
should have been punished in, and by their Counties, and Courts at home, have
by this means found Westminster, and its Courts, their only Sanctuaries, and
Privileges for none but Eminent, Opulent, Impenitent Offenders? But is not
Justice denied, when any Bailable man is denied to be Bailed? Or more, when
Bail is accepted upon Oath for its sufficiency, and is denied to be Filed, and
the Party so Bailed in Law, detained Prisoner still, at the Judges, and
Planriffs pleasures? Briefly, Is not the Administration of all the Law, and
Justice in England, Engrossed and Monopolized at Westminster, where the Judges
and Courts assume to be chief, and do exercise a plenary jurisdiction over all
others, so that they suffer none but themselves to err, or to abuse Law; nor
any to accomplish any Justice, or to reform any Errors, but only themselves,
who do pretend to correct all in their Exchecquer-Chamber, where instead of
correcting any, they confirm their own; which must be all as aforesaid. Lastly,
is it unknown that they were wont to Buy their Offices of the Kings Servants,
and therefore to Sell their Under-Offices to their own Servants, Attorneys,
etc.? And was not this the Buying and Selling of Justice that is yet unpaid
for, and had need so to be Reformed? Is it any reason that any should Buy
Justice, and not Sell it for gain by the Bargain? Is it not Bought to that end?
Is it not to that end, Judges neglect to give Attorneys their ancient Oath,
whereby they were wont to be Sworn to do no Falsehood, nor cause any to be done
in their Courts; and if they knew any, to give knowledge thereof to the Judges,
etc. that they should increase no Fees, etc. (as you may read it at large in
the latter end of the Attorneys Academy. Is it not to the same end that Judges
neglect to give all Plantiffs for Trespass, their Oaths that the Trespass
amounts to 40f or more, or else let the Suit be Tried in the Sheriffs Court
at home, according to the Statute of Gloucester, 6. Ed. 1. cap. 8.? And is it
not likewise to the same end, they neglect to take security of all Plantiffs,
to prosecute all Actions with effect, or pay Costs and Damages to the
Defendants, if they prove not their Issues? which Judges anciently used to do,
and still ought, before any Declaration be admitted, or Plea required, as says
the Mirror of Justice? fol. 64. b. Is it not to the same end the Chancery
neglects to take the Oath of all Complainants to make good their Bills in all
points, or pay Costs and Damages in case they fail, and that before any
Sub-poena be granted them, according to the Statute 15. H. 6. cap. 4o? And were
not all well ended, if all the end were that none were forsworn for Injustice,
but the chief Justices? (though comfortless for them to be so wretched as to
have no associates,) is it not the worse for the People, that their Ministers
which ought to be Sworn as aforesaid, are not? Whereby old Attorneys without
hazard of Perjury, lead young Judges Sworn to what they know not, to do what
they should not? as when so many subtle and lying Mercuries, direct so many
covetous and blind Cupids to shoot forth their arrows, that they may stick them
where they please, and commend the shooters for hitting the marks that yield
them the best sports of the gain?

The rest of this Charter I shall omit as aforesaid, for the reasons aforesaid,
and shall conclude this with the beginning of another, made in Confirmation,
Renovation, and Perpetuation thereof, by King Edward the first, in the 28 year
of his Reign, as follows: viz. EDWARD by the Grace of God, King of England,
Lord of Ireland, Duke of Guyen. To all Archbishops, etc. greeting. We have
seen the great Charter of the Lord Henry our Father, of the Liberties of
England in these words: And so begins the Charter as aforesaid, and ondeth
this, and it together, saying, We ratifying and approving these gifts, and
grants aforesaid, confirm, and make strong the same for us, and our Heirs
perpetually, and by tenor of these presents renew the same, Willing, and
granting for Us, and Our Heirs, that this Charter, and all and singular its
Articles for evermore, shall be steadfastly, and inviolably observed; And if any
Article in the same Charter contained yet hithirto peradventure has not been
observed, nor kept; We will, and by Our Authority Royal command from
henceforth firmly they be observed. These, etc. being witnesses. Given at
Westminster under Our own hand the 28 of March, in the 28 year of Our Reign.

Again, where the L. C. maintains the Statute of Marlebridge made 51 Hen. 3.
cap. 5. which says, The great Charter shall be observed in all its Articles,
as well in such as pertain to the King, as to others, and that shall be
enquired of before the Justices in Air in their Circuits, and before Sheriffs
in their Counties when need shall be, and writs shall be freely granted against
them that do offend, before the King, or the Justices of the Bench, or before
Justices in Air, when they come into those parts, etc. And the offenders when
they be convict shall be grievously punished by our sovereign Lord the King, in
form above mentioned.

Expost and Quer.
I shall but ask, Why not Justices in Air still? And why not Writs Gratis sent
to the Sheriff of every County, to enquire of offenses, and offenders against
the great Charter? And does not this Statute prove, that Sheriffs ought to have
such Writs, and to make such enquiries? And that the King referred himself, as
well as others, to the judgments, as well of Justices in Air, as of the
Justices of the Bench? and that he would have his Writs granted as well against
him, as others, and that Gratis? does it not futther prove, that Kings
accounted the Justices in Air, his Justices, and their Court, his Court; as
well as the King's Bench? how therefore does the Lord Coke hereafter call them
new Justices, and their Court, new Court? But more of that in its place.

Now having done with so much of Mag. Charta as I promised: and with the 5
Chapter of the Statute of Marlebridge: and the 8 of the Statute of Gloucester.
Here ensues the Confirmation of the great Charter, made at London 10 October.
Anno 25. Ed. 1. three years before that which is Printed before it, because
that contains all the Charter in 38. chapters at large, and this but 7. In
the First of which it confirms both Charters, and every Article thereof; both
made 9o; H. 3. in general words, as follows, viz.

Edward by the grace of God, Cap. 1. Charters.
King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Guyen. To all those that these
present Letters shall hear or see, Greeting: Know ye, that We to the Honor of
God, and of Holy Church, and to the profit of Our Realm, have granted for Us,
and Our Heirs; That the Charter of Liberties, and the Charter of Forests,
which were made by the Commonalty of the Realm, in the time of King Henry Our
Father, shall be kept in every point without breach. And We will, that the same
Charter shall be sent under Our Seal, as well to Our Justices of the Forest, as
to others; And to all Sheriffs of Shiers, and to all Our other Officers, and to
all Our Cities throughout the Realm, together with Our Whits, in the which
shall be contained that they cause the foresaid Charters to be published; And
to Declare to the People, that We have confirmed them in all points. And that
Our Justices, Sheriffs, Majors, and other Ministers, which under Us, have the
Laws of Our Land to guide, shall allow the same Charters pleaded before them in
Judgment, in all their points,: That is to wit; The Great Charter, as the
Common Law; And the Charter of the Forest, for the Wealth of Our Realm. The
Title of this Statute (says the Lord Coke) is Confirmationes Chartarum de
Libertatibus Angliae and Forrestae, L. C. upon Cons. C. f. 526.
viz. The Confirmations of the Charters of the Liberties of England, and of the
Forest: And true it is (says he) that hereby the said Charters are expressly
confirmed; but they are also excellently interpreted, (which is a Confirmation
in Law) for here is nothing Enacted, but is included within Magna Charta. And
by the Commonalty (says he) is to be understood, by the consent of all the
Realm, by Authority of Parliament: and many times by the Commonalty of England,
is signified an Act of Parliament, etc. before Printing, and before the Reign
of King Hen. the 7th, Statutes were Engrossed in Parchment, and by the Kings
Writ Proclaimed by the Sheriff of every County: this was the ancient Law of
England, that the Kings Commandments issued, and were published in form of
Writs (as then it was.) An excellent course, and worthy to be restored, etc.
This Clause (says he) is worthy to be written in letters of gold, viz. That
our Justices, Sheriffs, Majors, and other Ministers, which under us have the
Laws of the Land to guide them shall allow the said Charters in all points,
which shall come before them in Judgment. And here it is to be observed, That
the Laws are the Judges Guides, or Leaders, according to that old Rule, Lex est
Exercitus Judicum, viz. The Law is the Judges Army: Tutissimus Doctor, viz.
The safest Teacher: or Lex est optimus Iudicis Synagogus, viz. Their best
Synagoug. And Lex est tutissimus cassis, viz. Their safest Fortress. There is
an old legal word (says he) called Guidagium, viz. Guidage, which signifies
an Office of guiding Travelors through dangerous and unknown ways. Here it
appears that the Laws of the Realm, has this Office to guide the Judges in
all causes that come before them, in the ways of right Justice, who never yet
misguided any man that certainly knew them, and truly followed them. The sense
of the words, That the great Charter is to be holden for the Common Law, is,
that it is a Common Law to all, in amendment of the Realm; that is, of great
mischiefs, and inconveniences, which oppressed the whole Realm, before the
making thereof.

Expost and Quer.
Does nor the Lord Coke by all this his expression, commend this Statute very
highly? Why did he not in his duty cause it to be observed in his time? And had
not Justices of the Forest, and other Justices, Sheriffs Majors, and other
Ministers of his time (had they received the Great Charter with the Kings
Writs) power thereby, as well as he, to cause the said Charter to be published
to the People, and that the King had confirmed it in all points? Why did he (by
neglecting his duty to send the said Charter and Writs unto them accordingly)
make them fail of their duties? Does not the Lord Coke confess by this clause,
Worthy, (as he says) to be written in letters of gold, That Sheriffs, Majors,
and other Ministers, as well as Justices, and other Justices as well as those
at Westminster, have, or ought to have the Law of England to be their guide, and
ought to allow Magna Charta in all points, which in any Plea shall be before
them? Why then do the Justices at Westminster by their Habeas corpus, and other
Writs, (as aforesaid)* disturb, and prevent all Sheriffs, Majors, etc. to
exercise their Offices, before Judgment, or after, without proof of Injustice,
or manifest Errors committed by them in their Judgments? Why do not the
Justices at Wistminster (when they have Persons, and Causes brought before them
by virtue of their Writs) allow Mag. Car. to be Pleaded before themselves,
since they will suffer no others to hear it? How can it be true, (when they do
not) that the Law is their guide? Do not they assume the sole Guiding, Learning,
Interpreting, Exercising, and Over ruling of the Law to themselves, when they
suffer no other Justices, or Ministers of the King, but themselves to have any
Judgment therein, as aforesaid? Why do they belly the Law so much, as to call
it their Guide, their Teacher, their Army, their Synagogue, their Fortress; when
it is manifest, That their Attorneys, their Sollicitors, their Catch-polls, and
their Goalers, are their Guids, Teachers, Supernumerous Armies, and Invincible
Fortresses, (as they trust, but may be deceived) all whose ways are to
Injustice as aforesaid? How can that Law be called Common to all, which They,
and these their Creatures, Monopolize, Ingross, and Appropriate all to
themselves as aforesaid?

And We will, C. 2. Judgments.
That if any Indgement be given from henceforth, contrary to the points of the
Charters aforesaid, by the Justices, or by any other Our Ministers, that hold
Plea before them against the points of the Charters, it shall be undone, and
holden for naught. Whatsoever Judgment is given against this Statute of Magna
Charta, L. Coke upon Con. C. f. 527.
etc. is made void by this Act, and may be reversed by a Writ of Error, because
the Judgment is given against the Law; for this Act says, Soir de fair and
pur nienttenus, viz. as the Stat. Englisheth it self, It shall be undone and
holden for naught.

Expost and Quer.
If so? Why should not all Judgments (appearing as aforesaid, to be contrary to
Mag. Charta) which are given for Arrests, and Imprisonment of men's Bodies for
Debt, be undone, and held for naught? Why did Mr. Garland lately trouble the
most High Court of Parliament (whereof, by so doing, he showed himself an
unworthy Member) with a ridiculous useless Act of his drawing, for the
Enlarging poor Prisoners for Debt? Why did not he, (if he did ever read this
place of the Lord ((...).) mind the Parliament to command the Judges (who seem,
if they have read it, to have forgot it) to reverse their Erroneous judgments
against Debtors, so far as they extend to their Imprisonment, and to send their
Liberate to all their Goalers, to set open all their Goal doors, and let forth
so many of the Prisoners for Debt, as they have left alive? The poor, because
they have no Estate whereof to pay; the rich, because they have Estates
sufficient for all, or part; against which Estates, so much of their judgments
may stand, as concerns that, and not their Bodies: and Executions may be
taken thereupon, by Elegit, or Fieri facias, according to the Statute of
Westminster the 2. cap. 18th. agreeable to Magna Charta, and the Parliament not
to be troubled, except to Empower the Judges by an Order, to rectify their
judgments according to that Law which is in force, and so forgo their Errors,
and Repealed Statute of the 25th of Ed. 3d c. 17th. which ought to be no Guide,
Leader, or Teacher, to learned and grave Judges, that can never be misguided by
the right law, if (as the Lord C. says) they certainly know it, and be pleased
truly to follow it. And by this course, as well the Creditors of the rich
Debtors, as the poor Prisoners for Debt, (that have been wronged by the Judges
Erroneous judgments, and proceedings against Mag. Charta) may be partly
redressed, and so rest satisfied, until the Parliament be pleased to right them
further (as shall appear hereafter they may.) So likewise may that Prisoner,
(which is Imprisoned again after his enlargement by Garlands Act) be Enlarged
again by the same Judge that Committed him, without troubling the Parliament,
or People with any such Appeal, as is lately divulged; or suffering the
Apprentices Outcry to run so far, That now it will never be stopped till the
Thieves be taken.

And that all Arch Bishops, Cap. 4. Excom. etc.
and Bishops, shall pronounce the Sentence of Excommunication against all those
that by word, deed, or counsel, do contrary to the said Charters, or that in
any point break, or undo them; And that the said Curse be twice a year
Denounced, and Published by the Prelates aforesaid: And if the same Prelates,
or any of them, be remiss in the Denunciation of the said Sentences; the
Archbishops of Canterbury, and York, for the time being, shall Compel, and
Distrain them to the Execution of their Duties, in Form aforesaid. This
Excommunication the Prelates could not pronounce without Warrant by Authority
of Parliament, L. C. upon Confir Cart. f. 527.
because it concerned Temporal causes.

Expost and Quer.
Was not the Authority of this Parliament sufficient Warrant for Prelates to
pronounce Excommunication according to the Tenor, and limitation of this Act?
Does not the Lord Coke say before, That this Act is not only an Express
Confirmation of Magna Charta, but also, a Confirmation of it in Law? Does he
not say before that; That Magna Charta should live for ever, and in all
Successions of Ages for evermore? Is not the substance of the Excommunication
given by this Act to the Prelates to pronounce? Had the Prelates any more to do
therein, but to pronounce an Excommunication? What means Ipso Facto in the
Act, but to let all future Ages understand, That the breach of Mag. Cha. which
is a Declaration of the Fundamental Laws of England, is such an Offense as
deserves an everlasting Curse inflicted by the Law it self upon the Breakers
for ever? Which Curse receives no more strength from the Pronouncer, than a
Sentence of Death from a Judge, who does but tell a Fellon whom the Law
condemns, what shall be the manner of his Death. If any Excommunication was
ever pronounced by virtue of this Act (as there were two in two several Kings
Reigns) were not those Excommunications in force, and so to continue as long as
Magna Charta it self? the Prelates, and their Successors neglect of their
Duties, by discontinuing such Denunciations twice yearly, afterward
notwithstanding? If so? Are not those Excommunications still in force, except
Absolutions be produced, granted, and given by equal Authority to that whereby
those Excommunications were Denounced? If so? Are not Excommunications, until
Absolutions, of the same account, and validity in Law, as Out-lawries, until
they be reversed? If so? Are not all the Lands, Goods, and Chattels of all
Excommunicats, now the States, as formerly they were the Kings, and so
Seizable, Sequestrable, and Convertible to that use, until Absolution? And
ought not satisfaction precede Absolution? Ought not that satisfaction extend
to every particular man that has been wronged in this case, which (as the L.
C. says) is a Temporal case, and so called, in respect of the interest of all
men, called by the Clergy, Temporal, for distinction from themselves, that
would be called Spiritual? And so (as I believe) not to be commuted by a
Prelatical Sentence, to a trivial Penance; nor pardoned by Parliament, without
excepting every particular Interest. And what Parliament can Pardon, or Absolve
Offenders against Magna Charta, but by the Rules of Magna Charta, without
offending Magna Charta themselves, and incurring the same Excommunication, as
they have incurred that would be Absolved? If Excommunications be no Terrors to
Atheistical Judges, Justices, etc. who neither Believe, nor fear, Heaven, Hell,
God, Justice, nor Laws, (though they cannot in nature and reason, but know that
such there are, and are to be believed, feared, and obeyed) shall not
Excommunications be sufficient Warrants for Christians, English Christians in
England, (being warranted not only, as the L. C. says, By Authority of
Parliament, but of many Parliaments, such Parliaments of such Infallibility as
were those wherein Magna Charta, and all its Confirmations were made, and
grounded upon the Common-Laws of England, which, as all Lawyers profess, were
grounded upon the Law of God, the Word of God, the God of Christians, Christ
Jesus, the God of Truth, even Truth it self,) to put them in Execution? If not?
To what ends are Parliaments, or the Laws of God, and man, to such as dare not,
or will not, if, and when they may? Does not the Statute of Ano. 1o. P. and M.
cap. 12o. which made it Felony for twelve English persons, or above, to
assemble together of purpose to break any point of the Laws of England, imply
it to be Warrantable for all the People of England to Assemble together, to
cause the Laws of England, made by all their consents, to be observed, and to
punish not only the Breakers, but also the only begetters, and causers of all
the Breakers, and Breaches of all the Laws of England, the only assumers of
the knowledge thereof, and concealers of that knowledge from the People; so that
none but themselves, can knowingly break the Laws, because they will not let
them know them? Lastly, If Excommunications be nothing formidable to Lawyers,
to make them care whether they incur, or shun them, but as their profit guids
them? Let us see what the L. Coke says, fol. 536. concerning the conclusion of
this Act, and the Seals that were put to it, and the Oaths of the King and
Parliament, then and for ever, for the Ratification of it, omitted in the Stat.
at large, in Print, but to be seen in the Tower, Rot. Parl. 7o. Hen. 4th. no.
60. beginning with the word Simile, etc. Note (says he) the Solemnity of this
Act, in that all the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Berons, etc. did put their
Seals thereunto. A rare example, which was done for the obliging of them the
more firmly to the observation of this Act, which concerned the Laws,
Liberties, and Free-Customs of their Country; and for their greater Obligation
for the due Observation of this Act, they took a voluntary Corporal Oath.

And let us note, Expost and Q.
that if the Judgment of God, and this Parliament, has made the Prelates
sensible of their slighting of their Predecessors Excommunications, seals and
oaths? by what justice, or excuses, shall Lawyers avoid the same Judgment? And
though the Ignorance of Mag. Charta, and the Law (which Lawyers have begotten
and caused by concealing the same from them as aforesaid) can be no safe Plea
for any with God, or man, without prayers for Remission, and manifestation of
Repentance; yet is Ignorance a better subject for mercy, than knowing
wilfulness; and the people, while ignorant of Mag. Charta, are more capable of
grace for the breaking of it, than when they know it, if they put not the
Judgments of it, in Execution, against the causers of their offense.

Now I shall let you see, that there were two Excommunications denounced
against the breakers of Mag. Charta, according to this Statute; as follows.

The Year of our Lord One thousand two hundred fifty three, Excomunic. prim.
the third of May, in the great Hall of the Ring at Westminster, in the
presence, and by the assent of the Lord Henry by the Grace of God, King of
England; and the Lord Richard Earl of Cornwall his brother; Roger Bigor Earl of
Norfolk and Suffolk, Marshal of England; Humohrey Earl of Herford; Henry Earl
of Oxford; John Earl Warren, and other estates of the Realm of England: We
Boniface, by the mercy of God, Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all
England; T. of London, H. of Ely, S. of Worcester, E. of Lincoln, W. of
Norwich, P. of Herford, W. of Salisbury, W. of Durham, R. of Excester, M. of
Carlisle, W. of Bath, E. of Rochester, T. of S. David's, Bishops, apparrelled in
Pontificals, with tapers burning against the breakers of the Churches
Liberties, and of the Liberties, or other Customs of the Realm of England, and
namely of those which are contained in the Charter of the Common Liberties of
England, and Charter of the Forest; have denounced the sentence of
Excommunication in this Form: By the Authority of Almighty God, the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, and of the glorious Mother of God, and perpetual
Virgin Mary; of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul; and of all Apostles, and
of all Martyrs; of blessed Edward King of England; and of all the Saints of
heaven; We Excommunicate, accurse, and from the benefits of our holy Mother the
Church, we sequester all those that hereafter willingly, and maliciously
deprive, or spoil the Church of her Right; and all those that by any craft, or
wiliness do violate, break, diminish, or change the Churches liberties, and
Free-customs contained in the Charters of the Common liberties, and of the
Forest, granted by our Lord the King to Arch bishops Bishops, and other
Prelates of England: And likewise to the Earls, Barons, Knights, and other
Freeholders of the Realm; and all that secretly or openly, by deed, word, or
counsel, do make Statutes, or observe them being made, or that bring in
Customs, or keep them being brought in, against the said libertis, or any of
them, the Writers, Lawmakers. Counselors, and the Executors of them, and all
those that shall presume to Judge against them. All and every which Persons
before mentioned, that willingly shall commit any thing of the Premises, let
them well know; That they incur the foresaid sentence Ipso sacto, first upon
the deed done. And those that commit ought ignorantly, and be admonished,
except they Reform themselves within 15. days after the time of the
Admonition; and make full satisfaction for that they have done, at the will of
the Ordinary, shall be from that time forth, wrapped in the same sentence. And
with the same sentence, we burden all those that presume to perturb the peace
of our Sovereign Lord the King, and of the Realm. To the perpetual memory of
which thing, We the aforesaid Prelates have put Our Seals to these Presents.
What though the Form of this Excommunication be Popish? Expost and Quer.
Is not the Substance the maintenance of Englands Liberties? And is not that
all which the meaning of this Law requires? If Judges and Prelates, as well
since King Hen. 8. as before, have neglected their Duties in Itterating the
charge of their Functions, the first, in pronoucing Sentence, and the other in
Executing it; does not once pronoucing, and once executing of such one Sentence
of Law, as concerns all Ages, Sexes, and Conditions of People to learn and
remember, no less for the Preservation of their lives, and livelihoods, than
Scriptures for their Salvation, take away the plea of Ignorance from all men?
Shall any man commit that sin which he knows to be once so Declared by the
Law, and think to avoid punishment because not often so Declared by
Law-Professours? Are not all men bound to search the Scriptures, and learn the
Laws at their perils therefore? If Ignorance were a plea, shall knowledge be
excused? Professors of knowledge? nay, such as ingross that Profession from all
others, nay more, such as are the only causers and punishers of all other men's
Ignorance?

It appears that this Sentence was Denounced in the time of King Hen. 3d. Now
follows another, Denounced upon the said Confirmation made in the 25th. year
of King 8d. 1o. viz.

In the Name of the Father, Excom. 2.
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen, Whereas our Sovereign Lord the King, to the
Honor of God, and Holy Church, and for the common profit of the Realm, has
granted for him and his Heirs for ever, these Articles above written. Robert
Archbishop of Cauterbury, Primate of all England, Admonished all his Province,
Once, Twice, and Thrice. Because that shortness will not suffer so much delay,
as to give knowledge to all the People of England of these Presents in Writing:
We therefore enjoin all persons of what Estates soever they be, that they, and
every of them, as much as in them is, shall uphold and maintain these Articles,
granted by our Sovereign Lord the King, in all points; And all those that in
any point do resist, or break, or in any manner hereafter procure, counsel, or
any wise assent to resist, or break those Ordinances, or go about it by word,
or deed; openly, or privily, by any manner of pretense, or color: We the
foresaid Archbishop by our Authority in this Writing expressed, do
Excommunicate, and accurse, and from the Lord Jesu Christ, and from all the
company of Heaven, and from all all the Sacraments of Holy Church, do
sequester, and exclude. Does not the word, Hereafter, Expost and Q. 1
extend to all successions, and implie a Duration, as long as there be a Mag.
Charta, and a breaker of it? Do not Parliamentarie Oaths, as well as their
Laws, include absents, and futures, as well as present? If neither Oaths, nor
Excommunications be obligatorie to Atheists, shall not their hands, and seals,
bind them and their Heirs, and Executors after them, as common Bonds signed and
sealed between private parties, commonly do? And more specially, such as take
upon them the sole Execution, and Administration of the Laws, Liberties, and
Freehold of England? Shall not Charters of Parliament, made, signed, sealed,
and confirmed by Authority of Parliaments, bind all Subjects, their Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, as well, and as far, as private Charters of
Feofments shall bind their Contractors, and their Heirs, etc. Nay, as far as
Acts of Parliament can bind, till repealed? Is not every Court called Curia, of
the Care it ought to have to execute that charge it undertaketh? and not to
exact, and raise Fees, etc. for discharging themselves of all their said
Obligations to do even Justice to all men, and to force men to pay those
exactions, even for doing injustice? If all before written be not sufficient to
discover that to be true, and that therefore the Lives, Lands, and Goods,
possessed by Judges, Lawyers, all, or most of them, are in the States power to
seize into their hands, to the use of the Commonwealth, as aforesaid; let us
look a little further, and we shall find more that may. And first, the Statute
called Articuli super Chartas, viz. Stat. of Artic. on the great Chart. A. 28.
Ed. 1.
Articles upon the great Charters, made 28. of Ed. 1. viz. the same year as the
Confirmation at large (which consists of 38. chapters of Magna Charta) was
made; proves further, as follows.

For as much as the Articles of the great Chart^r of the Liberties of England,
Preamble.
and of the Charter of the Forest, the which King Henry, Father to our
Sovereing Lord the King, granted to his People for the Weal of his Realm, have
not been heretofore observed, ne kept, and all because there was no punishment
executed upon them which offended against the points of the Charters before
mentioned: Our Sovereign Lord the King has again granted, revived, and
confirmed them at the requests of his Prelates, Earls, and Barons assembled in
His Parliament holden at Westminster in the ^8 year of his reign. And has
ordained, enacted, and established certain Articles against all them that
offend contrary to the points of the said Charters, or any part of them, or
that in any wist transgress them, in the form that ensues, viz.

First of all, That from henceforth the great Charter of the Liberties of
England, granted to all the Commonaltie of the Realm, and the Charter of
Forest in like manner granted, shall be observed, kept, and maintained in
every point, in as ample wise, as the King has granted, renewed, and confirmed
them by this Chart. And that the Charter be delivered to every Sheriff of
England under the Kings Seal, to be read four times in the year before the
people in the full County, that is to wit, the next County day after the Feast
of S. Michael, and the next County day after the Feast of the Circumcision, and
after Easter, and after the Feast of S. John Baptist. And for these two
Charters to be firmly observed in every point, and Article (where before no
remedy was at the Common Law) there shall be chosen in every Shire Court by the
Commonaltie of the same shire, three substantial men, Knights, Justices of Oyer
and Term.
or other lawful, wise, and well disposed Persons to be Justices, which shall
be assigned by the Kings Letters Patents under the great Seal, to hear, and
determine (without any other Writ but only their Commission) such plaints as
shall be made upon all those that commit, or offend against any point contained
in the aforesaid Charters, in the Shires where they be assigned, as well in
Franchises, as without, and as well for the Kings servants out of their places,
as for other. And to hear the plaints from day to day without any delay, and to
determine them without allowing the delays which be at the Common Law: And the
same Knights shall have power to punish all such as shall be attainted of any
Trespass done contrary to any point of the two said Charters (where no remedy
was before at the Common Law, as before is said) by Imprisonment, or by Fine,
or by Amerciament, according to the Trespass. Nevertheless the King, nor none
of his Council that made this Ordinance, intend that by virtue hereof, any of
the foresaid Knights shall hold any manner of Plea by power, for to admit any
suit in such cases wherein there has been remedy provided in times passed,
after the course of the Common Law by writ. Nor also that the Common Law should
be prejudiced, nor the Chapter aforesaid, in any point. And the K. Wills, that if
all three be not present, or cannot at all times attend to do their Office in
form aforesaid, the King commands that two of them shall do it. And it is
Ordained that the Kings Sheriffs, and Bailiffs shall be attendant to do the
commandments of the foresaid Justices, as far forth as appertains unto their
Offices. And besides these things granted upon the Articles of the Charters
aforesaid. The King of his special Grace for redress of the grievances that the
people has sustained by reason of his Wars, and for the amendment of their
Estate, and to the intern that they may be the more ready to do him service,
and the more willing to assist, and aid him in time of need; has granted
certain Articles, the which he supposes shall not only be observed of his
liege. people, but also shall be as much profitable, or more, than of the
Articles heretofore granted.

One of the causes for the making this Act, L. Coke f. 537, 538, 539.
was (says the Lord Coke, as in the Preamble is suggested) that there was no
certain punishment in many points established by the said Charters against the
violators of the same; which also by this Act (says he) is remedied: And the
word, People, here (says he) does include all the Kings Subjects, etc. And
again, the word, Pain ne fuit estable, some read (says he) Pain ne fuit
execute, and that is true in effect; but the Original, is, Pain ne fuit
estable; that is, no pain was set down certain: And (says he, fol. 539.) This
Act had but the force of a Charter, until confirmed by this Parliament, the
34th Ed. 1. And that these Charters should be read four times in the year, in
full County, here is an order taken for the publishing. And Ou remedy ne fuit
avaunt, etc. is to be construed (says he) where no Action was given by the
Kings Writ, to be pursued at Common Law, etc. Again, here (says he) for the
better Execution of those glorious two Lights, Magna Charta, and Charta
Forestae, a new Court, and new Justices were appointed, etc. Again (says he)
these clauses against the Kings Servants out of their places, as well as
others: And to hear the Plaints without delay, day by day, and to determine
them without admitting such delays as be at Common Law, was the first ground
of the raising of the Justices called, Trail Baston, and their Courts so
called, in respect of their precipitate proceedings from day to day, without
such convenient leisure and time, as Common Law allowed, etc. they in the end
had such Authority, as Justices in Eyer; but albeit they had their Authority
by Act of Parliament, yet if they erred in judgment, a Writ of Error did lie
by the general Rule of the Common Law, to reverse the Judgment in the
King's Bench; which being once resolved, and known, and their Jurisdiction
fettered with so many limitations, their Authority, by little and little
vanish^d.

Expost and Quer.
Was there any certain Pain established by this Statute, against the violators
of Magna Charta, other than by Commission in Eyer, that the Justices might
determine, and punish the Offenders by Imprisonments, Fines or Amerciaments,
according to the Trespass? Ought not the Justices of the King's Bench to have so
punished all such as were Indicted before Sheriffs, or Justices in Eyer, who
had power to inquire, and certify them of all such Offenders, and Offenses
against Magna Charta, by the Statute of Marlebridge? 51. Hen. 3d? Does not the
Lord Coke say elsewhere, That all Statutes ought to be construed so, as that
there should be no failer of Justice: should not the Justices of the
King's Bench have construed Magna Charta so? Does not the 14th chap. of Mag.
Charta expressly direct; That all offenders ought to be Amercied by their
equals, according to the quantity of the Trespass? Does the Lord Coke speak
truth, when he says, this Statute gave any man Remedy for the certainty of
the punishment, other than Magna Charta did before? Was it not made more
uncertain by referring it to the Justices in Eyers discretion, whether
Amerciaments, Fine, or Imprisonment? Does he not confess plainly, (when he
says, It is true in effect, that the Pain was not Executed, as some read,
instead of the Pain was not Established,) That it was the fault of the Justices
of the King's Bench, in not Executing the Pain of Amercying, etc. (as they
might, and ought to have done) was the cause of Impowering the Justices in
Eyer, (who were but Enquirers before) now to determine, and punish such
Offenders, and Offenses, as they did forbear, viz. The Kings Servants, with
whom by this time, they of the King's Bench tampered for their Offices? And was
it not for the same cause, the people were Declared to be choosers of Justices
in Eyer? And does not the Lord Coke show a great spite between himself, and
his brethren; whom he would have to be ancient; and the Justices in Eyer, whom
he calls a new Court, and new Justices? And show his Memory to be weak, as
his Envy was strong, when he is forced to give himself the Lie, (either here,
or in his Exposition of the Stat. of Marlebridge, where he says; They were
then Justices, and a court, though but for Inquiry? And upon the 23th Chap. of
Magna Charta; he says, they used before that time to give charge to all Juries
concerning Wears etc. Does not the Lord Coke say, fol. 235. That Bracton wrote
before the making West. 1. which was 3. Ed. 1? And does not Bracton lib. 3.
cap. 11, 12, and 13. say, Justices in Eyer were before his time? Does not
Camden in his Britannia, page 104. say, They were Instituted by King Hen. 2?
Does not Hoveden in his Annais, part, poster. fol. 113. b. confirm the same?
And add that K. Hen. 2. divided the Realm in six parts, and settled thre^
Justices in Eyer to every part, whose names he relates? And does not the
Mirror of Justice lib. 3o. Tit. 1o. Justice in Eyer, declare their power at
large? And as for their Election by the people, does he not say, fol. 538. That
Magna charta, etc. contains the substance of all that is contained in these
Articles? And does he not say in his Preamble, That Magna Charta is an Act
declarative of the ancient Laws, and Customs of England before it, and no
introductive of any new? And fol. 558. That of ancient time, before the making
of this Act, all such Officers, or Ministers, as were instituted, either for
Preservation of the Peace of the County, or for execution of Justice (because
it concerned all the Subjects of that County, and they had a great interest in
the due and just exercise of their places) were by force of the Kings Writs in
every several County, chosen in full and open County, by the Freeholders of
the same County? Again, (says he,) So it was then, and yet is, of Coroners,
and so it was then, and yet is, of Knights of the Shire for Parliaments; and of
the Verdors of a Forest, and likewise it was of ancient time of the Sheriff of
the County, and restored by this Act: but this is altered by diverse Acts of
Parliament. Now were not Justices in Eyer therefore that were before Magna
Charta chosen by the peole, as they were Ministers of Justice, wherein the
people were concerned? And were they by this Act but restored to their ancient
jurisdiction, as (the Lord Coke says) Sheriffs were? Was not that alteration
which was made by diverse Acts of Parliament, made by such Acts as were contrary
to Magna Charta? And are not, or ought not all such Acts to be void, (as the L.
Coke has elsewhere said?) Does not these contradictions declare the Lord Coke
to have been distracted with spite and envy against ^ustices in Eyer? And
where in this leaf, he would persuade the people to suspect Justices in Eyer,
of corruption, and Monopolizing justice to wrong the people that choose them;
can the people believe that these Justices (who are to be chosen by them, and
to be displaced by them, when, and as often as they see cause) will, or can
wrong them more, than those chosen by the King and his Servants, without their
consents, unless they can believe that they may be persuaded to give their
consents to wrong themselves? Is it not a Bull of less formality than ever any
Popish Bull was, (keeping a man off with his Horns, That he shall have no hold
of his tail) when he says, That the clause, where no remedy was before, etc.
ought to be expounded, where no Action was given by the Kings Writs, to be
pursued at Common Law? Since by the Statute of Marlebridge, Justices in Eyer
were to inquire by the Kings Writs; and now are, by express words of this
chapter, not only to inquire, but also to determine by virtue of their
Commissions, without the Kings Writs? And what cause could they, or can any
other Court determine by virtue of their Commission, without the Kings Writs,
but is Actionable by the Kings Writs? What does this Statute give by virtue of
this Commission, if all things Actionable by Writs, be not determinable by
these Commissions, without Writs? And what does this Statute avail, if not
constructable as others, so that there should be no failer of justice? Where
was the failer of justice, but in the Kings Courts, and Judges, in not
executing justice upon the Offenders of Magna Charta? Does it not therefore
appear that the said clause (Where no Remedy was before) ought to be expounded,
where no remedy was given before by Justices in Westminster against the Kings
Servants, and themselves, that were the greatest contractors in the breaches of
Magna Charta? Were not the Justices in Eyer therefore enabled with a power to
supply their defaults faults, and to do right to the People, against the King
himself, and all his Servants at Westminster, that wilfully failed in their
justice and power? And where he says; The Justices called, Trail Baston, had
like authority as Justices in eyer, and committed Errors, and upon pretense
thereof, had all their proceedings transported to the King's Bench; does it not
appear by the Statute called, Ragman, that those Justices were made by the
King, without the consent of the people, and sent abroad (perhaps of purpose)
to err and abuse the people, to give color to the King's Bench, to send their
Writs of Error, for the proceedings of the Justices in Eyer (upon pretense of
like Errors) so to suppress all Justice against themselves, and their
Creatures? Does not the Lord Coke here withal prefer the chargeable delays of
causes (spun out by Terms, and Years,) before speedy justice done day by day,
at men's own doors, which he calls, Piecipitat? Does he not ground this
course, for suppressing speedy justice by Writs of Errors, upon the resolution
of the Judges at Westminster, which he al leadgeth as sufficient to master
Authority given by Act of Parliament? And is it not the resolution of all
Lawyers, that no power but Parliament, is equal to Parliament, and no
Parliament to be so empowered as to cross Magna Charta, and its Confirmations?
Does he not further (sol. 559.) allege the resolution of all the Judges of
England, against the King and his Council, for an Erroneous Act, when they had
chosen a Sheriff for Lincoln in a case of necessity, without the consent of the
People? But to hasten this Treatise to an end, I shall end this Statute for
this time, with few chapters following, viz.

The King has granted unto his people, Cap. 8. Elect. of Sherifts.
that they shall have Election of their Sheriff in every Shire (where the
Sheriffalty is not of the Fee) if they list. I shall say no more to this, than
has been said before.

In summons and Attachements in Plea of land, C. 25. Summons and A. ^ach.
the Whits from henceforth shall contain 15. days full at the least, after the
Common Law, if it be not in Attachement of Assizes taken in the Kings presence,
or of Pleas before Justices in Eyer, during the Eyer. Upon this I must ask,
Expost and Quer.
Is not a Writ of Debt, Summons? Should not that be given to the party which
ought to be summoned? Should not an Attachement follow by distinction of 15.
days, as this Statute prescribes? Shall the repealed Statute of the 25th of
Ed. the 3d, serve Lawyers turns to make a distinction between a Plea real, and
Personal? And shall that Writ of Summons be counterfeited, either in it self,
or in its return, as aforesaid.

Such Executions shall be done of them that make false Returns of Writs, Ca.
16. False Retur. of Wr.
(whereby right is deferred) as it is ordained in the 2. Statute of
Westminster, with like pain, at the Kings commandment. This is an Act of
Confirmation, L. C. upon Ca. 16, f. 568.
whereby the Statute of Westminster the 2d. cap. 39th. touching false returns,
is confirmed.

Does not the 2d Statute of Westminster cap. 39. say, Expost and Q.
That the King has commanded that Sheriffs shall be punished by the Justices
once or twice if need be for such false Returns? and if they offend a third
time, none shall have to do therewith but the King, etc? Does not the Court of
King's Bench assume the King to be always there in Person? And what they speak,
to be his own speech? Is it not they therefore that should punish Sheriffs for
their false Returns, the third time of their offense? But is it not indeed
they, and their Creatures, as well as those of the Common Pleas, do make false
Returns in the names of the Sheriffs of L^ndon, and Middlesex, and do
consequently make those Sheriffs liable to Actions, as aforesaid? How can they
punish those Sheriffs for those false Returns, which they themselves suffer
their Clerks to make, unknown to the Sheriffs, as aforesaid? And who but they
cause, or suffer all Sheriffs falsely to Return Exigents with the words, Per
judicium Coronatorum, and the Coroners names, who know no such thing? And if
any man be Outlawed without the judgment of the Coroners of his County, or
any mention made thereof in the Sheriffs Return, is not that Outlawry as
injurious to the Party, Perjurious in the Judges who admit such a Return, and
proceed upon it, and as Illegal in the Sheriff that makes such a Return, and as
different from due Process of Law, as the other? And do not those false Returns
filed upon their Records, make all their proceedings thereupon, false, and
faint Actions as aforesaid? And if all before written be not sufficient to make
it appear to the world, that they are not only Forgers, Perjurers, and
Anathema's themselves, but also the only causers of all others to be, or be
accounted the like? And that their Lives, Lands, and Goods, are in the
immediate dispose of the present State, by the judgments and confessions of
their own mouths? Behold their Oath, which they voluntarily take when they
assume their places, whereby they bind themselves further, before God, and
man, as follows, viz.

Ye shall Swear, The Oath of the Kings Judges
that well and lawfully ye shall serve our Sovereign Lord the King, and his
people, in the office of Justice, and that lawfully ye shall Counsel the King
in his business, and that ye shall not council, nor assent to any thing which
may turn him to damage, or disherison, by any manner way, or color. And that
Ye shall not know the damage, or disherison of him, whereof Ye shall not do
him to be warned by Your self, or by other. And that Ye shall do even Law, and
Execution of right to all his Subjects, rich, and poor, without having regard
to any person. And that You take not by Your self, or by other, privily, nor
apertly, gift, nor reward of gold, not silver, nor of any other thing which may
turn to Your profit unless it be meat, or drink, and of small valor, of any
man that shall have any Plea, or Process, hanging before You, as long as the
Process shall be so hanging, nor after the same cause. And that Ye take no Fee,
as long as Ye shall be Justice, nor Robes of any may, great or small, but of
the King himself. And that Ye give none advise, nor Counsel to no man, great
nor small, in no case where the King is party. And in case that any of what
Estatt or Condition they be, come before You in Your Sessions with Force, and
Arms, or other ways against the Peace, or against the form of the Statute
thereof made, to disturb Execution of the Common Law, or to manace the people
that they may not pursue the Law, that Ye do their Bodies to be Arrested, and
put in prison: and in case they be such, that Ye may not Arrest them, that Ye
certify the King of their names, and of their Misprision hastily, so that he
may thereof ordain a covenable remedy: And that You by Your self, nor by
other, privily, nor apertly, maintain any Plea, or quarrel, hanging in the
Kings Court, or else* where in the Country: And that Ye deny to no man common
right by the Kings Letters, nor none other man's, nor for none other cause; and
in case any Letters come to You, contrary to the Law, that You do nothing by
such let, but certify the King thereof, and go forth to do the Law,
notwithstanding the same Letters. And that Ye shall do, and procure the profit
of the King, and of his Crown, with all things where Ye may reasonably do the
same. And in case Ye be from henceforth found in default in any of the points
aforesaid; Ye shall be at the Kings Will, of Body, Lands, and Goods, thereof to
be done as shall please him: As God You help, and all Saints. Anno, 18. Edward,
3. Stat. 3. Expost and Quer.
If Atheists can persuade Christians that this Oath was no binding for them that
had taken it, (even the Wise, Learned, Reverend, Judges, Sages, Scientissimous
Interpreters of the Laws of England,) sufficient to keep them within the
compass of their Oath, Law, and Knowledges? Shall not Christians persuade
themselves, that it is a sufficient Confession, Declaration, and judgment of
their own mouths that made it, that their forfeitures, viz. their Lives, Lands,
and Goods, in case of their breach of any point of this Oath, are now
immediately in the power of the State to dispose of to the public use, at
their pleasures, without any further Process, or proceedings in Law, but only
to give Order, and Warrant to Arrest the persons of such Offenders to stand to
their censures; and to Sequester their Estates, and to divide them to the said
use, accordingly? Did Lords ever use any more Law than their own Wills, when
they Sequestered, and punished their villains? Had Lords any more Law, Right, or
Reason, to Sequester, and punish their villains at their own Wills, but for
that their villains did take their Lands upon conditions to do those services
which they and their Lords agreed upon, and gave their Lords their Oaths (as
their greatest bonds) to perform those conditions, or in case of breach, to
suffer their Lords to repossess their Lands, with the forfeitures of their
Goods, (which they gained) and their Lives (which they sustained) upon the
same? Was the Oath of a Villain (though made by Parliament, to the end that
Lords should be well served by their Slaves in their private and meanest
Offices) of as considerable consequence to be observed, or in default thereof,
their forfeitures to be executed, as the Oath of Judges, made and Confirmed by
several Parliaments, to the end, that the commonwealth should be well served
by their Justices in their public, and most honorable (if rightly served)
Offices of Judicature, and administration of Justice? Are not such Villains, as
dare incroach, not only upon their Lords Lands, and Estates, but also upon
their Lives, and Liberties, dangerous, transcendent, Hyper-Prelatical Usurpers?
Are not such Usurpers intolerable mischiefs in a Commonwealth? Who being
sworn servants to the Commonwealth (as by this Oath it appears the Kings
Justices were) make all the Commonwealth their servants, to attend their
Trains at Westminster at their pleasures? And all Prisoners for Debt, not only
their own Villains, but also Villains to their Villainous Goalors, and Slaves
to their Slaves? Are not the meanest of the Free-People of England, interessed
in the due execution of Justice, to which these Judges were sworn? (as well to
them, as to Kings) and consequently ought they not to be such Lords as dare,
and will take the forfeitures of such Villains, as do them daily Injustice? Is
not this Oath a sufficient Evidence in it self, that the takers of it, have,
and do daily break it? and cause all others that have, or do break it, to do so
likewise? Since Kings and People have wholly referred themselves, and their
Estates, not only to the Justice of their Judges, but also to their fatherly
advertisements, and admonitions (whereby they ought not to suffer any that
depend upon them, to err through ignorance) and they (contrariwise) admonish
none not to offend, but suffer, and cause more to offend than willingly, and
wittingly would; and so do, for want of such admonitions, much more increase,
and enhance the Markets of their Justice, by suffering no other Judges to
admonish, or Justify any offenders at home, and engrossing all to themselves
at Westminster, or before such as they send to fripper for them, in Assizes,
Goal-Deliveries, and Nisi prius^s. Have not some present Grafts of the old
stock Judges of Assizes in possibility for the Country) and their Agents in
Chancery, procured several late Injunctions to be dissolved in Chancery,
without the privity of both parties whom they concerned, to the end only to
beget work for them in the Assizes, lest they should want better? Did our late
Judges lawfully counsel King Charles in his business, when they gave their
Resolutions for him concerning the Ship Money? Did they not assent to a thing,
or things, that turned to his damage and disherison, and overturned him, and
his Posterity out of three Kingdoms, and his life to boot, when they assented
to Ship money, and Monopolies? Did not the Kings Council and other Sergeants,
and Lawyers, draw (if not plot) all such Patents? Got they not more by their
Fees, for their advise therein, (which were present pay) than the King did by
his reservations for interest in those Grants which are yet in Arrear? Was any
thing reserved to the King thereby, but what his Council learned thought fit,
and advised him to take, and the Pa^^ntees to give? Did not those Judges, that
had the keeping of both the Kings Seals, assent to all those unlawful things,
whatsoever they Sealed? Briefly, does not this Oath in every point evidence the
Judges at Westminster, and their brethren to have been the chief betrayers of
Kings and People in their chief trust, to guide and hold both in the right way,
and did they not lead both wrong? And thereby are the chief Authors of all the
blood spilt, and estates ruined in these three Kingdoms, in and by these late
Wars, which were undertaken for Reformation, only of such deformities in Law,
and Government, which (you see) they had power to keep in form by their lawful
judgments, or admonitions to the right, or not consenting to the wrong? Do not
our Records, and History testify, that all the Civil Wars of England, were
always undertaken for Reformation of Injustice, evil Government, and corrupt
Lawyers that were always the causers thereof, by breaking, and causing to be
broken the Liberties of Magna Charta, which the People sought always to
recover? Were not Hugh D'Burgo, Chief Justice of England, Walter D'Lancton,
Lord Treasurer of England, Brember, Trisilian, Bellknap, Thorp, etc. examples
of their times in that case? If so few examples will not serve to make all
Judges mend, should not all such Judges be made examples, to serve posterity to
see that such evils are not necessary for Commonwealths? Shall such
Extrajudical Judges, such lawless Lawyers, etc. as will not be tied by Oaths,
made in, and by Parliaments; Excommunications denounced by Authority of
Parliaments; Charters Signed, Sealed, and Confirmed in, and by Parliaments; nor
by Acts, Laws, and Statutes made by full and free Parliaments; be suffered to
sit with Christians in Parliaments to make Laws, Votes, Oaths, and other
Obligations upon Christians, which shall be none to themselves? But let us see
further, what an other Act of Parliament says to this Oath, as ensues, viz.

The Statut. 20. E. 3. Pream. Letter. Justice.
Edward by the Grace of God, etc. To the Sheriff of Stanford, greeting. Because
that by diverse complaints made to Us, We have perceived that the Law of the
Land, which We by Our Oath are bound to maintain, is the less well kept, and
the execution of the same disturbed many times, by maintenance, and
procurement, as well in the Court, as in the Country: We greatly moved of
Conscience in this matter, and for this cause, desiring as much for the
pleasure of God, and ease, and quietness of Our Subjects, as to save Our
Conscience, and for to save and keep Our said Oath, by the assent of the Great
men, and other Wise men of Our Council: We have ordained these things
following, viz.

First, Cap. 1.
We have commanded all Our Justices, that they shall from henceforth, do even
Law, and execution of right to all our Subjects rich and poor, without having
regard to any person, and without letting to do right for any letters, or
commandment which may come to them from Us, or from any other, or by any other
cause. And in that any letters, Letters.
writs, or commandments come to the Justices, or to other, deputed to do Law
and right, according to the usage of the Realm, in disturbance of the Law, or
of the execution of the same, or of right to the parties; the Justices, and
other aforesaid shall proceed, and hold their Courts, and Processes where the
Pleas, and matters be depending before them, as if no such Letters, Writs, or
commandments were come to them. And they shall certify Us, and Our Council of
such commandments as be contrary to the Law, (as before is said) And to the
intent that our Justices should do even right to all people, Justice
in the manner aforesaid, without more favor showing to one, more than to
another, We have done Our said Justices to be sworn, that they shall not from
henceforth, as long as they shall be in office of Justice, Fees. Roabs
take Fee nor Roabe of any man, but of Our self. And they shall take no gift,
nor reward by themselfs, nor by other, privily, nor apertly of any man that
has to do before them, by any way, except meat and drink, and that of small
valor; and that they shall give no counsel to a great man, nor small, in case
where We be Party, or which do, or may touch Us in any point, upon pain to be
at Our will, Body, Lands, and Goods, to do thereof as shall please us, in case
they do contrary: And for this cause We have increased the Fees of the same
our Justices, in such manner, that it ought reasonably to suffice them.

Expost and Quer.
Does not the King say here, He is bound by his Oath to maintain the Laws of the
Land? Does not the Lord Coke say before, That a King in his Politic capacity
cannot dye? Did not, or ought not all Kings of England take the like Oath as
this King did? Were they not therefore bound to maintain the Laws of England as
well as he? and to be advised, and ruled by their Judges, how to maintain them?
as the Oath of the Judges, this Statute, and others, do manifest they were? Are
not Judges as Immortal as Kings in their Politic capacity? Are they not bound
by their Oaths, not only to maintain, and execute the Laws of England against
all men, without regard of Persons, but also to advise their Kings to maintain
them, and how so to do, and to hinder, or not consent with their Kings to break
them? Were not the maintenances (whereof the King here complains, and the
procurements as well in Court, as in Country, whereby (he says) the Laws, and
the due execution thereof were disturbed) the remainders of the Factions of the
Spencers, and others, who in Edward the 2d. his time had made such Judges, as
had put all Laws out of all order; so that this King, being Edward the 3d.
could not reform what had been deformed hitherto? but now endeavors to do it
by means of this Oath made in Parliament in the 18th. year of his Reign, and
this Act made in the 20th. If Kings endeavored to perform their duties (as
this King did, and Judges would not) should not such Judges suffer, as in this
Kings time diverse did? If Kings, and Judges, (contrary to their Oaths, and
Offices) omit their duties (as this Kings Father, and his Judges did) should
not such Kings and Judges suffer for their defaults, as he and they did? If
Kings, and Bishops did lately neglect their duties, (contrary to their Oaths,
and Offices) and were punished for their defaults? why not such Judges as were
the greater Delinquents for suffering them so to offend? and more for
consenting thereto? And more than that, when they advised the same? If the
secret Sacrilege of one Achan deserved Gods indignation against all his People
of Israel, until they discovered, and punished him, and his Offense? What does
the manifest extortion (a sin no less prohibited than Sacrilege) of so many
Achans, merit of Gods Judgments against the whole Nation of England, if they
prosecute not, or leave unpunished, their Offenses, which are more than
Extortions; as Perjuries, Forgeries, Sacrilege it self, and diverse others
spoken of before. Judge, O People? Judge, your selves, O ye People, least ye be
Judged.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF it please the Parliament to require more proofs than common experience of
the common breach of all the Common Law of England, by our common Mercinary
Judges, they may cause Commissions in Eyer, or other Oyers, and Terminers to be
issued to clear the matter by more particular evidences.

Eight Observable POINTS OF LAW; Executable by Justices of the Peace in their
Counties, and Magistrates in their Corporations.
Necessary to be known to the COMMON PEOPLE.
1. The choice of all Officers of Peace and Trust, anciently in the People,
confirmed by Magna Chart.
1 COunties and Sheriffs Turns, were ancient Courts in the time of King Arthur,
and before; And in the Turns were tried all Pleas of the Crown; and in the
Counties all Common Pleas under forty shillings without Writ; and above, to
any value with Writs, according to the Law maxim, Quod placita de Catallis,
debitis etc. quae summam 40s. attingunt, vel excedunt secundum legem and
consuetudinem Angliae, sine brevi Regis placitari non debent. See the Lord Coke
upon the 35th Chap. of Magna Charta; and upon the Stature of Gloucester fol.
310. and 312. Hundreds, and Court Burons have the same power, and rights, and
neither Sheriffs nor Stewards are Judges, but suitors only, fol. 312. And so
all men were to have Law and Justice at home, cheap and near, and not to fetch
it from Westminster, far and dear. And the Conservators, otherwise called
Guardians of the Peace before Magna Charta, and since; had all necessary power
to govern their Counties in Peace, and to execute all Laws conducing thereunto,
and to command the power of their Counties to assist them; and were chosen (as
all other Officers of Peace and Trust were) by their Counties, as the Lord Coke
affirms.

2. This Mutuatus is usual in the King's Bench, and Common Pleas, to fetch poor
men not worth 40. s. from York or Cornwall to London, for 5. s. debt or less;
and to Outlaw him in the Common Pleas, if he come not; which example other
Courts of Record follow too much.
2. As Superior Courts ought not to incroach upon Inferior, so the Inferior
ought not to defraud the Superior, of those causes that belong to them: viz.
Neither ought a man be sued in any Court of Record for debt not amounting to
40s. by way of mutuatus, and other lawless tricks daily used by Attorneys; nor
in any inferior Court for debt of 40 shillings, or exceeding, by dividing it
into Actions under 40 shillings. In which cases the Defendant ought to be
admitted to plead to the jurisdiction of the Court, and to have a Prohibition
to stay the suit: see the Lord Coke, upon the Stat. of Glouc. fol. 311. And all
Courts were to dismiss all Actions entered without sufficient bail to prosecute,
answerable for costs and damages. If nonsuited, or cast; and not Jo. Do. and
Rich. To. as is used. See F. H. Just. P. the Register, and Fitz. H. Not.
brevium at large. And no Court of Record was to proceed in any action of debt,
before the Plantiff swore his said debt to be 40s. or more, and his damage in
trespass to be so much at least: And if Battery, that he was beaten indeed, to
his uncurable hurt to that value. See the Stat. of Glouc. and the L. Coke upon
it, with his reason for the discontinuance of this practice.

3. Does not the denial of an Habeas Corpus, to bring a prisoner before a Judge
without Fees, (both to Judge and Attorney) include the sale, delay, and denial
of Justice, while the prisoner is unprovided to buy it.
3. All the Kings Writs for the doing justice and right to all men freely and
speedily, without delay or denial, ought to be granted, and had freely at the
Kings cost: And justice ought to be done freely, without sale; fully, without
denial; and speedily, without delay: whereby (says the Lord Coke) it appears
that justice must have three qualities, viz. To be Free, because nothing is
more vile, than what is venal; Full, and perfect, that it may not halt; And
speedy, because delay is a kind of denial. See the L. Coke upon the Stat. of
Marlbr. chap. 80. Thus to have and do, was the Common Law of England, and the
Liberties, and Right of the People before Mag. Char. and saved unto them by it:
and the best Birthright they ever had, or can have; whereby their Lands,
Goods, Wives, Children, Bodies, Lives, Honors, and Estimations ought to be
protected from injuries. See the L. C. upon the 29 and 38 c. of M. C.

4. All defaults, and offenses of Sheriffs, Coroners Escheatours, etc.
inquirable, and punishable by Justices of Peace.
4. Therefore Magna Char. ought to be read, and published to the People in all
Cathedrals twice yearly: And all breakers thereof are excommunicated ipso
facto, and so twice pronounced by two Acts of Parliament, Tit. confirm. and
excommengm.t in Rast. abridg. fol. 65. and 148. And it ought to be read in full
County in every shire, four times yearly, and all the breakers thereof inquired
of there; and further inquired of, and punished by Fines, Imprisonments, etc.
by Justices in Air, two of every Counties choosing, whereby 12. or 14. may
serve in circuits throughout England, and Wales, divided into six or seven
Provinces, as twelve did serve for all England divided into six. See, and
compare Rast. abridg. fol. 65. and Rog. Hoveden part poster. Annal. fol. 548.
The not reading, and publishing of Mag. Char. is the default partly of Sheriffs
not requiring it; partly of the Clerk of the Crown, etc. not sending it to them
under Seal. All defaults of Sheriffs, etc. are inquirable, and punishable by
Justices of Peace; as Lamb. Fitz. H. Cromp. Dali etc. affirm at large.

5. Observe the peoples choice resumed by this Statute, when the King presumed
to make Justices of P. and under that specious Title to empower them, first to
affront, and by degrees to suppress, and at last to extinguish the larger power
of Conservatours. A Prerogative imposture devised by Lawyers for their own
advantage, when they got the King to confer this creation of Justices of Peace,
upon his Chancellours, and Keepers, to whom their creatures became obliged to
subject all England to Westminster, contrary to Mag. Char.
5. Justices in Air are discontinued long since, and not only for that they
were interrupted, and wearied out by the Prerogative Judges, and Courts at
Westminster by their Certioraries, Corpus cum causa, Errors, and other Writs
(as the Lord Coke confesses in his Exposition of the Stat. called A^t. super
Chart. fol. 540.) but also for that Justices of Assize, Justices of Peace, and
all Oyers, and Terminers by their Commissions, and Magistrates of Corporations
by their Charters, were enabled and sworn to hear and determine all Trespasses,
Contempts, Oppressions, and Misdemeanors, according to the Laws and customs of
England, as appears in, and by all Commissions of the Peace, Oyers,
Terminers, and Charters that have Oyer and Terminer, and by the Stat. made for
the first institution of Justices of Peace, in the 18th year of Ed. 3d. in
which year was also ordained the Oath of all Judges, and Justices of Oyer and
Terminer for the due execution of justice, without sale, delay or denial, which
the thrice reverend Judge Anthony Fitz Herb. admonishes them that consider it,
and their duty to God, and their Country, not to break upon any conditions,
Not. brevium fol. 240. d. but now the common practice is otherwise.

6. Justices of Peace ought not to be seduced to transgress M. C. and the
Petition of Right, by any Stat. that contradicts them, nor to lose the public
interest for any Prerogative usurpation, but to reassume their authority fro
People, to act as conservatours of the ancient peace, and profit of the
Commonwealth: as in cases of Remitter, men stand to their best Title.
6. Any that Will, ought to have Commissions of Oyer and Terminer for all
Extortions, Oppressions, and Misdemeanors of Sheriffs, Under sheriffs,
Escheatours, Bailiffs, Clerks, and all other Officers: See Cromp. Just. Peace,
fol. 51.8. Fitz H. Not. br. fol. 112. d. And Justices of Peace, and all other
Commissioners that ought by their Commissions, and Oaths, to punish all such
offenses, and do not, are no less than porjurers, and the greatest malefactors
of all other, themselves. Nor can any Writs of Certiorari, Corpus cum causa,
Error, Supersedeas, or putting out of Commission, excuse or supercede them to
finish their Judgments, and Executions in all such causes brought in question
before them: See and compare the Stat. of 2. Ed. 3. and 14. Ed. 3.14. and the
20. Ed. 3.1. and the Procedendo thereupon in Fitz. H. Na. Bre. fol. 240. where
it is said; They shall proceed to justice according to law, notwithstanding any
Letter, Commandment, Prohibition, Writ, Privy Seal, or Great Seal to the
contrary. And if any such things be granted by the King, or any of his Judges,
or Coutrs, such a Procedendo ought to be granted by the Keeper of the Broad
Seal to countermand them; and to command justice, judgment, and execution to
be done, even against the King, much rather against Judges, who under color of
Authority and justice, delude and wrong Kings, and People: For (says the L.
Coke upon the Stat. of Marlebridge, cap. 5.) there is no greater injustice,
than when under color of Justice, men are injured: but Writs of Certiorari
Corpus cum causa, and Error, ought to be had, and granted, upon proof of
malice, partiality, injustice, or error in matter, committed by any inferior
Court, but not upon suggestions, or bare suppositions, as is used: See and
compare therefore all the said Statutes in this case, together with M. Dearhams
Manuel, p. 25. Nor by any Superior Judges or Courts that are parties, or
concerned in the cause. See the L. Coke upon Art. super Chart.

7. These oppressions are daily committed by mercinary lawyers, by color of
Statutes of their own devices against Mag. C. which Stat. ought to be repealed,
and the longer execution thereof resisted by all, or any necessary means.
7. The granting of Writs, or Commissions to do injustice by, or to stay, or
delay justice, where it is done, or doing; or to deny Writs or Commissions to
cause or further justice to be done, (which always was, and yet is the practice
of the Prerogative Judges at Westminster; not only to cross, and interrupt
Commissioners legally chosen in, and by their Counties, (as Justices in Air
were) and such, and all Justices of Peace, and Officers of Trust, and
concernement in, and to the Commonwealth, still ought to be) is the worst of
all Oppressions, and a general destruction of Law and People, committed by
color of an usurped Authority, as says the L. Coke upon the Statute of
Marlebr. cap. 5. To prevent which (his Lordship further says) It is lawful for
the People to take up Arms, or for Inferior Judges to commit their Superiors
and that before any Verdict, or Judgment, because they worthily loose the
benefit of Law, who intend to subvert it; and Subordinate authority is more to
be obeyed, and assisted in the execution of Justice, than the Supreamest to be
endured to obstruct it. All this, and more, is to be read in effect, in the L.
Cokes Exposition upon Art. super Char. and the Stat. of Marl^br. which if
executed by Justices of Peace in their Counties, and Magistrates in their
Corporations, would soon regulate abuses, settle Peace, and much enable the
State, and Commonwealth to pay public debts, and relieve distressed
Soldiers: For it is Law it self, as virtue it self, invirtuateth, dignifieth,
and authorizeth her true servants to execute her precepts; and confounds,
expulseth, and turns out of her service all her unjust Stewards, and
underminers: As Jacob, and David were preferred before their elder brethren;
and Saul, Jeroboam, etc. were confounded by, and for their own Apostacies.

As in all these cases, etc. all Justices of Peace should be careful to
observe their Oaths, and perform their duties to the Commonwealth (whereof
they are eminent members) So, no doubt the Freemen of England, would be ready
to assist them in the regaining and preservation of their ancient Birthrights,
Laws, and Liberties. Deus Faxit.
8. Under the Titles of Trespases, Contempts, Oppressions, Misdemeanors, are
comprehended all breaches of Magna Char, and all Offenses against all Statutes
in force, and concurrent with Mag. Char. and the Petition of Right, which all
Justices of Peace, and Magistrates in their several jurisdictions, are
Authorized, and sworn to hear and determine, without fear, favor or respect of
persons. How then to be excused, or delayed by any Writ, or command of any
Superior? And how are the Judges of the King's Bench (whereof the chief was the
Kings Deputy by Writ) now Superior, or equal to any other Judges, or Justices?
If that maxim be true moritur Actio cum Persona? But the Office of a Deputy
dies with its Master, as a Letter or Warrant of Attorney, with its maker: the
King-Bench may be spared as well as his person? And all causes in this
Commonwealth, be called Common Pleas, and tried by the Common Law of the land,
and Verdicts of common people, and Freeholders of every County, and
Corporation, before the Free Judges, and Magistrates freely chosen by the said
Common and Free-People, to justify them at home, and not before mercinary
makers, expounders, and sellers of all Laws, and Liberties, as they please at
Westminster. And does not the said Stat. of 28. Ed. 3. warrant Justices of
Peace, or any two of them (whereof one to be of the Quorum) to call and keep
Sessions as often as they see need to do justice to their Country? See the
Stat. at large, and Cromp. I. P. fol. 112. and F. H. I. P. fol. 10.

Whereunto add, That as Magna Charta compriseth all the Law of this land
agreed upon by Kings and People, and would be read and published in English (as
aforesaid) for the better understanding thereof by all English People, to the
end, that the ignorance of their Law, should be not excuse for any of them to
transgress it: So how needless it is, if not pestiferous, to have this
Common Law reduced to a private mercinarie Trade, or particular science
exceeding the seven Liberal, by such professors thereof, as have, and do
endeavor to disguise, mask, and hide it from all but themselves, in base
French, and Latin intricacies and obscurities, to the end to make all persons
offenders thereof, and none excusable, but by their resolutions of their own
Riddles, which are always answerable to their Fees (be the cause right or
wrong) whereby the cure of Law becomes an incurable disease, until that
superfluous mercinary profession be abolished, or regulated, so as the best and
soundest Lawyers may be used in Parliaments (as in former times) to sit upon
Wol-sacks, to answer to what that high Court shall be pleased to ask them, and
not as members of that Court, to make Laws, and Oaths for others, which they
never observe themselves but for their own gain, and the peoples damage: To
which end, they always preamble their inventions against Mag. Char. with
titles of Acts for the good of the people, when in their subsequents they hurt
all but themselves; As (passing by all former) their last Acts for the
enlarging of poor prisoners for debt, sufficiently witness; whereby neither
creditor nor debtour are any way relieved, but both further entangled, and
Lawyers Fees more procreated; Videat experientia. Conclusive; That there can be
no firm peace, or end of Wars, till there be an end of mercinarie professors
of Law, less needful, or useful for Parliaments or People, than Bishops, or
such as might be used there, or elsewhere, for saying, or reading prayers; while
these neither pray, preach, nor study, but their own lucrative magnificence
every where upon the peoples purses.

Add lastly; Such Justices of Peace as will not execute Mag. Char. with its
confirmations, and the Petition of Right, and desert, and wave the execution,
and practice of contradictory Statutes, (for zeal to their Creatours, or fear
to be unmade by those that made them) ought to be deserted and waved by all
good Patriots of their country, as excommunicated persons, and breakers of M.
Cha. And such only as will execute Mag. Chapter etc. ought to be confirmed by the
choice of the People in their Counties respectively, whereby they may act as
the ancient Conservatours of the Peace did by the Common Law of England before
Mag. Char. and since, which was, to conserve the Peace of England by all
necessary means, word, or sword; unlimited by Prerogative Statutes devised by
mercinary Lawyers, to steal from the People their birthright Authority in the
name of the King, unto themselves, to sell, delay, and deny it at their
pleasures; which to do, is apparently contrary, not only to Mag. Char. and the
Common Laws of England, and also to common reason, but chiefly to the divine
Providence of God: for neither Law, Reason, nor Divine justice, would ordain a
man to conserve the public peace of Gods people (which peace, as they, is his
own) without giving that man an unlimitable power, by which he may execute his
Office, and without which he cannot.

FINIS.

