AN ELEGY OFFERED UP TO THE MEMORY Of that late faithful Servant of GOD, Mr.
JEREMIAH BVRROVGHS, Minister of the Word at Giles Cripplegate and Stepney.
TO add more ashes to our mortal Store,
Buroughs is followed now, those gone before;
Unconquered Death, that spares no degree;
But fetters all in his Captivity,
Has seized him, a servant of the Lord,
Who preached JESUS, as he is in the Word:
Set forth to all, he for them mercy has,
If they upon him will depend their Faith:
These things (this Man of God) did to us preach,
And to us plainly Jesus he did teach;
Declaring to us, he is the only way
For to be saved, to him we must pray,
If we would ever Heavens Gates enter in,
We must leave all, we must forsake cut sin,
On such good things he thought; the faithful Preacher
Spent all his life for Christ, who was his Teacher,
For Christ our Savior did alone him teach,
And none but Christ our Savior would he Preach.
The world he scorned, though plenty of it having,
But at Gods hands for grace was daily craving;
Too base it was, that he to it should bend,
Or to her Riches any credit lend;
For, what are Riches? But like a Post in's way,
Or, like a span, or like the flower in May:
So worldly honors unto him seemed base,
To honor Christ that was his only grace:
For Christ alone he loved, so loved to live
That he might always praises to him give.
The grace of God was always in his thoughts*
The love of God, in sparing such foul faults
Which he committed daily in his sight,
Yet from the Lord would never take his flight.
For Jesus Christ was only his delight,
And Christ his Cross was always in his sight,
Christ was his joy, he was his whole desire.
What shall I say? Christ did he love entire.
An happy end this godly man did make,
The world, her Riches from him he did shake.
Elijah like, his mantle left behind
For others to possess, that they might find
A loving friend of him, and might confess
That to his Neighbors all he was no less,
Then a Iohathan unto King David,
For's love was fixed, fixed where he loved.
The truth of this, if you desire to know,
Do you unto his Printed Sermons go;
For they do there unto the world declare,
What was their masters heart, what was his care
To those that loved grace, and loved those
That truly loved Christ, and him had chose.
London afflicted in the face I see.
That such a man from us by Gods decree,
Should thus be snatched away, and from us part,
The thoughts of which might melt the hardest heart;
For in this City, for him being deceas't,
Thousands are mourners, and I not the least*
Yet mourn, why should we? Or, why should we weep,
When Buroughs is not dead, but is a sleep*
This man of God unto that glorious place,
Ascended is, ever to see Gods face.
Tendimus huc omnes, metam properamus ad unam, Omnia sub leges mors vocat atra
suas.
Per me, I. C.

LONDON.

Printed by B. A. 1646.


