Captains BVRLEY HIS SPEECH AT THE Place of Execution at Winchester, where he
was hanged, drawn, and quartered, for endeavoring to raise Forces to take away
the KING from the Isle of Wight. ALSO A Letter from his Majesty's Court at
Carisbrook-Castle. AND A Great Rising in the City of Worcester; Certified by a
Letter to a Member of the House of COMMONS.

Feb.7. 1647. Imprimatur Gil. Mabbot.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1647.

THE Copy of a Letter from his Majesty's Court, at Carisbrook Castle.
Right Honorable,
HIs Majesty (though abridged of that Liberty as formerly) yet is merry
sometimes when occasion is offered, There is little of News from Court, only
comments of what comes from other parts, and expectations of the events.

Nor is there mourning here for the death of Captain Burley, who is hanged,
drawn, and quartered, (already almost forgotten) concerning whom there was used
what means could be to work him to sight of his wicked and bloody crime (in
that had not God prevented it) this poor Island might have been imbrued in a
bloody and sad massacre, by his wicked design, but yet he continued obstinate.

Diverse Ministers were with him before his death several times, but they could
not work upon him: And in the last Sermon before he was executed, that he
heard some passages against that design spoken off (as before at others) he
carried himself, as if he had rather scorned, then been melted at it.

And when he was brought our to the place of Execution, and the Hangman ready
to do his office, (It is true, he seemed to have some fear of death, but) was
still obstinate: And spoke to the effect of the enclosed paper.

And having taken his leave of the world, and prayed a while, he prayed to God
to receive his soul, and was then by the Hangman that came down thither turned
off of the ladder, and after he had hanged a space, cut down, and quartered,
after the usual manner.

Sir, we have nothing here new: his Majesty is very reserved in his speeches,
and cheerful at his meat; we are all quiet, desiring a happy settlement: so
prays,

Carisbrooke-Castle, Febru.4.1647. Your affectionate Friend, Fran. Moline.

Captain Burleyes Speech, at the place of execution, imediately before he was
hanged drawn, and quartered at Winchester.
CAptain Burley being on the ladder ready to dye, he was moved by a Minister
and others to be humbled, that the Lord might have mercy upon him, and
confess his sins to God, and particularly the Treason for which he was to
dye: he said, he was a sinner, but no Traitor.

It was told him what a fair trial he had had, and how legally he was
condemned; he answered that it was true, the Gentlemen condemned him on the
Bench, the Ministers in the Pulpit, and the Gentlemen of the County in their
verdicts, but yet he was no Traitor.

He was told how bloody an act he agitated, in seeking to take away the King
through blood: he answered he was happy to dye so, and prayed that his blood
might be the last.

The foulness of the act was declared to him, but he continued obstinate
still. Afterward he prayed, concluding with the Lords prayer. Then the
Hangman pulling his cap over his eyes, Captain Burley called upon God, Lord
preserve my soul, Lord Jesus receive my soul, and so was turned of, and
hanged, drawn and quartered.

A Letter to a Member of the House of COMMONS.
Sir.
MY service presented unto you, these are to certify you of the rising among
us, you shall understand that about a week since there came a pestilent book
to Town amongst us called Loyalty speaks truth, purposely written against the
Excise-men naming them by name, but so soon as the Country Troop was
disbanded upon this day being Monday the people in the City rose in very great
numbers, and went directly to the Excise house which they most violently
ransaked and plundered, from morning till night breaking the windows and as it
was thought they would have laid the House level with the ground had not some
made great intercession, they abused the Mayor and Aldermen, neither could the
Mayor get any of the freemen at his call, to come to his assistance, neither
could the chief Officers of the Soldiery that quarter in the Town do any
thing for their assistance, but in my sight was assalted by the people and had
very much ado to escape, they did not only take away Stools, Bedsteds,
Coffers and all away that was worth a groat; but that Wine and Beer which was
in the Cellor which they could not drink they let run about the Cellor, and
lastly took away the empty Caskes.

About noone they cried down with the Committee, and for God and King Charles,
when we heard them at that; at that time all our small Party was out of the
Town, but some of them came home presently.

Some Rogues gave out that the money belonging' to the Excise was carried to
Mr. Moors the Ministers, wherefore Mr, Moore exhorted every one that was or
had been for the Parliament to stand to it. At that, some few of us met in the
College Green and made fast the Gate, some fifteen well-affected Townsmen
came in to our assistance, we charged the Gunnes with small shot, and so we
keep a small Garrison yet, about six a clock the Mayor came to us, and informed
us of the tumult, hoping that now night was come they begun to go home. They
were about 2000. truly they seemed like the muster of a Battle so many men
women and children about this business. We have made a great fire in the Hall
in the Deanery and keep our Court of Guard in that place, I for my part stole
from among my fellows about ten at night, and came as secure as I could to my
house to write to you, meaning to return about one of the clock after
midnight. The tumulters threaten hard that next Wednesday they shall have the
assistance of Witch and other places against us, and we as resolutely intend to
defend our selves.

I heard some inkling of this business before, but they spoke so mystically
that I could not understand them, but now I see what they meant, I do most
truly gather that except some part of the Army come down to quiet those
Mutiners, it is very like to be true which (they say) that not only this
County but Hereford and other places will do the like, you shall also
understand that this business was plotted by some prime ones, and diverse
Soldiers that had been Cavaliers were with them, and mightily encouraged
them, and assisted, there has some laid wagers and made wonderful.
Protestations that the fate of things (as they call it) will change within
these six weeks).

I believe amongst their party they durst as freely buy the Parliament men's
lands when they can get them, as any man the Bishops lands, I judge this to be
a thing they look for, that when they can get a full rising of the people to
suprresse grieviances (as they call them) some wise heads amongst them together
with the supernumeraries (that neither are nor will be disbanded) they will
make a Party again of their own. My Reasons are these.

1 Because I am sure by their talk and by private conference they have a
wonderful sure Design which must suddenly as they say be brought about. 2
Diverse of them have bought new arms very lately, giving dangerous words out
when they saw the Forces disbanded. 3 The willingness of the Soldiers to
assist them which quarter in this City (as also in other places here about.) I
am now about to go to the College again it being two a clock after midnight.
Worcester the 1 of Feb. 1647. Your Humble Servant J. SMITH.

FINIS.

