THE ANSWER AND VINDICATION of Sir WILLIAM COLE Knight and Colonel (presented
to the Right Honorable the Lords and others the Committee of both Kingdoms,
and by them sent to be reported to the Honorable the Commons house of
Parliament of England at Westminster) unto a Charge given in by Sir Frederick
Hamilton Knight, to the said Committee, against the said Sir Will: Cole.
Wherein also will appear, how frivolous, the aspersions are, which were
endeavored to be cast upon the said Sir William, and his Regiment, in a
Pamphlet set forth in Anno Dom. 1643. Declaring the Services of the said Sir
Frederick. Which chiefly occasioned this Answer from the Press.
To the Right Honorable the Lords and others the Committee of both Kingdoms.
The Information of Sir Frederick Hamilton Knight and Collone, against Sir
William Cole Knight.
Showing:

FIrst, That the said Sir William Cole had notice of the intended Plots of the
Jrish to break out into Rebellion above a fortnight before the Rebels took up
Arms, as it is generally given out in Jreland; and yet did neither timely
inform the State, nor his Neighbors for to prevent the mischief and to
defend themselves.

II. That having a Commission from his Maejesty to be a Colonel only of five
Companies of Foot, he notwithstanding takes on nine Companies, making them
believe, as if he had Commission for a Thousand. And when he had made use of
their Service near a year and a half, when provisions were sent him by the
Parliament, whereof they expected a share, he casheer'd four of the most
deserving Captains and their Companies of purpose to gain all the said
Provisions to himself and his Son in law Deane Barkley, who was his Agent to
the Parliament for those provisions.

III. About the beginning of the Rebellion, there were two English Papist whose
sirnames were Hetherington, who joined themselves with the Rebels, and
plundered one Sergeant Abrels house, a Tenant unto Sir Frederick, and
afterward burned the House, which was certified to Sir William Cole by Sir
Frederick, with the Depositions of certain witnesses proving the same fact:
and it was desired that Sir William Cole would make them sure for Justice, they
being then daily employed by him, which he refused to do, aleadging that they
had done good service to him and afterward suffered them to escape.

IV. That whereas Sir Frederick Hamilton had taken one Robert Parck, one that
complied with the Rebels and had him in custody a year and more, and had
likewise gained the Command of his Castle, which was of great advantage and
service to the Parliament; and by means whereof, the said Sir Frederick did
daily much spoil and annoy the Rebels: The said Sir William Cole knowing the
consequence thereof, and how well affected the said Parck stood unto the
Rebels, on a time after that horrid Cessation concluded with the Rebels, and
when he knew that Sir Frederick himself, his Wife and children were gone for
Londonderry, some sixty miles from Mannor-hamilton: The said Sir William Cole,
upon the Marquis of Ormonds commands, sends his Ensign with 40. Musketeers
unto Sir Fredericks said Garrison, and by permission of the said Sir Fredericks
Lieutenant, who commanded in his absence, and corresponded with him as it
should seem, he took away the said Parck. And whereas he was by the said
Order to have conveyed him unto Londonderry, and so to Dublin, he first
feasted him at his Castle, and then returned him back amongst the Rebels, who
received him with all gladness, and after they had rejoiced a while together,
they go along with him to Dublin, where afterward he procures an Order of
the State for restitution of his Castle with whatsoever Arms and goods were in
it; which he accordingly obtained in Sir Fredericks absence: Which he and the
Rebels now make good against the Parliament, to the great prejudice of the
Parliaments service, and the danger and hazard of all those parts of Conaght.
And this done, albeit, the said Sir William Cole, well knew that Sir Frederick
had refused to deliver the said Prisoner upon several Orders and Commands,
sent unto him by the said Marquis for that purpose, as well knowing the said
Parck to be an utter Enemy to the Parliament here and their proceedings. And
one for whom the Lord Viscount Taaffe (that Arch-rebell) had by his Letters
solicited the said Sir Frederick for his delivery.

V. That the said Sir William Cole did in the month of February next after the
said Cessation, apply himself unto the Marquis of Ormond, who then and long
before was declared an Enemy to the Parliament. And complained against the said
Sir Frederick and his soldiers to the said Marquis, for taking of a prey from
the Rebels; which Rebels the said Sir William Cole had then protected: and
gained an Order from the said Marquis for restitution thereof, which
notwithstanding was disobeyed.

VI. That before the said Cessation the said Sir William Cole corresponded with
the Rebels, and took 100. of them at the least into his Protection, and formed
them into a Company consisting of a Captain and Officers; and employed them
for some time with the rest of his Regiment, who did him service in getting of
Preyes, but did great dis-service unto the State, in giving Intelligence
against all the British of their proceedings; and more particularly did much
grieve and offend Sir Fredericks Garrison at Mannor-hamilton, who at the last
took their opportunity and turned Rebels again.

The said Sir Frederick could inform many other particular Omissions and
Dis-services which the said Sir William Cole has committed in this time of his
employment, since the Rebellion began in Jreland: which because they do
concern himself in a more near relation, he shall therefore forbear to
mention. And the said Sir Frederick is ready to justify himself in whatsoever
that any man can object against him, And humbly prays, that this honorable
Committee will not think the worse of him, for discharging his duty to God and
the State, by the informing of these Miscarriages, which in Conscience he holds
himself bound to relate in pursuance of his solemn League and Covenant.

Frederick Hamilton.

To the Right Honorable the Lords and others the Committees of both Kingdoms.
The humble Answer of Sir WILLIAM COLE Knight and Colonel, to the Information
of Sir Frederick Hamilton Knight, exhibited against him to your Lordships, the
26. of December, 1644.
1. FOr answer to the first Article, he says; That he had no certain notice
of the intended Plots of the Irish to break out into Rebellion as is suggested
by the Informer; But says, that upon the Eleventh of October, 1641. Bryan mac
Coconaght Magwire Esquire, and one Flartagh mac Hugh, informed him of some
jealousies and suspicions, that they then apprehended of some evil Intentions
and practices of the Lord Magwire, Sir Phelem roe O Neill, Neill mac Kennay,
Hugh oge mac Mahon, and others of the Irish Gentry of Vlster, of which he gave
advertizement by his Letter to the then Lords Justices and Council of Ireland
with all possible speed; Also intimating his desires, that their Lordships
would be so pleased to take that matter into their serlous consideration, as
that they would strictly Examine the said Lord Magwire and others of his
Accomplices concerning the same, who he understood were shortly after to be at
Dublin; which Letter or a Coppie thereof this Respondent understands, was
transmitted by their Lordships to the Parliament of England, and remains with
the Clerk of the honorable House of Commons, and was one of the chiefest
Evidences and motives (upon the Discovery made by Owin O Connallie) to induce
the State to be upon their Guard, and also of the apprehension of the Lord
Magwire, Hugh oge mic Mahon, Coconaght Magwire, Redmond Magwire, Tirlagh oge
mac Hugh, and others of their consorts in Dablin, the 23. th of October, 1641.
or thereabouts. And for proof of this advertisement he can produce their
Lordships letter in answer of his, which he received before the Rebellion broke
out. And further says, that upon the 21. th of October, 1641. the said Plot
being more fully discovered unto him, by the said Flartagh mic Hugh, by
Direction from the said Bryan Magwire, and by one Fargus O Howen, how the
Rebellion was to break out universally by the Irish on the 23. th of that
Month. He not only posted away a Messenger with a second letter to signify
the same unto the said Lords Justices and Council (which was intercopted *
Notice was given of this Rebellion, from the Respondent to Sir Frederick
Hamilton at London. Derry the 22. of October, 1641. by Francis Barnaby.
by the way at Laghramar,) but also the same Day hastened eighteen Messengers
with so many Letters, to notify the same to his Neighbors at Monea,
Castle-Balfoure, Newtowne, Newpurtton, Lowtherstowne, Archdale, Bowssland,
Clogher, Glasslogh and elsewhere, as far as in so short and Distracted a time
he could possibly do, being fully busied to draw his Neighbors and Tenants
together, and to Arm and put them into a posture of War, for the Defense of
the Castle and Town of Iniskillin, and the parts thereabouts; and amongst
others did then direct particular advertisement thereof to be given unto Manor
hamilton (where the Rebellion broke not out in a Month after) and of which the
Informer could not afterward be ignorant, though he himself was then absent;
and certainly of all men has least reason to lay this as a crime to the
Respondents charge, had he not wanted other matter.

II.
2. To the second article he answers. That the Commission therein mentioned
(as he has heard) was the first ground of the Informers envy and discontent,
not only against this Respondent, but also against all the other British
Colloness then in Vlster, that received Commissions from His Majesty at that
time for the raising of their Regiments and prosecuting of the Rebels, taking
it in great disdain, that there was not the like Commission then sent unto
him; whereas for ought this Respondent could ever hear, none of the said
Colonels knew any certainty of the said Commissions, until they were brought
unto them, neither did this Respondent receive his said Commission until
almost a year after the Rebellion began (at which time he gave notice thereof
unto all his Captains) for that (during the greatest part of that year) he
was so enclosed on all sides with multitudes of the Enemies (being above forty
miles distant from any that were able to give him relief) that he could not
receive any intelligence how the state of the Protestants of that Kingdom
stood, in any part thereof, though he had often used his best endeavors to
gain the same to his exceeding great charges, and the hanging of twelve or
fourteen of his Messengers, by the Rebels. And the said Informer finding this
Respondent next unto him, and conceiving him easiest to be dealt withal, has
ever since used his uttermost endeavors by invective Calumnies, to asperse and
undervalue both him and his actions, which he has ever envyed, so that by
extolling his own unknown services, he labors as much as in him lies to
eclipse those well known services performed by this Respondent, and all other
the Commanders and Officers in Vlster and Conaught; And this Respondent further
says that by virtue of a Commission from the Lords Justices and Council of
Jreland to him directed, at the beginning of the said Rebellion, for raising,
Arming and Banding all the British within the County of Fermanaugh, he (with
the help of his friends) raised, Armed, and Banded the nine Companies in the
said second Article specified, together with a Troop of horse, by virtue
whereof also, he might have raised, Armed and banded as many of the British
as he could have drawn together for their own mutual defense, and prosecution
of the Rebels, by whose assistance (and Gods great blessings) sundry good
services have been performed, whereof this Respondent did often give
intimation, both to the Honorable Parliament, and to the Lords Justices and
Council of Jreland, Humbly desiring that in reward of their good services they
might be listed into the Parliaments pay, and Regimented under his Command. But
inasmuch as he could not obtain tha^ favor by reason of the troubles then
here, though earnestly solicited by his friends, and that but 500 of his Foot
and his Troop was inlisted and taken into the Parliaments pay, from the first
of July 1642. As appears by Order of the 21. th of that Month, and Provisions
of clothes and Victuals being only sent for them, upon the solicitation of
his Agent Master Robert Barcklay, this Respondent was constrained to deliver
out the said clothes unto the Officers and Soldiers of the said five
Companies, (not being able to divide the said 500 suits amongst 900 men) vizt.
unto his own Company, his Lieutenant Colonels, his Serjant Majors, to the
Company of Captain John Cole and to the Company of Captain Hugh Rosse, of
whom three are Scottish Officers, and whom without prejudice to the others
merit, he conceived very deserving of the Employment. Offering at the very
same time to the other four Captains, and their companies an equal divident
of all other provisions sent him then by the Parliament, and of what spoils
they could get from the Rebels, if they would continue with him in the service;
promising also to use his best endeavors to have them taken into pay, and
added to his Regiment. But the clothes being thus divided (which could not be
otherwise) the said four Companies were so discontented, that of their own
accords they disbanded themselves and went to seek their fortunes elsewhere,
and yet the greatest part of their best and ablest men, were persuaded to
continue in the Garrison. So that this Respondent denies, that he did Casheere
four of the said Captains and their companies, of purpose to gain all the
said provisions to himself and his Son in Law Master Barcklay, as is
suggested by the Informer, but was so far from doing so dishonest an act,
that during the stay of the said four Captains and their Companies in the
Garrison; they received an equal and proportionable share of the Victuals sent
by the Parliament unto his five Companies only, and moreover, he then, and
about that time did procure upon the credit and Obligations of himself and his
friends, worth 1300. l. more in Corn and other provisions for his said five
Companies and Troop, besides those provisions before mentioned to be sent them
from the Parliament, without which care and charge it was impossible for him to
keep his Soldiers together, and to do service for the public, in a remote
Garrison, environed then with Rebels on all sides.

III.
3. To the third Article this Respondent says, that one James Dunbarre
Esquire, Son and heir of Sir John Dunbarre Knight (whose Lands with a
good-Yron work thereon, lies next adjoining, to part of the Lands of the
Informer, whose desire to intrude upon and gain their Rights to himself (as
they often affirmed to this Respondent) begot much contention amongst them, (as
it did between him and all others also who were his landed Neighbors) which
bred such malice in the heart of the Informer against the said James, that he
not only exceedingly thirsted after his life, but after the Lives also of his
two servants the Hetheringtons, in the said Article mentioned, (not Papists as
therein is surmised) but then, and now Protestants, who as well to shun the
malice of the Informer, as the fury of the Rebels, came with his said father
unto this Respondent in December 1641. Who entrusted the said James with the
custody of the Castle of Lissgole near Iniskillin, with 74 persons with him,
where he was assaulted the 18. of December 1641. or thereabouts, by a powerful
party of the Enemy under the conduct of Rorie Maguire, Brother of the Lord
Maguire* who then took and burned the said Castle, and massacred all that were
in it, except the said James Dunbarre, whom the Rebels kept in Prison, until
May or June 1642, at which time he made an Escape, and came again
(accompanied with the said two Hetheringtons) unto this Respondent where the
said Hetheringtons, went to Church, and did many good and acceptable services,
behaving themselves honestly and valiantly in all that time, and as he is
informed, or both together with their Master at this time in the service of
this Honorable Parliament, under General Major Monroe (whose Kinsman the said
James Dunbarre is) And where he and his said men are ready to answer ought the
Informer can lay to their charge, but this Respondent says, that he never
knew, or heard, that the said Hetheringtons, joined themselves with the Rebels,
or plundered the said Sergeant Abrels house, or afterward burned it, neither
was their any proof thereof, made by the said Abrel, or any witnesses upon
Oath or otherwise produced before the Respondent, neither did he deem it
requisite upon the bare Letters of the Informer, (knowing his malice toward
them for their Masters sake) to commit them to Prison where they might have
starved, for want of sustenance, neither did he suffer them, as fellons or
Traitors to escape, for that they in the service did destroy diverse Rebels, and
Traitors, whilst they remained at Iniskilling under this Respondents command.

IIII.
4 To the fourth Article of the said Information, this Respondent says, that
upon the First of July 1642. or thereabouts, the said Informer having a design
upon the Town of Sligoe, about ten miles from his house, marched to the Castle
of Robert Parck Esquire, in the said Article mentioned, an English Protestant,
and a Justice of Peace, which before the Rebellion was possessed of an estate
of about 1000. l. a year, and one that was of very good repute and esteem,
amongst his neighbors, and who (as this Respondent has bin often Informed by
credible persons) had (to the best of his power) opposed the Rebels, in the
beginning of that Rebellion, without complying or any way corresponding with
them. And under color of going forward with that design, procured the said
Master Parck with 30, or 40 of his Soldiers to accompany him to Sligoe, and
when they came near the said Town, both Master Parcks Soldiers and those of
the Informers entered the Suburbs thereof, and having burned some few houses in
it, and received some British Protestants, that escaped unto them from the
Rebels, they brought them unto the Informer where he stood aloof, with the
said Mr. Parck, two of the said rescued Protestants, namely John Wetherspin the
Father, and James Wetherspin his Son, both Scotchmen, were questioned by the
Informer; wherefore they were amongst the Rebels. The Father answered, that by
reason of his age (being about 70 years old or upwards) and that he was sick
and Bedridden three Months before, he could not get away, but lived upon the
Alms of the people; Whereupon one of the Informers servants told him, that
this old man was formerly Tenant to one John Waldrome Esquire, (a Gentleman
that had an estate near the Informers lands in that Country) and had borne
witness upon Oath on his Landlords part in matter of title of Land against
the Informer, by means * Note, that this John Wetherspin, conceived to have
been the Father, was not the man the said Sir Frederick shot as aforesaid, yet
was hanged by him, but it was another old sick bedridden Scotshman that was so
shot and killed by him in manner aforesaid.
whereof the cause was Decreed for Mr. Waldrom against the Informer, or matter
to that purpose. Upon which (without using any more words) he shot and killed
the poor decreped old man, which was the first, and last man the Informer killed
with his own hands since the Rebellion began in Ireland, as some of his own
servants and Soldiers affirmed. Whereupon being informed by James Wetherspin
the son that the Forces of the County of Sligoe, were upon their March to
join with the O Roirkes, for to trouble Mannor-hamilton, he together with Mr.
Parcks and both their Companies, hastened back to Mr. Parcks house, where at
the importunity of the Informer (as this Respondent has been credibly
informed) he got the said Mr. Parck and his Company (for the better Guard of
him and his men) to accompany him to Mannor-hamilton. And although in the way
they were heard beset by the Rebels, insomuch as the Informer in a Bogge was
unhorst, and his Horse with Furniture and Pistols taken by the Rebels, by whom
he had been then slain or taken, if by the care and valor of the said Mr.
Parck and some of his Soldiers he had not been Horst again and brought off.
Yet when they had escaped that danger and were come to the Informers house (as
this Respondent has credibly heard) he took the said James Wetherspin (for
having formerly witnessed with his Father against him as aforesaid) and twisted
a Cord with a wrinch about his Head so hard, that his blood streamed forth of
his * Note, that there were Suites depending both in Ireland and in England,
between Sir Frederick Hamilton, and the said James Wetherspin, some years
before the Rebellion. And that the said Wetherspin, being served in Ireland
with a Command, Dated the 14. of January 1640. under the hand of the Speaker of
the House of Commons of England, at the instance of the said Sir Frederick; he
appeared here in London, 7. April 1641. Where having attended the House to
answer Sir Fredericks complaint until the 20. of September 1641. And (not
being able longer to stay) be returned into Ireland, where the said Sir
Frederick became his Judge and Executioner, as in this Answer is declared.
Ears, Eyes, Nose, and mouth; In which tortures he continued him during his
pleasure, and then easing him of that, did cast him into a Dungeon, where he
continued him languishing for hunger from Thursday until the Wednesday
following: And did cruelly punish a poor Scotshwoman, which in pity did cast
him an handful of Oatmeale under the door, which the miserable man, did lick
with his Tongue from the Dirt, his hands and feet being fast tied together with
Coards or Withes; and upon the Wednesday following caused him to be Hanged. Who
at the beginning of the Rebellion, with a Horse, Sword, and Fowling piece, came
to him, offering his service against the Rebels, from whom notwithstanding he
took the said Horse and Arms, commanding him to be gone out of his Garrison,
and that if he did not, he would Hang him, or if ever he got him again, he
would be his Death; which he faithfully performed, as aforesaid.

And also upon the Informers entrance into his Castle, he made exceeding
shows of welcome to the said Mr. Parck, whilst in the interim, he caused all
his Soldiers to be Disarmed, and they put in restraint in several lower
Roumes in his house; and then when he perceived no danger of opposition, he
arrested the said Mr. Parck, charging him with Treason, and committed him close
Prisoner, where he detained him in Durance the space of a Year and upwards,
without suffering any man, except Sergeant Major James Galbraith to speak unto
him, which was but once, and that upon much importunity; whose extreme misery,
was lamentably bewailed by all the men that were in that Garrison. And then he
not only seized upon and kept his Castle of Newtowne, putting a Guard of his
own into it, but also Plundered, and converted to his own use, all his Money,
Plate, Arms, Housholdstuffe, Bedding, Furniture, and all other his goods
whatsoever, which he had then as well without as within Doors there, not
suffering his Soldiers to come out of Restraint, or use their own Arms,
until he had unlawfully compelled them, to take an Oath to serve as Soldiers
under his only Command. By reason whereof, the said Mr. Parck was utterly
disabled to perform far greater and much more advantageous Services in every
degree in that place for this honorable Parliament against the Rebels, then
ever the Informer did, or could do there, as this Respondent has been
credibly informed, as well by the Testimony of sundry other honest men, as by
the said Mr. Parck himself.

Whereupon Sir Edward Povie Knight, whose Daughter was the Wife of the said Mr.
Parck, together with others his Friends (being advertised of his extreme hard
usage) Petitioned the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland, for his removal
to Dublin, to answer such matters as the Informer had to lay to his charge, and
entered into Recognizance of 10000. l. for his appearance, upon which their
Lordships by Order dated in May 1643, or thereabouts, required the Informer, to
set the said Parck at liberty, to be sent either to Captain Folliot to
Ballyshannon, or unto this Respondent to Jniskillin, together with the matters
that he had to object against him. That so he might be conveyed by them, or
one of them to Londonderry, to be sent from thence to Dublin. But the Informer
(notwithstanding the said Order was showed unto him) denied obedience
thereunto. And detained the said Parck still in durance, until his said
friends procured several Orders commanding his enlargement, yet nothing would
prevail to that effect with him, until that about the beginng of September
1643, Captain King coming with a Troop of horse from Conaght into Vlster,
about some business he had with Sir William Stuart, and Sir Robert Stuart, he
came about the 13. th of that Month to Jniskillin unto this Respondent, who
sent his Ensign with 50 Musquettiers to guard the said Troop to the Abbey of
Boil in Conaght, which is about 40 miles from Iniskillin, who were so far
from knowing, or allowing of the said Cessation mentioned in the said fourth
Article, that they fought with and killed some Rebels in the pass of
Ballinafadd, and took a pr^y from thence to the Boil, whence upon return of
the said Ensign, he came to Manor Hamillon in his way, where he delivered a
letter from this Respondent, to Lieutenant Lesley, the Informers Lieutenant, it
being direc^d to the Informer, or in his absence to the Officer in chief at
Manor Hamilton, with an Order of the Coppie of an Order which the Respondent
received from the said Captain Foliot in it directed also as aforesaid, from
the Lords Justices and Council of Jreland, for the enlargement of the said
Parck; to be sent to Iniskilin or Ballyshannon, which this Respondent left to
his choice to do, or not to do, as best pleased the Informer or his said
Officer; who sent the said Parck along with the said Ensign, and because he
was sensible of the great misery which he had wrongfully sustained by his
Captains severity, he delivered to the said Master Parck, two of his own
horses, with some other little help toward his charges, as the said Parck told
this Respondent when he came to Iniskillin, before which time, this Respondent
was never acquainted with him, neither did this Respondent know, or ever heard,
that he was affected to the Rebels, neither did he know any manner of
certainty, of the concluding of the Cessation with the said Rebels, until he
received advertizement together with a Proclamation to that effect, from the
Lords Justices and Council of Ireland the 23 of October 1643 or thereabouts,
nor did he or could he obey the said Cessation before or since that day,
neither did he take any notice, whether the Informer or his wife and children
were gone to Londonderry, Neither was the Marquess of Ormond at that time,
Lord Justice, Lord Deputy, or Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, nor did this
Respondent receive any such Commands from his Lordship, to send to the
Informer, as in the said fourth Article is surmized, neither did this
Respondent look for, or expect any indirect corresponding from the Informers
Lieutenant.

And this Respondent says, That as a Prisoner and poor distressed Englishman
his Countryman (being under bail and mainprize as aforesaid) he gave some
entertainment unto the said Parck, for some few weeks in his house, far
short of feasting as the Informer terms it, and not finding safety to convey
him by the nearest way to Dublin, He sent a guard together with one Henry
Langford, and other English and Scotchmen with him, to Manor Hamilton again,
where he heard he was lodged for a Night, and where the Informer or his Officer
might have detained him if they pleased. But from thence he was conveyed, by
the said Langford and others to the Abbey of Boil, whence after he recovered
of a Fever (whereof he had almost dyed) he repaired to Dublin, and according
to the condition of his said friends Recognizance, appeared before the Lords
Justices and Council at the Council Board there, where how he was proceeded
withal this Respondent knowoth not, Neither did this Respondent return him
back amongst the Rebels, neither does he know whether any of them did accompany
him to Dublin, neither does this Respondent believe that the state there would
grant him an Order for Restitution of his Castle, with whatsoever Arms or
Goods were in it, unless it appeared to them, that he was wrongfully expulsed
by the Informer. And this Respondent says, that he heard, that by virtue of
such Order of the State, the said Castle was restored unto him; and that he
keeps it, as the rest of the British Forces in Conaght does their Holds for
the Parliament service. For upon the 25. th of March last past (as this
Respondent has been informed,) The said Parck his Soldiers of Newtowne, with
the Informers Soldiers, did spoil and prey the Rebels at Dromaheare, within
six miles of Castle-hamilton, and two miles of Master Parcks Castle of
Newtowne, so as the Informers alogation, that he and the Rebels makes good that
Castle against the Parliament, to the prejudice of the Parliaments service, and
the danger and hazard of all those parts of Conaght, is merely surmized,
invented, and devised, of purpose (as this Respondent conceives) to make him
odious on the one side, that the Informer may thereby the better work his
malice against him, and on the otherside, to bring the said Master Parck into
the displeasure of the Parliament, whereby he may make way to gain his Estate.

And this Respondent further says, that he never knew, or heard of any Orders
or Commands, sent unto the Informer, by the said Marquess of Ormond, to the
said Master Parck, neither did he know, or does believe the said Parck to be
an utter enemy to the Parliament or their proceedings, nor does he know,
neither does it concern him, whether the Lord Viscount Taaffe, did by his
Letters solicit the Informer for the delivery of the said Parck. But this
Respondent does believe in his conscience that if the said Parck had but 1000.
l. in the world, he would give 500. l. of it to be here now, to be a most
humble suitor to this honorable Parliament for remedy against the said
Informer, for these and many other intolerable wrongs, and high oppressions
done him by the said Informer. And this Respondent humbly craveth leave, to
declare further the behavior of the said Informer, toward Thomas Abbertromy
Esquire, a Protestant and principal undertaker in that Plantation, and
sometimes high Sheriff of that County, whose Estate there bordered upon the
Informers, within a mile of his Castle, whom he also Imprisoned, and kept in
miserable durance, for a long time, out of the malice which in particular he
bore to himself, and also unto his Father in law Sir John Dunbarre Knight, and
James Dunbarre Esquire, his brother in law, not suffering any to wash his
linen, but was necessitated, with his own hands, to wash his shirts, in his
own Urine. And at length being set at liberty, the poor Gentleman with his
wife and children came (in great want of all necessaries) to Iniskillin to this
Respondent, who used means to releeve them until he conveyed them toward his
native Country of Scotland.

And further this Respondent says, that (as he has been credibly Informed by
diverse honest Protestants, who well knew the Informers evil carriages, to
those that were under his command, and more especially to the Protestants that
fled from Sir John Dunbarres Iron works to his house for safeguard of their
lives) the Informer compelled many of them (without sending guards or convoyes
with them) to depart from his Garrison, insomuch, as by their endeavoring to
travel 20 miles over Mountainous ways toward Iniskillin, many of them were
murdered in their journey by the Rebels. And in particular twelve or fourteen
persons at one time, and diverse of them famished through hunger and cold, which
will be proved by sundry men and women of the same Companies, whose fortune it
was (through Gods Providence) to escape those dangers. And are now resident
partly under this Respondent at Iniskillin, and others of them dispersedly
dwelling amongst other Reglments, in Vlster and elsewhere.

V.
5. To the fifth Article this Respondent says, that he did not know in the
Month of February, after the said Cessation, whether or no the said Lord
Marquess of Ormond, was Lord Lieutenant of Jreland; nor whether he was
declared an Enemy to the Parliament, not did he hear any other then that he
was gracious and acceptable unto the Parliament, until this Respondent was now
upon his journey to London, and says that after concluding of the said
Cessation (which how acceptable it was to the Parliament, this Respondent being
so remote, understood not) He by virtue of a Commission dated in November or
December 1641. from Sir William Parsons and Sir John Borlace then Lords
Justices of Ireland, and the Council there, did upon the 29 of Iannuary 1643
or thereabouts, receive Tirlagh Og Mac Gawran, and some followers of his, being
Inhabitants of the Barony of Tallag^aph in the County of Cavan, together with
their goods into protection, appoynting them some quarters to dwell and grase
upon, near Iniskillin, until directions to the contrary should come from the
Parliament, and that upon agreement, that they should pay 70. I. in Money or
Victuals by a time limited, toward the better subsistence of the Soulders of
this Respondents Regiment, for the preserving of that Garrison, whose
provisions being then near spent, had no hopes to be supplied by the State
there, and as little expectation to be furnished in due time from hence, and
the said protected men having delivered in one of their Kinsmen unto this
Respondent, to remain in Prison at Iniskillin in pledge as well for their
Loyalties during their continuance upon the said Protection, as the paying of
the said Contribution, and performing other duties, conformable to their
agreement, gathered their goods from remote parts, and upon the second of
February 1643 or thereabouts, were coming tothe quarters assigned to them by
this Respondent, but by the way the Soldiers of the Informer, incountering
them, declared that they were in want of Victuals in their Garrison, and
although they would forbear to kill them (for so far they agreed to the said
Protection) yet they would and must borrow some Cowes from them upon ticket, to
be paid by the State, out of their entertainment, and thereupon took from
them 3 or 400 Cowes, whereof their Officers at Mannor-hamilton (upon the
mediation of the Respondents Lieutenant Colonel) caused the greatest part to
be restored again unto the said owners, but refused to deliver the rest. Of
which (upon the next occasion that this Respondent had to write to Dublin) at
the request of the said owners, he gave intimation unto the then Lords Justices
and Council and thereupon, the said Lord Marquess being newly then, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, did by his Warrant command, not only the restoring of
the refidue of the said goods unto the owners, but withal required better
correspondencie to be observed for the future between the Officers and
Soldiers of the Informer, and those of Jniskillin, and not to clash or jarre
between themselves, but whether the said latter Order was obeyed as touching
the restitution of the said Goods, this Respondent knows not, and says that
the Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrisons, not in obedience to that
Order, but of their own mutual accords (have ever since the Informer left
those parts) lived in better amity, then ever they did, or could do, whilst
he continued there amongst them: Nevertheless this Respondent says, that by
reason of that impediment, offered by the Informers Soldiers as aforesaid,
this Respondent and his soulders lost the benefit of that bargain to the great
prejudice of that Garrison.

And says further, that the Informer or his Officers, received into his
Protection (by what authority this Respondent could never yet understand) one
Owin, or James Mac Murrey, Margaret Ny Cabe, and sundry other Rebels of the
County of Letrym, and kept them and their goods upon his own Lands of
Glanfear^e near his Garrison in that County, which will be proved by
Certificate and sundry Letters of the date of January 1643. under the hand of
his own Lieutenant and others.

VI.
To the sixth Article, this Respondent denies that ever he corresponded with
the Rebels as by the said Informer is therein suggested, but says that by
virtue of the aforesaid Commission from the Lords Justices and Council of
Ireland, he did receive into Protection one Bryan mac Coconaght mac Gwire
Esquire, with 40 or 50 of his friends, Servants and Tenants who had some Goods
of their own to live opon, taking Pledges from some of them for assurance of
their loyalties, which Protection this Respondent humbly conceives was lawful
for him to grant unto the said Bryan Magwire for the Reasons following, vizt.

First, for that upon the 21. th of October 1641. he discovered unto this
Respondent by Flartagh mac Hugh aforementioned, the purpose of the Irish to rise
into Rebellion upon Friday and Saturday, the 22. and 23. th of October
aforesaid, advising him and all the English and Scottish Protestants in the
Town of Iniskillin, and County of Farmanagh, to be carefully upon their
Defense; which this Respondent acknowledges was (by Gods mercy and providence)
the principal Motive that prevented the Murdering of this Respondent, and of
all those Protestants that escaped that bloody Massacre thereabouts.

Secondly, for that the said Bryan did refuse to join in any Action with the
Rebels, denying to enter into their Oaths of Confederacy and association
against the Protestants, for which he was in great danger to be cut off by
them.

Thirdly, for that he preserved under his own Protection diverse of the British
Nation, Protestants which together with several of their goods he brought safe
to Iniskillin, when he was so received into Protection, as Ambrose Carleton,
Richard Irwing, Gawan Bettic, and many others.

Fourthly, for that by receiving him, being an eminent man of Vlster, and
allied unto many Noble families, (both in Scotland and Ireland) It exceedingly
abated the fury and courage of the Rebels, and distracted their Consultations
in those Parts, and wholly dis-joyned the Forces of the Rebels in that County,
by dividing themselves into factions; and no less disheartened those of the
next adjoining Counties, which in that interim, and for a long time acter did
abundantly advantage and further the public Service.

Fifthly, for that in further Evidence of his loyalty to the English Crown and
Government, he presented a Letter unto this Respondent, which came unto him
from Owin mac Artt O Neille (Uncle of the Lord Magwire, and General of the
Rebels in Vlster) who lately before, arived in Ireland, with Men, Arms, and
Ammunition, out of West Flanders, which Letter is as follows, viz.

To our loving and dear Cozen Bryan mac Coconaght Magwire.
Loving Cozen,
KNow that I am arrived at this Harbor, nine or ten days past, whether I sent
before me as much Ammnuition as J deemed needful to answer the Necessity of
this Country: and that I have here now, Men and Provisions such as (by the
leave of God) will give great Comfort and succor unto this whole Kingdom. But
beloved Cozen, I am given to understand that (notwithstanding your sufferance
and distress) you are abundantly inclined to side with the English Nation,
which indeed does exceedingly grieve me; Wherefore I will have you from
henceforth (as you tender your own good) to banish those thoughts out of your
mind, and not to pursue those Resolutions, which in the end may be the occasion
of your own Destruction, as I think it will be to all those whose minds will
appear contrary to ours, let these suffice with the addage of many salutes
unto you, from Castle-Doe the 18. th of July, 1642.

Your affectionate Kinsman, Signed, Owen O Nersle.


And besides, the said Bryan gained intelligence of great concernment, from the
Enemy and discovered it at all times, and upon all occasions unto this
Respondent, who made great use thereof for the furtherance and advancement of
the public Service; whereof this Respondent made report by his Letters unto
Sir William Parson^, and Sir John Burlase, then Lords Justices of Ireland and
the Council there, to whom he did send the said Bryan Magwire, to Dublin; who
did not only approve of this Respondents act in receiving of him and his men
into Protection as aforesaid, but also (as this Respondent was informed) did
further signify unto this Hon: Parliament, the affection and service of the
said Bryan, with their desires in his behalf that he should be rewarded for
the same. And afterward their Lordships returned the said Bryan unto this
Respondent, allowing him and his men to be continued upon Protection at
Iniskillin; Necre unto which Garrison he remains loyal even at this time,
but in a most miserable condition for want of Necessaries. And this Respondent
denies that ever he did form the said Protected men into a Company,
consisting of a Captain and Officers, as in the said sixth Article is merely
devised and surmized, but did employ them under the leading of some of the
British Gentlemen of his Garrison, upon service many times, with the rest of
his Regiment against the Rebels, wherein they were of abundant use, as well for
Spies and Guids, as by killing and destroying the Enemy as effectually as
others did; And (for ought known to this Respondent) did no dis-service at any
time unto the State, in giving Intelligence against all or any of the British
of their proceedings, and diverse of the said Protected men, being taken
Prisoners at several times, by the Rebels, were put to Death for taking part
with this Respondent. But this Respondent denies, that all the said Protected
men did take their opportunity to turn to the Rebels again as is surmized,
but some few that did (leaving their Pledge which they gave for assurance of
their loyalty, in Prison at Jniskillin) this Respondent caused him to be
Hanged, when they proved Disloyal. And this Respondent humbly conceives, That
as Rahab and her Parents, Family and friends for her sake, were preserved in
Jericho for saving the two Spies of Joshua; so this Hon: Parliament will be
pleased to think, that this Respondent did no Dis-service unto the State in
Protecting and preserving of the said Bryan Magwire, and some of his Friends
for his sake; who was the Instrument of the saving of the Lives of many
thousands of Protestants (even Gods people) from being utterly destroyed by the
fury of the said bloody Rebels.

And for answer unto that expression wherewith * Note, that since this Answer
was sent into the Commons house of Parliament, Sir William Cole received a
Letter of the 8. of January, 1644. written by one of the Captains of his
Regiment from Iniskillin; certifying that about that time, 40 Horse and 120
Foot of that Garrison, fought with and routed 500 Foot and 3. Troops of Horse
of the Rebels, conducted by Colonel Philip O Rely, wherein they not only
rescued their own Cattle which were Plundered by the Enemy: but also killed
140 of them in the place, and took 55. Prisoners, whereof are Officers, one
Sergeant Major, 3 Captains, two Lieutenants, with diverse Gentl^men and other
Officers. Whereby it appears, that neither the said Sir William, or his
Soldiers did any way correspond with the Rebels since the Cessation before.
the said Informer seems to conclude his Information, by saying he could
inform many other particular omissions and dis-services, which the said
Respondent has committed in this time of his employment, etc. The Respondent
says, that he conceives the Informer means it, by the scandalous calumnies
and aspersions digested in fifteen places of that Pamphlet, printed at London
in An. Dom. 1643. wherein his Services are registered, and wherein this
Respondent and his Captains, Officers, and Soldiers, are most injuriously
taxed, with often reiterations of unworthy and mean carriage toward him, for
that they did not wait upon him, upon all his calls, which this Respondent
conceives was more then he was bound to do further then to this Respondent
would seem fit, for the good of the public service; especially when as at
the same very times (which was long before the Cessation) he was employed about
services of far greater and better concernment in the Counties of Fermanagh,
Cavan, Monaghan, Tirone, Donegall, Letrim, or Sligoe, which has formerly been
well known both in Ireland and elsewhere.

And this Respondent further shows, that immediately after the said Cessation,
this Respondents Regiment destroyed 295 of the Rebels and famished many
hundreds of them, and also took in Rory mac Gwires Castle, which is now
preserved for the Parliaments use; And afwell then as before did rescue, or
otherwise redeem from the said Rebels 5467 English and Scottish Protestants,
and relieved them for many Months, out of the spoils gained from the Enemy,
until that in his own person he guarded and conveyed great numbers of them
toward Londonderry, where further care was taken for their relief by the
good people there: And says also, that he this Respondent was one of the first
Colonels of the British Regiments in Vlster, which did embrace and take the
solemn League and Covenant, which he humbly conceives will not be deemed to
be Omissions or Dis-services, as the Informer terms them: who since his
coming hither, has not only labored to Defame the Respondent, but also has
taxed the rest of the Colonels in Vlster for their Neglects in their service,
who (in this Respondents opinion) have done much better Service than either of
them.

Yet did this Respondent several times show his desires in a most effectual
manner to help and relieve the said Informer; for having received a pitiful
Message from him about the 26 of July 1642. That he, his Wife, Children, and
Soldiers, were like to be destroyed by Nine hundred of the Rebels that then
besieged him; This Respondent immediately sent a party of Four hundred Horse
and Foot for his Relief, with Orders that after they had releeved the Informer
they should return within 48 hours; This Respondent being then threatened to
be Besieged, by the General of the Irish Forces Owin mac Art O Neille with
6000 Men. But when the Respondents Lieutenant Colonel came to the Informer
with this Party, they found him not at all besieged nor in no such extremity
as he pretended, but perceived he sent this pressing Message, only to get
some of the Respondents men with him to take in the Castle of Dromoheare, which
without Ordnance they could not have effected, though being come, at his
importunity they attempted, in conclusion to no other purpose, then to destroy
their Men.

Whereupon his Officers and Soldiers returned on the 29. th of July from him
having received many affronts and abuses. And on the 20 of May following this
Respondent intending some service, in the Province of Conaght drew forth about
500 horse and foot, and Leaguring within two miles of the Informers Garrison,
was importuned with much earnestness, to come unto him to Christen his Son,
which the Respondent (conceiving to be an act of Charity and Christianity)
consented unto, expecting, such civility, as might be answerable to so
neighbourly an Office. But both himself and those few Officers he carried with
him, received such gross disrcspect, that he will not defile your ears with
the hearing it.

Nevertheless, God having blessed the Respondent in his journey with success
against the Enemy, he gave him for the relief of his Garrison Two hundred
fifty nine Cowes; There going with him in his Journey of their own accord of
the men belonging to his Garrison, only 38 Footmen and 12 Horse.

He moreover then bestowed upon his good Lady 1000 Sheep, and what he bestowed
on those Gentlemen of his Ladies kindred, and his Officers, who went in a
friendly manner with this Respondent, the Jnformer suffered them not to enjoy,
but converted to his own use.

These civilities, which this Respondent is most unwillingly drawn to mention,
he conceived might deserve more thanks, and not to be himself and his
Regiment, exclaimed against by the Informer, merely to render him and them
odious, in all places where his tongue gets any credit.

In the time of Peace, his carriage toward his neighbors was so full of
contention, that there was hardly any man of quality or worth near him, in the
Province of Conaght, that he had not labored to injure and oppress, either in
their Estates or reputations, if not in both, so that before the Rebellion
began, such his carriages made him extremely distasteful to men of all
conditions, that lived within 20 or 30 miles of him in that Province, which
will be evidenced by diverse of his Neighbors, of the best quality, now in
this City, if they may be called upon for that purpose.

And particularly this Respondent, represents to your further notice,
something of the Informers demeanor toward some of his distressed neighbors
in the hands of the Rebels, decyphered in these two short ensuing Letters,
Printed in the latter end of that Book of his own Services, Page 57. viz.

Sir Robert Hannay's Letter and other Protestants being Prisoners at Sligoe,
are sent to Dromaheare Castle.
Honorable Sir,
We the undernamed persons having suffered in all our whole Estates, and being
upon our banishment out of this Kingdom, under the safe conduct of Master
Edmond Bourke of Ragagh and Master Walter Bourke of Ardagh, toward the North,
but most opposed at Castle-Coner; Eniscromme Escagh-bridge, Downeill,
Arnaglasse and Tomler, go by several bands of armed men, purposely to set for
our lives, were not there extreme violence suppressed by the discretion, worth
and care of those two Gentlemen, and we taken Prisoners by the MacSwines,
brought before O Coner-Sligoe where we now remain, and intended to be sent to
the Castle of Dromaheare, to be kept until you Sir deliver sach Prisoners of
the O Roirkes and others, as you have in your eustody, or to be dealt with, as
you do unto them, Sir you are Nobly disposed so that in honor, we hope, the
means of relief being in your self, you will not suffer us to perish who
will ever remain Sir

Yours truly obliged to serve you, Signed Robert Hannay, Andrew Adare,
Alexander Mountgomorie, William Liston, Thomas Fullerton.



These be the names and number of the Prisoners, Sir Robert Hannay, his Lady,
his two Daughters, two Boys, two men, and a gentlewoman, Master Andrew Adare
and his wife and Sisters Son, Master Alexander Mountgomerie, his wife and
eldest son, Master William Liston, his Wife and Daughter, Master Thomas
Fullerton and his Wife, Patrick Deomand Mr. Adares man.

Sir, after the writing of this Letter, we are brought to Dromaheare Castle,
and Order left with the Captain to bring us unto the Camp at Mannor-hamilton,
where we must suffer death, if those Prisoners with you be not delivered.

Sir Frederick Hamiltons Answer to the Letter aforementioned.
SIR, I have received your Letter, whereby I am given to understand of your
treacherous surprisal notwithstanding of your safe conduct promised, for the
which I am very sorry. But such is the treacherous falsehood of those disloyal
Traitors generally throughout this whole Kingdom, that hoth made me Vow and
swear in the presence of Almighty God, that I will never give or take quarter,
with them or any of them, yea though my own Sons that descended from my loins
were in your estate, I had rather they should dye gloriously for the cause of
Christ, then I should so abase my self, as to deal with such Traitors to God
and his Majesty. Thus beseeching God Almighty to strengthen and encourage you
that you may continue constant, until it shall please God to give you
deliverance either by life or death. In the mean time I am persuaded that they
will use you with no worse measure, then their Prisoners, who were apprehended
by me in the action of Rebellion are used, so recommending you to God I rest.

Your very loving friend, Frederick Hamilton.
Castle-Hamilton, January the 19, 1641.

And after he delvered this letter unto the Messenger, he hanged the chief of
the Prisoners (being brother to Colonel O Roirke who was desired by this
exchange) in the sight of the Messenger before he would permit him to depart,
upon whose return to the Rebels they in revenge thereof, Murdered about 10 or
11 of the said Protestants, whereof two were Godly Ministers, and yet if their
mercy, and Compassion in the midst of their Barbarity had not far transcended
Sir Frederick Hamiltons, they had likewise put Sir Robert Hannay and his Lady
and Children and all the rest to death.

And that his ill disposition may the more fully appear, he has with striking
and other ill usage so behaved himself, toward his Officers, that his
Lieutenant, Ensign, Minister and one of his Sergeants have all forsaken him,
so that he has now no Officers, but one Sergeant to Command his Company, at
Mannor-Hamilton consisting of 70 men or thereabouts.

And notwithstanding all this, the said Informer is laboring for the
Government of Londonderry, and because he conceived he might prevail in that
sure if his miscariages were not discovered, he moved this Respondent, that all
the differences betwixt them, might be composed by the order of friends, which
motion if this Respondent would then have accepted, he conceives this
information had never been heard of.

And as touching the Government of Londonderry, aforesaid this Respondent
humbly desires leave to declare that once it was conferred upon Sir George
Pawlet, a man whose temper in some things, was not much unlike this of the
Informers, whose passionate demeanor in his Office, was not only the occasion
of the loss of his own life, but of the loss also of the lives of many of
this Nation there, and the burning of that Town, with the kindling of a
violent (though as it happened) but a short Rebellion in the Country
thereabouts, which did put the State then, to much unnecessary expenses in the
suppressing of it.

All which together with the premises, this Respondent humbly represents as
pertinent instances, and reasons to induce the honorable Parliament, not to
put the Government thereof into the power of the Informer, whose demeanor will
never be brooked, by those good people that now inhabit there, upon whom, all
the aspersions that are laid by any late reports or printed letters, (this
Respondent believes) were invented and contrived by the Informer, or his
Instruments, of purpose to make them detestablee to this Honorable Parliament,
whom this Respondent is confident, are as Loyal, and well wishing to the
Parliament as can be expected, and will really witness the same, by their
ready and joyful receiving and obeying of any Governor (except Sir Frederick
Hamilton) that the Parliament will be pleased to appoint over them. But his
conditions are so well known unto them, that they will quit their fortunes and
stations there, which they have hitherto preserved, with so much expense and
hazard, rather then submit unto his Command.

And this Respondent most humbly desires this honorable Committee, would be
pleased to pardon him if he have trespassed upon your Patience, in answer to
the Charge given in by the Informer, being necessitated thereunto, for his more
ample Vindication, by laying open the disposition of the Informer, which he
has most unnecessarily drawn upon himself, without any provocations given to
him, by this Respondent. And humbly prays such reparations as in your Wisdoms
shall be thought fit. Signed, WILLIAM COLE.
Exhibited 11 of January, 1644.

