THE POOR-MANS PHYSICIAN AND Chyrurgion, CONTAINING Above Three hundred rare
and Choice Receipts, for the Cure of all Distempers, both Inward and Outward:
Together with necessary Considerations before Purgation; Easy Rules for the
opening of a Vein, and the manner of Bleeding by Horse-leeches, with a Method
for drawing Teeth.

All being of great Worth, and now Published for the Public good:

By LANCELOT COELSON Student in Physic and Astrology.

London, Printed by A. M. for Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1656.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Barkstead Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower of
LONDON, High-Steward of COLCHESTER, Major General of MIDDLESEX and WESTMINSTER.
L. C. wishes all Health, with long Life and Increase of Honor.
Right Honorable,
FOr many ages past it has been a custom amongst these who have endeavored
to leave to posterity any of their Labors, to Dedicate them to some eminent
Personage, partly to express their gratitude for benefits received, and partly
to procure with the Readers a more easy acceptance of the Work, and a more
firm protection for it from the reproachful tongues of malicious censures
which no age hitherto ever wanted. Among the sage sayings of Solon, being an
ancient Philosopher of Athens, this is continually to be born in mind, that he
only did glory of the good he received by his endeavors and study; the which
Philosopher was a Heathen man: I would we Christians could follow the like
example, but I fear most in our age neither return thanks for what they
receive, nor apply themselves to study any good, nay rather, there be some will
speak evil of them which apply their study to the knowledge of their
Profession, and especially the Professors of Arts. But in part being sensible
of Your Honors ingenuity, and so much a friend and lover of Virtue and
Learning, I did make this bold attempt, which I hope Your Wisdom will be
pleased to pardon, this did the more encourage me to enterprise it. For I do
ingeniously confess that I have not thought this Labor of mine fit or worthy
to be perused of Your Honor, by reason of my own inability, who am altogether
insufficient to perform any thing suitable to the acceptance of Your Honor. It
was not the affectation of any popular praise, but an honest zeal to benefit my
Country, which begot in me a desire to publish this Work; and in the next place
I perceived in my self a certain earnest willingness which I have always had to
commend some piece of service to Your Honor, this meeting together did induce
me and reinforce my over-presumptuous determination with such a bold
confidence, as it were, to rush into Your presence, and to demand, without any
show of merit, Your Honors most favorable Protection, that this Book of my
Labors may run under Your Patronage. The Lord God, who has made Your Honor
an Instrument to work the advancement of his Glory, the furtherance and
propagation of good Learning, protect, guide and bless You with all success
in this world, and eternal happiness in his Kingdom.

Your Honors most humble Servant, Lancelot Coelson.

TO THE READER.
READER,
WHen God had perfected that wonderful work of his, I mean the frame of the
World, and had assigned to every part thereof his special duty, as namely to
the water to harbor fishes, to the air to uphold all feathered fowls, to the
earth to softer beasts, and to produce and bring forth good and wholesome herbs
and trees, and over all these, as Regent and Governor, had appointed man, his
last and noblest creature, he demanded of his Angels, who were present with him
at this work, what might be desired in this so rare and strange a workmanship;
who answered, Nothing but a tongue to unfold the secrets of his Labors, to
talk and commune with them; with the which also, He as a Workman of all, might
be extolled and magnified, there being no better way to advance his glory: As
he did infuse into man a conceivable mind apt to understand his mysteries, so
now he gave him a tongue to utter what the mind was capable to receive; and it
has been the delight of many of our Ancestors to give themselves to study
this noble Art of Physic and Chyrurgery, not only to study them, but to
practice them for the good of themselves and others: and not only so, but have
spread their Labors and Knowledge over the whole world, knowing that what they
had was nothing but what they had received, and not only for themselves, but
for the good of their Country.

But we will remember some of those Kings, who had an especial fantasy to
this Art, whose names are devolved and brought unto us by the succession of
ages, though their Works have not escaped the wrack, but have perished in the
Sea-gulf of Antiquity, which have swallowed the good actions of many: And
Mithridates the King of ^ontus shall be the first, whose glory in battle,
being victorious, did much fore-passe all other, and yet gave his mind much to
study the Book of the creature. In so much, as ^liny remembereth, was alike
profitable to the Commonwealth, and to man's life: For in his Manor where he
lay there were found many Books written by his own hands, both of the virtues
of Herbs, and of the constitution of man's Body, with remedies for many
infirmities of the same. E^ax also the King of Arabia wrote a Book of the
effects of Simples, which he Dedicated to Nero the Emperor. I need not mention
them in particular, there was no King either of Ethiopia, Egypt or Arabia, who
did not himself either write somewhat concerning this Art of Physic, or else
by his liberality encouraged others to employ their time in the same.

I will not stand to recite any of our famous Physicians who have lived before
us in several ages, as Dioscorides, Galen, Paulus Aetius, Egyneta, and others:
For it will easily appear of what credit this Noble Science of Physic was in
times past, the insolency and pride of which Physicians was so high, that many
of them disdained the fellowship of Kings, and expected homage as Gods. The
opinion of this Science did so possess the minds of the people in those
days, that they imagined the Professor of the same immediately to be sent from
heaven, for the commodity of the whole Country, and for the preservation of
mankind, which begot in those Physicians such a spirit of pride, expecting
much reverence. I desire the Physicians of our times may have contrary spirits,
humble, meek and lowly, visiting even the poorest of Patients when help is
required, for the life of the most miserable vassal is as dear in the sight of
God, as the life of the most renowned Monarch; they glorify God in so doing,
serve their Country, and gain much experience. For it is not enough for a
Physician to know the constitution of the body, the diversity of temperatures,
the variety of diseases, the causes, signs and symptoms of the same: but by
knowing these things, and doing good to your Country, you gain much experience,
at least you find many times diseases to deal withal which Galen did never
dream of, even such diseases as make many Physicians amazed, and to judge that
their Art is unperfect. If then it be so that Art is weak without practice, and
that as Galen says, Experience is gotten ^ongo rerum ^su, let our Physicians
not mind gain and self interest more then to be harbored under the roof of
the poorest vassal in the world, and seeing there is nothing given unto us of
God, more acceptable then the health of the body, how honorably must we think
of the means by which it is continued and restored, if lost. Pyrrhus the King
of Epire did sacrifice unto no other God or Goddess but only unto health, to
whom he erected a famous Temple in his own Country, calling it Templum
Sanitatis: He craved nothing at the hands of his Gods but the fruition of his
health, when going to battle against his enemies; thinking that industry and
diligence meeting with the health of the body, were able to atchieve any thing,
were i^ beset with never so many dangers. Then Courteous Reader, the health of
the body deserving so much to be esteemed, and the means so honorable by which
it is preserved and restored, if lost; and truly the ignorance of my Country so
much abounding, being perfect enemies to the health of their own bodies, I may
compare them to those people of whom God complains in another case, Isa. 5.
12, 13. which did not regard the works of the Lord, neither considered they the
operation of his hands; therefore were they gone into Captivity, because they
wanted knowledge: But see what God says of them, Jer. 4. 2^. They are wise to
do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge, and for want of knowledge they
are destroyed. See Hosea 4 6. there being too too many such persons now living
in this age have been arguments to provoke me to put this small book forth to
the view of the world, which I really intend for the public good; I do desire
both the Learned and unlearned to take view thereof, I have endeavored to give
language suitable to both their capacities, expecting and desiring the kind
acceptance of both, resolving if God shall be pleased to preserve life and
health, not to let my pen rest, but I will endeavor still further to serve you
to my power,

London, East Smithfield, March 25. 1656. LANCELOT COELSON.

A Table of the Contents.
A
AChes. Page 36, 38, 39, 118. Ach or Ague. 40 Aches or Bruises. 37 Appetite
lost. 45 Ague, an excellent Remedy. 41, 42, 43, 44
B
BAck. 46, 51, 62, 63, 155 Belly bound. 46 Biting of a mad dog. 72 Bruises. 49,
50, 55, 115 Bruise or Cut. 49 Breath stinking. 53 Bleeding to stop. 51 Broken
bones. 53 Broken veins. 55 Blood staunching. 48, 56, 62 Breast sore. 54 Burn or
scald. 56 Burning with gunpowder. 61 Balsom Lucatella. 57 Black plaster. 60,
142 Bone mortified. 63, 64 Breast diseased. 65 Bruises or Ach. 117 Bloody Flux.
47 Balsom rare. 183
C
CAnker. 71, 112, 113 Chin-cough. 65 Childbirth. 50 Choler. 67 Chollick and
stone. 68, 69 Chollick. 72 Consumption. 70, 72 Corrupt Coar. 71 Corns. 67
Cough. 69, 105
D
DEafness. 75 Diet-drink. 73 Digestion. 75, 80 Dropsy. 74, 76, 77, 78, 79
E
EYes sore. 81, 82, 83
F
FAlling sickness. 93 Fevers. 144 Fistula. 88, 93 Fleam. 86, 87 Flower of
Ointment. 119 Flux of blood. 87, 95 Flux. 92 Fracture in Scull. 96 French Pox.
123, 124, 150
G
GOut. 93, 94, 116 Green sickness. 146, 147 Green wound.154, 155, 157
H
HEad. 157 Headache. 97, 98, 99, 100 Heat in face. 96 Heart-burning. 98
I
JAundies. 101, 102, 104 Imposthume. 80, 102, 103, 144 Itch. 101, 102, 103
K
King's Evil. 104
L
LEgs sore. 106 Liver heat. 106, 107, 108 Lungs. 53, 105
M
MAtrix. 111 Menstrues. 86, 114 Milk to increase. 112 Molten. 110 Morphew. 110
Mother. 111
N
NVmbness, 40, 114
P
Palsy. 121, 131 Pipes to open. 66, 120 Plaster. 91 Plague. 121, 122, 126,
127 Plurisie. 123, 127 Preparative. 129 Purges. 125, 126, 129, 130, 131, 132
R
REins running. 95, 134, 135, 136 Rickets. 133
S
SAlve rare. 136, 139, 153 Sear-cloth rare. 140, 142 Sear-cloth. 154 Sciatica.
41, 116, 140, 1^7 Scurvy the cure. 146 Sinews shrunk. 146 Skull. 145 Sleep to
provoke. 136, 138, 144 Small Pox. 125 Soars. 140, 149 Speaking in sleep. 139
Spleen. 138, 139 Stitch in the side. 137, 144 Stone. 47, 136, 144 Stomach weak.
62 Strain to cure. 143 Swelling. 147
T
TEeth. 150 Tisick. 148 Toothache. 45, 150
V
Venom. 54 Ulcers. 156 Vomiting to stay. 151, 152 Vomiting to cause. 151 Urine
to provoke. 152, 153
W
WAter to serindge. 152 Weakness. 154 Wind. 148, 157 Women in Travel. 158
Worms. 156, 197 Wounds. 119, 158
Errata.
PAge 77. line 14. add the dose one dram. p. 96. l. 4. read heat. p. 103. l.
7. r. Coral. p. 107. l. 19. r. no blood. p. 134. l. 16. r. Dealthee.

INSTRUCTIONS to be Observed in Physic and Chyrurgery.
When you enter upon the Cure of any Disease, let this be your Method.
SEE what superfluous humor does abound, that have respect to either by Vomit
or Purge, with a meet Medicine for it.

As if Fleam abound, it must be helped with such a Medicine which expels Fleam.

And so if Choler abound, or Melancholy, the same must be considered.

Likewise if the distemperature of the Liver or Spleen do weaken the Stomach,
then the cure consists only in the healing of those members, and not to
administer any thing for the Stomach at all.

And let not any man ground himself only in the knowledge of an Urine, in the
distinguishing between the Disease and the Cause thereof; as namely the Ague,
or Cholick, or Flux, and such like, and so to minister Means or Medicine
according.

But let him search out, if by all means possible, the cause it self.

For in all inward Diseases there ought to be as much care taken of the pulses,
and of the State, and of the Disposition of the Brain of him that is sick, as
of the Urine.

Also the egestion, sweat, and spittle, and other excrements, ought not to be
neglected, for they may show that which the Urine show not.

As for example, in a Plurisie, or Inflammation of the Lungs, or in a Squinzy,
or such like, there is more known by the spittle, than there is by the Urine.

And again in a Lask, or in a bloody Flux, or in a Chollick or Illiack, there
is more certain judgment to be given by the egestion or ordure, than there is
by the Urine.

For Urine is nothing else but only the washy part of the blood, for it is
separated from the blood in the Liver, and sucked from thence into the Reins,
from whence it distilleth down into the bladder, and so passes forth.

Seeing therefore that Urine is the excrement that is separated from the blood,
there is good reason why it should show the state of the Liver, and also of the
blood in all parts of the body, and that it can declare the full state of those
members which it passes by, as of the Reins, the bladder, and such like.

But certainly in other Diseases that be out of the Veins, and be distant from
the places by which the Urine passes, there can be no certain judgment of the
Urine, unless the vehemence of the Disease have infected the blood or the liver
in some sort.

This is the ignorance of many people, they think him worthy of no estimation
that cannot at the first sight of the Urine, judge whether it be a man's or a
woman's Urine, and how the Disease grieveth, and whether the party shall live or
die, although it have been carried 20 or 30 miles, which is a thing unpossible
to be known by the Urine.

Therefore they that will take upon them to study Physic, let them well
observe these four things following:

1. To see the sick persons, and to confer with them about their grief, for
none can so well declare it as the party grieved.

2. Let them view and feel the pulses of the sick person, and observe well the
state of them.

3. Let them view diligently all the excrements, not only the Urine, but also
the Spittle, Sweat and Ordure.

4. And lastly, Consider well where the grief is, and all the accidents that
may happen thereupon: These things ought well to be considered by all that
study Physic.

Next we will treat somewhat of the use of blood-letting, and the benefits that
come thereby, and also the use and benefit of Purging, and I would wish all
that study Physic and Chyrurgery to be careful thereof.

FIrst note, if the body do abound with humors which are ready to oppress
nature, then whether there be any sickness in the body at present, or danger of
sickness to ensue.

Those humors must be evacuated out of the body, either by Blood-letting,
Purging, Vomit, Sweating, Bath, or else by some other evacuation: But I will
speak only of evacuation by Blood letting and Purging.

There be diverse things to be considered of before blood-letting.

1. The age of the patient. 2. The complexion. 3. The time of the year. 4. The
region, the custom, the strength, and the vehemence of the Disease.
1. The age of children under 14 years of age, and aged persons may not be let
blood unless great necessity require it.

2. The complexion ought to be noted, because a hot complexion has large
Veins, and always abounds with much blood, and they may therefore forbear a
good quantity of blood.

The cold complexion have narrow Veins, and little blood, and therefore their
evacuation must be small.

3. The time of the year must be considered, that the weather be not too hot,
nor too cold, and therefore the Springtime is most fit to let blood, because
then it is temperate.

4. And lastly, Observe well the Region and Country, the custom and strength of
the Patient, and the vehemence of the Disease.

A temperate Region is good to live in, where it is not too hot, nor too cold

The custom must be considered, for those that use to bleed may better suffer
it than those that never were let blood.

The strength of the person must be considered, for if there be great weakness
it is dangerous to let blood at all, without necessity requires.

The vehemence of the Disease must be considered, for if the Disease be
vehement, then you must not delay bleeding, if the former circumstances will
permit.

Then note also what sign the Moon is in, you must take heed she be not in a
sign that governs that member wherein you intend to open a Vein.

And forsee that she be in a sign that is good to let blood in.

For the Complexion, let blood
the The Moon being in Phlegmatic, Aries or Sagittarius. Melancholic, Libra
or Aquarius. Choleric, Cancer or Pisses. Sanguine, In either of these.

For his Age, let blood
in his youth, from the change to the first quarter. middle age, from the first
quarter to the full. elder age, from the full to the last quarter. old age,
from the last quarter to the change.

For the time of the year, as I told you before, the Spring time is best,
Harvest indifferent.
let not blood the Moon in Taurus, Gem. Leo, Virgo, or Capr. the day before nor
after the change and full. twelve hours before and after the quartils. the Moon
with Jupiter or Mars evil aspected.

For the time of the day, let blood
in the morning, after sunrising, fasting. afternoon, after perfect digestion,
the air temperate, not South.

Notwithstanding for the Frenzy, the Pestilence, the Squinsie, the Plurisie,
the Apoplexy, a continual Headache, growing of choler or blood, a hot burning
Fever, or any other extreme pain, in this case a man may not tarry a chosen
time, but incontinently with all speed he is to seek remedy, but then you must
not take away so great a quantity of blood, as at a chosen time might be
expected.

The Benefits that arise thereby.
1. IT is a good remedy for all Diseases that be engendered of abundant flowing
of eruption of blood, as be chiefly the Fevers called Sinochy.

2. Also Frenzy, Squinsie, Plurisie, Perip-newmoney, Opthalmy, and all
Inflammations and Impostimations, engendered of blood in the Liver, the Spleen,
the Reins, the Womb, the Shar, the Armholes, the Arms, the Legs, and to
conclude, it is good to bleed for all Inflammations, whether it be in the
inward or outward parts of the body, or whether the grief is present, or in
danger shortly to engender.

3. It is also good in Fevers, whether they be continual or intermittent,
insomuch that the obstructions and stopings of the Veins be caused of
immoderate reflection of the humors.

Note also that blood-letting does empty and evacuate from the body all humors
alike, as well the good as the bad, and therefore ought to be used chiefly when
there is a great abundance of blood in the body, and other humors.

Also it causes nature to have the larger scope, and a free passing by opening
and emptying of the straight ways and passages of the Veins and Arteries.

4. And lastly, It being done in time, it preventeth diverse and sundry Diseases
into which the body was both apt and ready to have fallen.

But see that none of those things which are forbidden be in the way without
great necessity, but then the common Proverb is, Necessitas non habet legem,
necessity has no Law.

Also let the party bleeding note, that after bleeding they walk not fast, or
that they do not use any vehement exercise, but let him be quiet and rest
himself till his spirits shall be well refreshed and quieted again.

Again let them not sleep immediately after it, and as I told you before, the
time most fit to bleed is in the morning, for then every digestion is perfectly
finished, and the superfluities and excrements of each of them avoided out,
which must be considered.

And thus have I treated concerning blood-letting, of the use and benefit
thereof; and now I do purpose to speak somewhat of the use and commodity of
purging.

Of the Use of Purging, and the Commodities that come thereby.
FOrasmuch as it is necessary to be understood of all persons, that every kind
of purgation has that secret virtue and property in it self, that when it is
received into a man's body, and provoked to exercise its virtue that it has by
natural heat laboring to digest it, then does it draw unto it all such
humors as it has virtue and power to purge.

And therefore a purgation is an evacuation of vicious and corrupt humors,
which do often trouble and molest the body, but not of all corrupt humors
alike.

For every purging Medicine does draw unto it self one peculiar and proper
humor, that is either fleagm, choler or melancholy or watery humors.

And therefore persons in health ought not to take a purgation, since they do
not abound with corrupt humors.

For when the Medicine finds no such superfluous humor as it has virtue to
draw, it consumes and wastes the blood and the flesh, and therefore age ought
not to take purgations, because it wastes, where there is not that abounding
as it has virtue to draw, and so it is dangerous for age, and for those that
are in perfect health, which thing is also testified by Hippocrates in the 37
Aphorism of his second Book, where he says after this sort, Qui corpore been
se habent, hos purgare periculosum est: That it is dangerous purging those that
are in perfect health.

And again, Because every purging Medicine has virtue to draw one peculiar
humor, there ought good heed to be taken that such a Medicine be ministered as
has virtue to draw out the humor abounding and no other, or else the not
right administering of it may do much harm, and work many inconveniences to the
body; and according to the saying of Hippocrates in the last Aphorism of his
first Book, in this manner, Si qualia oportet purgari purgentur, confert and
facile ferunt difficulter: that is, If such things be purged as ought to be, it
profits, and may easily be suffered, but if the Medicine be contrariwise, it
does much harm and may not be born.

But alas the greatest number of the common people do hold an opinion, that if
they have a Medicine for a little money, which will provoke them often to
stool, what humor soever it purges, they persuade themselves they are safe
enough.

But I would have these rules observed by all Physicians, before such time as
they minister any purgation which is before related.

1. Consider the quantity and quality of the humor abounding, and the strength
of him or her that is sick, the age and the time of the year, and the Disease,
minister no purgations to those which are weak and feeble, because all manner
of purgations do weaken nature.

2. Beware of strong purgations, old people and children are not to receive a
purgation except great necessity.

3. Consider the time of the year, and take notice that Summertime, during the
dog-daies, is not good to purge.

And also when the Sun is in Leo it is not good to purge, for then is nature
burnt up, and made so weak withal, that she is not able to suffer the violence
of a purge, the Spring time is best, then it is temperate.

And again, the Physician ought to behold and contemplate the Disease, that so
he knowing of what kind it is, may the better find out of what humor it is
caused:

As for example, If he do perceive the Disease to be a Tertian Fever, then
straitway he knows that is caused of great abundance of choler, and therefore
must of necessity minister a meet Medicine to purge choler, and so likewise in
all Diseases.

Note also, that before a purgation be ministered there ought to be a Medicine
taken which shall prepare the body, and make it apt to purge, and therefore it
is called a preparative.

It is given for two causes, either to divide, extenuate and make the gross and
clammy humors, that they may be ready to flow out when the medicine draws
them; or else it is given to unstop and open the conduits and vessels of the
body, by which the purgation must draw the superfluous humors to it, and this
is that which Hipocrates does counsel in the first Aphorism of his second
Book, where he says, Corpora cum quisque purgare voluerit, oportet fluvia
facere: that is, When a man would purge the body, he must make it flowing, by
opening and unopening the vessels.

There is good heed to be taken what sign the Moon is in when you do administer
a purgation, for some signs are very good, other-some very ill, therefore I
would advise all that study Physic to mark well all such things before
rehearsed, least they do more hurt then good.

Good to the Moon in prepare humors, Gem. Libra, Aquary. Vomit, Aries, Taurus,
Capri. Purge by sneezing, Cancer, Leo, Virgo take Clysters, Aries, Libra,
Scorpio. take Gargarisms, Cancer or Aries. stop Rheums and Flux, Taurus, Virgo,
Capri. bath for cold Diseases, Aries, Leo or Sagitary. bathe for hot Diseases,
Cancer, Scorp. or Pisses.

Purge with the Moon in Electuary, Cancer. Potions, Scorpio. Pills, Pisses.

A purgation must also be taken hot, for so it offends the stomach least, and
it will work the sooner and better.

And as for those which are apt to Vomit, and are not able to bear smelling to
a purgation, let them stop their nostrils, or let them smell to some
odoriferous thing, when they are about to take it.

And so soon as it is taken, it is good for the patient to smell to a tossed of
brown bread dipped in Vinegar, and to apply warm clothes to the stomach, and
also to put the taste of the Medicine out of the mouth, with chewing some sweet
and pleasant thing, and so by this means hinder Vomiting.

Note also that for the space of an hour after that any purgation is taken, let
the patient fit still and be quiet, and in any case avoid sleep four or five
hours, so that the strength of the Medicine may the better pass into all parts
of the body, if it work but slowly let the patient walk up and down a good
space after.

And after the purgation has done working, the patient must be nourished with
a mean quantity of broth, and that will breed good juice, and be easily
digested, and afterward by little and little return to his accustomed diet
again.

Also note that there ought to be more care taken in ministering of all Potions,
Electuaries and Pills, than in Clysters and Suppositaries, by reason they enter
no further then into the guts, where the ordure lies, and by that place
brings forth the matter which causes the Disease. But the other enters
into that way which both meats and drinks do come into the stomach, and there
is boiled and sent forth into the places of digestion, and afterward is mixed
with the juice, whereof the substance of the body is made, and expelling the
adverse humors; yet some part thereof remains in the body, wherefore people
ought to take heed and be careful what Medicines they receive, that in them
there be no venenosity, malice or corruption, least for the expelling of a
superfluous humor they receive a Medicine which shall engender any venomous
humor, and inevitable destruction into all the whole body.

And note also that after any purgation is taken and has wrought to full
perfection, then thirsting and sound sleeping are good signs and tokens that
the body is sufficiently purged.

Having sufficiently treated concerning the use of Blood-letting, and of
Purgations, and the benefit coming thereby, I shall now in brief treat of the
great necessity some people have to have their teeth drawn, and the benefit
which comes thereby, and the manner how a Chyrurgion shall behave himself to
draw a tooth best for the ease of the patient.

Of drawing Teeth.
SOmetime it happens that there is great pain incident to Teeth, and such
torment that the party grieved is as Frenzy that no remedy can be found but
drawing forth the Tooth.

Whenas therefore we would draw forth a Tooth, we must cause the Patient to sit
down in such a place or sort as is convenient, and then make choice of the
corrupted or rotten Tooth, that we may not mistake that from another, which we
must make loose from the gums, and fill up the concavity or hollowness of the
Tooth with a little piece of lead, or a little lint or cotton, filling it full,
so as the pelicane chance not to break, through the hard shutting of the same.

Having hold of it, we must easily and gently crush the instrument together,
lest the Tooth chance to break, and then drawing the foresaid Tooth a little
aside, pluck it out, because that if too rigorously we waggle the Tooth up or
down, that part of the cheek bone wherein the Tooth stood might easily be
broken, therefore it must not with too much violence be drawn. Another reason
is, If it should with violence be drawn out, it might disjoyn and pluck out of
place the nethermost cheek-bone, and so cause great perturbation in the
uppermost jaw, even to the eyes.

The Tooth being drawn we must with out finger join and shut together again the
gums, and cause the Patient to wash his mouth with a little excecrate, wherein
we must put in a little salt, for if there be any efluxion of blood, it ought
not to be esteemed a small thing; for I have known some to bleed even to death,
and therefore the surest way that ever I have known to be used is this, to
thrust therein some cotton which has been madified in juice of Lemons, into
that place from whence the Tooth was drawn.

Now having sufficiently treated of that, I do next purpose to discourse of the
manner how to open a Vein, or Phlebotomize.

Of Phlebotomy.
MY purpose and meaning is not now to describe unto you what Disease or
Sickness requires Phlebotomy, or what age, in what time or season of the year,
in what Country, in what constitution of the body it must be done, or of any
particular occasion:

But my purpose is only to show you how you ought to open a Vein, and whereon
we must diligently consider before we make the apertion therein after we have
opened it; and also whereon we ought not, when the blood issues forth out of
the same.

For it is difficult and dangerous, and therefore is he praiseworthy that can
bleed aright.

It is dangerous, because the Veins are situated sometimes close to the
Arteries, as are the sinews and Tendons, that if we chance to hurt a Tendon
with the Lancet, thereafter most commonly issues a Spasmus or a Gangrene and
mortification, and with great torment ends his life.

If there be any Artery touched or opened, there will be great difficulty in
curing of it, whereby the Patient may bleed to death, and whenas we descide a
Vein quite asunder, both the ends thereof are immediately retracted and drawn
inward, the one end one way, and the other end the other way, so that under the
flesh both the ends are left, and no blood can possibly issue thereout.

If it be then with too great timerousness and fear pricked, and the skin only
wherewith it is covered, is as then inscided, and the Vein not opened; or else
if it be only pricked with the point of the Lancet, the blood as then issues
out droping-wise, and the subtlest blood only comes out, where consequently
thereafter it exulcerateth.

Sometime again the Vein lies occultated so deep in the flesh, that we cannot
with the Lancet find it without great pains.

Yea also, and although we espy them, yet through perpusillity and rotundity
they avoid and eschew the point of the Lancet, how acute and subtle soever the
same be, so that there are diverse occasions wherefore Phlebotomy is difficult,
which to one that has never used it, it seems to be very easy.

But before the Chyrurgion makes his apertion in the Vein, if so be the
Patient be restringed and bound in his belly, and have not in a long time been
at stool.

We must first of all cause him to use a Clyster, because through the
Phlebotomy the Veins being evacuated and emptied, do not atract and draw unto
them out of the guts or entrails, any corrupted or rotten humors whereby any
of the worthiest parts might be offended and hindered.

Consider whereon we ought to be well advised before we Phlebotomize.
PHlebotomy is not expedient, when as the stomach is burdened either with any
crudity of undigested meat or drink, or with any other viscosity whatsoever,
and also it is wholly dissuaded to be done after any great evacuation or any
other occasion whereby the Patient might be debilitated, as is the superfluous
breaking a great lask, great abstinence, continual vigilation, and great
conversation of women, and when all these things are considered, then proceed.

If any person shall desire to be Phlebotomiz'd to prevent any Disease, he must
then cause it to be done when he is best of courage, as being freed from sorrow.

And beside we must not Phlebotomize any person which is fearful and timorous
to bleed, because then the fear causes the blood to withdraw it self toward
the internal parts of the body.

Consider also how we should conveniently Phlebotomize.
THe Patient being lusty and strong, we must then cause him to sit in a stool,
but if he be feeble, and subject unto faintness and swouning, as those be which
are of a hot nature, then we must first let him sip in a soft-dressed egg, or a
morsel of bread sopped in wine, and then cause him to lie on a bed half
setting upright, and stuff him under with cushions, as if he sat.

And above all note that the light of the candle or of the air do rightly shine
on the Vein, because that through the shadow thereof the knowledge of the Vein
and of the place whereon it must be pierced be not vanished out of your sight.

Then must the Chyrurgion with his right hand take the right hand of the
Patient, or with his left hand the left hand of the Patient, out of which he
means to draw blood, depressing the arm somewhat downward, and with his hand
which is free from holding the hand of the Patient, or with a warmed napkin rub
the inside of the arm where he intends to make the apertion, and then bind
the arm double a little above the elbow, with a little narrow list or silk, not
too stiff, nor too loose, because too loose or too stiff binding do both of
them hinder bleeding.

Then must the Patient shut his hand, so that the Veins lie fast and steadfastly
in the flesh and not move this way or that way, and then they also raise
themselves and swell the more, by the which we may the easier see and feel them.

How we ought conveniently to make an apertion in the Vein.
IF the Chyrurgion determine to Phlebotomize in the right arm, he must then lay
hold on the said arm with his left hand, by the bending of the arm, or about
that place where we purpose to make the apertion, and lay his thumb on the Vein
a little below the place where he would prick, that so he may hold the Vein
steadfast without gliding this way or that way, because sometime the Vein
spaimed like a little cord, may chance to roll and glide under the Lancet, and
because the aforesaid Vein is oftentime empleat with wind and ventosities, it
therefore yields and slideth away under the Lancet, where through we cannot
fully pierce it, and by this means the apertion-Vein falls too small.

All this being in this sort noted, we must with the first finger of the right
hand feel where with most convenience we might make the apertion, setting an
impression on the skin above the Vein where you purpose to prick with the nail
of your finger, and then immediately take the Lancet in the right hand, which
between our lips we must have in a readiness, with the which we finely must
make our apertion in the Vein causing the point and accuity of the same gently
to enter into the concavity of the Vein, and not abruptly and rudely with a
hasty thrust.

And to make this apertion the more certain and without trembling of the hands,
the Chyrurgion must take the Lancet in the middle with his thumb and his first
finger, suffering his hand with three of his fingers to rest on the arm, and so
lay his thumb and his first finger which hold the Lancet, on the thumb which
holds fast the Vein, and so without any tremefaction to use the same.

If that the apertion be made at one thrust, it is good, but if not you must
immediately give another prick, either a little below the same, or a little
above it, if the Vein sufficiently demonstrateth her self.

And when you have made the apertion, and it prove too small that the blood
issue out of the same too subtly, so that you fear you shall not draw blood
enough thereout, then immediately we must thrust into the same apertion again
and a little dilute the same, because that oftentimes through too small an
apertion the gross blood congealeth before the apertion, and then consequently
it exulcerateth.

Having conveniently made or brought to pass this apertion, we must then give
the Patient in the hand of that arm whereon he is Phlebotomized, a round staff
thereon to rest his arm, as also to turn round the aforesaid staff in his hand,
that by that means the blood may the better issue out, which if it do not issue
out aright, we must then mark if the ligature be not the cause thereof, as if
it were too hard tied, then we must a little district and make it loose,
without wholly loosing of the same.

A Chyrurgion must also have diverse Lancets, whereof the one must be a little
broader then the other: The broad Lancets are very necessary when the Veins lie
high exalted, and when we desire to make an ample apertion.

The small narrow Lancets are very necessary, when as the Veins lie profoundly
occulted in the flesh, and also when as in the high exalted Vein we desire to
make a small apertion, because sometime the Patient requires a great and
festivous Phlebotomy, to the which end we must make an ample apertion, as we
must also do if we conjecture the blood to be gross, and when the Patient is
lusty and strong. And contrarily if so be we retract and draw back the blood
which supernaturally has issued out of any part of the body, as in those which
spit blood, or those which bleed much at the nose. As then we must make our
apertion small, by reason great evacuation of blood is not necessary for them,
because through their noses they have avoided sufficient, then only in such
accidents is required a regression of blood.

And besides it is necessary that in the aforesaid evacuation and sickness we
suffer the blood to run out long enough out of the apertion of the Vein, which
the Patient would not be able to endure if the aforesaid apertion were ample,
because there would issue too much blood otherways thereout.

We are also in Phlebotomy urged to make a small apertion in those which are
troubled with the frenzy, and in those which are grown mad, because that a
little wound might with all expedition be cured again.

For such frantic persons will always make loose the ligature or dressing
before we are aware thereof, and so they might come in danger of bleeding to
death.

But the apertion being small, although they loosen the arm, yet
notwithstanding they cannot bleed violently, because in such a small apertion
the blood congealeth and stops the wound.

We ought in small Veins to make a small apertion, and in great Veins an ample
apertion: For if so be we make a small apertion in a great Vein, then will
necessarily follow that the blood which coagulateth in the small Veins, be a
hinderance unto the issuing or running out of the blood.

Touching the form and figure of the incision, it is effected three sundry
sorts and fashions.

The first is made overthwart.

The second to the length of the Vein, so that the Vein is cleft or split and
not pricked.

The third is a mean between them both which we may properly call the
contradictory apertion, because so it is made.

We make the apertion overthwart when we are minded to reiterate the
Phlebotomy, for when we bend the arm or elbow, then both the ends of the Vein
join together again; this figure or form is very necessary when as we desire to
make a large apertion.

We must make the apertion sidelong or contradictory, when we purpose to
iterate the Phlebotomy, and we making the apertion in this manner, very seldom
or never miss the Vein, and it is better for the circumstances and standers by
when the blood issues out.

That incision which is made according to the length of the Vein is very
expedient when we intend to renew the blood-letting, and that not only upon the
same day, but on the next day also, because that when we bend the elbow, both
the labia or lips of the Vein do separate and divide themselves.

But in what form soever we make the incision, yet notwithstanding the Vein
must be pierced in the middle without wholly cutting asunder of the same,
because the lips of the Vein might chance to be inverted inwards, and then the
blood cannot result out of the apertion, but run downwards along by the arm, or
both the ends of the Vein may be drawn inwards without deliverance of any blood
from it, or at least in the first very little.

This is not enough neither, but we must well observe this method after the
thrust and apertion is made in the Vein, and when the blood issues thereout.

We shall know when the Vein most commonly is well opened, when as in the first
the blood rusheth, and as it were, leapeth out in great haste, but many times
through the affrighting of the Patient, it immediately alters unto droping,
the reason is because then the blood is drawn inwards.

When this chances at any time unto us, we must with patience abide, and
somewhat unbinde it, and encourage the Patient, causing him to move his fingers
and to turn and crush the staff in his hand.

Sometimes the apertion in the Vein is ample enough, but because the blood is
gross it cannot issue thereout, and for that purpose it is good to put in a
little oil into the apertion to make the blood issue forth. And if the Patient
be weak and feeble it is not good to draw too much blood at once, but rather to
renew the Phlebotomy the second time certain hours after, nay if need require
the third time, rather then to over-charge the Patient with too great a
Phlebotomy at one time.

The Chyrurgion must not in such a case always follow the advice of the
Physician.

For it might chance that before we could detract such a quantity of blood as
the Physician did ordain, the Patient might chance to be debilitated and in
danger to fall into great faintness and swouning, whereon the Chyrurgion must
well consider.

This you may easily perceive when the Patient waxes pale and oppressed at his
heart, his pulse diminishing, and when the blood runs down by his arm.

When at any time this chances, the Chyrurgion must then immediately cease
bleeding, laying his thumb upon the apertion of the Vein, and lay the Patient
upon his back, with his head on a cushion, sprinkling cold water on his face,
and give him a little wine in his mouth, and cause him to smell to some
Vinegar, and have a little patience till he reviveth and come to himself, for
as soon as he shall come to his former strength, we may then finish the
Phlebotomy.

Some there are which in any sort cannot endure Phlebotomy how low soever they
sit, although it be on a bed, or although you do continually hold Vinegar
before their nose, or give them wine to drink, yet notwithstanding let them lie
prostrate on the bed with their head reasonable high, they can then very well
endure and abide the aforesaid Phlebotomy, although we draw a great quantity of
blood from them.

After that we have detracted a reasonable quantity of blood out, we must then
dissolve and make loose the ligature, and crush out the blood of the Vein, lest
that the blood congeal therein and coagulate, and so exulcerate.

If there appears any little parcel of pinguedity or fat, we must then gently
thrust it in again with the head of a pin, and not cut it off, and then wipe
away the blood that cleaves and is dried or exciccated to the arm.

Then lay a little comprese on the apertion which is madefied in cold water;
and wind the lig^^^re twice or thrice about the elbow like a burgundian cross,
without tying both the ends fast, before you have caused the Patient to bend
his arm to lay the ligature thereafter.

This ligature must not be too stiff bound, because the cicatrice by that means
may quickly be situated on the apertion of the Vein.

The arm being thus bound, if the Patient be able to walk he must wear his arm
before on his breast in a scarf, and if he lies on a bed he must gently lay
the same beside him without much moving of the aforesaid arm, neither must he
lie thereon, for some have in their sleeps had their arm violently to bleed
with great danger of their lives.

Blood issues sometimes so violently out of some parts of the body, that with
no comprese or ligature we can restrain the same.

When this happens we are then constrained to lay above on the top of the
apertion, the one half of a green bean, and the comprese thereon, and so bind
it together.

Sometimes there remains a nigredity or blackness, and viridity or greenness
about the apertion, but thereof ensues no evil, unless any other accident
chances thereunto.

When we do intend to renew the Phlebotomy, we must then lay on the incision
salted oil, because that hinders the curing of the wound, and the salt keeps
the blood from coagulation, where-through the apertion of the wound is stopped.

And if the wound were so stopped that the blood would hardly issue thereout,
we must not then rigorously stretch out the arm which the Patient did carry on
his breast doubled, neither must we depress the Vein with great violence to get
the blood thereout, because such violence might cause great pain and
inflammation: But we must rather with a small prinet or searching iron, remove
that blood which therein is exciccated and dried, or rather once again make an
incision.

When we desire to make an apertion in the Veins or Arteries of the temples of
the head, of the forehead, or under the tongue, we must then cause the Patient
to wring about his neck a table napkin or a towell, thereby to cause the blood
to ascend on high, and the Veins to swell which we intend to open.

And when as we intend to open the Veins of the hands or feet, we must bathe
them in warm water, because through calidity and warmth of the water the
aforesaid Veins might erect themselves, and the blood Vein being opened, the
blood may the better issue forth.

Thus have I as fully as may be given Rules of bleeding, and the use thereof,
that a weak capacity may attain thereunto.

Some again there be which desire bleeding with horse-leeches, and that you may
not be left without the manner how to use them, observe these following Rules.

Of bleeding by Horse-leeches.
YOu may know them thus, they are little and perpusill creatures like a worm,
of the longitude of a finger or thereabout, neither are they of any great
crassitude or thickness, unless it be when they are sucking of blood.

The end of their head has a round hole, much like unto a little lamprell,
wherein are to be beheld and seen three stings or acuities proceeding out of
three corners, which so violently and strongly prick, that therewith they can
pierce the skins of all creatures, and thereon they will hang fast until such
time as they have sucked themselves round and full of blood of their own accord.

They live and are engendered in the water, especially in standing waters,
because they delight and are solaced in all filthy and muddy places: I suppose
there is no Chyrurgion but does well know them, because of all men they are
known, but every man does not know which are venomous and which are not
venomous, which is very necessary to be known, by reason of the many accidents
and mischances which might happen thereof.

As for example great tumors, inflammations and venomous ulcerations, through
their venomous momorsions and bitings, yea also and death it self does ensue:
As for example, one was bitten on his knee by one that was venomous, and died
thereof.

You shall know them by their greatness and color, and by the place where they
are caught.

For those which are thick and have a head thicker then the rest of their whole
body, shining like unto glistering worms and are greenish and have on their
back blew or black strokes or lines, and were caught in standing pools, where
all manner of stinking carions and other filthiness is thrown, they are all
venomous, therefore in no case use them.

But those which are small, round, and have a little head, and are of color
much like unto a liver, a round belly, and the back stroaked with gold yellow
strokes, and live in clean running water, they are not venomous, but you may
safely use them; yet not so soon as they are caught, but first of all keep them
two or three weeks in a glass of fair water, because therein they may void the
viscosity and impureness.

And be sure to refresh the aforesaid water every three days, and wash the
said horse-leeches with your hand from all their filth and sliminess.

Galen does counsel the first day to keep them in blood, and then put them in
fresh water, and thus we may preserve them a whole year or longer if we please
to use them when need requires.

The use of them was invented in stead of scarifying, we may apply them on such
places of the body where we cannot set any boxes at all.

As for example, in the privities, on the gums, on the lips, and sometime on
the raw flesh of any wound, or on the nose, or above on the hand or fingers, or
on the legs or thighs also.

And when the Patient fears boxing, or else when we desire to draw and
extract any venom out of a thrust or bite of any venomous creature, before we
apply them, and because they might be hungry and not to retain any thing in
their bodies, and because they should the sooner lay hold we must take them out
of the water three or four days before we use them, and put them in a little
new box of wood, and keep them so till we use them.

We must first wash that place where we intend to apply them very clean, and if
the place by reason of salve or plaster be faulty, you must wash it off clean
also, because they are enemies unto all pinguedity and fatness: this being
done, we must take them one after the other in their middles with a white clean
cloth, for if we touch them with our bare fingers it will hinder their biting
or placing their heads to that place where we would have them suck: if they
will not at the first lay hold we must then anoint the place with pigeons or
hens blood, or cause the place, either with the point of a Lancet, or with the
point of a pin to bleed, and then immediately she will begin to suck.

And if she do not suck so violently as we do desire, or if we would have her
suck more then she is able to hold, we must then with a pair of cisers clip her
asunder above the third part of the body, whereby she will begin to suck far
stronger and with more violence, and as fast as she sucketh the blood departs
from her through the hindermost parts which is cut away.

If they be not cut when they have sucked themselves full they will fall off,
and when one is fallen off, you may apply another on the same place, for when
they are satisfied they will of themselves fall off.

And if we would have them fall off before they are satisfied, we may then
strew a little salt or ashes of wood, and they will immediately fall off.

If when they are fallen off, blood does drop from the bite, it is a sign that
they have drawn blood from far, which blood we must not on the sudden stop,
because that part may be the better purged and purified from all venomous
humors, if any be at hand.

For which cause some do apply small boxes upon the place sucked, or else they
wash that place with hot water being salted, and so cause it to bleed somewhat
longer, if cause require, and the Patient be able to suffer it.

And if the blood run out too long and will hardly be restrained through
comprese, we must then apply thereon a little adusted or burned linen with his
finger, or a cloven bean, retaining the same with his finger so long thereon
till he can come to lay on a small comprese and bind the same thereon, if
possibly it may be done.

And so I have been as good as my word to give you the method of bleeding with
Horse-leeches.

Here follows a Catalogue of such Medicines as are good to Cure all or most
Diseases incident to Man's body, from the Head to the Foot, as well Inwardly as
Outwardly.
An excellent Medicine for that Grief we call an Ach in the Bones.
TAke Aqua vitae, Neats-foot oil, Ox gall, and oil of Camomill it self, and
boil them all together, and stir it well until it be well boiled and
consumed to a pint, then strain it, and when you will use it anoint the place
grieved therewith, and this will assuage the pain immediately. Probatum est.

Another for the same.

TAke a good quantity of Scurvy Grass, and put thereto a good quantity of
Barrows-grease and stamp them together, and then boil them together, and when
it is well boiled then strain forth the liquor into some Gallipot, and stop it
close, and when you have an occasion to use it anoint the place grieved often
therewith before a good fire, and this will cure the Ach in a short time. Prob.
est.

Another for the same.

TAke a pint or somewhat more of good malmsie, one pint of Capons grease, and
one penyworth of Frankincense finely beaten to powder and sifted very fine,
boil all these together till one half be consumed, and then strain it, and so
keep it close for your use in some gallipot, and anoint the place grieved often
therewith and it will help. Prob. est.

Another for the same, although it be a Sciatica.

TAke Neats-foot oil, and Aqua composita and mingle them both together, and let
the Patient anoint the place where the pain is, and take new plucked wool from
the sheeps back and lay it upon the grief, and wrap it well with warm clothes,
and this will help him.

Another for the same, and good for all manner of Aches and Bruises in the
Bones.

TAke a good quantity of Wallwort, and a certain quantity of Balm and Smallidge
and stamp them all together, then take a pound of May butter and temper them
very well together, then make them up in round bals, and let them lie the space
of eight days after, and then stamp them again as you did before, then take it
and fry it and put it into an earthen dish or pot and so use it, and this will
help a bruise though never so black. Prob. est.

A precious Plaster for all manner of Aches, for as soon as the Plaster is
warm on the flesh the pain is gone, excellent for the Gout.
TAke unwrought wax two pound, Deer suet half a pound, perroson four pound,
mace and cloves of each two ounces and a half, saffron one ounce, rosin two
pound, pitch four ounces, powder the Spices, and melt those things which are to
be melted, powder your saffron with the Spices and searce them, set your things
which are to melt on a soft fire, and when it is boiling pour in by little and
little at a time a pottle of red wine, stirring it well into the salve, and
when it is well melted strain it into a clean pan, and then put in your powder
of Cloves, Mace, and Saffron, casting it abroad upon your ingredients, stirring
them well together, and let them stand till they be cold, then anoint your
hands with oil and grease, and while it is warm make it up into good big rowls,
draw it with your hands till it be colored like wax, and wrap every roll into
a piece of oyled paper and keep it for your use. Prob. est.

An excellent ointment for all Aches, Rickets, Stiches, bruised Shoulders, and
all Colds.
TAke of Sage and Rue of each one pound, of Wormwood and Bayleaves of each half
a pound, one handful of Rosemary, chop these herbs as small as may be, add
thereunto the like weight of sheeps suet clean picked from the skin and cut
small, bring these unto one substance, and add thereunto oyl-olive a pottle and
a pint, and work them together with your hands to one substance, then cover
them close that no air come to them for the space of nine days, then set it on
a fire and boil them softly, always stirring them till the herbs be purged, then
strain them and keep them for your use.

Another most approved Medicine for the same.

TAke half a pound of Mutton suet of the near, and one pint of white wind
Vinegar, and one piece of rosell as big as an egg, and one handful of Elder
leaves, and one handful of Camamill, and shred them very small, and boil these
altogether while they are boiled half away, and with this make a Plaster and
lay to the grief and it will cure approvedly.

A precious Ointment good for the Ach in the Bones, or to take the Ague out of
any part of the Body.
TAke Wormwood and Rue, Vervine, Dill, and herb John, and Balm, of each a like
quantity cut them very small, and then boil them in Mutton suet and fresh May
butter, of each a like quantity till it come to the substance of an ointment,
strain it and keep it for your use.

Another for the same.

TAke a quantity of Rosin and a quarter of a pound of Mutton suet, and a
quantity of Bees wax, and a quantity of Saffron, and a quantity of Boneset, and
a quantity of Roman nettles, and boil them like a salve.

Another for the same, or numbness in the Joints.

TAke a linen cloth and wet it in Dragon water and apply it very warm morning
and evening, or drink six spoonfuls of Dragon water, and one dram of
Methredatum three mornings together, and sweat every morning two hours. Cures.

A precious Unguent for the same, or Sciatica, or to expel wind, or to ease
pain in the Back or stone in the Kidneys, anoint the place therewith first rub
it well with a dry cloth.
TAke an Ox gall, flit it in the bottom, and let it run out into a pipkin, and
add thereto one pound of Neats-foot oil and ground Ivy, Rue, Camamill and
Thyme, of each one handful, pound them in a mortar together, add thereto one
ounce of aqua vitae, boil them all at a soft fire threequarters of an hour,
stir it often in the boiling, and then strain it, and so it is made.

An excellent remedy for the cure of that Disease so hardly to be cured, viz.
the Ague.
TAke two ounces of bay salt, and two ounces of Frankincense, and one handful
of Smallidge, beat them together, and lay them to the wrists of both your
hands, and to the bows of your arms, let this be done two hours before the fit
comes. Prob est.

For a burning Ague.
TAke one handful of Strawbery leaves, and one handful of Violet leaves, one
handful of Sorrel leaves, and so stamp them and strain them into posset-ale,
and drink it as hot as you can suffer it when your fit is coming upon you.
Prob. est.

An excellent Medicine for an Ague or burning Fever: It has cured some which
were thought past cure.
TAke two handfuls of Plantine, and as much Ribleaf which is like Plantine but
somewhat longer, a pottle of running water, but take it up against the stream,
two penny worth of Liquorish fine scraped, and boil them altogether till the
liquor come to a pint, then put it into as much Sugar Candy as you think fit to
sweeten it, and then strain it and let the Patient drink of this at all times,
refusing all other drink as near as he can till the Fever leaves him. Prob.
est.

A precious Unguent for an Ague, bruise or sprain.
TAke Rue, Yarrow, Dill, Self-heal, Vervain, Mugwort, Comfry, Adders tongue,
red Sage, Fennel, red Nettles, red Dock leaves, Valerian, Carduus Benedictus,
of each two handfuls, bruise all these together in a mortar, and then boil them
in one pound and a half of May butter for a quarter of an hour still stirring
it, then strain out the herbs, and add to the liquor oil of Dill, and oil of
exceter, of each one dram, let them be set upon the fire again, and let it boil
one wallop, and when it is cold anoint the place grieved therewith.

The Ague fallen into the legs, which cause them to swell. The Cure.
TAke Plantine, Marygold, Houndstongue, St John's wort, Bettony, red Fenill,
Southistle, Dandelion, Smallidge, Plumtree leaves, of each of them a handful,
shred them small, and add to them wheat meal, and sees them in hot Cows milk
to a plaster, and so apply it, this will dissolve the humor and digest it by
the serosity of the blood. Approved.

A Medicine to cure the Ague either in old or young.
TAke as much milk as will make you a quart of posset-ale, and then take the
young tops of Rosemary, Marygolds, Plantine, and young Bay leaves, of each two
drams, cut them small and boil them in the posset-ale until all the strength
be out, then drink a great draught thereof ever before the fit comes, and
sweat upon it, do this three times and it will cure. Approved by many.

Another approved Medicine for an Ague and Fever.

TAke of Dragon water, and of aqua composita to the quantity of a quarter of a
pint of each, and put therein a pennyworth of London Treakle, and half a
quarter of an ounce of gross beaten Pepper, warm all these together and
continue stirring it with a knife, and give it the Patient to drink as hot as
he may suffer it, a little before the fit comes, and let him lie down and
sweat very well. This has cured many.

Another for the same.

TAke an Oxe-gall and as much aqua composita, and put unto it a quarter of an
ounce of pepper a little bruised, and add to it two pennyworth of Treakle, and
anoint the hands and wrists and stomach with the things aforesaid, being all
mingled together, let this be done half an hour before the fit comes, and
applied as hot as the Patient can suffer it, and let him sweat well upon it and
it will speedily cure him. Prob. est.

An excellent Plaster for the same.
TAke red Rose water, Venice Turpentine and Frankincense, of each of them two
pennyworth, and mingle them well together, then take a piece of white sheeps
leather sit for both the wrists and strike the same upon them and apply them
hot to both the wrists of the party grieved, and let the same remain till it
fall off of its own accord. This has cured those that have been troubled
therewith two years, who have taken the disease in foreign Countries.

For the Toothache.
TAke a little cotton and dip it in the essence of Cloves which you may have at
the Apothecaries, and thrust it into the hollowness of the tooth and it will
appease the pain presently, and you will be well. Prob. est.

To cause a good Appetite.
TAke Centory and boil it in fair water, and put into it one ounce of
Sugar Candy, Sugar and Anniseeds, of each a like quantity, boil these well
together, and let the Patient drink thereof lukewarm every morning for six
mornings together, three spoonfuls at a time, this will help although the party
be never so far spent.

A good Plaster to ease pain or a crick in the Back.
TAke white Archangell flowers and leaves a good quantity, and of Comfry leaves
and roots of Plantine one ounce, bursa pastoris one ounce, beat them altogether
very well, and put unto them a spoonful of honey, and fry them in a pan, and
divide it into four parts, and make of every part a Plaster, and lay it on the
back of the Patient in four nights when he goes to bed. Prob. est.

A Remedy for one that is Bound in his Belly.
TAke a good quantity of Hempseed and sees it in fair running water, and then
strain it through a fair linen cloth, and let the Patient drink a good draught
when he goes to bed, and it will make him laxitive.

Another for the same.

TAke a chicken, and a pretty quantity of Cassula fustula and sees them
together in fair running water, and let the Patient drink the broth and it will
make him laxitive without pain.

A mavelous good Water to break the stone in the Bladder.
TAke two pints of the juice of Saxifrage, the juice of Gromell, and of the
juice of Parsley, each of them a pint, and put thereto a quantity of eight or
nine ounces of the best Vinegar that is made of pleasant Wine, and distill all
these together, and then put the distilled water into some glass or other
vessel with a narrow mouth, and let the Patient take one ounce at a time, three
times in a day, morning, noon and at night, a little before he go to bed. Prob.
est.

Another drink to take after the stone is broken to avoid it in slivers.

TAke Rosemary and wild thyme, of each a handful, and seethe them in a quart
of rain water, until the one half be consumed, and then put in as much Sugar
as will make it sweet, and let the Patient drink often thereof every day until
he see his water being thick grow thin.

A good Medicine to staunch Bleeding at the Nose.
TAke a linen cloth and wet it well in Vinegar and wrap it about the members
of him that bleedeth, and his bleeding will soon cease.

Another for the same.

TAke Centory, green Rue, and red Fennel, of each a like quantity and stamp
them all together, and strain them into ale, and let the Patient drink thereof
lukewarm, and this will stop the bleeding of any wound, cut or bruise.

A good Medicine against spitting of Blood
TAke the juice of Betony, and temper it well with Goats milk and give it the
Patient to drink three days together. Prob. est.

Another for the same.

TAke Betony, Mints, Smallidge and Rue, of each a like quantity and sees them
all together in new milk, and let the Patient drink it as hot as he can suffer
it. Prob. est.

A singular good Oil for all manner of Bruises, Spleens, Swellings in the legs
or arms.
TAke a pint or somewhat more of pure Sallet Oil, and bruise a good quantity of
Cammomill and put therein, and put it into a glass, and set it into some place
where the Sun comes that it may stand safe for ten or twelve days, but when
it has stood five days then take it and strain it through a fine linen
cloth, and set it again into his place aforesaid, the remainder of the time
aforesaid, and then strain it again and set it the third time, and let it stand
till it be clean purified from any drugs, and then put it into a clean glass
and stop it close until you have use for it, and then anoint the place grieved
two or three times a day chafing it before the fire and it will help you. This
Oil stopped close will continue good twelve years.

A good Medicine for a Bruise or Cut.
TAke roots of Loveage, Alchoof, Parsley and Anniseeds, and beat them very fine
in a mortar, then take Barrows grease and boil them together, and then strain
them, and put to them as much unwrought wax as contains a Walnut, and half as
much rosin, and then boil them all together again, and having so done, strain
it through a fine linen cloth into a pan of water, and let it stand till it be
almost cold, then take it and work it well in your hands till it be something
short, then put it into a piece of leather and keep it for your use.

A Drink to heal all manner of Bruises.
TAke Egremony, Betony, Plantine, Sage, Roses, Jvyleaves, and Parsley, of each a
like quantity, and stamp them altogether, and mingle them with white wind, and
let the Patient drink thereof and it cures. Prob. est.

A Medicine for a Burning or Scalding, approved.
TAke the inner-bark of Elder, the leaves of Alexander, and the leaves of
Dasies, boil them in Hog's Grease, then strain them well and anoint the grief
with a feather and cover it with a red Colwort-leaf and you will be well.

A speedy Remedy for a Woman in Childbirth.
TAke a Date-stone and grate it to powder, and give a woman in travel to drink
in whitewine, and she will have a speedy deliverance.

Another for the same.

TAke Polipodium or Oke-fearn and stamp it very well and make thereof a
Plaster and apply it to her feet that is in travel, and it will cause a
speedy deliverance of the child dead or alive. Prob. est.

A good Medicine for to help the Kidneys and to cause the reins of the Back to
grow strong.
TAke Buglas water that is distilled, and put thereto a good quantity of clean
Rose Water, and a good piece of fine Sugar, and drink thereof every morning
fasting, this will restore nature and strengthen. Very much approved.

An excellent good Salve for any new cut or wound that will not cease Bleeding.
TAke a good quantity of the blades of Leeks and stamp them very well, and put
thereto a good quantity of Wheat Flour, and a good quantity of honey and mix
them well together, but let it not come near the fire, and lay it cold upon the
cut or wound, this will staunch the blood immediately, and will also draw forth
all the bruised blood, and make clean the wound. Pro. est.

A very good way to make a salve called the Black salve, which cures all old
sores and ulcers, be they never so foul.
TAke a gallon of stale Ale which is strong, two handfuls of Woodbine leaves,
half a handful of seeded Nettles, as many Colworts which have ragged leaves
upon them, red Onions and Garlic pilled, of each half a pound, one pound of
unset Leeks, one handful of the powder of a rotten post which is of Oak, and
stamp all these well together in a mortar, and put them altogether into the
Ale, with half a pound of Rochallum, and then set them over a soft fire to boil
till the one half be consumed or more, then strain the same through a fine
linen cloth into an earthen pot that is clean, then take one pound of Virgins
wax, half a pound of Rosin, half a pound of nerve oil that is good and green,
and a good quantity of stone honey, and put them and mingle them with the rest,
then let it stand four or five days, then take it and boil it again till it be
half consumed, then take it off the fire and put it up into a clean pot, and
stop it close for your use. Prob. est.

A perfect way to set a bone or to heal a broken bone in man or beast.
TAke the juice of Comfry roots, and wild Daises, boil them with Turpentine
and yellow wax, and make a flat Plaster therewith, and lay it to the grief and
set splinters about it, and roll it to keep it stiff once in five days until
it be whole also, let the Patient drink the juice of the roots nine days with
the use of the Plaster. Prob. est.

A proved Medicine against the grief of the lungs, and spitting of Blood.
TAke of the herb Tussilago, called at the Apothecaries Vngula Caballina, in
plain English Coltsfoot, incorporate it well with the Lard of a Hog chopped
with a new laid egg, boil all together in a pan, and give this to the Patient
nine mornings to eat, this will also make one fat.

Against a stinking Breath.
TAke Rosemary leaves with the blossoms, if you can get them, and sees them in
whitewine, with a little myrrh and Sinamon, and use it often in your mouth and
you shall find a mavelous good effect. And Commin powdered and boiled in
white wine half the quantity boyld away, and take half a pint at a time
mornings and evenings. This will cure in fifteen days.

A proved Medicine for an ach or sore Breast.
TAke Frankincense, fine wrought wax, Boars grease and Rosin, of each of them a
like quantity, and sees them together to a cake, and spread it on a cloth as
broad as the sore or pain, and let it lie twenty four hours, or twenty, or
twelve at least.

Another for the same.

TAke a handful of Mallows, sees them very soft in fair water, and then
strain them from the water and shred them small, then put them in a dish with
Boars-grease, and mingle them together and heat them very hot, and lay it on a
linen cloth and apply it plaister-wise to the breast hot as you can three or
four times a day, and this will help you, as has been proved.

A Remedy against the Biting of a mad dog, and the raging of madness which will
follow the party bitten.
TAke the blossoms of flowers of wild thistle dried in the shade and beaten
into powder, and take the quantity of half a nutshell full in a small quantity
of white wind and drink it, and in thrice taking of it you will be whole.
Approved.

A Remedy for one that spits blood by the breach of a Vein in the Breast.
TAke Mice-dung beaten into powder, as much as will lie upon a groat, and put
it into half a glassfull of the juice of Plantine with a little Sugar, and give
the Patient thereof to drink morning and evening, continuing it with Gods help
he shall in a short space be sound. Prob. est.

A good Ointment for a Bruise.
TAke a pound of May butter without salt, and set it on the fire, and when it
is boiled scum off the froth, and then put into it one handful of Rosemary,
Bayleaves, Fennel, Wormwood, Smallidge, of each a handful, shred them small
and boil them in the butter till it look green, then put into it Beeswax,
Rosin, Frankincense, of each one pennyworth, and let them melt but not boil in
it, when they are melted strain them, it is good for a Sprain or Bruise or any
old Ach.

An approved Medicine to staunch Blood at the nose, or any Vein that is cut.
TAke feathers and burn to powder and lay upon the Vein that is cut, and take a
wet cloth and lap it round about the members, and lay it on cold three times
and it will staunch blood wherever.

A Composition of a most excellent and precious Ointment to heal presently any
Scalding or Burning with fire, hot water or powder, or whatsoever else, being
presently applied, at which time it will work the best effect and hinder all
blistering and breakings out, the excellency of it cannot be parellelled.
TAke a wine pint of Oyl-olive and put into a clean pipkin, then gather some of
the Elder tree sprigs no bigger then the top of your finger, and a handful of
the smallest and young leaves, scrape off lightly the upper rind of the sprigs
and cast it away, then scrape off the second rind which is green and reserve
about a handful of that which together with the leaves put into a pipkin with
the oil, take also a few Plantine leaves and leaves of Sengreen and put them in
also, and add also a sixth part of strong white wind Vinegar, two or three
spoonfuls of Urine, about two inches of a cotton candle without the wick, let
all these boil together at a soft fire, stirring it now and then, then strain
it through a course linen cloth, and put that which you strain out into the
pipkin again, and put to it a little yellow wax and let it melt together still
stirring it till it come to an ointment or salve, which you may keep in a Vial
or box, when you will use it spread it thin upon a paper or linen cloth and
lay it to the place burned, and let it lie twenty four hours, if you do apply
it in this sort presently upon the scald or burning it will take out the fire
and hinder blistering and redness, and heals it in half a quarter of an hour,
it is also sovereign against the swelling or inflammation of the legs, and also
for any heat whatsoever. Prob. est.

Doctor Matthias, or the Lukatella Oil or Balsom, called Cordius Balsom.
THe virtues of it are many, as follows, (...) It is very effectual against
the watering of the Lungs, taking the quantity of a hazel nut in the morning
fasting.

It is also good to heal a wound inward or outward, being searing inwardly, and
applied to the outward with fine linen cloth or lint, as hot as may be endured.

It does draw forth broken bones or any thing which may putrify or fester if
the brain be not touched.

It is good against burnings, scaldings, bruises or cuts.

It takes away pains or griefs that proceed of moisture, as Aches in the bones
or sinews, first anointing the part grieved and then applying a warm cloth.

It also helps the headache anointing the temples or nosthrils therewith, and
taking a little quantity inward.

It is also good against the wind chollick or a stitch in the side, applying
thereto warm with hot clothes a quarter of an hour.

It expels poison and helps a surfeit by taking one ounce at once four
mornings together.

It helps the biting of a mad dog, or any other mad beast, the quantity of
one ounce taken in a little warm Sack.

It is also good against the Plague, anointing the lips and nosthrils in the
morning.

It is also good for a Fistula or Ulcer.

It is good for one infected with the Plague or small Pox or Measels presently
taken in hot broth a quarter of an ounce four mornings together, sweating after
it.

It is good also for worms or a canker.

It does help digestion. anointing the stomach and navil therewith going to bed.

It stauncheth the bleeding of fresh wounds laying a Plaster of lint upon the
wound, and tying it hard on.

This Balsom will do no good if any thing be applied before or between it to
the wound or grief, you may keep it twenty years, the longer the better. Prob.
est for all these things.

The way to make this Balsom.
Take a pint and half of Sallet-oyl and beat it with one pint of Sack, Venice
Turpentine one pound, beat it in Damask-rose water, still pouring it out till
the Turpentine look white, yellow wax four ounces, melt it in a great earthen
pot or pipkin and add to it the former ingredients, stirring them altogether
till they boil, then take it from the fire, put in one ounce of red Sanders,
then let it boil one hour, then take it off and keep it in a gallypot for your
use, which you may do by Plaster as well as by fommatation and tents. Prob.
est for the griefs aforesaid.

The way to prepare your Sanders is thus,

Take your quantity of Sanders and make paste thereof with the sharpest wine
Vinegar you can get, and roll it round, and bake it with white bread and let it
after stand a while to dry, and when it is through dry pound it well and searce
it for your use.

Another direction.

Take your Sack, set it on the fire, put into it the wax and let them boil
together till the wax is well melted, then put into it half your Oil, but let
it not boil after the Oil is in, then take it off and let it cool, and when it
is cold, put from it the Sack, and pour in the rest of your ingredients letting
them well melt but not boil, then take it off again and as it is cooling put in
your red Sanders and put it up into a new vessel which was never used; if you
have any of the naturea Balsom put some of it therein.

A special good black Plaster or sear-cloth to lay to any wound, or to ease
any ach or swelling, or to draw out any thorns: approved by the Lady Grimstone.
TAke Sallet oil and Neatsfoot oil, of each half a pint, and put therein half a
pound of red lead beaten very small, and as you strew it in a little at once
stir it well, then set it on the coals of a soft fire, and let it boil till
it look black, then put in as much rosin as contains the bigness of an egg
beaten small, stir it well all the time it is boiling, let it not boil too
fast least it boil over, drop a little upon a pewter dish, and if it roll off
without hanging then it is enough, and so may you make plasters or dip in
clothes without fremes for sear-clothes, take Sallet-oyl in want of Neats-foot.
Prob. est.

Another for a combustion or Burning with Gunpowder.

TAke out the fire first by linseed-oyl and water beaten together, more water
then oil, Plantine water is best, you may for your use dip in lane or fine
Holland clothes. Then take of Vnguentum album half an ounce, and Vnguentum
poppillion and warm them in a porringer, and with a feather anoint the
combustion, then lay on dry clothes upon the combustion.

And then if any spungy flesh arise,

Take spirit revinum one ounce, and put in seven drops of oleum vitriolum and
with a probe armed with lint dip it in the medicine and wash the Ulcer
therewith spreading a cloth with Vnguentum album and lay over it, and so do
till your cure be done.

A special Remedy for a weak Back.
TAke a new laid egg and put out all the yeolk, and then take as much white
amber as will lie on a groat heapt, and put it into your egg with Muskedine,
and drink it in the morning as soon as you can and lie one hour or two after
it, and if you can sleep, and at the two hours or thereabouts, and after you
have taken it take a draught of candle made with whites of eggs and no yeolks.

A Direction how to make a wholesome mess of Broth for a sick body, whose stomach
is not good.
TAke the yeolks of two eggs, put them in a little pipkin for that purpose,
squeese therein the juice of a lemon or two, then take a good ladlefull of some
broth out of another pot that boyls, first beat the eggs and lemon well
together and put in the said broth, make it not salt by no means, then stir
altogether upon a soft fire, at the first boil take it off, and when it is cool
enough give it the Patient.

To staunch Blood.
TAke Sanguis Draconis, bole armonick, Vermillion, of each a like quantity,
compound them with the white of eggs beat it to the form of a plaster, this
has stayed the blood of a woman's breast that was cut off.

To purge the Back and Brain.
TAke the powder of Bettony and English honey and make a dose of pills and take
two pills thereof when you go to bed, as big as a small nut, next morning you
shall see the effect thereof.

For a pain in the Back.
TAke a plaster of Paracelsus and lay thereon warm, and it cures.

To scale a mortified Bone.
TAke honey of Roses, and dip spledgets of lint therein, and lay it on the bone
till you find the bone loose, dress it every night for three nights, if it do
not then loosen by the sides in feeling, then apply this unguent or ointment,

Take pure hog's grease half a pound, argentum vivum two ounces well mortified
and brayed together, warm the Unguent in a sawcer or porringer, and with a
feather anoint the bone morning and evening and lay thereon lint, and roll it
up just let him keep his bed and take no cold and you shall see the bone arise,
then heal it up as you see occasion.

The Black plaster that mundifieth all sores and takes away all pain.
TAke Sallet-oyl and white wind Vinegar twelve ounces, white lead and red lead
of each two ounces, wax three ounces, boil them altogether till they be black,
and when you have taken it from the fire add two drams of camphire prepared
and mix it well.

A powder which scaleth Bones and stops the watering of sinews.
TAke burned Copras one ounce, auri pigmentum fine combust one ounce,
Verdigrease sinely searced one ounce, burned Alum fine powdered and searced
three ounces, mix them together, so use them, it is excellent in operation.

Another for the same and to abate spungy flesh.

TAke fine Alum, Verdigrease, of each two ounces, Bole four ounces finely
powdered, mix altogether, and so use it.

A good Medicine to cure any Disease which proceeds from the Breast.
TAke Parsley roots, Fennel roots, and Succory roots of each a like quantity,
take out the piths clean and wash away the dirt and sand from them, and then
sees them in white wind till they be soft, and then when it is well boiled
strain them and add thereto a little Pellitory of Spain, and let the Patient
drink hereof morning and evening for the space of eight or nine days together,
this has helped those which could not fetch their breath at all hardly.

A Remedy for a Chin chough.
TAke Bores-grease and warm the feet of the Patient against the fire, and chafe
and rub in the said grease well, and then let the Patient go to bed and be kept
very warm, specially his feet. This may be done to little Children. Prob. est.

Another for the same.

TAke a Mouse and flay it, and dry it in an oven, and beat it to powder, and
give it the Patient to drink in a quantity of Ale and it will help him, and it
is also good for those that cannot hold their water. Prob. est.

Another for the same, and for the straitness of the Pipes.

TAke dry Figs and Hysope and stamp them well together, and boil them well
with Honey, and let the Patient take it fasting and it will help. Prob. est.

Another for the same, a Syrup.

TAke Horehound and Hysope of each a like quantity, and a little water and
sugar and boil these together till they come to be a Syrup, let the Patient eat
this morning and evening and at other convenient times. Prob. est.

Another for the same, a pure one.

TAke Ellecampany and Reddish roots a like quantity and shred them small, and
pears or wardens twice the quantity as of the other, then put them together
into an earthen pot, and put as much clarified Honey thereto as will make it
ready to overflow the said ingredients, then cover it close that no breath
issue out, then set it in an oven and bake it with a batch of bread, and then
when it is baked give of this morning and evening a spoonful and at noon to
the Patient. Prob. est.

A perfect Syrup for the same.
TAke half a pound of white Sugar Candy, and half a pint of Rosewater, and a
good quantity of Licorish clean pared and bruised, boil all these together
until you see it come to a Syrup, then strain it through a fine linen cloth
and put it in a glass and keep it for your use. Prob. est.

A Medicine to take away Corns.
TAke black Soap and Snails, of each of them a like quantity, and stamp them
together, and make a plaster thereof and spread it upon a piece of white
leather and lay it to the Corn, and it will take it away within seven or eight
days. Prob. est.

A good Medicine to avoid Choler.
TAke half an ounce of Cassia which is new drawn, and a dram of Rubarb, and let
them be infused for the space of a night with water of indive and a little
Spiknard, and one ounce of Syrup of Violets and mingle them together with the
quantity of three or four ounces of whey, and let the Patient drink it warm.
Prob. est.

A proved Medicine for the Strangury, Chollick and Stone.
TAke Gromell seed, Parsley and red Nettle seed, Violet leaves, Smalledge,
Cherry stones, Philopendula, Eli sanders, Saxifrage, Cummin seed and Fennel
seed. Anniseed and Coriander seed, Sowthistle and Dill seed, of each of them a
like quantity, beat them very small in a mortar and searce them fine, then take
the Gum of Ivy or else the Berries of Ivy dried and beaten to powder, and
mingle with the powder aforesaid, and let the Patient drink this powder in
white wind or stale Ale or in his pottage morning and evening for eight or nine
days. Prob. est.

A Clyster for the same.
TAke Mallows, Pellitory of the wall and Carduus Benedictus, Colworts, Setrach,
and Oak-fearn, and Alkabergi seeds, of each a like quantity, and make thereof a
Decoction, then add oil of Dill and Camomili, and oil of Lillies, of each one
dram, and of Hiera simplex and salt, and so apply it.

An approved Medicine against the grief of the Flank and the Chollick passion.
TAke half a glass or less of the juice of Barberies when they be very ripe and
red, and put into it as much red Coral in powder as will lie upon a groat, and
give the Patient to drink.

Another perfect one for the same.

TAke fine powder of Virga aurea, and put one spoonful of it into a new laid
egg soft roasted, and give it the Patient in a morning fasting, and let him
fast four hours after it, and he will suddenly make water, use this for ten or
twelve days, and the Patient will void the Stone without any pain. Prob. est.

To cure a Cough that comes by cold suddenly.
TAke aqua vitae and Sallet-oyl, and loaf Sugar, mingle them together when you
go to bed, take a quantity of it, and in the morning when you arise also it
will take away your cough and ease your lungs. Proved.

To cure the Wind chollick.
TAke Seahorse pisfle, Hearts horn and enula campana of each one dram finely
powdered, take as much of this in a morning fasting as will lie on a groat or
somewhat more in a cup of Anniseed water. Prob. est.

Consumption a noted Cure.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Jordan Almonds blanched and beat small, adding
thereto in the beating some Rosewater one or two spoonfuls, then take the thigh
of a roasted Capon flay off the skin beat it in a mortar alone, then take
fourteen Dates stoned, skinned and picked and beat them alone, then put them
all in a pint of Rosewater with some Sugar and boil them three walms, then take
Sinamon two drams, Lignum and Aloes both powdered one dram, put them in your
Decoction and stir them well together, and put it up into some Vial, and
take the quantity of a Walnut at once in the morning fasting, the first three
mornings add to it every time two grains of Bezor.

A Diet-drink for the same.
THe first week in May infuse in your usual drink Succory, Devils bit,
Scabions, water cresses. Lungwort, Polipodium, Coltsfoot, Pennyroyal, Liverwort
of each two handfuls bruised and put in a fine linen cloth bag, and so put it
in your drink when it is new tunned, to work therein and this you will find
very good, drink no other drink for fourteen days.

To make an Incision to take out a corrupt Coar.
TAke Rose alger and powder it fine and mix it with Hog's Grease, and lay it on
so broad as you will have the Coar come out.

A perfect cure for a Canker.
TAke a pint of white wind Vinegar, and take Strawbery leaves, Colibine leaves,
red Sage leaves, Woodbine, Violet and red briar leaves of each a handful and
set your Vinegar upon a soft fire, and put in your herbs, and let them boil
till they be soft, then strain your leaves hard out and keep it in a Vial for
your use.

Another for the same.

TAke running water a pint, Woodbine, Bramble, Colibine leaves, of each a
handful, and a little Rosemary, boil all these together till half the water be
wasted, then strain it, and add thereto two or three spoonfuls of Honey, and a
little of Roach-allum three or four spoonfuls of white wind Vinegar, and so
wash the mouth with the herbs three or four times a day.

Chollick the cure.
TAke Gum hederue warm it that it may spread and spread it upon a piece of
Scarlet as big as a shilling or broader, and apply it to the navil. Your best
Gum is sweet, clear and soft. Prob. est.

For the Consumption. Proved.
TAke Diascordium, Flower of brimstone, Conserve of red Roses, and make this
into little bals and lay one of them under your tongue when you go to bed, and
let it dissolve in your mouth, also take Coltsfoot and white amber and
Anniseeds altogether in a pipe mornings and evenings.

A good Remedy for the biting of a mad Dog.
TAke Nightshed, Bettony and wild Sage, each of them a handful, and one pint
of fair running water, and stamp the herbs and strain them with the water, and
then put thereto a pennyworth of good Treakle and give it the Patient to drink
three or four mornings together fasting, and this will help him speedily. Prob.
est.

An excellent Diet-drink for any disease.
TAke a new earthen pot and fill it full of fair running water, only wanting
about a quart of being full, and then add thereto about a quart of white wind,
and set the pot over a soft fire of coals, and put into the pot a pound of
good Licorish scraped clean and sliced, and half a pound of Anniseeds bruised,
half a pound of Lignum vitae which you may have at the Turners, and one ounce
of the bark which is of the same tree, which you may have at the Apothecaries,
add thereto a small quantity of China and Saxifrage, and a little Centory, let
all these boil on the fire about two hours, or until you see a good part of
the liquor consumed, then strain it into another clean earthen vessel and stop
it close, and drink a good draught thereof morning and evening and at noon a
while after dinner. Prob. est.

A most excellent Wine made of Sage for to be drunk at all times, if you wash
your mouth therewith it will help the Toothache and pains of the gums, it is
good for the Palsy, and for the Cramp, and for Lunatic persons, it restores
sinews shrunk, it expels ill humors out of the body, it is also good against
the Plague and Pistilence.
TAke a good quantity of Sage, both white and red and boil it very well in
Muskedine and then strain it through a fine linen cloth and with a tunnell put
it into a glass and stop it close, and when the Patient will use it let him
drink a good draught thereof morning and evening for a certain space, and
according to the grief wherewith he is troubled, and this will perfectly heal
all the diseases aforesaid. Prob. est.

An excellent Medicine for the Dropsy.
TAke roots of kneeholm and Parsley roots and Fennel roots, of each of them
finely scraped and sliced a good handful, of Juniper Berries half a handful,
and of Anniseed and Alexander seed each of them a spoonful, boil all these
together in three pints of clear posset-ale, boiling to a quart, then take a
handful of dead Bees and stamp them in a wooden dish and strain them into this
posset-ale, and so let the Patient drink every five hours a good draught
thereof and this will help him in a short space.

A Medicine for a deaf and pained Ear.
TAke earthworms and fry them with Goose-grease and drop a little thereof warm
into the ear grieved, this used nine or ten times will cure. Prob. est.

Another for the same, and has cured some which could not hear almost at all,
and were troubled therewith twenty years.

TAke a Hedgehog and flay him and roast him, and let the Patient put some of the
grease or fat that comes from him into his ear, and he will recover his hearing
in a short space. Prob. est.

A comfortable powder to cause one to Digest his meat.
TAke Pellitory of Spain, Centory, Anniseeds, Licorish grains of Paradise,
Ginger, Cinomon, of each of them a like quantity, and beat them and searce them
into fine powder, and let the Patient drink half a spoonful at a time thereof
in white wind, ale or beer, morning and evening for a certain space, and this
will do much good.

A Treakle to cure the Dropsy or any other Disease.
TAke the powder of Rue and Bettony, of each ten ounces, Centory and Wormwood
of each three drams, Gentian myrrh, Oristolochia rotunda and Ivory, of each one
ounce, pulverize and searce all these and mix them with honey clarified to a
Treakle.

A Drink to be made in May, good for many Diseases.
TAke Scabious Mugwort, Smallidge, Devils bit, ground Ivy, Wormwood, Fumitory,
Fetherfew, Spicknard, of each two handfuls, boil them well in whey made in May,
and when they be well boiled put in the last walm the whites of six eggs and
some clarified Honey, a little Saffron, the powder of about a dozen Cloves,
then strain it and drink it fasting for some time in that month.

A drink for the Dropsy called roots drink.
TAke of Wormwood and of the tops of green broom, Sear Bean shells, of each two
handfuls, dry them in an oven, and beat them to powder, then put the powder
into a quart of white wind, let it stand twenty four hours, then strain it
through a piece of white new cotton four or five times, then let the Patient
drink four or five spoonfuls in a morning, and as many at noon, and as many at
night. Prob. est.

A Purge for the same.
TAke Mechoachan Sugar Diagredii, Rubarb, Sena, Spiknard, of each a dram,
Anniseed two scruples, Cinomon, Mastick, Ginger, of each one scruple, let all
these be fine powdered, the dose or quantity to take at one time in white wind
or posset-ale three days together.

A Powder for the same.
TAke Dragons, Spiknard, of each one ounce, and Alchenet half an ounce, powder
them and drink as much as will lie on a six pence in ale or beer, fasting and
at night.

A Diet for the same.
TAke Juniper thin shaved, and the Berries bruised, Ash-bark, Sasafras roots,
Walwort roots, Caper roots, Camock roots, Marsh-mallow roots of each a
handful, Parsley roots, Eringo roots, Fennel roots, all bruised, of each two
ounces, Parsley and Fennel seeds bruised, of each one ounce, put all this in a
pipkin close covered, put upon them as much skalding water as will cover them,
then stop it close with paste, and let it stand in hot embers and not boil for
twenty four hours, then put all into a firkin of new Ale of seven gallons, and
let it work together till the Ale be stale and drink this at all times and no
other drink till you, with the blessing of God, be well. Prob. est.

Another excellent Potion for the same.

TAke Rue, Sage, Bettony, Polipodium of the Oak, Watercresses, green Broom,
Hyssop, Parsley and Fennel roots, Lovadge roots, and Flower deluce, Gladwine
the middle, and of the Elder the small clot burre, of each of these a handful,
your roots must be pithed or the pithes taken out, boil these in Barly-water
and white wind of each a like quantity, mix it with pure Honey quod sufficit,
or as you shall see meet, of this let the Patient drink first and last. Prob.
est.

For the Dropsy.
TAke a penny-wait of Scammony, two penny-wait of Rubarb, six penny-wait of
Senny, one dram of Setwell, one penny-wait of Spiknard, Cammomill-flowers one
dram, beat all these to powder and searce them, and add thereto one ounce of
Sugar, and take thereof every morning one spoonful. Prob. est.

An Ointment for the same.
TAke a quart of Cream, one pint of Hodman dods, one handful of Housleek, one
handful of Brook-lime, boil all these together and anoint the grief and it
will take down the swelling.

Dropsy the Cure.
TAke Tare half a pound, Sallet-oyl two ounces, Bay Salt beat to powder one
spoonful, set them upon a soft fire and let them simper a while, then take it
off and keep it for your use, anoint and bathe the grieved joints therewith,
and bind it hard with a linen cloth. Approved.

A good powder to cause Digestion.
TAke Pellitory of Spain, Centory, Anniseeds, Licorish, grains of Paradise,
Ginger and Cinnamon, of each a like quantity, beat them to fine powder, and let
the Patient drink a spoonful hereof in Ale, Wine or Beer, morning and evening
for a good space. Prob. est.

A good Medicine to destroy an Imposthume in twenty four hours or little more.
TAke of the Flower-deluce, and Lilly roots, of each of them a good quantity
and stamp them together and put them into a quart of Honey, and boil them
altogether in wine or strong ale, and when they are well sodden, then take the
same liquor and strain through a fine linen cloth, and when you will use it
let the Patient drink two or three spoonfuls of it morning and evening and at
noon, sometime let the Patient drink Plantine and Wormwood mingled together
first and last. Prob. est.

Another for the same.

TAke a good quantity of the juice of Mints and put it into a quill, and let it
run into the Patients ear where the grief is, and let it lie with that ear
upward and that will cause the Imposthume to break speedily.

A precious water for sore Eyes which do run or look red. Approved by my self
many times.
TAke white Vitrioll or Copras a piece about the bigness of a good hasell nut
and beat it to fine powder then take a pint of pure spring water and put it
into a Vial, then take a new laid egg and break it, put only the white into a
dish, use the yeolk for what you please, beat the white very well, then put
that with the Vitreol into your Vial of water, and in two hours you may use it.
Prob. est.

Another for the same.

TAke the Celestial stone or blew Vitrioll and steep the stone in fair spring
water till the water be colored, then take out the stone and wash your eyes
therewith, this is also good to wash any sore.

Another to allay the heat of the Eyes.

TAke woman's milk white Rosewater and eyebright water, and Plantine water, of
each a like quantity, and dissolve in them one grain of Camphire, drop this
water into the eyes and lay li^^le linen clothes dipped in it, and lay to the
eyes all night. Prob. est.

A pure water for a pin and a web, or any film in the Eyes.
TAke roots and leaves of Daisies, and Tunhoof, and Solendine and ground Ivy,
of each a like quantity, and stamp and strain them and save the juice and put
into the juice a little piece of pure white Sugar, and let it dissolve therein,
and drop in some of it into the eye grieved, and in four or five times dressing
it will take away the film.

A water for sore Eyes, let it come either by inward or outward causes.
TAke two spoonfuls of the juice of Fennel, and one spoonful and an half of
the juice of Solendine, Honey twice as much as both, boil them a little upon a
chafendish of coals, scum away the dregs that you see arise, and when it is
half cold strain it through a fine linen cloth, and put it into a Vial glass
and stop it close and anoint the eyes with this when occasion serves and it
will cure. Prob. est.

A rare secret for a pearl or web in the Eye.
TAke nine worms which you shall find in an old hollow tree or timber, with
many legs, called Hogs-lice, stamp them with the juice of Solendine or Bettony,
then strain it and drink it warm fasting, eat not in two hours after it, use
this three mornings together. Prob. est.

For sore Eyes.
TAke Wood bettony and beat it to powder, and take as much as will lie on a six
pence each morning till they be well.

An admirable and perfect cure for the Falling Sickness, which I have proved
often with good success.
TAke the dung of a Peacock and dry it in an oven, and make it into fine
powder, and into one ounce and a half of it add half a quarter of an ounce of
Amber peretah known by the name of Scuchenelle at the Apothecaries, and add
also three leaves of pure gold of leaf-gold, your Amber peretah will easily
dissolve, and your way to dissolve the gold is thus, Do not touch it with your
hand, but lay your powder aforesaid upon the gold, and still with your
forefinger and your thumb be stirring it about till your gold does dissolve
under the powder, mix about half a spoonful of this powder with a little
black-berry water when the fit is coming, and it will cure the force thereof,
give it the Patient for a time first and last, and it will for ever cure it
although it have reigned twenty years, provided first you administer this drink
following.

Take a good handful of Camamill, another of Wood-bettony, half a handful of
Yarrow, a few Marrygold flowers, half a handful of red Sage leaves, green
Elder leaves half a handful, of Licorish one ounce, of Anniseeds one ounce,
Figs half a pound, Raisins stoned half a pound, boil all these together in a
pottle of fair running water to a pint, and then put in two ounces of Sugar
candy, of the best, after it is boiled, and let it stand unstrained twelve
hours, then strain it and let the Patient drink thereof first and last a
quarter of a pint at a time about one month, and at times some of the former
powder, and with Gods blessing it will cure. Prob. est. This I have kept as a
secret.

Another for the same.

TAke the brains of a Weezel and dry it to powder put it into some pure
white wind Vinegar and temper them well together with a knife and give it the
Patient to drink first and last, and it will help him. Prob. est.

Also Galen says that he knew many men in his time cured by drinking the
powder of dead men's bones, and in another place he says that the skull of a
dead man taken from the earth and washed very clean and dried in an oven and
beaten to powder will also, taken in their drink, cure them, although it have
reigned many years, but he says it must be the skull of one that has been
slain or hanged, and not of one that died by any sickness, because maladies in
the head in time of sickness will take away the virtue thereof.

Another for the same.

TAke Germander in May when it is blossomed, dry it in the shadow and make it
into powder, and when you will use it take the yeolk of an egg or two and
stir and break it with a spoonful of the said powder then sees it and give
it the Patient to eat morning and evening eight days, let the Patient abstain
from wine and carnal company of women and from all pulce, beans or pease, or
any tares and from sallets and salt fish, and from all other things that be
hard of concoction and digestion. This is a very precious Receipt.

Another for the same.

TAke the blood, liver and heart of a Mole, and dry them to powder and let the
Patient take one dram in a little pine water fasting, and fast two hours after
it, use it six mornings together and it will cure.

For a woman that has too much of her Flowers.
TAke the foot of a Hare, burn it to powder, and drink of it in red wine and
Cinnamon first and last nine days and it will cure her.

A good drink to cause Fleam to be avoided.
TAke a good quantity of Hysope water, a quart of good Muskedine, three or four
rases of good case Ginger pared clean, and cut in small slices, and twice as
much Licorish scraped, also then put thereto a good handful of fine
Sugar Candy bruised, put them altogether in a big glass to stand and soak well,
and so let it stand for the space of twenty four hours together, but shake it
often in that time, let the glass be well stopped, and let the Patient drink
this at his pleasure, this has cured such as could hardly speak for Fleam.

Pills good to stop the bloody Flux.
TAke Marmalet of Quinces two ounces, and of Coral, Cinnamon, Amber, Shepherds
purse, Alchemet, Acatia, of each two drams, powder them and searce them and mix
them together into a mase for Pills, take four of these Pills morning and
evening. Prob. est.

Another for the same.

TAke a quart of milk and set it on the fire, and when it seethes put in a
piece of Roch-allum, then will arise a curd, which when you have taken off,
drink the whey as hot as you can, and if your stomach will bear it eat the curd
also.

A precious Medicine to cleanse the breast of Fleam.
TAke of white wind and water, of each one pint, wine Vinegar ten spoonfuls,
English honey clarified with whites of eggs six ounces, Fennel, Parsley roots
and Licorish all mundified and then sliced, of each one ounce, El^^ Campana
powdered two drams, Egrimony one ounce and a half, and twelve figs cut in
pieces, Annise and Commine seed, Hysope, Thyme and Peniroyall, of each one
ounce and a half, boil all these together close covered till the one half be
wasted or a third part, and then strain it and drink thereof morning and
evening till you be well.

For a Fistula, the whole cure.
FIrst purge the humor offending, then take the soles of old shoes dried,
burnt in a clean harth with oaken wood to a bright coal, then lay it where it
may consume to ashes alone, then add to the weight of the ashes of the sole,
and half so much weight of the powder of burnt Alum, then grind all these
together on a Painters stone or in a mortar to fine subtle powder so put it
close up for your use.

To tent the Fistula.
TAke of the Cream of morning milk of one Cow, and set it by it self all night,
the next day cast away the greenish water from the bottom of that Cream, then
lay a spoonful of the Cream on a trencher, then mix so much of the powders
therewith as will make the Cream black and thick, then make your tents of one
inch long and no longer, although the Fistula be never so deep, and roll the
tents well in the Medicine, and tent your wound therewith twice in a day and it
will work out in small pushes and wheals from the bottom, cover the sore with a
red Colwort leaf, and when it is well digested heal it up with plasters fir
for it.

A vulnary potion for the Fistula.
TAke a quart of spring water, and boil therein Cloves bruised, Pimpernell,
Egrimony, red Colwort, Valerian, Mousear, Dovefoot and wild Tanzy washed and
chopped, of each one handful, boil all in a pipkin close covered, till half be
wasted, then add to it two spoonfuls of Honey, and one quart of white wind,
then let it boil one walm or two and strain it hard forth, and keep it in a
close Vial and drink of it morning and evening and at three in the afternoon,
in Summer cold and in Winter hot, until the Potion comes out of the orefice
of the Fistula, which must be always kept open with a Gentian tent.

A plaster to cure the Fistula.
TAke Latherage of Gold one pound, oil of Roses two pound, white wind Vinegar
and old Urine, of each half a pound, boil these till the Vinegar and Urine be
consumed, add thereto in the boiling, Wax two ounces, Frankincense one ounce,
mix it and so use it.

A Lotion to wash or seering into the Fistula.
TAke Bolearmoniack four ounces, Camphire one ounce white Vitrioll four ounces,
powder all these boil the Copras and Camphire in a close stopped pipkin till
they be melted, still stirring them till they grow hard, then powder them and
the Bolearmoniack together very fine, and when you use it take a pottle of
running water, put it to the fire till it begin to boil, then take it from the
fire and put therein three spoonfuls of the powder, as much as the spoon will
hold, put all into a double Vial and shake it twice every day for fourteen
days before you use it let it stand and settle very clear, and apply it as hot
as the Patient can endure it, if it be for a sore wet a double cloth four times
double and apply it, if for a Fistula use the searing morning and evening till
you be well, if you would have it stronger put into it one ounce of burned
alum powdered. This is approved either for Fistula or Pustels, Cankers, Scabs
in the head or body, and also green wounds.

Unto your Lotion for Fistula you may add Strawberries, Plantine, red mader,
sharp dock, of each one handful, let your Cloves be twelve in number, and if
you will six ounces of honey, if the Patient vomit up his Lotion three days
together at the first taking, there is fear of his cure; but if he vomit not,
no fear of the cure; let him drink it fourteen days, in his drinking thereof
put in some Ginger to allay the wind of the herbs.

An Implaister of Tapsus Barbatus which cures all Cankers, Fistulas,
Plague-sores, hot Bruises, Botches, or Fellones.
TAke the juice of Smallidge and Cardus, young Wormwood, Mullin, Walwort,
Pimpernell, Dovefoot, Plantine, Egrimony, Mugwort, Sage, Daises, Nightshade
and Fluellin, of each one dram, Woodbine four handfuls, stamp them and strain
them, put to as much Honey in measure as you have in juices, then boil them
together in a new red pipkin close covered, let them boil softly still stirring
it till it come to the thickness of Honey, then take it from the fire and keep
it in a new earthen pot close covered. And when you make a Plaster for any the
things aforesaid,

Take of this Honey four ounces, wheat-meal two ounces, boil altogether one
walm or two still stirring it for fear of burning, then take it from the fire
and put to it presently Venice Turpentine two ounces, mix it well with the
rest, and when it is almost cold pour the whites of two eggs well beaten
thereto, mix them together till it be cold, and so it is made. The Plaster is
called Diaflosmos.

A Lotion to wash or seringe the grief withal before you apply the Plaster,
dress it twice a day either by bathe or searing hot.
TAke Nightshade, Smallidge, Egrimony, Fluelline, Sage, Cardus, of each one
handful, Honey two ounces, Plantine water and white wind, of each one pint,
boil all these herbs small cut till their substance be forth with the Honey,
Alum, Wine and water, and so strain it for your use.

A perfect Remedy for the Flux.
TAke a good handful of Beans, dry them in an oven or upon a tilestone, and
let them be so hard as the huls will skale off them, and then bray them to fine
powder and searce them, then take a plot of good red wine and set it upon the
fire, and put the powder into the wine, and stir it well least it should grow
to the pan wherein you boil it, and so do till it be so thick that you may cut
it in slices when it is cold, and let the Patient take two or three slices
thereof blood warm every morning and evening for a certain space, and this will
cure. Prob. est.

Falling sickness, the cure.
FIrst every full Moon and change, purge one day and vomit another, then kill a
Jay and dress him, fill his body full of Commin and Anniseeds bruised, then put
the Jay so dressed into an oven after bread is drawn forth, until he be so dry
that you must beat his body and sides, and all into fine powder, then take of
this powder one dram in any thing what you please morning and evening till you
be well, as in broth or such like only, with it make two plasters, as you do
of Mastick, of Sanguis Draconis, spread it with a hot knife, and lay them to
the temple veins.

Fistula, the cure.
TAke Vervine and dry it upon a tile and make powder thereof, and make clean
the sore with a linen cloth, and fill the wound full with the powder.

For the Gout.
TAke Arsmart and wet it in fair running water, and lay it to the place
grieved, and when you take it away then bury it in a moist place in the ground,
and as that wastes the grief will wast also.

Another for the same.

TAke Mallows and Sengreen, beat them and boil them in water, then strain them,
put oatmeal grots soked in Vinegar and sheeps-suet untried, then boil it to a
poultess. Proved.

Another for the same.

TAke Archangell red stamp it in a mortar with Vinegar and bind it to the place
grieved, and if it go not away mix a little Opium with it and it will not fail.

A good cooling Clyster to apply where it needs.
TAke a pottle of running water, and Succory leaves, and Sorrill, and
Strawberry leaves, and Violet leaves, and Mallows, of each one handful, one
pennyworth of French-barley, sweet Fennel seed, and the four cold seeds of
each one pennyworth, boil all these to a pint, and strain it, and add one
ounce of Syrup of Roses, and a piece of butter as big as a Walnut, and so use
it.

For the Gonorrhea or Running of the Reins.
FIrst purge the humor with new drawn Cassia, one ounce extracted, mix
therewith two drams of washed Turpentine, and one scruple of pulvis athriticus
into bole, then next day saving one dissolve six drams of Confecti humach in
Fumitory-water, adding two scruples of pulvis Sanctus, and half a dram of Cream
tartar, mix them, and after the body is thus purged, use restringing Medicines.

For a Gunshot if there be a Flux of blood.
TAke Bolearmoniack one ounce and terra sigalatum one dram, and myrrh one dram
pulverized fine, and a dram of Vitriolum album or white Copras, and this will
be a stringum powder, mix with this the white of eggs, and make it as it were
an ungent, and so use it two days and then undress.

And then secondly take spirit revini or spirit of wine one ounce, and Melle
rosarum half an ounce, and one dram of Aegyptiacum, mix them together and put
them into a poringer, and heat them hot and dip in a pleget of lint, and so lay
it to the wound till you see the wound digested, or that the wound be cleared,
and after it is digested, use to incarnate or breed flesh, Vnguentum Basilicon
warm upon a pleget of lint, and that is sigitrising of the wound.

For a Fracture in the Scull or wound in the Head.
TAke spirit Revinum and Melle rosarum, heal and dip a pleget of lint and so
lay on the wound, but if the perecranium ly bare mix in some mire aloes, of
each about a scruple among the other medicines, or if the wound be on any part
of the body, use the same intention if the bone lie bare do the same as
aforesaid.

A good Medicine to destroy Heat in the Face, or any other place, although is
be St Anthonies fire.
TAke a pottle of Smiths water, and a handful of Sage, Elder leaves two
handfuls, or the green bark thereof, Alum two pennyworth, sees all these
together from a pottle to a pint, then take it and put it into a Gallypot, and
let the Patient when he goes to bed anoint his face therewith, and the next
morning he will find ease, it will help him five or six days.

Headache or Megrim, the cure, or a good cool water to be used for the Head if
it be over hot, or for any such distemper.
TAke Violet leaves, red Rose leaves, Letice and Willow leaves, of each two
handfuls, and a little Henbane, Vinegar, white Poppey, and a little Mandrake,
and distill them together in a Stillitory, and so keep this water close stopped
in a glass until you have occasion to wash your head.

An excellent hot water for the Head, if it be overcold, or any such distemper.
TAke Bettony, Camomill, Rue, Savery, Pennyroyall, Marjerum, Origanum, Fennel,
and Elnacampana, of each a like quantity, and distill them also, and use it as
the former.

For a pain in the Head.
TAke a Rose-cake and cut it fit to lay to your forehead, and wet it well in
Vinegar, and put thereto a good quantity of the powder of Nutmegs and the
powder of Cloves, and let the same be bound very hard to the temples of the
Patient, and this will speedily help him.

Another for the same.

TAke the juice of Rue and put into the nosthrils of the Patient and it will
expel fleam, cleanse the brains, and mitigate the pain of the head, and this
herb sodden in Wine will do the same.

Another to purge the Head.

TAke Pellitory of Spain and chew the root thereof in your mouth four or five
days at several times, and this will take away the pain of the head and fasten
your teeth and gums.

For wind in the Head.
TAke a good handful of the flowers of Camomill, and half a handful of the
powder of Cinnamon, mingle them together, and make two little bags of the
breadth of your ears, and put both the powder and the flowers therein, and bind
it close to both your ears. This Prob. est.

For Heart-burning.
TAke five or six corns of good Pepper and bruise them in your mouth and let
them go down your throat. This will help forthwith.

Hoarsness, the cure.
TAke three or four Figs and cut them in the middle asunder, and then put into
every one of them a pretty quantity of Ginger fine beaten to powder, and then
roast them upon a clean hearth or upon a tilestone, and let the Patient eat them
as hot as he can endure them. This has cured some which have been troubled
with hoarsness four or five years.

Headache of rheum, the cure.
TAke one Nutmeg, Cubebs, Piony seed, Setwell roots, Marjerum, Angellica roots;
of each two drams, dry them and powder them fine, and make them up with Honey
into a mase for Pills, take thereof five small ones every morning for fourteen
days.

For the same, Approved.
TAke four ounces of gray soap and bray therein the whites of two eggs, and
put it in a box, and when you have use for it spread it on a cloth double, and
lay it to the forehead, even to the ears, dress it so twice a day for five
days, you will find ease at twice dressing.

Megrime, pain or wind in the Head, the cure.
TAke a piece of Methridate as big as a good hazel nut, and put it in your
mouth, and let it there melt without chawing, holding your breath as much as
you can, and as it melts receive it into your stomach. This will be present
help.

Another for the same, or for any Imposthume or Fever in the Head.

TAke the roots of Pellitory of Spain one dram, Spicknard half a dram, beat
them together, and boil them in good Vinegar, then let them cool, put thereto
honey and mustard, of each a sawcer full, mix them together, and let the
Patient put half a spoonful thereof in his mouth, and hold it there a while,
then spit it forth, renew it so twelve times, when you go to bed drink a little
down, use it three days and you will be well.

Lice or Scabs in childrens Heads, the cure.
TAke red Sage chop it small and boil it in fresh butter with Pepper powdered,
when it is so boiled together, strain it and keep it for your use.

A good Medicine for the black Jaundies.
TAke the Gall of a Raven and dry it well and beat it to powder, then take a
pretty quantity thereof and temper it either with Ale or Beer, and let the
Patient drink thereof every morning fasting for six or seven days together and
it will presently help him. Prob. est.

Another for the same.

TAke of the roots and leaves of Strawberries, and eat them every morning
fasting for the space of eighteen days together. Prob. est. The same made into
pottage or broth and taken fasting, will do the same either for black or
yellow, especially for yellow.

Another for the yellow Jaundies.

TAke a good handful of red Nettle crops, sees them well in a pint of Ale,
and strain it through a clean cloth, and let the Patient drink thereof first
and last for four or five days together. Prob. est.

For the Itch.
TAke five or six spoonfuls of Barrows grease, and a penny-weight of
quicksilver, and a handful of bay Salt, and six spoonfuls of fasting spittle,
and bray them altogether until the quicksilver be consumed away; let the
Patient anoint himself therewith, and it will destroy the Scabs. Prob. est.

Another for the same.

TAke sweet butter, unwrought wax, Vinegar, Brimstone, a little Rose Water, red
Cloves whole, boil them together till they be like a Salve and anoint your body
therewith three sundry nights and no more.

Yellow Jaundies, a sure and quick cure.
TAke Plantine water one pint, Ivory powdered two drams, Saffron so much as
will make it yellow, boil them all two or three walms, then strain it and drink
a good draught morning and evening.

A precious Medicine to destroy an Imposthume in the body.
TAke Tanzy one handful and wash it, Maidenhair flowers that grow in wheat one
handful, bruise them alone, take either of their juices one spoonful, mix
them with three ounces of Camomill water distilled, drink thereof warm very
early a pretty draught, this will purge the disease downward without pain, take
of the powder of Maidenhair in your ordinary broth three times a day; also the
roots of Scabions half a pound stamped, and mix therewith some powder of Boral
well together, and drink thereof a draught in Camomill water three times a day
and the Imposthume will break and spit forth. Prob. est.

To ripen and maturate an Imposthume.
TAke the roots of Mallows and Lillies, and boil them in water till they be
tender, stamp them with fresh Hos-grease and meal, and apply it hot.

To kill the Itch.
Mortify Quicksilver with fasting spittle, and mix it with as much Hog's Grease
as will make it blackish, anoint the palms of your hands and the soales of your
feet when you go to bed, and in the morning wash it with this water,

Take Indive water and Vinegar, of each a like, Roch-allum, powder of Enula
campana, boil them together and wash the grief therewith, and this will cure
and stop the fluxion of blood.

Jaundies Black and Yellow, the cure.
TAke Earthworms, wash them in four or five waters very clean, strip all the
earth out with your finger and stamp them small, put stale Ale unto them and
stamp them hard out, and drink it with Saffron, it cures at three times.

How to know the King's Evil, or a Disease so called, and also the Cure.
TAke one ounce of pure yellow wax or somewhat more, and one ounce of
Turpentine, and a good quantity of sheeps suet clarified and made pure, boil
all these together very well, and then put therein the quantity of two good
handfuls of the finest and purest Barley-flower very clean without any pulce or
seeds of any manner of weeds, temper this flower and the other things together,
then put therein the quantity of three spoonfuls of the Urine of a male Child
being not above three years old, then boil it again with the residue of the
things before mentioned, then let it cool and put it into some Gallypot for
your use and stop it close, when you do use it take it and spread it upon a
fine linen cloth or a piece of leather and lay it to the grief, and this will
cure. Prob. est.

You may know it certainly by this following rule.
TAke a ground-worm and lay it alive upon the place grieved, then take a green
Dockleaf or two, and lay them upon the worm, and then bind the same about the
neck of the Patient at night when he goes to bed, and in the morning when he
rises take it off again, and if it be the King's Evil the worm will be turned
into powder or dust, or else he will be and remain dead in his own former form.

A sovereign Medicine for the Cough of the Lungs.
TAke a handful of Raisins of the Sun and let them be clean washed and stoned,
and a pennyworth of Maidenhair, and one spoonful of Anniseeds bruised small,
ten or twelve Figs, and three quarters of a pound of Portugal Sugar, and three
pints of fair running water, boil all these together till half be consumed,
then strain it through a fine linen cloth, and every morning drink thereof two
spoonfuls lukewarm. Prob. est.

A good Medicine for a sore Leg that does fester or rankle.
TAke Smallidge roots and Southernwood, Houseleek, and Violet-leaves and roots,
and Waybroad leaves, of each a good quantity, and a good quantity of Honey, and
temper it well which the herbs, and strain them through a fine linen cloth and
make a plaster thereof and lay it to the sore, and renew it twice every day,
and always before you lay on your plaster wash the sore well with white wind or
oil of Roses, and in time of your cure put always into your drink daily two or
three Sage leaves, this has cured many. Prob. est.

Another for the same.

TAke two white Herrings out of the pickle, and open them, and lay the insides
of them to the soles of your feet when you go to bed, and renew them in the
morning, use this five or six times and it will cure. Prob. est.

A very good drink made of whey which will cool the extreme heat of the Liver
and Stomach.
TAke Violet leaves, Sinckfoil, Succory, Endive, Scabions and Femitory leaves,
of each a good handful, and sees them in a pottle of good whey which has
been boiled, and let it continue till the third part be consumed, then strain
it through a fine cloth, and let the Patient drink a good draught thereof
morning and evening for a certain time, and this will cure.

For any disease in the Liver.
TAke the Liver of a Hare well dried and beat into powder, and drink it in Ale
or Beer or Wine, and this will do much good.

To preserve the Lungs.
TAke the Lungs of a Fox and dry it well and b^^t it into powder, and then put
a quarter of a spoonful thereof into Almond milk, or into Veal or Mutton broth,
and let the Patient eat it, and this will mightily preserve the Lungs.

For the Cough of the Lungs.
TAke green Box and dry it and powder it, and searce it, take so much at once
as will lie on a groat in a draught of warm white wind morning and evening till
you be well, which will be as soon as you see your self avoid blood, then leave
taking your Medicine.

For heat in the Liver, the cure.
TAke Liverwort, Maidenhair and Hart's-tongue, and Scabions, and
Strawberry-leaves, of each two handfuls, Egrimony and Hop buds, of each half a
handful, boil all these in a gallon of wort to the consumption of a quart,
then strain it and put it to the fire again with the white of an egg and one
spoonful of pure Honey let it boil again, then with a spoon scum off the white
of the egg and put in some Sugarcandy, and take it fasting till you be well.

A plaster for the distemper of the Liver.
TAke Oil of Roses two ounces, Wax three ounces, Vnguentum Populion half an
ounce, melt them together on the fire well mixed, then take it from the fire
and put it in a mortar and add thereto red Sanders steeped in Rose Water one
spoonful, and Camphire prepared one dram, work all these together with pestel
till they be wrought together when it is cold make a plaster thereof and lay
it on the right side against the Liver. Prob. est.

A Leglifium for a Gunshot.
Boil up with St John's wort, Centory, Bays, Wormwood and Rosemary, of each one
handful, and to a gallon of water add a quart of Aqua vitae, and use it in
this manner,

As for a Fomentation heat it hot and dip red clothes of cotton into it and lay
upon the wound as big as will lie on the wound or member, as hot as the Patient
can endure it, and that will bring out and evacuate all that intused blood that
is in the wound.

For the Cough of the Lungs or Tisick: Proved.
TAke four ounces of double refined Sugar, and two ounces of the flower of
Brimstone, half an ounce of Gum-dragon, steep the Gum in Rose Water all night,
the next morning beat the Sugar very small, and put the Sugar and flower of
Brimstone into the Gum-dragon and Rosewater, and work them well together till
they come to a paste, then make it into little cakes as big as a six pence,
then put them into a pewter dish and dry them in a window by the Sun, or by the
shelving of the fire, and when they are so dry put them in Papers and lay them
where they may have the air of the fire, eat this at your pleasure.

An approved Medicine for one that is molten within by travel or any other
labor.
TAke a quart of good Claret wine and sees therein a good quantity of avence,
and make a posset with the same Wine, and let the Patient drink three or four
times thereof warm when he goes to bed, and it will cure him. Prob. est.

For the Morphew.
TAke Mustard Seed and Salt and stamp them together with Vinegar, and let the
Patient anoint the place where the grief is, and it will cure in a short space.

For the same.
TAke green Copras and put it to steep in fair running water, and let it remain
a day and a night, and then strain it through a fine cloth, and when occasion
serves anoint the place often where the Morphew is, and it will cure. Prob.
est.

An excellent Medicine for a woman troubled with the Mother.
TAke Lovage and Elisanders, of them an ounce, roots and leaves of Smallidge,
one ounce, and of the roots of Buglass, Bur^^ge and Parsley, Fennel, and
Succory, of each of them one ounce, of Maidenhair, Hart's-tongue, wild thyme,
and wild marjerum, of each of them 2 ounces, of Cummin seed, Coriander seed,
Carroway seed, Smallidge seed, and Dill seed, of them 3 spoonfuls, and a good
quantity of Raisins of the Sun, and bray them altogether and steep them in
white wind or ale for the space of twenty four hours together, and then strain
them and let the Patient drink this first and last for a certain space, this
will cure. Prob. est.

For a sharp humor in the Matrix after a miscarriage.
TAke a quart of posset-ale, boil therein Motherwort, Mugwort, Mother of thyme,
Camomill, of each one handful, mader-root one ounce, boil these together till
half be wasted and close covered, be sure when it is boiled put in a pint of
white wind and drink a porringer full night and morning so soon as the Patient
has miscarried, and this will cure. Prob. est.

An excellent remedy for a Canker in the Mouth.
TAke a good quantity of red Sage and twelve crops of Rosemary, and a like
quantity of Honey-suckles, white Dasies and Sinkfoyl, and boil them altogether
in a pint of fair water until it be half consumed, then take a little
Roch-allum and burn it to powder, put half a spoonful of Honey therein, and
then strain it through a fine linen cloth, and when it is cold put it into
some glass or earthen thing that it may be stopped close, and let the Patient
wash his mouth therewith, and it will cure.

To increase Milk in a woman's breast.
TAke Crystal and beat it fine into powder, mingle it with as much Fennel
seed likewise beaten into fine powder, and a little fine Sugar, and let the
woman drink thereof often warm with a little white wind, and this will restore
her milk again, although it be clean gone from her. Prob. est.

An excellent good water to kill the canker and scurf in the Mouth.
TAke a good quantity of white wind and Solendine, red Sage, Rosemary stripped,
and Hysope, and Woodbine leaves, of each of them one handful, and boil them in
white wind until one half be consumed, then strain it and wring forth the
juice clean, and then take half an ounce of Alum, a quarter of an ounce of
white Copras, and two or three spoonfuls of Honey, and mingle it with the juice
aforesaid, and set it one the fire again and let it sees a little while and
take it off and strain it again, and then put it into a Vial, and when you
will use it wash the grief two or three times a day either with a fine cloth
upon the end of your finger, or else upon a sticks end if the place cannot be
come at other ways. This has helped many.

Another for the same. Approved.

TAke a quantity of running water, and a handful of Woodbine leaves, Bramble
leaves, and Colibine leaves as many, and a little Rosemary, and boil them
together till the water be half consumed, then put in two or three spoonfuls of
Honey, a piece of Roch alum, three or four spoonfuls of Wine Vinegar, and wash
your mouth with the sodden herbs three or four times a day, this will cure.
Prob. est.

For Numness in the Joints.
LEt the Patient drink every morning fasting one ounce of Camphire in a draught
of Bettony water, wherein infuse a little Stechadoes, this will cure in a
months time.

To provoke women's Menstrues.
TAke so much of the powder of Aristolochy rotunda, Myrrh and ^avine mixed as
will he on a shilling in warm w^i^e-wine, add thereto one race of Ginger
grated.

To stop their much flowing.
TAke the shells of new laid eggs, and pill off the inner filme, boil it one
hour in water and drink that powder at twice in red wine when it is dried and
beaten to powder, and at every time of drinking let her go to the newest
molehill and put away the earth with her foot, and sit down on the place and
make water in the hole so made, and during the cure let her eat Isingglass: let
her use this till she be well.

A singular good Oil for all manner of bruises, spleens and swellings in the
legs or arms.
TAke a pint of pure Sallet-oyl or somewhat more, and bruise a good quantity of
Camomil and put therein, and then put it into a glass, and set it to stand in
the Sun in some place where it may be safe ten or twelve days, but at the five
days end then strain it through a fine linen cloth, and set it to stand in
the Sun again the other five days, and then strain it again and set it in the
Sun again the third time, and let it stand till it be clean purged from any
dregs, and then put it into a clean glass and stop it close until you have use
for it, and when you have occasion to use it, anoint the place grieved two or
three times a day, chafing it before the fire, and it will help the grief.
Prob. est. This Oil stopped close will continue good twelve years.

A special Oil to heal bruises, swellings, wounds, and burnings, and what not.
TAke Camomill, Peniroyall, Sage-royall, or red great Sage, Southernwood,
Boneset, Setwell, Charity, Self-heal, Knotgrass, St John's wort, and Lavender
when it is blown, of each one handful, the leaves of red Roses one handful,
wipe all these in a clean cloth, cut them all at one length one inch long, lay
every herb by it self in a basin, and put thereto three pints of the best
Oyl-olive, and half a pint of the best Aqua vitae of the second distillation,
stir them together and cover them close, and so let them stand two days and
two nights, then boil them together with as soft a fire as may be five or six
hours, then strain it, and when it is cold put it up in glasses for your use.
Prob. est.

Sciatica, Gout or Ach, an excellent Oil to cure.
TAke Sallet-oyl one pottle, put it into a broad gallon glass, infuse therein
Rosemary flowers bruised one pound, let them stand in the Sun close covered
till Midsummer, then take red rose buds one pound, take out the whites, Dill
half a pound, St John's wort one pound and a half, Vervine half a pound, bruise
all these herbs, then put them into the glass of Oil, stop it close again, and
set it in the Sun for ten days more, then after a shower of rain gather one
quart of earthworms, cleanse them in white wind, and wipe them hard in a
course linen cloth; and take Lavender, Spike half a pound, and ten young
Swallows out of the nest, beat them so small till you discern neither bones nor
feathers nor guts, and then put these worms, oil and swallows into the glass of
oil also, and so let it stand in that place again one night or more, then pour
out all these ingredients into a pipkin and cover it close, add thereto one
pint of malmsie, and half a pint of Aqua vitae, let these simper softly till
the wine and Aqua vitae be wasted, then strain it hard and put it into a double
Vial and stop it close, boil it in some Balneo with some powdered Cloves and
Mastick powdered, of each two drams, let them boil half an hour softly, then
set it in the Sun again ten days, and then put it up and let it stand ten
weeks before you use it, and then use it.

Another for the same.

TAke a pint of old Malmsie, and half a pound of unsalted butter out of the
churn, and boil them together till they come to be a salve, and anoint the
grief or any other pain therewith.

A special Oil for all Aches and Bruises, called Nerve-oyl.
TAke Camomil, white Archangel, Plantine, young Wormwood, Mints, Waltnut tree
leaves, Sage, Violet leaves, Mallows, Rue, Chickweed, Brooklime, Watercresses,
Sovern-wood, Smallidge and young Bay Leaves, of each one handful, bruise them
all in a mortar, then boil them in a pint of white wind close covered till the
wine be near wasted, then add thereto Hog's Grease and Dear-suet, of each one
pound, Linseed oil and Neatsfoot oil, of each one pint, Rosin powdered six
ounces, Galbanum prepared two ounces, boil all these covered close upon a soft
fire till the Vnguentum be green, then strain it out till it be hot, mix
therewith liquid Storax and oil of Spike, of each one ounce, mix and stir it
till it be cold, and so use it.

To make Oil of Snails for any ach.
TAke in May black Snails one pint, put them in a great Ox bladder with one
pint of Aqua vitae, and let the substance of the Ox gall run into the rest,
then add oil of Peeter two ounces, oil of Spike two ounces, and tie up the
bladder as hard as you can, and put it into another bladder and hang it up fast
tied for twenty days where neither rat nor mouse comes, at the end of that
time strain it out and keep it in a Vial for your use, only add liquid Storax
one ounce, for that is good and gives a good sent.

To make a good Ointment or salve for any sore.
TAke a good handful of Sage, as much of Plantine, as much brown wort, as many
honey suckles, as much Turfame, as much Valerian, boil all these in May butter
till it be brown, then strain it and put in a good quantity of Virgins wax, and
then boil it again a little more and keep it.

An Ointment good for Sprain, Ach or green Wound, or old Ulcer: Keep a good
Plaster also upon the wound.
TAke four handfuls of Detainder, and as many Elder buds, and two pound of May
butter, the Detainder and buds must be stamped together before you put them to
the butter, which must be first melted in a skillet, then put in your other
things, and let it simper upon the fire about six hours, then strain it into a
pot and keep it for your use.

To make flower of Ointments, which cleanses old wounds and new, and gathers
good flesh, it helps headache and Imposthumes in the head or in the body, it
helps swollen ears or cheeks, or the jaw fallen in the face, it helps cut
sinews, and bitings of mad dogs, it helps pricks or sprains in travel, it
helps rheumes, it draws out iron, thorns, and it helps all manner of
botches and swellings, it helps aches in the cods or in other members, it
helps the flux of the emrods, it is good to make a sear-cloth for all manner
of griefs, it helps the flux and menstrues in women, being laid to the navill.
TAke Rosin and Perrosin of each a handful and half, Virgins wax and Olibanum
of each a quarter of a pound, Mastick one ounce, Sheeps tallow a quarter of a
pound, Camphire two ounces, Turpentine two ounces, make your gums into fine
powder and searce them, melt your wax and tallow, and mix your powders well
therewith and boil them together, then strain it through a canvas bag into
white wind, let it cool till it be blood warm, then add to it your Camphire
and Turpentine by little and little, stirring it till it be cold, and then make
it into rouls.

A sovereign drink to open the Pipes stopped.
TAke Indive, Succory, Parsley, Fennel, Burradge, Hysope, Thyme, Pennyroyall,
Germander and Neep, of each a good quantity, and boil them in a pottle of fair
running water, and let it boil till half be consumed, and then strain it and
add two spoonfuls of good wine Vinegar, and three or four ounces of fine white
Sugar to sweeten it, and let the Patient drink every morning and evening three
days together a good draught. Prob. est.

For the Palsy.
TAke Sage leaves, and Primrose leaves, of each of them a like quantity, if it
be in winter Primrose roots, beat them both together, and strain them with Ale,
and give it to the Patient to drink a good quantity at a time, and this will
cure. Prob. est.

For lameness in the side coming by the Palsy.
TAke Sage and Hysope, and boil a good quantity together in fair running water,
and bathe the side that is grieved well therewith, then take the herbs and
bind them as hot as may be suffered to the place grieved, and this will help.
Prob. est.

A sovereign drink if it be taken in time, to preserve against the Plague.
TAke a dram and half of the powder called Imperial, one dram of Treakle, and
Dragon water and Sorrel water, of each a dram, drink it with Ale in the
morning fasting, although the party have been infected with the plague twenty
four hours before, yet by Gods grace he shall escape. This has been truly
proved.

Another for the same.

TAke a good handful of winter Savory and boil it in a quart of good wine
Vinegar, with a spoonful of grains being beaten and put to it, and add also a
good quantity of fine Sugar, and take a good draught thereof morning and
evening, and if you must of necessity come into the place where any infectious
persons are, it is good to smell to the roots of Angellica, Gentian or
Valerian, and likewise a piece of Arras root kept in your mouth as you walk,
any of these are very good and cordial. Prob. est.

Another for the same.

TAke an Onion and make a hole in it and take out the inner core, then take
Dragon-water, Treakle and Pepper bruised, and put them altogether into the
Onion, and roast it in the embers, and then bruise it and strain it into pure
Malmsie and give it to the Patient to drink, this is a present remedy if it be
given before the heart be infected. Prob. est.

A good plaster to draw the Plague Sore to a head, and to break it.
TAke a good handful or two of Mallows, one handful of Linseed, one handful
of sower dow, and two or three Lilly roots, and stamp all these together very
small and boil them in a quart of white wind lees until it be thick, then lay
it one inch thick or more upon a piece of leather that is somewhat broader then
the sore, and let the borders of the leather be plaistered with Shoemakers wax,
and that will cause it to cleave fast, this will break it in a short space.
Prob. est.

A sovereign Medicine to cure the Plurisie.
TAke Brooklime, Sheeps suet, and a little fair water, and fry them together in
a frying pan, and make a plaster thereof and lay to the side of the Patient,
and this will draw forth all the corruption. Prob. est.

Another for the same.

TAke Aqua vitae and Capons grease, of each a pretty quantity, and boil them
together, then take a little black wool and dip it therein, and lay it as hot
as may be suffered to the grief, and this will give ease speedily. Prob. est.

For the French Pox, an Ointment good.
TAke Alum, Verdigrease, English Honey that is good, and wine Vinegar that is
both strong and sharp, of each a like quantity, mix them well together to an
Ointment, anoint the grief therewith often and it will both dry and heal. Prob.
est.

An excellent Receipt called Moses water, very good for the French Pox or any
other disease growing out in sores or scurfs.
TAke six gallons or more of the purest white wind that may be gotten, and as
much stale Ale, and a pound and half of Sarsaprila, of Licorish and Scena, of
each of them two pound, and two pound of the bark of Guyacum Coloquintida four
ounces, let all these be boiled together for the space of twenty four hours
over a soft fire, and put therein with the rest a little Backma maria, and when
it is well boiled put therein one ounce of Methridatum, then take it off and
put it into some earthen pot and stop it up close, and when you will use it
take a good quantity thereof at a time three times a day, fasting, at three a
clock and going to bed, and this will cleanse both inward and outward parts of
the body, and cause the body to be sound after it, when that is done, make more
and use it often. Prob. est.

For the small Pox.
TAke Milk, Saffron and English honey and sees them together and give it to
the Patient and let him be kept warm, and this will bring out the disease.
Prob. est.

An excellent good Purge for any manner of disease.
TAke half an ounce of Senna, one spoonful of Anniseeds, half a dram of
Licorish, one spoonful of Fennel seeds, a few Raisins of the Sun the stones
picked out, boil them together in a quart of fair running water, and let it
boil till the one half be consumed, then strain it, and add thereto one dram
and half of Diaphenicon, and shake the same well together, and let the party
which desires to purge drink a pretty quantity thereof every morning fasting
blood-warm, and it will purge him well without causing any sickness. Prob. est.

Another Purge for the stomach.

TAke young Mallows and Mercury, of each of them a good handful or somewhat
more, Senna one dram, and three spoonfuls of Anni-seeds, and put them into one
pint of white wind and as much strong Ale, and let them stand one night, the
next day sees them together again until the one half be consumed, then strain
it and give the Patient a good draught thereof in the morning fasting, and if
he sleep a little after it, it will be never the worse.

Another Purge for all parts of the body.

TAke two drams of pure Turpentine, and wash it very well in Fennel water, and
bruise it and dissolve it in a mortar with a pestill, and put thereto half the
yeolk of a new laid egg and one dram of Smallidge water, and beat them
altogether till it be like Milk, and let the Patient sip it off, and this will
work effectually in all parts of the body.

For the Pestilence.
TAke the water of Bettony and Pimpernell, and Turmentill or Scabions, mix it
together and drink it nine days fasting and fear no Pestilence.

Doctor ^urgess his Receipt against the Plague, and for any symptom of it, or
the small Pox or Measels, or for the beginning of the Ague or Fever.
TAke three pints of Malmsie, Sage and Herb-grace, of each one handful, boil
them altogether till the third part be consumed, then strain it and put into it
one pennyworth of long Pepper, Ginger half an ounce, a quarter of an ounce of
Nutmegs, boil them altogether a little while, beat your Ginger and Nutmegs to
fine powder, add thereto also two pennyworth of Treakle, four pennyworth of
Methridatum, and a quarter of a pint of good Angellica water: keep this secret
as your life. If the party be infected take two spoonfuls warm, and let him
sweat well upon it; if not, one spoonful every day is sufficient, half in the
morning, the other at night, this never failed any that took it.

For the Plurisie.
TAke a fair Pippin, cut off the top and take out the core, and fill it half
full of the powder of Olibanum, and then lay on the top again and roast it
leisurely upon the embers, see it do not burn, and when it is enough roasted
cut it in four parts with the Olibanum in it, and give it to the Patient to
eat, and it will suddenly cause the Imposthume to break, and it will cleanse it.

To make Oil of Puppy, which is good for any strain or bruise.
TAke a fat Spannell puppy, if you can get one, but let it be what puppy it
will it must be fat, and dress him as you dress a pig, then take half a dose of
yeolks of eggs, and two handfuls of Roman nettles cut very small, three ounces
of Venice Turpentine, and three pennyworth of Saffron, and beat them
altogether, and put them into the belly of the Puppy, and sow it up and roast
it, and what droppeth from it save, and it will become perfect oil for the
former uses.

A Poultis that will break a sore in twenty four hours.
TAke black-berry leaves and Mustard seed, and beat them together till it be a
Poultis. Prob. est.

A Preparative to take before a Purgation, the night before it is taken, the
dose is one dram in Diaprunis or posset-ale.
TAke Senna; Turbith, Diagredii, of each three drams, Epithimum, Galingal, of
each one dram, Salt gem six grains, all fine searced and mixed and taken as
aforesaid.

A Purgation which purges all aqueous humors.
TAke Rewbard, Turbith, Hermodactils, Diagredii, Senna, Agarick, Mechoacan,
Sugar, of each two drams, Cloves, Fennel, Ginger, Anniseed, Mastick, of each
one dram, Saffron and Cinnamon, of each two scruples, searce all these, the dose
is one dram in Succory water or Posset-ale.

To make Pills that purge the four humors.
TAke Mirabolaus and Rewbard, of each four drams, the juice of Egrimony and
Wormwood, of each two ounces, Hermodactils, Agrick, Coloquintida, Aloes, of
each six drams, Mastick, red Rose leaves, Salt, gem, Epithimum, Annis and
Ginger, of each one dram, searce them and mix them, and compound them in a
mortar with syrup of Roses to a mase for Pills, the dose is one dram in five
Pills taken in the pap of a roasted apple.

Pills of excellent virtue to purge all Phlegmatic Fevers or Agues.
TAke Agarick, Aloes, Acorus, Turbith, of each one dram, Esula half a dram,
Coloquintida one grain, Salt gem, Mastick, Ginger, Wormwood, Lettice, Raisins
mundified, Bdellium, of each three drams, let syrup of Roses be made up with
these Pills, the dose is two drams more or less according to the strength of the
Patient; if you add these following they are good in tertian Agues, Rubard two
drams, Spicknard half a dram, Diagredii, Mastick, of each one dram, mix these
with those aforesaid, the dose is half a dram more or less, according to the
strength of the Patient and the vehemence of the Fever.

A Purgation that cleanses the head, brain and all the body of Melancholy.
TAke Senna six drams, Ginger one ounce, Bugloss one dram, flowers thereof two
drams, infuse all in a close stopped ale-bottle of stone, with a pint of whey
of Goats milk, boil them in Balnea one hour, and let it cool when it is boiled,
warm it in the morning and give it the Patient, and it preserves against all
passions of the brain, it also helps hearing, smelling and seeing, and
strengthens all the body, and does unburthen the body of all humors that
abound, as choler, fleam and melancholy, this was the practice of Mathiolus
Riolanus and Achaius.

For the Palsy.
TAke Rosemary, Sage, Herbmandlin, of each a handful, Camomil-flowers three
handfuls, and with Sallet-oyl make oil thereof, as you make oil of Roses, and
anoint the grieved parts therewith.

Purgations with Senna.
TAke Senna in some quantity, with some Ginger in your broth, for the pain of
the head four drams may be given to children and to women with child.

An Unguent for the Piles.
Boil in fresh butter Pilewort and Elder leaves or buds till it be a Salve,
make it yellow with Saffron and use it.

An excellent healing and cooling Plaster.
TAke Wax and Deer suet, of each four ounces, Lapis Caluminaris two ounces, May
butter two ounces, Camphire one dram, Oil of Roses eight ounces, mix them and
melt them together and make your liquid Plaster.

A Plaster of Adders-tongue and sweet Maudline, all green, which cures green
wounds and old ulcers.
TAke Linseed oil one pint, Adders-tongue and sweet Maudline, both green in May
and June, of each three handfuls, strip forth their stalks and bruise them,
then boil them in the Oil, add thereto white wind, let them all boil till the
herbs be very soft, then strain them out and put the liquor to the fire again,
add thereto Rosin and Wax bruised eight ounces, boil them till all be melted,
still stirring it, then take it off presently, mix therewith Venice Turpentine
six ounces, liquid Storax one ounce, and so it is made.

A gentle Purge for Melancholy, and to comfort the spirits.
TAke the juice of old Pippins, and Burradge water, of each as much as will
make a draught, heat it seething hot, then infuse therein all night Senna four
drams, Manna and syrup of Roses, of each one ounce, Anniseed bruised four
drams, next morning strain it and drink it warm.

For the Rickets, a disease common to Children.
TAke Egremony, Scabions, Coltsfoot, Charnill, Tamaris, of each one handful,
one pennyworth of Maidenhair, a small handful of unset Hysop, six tops of
Spermint, six leaves of Hart's-tongue, a little Liverwort, and opening roots, as
Fennel, Parsley, Succory, Spergrace, scrape them clean and take the pith out
of them, sprinkle them with wine Vinegar when you have so done, slice them, and
about half an hour after put them to the rest of the herbs, and add licorish
half an ounce, Anniseed a quarter of an ounce, Raisins of the sun stoned, and
Currants, and Figs, of each two ounces, boil all these in a pottle of running
water until it come to a quart, and let the child drink thereof twice a day
morning and evening constant, and for a time at four a clock in the afternoon,
if the child be hot you may boil in it two ounces of French barley.

A Beer for the same.
TAke Tamaris two handfuls, Brooklime and Scurvy Grass, and Watercresses, of
each four handfuls, Egrimony, Scabions, Bettony of the wood, of each two
handfuls, Ash-bark, and Ivy-bark, of each two ounces, and half an ounce of
Anniseed, Licorish one ounce, boil all these in four gallons of wort till half
be consumed, and let the child drink of this at any time.

Another for the same.

TAke a quarter of an ounce of Licorish, as much Anniseed, a quarter of a pound
of Raisins, five Figs, one pennyworth of blew Currants, Coltsfoot, Calemint,
Fennel roots, Parsley roots, Marygold flowers, Tamaris, Pellitory of the wall,
Liverwort, Lungwort, of each a handful, boil all these in a pottle of running
water to a quart, and use to give it the child fasting and at night, and to
anoint the body use Vnguentum de dolfe, anoint the back bone, belly and left
side and breast at night going to bed, and have a care of the child catching
cold.

Pills of great virtue for the running of the Reins.
TAke Bole, Terra sigilata, Sanguis Draconis, of each one dram, Conserves of
red Roses three ounces, make it up into a mash for Pills, the dose is the
quantity of a Nutmeg morning and evening.

Another for the same.

FIrst purge well with new drawn Cassia one ounce in a draught of white wind,
and then take Pearl, Coral, Cresses seed and Mader, of each four ounces, Comfry
roots dried and powdered, and Acorns powdered the cups of them, of each of them
four drams, make all these with Venice Turpentine into a mash for Pills, the
dose seven Pills as big as a pea morning and evening.

Another present help for the same.

TAke a good quantity of Oatmeal, and beat it very small, and put it into a
quart of new milk and sees it, and put therein a good quantity of Sugar, and
when it is well boiled strain it and give it the Patient to eat.

For a consumption in the Reins.
TAke a handful or two of Clary leaves and prick them, and four or five yeolks
of Hen eggs newly laid, and take Saffron and dry it upon a little stone or
some such thing, and grind it very small, and put all these together and fry
them in fresh butter, and let the Patient eat of this fasting.

A Medicine against the Stone in the back or bladder, or for the weakness of
the back, which is called the Reins running.
TAke Venice Turpentine and wash it in Rose Water, either red or damask, until
it look white, then divide it into small bals, as you may easily swallow, the
full quantity of three bazel nuts, then roll them in Sugar to make them the
more easy, then swallow them in the morning fasting, and fast three or four
hours after them, take these three or four several mornings and in your water
will appear much gravel.

A good Medicine to provoke Sleep to the Sick.
TAke a good quantity of women's breast milk, and put thereto as much in
quantity of Aqua vilae, stir them well together, and moisten the temples of the
head, and the nosthrils of the Patient well therewith with a fine cloth or
feather, and it will do them much good.

A good drawing Salve.
TAke a good quantity of Rosin bruised small, and a pretty quantity of good
Wax, and a good quantity of Honey, mingle them altogether and set the same upon
a soft fire, still stirring it till it be melted into a perfect Salve.

For a Stitch in the side.
TAke Acorns and dry them and beat them into fine powder, and mingle that
powder with a little powder of Cinnamon and Ginger, and give it the party
grieved to drink in Ale, Wine or Beer, and this will cure. Prob. est.

Another for the same.

TAke Sage and Burnet, of each a like quantity, and dry them upon a tilestone,
and make the same into fine powder and give it to the Patient to drink in Beer
or Ale at meals and at other times for the space of three or four days
together, and this will cure. Prob. est.

For the Sciatica.
TAke Ivy, Mugwort, Walwort, and the inner rind of an Elder-tree, and sees
them in fair water with a good quantity of Salt, and bathe the sore place well
therewith for nine days together three or four times a day, and this will cure.

Another for the same.

TAke a pint of Neatsfoot-oyl, a pint of Aqua vitae, and a handful of roasted
Onions, and stamp them together and then strain them, and it will be an Oil,
anoint well the place grieved morning and evening before a good fire as hot as
you can suffer it, and chafe it well. Prob. est.

To provoke Sleep.
TAke the seeds of Lettice and Smallidg, of each a like quantity, and make a
powder thereof, and put the same into a quantity of white wind, and give it to
the Patient lukewarm, and it will cause him to sleep presently. Prob. est.

For the Spleen.
TAke a good quantity of Bettony and sees it in either Wine, Ale or Beer it
will do much good, it is also good for the milt and liver.

A precious water for the Spleen.
TAke Balm, Turpentine, Scabions, Bettony and Pimpernel, of each a good
quantity, distill them together, and let the Patient drink often of this water,
and this will help him; it is also good against the Pestilence, and for those
that are troubled with the Mother, and for the marrow of the bones, and for to
comfort the Liver. Prob. est.

A Salve to draw and heal.
TAke half a pound of Turpentine, a quarter of a pound of Rosin, as much Bees
wax as Rosin, and add as much Hogs suet or May butter as will make it soft,
which is about two ounces. This is approved.

A Medicine approved for the Spleen.
TAke a quart of Claret wine, a pint of Oyl-olive, two good handfuls of
Camomill shred small, boil these together till half be consumed, and with this
anoint the hardness of the Spleen morning and evening, and it will dissolve.

For one that Speaks in his sleep.
TAke Southernwood and lay it in white wind, and let the Patient drink thereof
morning and evening.

For the Sciatica.
TAke the gall of a Bull, and a quart of wort, boil it to a pint, then put in a
pint of Vinegar, powder of Frankincense one ounce, Honey half a pound, of
Commin in powder half a pound, boil them together till they be thick, and
spread it upon leather, apply it hot, lay a linen cloth between the skin and
the Plaster, the Plaster will serve many times. Proved.

For all manner of sores, old or new: Called The gift of God.
TAke Bettony, Vervin, Pimpernell, Bugloss, Smallidge, Plantine, Scabions,
Egrimony, of each a like quantity, stamp them together and boil them in a
gallon of white wind to the third part, then strain them and add to them a
quantity of Sheeps suer, and half a pound of wax, half a pound of Rosin, half a
pound of Pitch, one pound of Olibanum, and boil it again till by reason and art
thou do think it sufficient.

An excellent Salve or Sear cloth: Which being laid to the stomach will provoke
Appetite, and take away the pain of the stomach: Being laid to the belly it
will cure the Cholick: Being laid to the reins of the back helps the running
of the reins. It is also good for the bloody flux, and for the heat of the
kidneys, and weakness of the back. It heals all swellings of the breast, and
takes away all Imposthumes, or any aches. It breaks all swelling pustils. It
draws away all running ulters, not breaking skin. It being applied to the
fundament it heals all defects there. And being applied to the head it
helps all pains there and of the eyes.
TAke four pound of Oyl-olive of the best, red lead and white lead, of each one
pound, and twelve ounces of Spanish soap, incorporate all these well together
in a good glazed earthen pot over a soft fire the space of one hour and half,
until the matter be turned something darker then the Oil was by nature, let it
boil till that by dropping it upon a trencher it will neither cleave to the
trencher, nor to your fingers then it is enough, then take some long linen
clothes about eight fingers long and dip them therein, and when they begin to
be cold, smooth them upon a Table with a slick-stone and keep them for your
use, they will keep twenty years, the older the better.

Mrs Harris her black Salve, good for any sprain or swelling.
TAke of Wax three quarters of a pound, a pint of good Sallet-oyl, melt them on
a soft fire, and then take them off the fire, and add to it white lead half a
pound finely beaten and searced, then set it on the fire again and let it boil
half an hour, then take it from the fire again, and add to it Frankincense,
Mastick the finest, drops of Olibanum, of each two ounces, and also Myrrh two
ounces, beat them all fine and searce them and put them in, and set it on the
fire again, let them boil half an hour more, then put in half a quarter of an
ounce of Camphire, and let it boil till it be black, be always stirring it, then
take it from the fire, and stir it till it be cold, and keep it for your use.
It is good also for any wound. Prob. est.

Another rare Sear-cloth for the same.

TAke a quart of pure sweet Oil and one pound of red lead very finely beaten,
boil it in a bel-mettle skillet, upon a soft charcoal fire about half an hour,
stirring it with a wooden stick, then dip a piece of linen cloth in it and
cool it, if it stick not to your fingers then it is enough, then dip in linen
clothes into it and hang them upon a pack thread in the shadow until they be
dry, then lay papers between every sheet, and so keep it for your use.
Approved. Anoint the grief with that Ointment wherein is Detainder four
handfuls, page 119. before you apply the Plaster.

To cure a Strain in the arm in a short time.
TAke some Wormwood and fresh butter and mix them together, and anoint the
grief therewith, and bind the arm well, and in a day or two it will cure.

To make a Balsom that will cure all manner of Sores or green wounds, the best
that ever was.
TAke two ounces of Venice Turpentine, beat it in Rose water and Spring water
together three or four times till it look white, then take two ounces of
Virgins wax cut small, boil them together in a pint of Canary Sack, let it boil
half an hour, then take it off and put in half an ounce of red Sanders beaten
small, so it is made.

The juice of an Onion will take away a Scald.

For a Stitch.
TAke a dry Acorn, beat it to powder, and as much Treackle as a hazel nut, mix
them together, and give them to the Patient in a quantity of white wine going
to bed, and it will help.

A good Pill to cause Sleep and ease pain.
TAke Cinnamon, Cassia ligna, Opium, of each two drams, Myrrh, and both the
Peppers one dram, Castory half a dram, Saffron one scruple fine powdered and
made to a mash for Pills, the dose two Pills no bigger then a small tare.

To break a Stone.
TAke the shell or thin rind of Acorns, the hips of a briar, red holy briars
and Nutmegs, all dried and powdered, drink thereof morning and evening in
white wind half a spoonful at once for six days or more.

For all Sickness, Fevers, Imposthumes or any other disease in man's body.
TAke Hysop, Bettony, Rosemary, Violets, Vervine, St John's wort, Avence,
Mous-ear, Plantine, Feverfew, of each one handful washed clean and stamped in
a mortar, put them in a clean earthen pot which is new, with a gallon of
white wind, let it stand close covered to infuse all night, in the morning boil
it close covered to the consumption of half, then strain it through a hair sive
into a double vial, and let the sick drink thereof morning and evening a good
draught, and this powder following is to be taken therewith.

Take Gallingall and Nutmegs, of each four drams, Ginger one ounce, Cloves,
Cinnamon, of each two drams, Licorish six ounces, Sugar four ounces, all
powdered and searced, mix one spoonful of this powder with one pint of the
liquor aforesaid, take first the simple liquor six days and six nights, then
other four days and nights use this powder with it, and this with Gods
blessing will cure you, if ever you be cured.

To help any hurt in the Skull.
TAke the juice of Pimpernell, and wet therein pieces of linen cloth, and
apply it often to the grief, and it will soon cure.

To help shrunk Sinews, or hard ach in them.
TAke Oil of Roses four drams, Spermaciti one ounce, melt them together and
anoint the grief therewith twice every day, then lay on also plaister-wise,
clothes wet, butter, wax and Aqua vitae, use this till you be well.

A drink to be made in the spring for the green Sickness or any other grief.
TAke Senna six ounces, Wormwood, Balm, of each two handfuls, Anniseed and
Fennel seed, of each three ounces, the juice of Scurvy Grass three pints,
Watercresses and Brooklime, of each a pint, bruise all these and tie them up
in a linen cloth with a stone to sink it, put it into four gallons of new Ale
out of the tun, and let them work together till it be four days old, then
drink thereof in the morning fasting half a pint, and if it do not purge you
three or four stools a day, take as much at night, use it till you be well.

Scurvy the cure. First a Purge.
TAke Senna, Alexandrum, of each four drams, Epithimum two drams, Raisins of
the Sun stoned one ounce, Fennel seed, Anniseed and Ginger, of each half a
dram, infuse them all night in warm whey pretty hot, in the morning wring it
out hard, and give it to the Patient.

A drink to take after it.
TAke Scurvy Grass and Devils-bit, Watercresses and Brooklime, of each one
handful, Wormwood half a handful, stamp and strain them and take a quart of
white wind allayed with a pint of water, boil them altogether six or seven
walms, add to them in the boiling white Ginger powdered two drams, Elna
Campana one dram, a little Saffron powdered, drink thereof first and last, at
meals infuse therein Saxifrage.

For the green Sickness.
TAke a handful of Cowslip-flowers, dry them and beat them to powder, and let
the Patient drink one spoonful of this powder in six or seven spoonfuls of
Malmsie fourteen mornings fasting.

A Swelling, the cure.
TAke May butter and wax a like quantity, boil them together with a little Aqua
vitae, dip double clothes therein, and lay it to the grief very hot, and it
will draw out the water and presently swage the swelling. Proved.

A Dianthos which will help all feebleness of the body, the tisick, the grief
of the heart and of the Liver after long Sickness.
TAke Cloves, Gallingall, Ginger, Spike, Nut-megs, of each two drams and a
half, Cara-way, Anniseed, Cardamonium, of each two drams, Licorish, red Roses,
Violets and Rosemary-flowers, of each four drams, Honey cleansed and Rose Water
a pretty quantity, let those things which be to be powdered be beaten very fine
and searced, then mix them with the Honey and Rosewater, and let it simper on
the fire to a Confection, the dose is three drams, use this as a secret. Prob.
est.

A powder for Wind and Spleen.
TAke the rind of an Orange, Coliander seed, Caraway seed, Anniseed, Fennel
seed, and Parsley seed, of each one spoonful, dry all these and beat them to
powder, and searce it, then mix them with fine Sugar, take thereof in the
morning fasting, at noon before dinner and after dinner, and before supper and
after supper going to bed, in a little Anniseed water, and you will find much
good.

A rare Sear-cloth or Plaster for a sore breast, or any other sore, or sprain,
or ach, which I have often had experience of.
TAke half a pound of Virgins wax, and half a pint of Oil of Roses, and half a
pint of Oyl-olive, melt them altogether upon a soft fire of Char-coal, then let
it cool in a pan till it be half cold, then take half a pound of white-lead,
and beat it fine, and put it into the Oil abovesaid and to the wax, and stir
them together on the fire, and cause them softly to boil half an hour, then
take two ounces of Frankincense, and two ounces of Myrrh, and two ounces of
Gum, Olibanum, and two ounces of Mastick, beat them to powder very fine and put
them into the abovesaid Oil and Wax, and cause them to boil another half hour,
still stirring it till it be black, then add a quarter of an ounce of Camphire,
when you have taken it from the fire, so dip in your clothes for sear-cloths,
or work it up for plasters for your use. Proved often for what is abovesaid.

A white tossed steeped in white wind Vinegar applied to a strain, is a speedy
remedy for that grief.

For the Toothache.
TAke a piece of the root of Crowfoot, and put it into the hollow tooth if
there be any, if none be hollow, apply it often to the tooth that aketh, and
that will cure.

Again, take the powder of red Coral, put it into the tooth that aches, and it
will soon fall out.

Again, Take Organy that grows close to the ground and tastes like Aqua vitae,
bruise it and lay it to the tooth.

Also bruise bursa pastoris and do the same.

To make Teeth white, and to fasten the Gums, and to comfort the roots, and to
make the breath sweet.
TAke Vinegar of Squils and dip a piece of linen cloth into it, and rub the
teeth and gums therewith.

For Lues Venera, or French Pox.
FIrst prepare the body with purgations, as this Pulvis Arthreticus, the dose
is one dram, augment as you see good, not exceeding above a dram and half, but
a dram and a quarter is a good dose, or a dram of that and half a dram of
Jallop.

And then use this Diet-drink with Lignum vitae, for every pint of water an
ounce of Lignum vitae, and put in some Carduus Benedictus, let them drink half
a pint at a time morning and evening, let their diet be chicken or such meat.

And then next use Turbith Mellerares, begin at three grains, use it to a dram
but no further, till you make a Salavation or Flux at the mouth.

And then make a lotion for the mouth, to wash that daily, let the Salavation
continue three weeks or a month, till you be sure the ulcer be clean.

To stay Vomiting.
TAke Mints, Shepherds purse, Plantine, and Knotgrass, and Comfry, of each one
handful, shred them small and boil them in a quart of red Wine or Claret,
drink of this Wine, and plaster the herbs to the stomach in a double cloth.

A Vomit for any disease.
TAke and Elder bough and scrape off all the outmost rind clean, then take some
of the inside rind and stamp it and strain it into strong Ale which is old, and
drink it lukewarm, this will soon cause the Patient to vomit.

To stay Vomiting.
TAke Mints, Shepheards-purse and Comfry, of each one handful chopped small,
boil them in a quart of red Wine or Claret, drink of the Wine, and lay the
herbs plaister-wise to the stomach in a double cloth. Prob. est.

To force one to make Water which is stepped in Sickness.
INfuse and mix ten drops of oil of Juniper in two ounces of Parsley water and
drink it blood-warm, it will cure at once or twice taking.

A Water to inject or serindge into the secrets of men or women.
TAke water and white wind, of each one quart, Woodbine leaves and flowers, of
each two handfuls, Sage, Rosemary, and Watercresses, of each half a handful
cut small, boil all these together half an hour, then put in Alum powdered
four drams, and two small spoonfuls of honey, and boil them about two walms,
and keep it for your use.

To cause one to make Water.
TAke Saffron in powder, and pure ball soap, as much of one as another, mingle
it together, spread it upon the fleshy side of white leather, make thereof
plasters and lay upon the navill of the Patient, and give him to drink as much
of the powder of the herb golden rod as will lie on a six pence in a glassfull
of Renish wine or white wind.

An excellent salve for a deep Wound or cut, which requires tenting.
TAke the yeolk of a new laid egg and honey the quantity of a Wallnut, the
same quantity of pure Turpentine, beat them altogether, and lay them to the
wound with fine lint, and this will cure it in a short space.

Another for a green Wound.

TAke wheat flour and milk, and temper them well together, sees them till
they be thick, then take the white of a new laid egg, and beat it well with
the aforesaid stuff and it will keep it from rankling and heal it.

An excellent Medicine for a green Wound, being applied plaister-wise, or to
make a sear-cloth for any Ach, and it is good to be taken inwardly upon the
point of a knife for the Lungs.
TAke a quart of Ale and two pennyworth of fresh butter, one pennyworth of good
honey, boil all together till half be wasted, keep it close covered while it is
boiling. Use this as a treasure.

Another plaster for a green Wound, or for a Wound that is over-healed and
sore underneath.

TAke a good quantity of Barly-meal, and the white of an egg and honey, and
mingle them well together, and lay it plaister-wise to the wound, and it will
cure immediately.

For one that is brought low in sickness.
TAke Egrimony, Bettony, red Sage, Fennel roots the inside, Liverwort, Indive
and Succory, of each of these one handful, boil them in four pints of milk
till half be consumed, then strain it and let the Patient drink a quarter of a
pint at a time morning and evening lukewarm.

For Weakness in the back.
TAke Clary, Dates, the pith of an Ox, Cream and Eggs, and bread grated,
mingle them all together, and fry them, mix with them white Sanders, strew
Sugar upon them, and give it to the Patient fasting in the morning.

A salve for a green Wound.
TAke a pound of Rosin, half a pound of Wax, four ounces of old Swines grease,
one ounce of Verdigrease, boil them all together upon a soft fire, and strain
them for your use.

A good remedy for one that cannot make Water.
TAke three or four hive Bees, kill them and dry them upon a hot slate, then
bruise them to fine powder, then put the powder into a quart of Ale and give to
the Patient a pretty quantity at a time. Prob. est.

To heal Wounds and sores, and also to draw.
TAke Rosin, Frankincense, of each four ounces, white wax and Olibanum, of each
three ounces, Harts-suet and Mastick, of each one ounce, Venice Turpentine half
an ounce, white wind a pint, melt the Rosin, Frankincense and Suet together,
then strain it into a pan, and add to it then the white Wax, the Olibanum, and
the Mastick powdered, and the Wine, then boil all together till the Wine be
consumed, then take it from the fire and stir it till it be almost cold, then
put in the Turpentine and make it up in a roll, and keep it in parchment or
leather.

A Water to heal all sores and ulcers.
TAke a pound of Roch-allum, four ounces of green Copras, beat them and set
them on the fire until they be melted, then let them dry again, then beat them
into fine powder, then set a pottle of spring water over the fire till it
boyleth fast, then take it off, and when it cease boiling, cast your powder
abroad on the water so long as the water shall rise, till it appear black in
the bottom, then it is perfect, wherein dip a cloth and lay it double to the
ulcer or wound, first laying on the wound some of the powder and roll it up.

A Medicine to kill all manner of Worms in the body.
TAke Plantine leaves and roots, and groundsel, of each a like quantity stamp
and strain it, and give it the Patient to drink mixed with a pint of good
Malmsie warm together, give this to the Patient for the space of three or four
days together, and this will kill worms in the maw or elsewhere.

Another for the same, which will speedily kill the Worms.

TAke Aqua Composita that is made of herbs, and wash the Patients breast
therewith, then take a little powder of myrrh, and beat it very small and
searce it fine, and strew that also upon the breast after it has been well
washed, and then lay on a warm cloth upon the breast and set it remain twenty
four hours together. This has been proved.

For Wind and shooting in the head.
TAke Egrimony and Cinnamon, bray them and put them in Ale, and lay it it to the
temples of your head, and as the pain removes, so remove your medicine.

An unguent to heal a green Wound at the first dressing.
TAke Aloes siccatrine fine powdered, and the powder of perrosin, of each a
like quantity, mix them and grind them with the white of an egg, and lay it on
a pleget of lint, and apply to the wound.

A plaster to cure and heal a Wound.
TAke Letherage of Gold one pound, Oil of Roses two pound, white wind Vinegar
and old Urine, of each half a pound, let them boil till the Vinegar and Urine
be consumed, add to it in the boiling Wax two ounces, Frankincense one ounce,
mix it well and apply it. Prob. est.

For a Woman in Travel.
TAke a Date-stone and grate it into fine powder, and give it the Patient with
white wind, and God willing she shall be dclivered without danger. Prob. est.

Thus have I discharged my Conscience to my Country, not hiding any thing from
them which has been imparted unto me. I have given you the general Method of
Physic and Chyrurgery, with three hundred rare Receipts suitable for to cure
any Disease incident to the body of man, which secrets have most of them been
kept from the sight of the world, still to keep creatures in blindness, and to
advance their own interest, which in this Treatise I have endeavored to take
off: and that the poor may not perish for want of help by reason of their
poverty, here is a Garden to which they may go, and cure any Disease curable,
with small cost.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
THese Books following are Printed and sold by Simon Miller at the Star in St
Paul's Churchyard, near the West end.

The Harmony, Chronicle and Order of the New Testament. By J. Lightfoot D. D.
In fol.

The Civil Wars of Spain, in the Reign of Charles the 5th Emperor of
Germany. Wherein our late unhappy differences are paralleled in many
particulars: In fol.

Abraham's Faith, or the Good old Religion, By Jo. Nicholis Minister of the
Gospel: In 40.

Mr Robert Bolton's General Directions for a Comfortable walking with God: In
40.

The Anatomy of Mortality. By G. Strood: In 40.

Mr Henry Ainsworth on the Canticles: In 40.

Mr Paul Baynes Diocesans Trial: In 40.

The Supreme Power of Christian States, Vindicated from the Insolent pretenses
of Gulielmus Apollonii: By E. Gralle.

Several Politic and Military Observations of the Civil and Military (...) By
D. P. Esquire;.

The Meritor^^us Price of Christ's R^demption: By W. Pinchi^ of New England. 40.

Astrology Theologi^ed: In 40.

Jo. Lilburn*s Trial at Guild Hall.

The Reconcile^ of the ^i^l^* 80.

Mr Ed. Waterhouse Esquire his Discourse of the Piety and Charity of Elder Churches
and Christians. 80.

An Antidote against Popery: By Peter du Moulin. 80.

A short View and Defense of the Reformation of the Church of England by K.
Edw. and Queen Elizabeth. 80.

The Poor man's Physician and Chyrurgion. In 80

A Book of Schemes or Figures of Heaven, ready set for every 4 minutes of Time.

Rudiments of the Hebrew Tongue: By H. Knoales. 80.

Mr Robinsons Essaies: In 120.

The duty of Children to Parents: In 120.

Posselius's Apothegmes: 120.

A Complete Practice of Physic: By Dr J. Smith. 120.

The New Testament. 24.

The 3d part of the Bible. 24.


