DIVINE BLOSSOMS.

A PROSPECT or LOOKING-GLASS For YOUTH: Wherein and whereby he may plainly
behold and see a Supereminency and Superexcellency of Grace and Religion,
beyond the Worlds Honor, Glory, Fame, Repute, Pleasure, Joy, Delight, Love, And
all other lower Accommodations whatsoever.

Laid down to Youth by Exciting Parallel

Between Earths Honor and Heavens Glory Between Carnal Pleasure and Spiritual
Pleasure Between Inordinate Love and Divine Love.
Under every of which particulars, the Author Exemplarily expesseth himself in
a varied verse.

Composed by a hearty Wel-wisher to the Youthful Generation, FRANCIS COCKIN,
alias COKAYNE.

Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, Eccl. 12. Delight thy self in
the Lord, and he shall give thee thy Hearts desire, Psalm. 35. 4. I love them
that love me, and they that seek me early shall find me, Prove. 8. London,
Printed by W. G. for E. Farnham, at the entrance into Popeshead-alley out of
Cornhill, 1657.

To the Generation of Youth.
TEnder Reader, knowing how much youthful yearts delight in eating early
fruit, (though green and so unwholesome) I therefore here present thee with a
dish of early fruit, (yet mature and ripe, and therefore no whit dangerous to
thy greedy stomach,) therefore accept it willingly and (with safety) fall to
with courage.

And much good may it do thee.

Only let me request thee to use civil behavior in thy so doing: be sober,
be serious, read understandingly, apply diligently, and practice conscionably
the precepts here given thee.

For thy good profit and encouragement, I have vouchsafed to express my self
unto thee; what thou have heard of me, by me, in me, and from me, do therefore
and take all in Love from him, that seeks most heartily (and with the strength
of his Soul) thy eternal welfare and Gods glory in thee.

Ely July. 1656. F. C.

To the most famous and renowned Mr. George Wither.
Worthy Sir,
ALL happiness and peace I wish you: And having been very desirous (since the
first time I ever met with ought of yours) to gratify you according to your
worth and desert; and finding no means and ways thereunto, I have deigned to
present these few Pages unto you, thereby to testify (in part) the high esteem
and honorable respect that I adjudge you worthy of.

Sir, accept of this in love, pass your candid censure of it, and though the
Phrases and Style be mean, let the Matter and Drift excuse it. Again,
considering by me 'twas penned (in a few days) with much haste, and past from
me immediately, no person fitter then your self to patronize these Artless
Lines, could I find, because your Youthful years were in the same manner spent.

Sir, I am Yours, most ready to serve you in ought, FRANCIS COKAINE.

Courteous Reader,
LEt me request thee when ever thou find any fault in the sense or Verse, to
mend it as is hereunder specified; the Authors absence having occasioned
several mistakes.

Page 1. Staff. 4. l. 4. strange r. strong, st. 5. l. 2. in slavish r. give
slavish p. 12. st. 3. l. 3. r. scattered strength, p. 19. st. 30. l 2. r. with
those, p. 20. st. 34. l. 5. Joy r. Toy, p. 25. st. 54. 4. redeem r. esteem, p.
29. st. 70. Heads r. Hestos, p. 31. st. 79. l. 3. use r. case, p. 32. st. 82.
l. 1. besides r. repel or resist, p. 33. st. 87. l. 6. months r. moments, p.
34. st. 90. l. 5. r. lavish cups, p. 42. st. 98. l. 6. never r. ever, p. 45.
st. 110. l. 6. be^ded bow r. bend and bow, p. 66. st. 24. l. 6. r. but dim, p.
69. st. 34. l 3. was pric'd,* p. 92. st. 13. 3. r. sure small dispute, p. 93.
st. 16. l 4. full possessor p. 94. st. 20. l. 1. r. Queer of Heaven, p. 117. st.
30. l 7. r. motions.

The Contents of the Book.
FIrst the invocation (presents it self) wherein the Author craves Gods divine
assistance and gracious acceptance in and of the intended work.

Then by way of Introduction proves his own fi^nesse to the work. Gives a word
or two to Parents about the educating their children, and declares the manner
of their greeting them in Hell; hintes some matters to Superiors, and so
procceds to the work it self.

Wherein the Author.
First, begins to excite youth, to seek after God and glory, from the heat of
his Spirit aspiring to honor, declares the high worth of the engagement.

And forasmuch as the heart of youth is ambitious of fame glory and renown
gotten and won by valiancy in desperate and dangerous attempts, therefore the
Author describes the might, strength and power of that grand Christian enemy.

And stirs up the courage of youth, to engage in the quarrel against him, by
several encouraging motives.

Declares the worth of that that lies at stake and must else be lost, and then
the worthy renown and glory that may be obtained, by a courageous encounter
against fleshly lusts.

As also relates an Oneness that is between Christ's Spirit, and the Spirit of
him that opposes the motions of sin, they both join to do the same work etc.

Shows that according to the employment, so should the reward be.

Then for the further encouragement, and stronger excitement of youth, to seek
God and Glory, the Author expresses himself, and declares at what a rate, he
sets the service of God; the contempt that he has of the world and all things
in the world, in respect of that honorable service.

By a brief survey of all that the world affords he proves and declares all
therein to be non-satisfactory, and insufficient to the desire of the Soul of
man.

Then insisting upon the second point, viz. pleasure;

First, he shows the congruity that is between it, and the nature of youth,
declares the effects of pleasures, and to what they tend by instance.

And gives sound counsel therefrom, to youth in respect of Soul-demeanment.

Then the Author lays down the rist of pleasure, declaring what it is that
makes pleasure.

And shows by similitude the woeful and dangerous estate of a vain luxurious
Spirit.

Declares in a word or two the unmatchlesse worth of the Soul, and reasons
somewhat from that thence its freedom.

In sadness of heart declaring the abasement of the Soul by sin, hints at the
reward of sin by way of arguing.

Proves the soul Christ's purchase, and discourse^ somewhat therefrom; Then
lays down some Solid instructions to youth, how and whereby he should get free
from sins slavery, and get the conquest of every hellish enormity.

Describes the bliss that thereby his soul shall procure to it self; viz. the
presence of Christ and sanctification by his Spirit, acceptance of God through
him, and adornment with his graces; lays down the parallel of the present
estate with the estate past, and describes some excellent peculiar Christian
privileges.

Then describes pleasure to be a painted strumpet; propounds 4 Questions to
youth, from whence he gives him to understand how dear bought all the pleasures
of sin are.

Describes the miserable slavery and servitude of sin.

And then for the delight of the Reader, the Author varies that verse, and
expresses his own youthful experience of pleasure, showing what it truly is;

And then declares and lays down the arguments and considerations wherewithal
he opposed all the pleasures of sin, and got mastery thereof.

Hints to what sin deprives of, and lays down, in a word or two, the
excellency of the unpa^aleld sweets of religion.

Then coming to the third particular shows thereunder, how youths heated blood
lays him open to love, and lusts. Declares the advantage the Devil takes at
youths careless activity; and how he ever attends to give him an object for
his active Spirit to fix on.

Shows youth to be guided by a headstrong passion.

Then paralells Heavens beauty with earths, and divine with carnal love in
several circumstances.

Reasons youth from the excellency of the one and the sordidnesse of the other,
to seek that which is most excellent, eschew absurditie^ and dangers, the which
is illustrated by several resemblances.

Then the Author turns off, and in a pleasant strain expresses himself,
relating the excellency of divine beauty, and describes the worthyness of
divine Love by his own experience, triumphing in his youthful choice.

Therein paralelling the beauty, excellency, proportionablenesse, sweetness,
etc. of the Creatours Love to the creatures in a kind of Soul-ravishing ecstasy,
relating Soulenamoring rarities.

Then comes to a conclusion, wherein he shows the difference between the
service of sin and God: excites from several considerations to the service of
God.

Relates the sum of his own desired endeavor for the good of youth: how
single-hearted he has been therein, affectionately expressing the tenderness
of his heart to the good of young One.

But more especially, how exceeding precious gracious young-Ones are to him,
and how entirely beloved by him.

Deign^ out of depth of affection to give them some peculiar instructions.

Exhorts to make use of prayer; shows the excellency thereof in it self, and in
its effects.

Relates his own experience thereof, and so therein and therewithal puts
period to the whole.

The Invocation.
[1.]
MOst dearest Lord! My souls desire and joy,
That se'st and rulest all things even as one,
In whom it lies to save, or to destroy,
There being none can save, but thou alone:
[2.]
It Is thou alone, to whom I make my suit,
It Is thou to whom my self I do address;
It Is for thy sake that I would not be mute,
I Would speak thy praise, nor can I do ought less.
[3.]
My tender youth proffers my slender Rimes
To do thee service, whose I wholly am:
I give my best, I Would spend my vacant times
For and to thee, from whom my Being came:
[4.]
Lord, may thou please my fancy to enrich,
And fill my spirit with celestial flames,
Begetting in each faculty an itch
Of strange desire thereto, that whosoever blames
[5.]
Me, for the laying out my self about
That which may tend thee honor for to bring,
I may them slight, in slavish thoughts the rout,
And in despite of all thy glories sing.
[6.]
Instruct my heart, and fill my Mind with Matter,
My Apprehension quicken, and enable;
Compose my Thoughts, let not Distraction tatter
My inner Man, but in Thee make me stable.
[7.]
Yea, ad thou Art to polish so my Rimes,
That my intended purpose they may do:
Thou take the advantage of all Things and Times
Here take thy 'dvantage, that thy Glories so
[8.]
May grow by my endeavors, which when I
With joyful heart, with gladded soul shall see,
My utmost Aim and End I then epsy:
(Oh may I not in this deceived be!)
[9.]
For what doth't profit me, O Lord, to live,
If to thy praise my Life be noe directed?
Thou daily giv'st, I daily do receive,
Unworthy I, of Thee to be respected!
[10.]
A twofold ways my Soul and Body's Thine,
Thine by Creation, Thine by Purchase too;
(By the last of which thy Son and his is mine,
An interest in thy Self I have also.)
[11.]
A single Bond sufficient is to bind
An honest person to perform an Act;
And shall a double less advantage find?
How greatly dis-ingenuous is that fact!
[12.]
Thine, thine I am, for thee I would lay out
My Strength, my Skill, my Might, my Power and Love:
Fain would I busied be thy works about,
And for Employment now I do thee move.
[13.]
My dappled Quill thy Service waits to do,
For to record whatere the Mind dissolveth
To words, my hand is willing thereunto,
And all my Powers upon that task resolves.
[14.]
Oh bless and breath upon my weak Endeavors,
Thou God of blessing, Author of all good,
That crown'st with glory that Soul that persevers,
Whose might and power cannot be withstood.
[15.]
Infuse thy Spirit so into my Soul,
That neither Wit nor matter may be wanting
Unto me, Youths vain courses to control,
And set his Nature after thee a panting.
[16.]
For to insinuate into his will,
And usher thorough his Judgment to's Affection,
(Vouchsafe to me the Strength, the Art, the skill)
That He may give to Thee all due subjection.
[17.]
Vouchsafe these feeble Lines for to inspire
With so much power of thy prevailing Grace,
That they each Readers Heart may set on fire,
And efficacious be sin to displace.
[18.]
O God! Let not that Cannibal devour
Those precious Souls, for whom Christ gave his blood;
But mitigate his domineering power,
And make Mankind attentive more to good.
[19.]
Permit him not, O Lord! to spoil and stroy
Thy tender Plants, nor any budding flower;
Permit him not thy vineyard to annoy,
Rebuke him, let him not thy vines devour.
[20.]
O let him not of Youth make a full prey!
Correct O Lord, Correct and give a check
To You^h's vain courses, stop 'm, make 'm stay,
For they will conformed be to no ones beck:
[21.]
Unblind Youths Eyes, unstop his deafned Ears,
And undeceive his vain deceived Heart;
Strike thou his spirit, for he nothing fears,
And him and his beloved humors part:
[22.]
Thou God of love and grace, show mercy to him,
Vouchsafe to turn him, ere he goes to hell;
O let not lusts, pleasures, vain love undo him,
Defeat him of thee, with the damned to dwell!
[23.]
But make him tractable to good Instruction,
Conformable unto thy blessed pleasure,
Complyable to every safe direction,
And to esteem thy love above all treasure:
[24.]
Make this my endeavor serviceable to him,
Make this to him as pleasant savoury food;
Yea, make it powerful enough to woo him;
To purge out evils, make it physic good.
DIVINE BLOSSOMS.
The Introduction.
[1.]
IF sickly Men fittest Physicians are,
And troubled Consciences the best Divines,
To contradict my fitness, then who dare,
To speak to Youth in my unpolished Lines:
My years being tender, I experience do
What ere may be delightful Youth unto.
[2.]
Who better knows, or who is a fitter Man
To tell the Road, than Carriers that do travel
It every day? Perhaps another can
Say what it was of late, and where some gravel
Was laid on such a place, on such a day;
But what at present it is, he cannot say.
[3.]
But he that is a traveling each hour,
And seldom off the Road, can best discover
Each miry Bog: The like has he the power
To do in any Art, that is a Lover
Thereof, and a sound Student therein;
To which, and to his Nature, there is some kin.
[4.]
My years being tender, and well near their Bloom;
My blood being hot, and swelling in my veins;
Cares being strangers, vigor taking room;
Who better may greet youth with pleasant strains?
Who better may describe and speak to 's Nature,
Than I that am a young and youthful Creature?
[5.]
Youth may say, Age lays too much burden on them,
Having forgot what they in youth did do;
May think their solid precepts much may wrong them,
Or be too hard for Youth to attain unto:
There being disparity in Age,
They may object, their counsel is too sage.
[6.]
But these and many other such like cavils
Are ta'n away while youth to youth does speak;
Young ones best know what young ones soonest gravels
Their folly, their vain courses, where they are weak:
There Is a propensity in youthful nature,
Congruity in almost every feature.
[7.]
What shall I say to youthful years Abuses?
Them to describe, should I now make my task,
Taking away their vain and fond Excuses,
Too much time, pains, and labor would it ask:
Again, then must I old Age blame and check,
'Cause they neglected (carelessly) to deck.
[8.]
Their Childrens tender years with virtues veil,
Which is the cause their Lives are now so bad,
For Virtue might as well in Youth prevail,
If that her solid precepts they had had:
Train up a Child with precepts good and sage,
And he will not forget the same in Age.
[9.]
But how can Youth, Alas! how can he choose
But vile and vain disordered Courses take?
When as his Parent never did him use
To contradict, nor good to him to speak:
Ground sown with Nettles cannot bring forth Wheat,
He Is like to thrive that eats dirt for meat.
[10.]
Oh Parents! what account do you think to make
To great Jehov' at the great Judgement-day?
Oh! how will ye appear? what can ye speak?
The want of precepts made your Children stray:
Their language then'll be this, when they shall see ye,
Oh cursed Parents! Cursed, cursed be ye.
[11.]
H^d it not been for you, we had not come
Into this place of Soul-tormenting pain,
You made us guilty of this heavy doom,
In that you cherished us in courses vain:
You might have been the means of our Salvation,
But you have been the means of our Damnation.
[12.]
Cursed be you with an eternal curse,
Cursed be the time wherein you us begat,
Cursed be the womb that bore's, she that did's nurse,
Cursed be all they that much rejoiced at
Our Birth and Being: miserable we
That are confined in Torments ever to be.
[13.]
Oh cursed Parents! you the woeful cause
Of this our woeful case most truly were,
In that you let us violate Gods laws,
Neglected to instruct us in his fear:
Cursed we say, for ever cursed be you,
Because the means of this our curse are you.
[14.]
You cocker'd, when you should have us instructed;
You brought us up in vanity and sin,
You laughed with us, when you should's corrected,
And that encouraged us our courses in:
You looked not to us with an eye severe,
We never from you did sound precepts hear.
[15.]
Parents, what think ye of this woeful greeting?
Is It nothing for to bed in flames of fire?
And be saluted at your heavy meeting
With stripes and strokes, with whips of knotted wire?
Look for no less, your children will do so,
What will not black Revenge fierce jury do?
[15.]
Bowels of love are turned there to hate,
Your Children are transformed into Devils;
I cannot conceive, my Pen cannot relate
How they will torment ye' for those forbid Evils
That they did learn from your vain conversation,
Which greatly did conduce to their damnation.
[16.]
Indeed, Can they do less then torture you
That were the cause that they are thus tormented?
Parents, Remember this, Consider now
In time, lest your damnation be augmented
By their company in those fierce flames
That ever burn, and naught their fury tames.
[17.]
Your greatest Duty lie not in providing
Them here a portion, and in laying up
Such things for them, as if they would here abiding
For evermore, and should not taste the Cup
That Is in Gods hand, containing Wine that is red
(For them that know him not) by's fury bred.
[18.]
But I do not intend to task my Muse
At present, for to speak unto old Age;
No, at the present I the same refuse,
Yet shall my matter be both grave and sage:
It Is Youth to whom I do intend my speech,
It Is Youth I do as Auditor beseech.
[19.]
I shall not read Lectures of good Behavior
Now unto Age, how they should wisely live;
How act themselves, that all their acts might savor
Of Good; a good Example for to give
To imitative Youth, that notes each thing
They do, and does the like in many a thing.
[20.]
And though I have hinted, yet I have no more
Than given an hint of that same weighty charge
Of Childrens Education, on the score
Of those that keep them, those of riper age:
Those acts of yours, that you think time does smother,
Are kept alive, being acted by another.
[21.]
It Is Gospel-Exhortation, BE DISCREET,
(As well to Youth as Age directly given)
It Is not to one, but does both Sexes greet,
Speaks to all persons that look after Heaven:
Be circumspect and wise, Redeem the time,
You that would live in that all-glorious Clime.
[22.]
Old Age, remember, God does notice take
Of al your words, your gestures, thoughts and deeds,
Of each of which you must a reckoning make;
From Thoughts come Word, and from thence Action breeds:
God views your Generation, Children, see
The Devils mind, then see you wary be.
Excitations. [1.]
But tender Youth, Come hearken, lend an Ear;
My thoughts on you at present I do spend;
It is to you, to you I do declare
That which unto Soul-safety much does tend:
Now thou art young, and sound, and strong in stature,
Remember, Oh Remember thy Creator.
[2.]
Begin betimes to seek the King of glory,
At whose right hand pleasures for evermore
Do bide and dwell, whose worth the Angels story,
And they with Saints and Seraphims adore:
Up, up Youth, and pursue this glorious prize;
Shake, shake off sloth, come quickly, quickly rise.
[3.]
Thy blood is hot (Youth) let that heat excite thee,
And stir thy spirits, move them to a flame;
Collect thy spirits strength, here is that will fight thee;
Arise, arise, thy sloth I greatly blame:
It Is Glory, it is a Kingdom, it is laid down,
The brows of the victorious for to crown.
[4.]
Come, here are brave attempts, noble achievements,
Here, here is the way, the way to purchase honor;
Here Is truly noble, truly brave employments,
To be a Soldier under Christ's own Banner:
The God of Heaven and Earth the Captain is,
The cause is good, it is for eternal bliss.
[5.]
O put on courage! Let that boiling blood
That heats your veins, turn into holy rage;
Bid Sin avaunt, let Satan be withstood,
And in that holy War your selves engage:
Redeem your time, your freedoms, and your selves,
For all are Captives unto hellish Elves.
[6.]
Your enemy is strong, a potent foe,
He Is full of might, of policy and skill;
The World, the Flesh do join their strength un^^,
Most earthly Powers do obey his will:
Things that do look with seeming glorious faces,
Principalities and Foes in heavenly places
[7.]
You have to fight against: Engines of War
Your Foe-man has, sleights, stratagems and wilds,
Whereby he often conquers from afar,
And often many Creatures he beguiles:
We are his Slaves, and in fell bondage all,
Stand at his beck, and run when he does call.
Encouragements [8.] and Exhortations.
Oh let us rouse us, quitting sinful floth,
And put on courage, and go forth with might;
For to engage in fight, let us not be loath,
Because we lose our Souls else, and their right:
What though our Foe be strong, our Captain's stronger:
What though his arm be long? our Captain's longer.
[9.]
The Body's broke, Up, up, and take the spoil,
The Body of our foes puissant strength,
Our noble Captain 'th given Death the foyl,
And we shall be victorious to him at length:
Fall on, Fall on, our foes are in a Rout,
The Victory is ours, out of doubt.
[10.]
Right noble Spirits, true heroic Minds,
Delight to engage where Courage may appear,
I have often heard how glad He is that finds
A desperate attempt, that may him dare;
And this they do, that the shrill Trump of Fame
Unto the Age may blazon forth their Name.
[11.] Argument 1.
But young Men, Hark ye, If that airy honor
May move hot Spirits to adventure far,
Then what may this under Jehovah's Banner
(For your own Interests) to attempt a War?
Y' are Slaves to Sin, and to each Humor; then
Arise, arise, and quit your selves like Men.
[12.]
The Spoil is good, the Triumph and the Joy
Is great and glorious, Ever does endure;
Time shall not wear out, Oblivion shall not destroy
Your Trophies of Renown, you shall be sure
Ever to have, and therewithal a Crown
Of lasting Glory, when this life's laid down.
[13.]
Each valiant Act, and each Heroic Deed
You do, or ever shall attempt to do
With real Heart, taking respective heed,
Shall much the glory of your Crown ad to:
For every Lust you conquer and subdue
Joy, Peace, and Comfort will to you ensue.
[14.] Argument 2.
Nay, It Is high Honor for you then to join
With Gods own Son, the Heir of Earth and Heaven,
Your spirits then with his Spirit combine,
For to destroy all Sin his Life was given:
He came to overthrow the works of the Devil,
The same do you, when you oppose an Evil.
[15.]
Youth, would have Honor? Prithee tell me then,
What is it to be Favorite to a King?
The King of Kings, that rules and reigns when
The world shall cease, and every earthly thing:
This thou shall be, if thou do to him live:
A Crown and Kingdom likewise he will thee give.
[16.]
Tell me then, Can thy strength be laid out better?
Can thy hot vigorous Youth it self employ
For more advantage, then to make him Debtor
Unto thee, that does Heaven and Earth enjoy:
His Love thou gain'st by living in his will
Shall Him and his possess on Zions Hill.
[12.]
Oh lay not out the strength of youthful years
To feed foul humors, and a fond desire,
Vain pleasures will procure eternal tears,
And make thee lodge in everlasting fire:
Resist, oppose thy youthful inclination
That leads thee captive to each sordid passion.
[13.]
Wilt serve him whom thou art ashamed to own,
As Master of the work that thou do do?
Be not deceived, but look what thou have sown
Thou can not but expect to reap also:
Bur-seed does Burs, Dill-seed does Dill bring forth,
The fruit and seed are ever of like worth.
[14.]
Thou sow'st in Flesh, of Flesh thou shall reap shame;
But if in Spirit, glory thou shall find;
Permit not puny pleasure for to maim
Thy Souls best strength, nor to enerve thy Mind:
Thou can not say but it is an absurd evil
To give the worst to God, the best to the Devil.
[15.]
Tax me not Young Man, that I do enjoin
Thee to a thing impossible to do;
No, I Will assure thee, here is not a line
But it is thy safety to comply unto:
It Is not by Hearsay that the thing I tell,
But by Experience I know it well.
[21.]
My heart esteems't the noblest design,
That ere my youth can make adventure on,
Unto Jehove to make a full resign,
And in my Soul for to set up his Throne:
I would that he should reign over me as King,
And every thought to his Subjection bring.
[22.]
His service I esteem at such a rate,
I would not leave it for to be a King,
An Emperor the mightyest Potentate
The Earth ere bore: I do esteem that thing
Of far less worth in Splendour, far more dim,
Then for to be a Servant unto him.
[23.]
I scorn a Crown, an Earthly Diadem,
The Scepter of this universe to sway;
Compared with that matchless glorious Gem
Of grace: for why that Honor's but a day.
But grace does bring to glory evermore,
Makes a possessour of all glorious Store.
[24.]
If that a Crown was laid at my feet,
As sure as I do live, there should it lie;
If with Emperial honor men should greet
Me, as the greatest Earthly majesty;
I would refuse that honor and that grace,
For those same troubles that attend the place.
[25.]
Much more would I contemn it, if it should
Be proffered to me, if I would forsake
The Service of my God, or if I would
My self subservient to my humors make;
No, such petty honor I disown,
I eye no less then an alglorious Crown.
[26.]
An Earthly Crown's too mean for my desire,
Too base an object for my heart to fix on:
My Spirit's filled, with more Heroic fire,
I beauty love, not such a dull complexion;
My Noble Soul does crave a bigger boon,
I must enjoy that sacred Three in one.
[27.]
Your fading honor I esteem as dung,
Earth's weltering glory as the dirt in street;
I will not lodge one thought thereof among
Those noble thoughts, my Soul do daily greet;
Base servile earth, avaunt, I Will not enslave
My thoughts with thee, if I the world might have.
[28.]
Alas poor earth, what is all that thou can give,
Or do afford, when sorrow greets the mind?
Wherein can an awakened conscience live?
What cordial in thy Storehouse can it find?
Thou can not give thereto one dram of peace;
It Is not in thee to make distraction cease.
[29.]
Alas, Alas! thy glories are too mean.
Too mean an object, for the Souls desire:
The Souls desire's vast and too extreme,
It Is too extreme, and heat with better fire,
Then to be quenched, then for to be contented,
What those poor shadows that by thee's presented.
[30.]
Thy wealth, what is that a truss of mere deceit,
A bladder full of wind, an empty joy,
A real nothing, yet a glorious bait,
That does beguil man of eternal joy;
And shall my noble Spirit then lay out
Her precious thoughts, such vanities about.
[31]
No, No, my Soul's immortal, and must have,
Such wealth as is of an immortal being;
Such treasures as endure for aye I crave,
What do'nt I lightly prize and value, seeing
It cannot answer my Souls vast desire,
Allay nor cool the heat thereof the fire.
[32.]
Thy pleasures (world) thy Sense-besotting pleasures,
That so bewitch's men of tender years:
Conduce as much to joy as do thy treasures,
Unto contentment, and to free from fears;
But this is that, that most of 'th world do follow,
It Is after pleasure that they hoop and hollow.
[33.]
It Is pleasure that does take the heart of youth,
It Is pleasure his desires lead him to;
His hot veins swel, and pleasure strait does sooth,
His lively humors makes them act and go:
Pleasures does lull most younglings fast asleep,
Makes them laugh, now, eternally to weep.
[34.]
O Young ones know Pleasure's the Devils bait,
Wherewith he fishes for immortal souls;
In Pleasure he does lodge a grand deceit,
And so (most) youthful Nature he befools;
Your boiling blood do soonest close with pleasures,
Which of Gods wrath does often unlock the Treasures.
[35.]
Alas! and what are pleasures to Gods Ire?
Pleasures are fading that does Age endure:
Think ye, can pleasures cool those flames of fire,
Or the bitings of those hellish Scorpions Cure.
No your delightful pleasures then will sting ye,
As sure as now they unto Hell will bring ye.
[36.]
Pleasure's a Ship that does imbark for Hell
All Passengers that are contained therein;
In endless flames they must be sure to dwell,
That do indulge and live and dye in sin;
They sweet and swiftly Sail, and that does tend,
Quickly to bring 'em to their Iourneys end.
[37.]
O stay thy course young man, lower thy Sails,
Wind up thy Canvas Ty 't close to the Mast:
(Being open spread the wind then most prevails,)
Oh therefore wind it up and ty 't up fast.
The affections are the Sails, the which the Gusts;
Of vain desires do fill full with wanton Lusts.
[38.]
The Mast I Would have thee tie these Sails about,
Is Solid reason, and a judgment true:
Reason should guide the affections thoroughou^,
And judgment should inordinacy subdue;
Reason is Mistress Governess, will, desire, affection,
As handmaids should attend her in subjection.
[39.]
But for to speak more properly unto thee,
Respecting what delights most tender years;
Preventing pleasures that they may not undo thee,
And so expose thee unto endless tears;
I say Religion yields as much delight,
As sin can do, persisted in aright.
[40.]
All pleasure rises from congruity,
And fitness 't^een the faculty and object;
When there is a natural propensity,
Needs must it be a^^ost delightful subject.
Guide then thy Soul by ^udgments solid Art,
What makes delight's the ^^mper of the Heart?
[41.]
An earthly heart does earthly things pursue,
An heaven-born Spirit takes delight in heaven:
From a luxurious heart there does ensue
Luxuriousness, (of virtue quite bereaven;)
An empty wanton heart filled with air,
Every vain object's ready for to dare.
[42.]
And such a heart like an un-ballast'd Ship,
Is turned o'r with every breath of wind;
As empty vessels under sail do skip,
That they within 'm, naught but danger find,
So 's the immortal Spirit tossed to and fro;
Hurried up and down, where fancy wills to go.
[43.]
This matchless Gem, this noble worthy Pee^e,
Continually of shipwreck is in danger;
Tossed to and fro, now there, and sometime here,
Unto all safety a perpetual stranger;
So long as moved by the light wind of passion,
Subject to nothing but to alteration.
[44.]
Inestimable worth, value unknown.
And past conceiving is the Soul of man,
A treasure, Jewel, that Jehove does own,
Term so; and take delight in; tell me then,
Should this same peereless Spirit serve an humor,
A besteal, sordid lust, it^ (...)ngth consumer.
[45.]
The Soul's a heaven-born virgin prostitute her
Will thou, to loathsome sin and so to Hell?
Ah! can thou suffer Devils to deprive her,
Of state, of glory, with them for to dwell?
Must She her country, and her kindred leave,
A cursed doom with Devils to receive?
[46.]
My heart does ache to think of the abasement
The Soul does suffer, while it traide with sin:
My Spirit sobs to view that foul defacement,
Of J'hoves bright glorious beauty's seated in
The Soul of man; there ever to endure,
Consisting in an holy heart and pure.
[47.]
Ah wanton youth, are earths vain worthless pleasures
So dear unto thee, that thou't not them leave;
For fear of great Jehovahs direful treasures,
Nor yet a Crown of glory to receive?
Will thou sell life and glory for a toy,
For sordid pleasure barter heavenly joy?
[65.]
Ah can thou be content to bed in flames,
In utter darkness to make thine abode?
Can thou dwell there where nothing fury tames,
Eternally deprived of thy God?
Ah can thou bear the burden of Gods Ire,
When as that task shall never out expire.
[49.]
O youth remember thine immortal Soul,
And bear in mind what price was for it given!
Remember what can purge it being foul,
Consider what may bring it unto Heaven;
Gods only Son had of it such esteem,
That with his death its life he did redeem.
[50.]
For Christ's sake thou thy Souls Salvation prize,
Because his death did life unto it give,
Permit not pleasures to put out thy eyes,
But ronze thy sloth, and up unto him live;
Live unto him whose death bought thy Salvation,
Die for his sake whose Life's thy preservation.
[51.]
Oh die thou must, or thou can never live,
Die to thy self, to thy hearts lusts and pleasures;
Die to all sin, or thou can not receive,
Those glorious sweets that God to his out-measures
Thy Souls redemption cost Christ's utmost breath,
And its Salvation must be by sins death.
[52.]
Thou must be buried with him into death*
Or thou can not in life with him partake:
That sharp (two edged) cutting sword unsheath,
To cut down lusts that separation make
'Tween thee and him, 'tween his Spirit and Thine,
That do thee against him unto ill incline.
[53.]
Know, fleshly lusts do war against the Soul,
And seek its utter ruin and undoing:
It Is thy souls safety, Youth, them to control,
But thou art ever courting and a wooing
Them with delight unto thee, thy desires
Do beak themselves at lusts base smoaky fires.
[54.]
My Soul does groan for to behold the Courses
That young ones take; how they with full carere
Seek their own ruin, and as tender Nurses,
Do nourish, cherish, and redeem as dear,
That which deprives them of a dwelling place,
In Heaven to behold Gods glorious face.
[55.]
Luxurious youth, a little lend an Ear
To me, and I Will thee some few precepts give;
Be sober minded then attend and hear:
Some rules I Will set thee down whereby to live;
First guard thy heart with double diligence,
And let thine eye therein have residence.
[56.]
And being sober, then strait look about,
For matter wherewithal t'employ thy mind;
Rouse up thy self, give slavish thoughts the rout,
Let sor did lusts within thee no place find;
Read sacred writ, and meditate thereon,
Be ruminating ever thereupon.
[57]
That loose licentious Lusts may find no room,
No place for entertainment in thy Soul,
That when (according to their wont) they come,
Thy minds employment may their course control
Oppose an Evil, and it sha'n't overcome thee,
Resist the Devil, and he will fly from thee.
[58]
When saucy mirth, or any wanton lust
Does proffer thee a greeting any more,
Tell'em, you know 'em not, and that you must
Have no acquaintance with them as before
You had unto your cost, when they did fool
Your noble spirit, bearing in it rule.
[59]
Tell 'em that now you 'ave found a better Master,
And nobler service for to pitch upon;
You Will seek to spare where you have been a waster,
And will not do as you before have done;
When they do knock, tell 'm you a'n't at leisure
To let 'em in, but bid 'em wait your pleasure.
[60]
And sure I am that such like entertaiment
As this, will cause bold Sin to hang its ears:
These words or others of the like concernment
(Maintained with heart sincere and ardent Prayers)
Will make the Devil in thee hide his face,
Will overcome him, make him quit the place.
[61]
And then Christ Jesus and his glorious Train
(By his Soul-sanctifying Spirit) will
Enter thy heart, set up his Throne, and reign,
And all his blessed Pleasure there fulfill;
He Will enter then, who is the Prince of Peace,
Triumphing gloriously will make Sin cease.
[62]
And as before thy Soul was a foul Cage
Of unclean Birds, a Stie of nasty Devils,
Hells Council Chamger, and thy Acts Hells Stage,
Whereon thou did display all inbred Evils;
Now it is become the Palace of a King,
The King of Glory, blessed in every thing.
[63]
Where Devils did in consultation sit,
(As they do always about acts unclean)
Malicious hellish mischiefs, which to beget
Not yet brought in action to be seen)
There Gods blessed Spirit (Now) does counsel give,
Unto the Soul disport it self and live.
[64]
Note this, young Man, peruse well the expression,
Me thinks 'tshould thy hot blood convert to slames,
JEHOVAH will not only take possession,
And dwell in thee, but also Son thee names;
He Will be thy Father, thou shall be his Son,
Learn at all times to say, Thy will be done.
[65.]
But that is not all, though that is a glorious favor,
To be a child to the eternal God:
I Will walk in thee: Oh here is a speech does favor
Of more then making with thee an abode;
My self I Will joy refresh, disport, delight
In thee, says the allglorious God of might.
[66.]
For what does walk, speak less then recreation,
Delight, refreshment, (not excluding) joy,
As also (often it is) Soul accommodation,
Which senses (here) don't Scripture truth destroy;
For Scripture does the same to us commence,
What not in the same words, yet in the sense.
[67.]
But one thing more, youth, let me hint unto thee,
From this same text now I have touched upon:
God says he will dwell in thee, then let it woo thee
To say to Hell, Avaunt; to sin, Begone;
For he and sin in one heart cannot dwell,
No more then thou can live at ease in Hell.
[68.]
I Will walk in thee, the which expression speaks,
(As well as joy) that he will take notice too
Of all thy acts, and all those private tricks
That thou in secret undescry'd do do:
He that is always walking round about
A house, cannot choose but see what is done throughout.
[69.]
But to come closer to the thing in hand,
I Will put it to thee, youngling for to judge;
Whether herein or sin most joy does stand,
Peace this attending (too) but sin a scourge;
Sin leads the Soul a dance, I sigh to tell,
It here begins, but ends in the lowest Hell.
[70.]
Moreover youngling I can tell thee this,
That that which makes sin lively to appear,
And does bewitch thy Soul thereon, naught is,
But those same borrowed garments she does wear
That she has stolen from virtue; whose they are,
As't will hereafter plainly appear.
[71.]
There Is but a painted strumpet that does lure
All persons void of understanding to her;
Saw ye her in her night clothes, I am sure
She would affright ye, and you would cease to woo her;
She Is decked in virtues robes, and so she is fine,
Yet at the best, she is but a painted shrine.
[62.]
But if vain pleasures must thy Mistress be,
And have the service of thy best affection,
Then thou to bed with her must sure be,
Nor can thou that deny, since in subjection
To her thy Soul does live, and acts her will,
And all her heads do faithfully fulfill.
[73.]
Should I describe the Bed, and the place where
The Bed is made, 'twould task my Muse too hard,
But look where Devils dwell, the place is there,
The Bed it self cannot be by me declared;
It Is sulphurous flames, it is torments sharp and fell,
It Is gnawing Conscience, (in a word) it is Hell.
[74.]
One word more youngling, will thou sell thy sight?
Or will thou for a price part with the light?
What will thou ask for this thy breathing right?
Or take, the world to be bought out of quite?
I know thy answer to these very well,
For ten worlds worth, thou none of these can sell.
[75.]
And I believe thou do abhor the thought
Of valuing of those with any thing:
Nay, I believe thy Soul with sorrows fraught,
When any does these into question bring:
I know young man, that here thou art so nice,
Thou loath'st to hear these valued at a price.
[76.]
But forasmuch as none these things may mention
Unto thee: Hark, I Will tell thee in thine ear,
And tell thee truth, for that is my hearts intention,
Thou overlov'st these, yet not count'st them dear,
For why, thou spend'st them on thy mistress Pleasure,
And lavishly do waste them out of measure.
[77]
Nay, thou do sell a Pearl worth all of these,
More precious Gems thou part'st with for her sake
Than I can utter, that whoever sees
That dangerous course that thou do for her take,
Cannot choose but say, Thou wastes thy strength, and sight
Most wickedly, and so deserve no light.
[78.]
More plainly, is the light a pleasant thing,
That thou would not be deprived of for a world?
Then part with Sin, for else it will thee bring
Into perpetual darkness, to be hurled.
Thou shall for evermore part with the light,
And be included in perpetual night.
[79.]
Thy sight is precious to thee, 'cause the light
Does pleasant objects unto it unfold,
But know in Hell the use is altered quite,
There Is darkness, naught but terrors to behold;
So that for Sin both Light and Sight thou sell'st,
Both Life and Joy, and for its sake thou dwell'st
[80.]
Amidst fierce fiery flames, and do debar
Thy Soul that blessed Privilege, to see
Gods glorious face, the which exceeds far
What ere thy worldly interest to thee
Can give, and what is thy breathing right to this?
Breath well improved may make a gale to bliss.
[81.]
O youngling therefore if thou prizest ought
That Is dear or good, why then shake hands with sin,
And be not by it into subjection brought,
Nor in its slavery continue in:
Pleasures of sin but for a moment are,
The purchase of them therefore's too too dear.
[82.]
Besides its motions, force them from thy Soul,
And hold no private consultation with him:
Its rising power betimes suppress, control,
For growing great thou can not lightly will'm.
If any sordid evil you would entombe,
The readyest way's to kill it in the womb.
[83.]
Give sin no footing, for it will intrude,
'T will make its passage like a mighty stream;
Give 't but an entrance, and you straight include
Ten times more inconvenience then you deem;
If entertained for a months space,
It straight becomes Master of the place.
[84.]
It Is a bold guest, and though a sordid groom,
Too base to come within the Souls confines:
Yet takes it up the best and bravest room,
And further, all its forces strength combines;
To keep the same, and there as Lord to reign,
Permitting it none else to entertain.
[85.]
Sin's a most cruel Task-master to evil,
It gives work, but gives no time to play,
Does tyrannize as a most cruel Devil,
'Fording no intermission Night nor Day:
Heart, hand, eyes, ears, nor tongue, nor lips m'n't stound,
But eagerly persist to run Sins round;
[86.]
The Eyes must gaze the Heart to set on fire,
The Ear attends for to blow up the flame,
Which to express the Tongue does never tire,
And yet this Tyrant sharply does them blame,
Says they are idle, that they nothing do,
(When as their spirits faint, their work is so.)
[87.]
Here Is Slavery exceeding Egypts Task,
They Brick must make, yet store themselves with Straw,
No ease, no respite, nor no help must ask,
But ev^r in yoke, like Slaves, like Horses, draw:
From this to the other ill the poor Soul trudges
From that for to other Lust the poor Soul drudges.
[88.]
Yet so the Creature's fooled, that it contents
It self in this hard bondage; don't compl^in
Of Servitude, nor in the least repents,
But lays out its strength for to maintain
These sordid humors, and their lives to cherish,
Though for the same both Soul and Body perish.
[89.]
What does the Drunkard prize above his Pots?
Who is more free than he? He does not think
That he is a Slave, nor that ought him besots,
Although he place his happiness in Drink:
O how his heart does long, and thirst, and pine,
Ever to be drinking, quaffing Beer or Wine!
[90.]
He loves good Fellows, Pot-companions dear,
His Life and Joy lies in that Fellowship,
They Are far more prized by him than all Heavens Queer.
Than Living Waters he had rather sip
His lunish Cups of Soul-confounding Drink,
Though thereby Health, Estate, Soul, Body sinck.
[91.]
Tush, tell not him of the Tribunal Day,
Nor of Jehovah's dreadful flaming ire;
Come give him Drink to wash dry cares away;
He fears no Hell, he fears no flames of fire;
Thus does his throat already him foretell
His Souls Disease for evermore in Hell.
[92.]
And are proud Wantons any whit less Fools?
Their task's as hard, and yet that task is sweet
Unto them, the heat of their desire what cools?
Thoughts of Eternity must not them greet:
Bid them be humble, holy, chaste, and pure,
Such clownish Precepts they cannot endure.
[93.]
But why stand I thus for to instance any
One single Vice, when all the Ills of Nature
Do prove the same most clearly? though not many
Take notice of it, active in each feature
The most of men hotly persist to do,
What ere their wieldy Passions lead them to.
[94.]
Well to conclude young man; Remember this,
Thy Soul's immortal, and must aye endure,
'Twas made by God a Subject fit for Bliss,
And of eternal Doom it must be sure.
If thou liv'st well, a Crown he will to thee give;
If ill, thy Doom's with Devils for to live.
[95.]
But having been too tedious in my verse
Upon this subject Pleasure, (and yet I
Have been but brief and short, seeing commerce
By youth is held with Pleasure constantly)
Shall now for Recreation sake express
In varied Verse what my experience is.
[96.]
And what in mine own practice I do act
Of youthful pleasure, how I it esteem,
I shall lay down my thoughts of many a Fact
Tending thereto, and what I of it deem.
Example is a living Argument,
My self to thee, as so I here present.
Pleasure I find to be a sly,
A deadly, subtle Enemy,
'Twill sleer in the face, 'twill kiss the lip,
Yet then look to 't, 'twill up thee trip;
'Twill speak thee fair, 'twill kindly greet,
And straight 'twill lay thee at its feet;
'Twill promise thee large liberty,
(When nothing's a more real Lie;)
'Twill build thee Castles in the air,
'Twill fawn, and lie, and speak thee fair,
'Twill mention Peace, that it will give thee,
But trust it not, it will deceive thee;
'Twill 'ford content and satisfaction,
But then 't must be in Soul-distraction;
'Twill promise Else, perform no Inch;
Thou needst not question at a pinch
But it will help thee unto sorrow,
Deep-dy'd in grain, and Scarlet-horrour;
'Twill proffer thee its company,
And promise true fidelity;
Faithful 'twill be (indeed) 't w'on't leave thee
Herein, I say, it w'on't deceive thee,
'Twill stick close to thee to bereave thee
Of what ere Heaven, or God can give thee;
'Twill lodge thee with it self in Hell,
Together live and die (all is well;)
It Is sweet in show, but proves most sour,
Shows lovely fair, but yet will lowre;
It says, in it thou shall enjoy
Such matter as shall never thee cloy:
It Is partly truth, for parting never
Is living and enjoying ever,
Which thou, and it, and Hell sha'n't do,
When once conjoined thereunto:
O therefore now betimes resolve
That knot of Friendship to dissolve,
When ere she does herself present
(I need not question her intent,
I know her well, though she does bring
Honey in mouth, her tail does sting)
To me, I ask what she does crave?
Or what it is of me she would have?
I ask, how long I shall be sure
What she can give me will endure?
(Before I leap I love to look,
But all such counsel cannot brook)
Shall this thy joy continue ever?
And shall its life expire never?
Say I to her, Will this thy Pleasure
Not damage my eternal Treasure?
If 't be n't eternal, then be gone,
Entice me not, let me alone;
It Is no fit object for my view,
An unfit subject to pursue,
To gain those things I will persever,
That (like my Soul) endure for ever,
I dare not give thee any room,
Because to judgment I must come;
I know the Judge and thou art Foes,
If thee I follow, him I lose.
Avaunt, Be gone, Stand off; therefore
Don't dare (bold Sin) to tempt me more:
My heart thy dainties does disrellish,
Because deceit does them embellish:
Such Evils (too) they tend to cherish,
As will make Soul and Body perish;
Thy pleasant Path does lead to Hell,
With damned spirits for to dwell;
Mine eyes therefore thereon sha'n't look,
To hear thereof mine ears sha'n't brook,
Unto thy Paths my feet sha'n't walk
Nor of thee shall not my tongue talk:
All thoughts of thee, O may I smother,
Who am the interest of another:
Disloyal am I him unto,
If I strike friendship with his Foe,
I dare not, O, I dare not I,
Think such a thought, for he stands by,
He has a Cabin in my Breast,
He knows what is not by me expressed,
His eye does every secret see,
Kept ignorant he cannot be,
He Is omni-present, fills all
And every place both great and small;
His arm is long, he will me reach,
From East to West the same does stretch,
How then dare I consent to sin,
Or any one thought harbor in
My tender breast, that may conduce
His sacred Name to prejudice;
He Is just and jealous, I don't dare
Him to offend, my Soul does fear
His righteous judgments, and my flesh
Does tremble, and can do no less:
His Majesty, in flames of fire
Clothed with wrath and furious ire,
Shall make appearance when the world
By fiery flames shall be dissolved,
Shall mount upon his glorious Throne,
And then examine every one;
All acts must into judgment come,
And every one receive their Doom,
According to their several Deeds,
The Judge to them their Sentence reads,
He says to them that have done well,
Ye blessed of my Father dwell
In his bright glories, mount the Throne
Prepared for ye every one;
Ye did your hearts for me maintain,
Come therefore now and with me reign;
Ye on the earth did to me live,
Now I to you a Kingdom give;
You hated Sin, now I you own,
And give you an all-glorious Crown;
You of your ways did conscience make,
Your wills and lusts too (for my sake)
Did crucify, with strength oppose
All the suggestions of my foes;
Your strength up to me you did give,
Come therefore your Reward receive.
But as for you, you hellish Elves,
That to your Lusts did give your selves,
That ever burned with strong desire,
Bred and maintained by wanton fire;
Be gone from me into those flames,
That burn and naught their fury tames,
As in your lifetime you have been
A near Associate to Sin,
So now therewith go bide and dwell
For ever in the lowest Hell,
In utter darkness make abode,
Under my flaming furious Rod,
There live out your eternal breath,
With howling cries, with gnashing teeth,
I know right well this is Sins Doom,
Therefore I dare not give it room,
I dare not entertain it in me,
For sure I am it soon will win me,
Its joy does but a moment last,
But ah! its pain is never past,
Eternity my Soul does eye,
Vain Pleasure therefore dare not I
Once look upon* nor will I greet
It, wheresoever I it meet:
I know it is an hellish Fi^nd,
And all its courses thither tend.
Be gone, be gone, thou do beguile me,
And of most pleasant sweets do spoil me,
Thou giv'st me Peebles for my Treasures,
Sharp sorrows for delightful Pleasures:
Mine own I am not, but am bought
At a dear rate, and therefore ought
To give both Soul and Body too
Unto his blessed service, who
Did me redeem from bondage fell,
Reprieve my Soul from Death and Hell;
He gave his Life, his Love was such,
To men, and shall I then think much
To answer love with love entire,
And for his sake to quench the fire
Of lower loves, and with affection
Most pure and true, yield him subjection;
Long may I to him loyal prove,
Strong may I with him be in love;
The pleasures of religion I,
Do find more sweet and do espy
More beauty in, than want on pleasure
Can give to them, that have most leisure
To wait thereon* in it I find
That sweet repose unto my mind,
That peace, that sweet delight, that joy,
That worldly powers cannot destroy:
Faith feeds me with the Bread of Heaven;
Thereby to me its joys are given
In such a measure that often I
Being overcharged with joy do cry,
(As of my senses quite bereaven)
Whether am I now in Earth or Heaven?
What Is this I both feel, taste and see?
Sure I am in Heaven, or Heaven's in me.
Time slackes his course, his glass do'n't run,
Or is eternity begun?
Both weeks and months their motions stay,
They are to me as one short day;
But they that would of Soul delight
(Then this) have a more fuller sight
From me, then let them please to look
Upon another former book;
I penned (in part) long since, and there
Expressions make 't at large appear.
[97.]
But still for to pursue my present task,
As youthful blood does make the wind aspire
To fading honor, after pleasure ask,
Setting the Senses thereon all on fire;
So too that heated blood the Soul does move,
To be a thralled Captive unto Love.
[98.]
Youth's swelling veins made hot with blood and Spirits,
Does like to fire never cease to stur:
Will be in motion, though thereby 't inherits,
Shame for the same a constant blur,
The Soul of man is made of living fire,
That never moves yet motion don't expire.
[99.]
The Devil therefore tends with diligence,
To give it matter whereupon to act:
Presents an object to the greedy Sense,
The which from thence the Soul does soon infect,
Unto the Eye of youth he proffers beauty,
And straight fond youth presents it shrine with duty.
[100.]
Beauty to youth is as the oil 't a fire,
And as dry fuel unto raging flames
It does convert him all into desire,
And what is 't then that furious passion tames;
The eye to the heart presents this foul infection,
Poisons the Soul thoroughout, by the affection.
[101.]
Youth now does love, and must possess in love
What he desires, on whom his heart is fixed;
All arguments are far too weak to move,
There is no incongruity betwixt
Her whom he loves and him; no he can tell
She suits his disposition very well.
[102.]
What will he stick to venture for her sake,
Whom he so fondly loves, as that his life
IN n't dear unto him, so he may partake
Her fellowship, and she be made his wife;
Heaven and earth and God and life and bliss,
Compared with her unto him norhing is.
Youths antic tricks herein I sha'n't discover,
I do'n't intend to toil my muse so much:
Again my Soul thereof was never a lover,
And therefore once to speak of them I grutch;
My Soul takes no delight such things to mention,
Further than is concerned in my intention.
[104.]
Is thy blood hot? (youth) do thy Spirits move,
And work thee to a flame of strong desire?
Make God the only object of thy love,
Present him with an heart sound and entire;
He Is the alone-original of beauty,
His loveliness (from thee) may win a duty.
[105.]
If thou could see him with a single eye
His lovely beauty, but by glance behold:
I Am sure in him thy Soul would soon espy,
That which would make thy burning love grow cold
To all things else, and all things disappeare,
In loveliness to what before me were.
[106.]
Those sparkling glories, whose unmatchless luster
Do make a heaven where ever they are unfolded,
Displayed to thy view thy thoughts would muster,
And set them free from what they are inthralled;
'Twould flame thy Spirits, and thou then should prove,
The power of that noble heaven-bred love.
[107.]
Love of this beauty don't the Soul abase,
Nor make it act below it self as to other:
Which does ignoble it, and much deface
Its beauties, tending also for to smother
All sparks of good, that are contained therein,
By the base smoaky vapors of foul Sin.
[108.]
No this does raise and elevate the mind,
And does ennoble, and sublime the Soul:
It makes it unto real good inclined,
Refines and purges it from courses foul;
It does transmute, transform and make the Spirit
From real ill true goodness to enherit.
[109.]
This love to God does spread it self throughout
The inner man, and strange effects it works:
It does employ its utmost strength about
Ejecting Sin from whence it closely lurketh;
Oh, here is delight indeed! the Soul does move,
Employed in the service of its love.
[110.]
Lovers often beg this on their bended knee,
(O great abasement of a noble Soul!)
That by their mistress they employed may be,
The service never so base, low, mean or foul;
O for her sake what wo'n't they deign to do,
They Will bended bow even for to kiss her Shoe.
[111.]
Loves Nature it is to act with joy and cheer,
In any act whereto their Love enjoynes'm:
Love's life therein consists, and does appear
It Is love, and love't self thereof does mind'm;
Then Christians who are happyer men than you,
That ever have advantages enough
[112.]
To prove and to express your love to him,
The fountain of all love, the King of glory:
Unto whose shine Sol's splendent rays are dim,
Whose beauty Seraphims't would pose to story;
By mortifying Sin, by crucifying
All earthly members, to self-wisdome dying.
[113.]
Oh! it is advantage Christians to be tempted,
By sordid humors, by a base desire;
For why; thereby occasion is presented,
To purge your Souls and prove your love entire;
Sin tempts, the Soul opposes, God looks on
As the Spectator, to behold what is done.
[114.]
O how thou would fight young man, if that a foe
Of thy beloveds did encounter with thee;
Especially if she commanded so,
And did look on herself; but then I prithee
Tell me, do think service to the creator
Affords less joy than service to the creature?
[115.]
How happy do your lovers think themselves,
If they may be but graced for to talk
With their dear love: Oh! how the mind now delves
For matter, there is no faculty does balk,
Its utmost strength for to give up in this,
In this same act wherein consists its Blis,
[116.]
Words from her mouth you prize as honey dewes,
Yea Nectar, and Ambrosia a'n't so sweet
As her discourse is to you; while her brows
Displayed in lovely smiles deigns you to greet;
Her words drop down like Manna from the Skies,
While with delights ye bathe ye in her eyes.
[117.]
O happy ye, your hearts now melt in love,
And like to Wax before the Sun dissolveth,
Ye now lie captivated, cannot move
Until she from this bondage you absolveth;
You bath your souls in this her sunny-shine,
And think her favors more than half divine.
[118.]
But what is all this to those unmatchless favors,
That they who seek the face of God do meet?
The very way and path they tread in, savours
Of joys illustrious, most delightful sweet,
Where ere he moves the sweets he leaves behind him
Is a sufficient tract whereby to find him.
[119.]
They that love him he turns them love again,
And who with diligence his face do seek
His glorious face shall see (to quit their pain)
(Under a veil) yet lovely, sweet and meek;
O could I tell what his imperial brow
Affords to them that see it, 'twould ravish you.
[120.]
So lively glorious, so sweet, so clear,
So Sp'ritly vigorous, and Soul-reviving,
So mild, so gentle, yet so lovely fair,
The Soul that sees it, ceases ever from dying;
I cannot half conceive, much less express
The joy, the blessedness that therein is.
[121.]
Converse with him; yea freely that you may,
He Will find you matter fit for to converse on;
Nay, further He Will you send a glorious ray,
To fit your hearts for what they do commerce on;
Here Is love indeed your Love, this thing cannot do,
If you are infirm, she throws a scorn on you.
[122.]
He sends his Spirit to renew dead flames,
To quicken, to revive the affection dying:
A God of grace and love, himself he names,
His Nature's so; his Soul is ever eying
His creatures wants, the languishing desire
He cherishes with Grace, does re-enspire.
[123.]
How sweet so-e're your thoughts are when you muse,
Upon your Mistresses most lovely face,
Her person and proportion, when refuse
You do that any thoughts them should displace;
Yet know even then the thoughts of God are sweeter,
His love more lovelyer, his Spirit fleeter.
[124.]
Being wounded by the beauty of her face,
Her words have power to kill or give you life:
Your Souls do sue for to obtain her grace,
To gain her love, that she would be made your wife;
When she is pleased to greet you with disdain,
Your Spirit sinkes, no life in it does remain.
[125.]
But this to great Jehovahs powerful voice,
Which is Soul quickening, or Soul confounding:
Will thou join parallel to make a choice,
('Tween real want and what is most abounding?)
His voice such rare magnetique power does give;
'T preserves the dying, makes the dead to live.
[126.]
Touched with his beams, touched with his flames of love,
An ecstasy that Soul must needs remain in,
It Is bounden to him, and it cannot move,
That bed' maines ever green that it has lain in;
Oh, stop my lavish pen, I cannot tell how,
Those rare unmatchlesse sweets ^'describe to you.
[127.]
Youth, can thou dote on any female beauty,
What do thou think thou shall therein enjoy?
That thou do vow thereto such solemn duty,
Demean thy self so like a witless boy;
By any antic gestures her to gain,
Whom being got thou do possess with pain,
[128.]
Alas, thou over-prize^^ things a far,
And buy'st the enjoyments at a rate too dear,
It Is granted in their place they something are
But what; ('it is not my task to ^ell you here;)
Yet mind ye what Elchanah said to Hanny,
Am not I more to thee than children many?
[129.]
So in Jehove is far more to be found,
Than in all Creatures if conjoined together:
All creature-sweet is in a moment drowned
In those delights that he affords, whither
The Soul at all times freely may resort,
And with those pleasures may it self disport.
[130.]
Pleasures, sweet pleasures, precious delights,
To these expressions youngling sure I see thee
Attend and bend thine ear, (come naught affrights)
Be sober and let those expressions cheer thee;
God is the rist of beauty, peace and love,
Joy and delight, and therefore to him move.
[131.]
As from a mighty fountain that disperses
Its great abundance thorough many springs,
And in those narrow channels quickly passes,
And spreads its self and waters diverse things;
So does Jehove from his own fullness give
What ever good the creature can receive.
[132.]
Now it is absurd to think, much more to say,
That there resides that fullness in one Spring
That in the fountain head it self does stay,
No more can any creature comfort bring
That peace, joy, Satisfaction to the mind,
That in Jehove himself thy Soul may find.
[133.]
Extract what ere thou can from every creature,
And pack that lovelynesse all up in one;
Beauty from one and from another feature,
(Perfection rests not in one alone,)
From a third virtue, a well composed Spirit,
That sweetness, patience, mildness does enherit,
[134.]
Nay take the Quintessence of every thing
That thou in any creature good can call,
And then know this that all that good does spring,
From God its fount and its original;
And if one single good so lovely is,
What Is he in whom thou may them all possess.
[135.]
Note this young man, and deep impression give it
Upon thine heart, endorse it on thy mind:
Upon thy judgment do it fast on rivet,
And let it equal entertainment find
To things of far less worth, inferior beauty,
Remove from that, and give to this that duty.
[136.]
Thou can not say that this is a demand,
Unreasonable of thee to be asked?
The worth of the object rightly understand,
And then thou wilt not complain that thou art task'd,
In any service that thou undertak'st
For it to do, nor that deer thou forsak'st
[137.]
It for to gain, cause worth far less does move
Thee, cost, labor and strength for to lay out,
To be an humble servant in her love,
And think it a bliss to be employed about
(At any time) the service of her pleasure,
Which to fulfill, thou sparest for no treasure.
[138.]
And all is to gain what may be lost to morrow,
But if not so, yet's but a petty good,
A sweet that does contain a deal of sorrow,
A peace that many discontentments hood.
Leave not the kernel for the empty shell,
When as thou may enjoy'm both as well.
[139.]
But to look ore those petty petty sweets,
That thou endearest to thee as thy life:
And for to mention some of many feats,
That in thy nature's acted very rife;
Thou never do leave till thou have found an object,
Whereto thou make thine affections subject.
[140.]
Oh! might thy active thoughts employ themselves
No less in seeking out to find abode,
'Cquaintance and friendship and him that ever dwells,
Between the Cherubims, thy heaven, thy God;
Thy self cast down before him, prostrate ly
With resolution, if I die, I die.
[141.]
This thou will do to gain her worthless favor,
On whom thou do thy fond affection pitch:
There is no good like that, that thou can favor,
Nor any thing that thou esteem'st so much;
Therefore thou layst out all thy Art and strength,
With strong desire, her to enjoy at length.
[142.]
The Suns bright rays do far less comfort yield,
Then does the sunny beauty of her face;
To which thou think that the fragrant field
Is less delightful, nor of so much grace.
There is no happiness thou can espy,
Out of the sunshine of thy Mistris's eye:
[143.]
Thy life and happiness lies in her smiles,
Thy death and misery in her frown consists,
Thy fond affection thus thy judgment spoils,
Will and desire do in thee what them lists;
Affection, will, and vain desire together
Do lead th'enthraled judgment any whither.
[144.]
But oh fond youth that thou could turn about,
And see that worth from which thou turn'st thy face,
Ah! did thou but behold it, out of doubt
Thou would endeavor for to give it place;
It Is worth where from th'algorious Queere of Heaven
Have all their happiness unto them given.
[145.]
It Is worth affording each Soul faculty,
A full contentment of all needful things:
A real worth where is no deceit, no ly,
Perfect delight and joy that is free from stings;
It Is more then the Quintessence of every good,
It is a worth that cannot be understood.
[146.]
It is a worth from whenceall worth's derived,
It Is real substance, thine a vain conceit:
It Is death eternal for to be deprived
Sight of the face of that al-glorious wight;
It Is life e'rlasting it for to enjoy,
Where Is all delight and peace without annoy.
[147.]
A dark and loathsome Dungeon is that place,
(Of no delight, but sorrow now to thee?)
That thy dear Loves sweet presence used to grace,
Where thou her lovely-face did use to see;
Her sunny beauty was that place's light
To thee, her absence make a darksome night.
[148.]
This thou experiencest and know it truth,
But in the Suuny beauty of Gods eye
(Regardlesse, negligent, vain, witless youth,)
Thou know not what an happiness does ly;
For it is his face, his presence that makes Heaven,
Who sees it not of all joys are bereaven.
[149.]
Ah! could but half consider what it is,
To live without him, be deprived the place
Of his abode, the misery to miss
The sight of his best smiles, his lovely grace;
'T would break thy heart to think upon that sorrow,
(That thou must feel thereby) with deadly horror.
[150.]
The loss of any creature Love i'n't so,
That loss may in an other be repaired:
Bear but the grief, no punishment may go
Along therewith beside, that may be spared;
Considering (for ought thou know) that loss,
It had by thee might 'ave proved a cruel cross.
[151.]
For why on earth no sweet's without some sour,
There is no peace without some coffeehouse,
Withoutsome weakness there is no strength, no power
No earth without some grief cannot make presentment
Of any joy unto thee in the least,
At its vain Loves let not thy soul (then) feast.
[152.]
But least some persons should exceptions take,
(By misinterpreting my aim, my drift)
And say Gods ordinance I useless make,
And chastity is a peculiar gift;
I wish such persons rightly to conceive me;
I aim at no such thing, if they will believe me.
[153.]
I don't condemn such Love as lawful is,
But fain would lead the creature a pitch higher,
Above all first to seek eternal bliss,
To God himself would have the Soul aspire;
Would have it first to mind the things of heaven,
Then all things else shall be (as vantage) given.
[154.]
I Would have youth give the prime of their affection,
As their first fruit unto Jehovah due,
Their will and their desire too in subjection,
And after him with their whole strength pursue.
For to his beauty all things else are dim,
He is our Lord, and we must worship him.
[155.]
For fear I say if any misconstruction,
I Will here turn off, and in few words express
My self herein, and so will by deduction,
Declare how short all creature-comfort is;
Touching upon in a compendious story:
My Love's bright beauty excellence and glory.
1.
My tender youth has found
An object for its Love,
Whereat I do not stound,
But all my powers move,
It for to gain,
Though with much pain,
And for to make it sure,
I will not spare,
Nor do I care,
What ere I do endure.
2.
It is no lower wight
That I do pitch upon,
My subject of delight
Is great Jehovah's Son,
In him my mind
That sweet does find,
That none with may compare,
By him I have
What ere I crave,
Though never so good and rare.
3.
My youth has made a choice,
That I will not forgo,
Wherein I much rejoice
And am affianc'd to,
Whom my desire
Is set on fire
With ever to behold,
And whom I love
All things above,
Therefore in suit am bold.
4.
Between my love and I
Is such congruity,
That naught unto mine eye
Of like respect can be;
I do not prize
Nor hands, nor eyes,
Nor ought else whatsoere,
My very life
Is but a strife,
Not loved in his compare.
5.
Ah, could my tongue but tell
The beauty of my love,
Wherein he does excel,
Whatever does breath or move,
There Is none I Am sure
That could endure
Him for to rest short of,
They would him love,
All things above,
Though now they at him scoff.
6.
Could I but pensil out
That bright perfection rare,
That spreads it self about,
His limbs and face so fair,
Each Readers heart
With Loves strong dart,
Would suffer such a wound,
So as that then
With lock and key
Were closely Prisoners bound.
7.
My Love's so fair, so clear,
That neither Moon nor Sun
Do light or bright appear
In the Meridian,
No they are dim,
Compared with him,
Their beauty's 'clipsed quite
They hide their face,
As in disgrace,
To such a glorious light.
8.
With glory he is arrayed
As with a garment gay,
His beauty may be said
To be the Angels day;
Heaven can naught
Afford that is ought,
If dispossessed of him,
For 't is his light
That makes it bright,
His presence makes it trim.
9.
O did you know the power
Of his imperial brow,
And what delights do tower
Themselves therein, and how,
Within your breast
You could not rest,
Till you had seen that face,
Nor without doubt
Could live without
The presence of his grace.
10.
For why the Angels joy,
And Seraphims delight
Consists constantly
By being in his sight,
Their happiness
Is only this
Him ever to behold,
Whereby desire
Is set on fire,
And never waxes cold.
11.
His smiles do make an Heaven,
His frowns produce an Hell,
For where his favour's given
No tongue their bliss can tell;
His flaming ire
Begets a fire
That ever does endure;
His blessed love
The Soul does move
To joy and Peace most sure.
12.
No Angels tongue can tell,
Nor mortal ear ere heard,
Nor heart conceive or spell,
Those joys that are prepared,
Prepared for them
That as a Gem
Do prize the Lord of Life,
Whom he will grace
With his blessed face,
And marry as his Wife.
13.
His nature's sweet and mild,
Lovely, and full of grace,
Himself he so has styled,
And it is read in his face,
His countenance
Does much advance
His glories every where,
It is so humble
That none can stumble,
Say no acceptance's there.
14.
For though he does possess,
All things in Earth and Heaven,
Yet will he ne'rtheless
His grace to such be given
As do him seek
With spirit meek
Though never so vile and poor,
With real heart,
If they do part
In will and intention.
With sin for evermore.
15.
His countenance does carry
In 't such majestic grace,
That where it is Sin w'on't tarry,
But straight acquits the place;
It Is Pleasures black
Their Beauty lack,
And melt away like Snow;
They show then plain
But grief and pain,
But misery and woe.
16.
All worldly Pleasures are
Compared with this delight
But as a Candle's blear
Unto the Suns clear light,
Or Glo-worms shine
In the daytime,
Yea and far viler too;
They then are sorrows,
And deadly horrors,
Loathsome the Soul unto
A mass of real woe.
17.
I Will prove this straight a truth
Unto your open view,
Come wanton lustful youth,
And give me answer now,
Your mind aspires,
Being filled with fires,
And at great things does aim,
But whose intent
Noblest descent,
(Of you or I) can claim?
18.
Again in Pleasures Pool
Your youth does bathe it self,
But I my youth do school,
In shunning of that elf;
I deal with joys,
Not such vain toys,
A far they are below me,
I trade for Treasures,
Not carnal Pleasures,
The which vain youth do cow thee.
19.
Thou serv'st a sordid Lust,
But I the God of Heaven;
And if obey thou must,
But to me freedom's given;
My joys do lie
With God on high,
My youths delights are there,
I in his Court
My self disport,
Where 'quaintance claim I dare.
20.
Thou woo'st and su'st for love
To some inferior Beauty,
I God himself do move
To him I tender duty,
Nor w'on't give over
My Suit before
Himself I do obtain,
My heart in trial
Cannot take denial,
My Soul must with him reign.
21.
O tell me wanton youth,
What Is thy delight to mine?
Wilt dare to say in truth,
My love exceeds not thine?
I know the art shamed
It should be named
Upon that present day,
You blush to see
What fools you be,
And therefore naught can say.
(22.)
But to proceed to speak
Still further in his praise,
Whereto my heart's too weak
My eyes to view his Rays,
His beauty bright
Allows no night
where ever it does shine,
He does impart
Unto that heart
A light and life divine.
(23.)
He does the soul revive
Where ever he does come,
And gives it so to live
That it may keep a room
For Majesty,
Therein to lie,
And always find a place,
He Will there keep Court
The soul disport
With his most lovely face.
(24.)
He does the soul transform
Into his own likeness,
Does it throughout adorn
With his bright glorious grace,
What found in him
Although but sin
Shall in it (too) appear.
Transmutes and changes
The soul estranges
From what is to Nature dear.
(25.)
But not to soar above
The reach of tender youth
That slaves himself in love
Whom vain fond humors sooth*
Whom up to lift
It is my drift
From off the dreggs of nature,
To fix on high
And him to eye
That is his blessed Creator.
(26.)
Most glorious is my Love
As you may plainly see
And doth't not me behove
Loyal to him to be?
Yes that I will
With all the skill
That I can make or gain
Whose work about
I will lay out
My self with might and main.
(27.)
Come Lovers I Will you tell
What privilege I have,
The which I will not sell
For all Earths glory brave,
Although that glory
Shows none can story
Whereof my love possessed
Yet still dare I
To him draw nigh
In love to be refresht.
(28.)
My love he is not coy
Though beautiful and fair
But fills my soul with joy,
It glads me to appear
Before his sight,
For why? with might
Afresh he does me fill;
He never me scorns,
But me adorns
According to his will.
(29.)
While that low worthless beauty
That thou do so adore,
(Presenting with such duty)
Gives thee no thanks therefore
But makes thee serve
While like to starve
Regarding not thy love
Whom thou draw'st nigh
(Often she is shie,
And does far off remove.
(30.)
With scorn she often thee flouts,
(The fruit of loathed rejection)
Disdains with churlish pouts
Thy tenders of affection;
Though thoudost crouch
Her for to touch
With lowly bended knee,
Yet she flies off
Does at thee scoff,
She will not, no not she:
(31)
O youth, what pains thou take
Her love for to obtain,
Thy self most servile make,
Yet merits but disdain;
But were I you,
I never would sue
For love so frivolous,
I would forsake,
No suit more make
To be rejected thus.
(32.)
Unto my Love I never did
Tender my hearts desire,
But he forth with me answered,
And sent me fire for fire,
What I him give
He does receive,
And so in mutual love,
We each enjoy
Nor do we cloy,
Oh may I never move.
(33.)
They that do give a heart
Unto the great Jehove,
May sure themselves that start
He will not from his Love,
I Am sure there is none
Can make their moan,
That they did to him tender,
Not only part,
But their whole heart,
And he no love would render.
(34.)
Think thou that Jesus Christ
The Heir of Earth and Heaven,
By whom thy soul was pricked
And for it his life was given;
Thinks thou (say I)
That he will deny
Thee love when thou do sue,
Ah no he will not
His practice don't
Confirm that thing as true.
(25.)
He Will bind his listening ear
When thou prefer'st a suit
Thy voice he soon will hear
Nor will he then be mute,
He Will condescend
Unto that end
For which thy suit was made,
He will delight,
And glad thy spright,
Come therefore ben't afraid.
(36.)
None ever made a proffer
Of any thing to him
That he refused their offer
Or flung their scorn on them
Ah no his grace
Does soon give place
To entertain that love,
He Will answer them
With love again
That truth of heart does move.
(37.)
And youth when thou have gained
The person thou do sue for,
Her love I mean obtained
(Which often thy heart did rue for)
Thou art not sure
It will endure
For Lovers minds are changing,
For all that love
Don't constant prove
(The mind is prone to ranging.)
(38.)
But sure I am that love
That God does give to his
Is constant, cannot remove,
It everlasting is,
The highest mountains
And lowest fountains
Shall all first cease to be,
The mighty hills
The desert fields
Shall move into the Sea.
(39)
Could my tongue tell the sweets
The pleasures of the mind
That with my soul often meets
And I in love do find,
There is no ear
That could them hear,
But would be ravished by 'em,
And then would spy
The vanity
In earthly things, and fly 'em.
(40)
No place can me debar
The presence of my love,
That bideth every where,
On earth beneath, above:
No company
Can me deny
My sweet converse with him;
Nor darkest night,
Hide from my sight
His beauties clear and trim.
(41)
This beauty cannot decay,
(Though age your lov's defaces)
My joys shall 'bide for aye,
In mutual loves embraces;
I shall enjoy,
Without annoy,
My love for evermore,
In that bright glory,
That none can story,
Where Seraphims him adore.
(42)
The care that now I take,
Is only so to live
A life, that love may speak
To whom my love I give;
I care not I,
Who does defy,
The service of my love;
'I shall be my care,
No cost to spare,
Sincere to him to prove.
(43)
Commend, or dis-commend
My lov's most strict commands,
It naught to me does tend,
My act not therein stands;
I will endeavor,
Now, and for ever,
His pleasure for to do,
With heart and might,
Both day and night,
Who 'er's averse thereto.
(44)
I prize no love to his;
For what is all else to me?
In him's contained my bliss;
Naught care I else to see:
It Is he alone,
That only one
On whom my hear does fix,
Him would I serve,
Not from him swerve,
Nor other service mix.
(45.)
Oh may my heart be true,
My will and my desire,
Constantly him pursue,
And be to him entire,
Who is worthy
Of more than I
Am able for to give him,
But to his praise
Even all my days
I crave that I may live him
(46.)
A thousand hearts had I
And every heart the might
The strength and valiancy
Of thousands, as his right
Them unto him
(My hearts dear gem)
Would I present and give,
And think this all
Yet far too small
For him for to receive.
(47.)
My tender youthful years
Has long ago forsaken
Earth's fading foolish toys,
Of them farewell has taken,
My tender youth
They may not sooth,
For dead is my desire
Unto its joys
Such worthless toys
That do so soon expire.
(48.)
My tender years present
Their youthful strength to him
With whole and joint consent
To whom bright Sol is dim,
Whom I adore
For evermore
As Sovereign, Lord, and King,
Whom I Would reraise
In strains of praise
And of his Glories sing.
The Conclusion.
NOw, young man lay to heart what I have said,
Note well each matter I have here down laid,
Here Is life and death presented fairly to thee,
Be well advised they both alike do woo thee,
Only there is this advantage, courses ill
do swiftest go, their path is down the hill;
But youth, thy breast is strong, and youthful fire
May carry thee up-hill-wayes and yet not tire,
Put thy strength to it, do not back retire,
Thy lungs being good, thy breath 'twill not expire,
Though down-hill-waies are easy, yet there is danger
In them, it is the practice of each stranger
Easily to go, yea to light and lead their Horse
There where the Road does prove a down-hill course:
But up-hill ways do offer means to try
The Horses courage, strength and valiancy;
The rider he delights swiftly to force
A speedy passage on an up hill course:
So young man, up-hill-waies present the occasion
To try thy youthful strength without persuasion,
Come put on courage, put on manly might,
And mount this hill, the which presents to sight
A gallant prospect, the bright Court of Heaven,
Where Saints and Angels, all the glorious seven
Do sit, and chant the everlasting praise
Of great Jehove, (decked with bright glorious rays)
Women and Children labor to fulfill
The puny wishes of their craving will;
It Is childishness to follow inclination,
Effem'nacy to serve a foolish passion:
These down-hill-waies though pleasant sweet and sooth,
yet don't become, but much abase thy youth:
Where Is manly courage seen? up, up oppose,
Resist, resist the invasion of thy foes;
Ben't captivated by a head strong will,
Fooled by affection, led for to fulfill
A vain desire, to gratify a lust
The soul and all her powers subservient must:
Fie, fie young man, thy self confine to reason,
And let grave precept thy weak judgment season;
Let reason rule by Precepts, good direction
Thy stubborn will, and thy vain fond affection.
Art not ashamed to let a humor lead thee?
Unruly lusts, untamed passions ride thee?
Is the heat of thy young blood degenerated
From all things good, to ill so closely mated?
Hath't lost its strength and vigor with its heat,
That it regards not worth, nor glory great?
Rouse up thy soul young man, ben't so besotted
To let a Pearl of price in dung be rotted;
Thy blood's waxt cold, obstructed, it don't run
Quick in its channel, Glory is not won,
Nor once regarded by thee, sure the course
Of nature's changed, yea, from bad to worse.
Motives enough I'ave laid down to excite thee
Sin to oppose, and unto God invite thee;
Described during pleasures to delight thee,
Set forth thine enemies in field to fight thee:
What can I more? What can I further do?
To gain upon the, which way should I go?
Heaven and Glory I have laid thee down
(As Garland) thy victorious brows to Crown,
Pleasures and joys I have thee with presented
That aye abides, and never shall be ended;
Beauty I have protraicted to thy eye,
For therein many a younglings heart does lie,
I'ave showed thee how thy tender youth might gain
Either of these, or all of them attain;
Believe me youth if ought more lies in me
To do thee good, thy servant I will be;
How freely could I bear thee in mine arms,
But ah they are weak and cannot secure from harms,
I Will take thee by the hand and gently lead thee,
I Will go before thee and thy path out-tread thee:
But what am I? a poor weak sorry Guide;
Mistake me not! nor don't the speech deride,
It Is not of pride I speak't, but out of love,
The bowels of my soul to youth does move,
Fain would I have him 'quainted with his God,
That he might give him with himself abode:
Oh tender youth be ruled, shake hands with sin
And wanton courses don't continue in,
They are not safe but full of deadly danger,
Or sin with thee or God must be a stranger,
They will not lodge together in one breast,
For where sin reigns Jehovah will not rest.
And thou sweet youth whose face is Godward bent,
Who of all sin and evil do repent,
I kindly greet thee, and if I did know thee,
I would endeavor more of God to show thee;
Well howso'er, thou to my heart art dear,
And as my body to my soul as near;
As true to God may thy heart be as mine
Is true to thee, that do to good incline;
Thou art to me as dear as an own brother,,
To Jesus Christ likewise thou art no other,
He owns thee as a friend, a brother, wife,
More dearer to him art thou than his life,
For thee he died, and lives, and now does sit
At Gods right hand, for thee to intercede;
And whom Christ Jesus daignes himself to love,
With best affection, I dare boldly move,
But wheresoe'r thou art, my Counsel's this
To thee, persist and follow on to bless,
In earnest seek him and thou then shall find him,
Which having done, with strong affection bind him,
With constant suits salute his listing ear,
Be confident and bold he will thee hear,
He loves an earnest suitor at his Throne,
And that is the way to thrive in grace (or none)
Prayer gives to God his due, and shows the creature
How far it is below its blessed Creator;
It brings the soul as first it self to know
Its own frailty, so its God also,
And his abundant fullness of rich Treasure
That he unto all creatures out does measue,
It brings the soul with its blessed God acquainted,
Works't off of sin wherewith 'twas foully tained,
It Is ardent prayer unlocks the gates of heaven,
Naught God affords that is not by him given
Unto the soul that earnestly does sue
With ardent fervent and affection true.
In prayer there is that rare rich secret good
That cannot be expressed, that cannot be understood;
Prayer is a jewel that I Would not forgo
For all this world, I do esteem it so;
Honor, wealth, fame, endowments laid at stake,
For precious prayer I would them all forsake.
The greatest honors loss it soon can gain,
And wealth procure, yea wealth that does remain
For ever, when this world shall cease to be,
This worlds best wisdom is but foolery
To that which heaven, (by earnest suit) does give,
A praying temper may I ever in-live.
Prayer is my souls delight, and I am mute,
To none save God can I present a suit;
Prayer's my refreshment, and my greatest joy,
I never could say that ever it did me cloy;
Though days and nights, yea weeks and months together
I gave it all my soul, it joys me ever.
Were not for prayer, what were this life unto me?
Were not for prayer, Devils would soon undo me,
Were not for prayer, the loathsome stink of sin
Would poison me, and I should die therein:
Were not for prayer, in doleful misery
(By Gods permission) should I live and die;
Were not for prayer what comfort could I find?
What solace? what refreshment to my mind?
Were not for prayer, how could I ought possess?
How could I bear my head up in distress.
Were not for Prayer, what were all comforts to me
Lawful? Indifferent things would quite undo me*
I have all things by Prayer, without I'ave nothing;
All things are joyous by 't, without 't, a loathing:
Prayer is my soul's best banquet, naught more joys me
then praying does (you know what most then'noys me)
Sweet Prayer, I Will ever live and die in thee,
Till that time comes when thou shall useless be;
Even till I Am swallowed up in his blessed love,
And full possessed thereof by thee, I Will move,
I Will move by thee, soaring upon the wings
Of Contemplation, until Death brings
Me to enjoy most fully, what I now
With longing heart, and true desire forsue;
O blessed Majesty! Thou, Three in One,
And One in Three, Thou art that One alone
That I desire to be acquainted with.
To love, to serve, to praise, to worship, since
Thou art of during Goods, that blessed Fountain
Of strength, and safety, that everlasting mountain:
Thou giv'st most freely, yet have still in store
More than enough, to last for evermore.
Thou giv'st, and yet by giving have no less;
Thy store increases that thou do possess.
Lord, I am poor, and thou art full of riches,
Abound'st with wisdom, Folly me bewitches:
Lord, I am weak, and thou art God of strength,
Unless thou sav'st, I perish shall at length:
Thou do enjoin the Rich, unto the poor
For to impart with some of their full store;
And can thou, God of Riches, do ought less,
Then give to the Needy what thou do possess
In great abundant* fullness? Ah! Can thou,
What thou enjoynst thy Creatures to, tell how
For to deny thy self? Oh! Wilt thou prove
So cruel, so unkind? Thou God of Love!
No sure thou can not, thy delight's to give
Abundantly to man; crav'st that receive
Of thee he would, that everlasting treasure
Of thine consisting in true joy and pleasure.
Miserable am I! whither should I turn
But unto Mercy? My desires burn,
And long, and pine, thy Grace for to possess.
O thou in whom my life and pleasure is,
Enlarge my Soul still more, fill my desires
With greater longings, with more stronger fires,
That still my youth may make its boast of thee,
And thou may still delight thy self in me,
That the whole strength of these my younger days
May be laid out and spent in thy blessed praise.
As freely as thou gav'st my life to me,
So freely do I give my strength to thee.
A GLASS FOR VIRGINS.

Wherein also every SOUL may see, and from whence may be gathered, The Duty of
every SOUL to CHRIST.

Held forth by a continued Parallel, Between, Virgins Behaviors to their
Suitors, and The Christian Souls to Christ.

Unto which likewise the Author expresses himself.

By F. G.

Young Men and Maids, Old Men and Children* Praise ye the Lord. THE AUTHOR Of
this following POEM.
ALthough young Women are included and comprehended always under the
expression, young Man (when Mankind is spoken to in general) because things
must be expressed in the Melior which the sacred Writ, as well as common Writ,
witnesses, which take in this one instance for many, Psalm. 119. Wherewithal
shall a young man cleanse his way, etc? The Expression comprehending both
Sexes, young Women as well as young Men; so also have I all along, as much as I
could, hinted to young Women, in, and through young Men, often times also
expressing the term more indeffinitely by the word youngling, which more
clearly comprehends both Sexes: But for as much as in the pursuit of a Discourse
we are bound to follow up matters in the melior, and to pursue Instances of the
prime Concernment: Therefore do I think good to annex these following Lines to
the former, wherein young Women shall be positively concerned, and the state of
young Women absolutely spoke unto and paralleled as the nature and condition of
young Men was before, yet so, as reserving that truth always in my mind, and
carrying of it along in my thoughts with me in this Discourse, viz. that there
is no distinction of Sexes with Christ.

And therefore, peradventure, I may mix Expressions of both Sexes in one (often
times) because all is one in Christ.

Herein will be what as well concerns the one Sex as the other, and that not
absolutely young Ones only, but the Aged also may find their Duty in some
measure herein laid down.

Oh Reader, be sober, and read with a heart solid and spiritual, and thy
delight (I doubt not) then will be as great in reading, as mine is in writing
and was when I expressed from truth of Experience these things; thy good and
prosperity in God I heartily wish.

A Glass for Virgins.
(1)
NOw Virgins unto you, to you I speak,
To you directly now my Speech I turn;
For why? Your welfare I entirely seek,
And thereunto does my desire burn.
You are to me alike beloved and dear,
And every whit as precious as they were.
(2)
Christ makes no distinction, no more do I,
But good in any one I love and prize;
And wheresoever Grace I do espy,
Why in those persons my hearts pleasure lies.
Both Male and Foemale are alike to me,
When alike Principles I in them see.
(3)
My heart is dead, most cold is my desire
To any's friendship where no Grace I find;
Naught else but it can my affection fire,
Or something that is like to it in kind.
Partial: Oh! May I never he in Love,
Nor never affect where great Jehove don't move*
(4)
Virgins attend: Note your denomination,
You prize the Name, Oh! see you live unto it:
Yo be^r your selves upon that appellation,
And so do I; what it bespeaks let us do it:
Virgin speaks purity, and singlnesse,
All Chastity, and Soul retiredness.
(5)
A Virgins heart's within it self compact
In unity, within it selfe's composed,
Each faculty's entire, and all exact;
Its happiness within it selfe's enclosed.
The heart's entire, the affection whole and sound,
The will, desire, unto themselves are bound.
(6)
A serene, quiet, calm, tranquillid frame
Of spirit does a Virgins soul possess;
And being so, naught can it easily maim:
Nor is there ought can make their joys he less.
Affections in 'em are not parcel'd out,
Disordered passions therefore cannot them rout.
(7)
A Virgins glory's to maintain this frame,
It Is this they make their business of life;
Their strength's laid out for to maintain the same,
And so their souls preserved are from strife.
Thus is Virginity Angelical,
And to be prized the best estate of all.
(8)
A Virgins honor lives in modest looks,
In sober, and yet humble carriages,
A Virgins spirit no uncleanness brooks,
Hates of impurity all passages:
Her front shines with a kind of Majesty,
True virtue may be seen with in her eye.
(9)
This is a Virgins 'state: I have defined
A Virgins Nature; I have pencil'd out
The Acts of them that have themselves resigned
Up thereunto, with their employment what about.
The which so worthy, and approved carriage,
Presents them most desirable in marriage.
(10)
Choose to what person you will this apply,
To God himself, or to a lower creature,
For both in love the carriages do eye,
Deporture and demeanor in each feature.
To one, to both, this lovely you presents
(Though God alone to please were your intents)
(11)
Oh Virgins know, Jehovah has a Son,
The Heir of heaven and earth (alone) is he;
He Is meek and mild, yet has by courage won
Of the world, sin, hell, and death, the victory.
All power, and might, and strength's subjected to him*
He is so truly rich, naught can undo him.
(12.)
This person's single, and he seeks a wife
Amongst the sinful childeren of men,
He was so real, that he gave his life
To gain their love, and to redeem them, when
They were sold captives unto hellish fiends,
Under darkness bound with everlasting chains.
(13.)
Which was such love, that now a silent suit
('It Is thought) might be enough to gain their love,
Because their lives are his in small dispute,
May cause affections unto him to move;
His Love was true and real, no vain proffer,
No complement, no superficial offer.
(14.)
His blood did seal the truth of his affection,
His life throughout did testify the same,
His neck he bowed under all subjection,
Nay he so much did do, I cannot it name;
And may such real love, be disrespected
While lighter's prised, shall this be rejected?
(15.)
If your hot blood may move your minds to aspire
To high preferment, by some noble match,
If honor, riches, pleasure you desire,
His love embrace, and his kind proffers catch;
For why? all these you meet withal in him,
Yea and much more whereto all these are dim.
(16.)
He is a King and therefore can advance ye,
A King that tules and reigns for evermore,
A price upon his love therefore inhaunce ye,
He Is full professor of enduring store;
If therefore you would unto honor rise,
And happy be, accept his love, be wise.
(17.)
The best of mortals cannot advance ye so,
The greatest Monarch cannot that honor give,
The mightiest Potentate, cannot bestow,
That wealth and pleasure that in him ye have;
Those full contentments, those delightful pleasures,
Enduring ever with all peaceful treasures.
(18.)
Comprize the whole together, and it is this,
The God of Glory, heir of Earth and Heaven;
In whom all honor, pleasure, wealth and blsis,
Does bide and dwell: whose precious blood was given
For man's Redemption; to the soul of man
Becomes a suitor, tries all ways he can.
(19.)
To gain that love he over dearly bought,
To win that heart, for which he gave his life,
It to enjoy, that being lost, he sought
Eternally to make his glorious Wife:
His Grace does sue, Oh can our hearts deny,
Hold off, and so abase such Majesty.
(20.)
Shall he to whom the glorious Queen of Heaven,
Ever sues for favor, suit our worthless Love,
That are of whatsoever's good bereaven,
Shall he suit us, and we to him not move?
When he presents himself can we be shie?
Ah shall he woo, and we his suit deny?
(21.)
Maidens are wont much to regard their beauty,
They may not admit a blemish in the face,
Adorn themselves, in carriages are haughty,
Are circumspect lest they incur disgrace;
They heed to shape each action, work and carriage,
So as they may not prevent 'em in their marriage.
(22.)
Oh Virgins! this Christ Jesus looks upon,
A comely face with answerable attire,
Whose heart does monut in contemplation,
Wh'are cautious what they will, what they desire;
Whose spirits are sublime, and scorn the earth,
And mount a lost according to their birth.
(23.)
May I explain my self in this expression,
By a comely face, a sincere heart is meant,
Pure and humble, (^ear with this digression,
Not a bare say so, and a complement
A gracious conversation is the attire
Answering thereto, the which he does desire.
(24.)
Our employment he would have noble, and our thought
Raised above these low inferior things,
Our Virgin spirit he would not have fraught
With other matter, than what glory brings;
What would us suit, we may with scorn deny,
Or our hearts court; unto we may be shie.
(25.)
A Virgin stands upon her reputation,
A haughty scorn often times does fill her breast,
(Remember this in Christian conversation)
She will not be in a sluttish habit dressed;
She blushes much at every misbehaviour,
And only things commendable will savor.
(26.)
Then Damsel hear, make conscience of sin;
Your reputation that does foully blemish,
Reject and scorn its paths to trample in,
Look ever upon it with a look most squemish;
Abhor each though of sin, it does defile you,
Blemish your honor, does of your glory spoil you
(27.)
It marrs your beauty, and your comely looks,
It disproportionates you throughout,
It makes you loathsome for Christ Jesus brooks;
No sin delighting soul, that thereabout
Does spend its precious time, and trade in folly,
No, he delights and is a person holy.
(28.)
Oh Virgins! shame to prostitute your selves,
And give the strenth of your young tender years,
Unto the service of those hellish Elves,
That so^^ delight unto your nature bears;
Remember that this Virgin-Prince looks on,
Sees every act, though nere so secret done.
(29.)
Oh! how you blush when young men do discry you
'Bout some uncivil, some immodest act;
You hang your heads, and from their sight soon hie you,
Ashamed you should be seen in such a fact;
You will not dare then once to show your face,
So long as they continue in that place.
(30.)
This Heaven-born heir, this Prince of great descent,
That seeks your love, that tenders you affection;
Veiws your immodest looks, your hearts intent,
Beholds full well to what you give subjection;
Blush you may at this, but ye cannot flee him,
He sees you well, although you do not see him.
(31)
Consider Maidens, should a worthy Suitor,
A well bred man, a man of noble birth;
Learned by virtue, having it his Tutor;
A comely person, owner of much wealth:
Should such a one unto you make a proffer
Of love, and would you then contemn his offer.
(32)
Would you before him, your selves mis-behave?
No, for your reputations you would not,
Although he did not from you favor crave,
Nor tender your affection one jot.
For fear that i^ should be by him reported.
You were ill bred, to vanities besotted.
(33)
Think this in all the actions of your life,
For sure Jehovah evermore does eye ye,
He sees what ills are in your natures ^ife,
In closest misdemeanors he will spy ye.
Tremble hereat, for he will blaze the same,
More openly then by the trumpe of Fame.
(34)
But further, Virgins, note your own behaviors,
Before, and to the person that does tender
You hearty love, and daigns you many favors.
Consider well I say, how you do render
Your selves unto him, also how before him,
You do behave ye (though you don't adore him.)
(35)
Your looks are sober, carriages severe,
Modest your countenance, most chaste your eye;
You heed your gestures all (I may not say fear)
Lest any absurd carriage he should spy.
You watch your words, and strictly gaurd your tongue,
And heed that wisdom be your words among.
(36)
All this you do, nor can ye do ought less,
Whether ye respect the person ye or no,
Because your worth lies in your carriages,
For credit and much praise ye do gain so.
To every person ye must give respect,
Show carriage good, though him ye do reject.
(37)
But how much more, yea, with what aggravations,
Of all this do ye (with much care) demean
Your selves to him, and to all his relations,
Whom of your best respects you worthy deem.
Yea, heed with patience, and much humbleness,
Yet very gladly what he does, express.
(38)
You suit your selves with him (prizing his love)
The temper of his Spirit you delight in;
Your will does close with his, and you approve
What ever he does, and love what he has right in*
An Oneness so is made up in your Spirits,
Naught you can do, but you think he it merits.
(39)
Behold the worthiest Suitor that did ever
Make suit to Creature, Gods (sole) eldest Son,
Does to you, Virgins, his hearts love deliver,
Expressly penned in what he has done.
Had not he loved us, sure he would not have given
Himself to death, to purchase for us heaven.
(40)
But may this love be termed; or a debt
That Is to him due, that suffered so much for us?
We are the purchase of his Blood, and yet
He craves our love, when as he might abhor us.
He need not sue our hearts, enough are his,
If that a debt by way of purchase is.
(41)
About this matter let me reason with ye;
Were we not his, we could not be our own;
His en by debt (mistake me not I prithee)
He was our Help when we were helpless grown.
When we were lost, why then he did us find;
When none regarded us, he did us mind.
(42)
When we were Captives bound unto the Devil,
And to partake with him in his sad doom,
Sold unto Sin, and to each sordid evil,
For our Redemption, then his Grace did come
To satisfy for us God's flaming ire,
And save our Souls from everlasting fire.
(43)
He drunk that Cup, which else we must have drunk;
He felt for us* what else we should have felt;
He plunged those deeps, wherein we should have sunk;
He bore that blow, that justice to us dealt.
For Mankind's safety he his life laid down,
And by his Death did purchase him a Crown.
(44)
Now does he sue, it is but his own he sues for,
It is the purchase of his blood he craves,
Denial here is that, the soul ever rues for,
Who so complies thereto the same he saves;
Oh Virgins be ye solid, be ye wise,
Undone for ever she is his suit denies.
(45)
Be circumspect, look well to your behaviors,
Return him for his love true love again,
Who does not, Ingenuity not savours,
And must feel for it everlasting pain;
He'as over-bought our love, who does deny
To give't him, therefore's worthy aye to dye.
(46)
Who does accept his love, he makes his Wife,
Whom he does cloth with Roabs of brightest glory,
Fills with all joy and peace, that is free from strife,
Her state's then such, as Seraphims scarce can story;
The best of Sains cannot (while here) conceive it,
Oh may we ever faithfully believe it.
(47)
His Grace does sue that we'd hold forth in carriage,
That him we prize, and love and do adore,
That we would live as those that expect marriage
With him, that rules and reigns for evermore;
Most reasonable is this, then let us comply,
With mind and members, let us instantly.
(48) Parallel this with 34.

Oh! Virgin souls, can ye less worthy judge him,
Than carnal Lovers, that can gain respect,
At all hands from ye? Oh! how can ye grudge him
Those common favors, and his love neglect?
Careful are ye to live as ever before him,
And with your souls whole strength do ye adore him.
(49) This with the 35.

Are ye ever sober, modest, chaste and wise,
Respective in each gesture, each behavior,
All this you will be before your Suitors eyes,
Your words or actions may of no ill savor;
Solid you seem, not garish in your looks,
No ill discourse your ear (at that time) brooks.
(50)
Can ye do this for them? less worthy deem him,
That as your Love, so is your Lord and King;
Oh! can ye, can ye lightlier esteem him?
Would ye far less respect unto him bring?
He eyes your carriages as well as they,
And thinks the same respect expect he may.
Staff 37 (51)
Do you love those that are related to him?
Do you respect them as your Lovers kin?
Think ye in love that your dear life ye owe him?
Spare ye for naught, his favor for to win?
All this for lower Lovers ye will do,
To the God of life and glory will not ye so^
(52)
Your Lovers voyse is pleasant to your ear,
No burden is the precept he lays on you,
You joy as much to do it, as it to hear,
Dissent thereto in the least tittle will not you;
The God of life for this same thing does woo,
And ye will not for him comply thereto.
(53)
Ah must he be denied, that which his Creature
May gain, and have with joy full cheerful heart,
Expressed clear by many a lovely feature,
You will not stick, nor with his Love will not part
You will maintain that love on any terms,
Your souls with strong resolves themselves so arms.
(54)
This prince of Light, of Glory, Wealth and Peace,
Does crave no more than what you to these give,
From evil courses he would have you cease,
And then a life conformed to him live;
Tender his Precepts, and obey his voice,
Making his pleasure your selected choice.
(55)
He craves respect as lower Lovers have,
And then your hearts affection he does sue for,
He gives true love, and he true love does crave,
Which for to do, bid all the World adieu for;
This seems not harsh, for persons whom ye love
You Will all forsake, and with them you will move.
(56)
"Who so loves me, give ear unto my voice,
"(Says this blessed heir) and note my precepts well,
"To keep my Hests make evermore your choice;
"And ever with you then I Will bide and dwell:
"Then unto you shall my affections move,
"To joy and be enjoyed in mutual love.
(57.)
"If you love me then keep you my Commands,
"And you shall loved be by the most high;
"Of me these were my Fathers strickt Demands,
"And I obeyed his glorious Majesty;
"Do thou obey, and his love eke and mine,
"Twisted together, shall be both made ^hine.
(58.)
"Which when ye do, say then what is in Heaven
"That you desire, or that your soul can crave,
"Which at your earnest suit shall not be given?
"And at my hands most freely ye cannot have?
"Enlarge your hearts, and crave what ever you will,
I ready am, the same for to fulfill.
(59.)
"Ask what you will and I Will accord unto it,
"For powers all in Heaven and Earth are mine,
"Soul speak thy suit, I will not refuse to do it,
"My ear and heart, shall thereunto incline;
"Thou can not ask what I cannot to thee give;
Nor can thou fail because I ever live*
(60)
Soul, if thou love him, then let these his words
Be sweeter to thee than the honey dewes;
For whatsoever God or Heaven affords,
Of joy or peace, then to thy Soul acrews.
Thou then shall have him here, and evermore
Possess him, after with all glorious store.
(61) Staff 38.

You suit you to the temper of your Love,
Are pleased and delighted with his pleasure;
What e're he wills you to, you do approve,
And his deserts out by your love you measure.
Demean your selves to Jesus Christ but so,
(You shame to say to this Proposal, No.)
(62)
But if you reckon upon life and bliss,
And that your Souls should escape e'^lasting fire,
Close with his love, your safty else you miss,
And are frustrated in your hearts desire.
Shall he enjoy you that did never love you,
Nor with a Lovers suit did ever move you?
(63)
Ah! Sure he shall not; it is for love you marry,
It Is mutual love that joyneth hearts together:
If you do'nt like the person, you will tarry.
The case stands thus 'tween us and Christ; for either
We must love, prize, esteem him above all,
Or '^is in vain him our loved Lord to call.
(64)
He will not save that Soul that does not love him:
Marriage cannot be where persons don't affect.
Can he unite with them thatn're did move him,
Nor show unto him any love Respect?
Life is not dear where love has taken place,
How do we prize? How do we ra^e his Grace?
(65)
Make we no Conscience of a course of Sin?
Nor cool, nor quench, a soul or vain desire;
Yet do we think his favou^ for to win,
And to be filled with that celestial fire?
That mutually does joy and re-enjoy
Those pleasures in him, that can never cloy.
(66)
Think we, Gods Son will marry with a Whore?
Will he, that is the Heir of Earth and Heaven,
Abase himself so much, as evermore
To honor persons of all good bereaven?
No, no, such persons as indulge in sin,
He will not own (if live and die therein.)
(67)
I appeal to young Men (or to Virgins either)
Would they present her with true love, that is common
With every man? (The like to Virgins) Whether
Could ye love him that deals with every Woman?
Much less may any One expect to win
Christ's favor, that trades with delight in sin.
(68)
Know whatsoever thou art, that do commerce
Continually with sin, that thou shall never
See or behold, much less, with have converse,
This glorious Bridgroome, that does live fot ever;
No know thou that he is full of jealousy,
And cannot brook filthy Adultery.
(69)
And whensoe'r thou hold'st commerce with sin,
Thou play'st the whore, commit'st adultery.
Know whenso'r vain thoughts are lodged in
Thy breast, thou losest thy Virginity;
Sin does pollute the heart, it is filthy, foul,
It does corrupt, it does defile the soul.
(70.)
You know that it is abominable in nature
To have a bed defiled, it moves rage,
And stirs up that fury in a creature,
That scarcely death and Divorce can assuage;
In noble persons it is the greater sin,
Noble I mean that wronged are therein.
(71.)
Now it is a King, the everlasting King,
That is concerned in thee, O Virgin soul;
It Is he whose worth the glorious Angels sing,
Whose nature does abhor a deed that is foul;
It Is he, no less person that thou wrongest,
Thou art his interest, unto him belongest.
(72.)
They that defile his bed, are worthy sure
Of a Divorce, and of perpetual pain,
Yea, they shall be confined to endure
Such horrors as for evermore remain;
Sin does the soul divorce from God for ever,
Brings it to torment that expireth never.
(73.)
To sum up all, then take the matter thus,
Virgins while Virgins strickt are and severe,
Because their lives are then perspicuous
Unto all persons, great respective care
They have, that they miscarry not in ought,
It Is good behavior makes them after sought.
(74.)
Their reputation lies in their behavior
It Is that gains love and meriteth respect,
It Is that continues their loveds favor,
That may they therefore by no means neglect;
O Virgin souls, remember all this carriage
To Jesus Christ, who proffers to you marriage.
(75.)
When Wives they are, and in strickt wedlock bound,
Such carriage must they shape, as best may please,
Their spoused Husbands, good Wives never stound
To give it to them, as their spousal fees;
If thou art spoused unto Christ, O soul,
Remember this each surgent I Will control.
(76.)
But as thou stand'st in hope to be his Bride*
Thou stricktly art enjoined to live up to him,
To love him heartily and none beside
(Conforming to his will does strongly woo him)
In holy life answer his gracious love,
And he will thine repay, will not from thee move.
(77.)
O Virgin soul! triumph for to present
His Majesty with love, and heart entire,
Be sure let nothing frustrate thine intent,
In giving to him thy hearts strongest fire;
Love is a most delightful bed to lie in,
Loves flames are very pleasant for to fry in.
(78.)
But to continue my old method still,
My self expressing in a varied verse
For the Readers pleasure, therefore now I will
Put stop, and what remains therein rehearse,
For both to the outward and the inward man,
I Will suit my self as pleasant as I can.
(1)
NOw my self for to express, then
In a varied pleasant strain,
And speak those sweets I taste, when
Sin does not my soul distrain,
O may my Song
And Lungs be strong
To tell what joys there do remain.
(2)
As a Virgin sworn to him,
Out of depth of true affection,
So am I, and will not forego him,
Nor refuse his blessed subjection;
Long may I still
Maintain my will,
Obedient to his direction.
(3)
I do my high glory count it,
To maintain a loyal heart
Unto his Grace; and think amount it,
Does all treasuries and art;
My soul does crave,
Still to behave
Her self so, she may not with him part*
(4)
He Is my choice, and I do prize him
Above all the world can show me;
My Soul's ravished when she eyes him,
And all things are then below me.
She never meets,
With such like sweets,
As she conceivs when he does know me.
(5)
As a Virgin, may I ever
My self humble chastily carry,
That displease him I may never,
That abide he may, and tarry
With me till the time,
In the glorious clime,
My worthless Soul does with him marry.
(6)
Ah! might I ever feel the power
Of his soul-melting love,
That all sweet, and no whit sower,
Ah then! how then should I move?
With quick'ned pace,
I Would keep no place,
Till in the Courts of great Jehove.
(7)
O the sweets, the joys, the pleasures,
That the soul does taste and find!
O the honors, glories, treasures,
That are possessed by that mind;
That Christ does love,
All things above,
Showing not it self to him unkind!
(8)
There Is no earthly sweet can gloss it,
Nor shade it forth in meanest hue;
There Is no Artist that can dose it,
Or dimention give it true;
No, reason's blind
And cannot find
Wherewith to set it forth to view.
(9)
May my Virgin-soul enjoy him,
He shall lodge between my breasts,
And that nothing may annoy him,
I Will keep watch while he there rests.
He shall to me,
Most welcome be,
So long as in my Soul he guests.
(10)
He knows my heart, I Would not displease him
(Willingly) to stire his ire,
But when I do, why then I lease him:
Yet then his patience I admire.
For when that I,
To him draw nigh,
With Grace he does me re inspire.
(11)
He Is my joy, my crown, my glory,
Such contentment he affords,
As an Angel's Pen cannot story,
Far beyond all sense of words,
Him for to gain,
I fear no pain,
Nor care I for the edge of Swords.
(12)
For What Is life to the enjoyment
Of his ever-blessed-love?
The sweets of life often prove a cloyment,
Often a loathing: I Will not move.
I Will take no pain,
Them for to gain,
Because they mere deceits do prove.
(13)
But my joys in love last ever,
When both light of Moon and Sun
Shall cease to be; yea, cease for ever:
And fierce fire this world shall burn.
Say then shall she,
Lo! This is he,
That I have waited so upon.
(14)
Behold him now with glory claded,
And his great Majestic train;
Oh now how my soul is gladded!
I shall with him ever remain;
With Angels I
Eternally,
Shall praise him in melodious strain.
(15)
Then will he in glory throne me,
With his sacred Majesty,
He as his dear spouse will own me,
I shall bide ever in his eye;
And live by love,
Of him above,
In heaven to all eternity.
(16)
To such a Spouse as thus'll advance me,
Say, may I be coy to love?
At what a rate should I inhaunce me?
With what hatred to sin move?
How coy how shie
With heart defy
It? seeing he me terms his Dove.
(17)
My noble spirit scorns the abasement,
Of the servitude of sin,
It puts her beauties to defacement,
Blasts and stains her Lilly-skin;
Far may it be,
The refore from me,
Its pleasures by such loss to win.
(18)
No, Sin avaunt, my Soul does loath thee,
Thou do of my beauty spoil me:
Begone, I say, my Soul abhors thee,
Thy pleasures do not please, but toil me.
Thy delights,
My Soul affrights,
And thy ease does greatly foyl me.
(19)
My Virgin-Soul's of noble birth,
Of his royal blood descended,
That is Lord of Heaven and Earth,
Therefore ought to be attended
As such a One,
And not alone
Left, for to be by Sin offended.
(20)
O Sin! Thou base foul Blackamore,
Hell's offspring, and by Devils nursed,
That part'st from God for evermore,
And make all like thy self accursed.
Thou deadly Foe,
Far from me go,
Into my presence do not thrust.
(21)
For I am a Maid of Honor,
Spoused to God's only Son.
Over whom he displayes his Banner,
And thereby has conquest won,
It Is vain for you,
Therefore to sue,
Bold Sin avaunt, away be gone.
(22)
A chaste Virgin I must keep me,
Till the day of Marriage come;
At which time, who should, may reap me,
Giving unto me this doom.
True have thou been
(As I have seen,)
To me, Therefore enjoy me, Come.
(23)
I know my Lord views my behavior,
I know he notes each gesture well,
He regards how I him favor,
And whereupon my thoughts do dwell:
My Virgin Soul,
If she prove foul,
Must with the Devils bide in Hell,
(24)
Loathsome Sin, begone far from me,
I dare not lodge thee: No I dare not,
Thou brings grief and horror to me;
Therefore for thy joys I care not.
Thy seeming joys,
Are sad annoyes,
Shall I transgress? O No, I dare not*
(25)
What, shall such a one as I am,
Prostitute my self to sin?
No its pleasures I defy? em,
And its ways to persist in,
No I may not.
Give place a jot,
For the disgrace of my kin.
(26)
Shall I dare my self to banish.
From my souls own native soil?
For sins sake that soon does vanish,
And my choicest pleasures spoil?
Oh! sure I will not;
Therefore sin don't,
Disturb me more, keep such a coil.
(27)
Shall I be bewitched with evil,
So as with my God to part?
Give my members to the Devil,
And with them my mind and heart?
Make I no more,
To play the whore,
And from my loved Lord to start?
(28)
No, I am a Virgin sworn,
Unto great Jehovahs Son,
And my Virgin soul does scorn,
To be by another won;
To do an act,
Or any fact,
That he prohibits to be done.
(29)
For life's to me far less dearer,
Than his precious matchless love,
Oh that that I were to him nearer,
In his glorious house above,
Him to enjoy
Without annoy,
And never more from him to move.
(30)
Dearest Lord, let me for ever,
While I in this vale abide,
Be disserted of thee never,
What ills ever so me betide;
So sin shall be
Abhorred by me,
And all its motives ever denied,
(31)
For thy looks revive my spirit,
And new life therein inspire,
They do give me to inherit,
Those delights that I desire;
Accord to me,
Let me them see,
And so they never shall expire.
(32)
Most Endeared, let me woo thee,
With thy Counsels me to guide,
And that nothing may undo me,
Let thy presence with me bide;
And so shall I
Most constantly,
Keep close unto thy foot and side.
FINIS.
THere is another Book, composed (long since) by this same Author, showing the
Souls Conversation with God, Contemplation in God, Supplication to God,
Adoration of God; and containing several Love Sonnets and Ejaculations,
breathed forth according to the several Estates and Conditions of the Soul;
laid down in several Odes as Occasion permitted the Author.

Wherein, and whereby may be understood the manner of the Authors, Life and
Carriage from time to time, which the Author gave forth to the Press long
since, whatever is become of it, to the which this Quotes, and would be of
great use to go along with this.


