Miscelanea Medica: OR, A SUPPLEMENT TO Kitchin-Physick; To which is added, A
short DISCOURSE ON STOVING AND BATHING: WITH Some transient and occasional
Notes on Dr. George Thompsons (...).

-- Nec lex est justior ulla Quam necis artificis art perire sua. LONDON,
Printed in the year 1675.

HIPPOCRATIS and GALENI FAUTORIBUS, Speciatim Erudito viro, mihique observando,
Thomae Austen Armigero, Mei amicissimo, Necnon Egregie Doctis J. N. and T. S.
Medicinae Doctoribus.
PEllae^ Juveni, Cultor non sufficit unus -- Duos igitur tanto Heroi, diversi
generis, obtigisse, memoriae traditur, Craterum scilicet, (...), and
Hephestionem, (...), ab eodem appellatos. Quorum, ille quidem Regem, hic vero
Alexandrum, coluisse dicitur: Mihi quoque, in publicum prodeunti, analogo
quopiam, multo magis opus esse, quis dubitet? Repertis enim libelli, and causae
quam tractat justissimae patronis idoneis, alios etiam, Scriptoris protectores,
exquirendos facile persensi: Nec mora, Vos enim, viri egregii, illico mihi in
mentem rediistis, (unde quidem, (ut verius dicam) nunquam abestis) qui me,
vestra familiaritate, olim dignati, sic me, sic mea omnia, utcunque tenuia,
estimatis, and vel laudare, vel saltem excusare, parati estis, ut aliis, hunc
tractatum inscribere, vel alios, mei Defensores adoptare, nefas duxerim.

De meipso (more Chymicorum speciatim (...), G. T.) multa promittere modestia
non patitur; and quamvis mihi non sum tam suffenus ut quidquam de me magnopere
pollicear, in utraque tamen Academia educato, exactis etiam viginti prope annis
in studio and praxi Medicinae, Chymiae, and Anatomiae, liceat mihi dicere me
non prorsus ignarum esse plurimorum, sive Dogmatum sive Experimentorum, quae
alicujus in hac art momenti sunt. Quapropter navem solvendi and hunc oceanum
discurrendi copiam facile mihi dandam confido, gratum aliquid and utile humano
generi exponere studenti. Valete viri egregie docti, Accipite hoc offerentem
(...); Pergite mihi (quod semper facitis) indulgere, meique patrocinium
suscipere, dignemini: and perpetuo favete

Addictissimo Vestri, T. C.

Miscelanea Medica: OR, A SUPPLEMENT TO Kitchin-Physick.
The Second Part.
ALL Physicians whom we ought most to confide in, do conclude and have
determined it as a most undoubted Truth, to cure with contraries, and preserve
with Cordials, according to that confirmed Aphorism of contraria contrariis
curantur: Similia similibus, conservantur.

Paracelsus, Theophrastus, Bombastus, Van-Helmont, and some of their late
conceited Disciples, without taking any notice of this distinction, do morbum
morbo curare: and venture to attempt the putting out of fire with fire: Or,
curing hot Diseases with hot Medicines, and consequently cold Diseases with
cold. Hippocrates, Galen, and their more aged Offspring; on the other hand
judge it more reasonable and practicable to put out fire with water; and to
subdue the cold effects of water, by heat or fire: and to this end, if the
Disease be hot and dry, as a Fever, they advise such Food and Physic, as is
cold and moist; and hot and dry Meats and Medicines to subdue a disease that is
moist and cold; never neglecting (as is supposed by the Chemist) to supply
Nature, though not the Disease, with convenient, delightful, and proper
Cordials, always remembering, not to nourish, but to oppose a Disease, with
things that remove, or alter it by their qualities.

We are much beholden to the temperament and qualities of things, for the
preservation of our health, and curing Diseases, nor is there, through the
benignity and bounty of God, any accident or distemper, but has its remedy
assigned it, by the matter, form, temperament or qualities of Medicines, knew
we but certainly how, and when to apply them: and therefore it is, that
Physiology, and all the five parts of Physic, are more absolutely necessary,
than the most exalted, and accurate Medicines of the Chemist: and though by
some (who know the vulgar neither do, nor will know any thing but what is
vulgar) the Galenist and Chemist are represented, as two distinct, different
and inconsistent things, yet it is certain, they both serve but to make up one
entire Artist: And I could tell you Eugenius not only of some Physicians, but
some also of your own profession, that can compare, if not outdo the greatest
Don and Heroes (as they think themselves) of the Chemical and Hermetick Sect:
And because you may depend upon it for a Truth, that all Diseases and Remedies,
may as well and better be comprehended under some of the simple or compound
Qualities, than any other invented Idea, Name or Notion whatever of the
conceited Chemist, to this very end, the foregoing Chapters in the first Part,
have given you a practical account of such things, as do preserve by their
agreement with Nature, and cure by their contrariety to the Disease; and not to
advise people to a Diet, that is answerable to their Disease and Physic they
are prescribed, is to ruin them: nor are they by any but conceited
Practitioners and Humorists, to be left at large, to feed as they think sit on
old Cheese, Red-herring, or to inflame themselves with the more subtle and
penetrating Spirits of Brandy, Punch and Aqua Vitae, which, though at first
they seem to content Nature, and exalt the Archeus, or vital and natural heat
of our bodies, yet they so alter also the natural tone, temper and ferments of
the pancreas, blood and stomach, that (in a little time) they leave them
languid, faint and vappid: By these things the Chemist may for a while,
seemingly make his Archeus or Nature blaze the better; but (like a Torch with
often beating) it will certainly burn out the sooner: and it is rare to find any
accustomed Brandy, or Aqua vitae Bubber, when once sick ever to recover,
because the frequent use of such things, make all other Cordials useless and
invalid in time of sickness, and when Nature should stand most in need of them.
Besides, they either at first so inflame the vital Spirits, as to produce such
acute, sharp, and sudden Diseases, as Fevers, Apoplexies, and the like, or else
in time (as one fire puts out another) they extinguish the vital heat and
moisture, and thereby occasion such chronick and fatal Diseases, as Gouts,
Dropsies, Palsies, Hecticks, Scorbuts, Consumptions, and death it self.

In short, our blood and spirits may as well be too much agita^ed as idle, and
the volatile Salts may stand in as much need of fixing, as the fixed Salts of
volatizing, nor is their less danger in one than the other: and how the
Chemist, only with his hot fiery Cordial Spirits at one and the same time, can
serve two such different Masters, I understand not, and must herein submit to
better judgments than my own, and surely, such a modest and mannerly
condescension, as this would have better become Mempsis, than an unmanly
disdaining others to magnify himself; nothing being more intolerable and base,
than inurbanity: Nor can I but wonder with what confidence he can pretend (as
he does, page 187) to subdue the irregular passions, and reform the sinful
inclinations of others by his Medicines, when, after so many thousand Doses, as
he says he has taken himself, (only to animate others) as yet he has not
conquered his own: his prevaricating in this is enough on all occasions, to
call in question his integrity, and to make him suspected a -- Chemist: Nor are
we so much to confide in the loud Hyperbolies of his Medicines, and great brags
that are daily made of Pantamagogons, Alexi-stomachons, etc. As to some few
well digested institutions, that may practically relate to the six
non-Naturals, and a Directory for Diet.

Like Food, like Flesh, like Meat, like Medicine, was once almost grown
proverbial: and some old Philosophers, by the continual succession of new
matter by Aliments; have not only affirmed; that from sick men we may become
sound men: but of late the Chemists have so improved, and advanced the Notion
in behalf of their Aetherial, and supernatural Spirits, that we may (say they)
also become new men; and one of the best and most accomplished of the Chemical
Cabal (meaning Mempsis) has undertaken (on condition his Majesty will be
gracious to that profession) not only to cure his Subjects of Incontinency,
Atheism, Profaneness, and all manner of Sin and Debauchery: But will make them
also Just, Devout, Loyal and Religious, only by cokesing, tameing, and tickling
the Archeus with his Hermetick and Chemical preparations: and to gratify
farther, his sacred royal Master for so great a kindness he engages (to use his
own words, page 187. of his (...)) by the powerful operation of his (...) ( i.
e. in plain English his profound skill in Physic) to convert Quakers,
Catabaptists, Independents, Separatists, Schismatics and the multitude of
Phanaticks to the Church of England. Do this, and thou shall have my consent,
not only to be honest George, Doctor George, and George the Doctor: But Sir
George, St. George, and George the Saint.

But in good earnest I wish, dear Doctor, thou had conceil'd the Divine and
Moral operations of thy Medicines, upon the hearts and consciences of poor
Mortals, because in these his Majesty's Dominions thou can now never more
hope for any practice and employ as a Medicaster: for surely the profane
Cavalier he will not meddle with thee, for fear of being made a Schismatic, a
religious Rebel or Roundhead: Nor will I Am sure the devout Phanatick, for fear
of being damned for an Atheist, a debauched and honest Royalist: now then or
never recant, and own the Doctrine of Contrarieties: now, now or never is the
time to make it appear and convince the ignorant Heretical, Reprobate, and
unconverted Galenist, that thy Chemical and Hermetick Physic, can at one and
the same time work such contrary effects, as to make the Serpent (thy self dear
Doctor) a Saint; a Royalist, a Roundhead, and a Rebel a Royalist; Now I say is
the time, the very time for thee, O Mempsis, to work these wonders; or else,
(with pity and compassion I speak it) thou must, I, thou must pack up, and be
gone into some of those horrid regions, where people are neither for God nor
the King; for King nor Parliment, no, nor for my Lord Mayor, nor Common Council.

I wish also, that the Doctor had not intimated, and suggested to his Majesty
that in good conscience (for the good service he has done himself, and Royal
Father of blessed Memory) he ought, or can do no less than overthrow, or at
least new Model, and purge with his reforming Physic, his College of
Physicians, and two famous Univerties, Cambridge and Oxford.

But above all things, after all thy glorious boasts and brags of Loyalty, thou
were bewitched to petition the Parliament for no less (in effect) than his
Majesty's; there own, and the peoples lives and liberties: for what difference
is there betwixt their being ruined, and their erecting a College for Mempsis,
with immunities for him, his Heirs and Assigns to dispense all the Medicines,
that must be made use of in his Majesty's Dominions.

This George, however reasonable, and necessary it seems to thy self; yet,
after thou have fluttered a little longer like a Feather in the wind, thou will
find that the Parliament will let thee drop, and take no more notice of thy
Phanatick Freeks and frisking Seminalities of thy brain, than if a
Tom-tit-mous, an Owl, or a Jack-daw had flown over Westminster. Let Wisdom
baul, and utter her voice never so loud: let her scream and tear her throat in
pieces; it is (as thou say George) all one, as if thou should vociferate
Neptune to forbear swallowing up Ships, since it is his Nature to do such dirty
and mischievous tricks: All which the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen taking
into their consideration, and that there is no hope, that either the King or
Parliament will accommodate thee with a College; our Senators and City Heroes
are at this time preparing one for thee at Moor-gate.

And now, seeing he is so hardly dealt with; let his Majesty, his two Houses,
his Nobility and Gentry; the Bishops and Clergy; the Lawyers and Laity; the
whole City, Town and Country look to it as they will, it is to be feared, that
whatever Chymick and Hermetick Physic can do, shall be done to have the same
effects on them as on himself: and (if Heaven helps not) convert them all to
non conformity, faction and sedition.

This zealous Mempsis in another place of his Evangelium Chymicum (for all he
says is Gospel) has a hymn to his Creator (and by the way let me solemnly tell
him, I wonder how he dare concern so great a God! in his little designs) for
putting it into the hearts of rusticks and Mariners, with their Punch, Brandy,
and Aqua vitae bottles, to teach sottish Galenists, the use and excellencies of
his well distilled Spirits, and the foolery of their dull Julips, fulsom and
fruitless Apozems, Bochets, Cullices and Gellies, as you may read at large in
several Paragraphs and Pages of his Book.

But to leave these extravagancies, and flurts of the Hypocondres: Lets hear
what Galen upon Hippocrates says concerning this affair of Aliments: This grave
Philosopher in his Book De Elementis, tells us, that by a dissent of the first
qualities (not from the Punctum latens, the little Atoms in the Archeus, and
Seminal Idaeas in the Materia prima, as our inspired Mempsis will have it) but
from the dissent of these first Qualities, says our Author, which proceeds
immediately from the Elements themselves, and the Aliments; man is born for the
Physician, and were it not for the defects proceeding from these two, man could
never dye.

From the four Elements, come the four Qualities of heat, cold, dryness and
moisture: from these arise the temperaments of Aliments; and from our Aliments,
come the four humors, called Choler, Phlegm, Blood and Melancholy; and out of
these humors the parts; and from those parts the whole, or what we call a
humane body: and when any of these four temperaments or humors are extinct,
depraved or hurt in Quantity, Quality, or Motion, then follows Sickness and
Death: So that in effect, Life and Death, and every man's temper and
constitution, depends more or less upon the Aliments he feeds on; and the
humors themselves are nothing more than the effect of food, v..g Choler is the
fomes of blood made of Aliments over digested and concocted, and serves to
ferment, agitate, or brisk up the constipated Ideas of the Archeus. Phlegm is
made of Food, (for want of natural heat) not enough concocted, and bridles
choler, and keeps the blood and humors from burninig, tames, and fixes the
Spirits, and makes the body, cool, fat, moist and soluble. Blood is made of
Food, perfectly elaborated to augment and nourish the parts: good Food makes
good Blood; and good Blood makes good Flesh: So that in effect, Flesh and Blood
is only good Food. Melancholy is the Terra damnata: The Devil, the thick and
drossie part of Food and Blood; and was intended by Nature to bridle the (...),
the fomes or froth of sperm and spirits; to temper rage and lust, to compose
the thoughts and imaginations: but being depraved, it works contrary effects,
as we see in our friend Mempsis.

From this little representation of man, an intelligent, and considering person
may find out as easily, as by the Idaeas, Atoms, or Magots in the Archeus, how
we come by Diseases, our dissolution and death; and also how necessary, a
direct and due diet, such a diet as may answer to the four temperaments, and
humors of our bodies, choler, phlegm, blood, and Melancholy: how necessary
this (I say) is for the preventing, and curing Diseases; as might be farther
amplified, but that I must avoid prolixity, that the Book may not be too
chargeable for the poor: Or else it might be made evident, that a diet may be
collected, not only to heat, cool, dry and moisten, but also to Bind Thicken
Lenifie Relax Thin Revel Restore Deobstruate Resist Poison

And all things else, that Pharmacy it self can necessarily lay claim to,
toward the conservation of man. But this will not consist with a short essay,
and therefore as concisely, as the subject will permit, I shall only add a
description of the Nature, Use and Virtues of an Artificial Bath, and stove
hereunto annexed; with which, our Ambrosiopaeas, and a proper Diet may be
performed as much as can reasonably be expected from the means.

What a help it is to Nature, to throw off by sweat those saline, acid,
sulphurous, and corrosive particles of blood, which are the root of all
Diseases, is manifested by the daily experience of such as are daily relieved
by it, in Gouts, Scorbuts, Hecticks, the Evil, Palsies, and the like: as it
helps thus to discharge the Serum Salsum, the salt, sharp and watery parts of
blood by the skin; how far this, I say, may extend it self, both for the
preventing and curing many potent Diseases, when Diet and other Remedies are
deficient, and cannot do it, I leave to the bounty of a prudent and liberal
conception.

It is so contrived that it is impossible for the patient to take cold, to faint
or sweat beyond their strength, and own inclinations; nor is there any
nuissance in it, that is incident to Stoving, or sweating in other Baths.

Place here the Figure.



AN APPENDIX: OR Practical Cautions AND DIRECTIONS To be observed about STOVING
AND BATHING.
STtoving and Bathing are two different things: the first may not improperly be
called a dry Bath, the other a wet; and when ever you meet with the word Bath,
you are to understand sweating in something that is liquid, as lukewarm Milk,
Milk and Water, or only warm water, or water prepared with ingredients proper
for the diseased person.

Note also, that a Bath with very hot water, drys more than it moistens, and
contracts the skin and pores, rather than relax or open them; and serves to
supply the intention of a cold Bath; or bathing in cold water with such parts
and persons, as cannot safely go into cold water: But a Bath of heated, tepid,
or warm water, is of so great a latitude, that it extends it self to most
Diseases, and serves (to use the words of a learned Author on this subject, Dr.
J. F.) effectually more than any thing Physic is prescribed for, to defecate
the blood and humors, to mollify the hardness of the Spleen and bowels, to
moisten, cool, and nourish a hot and dry constitution and liver, to rarifie and
resolve also all cold congealed humors, and to prevent Barrenness and
miscarrying, that is occasioned by any intemperies of cold, heat or dryness.

When you meet with the word Stove, you are to understand sweating as in a
Hot-house, without any thing that is moist and liquid: You will also sometimes
find the word Vaporarium used in this Appendix, the meaning of which will be
known hereafter.

The Romans were most addicted to Bains or Baths; the Lacedaemonians, Russians,
Germans, and most Northern Nations to Stoves: The Turks, French and Italians,
use both Baths and Stoves: and as soon as they come out of the Stove, they
enter into a Bain or Bath of warm water, to wash away the recrements, slime,
mador or mud (as it were) that stoving without bathing is apt to leave upon the
skin.

By this means also, the skin is not only made pure, clean and smooth, but also
plump and fleshy: and according as the Bath may be dulcified and prepared, it
will nourish, feed and refresh the limbs and musculous parts, more than food:
nor is there any thing to be done by the natural Baths at Bathe, but may be
also performed by artificial Baths of Sulphur, Bitumen, Nitre, etc. and being
advisedly used, they do as manifestly answer the expectation of the patient, as
any remedies whatever; in order to which observe these few Directions.

1. Never Stove when the blood wants ferment, or (according to the Notion of
the Chemist) when the fixed salts of the blood have overruled the volatile, as
in Dropsies, and some sorts of Scurvies: But when the Sulphur of the blood is
too much exalted (the fomes of most acute diseases) or acrimony and acidity has
insinuated it self into the Mass, and yet the blood not vapid, then the Stove
is a proper, and most effectual remedy: Or, more plainly, according to the
significant, apparent, and practical meaning of the Galenist; Stoving is not so
proper and beneficial, for weak, lean, hot, hectic, dry, choleric, maciated,
melancholy and squalid bodies, as bathing; nor bathing for cold, moist, fat,
corpulent, plethorick, phlegmatic and hydropick constitutions and diseases, as
stoving: The Stove is most proper for the Spring, Autum and Winter; the Bath
for the heat of Summer: the Vaporarium is neither bathing nor stoveing, but
differing from both, and to be used by all sorts of persons at any time.

2. Before you Bathe, or enter into the Stove; if your body be not naturally
soluble, be sure it be made so by Art: Take a gentle Clyster over night, if you
intend to sweat next morning, or take the like Clyster in the afternoon, if you
intend to sweat at night. An hour before bedtime, and two or three hours after
you have eaten a light supper, is the best time both for bathing and stoving,
because you may lie all night after in your bed, and have your body well
refreshed and settled by morning. Note also, that while you are sweating in a
Stove, Bath or Bed, you may refresh your self with Mace-ale, Egg-caudle,
Chickenbroth, or any convenient Bocheet, supping or liquid Aliment.

3. When you come out of any Stove or Bath, take great care you take not cold:
For preventing which, and many other accidents, nothing has ever yet been
invented comparable to this (...), Balneum, and vaporarium, now all in one
presented to you; which is so safe, so commodious and effectual, both for
preventing and curing almost all Diseases, that nothing ever was, or can be
advised better, for private Families than to have one of them constantly in
their houses; it being so contrived, that it may stand in any bedchamber, with
as much convenience and ornament, as a well wrought Chest of Drawers or Cabinet.

In Italy, France, Germany, Turkey, and many other Countries, they are so
curious, and (not without good cause) so addicted to stoving and bathing, that
they count their habitations not completely furnished, and well provided and
cared for, until they have them in their houses, esteeming them the most
commendable and necessary furniture that belongs to them: and scarce a Family
of any remark and quality is to be found without them; and if our English
Gentry, especially those that live in the Country, remote from Physicians, did
also take up this custom, they would have no cause to repent them of their care
and consideration: Besides, not only their healths, but interest and good
husbandry might induce them to it, it being the most profitable Physician and
Apothecary they can make use of.

Another benefit of having them in their houses, is the accommodation of their
sevants, attendants, bedding and linen, and the avoiding many accidents by
lying, bathing or stoving after strangers: by this means also, they will be
encouraged to use them the oftener; at least it is likely it will induce them not
to fail, spring and fall; those being (though no time amiss) the most necessary
times to prevent Diseases, and preserve their bodies in a perfect (...), health
and integrity the whole year after.

I know, and am well assured, that Physicians would frequently advise their
Patients to stoving and bathing, had they them in their own houses, but the
charge and trouble on all occasions of providing them, does too often
discourage both the Patient and Physician. By this means also you may avoid
Spring and Fall, the use of Diet-Drinks, Physick-ale, and the like, which being
at those times so rashly and promiscuously used as they are, do more hurt than
good. Letting blood also in the Spring, may by this means be prevented, only
observing then a spare and cool Diet, which the Ancients called their (...), or
succedaneum to bloodletting: Abstinence rather than bleeding being their way to
abate blood, and prevent diseases: and to deal uprightly in a matter of so
great concernment, for a preventive, it is to be preferred before opening of a
Vein, which I do not much fancy, but in cases of extreme necessity, and not
upon every trivial distemper, and occasion that offers it self: Bood being that
which makes blood, and (as the oil and lamp of life) not prodigally to be
expended, lest like the foolish Virgins we have our Oil to buy, when we should
have it to burn.

The particular benefits of bathing and stoving are not easily to be reckoned
up in a transient discourse, but that which they are so generally famed for, is
to depurate the bad recrements of the blood, the lassitude, and lumpishness of
the limbs, and to make the whole body brisk, nimble, light and airy.

They prevent and cure all Agues, and Fevers of all sorts, both ardent,
hectic, putrid and pestilential; and in times of contagion, are of absolute
use, provided the place they sweat in (as it commonly happens) be not
infected; which (if for nothing else) were enough to encourage persons to have
these Stoves in their Houses.

And as there is nothing more effectual to prevent the Plague, than sweating
moderately in these sorts of Stoves, once or twice a week: So also, if
infected, nothing can exceed them for a Cure, taking at the same time
convenient Cordials: Nature by a Metastasis, being thereby assisted to throw
off the poison and venom of the blood, from the Center, to the remote parts of
the body, which is the only intention of the cure, the like is to be said of
the Smallpox, malignant Fevers, and all contagious diseases.

It relieves or cures all sorts of pains and aches, as Sciatica's, Gouts, etc.
it cures also limbs, that are weak and relaxed, and all cold, and moist
diseases got by cold.

Bathing by the mildness of its heat, mollifies and relaxes, softens and
smooths, and on this account is very proper, and very prevalent to cure
contracted members, and parts obstructed, either outward or inward, as the
breast, spleen, liver.

Bathing also, wonderfully relieves and eases Nephritick pains, and such as
are tortured and troubled with the Stone, Cholick pains, Hemorrhoids, stopping
of Urine and Courses, and makes a costive belly soluble and loose.

All diseases of the sinews, and all internal diseases proceeding from a cold
and moist cause, are prevented and cured by Stoving, as Rheumes, Palsies,
Lethargies, Cramps, Deafness, weakness, swelling and numbness of the joints:
it is also a specific against the King's Evil and Jaundies, Scabs, Itch,
Chilblains, and all efflore scences of the skin. In short, it so alters and
defecates the blood, that you may alter as you will by them and diet, the whole
habit of the body, and make it another thing than what it is; like the ship at
Athens, though it continued still a ship, yet had it not by often reparation,
one foot of the timber it was first built with.

And not only sick and diseased persons, but such as are in health may receive
profit, but no prejudice in the least by them: and my inge^uous friend Mr. H.
H. has told me, that in his travels to Russia, Sclavonia, and other Eastern
parts of ^urope, he observed that in those Countries, it was no^ possible for
the inhabiants to live (for want of vntilation) were it not for t^eir Stoves,
but by the ^ontinual and frequent use ^f them, no people are to be found more
sound and healthful; and are thereby so little beholden to Physic, that the
name is scarce known among them: and not a place of any note, but has one in
them

So also the Scorbute or Scurvy, by often and frequent Stoving, is rever heard
of among those people (though for wan of perspiration) they would else be
inclined to it more than we in England. It Is their only refuge also to prevent
Fevers, Gou^, Palsies, etc. after they have debauched themselves wi^ high
drinking, which the people, to the great scandal of their Country, are most
infamously addicted unto.

Many people, especially such as are Hysteric and Hypocondriack, by Stoving in
common Stoves and Hot-houses, are subject to fumes, headache, swounings, and
suffocating vapors: But in this sort of Stove, (the head being in the open
Air, all the while they sweat) these and many other evil accidents are
prevented, nor are they at all offended with any noisome vapors or suffocating
fumes.

The manner of using it is thus.
Your body being made soluble by some gentle Lenitive or Clyster, go naked into
the Stove; stay in it about half an hour more or less to your content, or the
nature of your disease, taking while you sweat some comfortable supping, as
Mace ale, or whatever else may be advised by your Physician: while you are
sweating, you may increase or decrease the heat your self, and sweat as you
please; after you have sweat to your content, you may have the Flammifers, or
fire Vessels removed; and the neck-board slided away, and so slip down into the
wet Bath, and there wash off the recrements, the slime and filth of your former
sweat, with balls invented for that purpose: Then (after you have bathed about
half an hour) stand upon your feet, and wipe your body dry, and step out of the
Bath into a warm Bed, and lie warm till your body be well settled, and
afterward rise, and having taken some warm broth, you may go abroad, renewed
to admiration, and sufficiently recompensed for what you have done.

That which we call vaporarium, is a place in the Stove, contrived chiefly for
diseases of the Womb, Anus, and diseases of the inferior belly; as
Dysenteries, Hemorrhoids, Cancers, and fistulated Ulcers, Scyrrhous tumors,
Barrenness, Abortion, Menses, Secundines, and every (...), and were it for
nothing else but decency ( Cum vapor per infundibulum and fistulam plumbeam, in
Vterum, vel anum ingrediatur) it was enough to induce private Familes and
persons to have one of these Stoves by them.

It still remains, that I give some account of the Hydroticks which feed the
Flammifers; or how and what it is that causes the patient to sweat; it is not
caused by any gross material fire of wood, coals, etc. as the common Chairs and
Stoves are, but it is by an essential Oil, cohibited by retorts with well
rectified Spirit of Wine; and if you have the true exalted, and perfect
Oyly-spirit so well incorporated, and separated from its phlegm, as it ought,
it will penetrate, and prove as active as lightning it self.

There are some who know no better, who do in these cases use common Brandy,
and our poor, mean English Spirits, and they succeed in their cures
accordingly, there being seldom any visible or manifest benefit received by it:
Whereas, those mighty and potent diseases, of a confirmed knotted Gout, an
ulcerated King's Evil, Palsies, and the like, are frequently subdued by the Oily
spirit rightly prepared* as might be made appear, did it not savor too much of
the Pseudochymist, the Mountebank and Mechanic.

All that I have else to add, being confined to a short Treatise, and supposing
that after the publishing this manner of Bathing and Stoving, there will be no
want of undertakers, and such as will pretend to the utmost that can be done by
it; yet, that abuses may be prevented, and none but wilful people deceived,
this is to signify, that the very same preparation of Spirits for the
Flammifers, that produce those great effects by sweat, and that I use my self,
may be had at Mr. Briggs an Apothecary, at his house by Abb-Church near Cannon*
street: or in Spittlefields near the Salmon. By the help of which Spirit, any
that have these Stoves of their own, may do as much with them toward curing
themselves, as can be done for them, by the most mighty hand, and most
magnified Medicine of a Chemist.

Those that desire more ample satisfaction on this subject may read Galen, de
sanitat. tuend. The Learned Lord Verulam, de vit. and morte: And the wise
Seneca's Epist. de Baln.

FINIS.
Books sold by Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultry.
Folio.
THe Regular Architect: Or the General Rule of the five Orders of Architecture
of Mr. Giacomo Barozzio Da Vignola. With a new Addition of Michael Angelo
Buonaroti. Rendered into English from the Original Italian, and explained by
John Leeke, Student in the Mathematics, for the use and benefit of free
Masons, Carpenters, Joyners, Carvers, Painters, Bricklayers, Playsterers: In
General for all Ingenious Persons that are concerned in the famous Art of
Building.
Quarto.
A Golden Key to open hidden Treasures, or several great Points which refer to
the Saints present blessedness, and their future happiness, with the Resolution
of several important Questions, the Active and Passive obedience of Christ
vindicated and improved, II. serious singular Pleas, which all sincere
Christians may safely make to those 10. Scriptures, which Speak of the General
Judgment, and of the Particular Judgment that must certainly pass on all,
etc. the first and second part. By Tho. Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel at
Margarets New Fishstreet. A Practical Exposition of the Ten Commandments: With
a resolution of several Momentous Questions and Cases of Conscience. By the
Learned Laborious, and Faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, James Durham. Late
Minister of the Gospel at Glasgow. Paradise opened: Or the Secrets, Mysteries,
and Rarities of Divine Love, of Infinite Wisdom, and of Wonderful Counsel, laid
open to Public View. Also the Covenant of Grace, and the high and glorious
Transactions of the Father and the Son in the Covenant of Redemption opened,
and improved at large, with the Resolution of diverse important Questions and
Cases concerning both Covenants. To which is added a sober and serious
Discourse, about the Favorable, Signal and Eminent Presence of the Lord with
his people in their greatest Troubles, deepest Distresses, and most deadly
Dangers. Being the Second and Last Part of the Golden Key. By Thomas Brooks,
late Preacher of the Gospel, at Margarets New-Fishstreet. Letters of Advice
from two Reverend Divines, to a young Gentleman about a weighty Case of
Conscience, and by him recommended to the serious perusal of all those that may
fall into the same Condition.
FINIS.

