Christian-Experiences FROM Scripture-Evidences: UNDER This Variety, or several
Heads:

Viz. 1. Comfort for Believers against their fears and dismayings. 2. Comfort
for Believers from their spiritual Incomes. 3. Man's fruitlesness without saving
faith, being a parallel between the belief of most, and the belief of Devils.
4. Council unto Saints as sojourners and strangers. 5. Man's folly in
determining by present evens or state of things.

By Richard Coler, Preacher of the word at Broughton in Hampshire.

PSALM. 31. 24. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye
that hope in the Lord.

London, Printed for Tho. Brewste^* and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of three Bibles, near the West end of Paul's. 1652.

To the Right Honorable Col: Richard Norton, OF Southwick in the County of
Southampton, a Member of the High Court of Parliament: Grace and Peace be
multiplied, etc.
Honored Sir,
DId not the Title page bespeak your Condescension, I durst not thus presume
this Dedication: But I am thus bold, because (harmless) free from flattery,
though not from fear: But knowing that the Lord whom you serve, who being so
Great and Glorious, yet is so Good and Gracious, as not to despise the day of
small things; nay, such is his Goodness, Zech. 4. 10.
that he accepts, succoureth, and supporteth it; not breaking the bruised
reed, or quenching the smoking flax; yea, the poor mite [with a free and Mark
12. 43.
willing heart] is accepted as a Treasure in Christ's Treasury: And then shall
not Christians? O that name Christian! not the titular, but the real Christian,
that Prays in Prosperity; and Praises in Adversity; that is indeed a Piece
of that Master-peice of the New Creation in the Mat. 10. 39.
Lord Jesus Christ; that finds life by loosing of it; and self by throwing it
away; that is watchful in every thing, but careful for nothing; who feasts with
Divine favor and companies, with sweet fear, living in highest hope; Christ in
him the hope of glory; who being above all in advancement, is the lowest of all
in abasement! Thus was the nature of our Lord Jesus, he humbled Phil. 2. 5, 7,
8, 9.
himself to behold things below: Let the same mind be also in you; own truth,
though in the plainest style, the lowest form, the least appearance, the
meanest person; like not the face for the dress sake; but the dress for the
face sake. Truth is lovely, and to be Beloved, not for the habit and notion;
but for the Nature, and Naked Primitive purity, truths union with the soul; or
rather with the Soul of our soul, the truth as it is in Jesus.

This I have endeavored after in this little Tract; and I doubt nothing
(material) shall be found therein, but what is consonant to Scripture, and the
experience of the Saints: I confess it is but a diminitive, not suiting the
greatness of your person, nor the excellency of your endowments; but to
testify what I would do, and what I could wish, some attainment worthy your
owning and receiving: the which having not, I do beseech you to accept of what
I have; it is indeed but a little little, yet it is what I have received; not
from men, or of men, but of the Lord; A few Christian Experiences, with
Scripture Evidences: And so far I doubt not but you will Patronize, the Lord
having taught you the truth of Text and Title, in the field, to admiration: Who
taught your hands to War, and your fingers to fight, through Isa. 41. 10.
many and great Transactions, many and great Achievements, many and emminent
Victories? was it not the Lord? saying, Fear not, I am with you; be not
dismayed, I am thy God, helping, upholding you, against number, power, policy;
What speaks experience in the streets of Havant, Downs of Chereton, the Siege
of Basing? may not you truly say, That special providence, and special presence
was not once or twice, but imminently about your person, and prospering your
affairs, owning the day of small things; sometimes but as a worm amidst an host
of Isa. 41. 14.
adversaries; giving you resolution, strength and courage to pass through many
strengths, yea many Troops, to the astonishment of spectators; and the calling
forth of the highest acts of Temporary faith for the present and future ages.

But I shall say no more, such things being so well known amongst the godly in
the Country, who were your friends and followers: Only Right Honorable, as
the day of small things may not be despised; so those days of great things must
not be forgotten: Remember, O Remember in this forgetful age, the mercies of
old the Lord has vouchsafed unto you: My hearts desire is, that you might live
in deliverances and successes in time of peace, that you experimentally have
been partaker of in time of war; And that God who was with you, over you, and
made you instrumental, doing wonders in the field, would also still be with
you, and make you as savingly successful in your Councels. The Chariot wheels
of Through-Reformation drive on heavily; and I do not wonder, because great
bodies move slowly; yet if sure to Gospel terms, it will bring comfort in the
end, to answer all your Pains, Patience and expense: In the interim, were but
the life of those Ordinances put into life, which are against Sabbath-breaking,
Swearing, Blasphemy, Drunkenness, and Rioting, etc. certainly a further
blessing might attend this Commonwealth; but I fear the want will cause woe: Oh
that Under-officers might exercise their duty conscionably and carefully
against such as these, and not be such as these themselves. The Lords day, and
Gospel Ordinances, under Christian Magistracy, ought not to be so slighted by
any plea whatsoever, where Christian Liberty is granted, away with Licentious
Liberty; no conscience conscientious, but will confess the Commandment is holy,
just, and Romans 7. 12.
good: But if any such object, That the Magistrate has not to do in such
cases; as some cry out, Penalty is Persecution; to such an Objector I shall
only say, Non est persecutor vester, sed persecutor persecutoris vestri, id
est erroris vestri: the Magistrate is not your persecutor, but a persecutor of
your persecutor, that is, your error: What evil is it to put restraint unto
Licentiousness? What evil to put constraint on that that makes for holiness?
But what good would be manifest if penalty on either? certainly a stop to sin,
and an advance of profession (if not of piety) and I am sure a discharge of
duty: But I must return, submitting, and beseeching you to pass by my failings,
and to accept of these few lines; part of which you once granted the hearing of
in a Family-exercise, which is now presented unto your reading; but before you
pass into it, receive that which is most intended, something of comfort and
spiritual incomes; the Lord being about believers, they are surrounded with a
Gracious Gloriousness, and a Glorious Graciousness; you have experienced it
abroad, now within: In bread fears must be removed (as well as outward favors
must be remembered) not by sword, but by shines, the Fathers saying, I am with
thee. Now the Lord himself make you victorious over all dismayings, and lead
you and your Precious, Pious and Elect Consort into the Chambers of his own
Special Presence, where you may enjoy the Full Fruition of the Sweetest
Promises, the Richest Graces, the Noblest Hopes, and the Highest Privileges:

Which are the unfeigned wishes of him who is the meanest in the things of
Christ, Rich. Coler.

To the Christian Inhabitants in the Parish of Broughton, in the county of
Southampton, and to the godly professors of the Gospel of Christ, in some of
the places adjacent: Grace and Peace be Multiplied, etc.
Friends,
I Could not choose but make mention of you in the front of this Discourse; and
that for these two Reasons, amongst many others:

First, Because most of you did sympathize with me in my late sorrows, and were
very willing and freely active for my enlargement.

Secondly, Because most of you at sundry times, either publicly or privately
have been partakers in hearing of what is here presented unto your reading: And
because most have want of memory, especially to retain spiritual and heavenly
truths, I have put forth this for your hands, that through the grace of Christ,
every one may put home unto their hearts, according as every one has need.

But to be as quick as my intent, I shall cast what I have to say to you, and
those whom it most concerns, into two or three words, as follows:

1. A Word or two by way of Account. 2. A word by way of Caution. 3. But a
word, and that by way of Council.
First, By way of Account: To testify that about six months since, a
Thanksgiving Sermon for that great deliverance at Worcester, was published
under my name, entitled, Goodness, and works of wonder; which Sermon I own,
and doubt not but that it is both Orthodox, and Consonant to the Doctrine of
the Scripture, and the harmony of the late reformed Churches: And this I
testify against any such scandal of Recantation or Satisfaction, knowing
nothing therein for substance, but what is agreeable to the word of God: And if
any can prove or make appear the contrary; namely, any error or untruth worthy
recantation; or any thing of wrong, which meriteth satisfaction: Let such an
offense be worthily picked out, and as publicly stated; and let not any doubt
but a ready Account shall cheerfully be acknowledged: But to give satisfaction
where no wrong appears; and a recantation, where no error is found, were to
injure truth, and stablish error: But interdictum esse jure naturae.

As for any expressions of tartness, if they be but words and not untruths; why
should I be made an offender, or any man to be offended for a word? words have
their weight, but it is matter makes an Accusation; and my wish is, since no
man nominally is accused by me, that none as from me would accuse themselves.

And though some have a faculty to take every thing in the worst, who have a
mind to make things odious: I say, though such can extract poison out of any
expression; yet conscientious hearts will not: And as for others, let them
know, I was not light, but serious in the similitude: And most know, that
comparisons are not conclusions; they are to set off, yet they do not conclude:
Verba in definitionibus posita, non actum sed potentiam significant.
And this is no strange rule amongst Logicians, That words used in definition,
do not signify the very act indeed; but the power, aptness, or the inclination
thereunto: And if in definitions; why not in illustrations?

Secondly, In way of Account: Having been about two years upon the exposition
of the 5, 6, 7, Chapters of Matthews Gospel, I delivered for Doctrine, from the
scope of the 9 Ver. in the 6. Chapter, That the Lords Prayer, improperly,
(though vulgarly) counted and called so, was but part of Christ's Sermon, and
none of Christ's Prayer: For Christ could not pray for pardon of sin, in a
proper sense, who was without sin, neither guile found in his mouth: This I
thought good to assert in this Epistle, to silence, if not for the satisfaction
of such who think I should be ashamed to publish, preach and own such Doctrine,
because they will wilfully and ignorantly wrangle against the clear truth of
the Gospel.

Thirdly, By way of Account; which is the least of all, yet something therein
as a motive unto my self to publish these notes; namely, to silence such
tongues which are too too apt for any Accusation, charging me that I preach
nothing but other men's labors: But to testify that I do not steal, but study,
and according to my poor mite labor in the Word and Doctrine: not what I have
received from men; but what I have received from the Lord, that I have
delivered unto you, comparing spiritual things with spiritual; studying the
Scriptures against men's distempers, that if by any means I might be a
manuductor, to draw any out of the fire of their sins, into the saving
knowledge of the love of the Lord Jesus: This in way of Account.

Secondly, By way of Caution: Take heed of a prejudiced spirit in any of you
against truth; though it comes unto you in never so plain a style; yet if
truth, esteem of it, though it come unto you in an earthen vessel; though the
person be despised, yet let not the endeavor: It is a great fault of some, who
are very ready and apt to represent the dark part of things, but will over look
the light: All the good endeavored shall not once be mentioned; but if but a
seeming fault, that shall be aggravated and heightened: This has been hitherto
my lot and portion; and therefore I must give it by way of caution.

Thirdly and lastly, by way of Council: These are evil times, wherein too too
many depart from the faith which was given to the Saints, that trifle and
slight the precious truths of the Lord Jesus: But O, do you keep close with
God, and to your Christian principles; let none take your Crown from you, be
not ashamed of the Gospel, nor a shame to the Gospel; hold fast your
profession, with a holy conversation; be burning and shining lights in your
generation, Fighting the good fight of faith, and persevering unto the end,
that through mercy you may have an entrance into everlasting glory. Two things
let me entreat:

1. Read and consider; for it is with Sermons as with a plaster: Let the
plaster be never so sovereign, yet if not applied unto the soar, it profits
nothing: So if Sermons be never so sovereign, spread with promises never so
precious and threatenings never so searching; yet if not applied, no comfort is
persuaded to a poor perplexed and sick fearing soul: nor no malady assuaged or
removed from the brawny and sin-festered souls; therefore meditate and consider.

And then,

2. Read and resolve, as you have daily new Moans, and new Mercies, so daily
new resolutions; as a daily dawning, so a drawing nigh to our redemption; yea,
an earnest, lively, constant, daily motion of lifting up the head and heart for
our redeemer; yea, higher and higher, for the time is shorter and shorter: Our
Jesus will come, and will not tarry; for whose expectance and appearance, let
us wait and watch; and watch and wait; and watch and pray; and pray and say,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly:

So Prays Yours, as you are Christ's, R. C.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THou that make more conscience then the Christian at large, who has only
name, but not nature: But thou that fear the Lord greatly, that art a man of
wonders, being a part of that unparalled Master-Peice of the eternal Wisdom
of the Lord Jesus -- Before thou censure, suffer the perusal of these few
lines, the which I am necessitated to invite thee unto; not only in regard of
my own weakness, but by reason of some men's wilfulness, who are so apt to be
more sinister, then serious in other men's preaching or writing: who can see
beams, though motes, in other men's eyes, if different in judgment, and of a
lower name; but will not see motes, though beams in their own eyes; carping at
words in others, when doubtless truth is too too often a sufferer amongst
themselves. I confess Christians should walk accurately, pondering every
expression, and as much as in them lies, be saving from the worlds spleen, and
Christ's dishonor: But to one another, certainly some grains of allowance, not
exacting their labors, but sweetly to practice that prescript of that gallant
Apostle, Gal. 6. 2. whose express is for Christians to bear one another
burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ; and if a bearing, then certainly a
forbearing; and not a ploughing long furrows of spite and disparagement upon
the backs of weaker brethren; knowing the frame of a Gospel spirit is for
condescension, Romans 15. 1. you that are strong, bear with them that are weak;
not wilful; so Christ be preached, it should be a Christians glory, not his
grief: Herein will I joy, says Paul, Phil. 1. 18. not wrangle, as the manner
of some is, who would be counted great masters of the Assemblies; who instead
of encouraging, are lessening and discouraging, if not despising the day of
small things: Yet hoping better things of you, that you will be so like minded
unto Christ, as not to break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax,
has made me thus adventrous to put forth into the Main; I mean, the public,
this little book or bottom of experience: That quietly it should pass, without
some storms and tempests, I do not expect, knowing the several gusts that now
adays arise, men's passions and opinions: however, as prepared for wind and
weather, it is built low, not hanging out flag or flourish; and my wish is, it
might waft over to fearing souls; for thither is the first Port to which it
makes fraught, with comfort and spiritual incomes: My fear is not of the ship,
though little, because it is built with heart of oaks, planks and proofs of
Scripture: Nor do I fear the Seas, though rough and raging; experience is the
Pilot, which knows both sands and shelves: And my hope is, amidst this floating
age, some may receive it into their hearts, and harbor something therein
contained.

I had not thought to have pressed into the press, much less into the public,
had not some God-fearing souls pressed me thereunto; for whose sakes I was put
upon the first sort of these meditations; and at their requests drew it into
manuscript; for whose sake it is thus published: And because Ministers are to
divide to every one their portions in due season, without fraud or flattery, I
have not only held forth comfort to dejected and dismayed souls; but also
terror to the careless, carnal and incorrigible; knowing we are to eye in all
our preaching, desperate sinners and desparing Saints: The one needs
Corrasives, the other Cordials; both which I have endeavored after; fears to be
removed from dismayed souls, and the formalist to be affrighted, by comparing
most men's faith with the faith of devils. Something here is of a Saints
sojourning, as it was preached at the funeral of a deceased friend, which is as
a staff fitted to the hand of the worlds strangers: In every of these subjects
do not run over, but read and meditate; be not like the unclean creatures that
never chew the cud; but like the clean, swallow not down at once, but fetch it
up again and again; digest what thou read and hear by serious meditation
and consideration; be like the Be, that sucks honey by abiding upon the
flower: Every truth is a flower; let thy heart dwell on truth, that so honey
may be gathered, and thou comforted and reformed, flying home to the hive of
Gods Church and people -- This is the earnest desire of him, who is the meanest
in the things of Christ Jesus,

Richard Coler.

Comfort for Believers against their Fears and Dismayings.
Isa. 41. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee: Be not dismayed, I am thy God;
I will strengthen thee; yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my righteousness.
CHAP. I.
Wherein the sense and scope of the words are paraphrased and enlarged.

AS the Bodies of men do live in contrarieties, so do men [usually] as men, if
you take them in Nature or Grace. Only we must observe with this difference;
That look what is most proper to the Child of Grace, that be sure the child of
Nature will most counterfeit: And contrary, what is more proper to the Child of
Nature, that the Child of God is most incident unto. As for example.

The Element that a wicked man should properly live in, is fears and
sorrowings. So says the Apostle, speaking to the friends of this world, Jam 4,
9. Be afflicted, mourn and weep; let your laughter be turned to mourning, and
your joy to heaviness; yea, howl and weep for your misery that is approaching,
Iam. 5. 1. Every wicked man has fearful threatenings, and ought to have
sorrowing spirits and howling hearts. But now how contrary is the race they
run? Who more jocund then they? Sometimes they may have flashings of
conscience; but it is like the lightning, quickly gone: they have not such
fears and dismayings as are incident unto Gods children. Let a wicked man want
or abound, the false joy must still be full: No bonds in their death, their
strength is firm, as David speaks, Psalm. 73. 4, 5.

But now on the other side, Take but the Church or a Saint of God, whose proper
element is to be full of joy and cheer; and how contrary? What less then of
joy? what more then of grief and sorrowings? notwithstanding they are called
for to rejoice and sing: yea, says Paul, 1 Th. 5. 16. Rejoice evermore; yea
rejoice, and again I say rejoice: Let your whole life be a melody and full of
mirth. But now how constant are they in sable? their eyes bedewed with tears,
their hearts with sighs; fears and dismayings begirt them round about. Well,
Christians, God the Father and Christ the Son takes notice of it. Says Christ,
Ioh 14 1. Let not your hearts be troubled, but rest, depend, rely; Ye believe
in God, believe also in me. Though the wicked rise high in their false and
fleeting joy, yet know (believing soul) Christ is for you, and the Sera and
certa vindicta Dei.
Father is for you: And though he comes slow, yet he comes sure: yea, he has
engaged himself on your behalf, given you his promise, Ioh. 4. 18. and his
hearty love is in it. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you. And
this is not only Christ's, but the Fathers express too: Fear not, be not
dismayed; I will help thee, I will uphold thee, etc.

And now what is the matter thy soul is still cast down? thy heart so full of
sighs, thy eyes so full of tears? Come hither in the name of Jesus. I summon
every ingenuous, drooping, doubting Christian, to bring in all your fears, all
dismayings, yea all objections, let them be what they will. Here Is that in the
Text will answer all, let the souls necessities be what they will. If the
Father of comfort can help, if the God of consolation can cure thee, if he that
trod the wine press alone, that led captivity captive, and triumphed over death
and hell, yea, if Christ the right hand of Gods righteousness can sustain thee,
all this in this Text is held out unto thee: for so the 14. verse tells thee,
Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, says the
Lord, and thy Redeemer the Holy one of Israel. Compare this but with the Text,
and you may clearly gather, the scope of the Holy Ghost is to set out the
tender care and zeal of God the Father and Christ the Son, to stop the current
of fears and dismayings which are so incident unto his Church and people. This
truth speaks Moses, Exodus 3 7. Thus says the Lord, I have surely seen the
Videndo vidi certo and serio.
affliction of my people, and I have heard their cry by reason of their
taskmasters, for I know their sorrows. If God take such acquaintance with his
people while in the land of Egypt, when the child is in darkness; what does he
do, the Child being light in the Lord Jesus? In the Text, you have him like a
husband, who knowing his wives weakness and mistrustings, will lay in symptoms
of his love to take off jealousies and fears. Though I am abroad, says the
husband, yet still I am with thee; I am at home, my Love, and my care is still
for thee. So says the Head and Husband Jesus Christ unto his Church: Thou
harbourest fears and jealousies of my love; thou think I am like a wayfaring
man staying but for a night; but know my love is constant, and my care is
tender: believe it, and be comforted; I give you no such cause of jealousy and
fears. The world thinks thee a poor go-by-the ground, as one forsaken: A worm,
and so is ready to tread on thee. But for my part, I am thy Redeemer, the Holy
one of Israel: fear thou not, but cheer thy heart, and free thy heart from
these dismayings; for I am with thee, I am thy God, etc.

Thus, doubting Christian, does thy Head and Husband lay in symptoms of his
zeal and realities of his love: as Paul says to the Colossians, c. 2. v. 5.
Though I am absent in the flesh, yet am I present with you in the spirit, etc.
So says Christ unto his Church, and to every believing soul: Though I am
absent, yet I am present; and I joy in thee; why should not thou joy in me?
However do not fear, be not dismayed. Mark how kindly he speaks it: as if he
would take near and dear acquaintance with thee, communicating himself in the
life of all relations: Were I with thee but as a Lord, thou being my servant;
or as a friend, I counting you my friend; as at the 8. verse, where he says,
Thou believer art my servant, the seed of Abraham my friend: this were enough.
But now when God is with thee, not only as a Lord, but as a friend; not only as
a friend, but as a favourer; not only as a favourer, but as a Father, yea as a
Head, as a Husband, as a Redeemer; yea combining all these in one, I am with
thee: what a sweet pledge of love is here! Who would be dismayed, or rather who
would not be in love with such a Love, whose presence is fullness of joy? Psalm.
16. 11. In thy presence is fullness of joy; at thy right hand pleasures for
evermore. Why, this gracious presence is about every Believer; I do not say
glorious. And it is the same right hand: which if evermore pleasures do attend
it, why should ever and anon fears and dismayings so affright it?

Have you not seen the ingenuous Mother sitting up with her beloved Child,
suckling and feeding it to quiet the crying and complainings, and in the
swooning fits laying the head in her bosom, the child in her lap, begirts it
round with her arms, saying, Peace my child, thou shall not fall, why do thou
faint? etc.

Just thus is God our Father, in the Text: you have him as it were sitting up
with his Church and people in their swooning state, putting his right hand of
righteousness round about, offering of it wine and milk. I am with thee, why
do thou faint? Be not afraid, my Babe of grace, thou Petty fidian! Having me
by thee what would thou more? Therefore be not faithless, but believing; be
not fearful, but be cheerful. I may do as the Nurse does sometimes; she takes
away the stool, that the Child may close and clink more fast to her hand. So
may I, says God, who am a Father and Mother both to a fearing Christian: I may
take away all outward supports on which thou art so apt to lean; but if I stand
by thee my self, and support thee with the right hand of my own righteousness,
be not afraid, be not dismayed. And that God does all this, is very clear in the
face of the words: yea, and that he might fasten this upon every believer, do
but mark how the Lord avers it over and over again; I will strengthen thee, I
will help thee, yea I will uphold thee. As if he should say, If you had but my
bare word, you may believe me; but if yea, and yea, and yea will serve turn,
you may perceive my heart is in it too. Yea (poorest believer) to take off thy
fears and troubles, my bowels yearn, I am in the earnestness of my affections:
and that is the reason I double and redouble my expressions. Therefore fear thou
not, nor be dismayed; I am with thee, I am thy God.

And thus much for the scope of the words, wherein you may see what is intended
by them.

CHAP. II.
Containing the Division of the Text, and the Provision therein for removing of
fears, which in the sum is the Lords special presence about Believers.

I Shall not spin out any long discourse, but presently endeavor to answer all
the Doubts and Fears that are so incident unto Gods children, whether they be
spiritual fears or personal: for though all personal fears be not spiritual,
yet all spiritual fears are personal; and the Believer may have these, and
National fears too. Against all which, or any of which, these words are to be
applied, that so dismayings may be removed, and the soul supported with its joy
and cheer.

But because the Children of light should not be foiled in this enterprise, let
us like the wise builder first count the cost. And therefore, before we set
upon these homebred enemies, (as these Doubts and Fears are) let us enquire
first what we have to answer.

The first thing that I meet withal to remove fears and dismayings, is Gods
special presence, not as glorious, but as graciously encompassing and
safeguarding Believers, set forth in these words, I am with thee. And then
secondly, a glorious relation, in these words, I am thy God; (...) which
comprehends all both efficiencie and sufficiency.
wherein is Gods omnipresence, his allsufficiencie: And this is set forth to us
with this enforcement, Yea, I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, etc.
And then thirdly, If you would know the manner how God will strengthen, help,
uphold, it is with no less then the right hand of his own righteousness. And
here (methinks) every Believer may certainly say, as the Lord once said against
his enemies, though they were mighty and a multitude, and on his side they were
few and feeble; yet (says he) they are too many. So may the child of God say
triumphingly against fears and doubtings: It is enough, O God, that thou
should afford me thy special presence; there is in that more joy and comfort,
yea nothing can be grievous whilst thou art with me; Oh what a Sun and a Shield
is God! what a strong Tower and Rock of defense, an Upholder and Helper! What?
with the right hand of thy righteousness! and, my God! What a plenty is here! I
may be afraid to fix, but not be afraid of fear; for the shadow of thy special
presence is enough to dispell all tumults, temptations, and troubles whatsoever.

Awake, awake therefore, thou doubting soul, and view that glory that does
surround Exodus 3. 14.
thee: for he that said enough, when he said, I am that I am, says enough to
thy soul, in saying, I am with thee.

What Christ says of God the Father in respect of moving away fears, Isa. 50.
8, 9. He is near that justifies me; who will contend with me? Let us stand
together; who is mine adversary? let him come near to me. Behold, the Lord God
will help me; who shall condemn me? Lo, they all shall wax old as a garment,
the moth shall eat them up. So may every Believer, and every justified person
by the same Jesus say, Christ is near me by his special presence for to comfort
me; what shall dismay me? Stand out Temptation, Tribulation, peril, sword! why,
in all these things we are more then conquerors: Romans 8. 37:
for behold, the Lord God will help me, yea is about me by his special
presence; And darkness must have no place, when the Sun appears.

And lest we should think that Christ should speak thus only of himself, he
applies it unto us, and bids us make this use of it, as in the 10. v. Who is
among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that
walks in darknesr, and has no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord,
etc. and stay upon his God. Mark, though he see no light for the present, yea
though he walk in darkness, yet God is with him, and he must not shrink, but
take shelter; the name of God must be both his trust and his stay.

What a Mount of Sufficiency was God to Abraham, when he tells him, Genesis 17. I
am God all sufficient? Here was enough to answer all things. Why, this special
presence is as much to every Son of Abraham. Nay, let me add thus much, as
against fears and dismayings, the special presence of God speaks more comfort
then allsufficiencie does: For though Gods allsufficiencie be of an infinite
weight and consideration, yet that may as well be allsufficient to kill as to
quicken; Gods allsufficiencie may as well speak death as life: but this special
presence which here God pitcheth about his Church and people, is not to speak
the least of terror, but support, comfort, and encouragement against all
terror, affrighting, or dismaying.

CHAP. III.
The Lords special presence in three excellencies; the first of which is
handled against fears, viz. The Lord being with Believers, his glory is for
them.

THis special presence of God proclaims these three Excellencies for every
Member of Christ and his Church.

1. His Glory is for thee.

2. His Comforts are for thee.

3. All that is in God is engaged for thee by this special presence, for this
very end, to comfort thee, and to expel all thy fears and dismayings.

First, God being with thee, all his glory God being with thee, his glory is
for thee: and what a comfort this.
is for thee: And what a presence must this be, that that which is above the
earth and heaven too, should wait upon a poor, doubting Christian? Yet thus it
is, Psalm. 148. 13. His name alone is excellent, his glory is above the earth
and heaven. And yet every Believer is near his glory, as his special presence
is near unto Believers. So says the 14. v. He also exalts the horn of his
people, the praise of all his Saints, even the children of Israel, a people
near unto himself. Praise ye the Lord, O Saints; join with this Chorus: for the
Lord has exalted our strength, even Jesus Christ; for he alone prays for
Saints, and he alone must have the praise of Saints. Sing Hallelujah,
Hallelujah. O believing soul, why art thou so cast down? Lift up thy eyes to
the hills, from whence comes thy help; and behold what see thou? [Not a hands
breadth, but] a Fountain of light and comfort. What means the Moon thus to
eclipse the Sun, from whence thou have thy light, thy life, thy glory? Say not
in thy heart, say not in thy eyes, say not in thy sighs, say not in thy
sorrowings, say not in thy tears, say not in thy fears, Where Is my Jesus! for
he is nigh thee, in thee, round about thee. Awake out of thy fears, and view
thy glory; for thy glory views thee through all thy fears. Oh the beauty and
splendour of that soul that is encompassed with Gods special presence! Why do
not our souls break forth with David, Psalm. 73. 26. Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire but thee. All the glory,
honor, and riches of this Creation cannot administer one word of comfort to my
bleeding heart; but the shining of thy face is better then life. Oh, how
excellent is thy loving kindness, O Lord! They that shelter here, are safe; and
they that seek here, have succor, yea satisfaction, yea abundance; they shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatnes of thy house, how much more with the beauty
of thy presence? For with thee is the fountain Ps. 36. 9.
of life, and in thy light we shall see light. For God is a fountain, fullness
running over all tears and fears. Be but in his presence, as his presence is
with thee, and thou shall in his light have light and everliving comforts. The
special presence of God that is about a believing soul, is a glorious
graciousness, and a gracious gloriousness, made up only of mercy, love,
kindness, and that on purpose to banish fears and dismayings. Now mercy, love,
and kindnesses of Mercy is a royalty for the fearing soul to boast in.
God is such a royalty that may be boasted in. Psalm. 34. v. 2. My soul shall
boast in the Lord. And says David, this truth is to be made good on such that
are cast down. The humble (or the tamed, as the word signifies) shall rejoice
in it, and be glad. And (...) from (...)
as if he would have such souls presently to wind up unto this key, he brings
in the Chorus in the next verse; O come magnify the Lord with me, and let us
exalt his name together. And his case was the same with a doubting soul full of
fears. But, says David, I sought the Lord, that is, his special presence, and
there I found such a glory of mercy, grace and love, that it has delivered me
from all my fears. So v. 4.

Oh, but may the soul say, David was one David did?

Why, yes: Thou having David's principle, David's practice? If thy portion be the
same, why not thy joy the same? Thou have faith in Christ; David had no more:
He had this special presence, and thou have as much. Yea, though thou think
thy self a worm, God singles thee out in special with this, Fear not, I am with
thee. And though David was a Type of Christ, thou art a Member; and that is
more. A shadow has the lineaments by reflection from the substance; but the
least and meanest Believer is a member, and so bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh. And if the same sympathizing in fears and tears, why not the same
heroic spirit over fears and dismayings? It was a precious expression, and a
precious experience, that David reports to a doubting soul, Psalm. 85. 9, Surely
his salvation is near unto them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our
land. This surely is thy certainty: For what is true of the whole, is of every
part, nay in particular unto such that fear. Salvation is nigh to them that
fear him. This is David's experience, who had but faith: And thou have faith,
and God himself saying, Fear thou not, I am with thee. To what end? Why, David
tells thee, that glory may dwell in thee. Which is as much as if he had said,
There is a beauty and splendour about every Believer, that one would not expect
such an Inhabitant at least to dwell there, as fears and doubtings; but love,
and joy, and peace, that glory may dwell, etc.

And this is but the language of the Text; I am with thee has a glory in it
for a gracious soul.
for, says the Lord, there is such a glory in my grace, such a beauty in my
presence, that the very shines of I am with thee, I am thy God, is enough to
dispell all slavish fears, doubts, and dismayings.

But now, may the believing soul say, I am with thee: and I see clearly, that
it is darkness that causes drooping; but now God being with me, and with such
a beauty and splendour, what is the reason that I cannot see him, so that I may
not fear nor be dismayed?

First, It may be thou look for an outside an inside glory. And so I may say
unto thee as the Apostle says, Ye have not, because ye ask not; Or, Ye receive
not, because Jam. 4. 3.
ye ask amiss. So, fearing soul, thou perceivest not, because thou look
amiss. Turn but the eye of faith inward, and there is Christ in us the hope of
glory. What says David? Ps. 45. 13. compared with v. 15. The Kings daughter is
all glorious within. The believing soul is clad with all the Needle Work
graces: but we must look within, if we would see this beauty and splendour. And
therefore it follows, They shall enter into the Kings palace. Kings daughters
are not to be expected in common, but in the Chamber of presence. Enter
therefore into thy Graces; there shall thou see this glorious excellency with
gladness and rejoicing.

But secondly, thou see not the glory that is round about thee by Gods
special presence, because though thou look aright, yet thou look through
an infirm (I will not say a false) medium.

God sees thee face to face, beyond fears A similitude.
and dismayings, but thou do not see him. Faith is like the Prospective
glass; it makes things that are afar off seem to be near, but yet with a great
deal of weakness: So Faith, it discovers visions of God, yea and it brings it
near; but because it is an infirm medium, we see fears and doubtings, when
indeed the object of faith is full of joys and chearings. So that we may say of
this special presence, as David says of the mouth, Psalm. 81. 10. Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it: so may it truly be said of the eye of faith;
Open it wide, yea wider, and Gods special presence will shine unto the full
assurance of light, and life, and glory.

Heaven and happiness it self is but this special presence. So says David, Ps.
16. 11. speaking of Gods glorious presence, In thy presence is fullness of joy,
at his right hand pleasures for evermore. Why now the difference between Gods
glorious presence and his gracious presence, lies mainly in this; God seeing us
with the eye of glory, through a gracious Christ; we seeing him with the eye of
grace through a glorious Christ.

The special presence of God is no less then heavenly joy and glory; only to us
it is contracted to the narrow eye of faith; and because of this, we do not see
clearly the things that are given us of God. Like A similitude.
a great Volume that is put into a very narrow Print, which one can hardly read
with the choicest and clearest Spectacle. So Heaven, it is a great volume, but
to every believing soul it is contracted into a very small print; so that
though the Creature put on the choicest Spectacle of Reason, he cannot read a
word: and the Christian, though he has on the Spectacle of Reason, and that
which is suited to the Print, which is Grace, yet he can read but darkly; yet
read he can, but it is* obscurely with ifs and ands, fears and doubtings. And
what is the reason? Because he looks through an infirm medium. But now put but
off, or rather put but on the Spectacle of Glory, and then we shall see face to
face, know as we are known. Yea, and the sum of this the Apostle speaks in that
1 Cor. 13. 12. For now we see through a glass darkly; but then, when the eye of
faith is opened to fruition, we shall see face to face, etc.

CHAP. IV.
The second Excellency. The Lords presence proclaims comfort: And what will
not this do against fears and dismayings?

SEcondly, Although the fearing soul The Lords presence speaks comfort to
believers against fears and dismayings.
does not see this special presence so beautiful and so full of splendour; yet
know that for the answering of all thy fears and dismayings, it shines forth
abundance of comfort. And thus I charge all you that are the beloved of Gods
soul, to make use of it: for thus God is present with you on purpose to
administer comfort to you by his Spirit; which Spirit is no less then Gal. 5.
22.
love, and joy, and consolation: And what will not this administer against all
fears and dismayings?

1. First, what will not the love of God Gods love is in his presence.
administer? Can thou say by experience, that earthly things administer
comfort and refreshment to thy body? and shall not Gods love much more refresh
and cheer thy fearing soul? All earthly comforts are but Wine; and Wine may
cheer the heart, as the Psalmist speaks, Ps. 104. 15. But now the love of
Christ is ten thousand times better, and the Spouse finds it more sweet, Cant.
1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better then
wine. Now this love of God is with thee by this special presence: And if the
love of earthly relations, as of Father, Husband, Wife, can administer comfort,
what will not the love of my heavenly Father, and Christ my Husband, who has
loved me with an everlasting Jer. 31. 3
love? Yea, when this love is round about me? yea, such a love that passes
Ephesians. 3. 19 2 Cor. 5. 14.
knowledge? Yea, such a love that is about Saints, is above Angels; a love of
an attractive sweetness, not straitning, but constraining the soul to comfort
against all fears and dismayings.

2. Though the love of God may administer enough comfort, yet in this I am Gods
kindness, yea loving kindness about Believers.
with thee, there is not only Gods love, but Gods kindness, yea his loving
kindness. And what will not the loving kindness of a God answer? The kindness
of a faithful friend is much; but the kindness of a Father, that is more. But
what is this to the loving kindness of a God? David tells you, it is better then
life, Ps. 63. 3. Thy loving kindness is better then life. And he speaks this
when his straits were as great as thine can be; He was in a bewildered
condition, yet the loving kindness of the Lord administered comfort above life.
And that his loving kindness is round about thee by his special presence, mark
how familiarly the Lord speaks to thee; Fear thou not, for I am with thee: As
if he would lay all in thy lap, whereby thou might be comforted.

3. This special presence brings special This special presence has in it
special mercy to remove fears.
mercy with it: yea, God thus proclaims himself altogether a God of mercy. In
this I am with thee, there is not so much as a moment of anger: for if he was
in any way with the soul but mercy, the soul might fear; as if he had said, I
am with thee a God of terror, the soul might tremble: but there is not the
least of terror to affright thee in this my special presence, but all mercy,
love and kindness to stir thee up against terrors and dismayings. And therefore
mark how the Text opposes all slavish fears, saying, I am with thee, fear not.
And as perfect love should cast out slavish fear, so should mercy take in only
hope; and to that soul that hopes in mercy, mercy alone is about such a soul,
without the least of terror, yea against all terror and affrighting. Therefore
fear thou not, but be thou comforted, and hope in mercy, Psalm. 33. v. 18.

4. This special presence is with thee to It is a full joy for a fearing soul
against fears.
comfort thee, as it is a full joy and a full tide of comfort against all thy
sorrowings. So that if the question should be, To what end the Lord
encompasseth the soul with his special presence? it is that our joy might be
full: for in his special presence there is fullness of joy, Ps. 16. 11. And if
we take this fullness only to be in glory, why should a night of sorrow so much
trouble us, for that joy comes in the morning? And yet being a Believer, thou
art not benighted: Although the Sun be not in the Meridian, or in his highest
altitude, yet he is risen, and shines above the Horizon of fears and doubtings.
So that to you must be applied that of the Prophet Mal. 4. 2. To you that fear
my name, that is, to the poorest believing soul, shall the Sun of Righteousness
arise with healing in his wings. And what joy must this administer, when these
wings that overshadow thee, are no less then all the saving benefits of Christ?
Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, yea the entrance into glory. And to
comfort thee, they all encompass thee with healing; A precious balm for comfort
and refreshment against fears and dismayings. So that though the soul flag
through fears, so that it cannot be upon the wing of prayer unto God, as Christ
speaks unto his Disciples, Joh. 16. 24. Ask, that your joy may be full; the
Father does as it were prevent the soul that is fainting with fears, and brings
his wings over the soul, saying, Though you faint and ask not, yet do not
doubt, but fear not, I am with thee; and in me there is such a full joy, that
may comfort thee against all thy sorrowings.

5. This special presence of God does There is in Gods being with believers,
all support to succor against fears.
not only administer comfort, as it has love in it, and kindness, mercy and
joy, but it has in it for thy comfort all strength, power and support: So that
grant thou art feeble, weak and staggering; why yet if thou have a Stander,
that which way soever thou reelest thou shall be supported, what needst thou
fear? David complains that he had sliding feet, Psalm. 116. 8. and so have thou
by fears and doubtings: But now, God being thy support, what needst thou fear?
for thou shall not fall; for I am with thee, to free from death.

Ah, may the soul say, that is true indeed. Yea, and so is the rest too; for
says the Text, not only from death, but mine eyes from tears, and my sliding
feet from falling. What Is this but to dry up tears and fears, and to uphold the
soul from staggering? And this council gives the Everlasting Councellor, even
Christ himself, in that Isa. 50. 10. If there be such a one that fears and
saints, that is weak and staggering, let him lean, depend, trust, and stay upon
his God.

And says the Father, I am with thee by my special presence, that thou
might be succored, sheltered, and supported. And therefore mark the Text; I
will strengthen, I will help, I will uphold thee. As if the Lord should say,
Here Is thy comfort, I am with thee: thou art afraid, because thou art feeble;
but be thou comforted, I am thy strength. Thou art afraid because thou art
weak; but be thou comforted, I am powerful, I will help thee. And why do thou
fear that thou shall fall? Fear thou not, I will uphold; yea, take thy comfort,
I will uphold, I will support, I will succor and sustain thee against all thy
staggerings.

Have you not seen the Child in its standing Similitude from a Child in its
weak estate.
stool? And though it be not in the arms or at the breast, yet if it be in the
stool, how confidently will the Mother and the Maids go about their occasions?
for that they know, the Child being there, there is no need to fear, though the
Child be feeble, and reel sometimes on this side, sometimes on that, yet they
know it is safe from falling. Even so is the Child of God, and the poorest
Believer, by Gods special presence which does surround them. Poor doubting
Christian, thou art but a Child indeed, a Babe of grace; but God is with thee,
and thou art in thy standing-stool; and though thou reelest and staggerest by
temptation, fears and dismays, yet fear thou not, for fall thou can not; God
is on this side with his strength, on that side with support, on every side
with his presence to comfort thee, and that against all fears and troubles.

6. And lastly, God being with thee, Gods special presence speaks all
relations, as a Father; and what room for fears?
the comfort of all relations are for thee. Some relations are more remote,
some more near, yet all relations administer comfort, and the harmony of all
lies in this special presence, God being with thee.

I might here put thy soul into an Ocean; but I must say but a word, as against
thy fears. Therefore, art thou fainting? Here Is Aqua vitae, water of life, by
Gods special presence, to revive thee. Art thou swooning? The hollow of the
Lords hand is with thee to chafe thee, and to cheer. To a dying soul I am life
and comfort; and to a fearing soul I am hope and mercy; for a wounded soul I am
healing; to the sick soul I am a Physician, and to the bleeding soul I am Balm
of Gilead; to the thirsty soul I am a well of waters, and by my special
presence I make proclamation to every one that thirsts, Come, yea O come* yea
to the waters, Isa. 55. 1 Can. 5. 1
drink, and drink abundantly, that you may be satisfied. ^o the hungry I am
bread; Joh. 6. 48
feed on me that you may have eternal nourishment; for I fill the hungry with
good things, and to the fearing soul too I am food: I am with them, that they
may be with me; therefore do not faint, but feed. Yea, I am a friend, and the
believing soul is my friend. So says the 8. v. Abraham my friend, and Jacob my
chosen, and Israel my servant. Now we say, it is merry when friends meet: Why,
God is with thee in this relation; and why should not thou be with him; and
that not fearful, but friendly? For he owns thee by this special presence in
the relation of friendship; and see that thou answer not his friendship with
fears, but return love for love: He is with thee to comfort thee, and be thou
comforted. Nay* by this special presence God is with thee as a familiar friend,
with whom thou can not be more bold then welcome, to whom thou may tell all
thy heart: And if telling of griefs be comfort unto the grieved, what will not
Gods presence afford when he is with thee, to remove all griefs and fears? Thou
say, thou have fears; but says the Lord, I am with thee, I am a Father to
remove all thy fears. Yea, thou art a poor Lamb, and thou fear: Oh, Joh. 10.
28.
but fear not, I am thy Shepherd, and none shall pluck thee out of my hand.
Yea, to comfort thee against all fears, know, I carry the poor doubting soul in
my arms, I tender it in my bosom, and I gently entreat them that are with
young. Yea, in the sum of it, Isa. 40. 11.
he makes the doubting Christian as his Darling, whereby it may take comfort.
And therefore though the Servant may be in the family with such fears, yet the
Sons and Daughters are free. Therefore own your privilege, from the eldest to
the youngest, from the Babe to the Strong man in Christ; for in Gods family
such are all sons and daughters; and why not free from servile fears and
dismayings, when the special presence of God has such an excellency in it of
comfort and consolation?

Which is the second thing Gods special presence holds forth; He being with the
believing soul, his Glory is not only for them, but his Comforts are all for
them, and that against fears and troubles.

CHAP. V.
The third Excellency. God being with us, proclaims engagement for us: And
what will not this do against Fears?

The Lord engages 1. His Word. 2. His Power. 3. His Faithfulness. 4. His
Honor.

THirdly, Know fearing soul, that God is not only with thee to comfort thee,
but also to engage for thee against all thy Fears: and what will not the power
of a Prince do, if he proclaim and prosecute? Tumults may arise; but if the
mighty man once wager, he breaks through all, specially if the case be urgent,
and himself resolved. Ah, but what if God be the undertaker! He that is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords; He at whose presence the mountains melt: shall not he
be more then Conqueror against such poor Principalities and Powers as servile
Fears and Troubles are?

God engages all by his special presence for the believing soul, and speaks it
like a Victor that were sure of the day, saying, Fear not, I am with thee,
doubting soul; why art thou cast down? my resolution is to hold thee up, yea
and I will encounter against all that break thy quiet. And that this is the
mind of God to engage for thee, mark but his resolution; Yea I will, yea I
will, yea I will strengthen, help, uphold. He speaks it as a vehement
undertaker of thy cause and quarrel, as if he would in no wise suffer his Child
to be so battered and abused by any fears, and troubles, and temptations.

Says the Creature, I have spent both time, and strength, and money; and do you
think I will suffer this? No, I will rather spend so much and so much more; I
will engage all, but I Will accomplish. As the faithful Subject says in his
Countries cause; Our fathers bought such and such a privilege with such and
such expense, and shall we now be so incroacht on? nay, my life and fortune
shall lie at stake first; I will venture all, and engage all, but I will
accomplish such dear-bought privileges.

Even thus says God the Father to a doubting Christian: I have not only bought
thee with the precious blood of my dear Son, but through him I have also
privileged thee with the graces of my holy Spirit, whereby thou may be
comforted against fears and troubles. But I see these guests are inmates in my
houses still; yea these slaves which should be underfoot are often usurpers,
lording it over my sons and daughters. But children, be of good cheer I your
Father will not suffer this, I will stand by you, and engage for you. Has my
Son redeemed you from your sins? and shall you now be overwhelmed by servile
fears? No, believe it, drooping spirit; Call forth all my strength, all my
power, all my love, its all at stake for you and all engaged for you; You know
I sent my Son for you; and in his low estate he slew the King of fears, Death
and Hell, and led Captivity captive. And now I am exalted, I in him, and he in
me, and you in both; and shall I now suffer you to suffer? No, I will not
suffer you to be tempted, to be feared; but I will succor you, I will relieve
you, and support you.

When the offending Child has got but a friend to stand between it and its
offended Father, how will it wipe the eyes, and cherish hope, and creep behind,
because it knows it has gotten one to stand between it and home! Ah, but how
much more may the Child of God, who has such a friend as Christ to intercede,
and such a Father as is so far from being offended with his Child in case of
fears, that he comes forth himself, and engages all his love, all his grace,
the least drop whereof is enough to remove mountains of sins; and why not fears
and dismayings? specially considering that he by his special presence singles
out thee alone, as if so be he had no more but thee: for so the Text implies
and expresses; I am with thee, poor fearing Christian, and and all my mercy,
power and grace is engaged for thee: and what will not the Bow of my power do,
being bent with resolution, and that against all your servile fears? I come, I
shoot, I engage all my power, mercy, love; Fear thou not, for I am with thee.

And this is no more then what the Prodigal found at the hands of his Father,
Luk 16. who leaves all for him, and engages all for him, although a Prodigal
and a Spend thrift; yet because a Son, the Father's out to meet him, and no
cost must be spared, the fatted Calf must be killed. And if our Heavenly Father
have such a resolution for a prodigal Son, what will he not have for thee, who
art a Son, but yet a fearing one?

The Children of God may say indeed, that the sons of Zerviah have been too
hard for them: Temptation, Sin, and Satan had made them slaves. The sorrows of
death encompassed me, and the pains of hell caught hold on me, yea I found
trouble and sorrow, says David as our President, Psalm. 116. 3. but v. 5, 6.
Gracious is the Lord, for he preserves the simple: I was brought low, and
(...) from (...) which signifies to be thin and poor and naked.
he helped me. That Is the fearing soul. And upon this he sings this Requiem,
Return unto thy rest, return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee. And thus may every doubting Believer not only say, but
sing, from Gods special presence that is round about them: Turn out fears and
dismayings; turn out troubles, sighs and sorrowings; turn out distrusts and
droopings: And turn in my love and joy, my comfort, my consolation! For my God
has dealt bountifully with me, engaging all by his special presence: And who
would not subscribe to such an engagement? such an engaging Father, and such an
engaging Son, who is about me with all his power and love to oppose all my
fears and affrightings.

How often have our fearing hearts said as David did in his case with Saul! 1 Samuel 1 Samuel 27.
27. Surely I shall one day perish by the hands of Saul. So says the weak
Believer, Surely I shall perish; Sin does so assault me, and Temptation like
the floating Sea daily rises high; and how can I choose but fear when my life
is in jeopardy every hour? Ah but consider, so often as thou have feared
perishing, who has delivered thee? 'Twas not thy faintings and thy fearings;
for it is not by the best of our might or power: why then it must be by the
Spirit of God in his special presence, which has been with thee in the time of
all thy straits and troubles; only it may be thou have not thought that God was
thy assistant, that he was so near at hand by his special presence to comfort
thee and sustain thee. And if thou had known and thought of this, thou
would have trusted more, and doubted less. However for the future still keep
this in mind. That God is with thee, yea engaged for thee, and that against all
thy fears and dismayings.

And if one Attribute of God may administer a world of comfort, and if one
Attribute of God is an infinite support; what then are all the Attributes of
God, which are about every Believer, to comfort and engage against all their
fears and troubles? Surely we may all say, We will not fear though the earth
were removed, for the Lord is a present help. Yea, though I be but as a worm, a
poor go-by the ground; for so the Text expresses, v. 14. Fear thou not, worm
Jacob; yea, the Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge, Psalm.
46. 1. 11.

God being with us, what need we fear any that are against us? And why? Because
all is engaged for us; All his Grace, all his Love, all his Mercy, all his
Wisdom, all his Strength; indeed all in God, and God in all.

I shall in a word or two hint unto you four things, which are engaged by this
[I am with thee,] which Believers are to take notice of against their fears and
troubles.

Our Father by these words, [Fear thou not, for I am with thee] engages first
his Word, secondly his Power, thirdly his Faithfulness, and fourthly his
Honor. God has laid all these, and much more at stake (as I may so express
it) for every Believer, to the removing away fears.

1. In his special presence his Word is engaged: and this the Text holds forth,
being the Word of God, though penned by this Gospel-Prophet Isaiah. There is a
twofold Word of God, the internal and external; but both are engaged against a
Believers fears and dismayings. The internal word is that voice within us,
saying, This is the way, walk in it. And this proceeds from the Eternal word of
the Father, even Jesus Christ himself, for so he is called by that divine
Evangelist, Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3. And by this Word we have the Law of the Spirit of
life, freeing us from the Law of sin and death: and this the Word of God
engages, and Jesus Christ by his Spirit makes good, Romans 8. 2. And then, if
freedom from sin and death, who should once make doubt against fears and
sorrowings? And in the Scriptures, how many gracious promises has the Father
given thee on purpose for thy consolation? All the comforting promises, all the
upholding promises, all the present promises, all the prccious promises are for
the support and comfort of every Child of God. So that though no holy things
must be cast to Dogs, yet all the words of Consolation, Comfort, Joy and Peace,
they are all to be dealt forth unto a believing soul. And therefore as our
Saviors words do invite you, so let them abide in you, Joh. 14. 1. Let not
your hearts be troubled; Ye believe in God, believe also in me. For both agree
in words of Consolation against all your fears and troubles.

2. God by this special presence engages not only his Word, but his Power
also: and what will not a man of power do, that will engage for a friend? But
what will not the powerful God accomplish for Jacob his friend? In case of
temptation he says to Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12. 9. And
all power is in Grace, though all Grace be not in power. But both these are in
this special presence of God, engaging for a fearing Christian. And I need go
no further then the Text, to make it appear that the Lord engages his power to
take off Believers fears. Observe when God will set forth his power and
greatness to the full, he says no more but thus; I am that I am, Exodus 3. 14.
And thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, [I am] has sent me unto
you. And thus he engages himself in the Text for the believing soul, Fear not,
I am; Be not dismayed, I am. And as those expressions, [with thee] and [thy
God] do set forth Gods gracious relations, so [I am] his infinite power; but
both opposing fears and dismayings.

3. God by this his special presence engages his Faithfulness; he will
assuredly perform the overcoming all thy fears. Had the Lord given us but his
word of promise, it were enough to master fears, considering all the words of
grace were written for the Saints comfort; and the Scripture says. Not one jot
or tittle shall fail till all be fulfilled. And the reason is, because he is
faithful that has promised. And let us take heed by our giving way to fears we
make not Gods word of none effect: for, He is faithful that has promised, yea,
and he is round about us to effect it, saying, I am with thee, fear not, I am
thy God, that is, a God in covenant; and I will nor suffer thee to be tempted,
feared, affrighted; but as I am with thee, so I will strengthen, yea I will
help, yea I will uphold. It remains only, doubting soul, that thou should
witness with the Saints, Heb. 10. 23. that He is faithful that has promised,
and does engage all for thee. Hold fast therefore thy profession without
wavering; for the Lord thy God he is God, the faithful God, a God that keeps
Covenant, and that with thee against distrust and fears, Deuteronomy. 7 9.

4. And lastly, God engages not only his word, his power, and his faithfulness
against a Believers fears, but his Honor is at stake for them; and know
(Believer) he will not suffer himself to be foiled in this; for he is very
jealous of it; whatsoever suffer, his Honor shall not. Isa. 42. 8. I am the
Lord; that is, my name and my honor will I not give to another. But a
Believers fears and distrusts carry this in the very front, even to eclipse
the honor and glory of God: but says the Lord, Fear not, for I know the drift
of all your dismayings; if distrusts did only seek your hurt, I would not
suffer it, 1 Col. 10. 14. God is faithful, says the Apostle, and will not
suffer you to be tempted above that you are able. Ah, says the soul, but what
is my ability? I am like a broken reed recling to and fro by every wind of
temptation. Well, grant it; what if thou art? God says, he is thy God, and he
is with thee, and he will deliver thee from all thy fears; thou shall escape,
and thou shall glorify him. Nay, he says, his own honor will suffer, if
slavish fears be suffered: For though thou art a doubting Christian, yet thou
art my Child: and so many distrusting fears may quickly make up slavish fears;
which is a dishonor unto my grace, which I have given thee, and of which I
have said, it should be sufficient. And come what will come, my honor shall
not suffer, nor my grace be clouded. Therefore fear thou not; for I am with
thee, and my honor is engaged in this my presence; and Fears shall not be
master. My honor will not I give to any other, much less to fears and
dismayings, which are so much against my honor.

And thus much for demonstration of these words, I am with thee, I am thy God.
To which I have chiefly spoken as they are directed against a Believers fears
and dismayings.

Give me leave now to call forth some of those usual Doubts and Dismayings that
are so incident unto Gods children; that so the Express by Gods special
presence may be made good, even not to fear, not to be dismayed.

I shall not speak any thing of the rise of fears, knowing that every
experienced Christian knows that sin was, and is the cause of all servile
fears. Only thus much the Text implies, that such there are in Gods own
children; and these are they that must be removed, that so comfort and
consolation may be administered.

CHAP. VI.
Endeavoring the removal of spiritual fears, and Objections answered as to the
nature of fears.

THere are many sorts of fears, yet they all may be comprehended to be
Spiritual or Temporal; and these again may be Personal, Family and National
fears.

And though all spiritual and temporal fears may be personal, yet all personal
fears may not be spiritual; but the believer may be surprised with all these
fears, spiritual fears, temporal fears, personal, and fears national, etc.

The worst of fears are spiritual, and these do most usually disquiet the peace
of Gods peculiar; and therefore I shall first speak to them, and I shall be
brief in each: Gird up therefore the loins of your minds, as Job speaks, Job
38. 3. and bring in all your Objections; here is enough in the Text to Answer
all, let your fears be never so numerous, and never so great.

1. Objection will arise from sin, for that is the ground of all fears and
troubles.

Says the soul, I have been a great sinner, broken all Gods righteous Laws:
and Christ has indeed satisfied, so that I need not fear: but the remembrance
of them cannot but be grievous unto me, in regard I was so wilful, and so
wicked against a God so gracious; surely God may cast such a one as I out of
his mercy, and out of his remembrance.

Ah, but thou must not so remember that I, even I am he that blotteth out
transgressions for mine own name sake, and will not remember thy sins; and the
Text is positive, I will not remember; What? thy sins; why? For I am with thee:
So Verse 5. of the same Chapter, and here in the text, the Lord says the same,
I am with thee, which I would not be, if thy sins were in my remembrance; For I
the Lord am of purer eyes then to behold the least iniquity.

Paul remembers indeed his sins, but he does it with joy at the thought of
mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 13. I was a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and injurious: but he
triumphs in mercy, I obtained mercy; and so do thou; for mercy is a Royalty
that may be gloried in by every fearing soul.

But, says the soul, my sins are not Paul sinned greatly indeed, but
ignorantly: I have sinned greatly and wilfully, and have not I just cause to
fear?

No, if thou apprehendst pardon by Give me my portion, Luke 15. 12. and he goes
away, spends all wilfully; and one would have thought the Father should never
have received him more; but he no sooner returns, but the Father embraces him,
kisses him, takes him about the neck; and if in this there was cause of fear,
he might have feared. So though thy sins be never so mighty, yet they are not
too big for the right hand of Gods righteousness; for that imbraceth thee,
that upholdeth; and Gods presence is so far from fears, that it speaks comfort,
and bids thee fear not.

But says the doubting soul, I have abundance Paul says, Heb. 12. 11. No
chastning for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous.

Ah, but what follows? why meat in thy For it yields, says the same Apostle,
the peaceable fruit of righteousnss unto them which are exercised thereby: And
add but Christ's promise that he will succor, and his special presence which
will uphold and strengthen, and thou have enough: What will not the everlasting
arm of Gods righteousness accomplish? thou may very well say, as David
does, 1 Samuel 17. 37. He that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out
of the paw of the Bear, etc. So if Christ's right hand of righteousness could
free thee from the condemning power of sin, never fear but the same hand that
is about thee, will deliver thee from the tempting power of sin, which thou
confessest to be the cause of thy fears and affrightings.

David might very well make such an Ps. 130. 3.
he be strait to mark what is done amiss but in one days infirmity, what soul
is there but must needs fear?

It Is true indeed, were God so strait unto his own children, as he is to wicked
men, then we might not only fear, but tremble. But mark the Text, Ps. 130. 3.
If thou Lord An if of inference, not of doubting.
wilt be extreme to mark what is amiss, etc. It is by way of supposition, and
it implies that God is not strait, but is to thee to succor and support thee,
yea to cover a multitude of infirmities, forgiving iniquity, transgression and
sin; and thou may read thy Fathers heart ready to relieve thee by his special
presence; so far is he from grieving of thee, or fearing of thee, that like a
tender father to his beloved child, he bids thee fear not; yea Christ, who knew
thy Fathers heart very well, would not have said, that if thou be but a little
one, yea the least of all in the stature of grace, yet says Christ, Mat. 18.
14. It is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these
little ones should perish; for he is about thee by his special presence.

Well, but I am a poor worthless Creature; Mat. 8. 8. Lord, I am not worthy
thou should come under my roof. As Moses says, Exodus 3. 11 Who am I, that I
should go unto Pharaoh?

But mark the Lords answer; it is like I have seen the afflictions of my
people, and the oppression wherewith the Egyptians have oppressed: Exodus 3. 11.
and thou must go for their relief; and fear thou not, for I am with thee; even
I, not Angels, though they be ministering spirits for your comforting; yet as
touching your fears and sorrows, I am with thee, and be thou courageous.

But the believing soul may object and say, There will come a time indeed when
Peter speaks, Act. 3. 19. When the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord, then indeed may I expect relief from all my fears and
sorrowings.

But the Text answers in the present tense, comfort and consolation. And as
Christ says, Joh. 14. 19. so says the Father by this Text, My peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you: Not as the world gives, which are ready to
grumble and to take it away again; but says v. 18. that it may abide with you
for ever. And why should your hearts be troubled or afraid? I am with you,
says the Father, and my promise is for thee at the present; and see, believing
souls, that you approve it.

There are three special times of fears; but this special presence of God to
every believing soul will answer all.

1. The hour of Temptation is a time of fear, when the soul is as a bird
ensnared by the fowler: but then God by his special presence makes way for the
soul to escape; so that though the Tempter tempt never so craftily, yet God
has so promised to succor and relieve the soul, that the soul gets cost, and
by being thus tried, has this crown set upon the head of it, Jam. 1. 12.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life.

A wicked man way-lays Satan, as well as Satan way-lays him; and being dead in
trespasses and sins, he is not capable what Temptation means; and therefore is
it 2 Timothy 2. 20.
said, the Devil takes them captive at his will. But now Gods child, he finds
it to go very hard sometimes with him through temptation; and he wrestles, tugs
and toyls; which is a clear sign by his complainings, that his soul is capable.
But fear not, holy soul; this Job 5. 19.
is the hour God will be seen in the Mount, and make way for thee to escape out
of six and seven troubles. Yea, when thou art thus tried, thou shall be crowned
hereafter with glory and life; and for the present by Gods special presence
thou art pronounced blessed: for, Blessed is the soul that endures, etc. Jam.
1. 12.
2. As the hour of temptation, so the hour of death, this is called the King of
fears, and may truly be so to an unbeliever. But fear not thou their fear; for
God is with us in this hour. And though thou think death to be an enemy to
thee, and a hard passage for thee to dispute; yet if thou believe nothing too
hard for God, then fear thou not this hour of fear; for by this special
presence God being with thee, thou have no less then the right hand of the
Lords righteousness; and this delivers thee from death, Pro. 10. 2. which is
but a parallel to the Text, to let us know we should not fear this hour of
fear; for God being with us, we have the right hand of his righteousness. And
though treasures of gold and silver will not, (for that will profit nothing in
that day) and therefore wicked men may fear; but fear not thou; God is with
thee and righteousness delivers from death. 3. Being thus delivered from death,
there is no fear to thee to come to Judgment, which is and will be a time of
fearful fear Pro. 13. 21.
to all wicked men: Ah, but to a child of God this is no time of fear, but of
everlasting refreshment. Wicked men in their life time have the powerful
presence of God, their conscience bearing of them witness that they thus were
always in his presence, and they could not fly it, as David Ps. 139. 7.
speaks: but this is their misery, they gave no regard to it. And therefore
Death and Judgment are times of fear, because they have Gods fearful presence:
Christ appears to them as a fearful Judge, and as an Avenger of all those
injuries offered to him, his Cause and Saints. And this is the cause why they
call to the rocks and mountains to fall upon them; it is to hide them from the
presence of the Lord: Whereas Rev. 6. 16.
the child of God has the Judge his friend, and Christ his Advocate; and
nothing is brought in against him, but he himself is brought in with shouts,
and with welcome love and kindness: And therefore believing soul, since Gods
special presence will own you at that great day of fears and tremblings, Mat.
25. 34.
saying, Come ye blessed, come my children, come my servants: See that you own
this special presence now, when God is with you, and bids you Fear not; yea,
and is so earnest you should believe him: Be courageous doubting soul, by
answering Gods kindness, saying, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Lastly, It may be objected, Am not I Psalm. 34. 9. O fear the Lord all ye his
Saints; and so likewise, Prove. 14. 27. The fear of the Lord is a fountain of
life; and the Text says, Fear not; How stands these Scriptures, and such
like, against this express Prohibition.

I Answer, The Scripture is very plentiful A double fear in scripture a slavish
and a filial.
in a double fear: A slavish or a distrustful fear; a filial or a depending
fear; a fear as a Passion, and fear as a Grace, or a gracious fear. The first
of these is that of our Saviors warning unto his Disciples, Mat. 10. 28. Fear
not them that can kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul, but fear
him that can cast both body and soul into hell: But now a gracious fear is that
of the Prophet, Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear into their hearts: Wicked men
are often upon this slavish fear; and therefore the child of God is called to
fear not their fear: Gods children must not have such doubts Prove. 29. 25.
and fears, and dismayings, but rather fly such fears; for Gods special
presence about believers, is perfect love: And perfect love casts out fear, 1
John 4. 18. perfect love, it may take in filial fear, but not the least of
slavish or distrustful fear.

And therefore doubting Christian take heed. Me thinks I hear thy sighs, and
see thy tears: Let not thy tears be tears of distrust, or fearful sorrowing;
for God is with thee by his special presence, forbiding any such tears or
sorrows: And if tears will needs flow, let them be tears of kindness; let them
be like Mary's, not only Luke 7. 37, 38.
tears of contrition, but tears of compassion; if thou will bedew Christ's feet
with tears, wipe them with the hairs of thy head, and kiss them, to let all
flow from constrained love, in the consideration of this special presence, that
God is with thee: Know therefore, as thou art a Believer, all thy fears should
be filial; more for love, then want; and all thy tears should be joyful, more
from comfort then grief. No men laugh louder then wicked men, but this is
madness; and none weep and sigh oftener then believers; but this is gladness,
says David, Psalm. 126. 5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: Now the
seed is of the same kind with the harvest; and a believer bearing precious
seed, why not his life full of precious comforts? And thus much for spiritual
fears.

CHAP. VII.
Containing something in general against Temporal fears.

THe next sort of fears that are incident unto Gods children, is temporal; and
they are either Personal Family, or National fears. I shall say something to
each of these:

1. In general: They that are members of the body of Christ and his Church, may
easily draw forth this conclusion, that if God the Father has given me his Son
and himself, by this his special presence to succor me against fears, and my
spiritual adversaries; surely he that has done the greater, he will also do
the less: David's saying is thine, 1 Samuel 17. 37. He that delivered me out of
the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, will also deliver me out
of the hands of this uncircumcised Philistine: So he that has given me such
comfort against my spiritual fear, how shall I lack any thing temporal that I
stand in need on: And this is Paul's conclusion, who was and did go through a
world of trouble, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own son, but gave him up
for us all, how shall he not [as if he wonders that any should make once doubt
of it] but with him freely give us all things?

And God our fathar is engaging himself in the Text upon this very account.
Thus observe the 11, 12, 13. Verses, where he says, That not only them that
are incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded, but them that make
war against thee shall perish; let them be men or devils, hunger, cold or
nakedness; let what will be that would break a Believers peace, they shall be
as nothing, and as a thing of naught: And if you would know how God will
accomplish this, he tells thee in the same language in the Text, as at the 13.
Verse, Fear not, I the Lord thy God will help thee, will uphold thee.

The Lord says indeed in the 14. Ver. that the Church and people of God are
very apt to have fears and dismayings upon a temporal account, as well as on a
spiritual; and therefore he calls the Church and every believer A worm, such a
one that is a poor go*by the ground, that the world is very ready to tread and
trample under foot; but fear not, I am with thee, to deliver thee as well from
temporal fears, as well as from spiritual fears: And thus much Christ exhorts
his Disciples to in that of John 14. 1. compared with the 2. Verse, Let not
your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. And this he
speaks to succor us in our natural wants, as well as against our spiritual
fears; for whereas the soul may say, Jesus Christ is indeed my souls portion,
and perpetual, Psalm. 73. 26. but for this poor body, I know not where I shall
abide with it; why now mark what Christ says to such a poor body, Fear not,
for I am with you; and, I am with you to the end of the world: I know you are
afraid of hunger, and of house-room; but let not your hearts be troubled, I am
John 14. 2.
your harbinger, and I go to take up eternal mansions for you; and it is my
fathers will that you should not be troubled; for he has meat and drink
enough, and houses for you all, and none shall take them away from you; for my
father is resolved to have no other Tenants but you; and I am resolved to
prepare them for you, and you alone; therefore let not your hearts be troubled
against temporal fears.

And Secondly, a more general text you cannot have, as being to believers to
remove away fears, Luke 1. 74, 75. That he would grant unto us, that being
delivered from the hand of our enemies, we might serve him without fear; that
is, slavish fear; and that this is Gods grant unto Believers, the text is
express, Fear not; and that it is to be against temporal fears, as well as
spiritual: Compare the scope of this place, with that of Genesis 22. 16. to which
this prophecy of Zacharias has relation: And God has performed the mercies
promised unto Abraham; yea, and also does perform unto every son of Abraham;
for we may all say, Qui loquutus est, and juravit, which spoke unto me, and
swear: Why now believing soul, do but add the Saints experience, the Lords
covenant, his promise, and this his special presence: And if against all our
enemies, and that he would have us without fear, then surely against Temporal
fears and dismayings.

CHAP. VIII.
Objections answered, against Personal fears.

1. FOr Personal Objections. The believing soul may say to the wanting body; My
wants increase, and misery must needs follow want: Blessed be God, I have a
little Meal in the barrel, and a little 1 King. 17. 12.
Oil in the cruse; some bread to feed me, a few rags to clothe me, a little
fire to warm me; but the Father of mercies knows what I shall do a month or a
week hence.

Ans. Poor heart! Take but notice of what thou have said, and thou have said
enough to answer all. If thou have said, [Father of mercies] experimentally,
and as a Christian. And thus the Saints have said before thee, and found it
true, 2 Cor. 1. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus, the
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort. Mark here; thou have a Father of
mercies, and this Father is a God of comfort; and he is so against all your
temporal fears, for He comfort us in all our tribulation. Not only that we
should be encouraged against fears, but thou should also succor and support
others; for so the verse following tells thee, 2 Cor. 1. 4.

Wicked men are often saying, Lord, Christ, Mercy, Faith! but they speak at
large, without any sense of what they say. But they that sound Father of
mercies faithfully, they have bread enough to supply all their wants. I may say
to such a soul, as Sampson said to Dalilah; Out of the eater Judge. 14. 14.
came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness: So out of the
Father of mercies thou may extract all kind of sweets that thy soul or body
stands in need of. Sampson speaks it by way of riddle; but answer thy soul and
body too by way of reality, That if a father of children will be pitiful, and
extend all for their supply, what will not my heavenly Father, who is a Father
of mercies? And what, will not this supply against all thy fears? Thou art
hungry; feed on mercy, and thou shall be refreshed: thou art thirsty; suck in
mercy, thou will find supply. Christian, believe it, do but draw forth faith,
and feed plentifully on mercy, for thou have in this an eternal maintenance,
and in such a maintenance there is no room left for temporal fears. I would
have poor Believers do as Abraham does, Genesis 22. 5. when he went to sacrifice
his Son: he goes up to the Mount with this, God will provide, my son. So do
thou; get up into this Mount that is come down to thee, even Gods special
presence: there is a Sacrifice killed already; it is but for thee to eat, and
thou shall be satisfied. Thou have not bread, thou have no provision: Ah but
have thou dependence? Exercise faith, but banish fears. When Abraham Genesis 25. 5.
goes into the Mount, he leaves his servants below; Stay you here, says he;
that is, Sense and Reason, Doubtings and Dismayings, these must be left below.
So must thou concerning thy fears and faintings: leave thy servants below, and
say to all thy wants, God will provide; for in the Mount of his special
presence he will be seen, and Can. 5. 1
there thou shall be abundantly satisfied; if Rivers will quench thy thirst,
then drink, and drink abundantly.

But thou will say, This is soul-satisfaction; dismayeth me. I am brought to a
morsel of bread, and I have no money to buy; and what shall I do?

Grant this (Believer) that thou have but fat things, more then the fatted calf
and wine upon the lees; for thou have a Kingly fare: for God being with thee,
thou art in the Kings house, yea in the Chamber of presence. It Is true, thou
art but a waiter; not on the throne, not crowned: but being in the Kings
family, thou art to fare deliciously every day. Thou fear hunger and thirst;
do but think how many full meals David made upon Gods word and promises, Psalm.
119. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea sweeter then the honey
unto my mouth. And so Psalm. 19. 10. Sweeter then the honey or the honeycomb.
Christ makes the accomplishment of his Fathers will his meat and drink, Joh. 4.
32. God feeds Christians two ways, by Promise or by Providence; and the
special presence God feeds his people two ways
answers both. I am with thee, is as well to sustain thy body, as to save thy
soul. Gods special presence is a supply two ways to a Believer.

1. God does feed his Children literally, giving his Child the thing that it
sensitively desires, so far as he sees it convenient. Thus the special
presence works in the letter of the Promise; and thus thy faith is called forth
by Christ, Mat. 6. 30. speaking to his Disciples. If God so clothe the grass of
the field, will he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith! and why take
ye thought for raiment? The Lilies of the field are but under common
providence; and you are not only under that, but Gods special presence is round
about you; and why will you fear, O ye of little faith! And for your comfort,
take that cardinal promise, Ps. 34. 8, 10. O taste and see, the Lord is good;
blessed is the man that trusts in him. And says, v. 9. There is no want to
them that fear him, that is, to such that have faith in him. And David seems to
speak this out of experience; for he had found the Lord making his promise
good, by feeding on him in his straits and troubles. And he makes this promise
applicable to the bodies wants, as you may clearly see in the 10. v. The young
Lions shall lack and suffer hunger; but they that seek the Lord shall not want
any thing. The authority of this Scripture gives thee every good, if thou be an
earnest seeker of the Lord.

2. Know, as God makes his promise good literally, so he does it mystically,
and this by his special presence.

May the body of a Believer say, I was hungry, but I am supplied; my stomack's
gone, and my thirst is quenched, and my body is warmed. I have been grieved,
tempted, troubled; but I know not how, I am now at ease, I have joy and cheer:
Surely, may the soul say, I have meat and drink and refreshment, and none has
given it me but God by his being with me, and mystically has made his promise
good in filling the hungry with good things, and Luke 1. 53.
sending the rich empty away.

A Believers body may say unto a rich man's plenty, as Mordecai said to Hester:
For if thou hold thy peace at this time, deliverance Hest. 4. 14.
shall come [unto me] some other way: however, covetous wretch, thou and thy
goods shall both perish; for God is righteous, and has given thee for such a
straight as many poor Creatures are in, and thou withholdest from them that
that is due: thou, and that thou have, will surely perish.

Thus may the Christians experience say, I have been troubled in spirit, but I
am relieved; I have lain under temptation, but I am succored; I have many a
time gone to bed an hungry, I have rise refreshed, help has come in some other
way. May the believer say, I have but these two things to keep me alive,
Godliness and Contentment, as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6. 6. but I find this
is enough to answer all my fears, it is more then money, meat or clothes.
Godliness, that is Gods special presence, and my faith desires to feed here,
and this is my contentment: Away my fears, though I am poor, yet I am rich;
though hungry, full; thirsty, satisfied; for special presence and faith is
godliness and contentment.

CHAP. IX.
The Lords Presence answers Objections against Family fears.

2. BUt thou will say, It does not so much grieve thee for thy self, but etc.

Surely thy condition is to be pitied, and God is with thee; and says David,
Psalm. 37. 25. I have not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging
their bread: Now I know you readily assent unto the first, that God does not
forsake the righteous; for that is his promise, I will not leave thee nor
forsake thee; but for the latter, that their seed shall not want, that Heb. 13.
5.
thou doubts of. Let me tell thee, God does make good his word, and thou must
believe it: Shall he say, and shall not he perform? For he is faithful that
has promised: Heb. 10. 23.
thou and thine must exercise dependence on his promise. It Is the fault of
Christians, that would live by bread alone. Our Savior tells us, Matthew. 4. 4.
That man [much more a beliver] must not live by bread alone, but by every word
that proceeds from the mouth of God: thou art to live by faith, to feed on
grace, and depend on mercy, to cast all our care on him, for he cares for us,
1 Pet. 5. 7. as we have a daily want, so must we exercise a daily dependence.

'Twas a fatherly expression of Paul, when he said he took on him the care of
all the 2 Cor. 11. 28.
Churches: But what a careful father have thou, that bids thee to cast all your
care on him, saying, do not you rack, and care, and fear, cast all on me, I am
with thee, and I care for you; yea, and for your children too: Although your
children are not destitute of father, mother, house and home; yet if they were,
says the father of mercies, my care is for them, I am a father to the
fatherless, a husband to the widow. I tell you, my pity is to Orphans, then
much more for you that are my sons and daughters, Hos. 14 3. For in thee the
fatherless find mercy; And why shall not we trust and stay upon so gracious
and merciful a God, when he is with us against all our fears?

Have thou no money, a little comfort, a mite of provision, and a great many
children? yet if God be with thee, thou art very rich; for thou have a heaven
against thy earth, riches against thy poverty, abundance amidst thy want; And
why should thou fear?

But may the father and the widow say, This is a rich portion indeed, but still
my family is not supplied; and I know God has promised; but what shall I do?
my children hunger; and can you give me no other council for their supply?

I would have thee do in this distress, as the rich do, such that have a great
deal of goods, if they have any fear of sickness and death, which ever and
anon they are afraid of, presently they will be making of their wills, and
giving of Legacies: why as now the rich does, so do thou that art poor, be ever
giving God a legacy, every night, and every morning; say Lord, Take thou the
wife, the children as thou have given me; they want bread, drink, apparel, and
thou art a fountain*fulnesse, preserve, feed, keep, this son is thine; and
father, take thou this daughter, for thou art a father of mercy, a God of
comfort and consolation. Thus poor doubting Christian, in thy family-fears, be
still resigning all to God by prayer and supplication; as Christ says, John 14.
My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: So make thy will every day
to God of all that God has given thee.

But will the soul say, May I be so bold? will God accept of such legacies as a
poor wife and children?

Yes: for thy comfort know, he will accept of thee, and them too before
thousands of gold or silver, riches or honors, or any of this worlds goods
whatsoever.

And thus much for personal and family fears.

CHAP. X.
God being with believers, they have enough against national fears.

3. GOd is round about Believers, to the taking off all national fears and
dismayings; so that a believer may say, from this special presence, The Lord is
on my side, and I will not fear what man can do unto me. What Kings or Princes,
Powers and Potentates, Councels and Combination, Policy and Strength, Army at
home, Armies abroad, Fire, Peril, Sword; no Weapon that is formed against Gods
Israel, shall ever prosper.

It is a certain truth, that the Lord will shake all the powers on earth, yea
the heavens and the earth also, Heb. 12. 26 yet it shall go well with the
Church and people of God; For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be
removed, but my loving kindness shall not depart, nor the Covenant of my peace
be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee, Isa. 54. 10. What if there
be wars, and rumors of wars, mountains of opposition? yet a Believer has peace
and loving kindness that shall not depart: though there be breach upon
breach, and break upon break upon the world, yet God is with thee by his
special presence; and that by Covenant, which is more certain then the Laws of
the Medes and Persians; for the Covenant of Gods kindness shall never be
removed from thee that art a believer; and therefore fear not any straits or
trouble.

But what if persecution should come, as

I Answer, thou have so little cause to fear, Dan. 3. their trial, it was their
triumph; and mark that precious place of Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 14. If ye be
reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; the spirit of glory, and of
God rests upon you. Compare but this with the 12 and 13 Verses, and thou
needst not count it a strange thing, or a hard thing; for by persecution thou
shall have glory revealed, and be glad with exceeding joy.

By persecution believers come to see the special presence of God more clearly:
The spirit of God and glory rests upon you; this brings in a Benjamins
portion: As your trouble and trial abounds, so your comfort and consolation
abounds much more; and therefore be so far from fearing persecution, as rejoice
in it as you blessed advantage; for to suffer for the name of Christ is not
only a fulfilling of Christ's joy, but your own enjoyment is increased: by it
James 1. 2.
Apostles and Disciples sing in prisons, and shine in prisons: fear not
persecution: for to a child of God the very prison brings presence, as may be
clearly collected from the marginal Quotations.

But we have so many enemies at home, etc.

This sounds more savouring of the world the earth should be removed, thou
should not be afraid. And as for thy trading, thy husbandry, thy occasions,
know no ingenuous child will prefer his own work before his fathers; the will
and the work of God must be done and preferred before ours; come out therefore
of such reasonings, and rather be thankful: Has not God saved thy life, given
thee many refreshments, and maintained thee until this day? and this is more
then he ows any of us; and therefore children, as concerning national stirs,
troubles and commotions, know you are not to murmr or repine, when the
servants are about your fathers business: If nations, men and devils combine,
do not grumble nor fear; the will and work of your heavenly father must be done:
However, beliver go forward with your occasions, with a holy subjection unto
thy fathers will; but take this in, that whether it be life or liberty,
prosperity or adversity, for so did Christ, it be with resignation of all to
God, Matthew. 26. 39. Not my will, but thine be done. Believers in times of fears
must do as the children of Israel did, Exodus 14. they were encompassed with a
huge host, and the red sea, yet they go forward till they could go no further;
and then comes in that, Stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord: So must
believers in the midst of all national fears, still be a going forward, and see
the salvation of God in all their enterprises.

But you will further object, Though I fear national troubles, it is not I
alone, but

I shall not blame, but argue what cause of fears, since being a believer, thou
have Romans 8. 28. All shall work together for good to them that love God; and
thou loving God, let it be tribulation or persecution, good will be brought out
of thy troubles and afflictions.

God will overturn Kings and Kingdoms; yet if it produce good for thee, what
cause of fears? God has thrown down Ahasuerus, with his hundred and twenty
Provinces; and the more he throws down, the nearer is the end of all things;
and this should be so far from grief to Gods people, that they should rejoice;
yea, lift up you heads you redeemed of the Lord: the more shakings of the
worlds powers, the nearer is your everlasting joy; Be glad then, and rejoice,
for the day of your redemption draws nigh: And the Text gives you this
comfort, that though foraign invasions come never so strong, and homebred
enemies plot never so secretly, yet fear not overcoming; for thou shall
overcome, says the Lord unto his Church and people at the 15 and 16 Verses,
Behold, I will make thee [speaking of the worm Jacob] to thresh the mountains,
and beat them small, and shall make the hills as chaff, and fan them, and carry
them away: Do but consider these expressions, and here is enough to answer all
national fears; and enough to draw forth thy spirit to rejoce in the Lord, and
to glory in the holy one of Israel.

Comfort for Believers, From their Spiritual Incomes.
1 Cor. 6. 17. But he that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit.
CHAP. I.
Showing the scope of the words, and how Believers and Christ are one Spirit.

THe Apostle in the former part of this Chapter reproves the Corinthians about
their going to Law about things indifferent; and in the verse before the Text,
about Fornication. He brings in these words, as lifting up his present Argument
to a more high and spiritual Conclusion, Know you not? says he, v. 16. that
is, You do know what Moses says, that Two shall be one flesh: this is
matrimonial coupling. The same effect has Fornication and sin: He that joins
himself to Drunkenness and Adultery, is one with Drunkenness and Adultery. But
now the Lord, to whom Believers are joined, has a spirit above the world, and
such base carnal defilements: For he that is joined unto an Harlot is one body,
but he that is joined to Jesus Christ is one Spirit.

The scope of these words holds forth that heavenly union and communion that is
between Christ and every Believer. And the Apostle brings them in as a royalty
that every Child of God has by being joined to Christ; as if he would have
them boast in this their present Income, above all such bitter sweets and
pleasures of sin, which are but for a moment. Mark therefore how he opposes it
against ^he poor and beggarly Contracts of this World and Sin; as being loath to
speak so much of the worlds miscarriages and defilements, and to hold so long
from the spiritual souls enjoyment. He does as it were wind up another key,
delighting in that wherein his heart had found joy and experimental comfort:
for every Believer is in union with Christ, and Christ is in union with every
Believer. Yea, here is my triumph, here is my glory; Every Believer has not only
union, but communion also: for between a Believer and Christ there is union;
they are one, and not only so, but there is enjoyment of communion in this
union, They are one Spirit.

In the words two things are to be enquired into. First, what is meant by being
one. And secondly, what is meant by being one Spirit.

1. By Union we are not to understand Corporal or Personal union; as if the
Husband should be the Wife, the Father the Son, or the Head the Members, or
contrary: but by being one with Christ, is a Spiritual and Conjugal union, an
union of Relations, as Head and Members, Husband and Wife; which though they be
two in appearance, yet are but one in compliance and acquaintance. As Moses
says in Natures wedlock. Two shall be one flesh; that is, man and wife shall
live, and move, and act together for each other. So Christ and every Believer,
though they be different persons, as head and members, husband and wife, yet
they both have but one Father, one house, one home; they live and move and act
together, have one compliance, one acquaintance, one enjoyment, one in love,
one in heart, one all. And the sum of this is eminently set forth in Ephesians. 5.
from the 23. v. to the end of the Chapter.

2. What is meant by being one Spirit: for this is Spiritual conjunction. In
corporal conjunctions there is a union in flesh; but this union of Christ with
the soul is spiritual, they are one Spirit. By Spirit here we are not to
understand the essential being of God or Christ; for he is said to be a Spirit,
Joh. 4. 24. God is a Spirit. He speaks it of his universal nature, as he is
Infinite and Omniscient: thus neither Angels or men are in union with him,
only Jesus Christ, who is God equal with the Father, blessed for ever,
comprehending all things, by whom all things subsist.

But by Spirit here is meant the participation of the gifts and graces of God,
whereby he does cooperate and work in our hearts a conformity to all those holy
ends and purposes as he has awarded in his Word to all the faithful in Christ
Jesus. So that by Spirit we are to understand the fruits of the Spirit. And
thus you may have a Cloud of witnesses. Romans 8. 11. But if the Spirit of him
that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Jesus from
the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in
you. That is, If God dwell in your hearts by faith, all the current of your
lives will be to dwell in him by love, by hope, and by obedience. Thus Gal. 4.
6. God has sent forth his Spirit into our hearts, whereby we cry Abba Father.
Here is the Spirit of Donation and of Grace sent from the Spirit of Power and
Glory, God has sent. So Joel 2. 28, I will pour forth my Spirit on all flesh.
Here is the Spirits pouring forth the Spirit, namely the fruits of the Spirit,
which are love, joy, peace, long-suffering gentleness, goodness, faith, etc.
which Spirit cooperateth in our hearts, through which we have communion in our
union.

I shall cast all that I have to speak at this time from these words, into
these three Considerations.

1. How may a Believer and Christ be said to be one Spirit?

2. What Evidences may I have, that my soul and Christ are thus in union? And
then,

3. What benefit and income have I by being united unto Christ? For so the Text
imports it by way of triumph, benefit and blessing to that soul which is one
Spirit with Christ.

And in all these three Considerations, I am not to speak of the Maximum quod
sic, or the Minimum quod sic; Not of the Degrees of believing: knowing that the
least grain of faith does as truly unite to Christ, as the Plerophoria faith of
assurance, though not so strongly.

First, How may a believing soul and Christ be said to be one Spirit? I shall
demonstrate this in some few and brief particulars.

1. This will appear in the life of Christ, and the life of a Believer. Take a
Believer in his birth and progress in this world, in his first and in his last,
and still you will find Christ and Believers walking hand in hand, and heart in
heart; they do not only close together in the final close, but through Christ
their whole life is a harmony, joying and joining and rejoicing in one another.
True it is, as Musicians may have in their Descant some sharp and flats, some
rests and pauses, yet even they set out the harmony: So a Believer may have
some withdrawings of divine light, Christ may seem to stand behind the wall and
to be estranged; but no sooner does Christ call, but straight says the holy
soul, Draw me, and I will run after thee, Can. 1. 4. And if the Saint cries, I
am my Welbeloveds, Christ says presently, She is his, Can. 2. 16.

Likewise as Christ and the soul have an union in life, so have they also in
death and suffering: If they suffer, he suffers; if he suffers, they suffer; if
Christ dies, the Saints die; yea count, reckon your selves so, says Paul, Romans
6. 11. yet with this difference; Christ dies for sin, the Saints to sin.
Christus non filius fuit irae sub ira; Christ was not a Son of wrath, though
under wrath. But we were both; and yet what we had done, Christ counts himself
had done, and stands in our stead. So that as Luther says, He was the greatest
sinner in the world. And he bids the Saints believe that all their sins were
laid on him; and that not only so, but that his righteousness is made ours; for
so says the Prophet, He is the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. And if we
be afflicted, Christ is afflicted; he having the same Isa. 63. 9
spirit of sympathizing, must needs have the same spirit in suffering. Out of
this sense, if Christ be bound and led to Mount Calvary to suffer for his
Saints, says the holy Soul, I am not only ready to be bound, but to die for
the name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 21. 13.

2. We are one Spirit with Christ, by having communion and interest in all the
precious graces of Christ. This is the Saints testimony, 1 John 4. 13. Hereby
know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his
Spirit: which Spirit is the sweet fruit of all the graces dwelling in our
hearts, and by which we cry Abba Father.

And if you would know what this Spirit of Grace is, the Apostle tells you, in
opposing it to the worlds envyings, Gal. 5. 21, 22. But the fruit of the Spirit
is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance* Be not proud of this thy Spiritual income; but be joyful, and be
cheerful; for against such there is no law. Why no law against such? Because
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes,
Romans 10. 4. So then if we rank up all these graces, Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, etc. these being one Spirit with Christ, we by
being in union with Christ, have a communion with all the graces of Christ.
Thus Christ dwells in us by faith, and we are in Christ by faith: Christ dwells
in us by love, and we dwell in Christ by love; only We love him, because he
loved us first: So that though we be many members, and have diversity of gifts,
and several operations, yet but one spirit, one body, one hope of our calling,
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, who is above all,
and through all, and in you all, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.

Thirdly, believers are one spirit with Christ, in that they leave all other
relations in coming to Christ: If any thing oppose, tribulation, peril, sword,
father, mother, friends, a believer will through thick and thin, cross or
comforts, good report or bad report, through all to Christ: How is man and wife
one flesh? by leaving all to be joined to one another, Matthew. 19. 5. For this
cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and
they shall be one flesh: Thus is it in the spiritual union between Christ and
the soul, they leave all for Christ: And this is but that which Christ has
done for us; for he left Glory, Father, House and Home, Phil 2. 5, 6, 7. Let
this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of
God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant; yea, he was made in the
likeness of men, and humbled himself, and became obedient unto death: And what
was all this for, but that his Saints might be joined unto him in spirit, in
righteousness, in life, in grace, in glory? Christ left all for us, that we
might have a union with him; so we must leave all other relations, and cleave
unto Christ alone. And therefore let us put the question unto conscience, How
many of us can part and leave all for Christ? if we find not this resolution
within us, but we have a cleaving to father and mother, to this worlds comforts
and enjoyments, profess what we will for Christ, yet so far as thy resolution
fails thee of leaving all for Christ, so far is my fear of thee, that thou art
not in union with Christ.

Fourthly, To be one spirit with Christ, does denote the constancy and
perpetual tie that is between Christ and the soul: No knot will be lasting and
holding, but this between Christ and believers. Couple our selves to flesh
never so strongly, yet all will be broken; couple our selves to sin never so
strongly, This shall you have of Gods hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow; your
vanity shall be bound up in vexation of spirit. No conjunction can hold, but
that which is spiritual; nor no spiritual conjunction, but that which is
between Christ and believers. Sin will make a separation; though God be thy
Creator, Preserver, these knots between the Creature and God will all be
broken: But this union with Christ and our spirits, it is a constant,
perpetual, and an everlasting holding. I have read of one, that writing to his
Consort, would use this salutation, Eternal thine: This was an expression of
excess, that can never be made good to any but Christ and believers; and
therefore for thy comfort, thou doubting believer, Christ and thee being one
spirit, bear up the head against all temptations; for thy head and husband
salutes thee with Eternal thine, Jer. 31. 3. The Lord has appeared unto me,
saying, I have loved thee with an everlasting love. A love that is both
boundless and endless; with such a love has Christ loved his Church and
people; And therefore though all fails, as it will, flesh and heart, and all
will fail, yet this spiritual union between Christ and the soul shall never
fail, Romans 8. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Summon all these into one; Tribulation,
distress, famine, persecution, peril, sword, life, angels, principalities,
powers, things present, things to come; now follows your triumph, Nothing shall
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

But may the soul say, If there be such Love, Joy, Peace, Meekness, Patience,
etc. What is the reason of all that variance, discord, and dissension that is
amongst even believers and professors?

The difference and disagreement amongst believers themselves, arises from
themselves, None should hate his own flesh. Believers are flesh of one flesh,
and bone of the same bone, all one in Christ; why not so one with another?

This is our fault [and indeed our misery] we keep the spirit of Christ under,
and we exalt our own passions: Christians therefore consider, what you do in
all your wranglings and disputings, keep to this rule, So far as you have
attained walk together, with a spirit of forbearance and compliance; and bow
your passions and your principles to the scepter of Christ, for that is not a
wangling, but a righteous scepter. I would have all Christians to keep to this
rule against sin, even to hate the Garment spotted with the flesh, not to touch
any unclean thing; for what concord has Christ with Belial, light with
darkness, sin with saints? No, says the Lord, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Be ye separated,
and I will be a father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters.

And Christians, for your Saviors sake, Let all bitterness, and envyings, and
wranglings be put away from you, as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. And thus much
for the first thing considerable, How Believers and Christ may be said to be
one spirit.

CHAP. II.
Touching Evidence whether we be one Spirit with Christ.

2. THe next thing to be touched upon, is, What Evidence may I have, that Christ
and my soul are one in this spiritual union? For this is very considerable,
before we can draw any saving and solid comfort in the benefits and spiritual
Incomes the soul has by being one Spirit with Christ.

1. As an Evidence for this union, try your union with Christ by your communion
with Christ. Not that you should measure out your union by your communion; for
it is possible for the soul to be united unto Christ, that as yet has no
acquaintance and familiarity with Christ. As Mary did, Ioh. 20. 15. talk with
Christ, as well as believe in Christ, and yet she did not know him; and why
might not she have supposed him to be Christ, as well as the Gardener?
Therefore let us not measure our union with Christ by our communion, but let us
try our union by our communion and enjoyment.

Can thy soul say from experience, as the Spouse, Can. 2. 4. He brought me into
the banqueting house, and his Banner over me was love. Without question so was
house and table, and all. Has thy soul ever been fed with his dainties? have
you been at his table, tasted of his wine? It may be thou will say, This I
know, that Christ has stood Rev. 3. 20.
at my door, and knocked at my heart, as he does at many a Sinners in a Sermon.
But when was the time that Christ came in and supped with thee? and when did
you sup with him? What inward feastings and familiarity has there been between
Christ and the soul? We know the tie of Nature will constrain some exchanges
and intercourses of love between man and wife; but much more the band of Grace
between the soul and Christ. Try therefore thy union by thy communion.

2. If you would know your Union, try not only by your Communion, but also by
Convincement: as Communion is an Evidence, so Convincement.

We know that there can be no true marriage, without convincement of love: No
more can there be between Christ and thy soul. Now, when was thy soul convinced
of Christ's alsufficiencie, and thy self of thy own natural misery? For this is
the way Christ takes to woo and win the soul unto himself, Ioh. 16. 7, 8.

3. They that have union with Christ, fly the pollutions of the world. None
can be one with Christ, and one with Swearing, one with Drunkenness: not one
with Christ, and one with Covetousness. In such pollutions there is not
communion with Christ, and therefore no union; For what communion has light
with darkness, Christ with Belial? The Spirit of Christ clears the heart of
such guests as drive a trade with sin. And would to God I might say of all you
Professors, as Paul says of many of these Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16. 11. Such
were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

4. They that are one with Christ, do mind the things of Christ, Romans 8. 5.
They that are after the Spirit, do mind the things of the Spirit; that is, All
their thoughts, words, works, projects and contrivances do habitually fix and
center in Christ. Try therefore which way thy thoughts, thy projects run: If
they meet in Christ, then from these and such like Evidences drink down thy
spiritual comforts; for from our union with Christ flow such spiritual incomes,
even benefits enough to hold up the heart in the worst of outward crosses,
losses, persecution, trial, troubles whatsoever. Mark therefore;

CHAP. III.
Shows the precious Incomes by being one Spirit in Christ.

FIrst, All the precious Promises are yours, 1 Timothy 4 8. Godliness is
profitable unto all things, having the promise of this life that now is, and of
that which is to come. True Godliness cannot be without union with Christ; and
(poor Creatures) it is very certain that this life will not make thee happy.
But now if another will, if a Jesus and Eternal Glory will, you have this
riches promised in that life that is to come. This life that now is, is indeed
to make you gracious; and in it you have a rich promise of comfort, Joh 4. 18.
I will not leave you comfortless, I will be with you to the end of the world. A
precious Jesus in a precious promise, is enough to bear up the soul in all
temptations. What though thou art poor personally? if Christ be one with thee
spiritually, thou have a plenty in the midst of all thy poverty. The Lord is a
sun and a shield; Ps. 84. 11.
yea, he will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from
them that are Believers. What says the Apostle for the chearing of thy spirit?
2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises.
What will thou desire more? If promises that are precious, if promises that are
great, if exceeding great and precious promises will do thee good, they are all
thine, if thou have union with Christ.

2. All the richest Graces are ours, from the least of Faith to the fullness of
Assurance. Gods graciousness is the richest and supereminentest grace: And it
may be for the present thou have but a grain or a drop of that Ocean; but know,
the whole Sea of love is all thine. It may be thou go weeping,
notwithstanding thou bear Ps. 126. 6.
precious seed; yet know thy spiritual comfort is sheafs of joy, yea joy
unspeakable and full of glory. At present thou have by union with Christ no
less then Riches of grace and Gracious riches; nay, but Exceeding riches of
Grace is all yours, if you be Christ's, Ephesians. 2. 7.

3. All the sweetest Comforts are yours, if you have union with Christ. I
cannot say all earthly Comforts, but rather Crosses; the sweetest and heavenly
Comforts are yours; and the very thought of this should swallow up ten thousand
Crosses, how much more the possession? Yet this is the fault of Christians; one
little trouble or Affliction swallows up abundance of Enjoyment; whereas one
thought of Christ, and one enjoyment from him should swallow up abundance of
afflictions. What will not peace of Conscience bring, which is a continual
feast unto the soul, by Christ being thine? And if Joy in the Holy Ghost may
comfort thee, that is thine: If wine refined, if wine and milk, if water of
life, if the Spring of all comfort may comfort thee, it is yours, if you be
married to Christ. 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4. Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort. And lest the soul should
think to have him thus only in Heaven, he adds, that he is a God of comfort for
you on Earth, to comfort you in all your tribulation; that we may be able to
succor, support, and comfort others, by the comforts wherewith he comfort
us. And what a precious Income is this, to have by Christ all heavenly, sweet,
and precious comforts!

4. By union with Christ, all the highest Privileges are yours. If it was a
privilege to be called the Son of Pharaohs daughter: what a high privilege is
it to be sons and daughters of the most high God? and thus thou art by being
united unto Jesus Christ.

1. What a privilege is it to be born an Heir unto some Great man on earth?
What honor and homage will men give to Heirs upon this account! But by this
union with Christ thou art an Heir to God, and Coheir with Christ. It Is true,
thou wast not born to it; but every Believer was bought into this eminent,
high, and noble privilege. And if we do but consider the price, it may suffice
to set forth this privilege. 1 Pet. 1. 19. Ye were not redeemed with silver or
gold, but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ.

2. It may be thou art poor; and therefore Great men upon Earth will scorn to
call thee Friend, Brother, Sister, Son, Daughter: many are so proud, that in thy
poverty they will be ashamed to own thee. But thou have this privilege in being
joined to Christ, that the Lord of all is not ashamed to call you Brethren,
Sons, Daughters, Friends: nay, you that are joined to Christ are Gods jewels.
Joh. 1. 12. To as many as Mal. 3. 17.
believed to them he gave power to become the sons of God. And says the
Apostle, Heb. 2. 11. For this cause he is not ashamed to call us Brethren. For
what cause? The verse before tells you; because of union thou have this
privilege: He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are both one; for
this cause he is not ashamed to call us brethren.

3: What a privilege is it counted to be free of some Corporations, as to be a
Freeman of London and such like Cities? And Paul tells you it was his privilege
to be freeborn. But now the Saints of God, by being united unto Christ, are
made free of that new Jerusalem, which is Heaven it self. Christ has enrolled
his Saints in the book of life; all your names are written and enrolled in
Heaven, and you are Citizens by virtue of your union. Ephesians. 2. 19.

4. What a privilege is it to be freed from all Arrests? Men's persons count
this a great privilege. But what is it to have the soul free; and to have it
so free, that it shall be free indeed? Such a privilege have Saints by Christ:
he by marrying them unto himself, has made them free, free indeed from all
arrests, No condemnation to them that are in Christ.

It would be well, if wicked men that have no interest in Christ, could bribe
Satan, Death and Hell, and at the great day of Judgment come off from their
arrests: but that is impossible; but if they could, Conscience will rise in
judgment against them, and issue out a greater Writ then that of Belshazar upon
the wall.

But now Believers are free by virtue of Christ; having this privilege, that
none shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect; for Christ has dyed, and
also is risen Romans 8. 33.
again, who will not suffer them to be tempted, to be touched or attached, but
deliver them out of all.

5. That soul that has union with Christ, has not only such an Income as all
the precious Promises, all the richest Graces, all the sweetest Comforts, all
the highest Privileges, but also all the noblest Hopes are yours, if you be
Christ's. What a noble hope is that, which a glorious Christ gives unto every
gracious heart? Col. 1. 27. Which is Christ in us the hope of Glory. This hope
is a mystery, yea a glorious mystery; yea there is riches of glory in this
mystery. By union with Christ this is our spiritual Income, Christ is in that
soul the hope of glory. True it is, that if in this life we had only hope, we
were of all men most miserable: as the hope of wicked men is, who make gold
their hope, Job 31. 24.
as Job speaks. But says the soul, I have not thirsted after such base and
earthly hopes as this worlds good, or this worlds gold; but Heaven, and God,
and Grace, and Glory, yea the noblest hopes, Christ in my soul the hope of
glory.

6. And lastly, not only the noblest hopes are thine by being one with Christ,
but all heavenly enjoyments are thine by virtue of thy union. And this is so
large an Income, that Saints and Angels cannot express: Eye has not seen,
neither has ear heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man to conceive
what God has prepared for such that are in union with Christ. Heaven, and all
Heavens enjoyments; Christ, and God, and Glory; a glorious God, a glorious
Christ, a glorious Glory. I can say no more; All is promised, and all shall be
accomplished. Saints united to Christ have all theirs; and they are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. 23.

And out of all that has been said, I shall add but a word by way of use.

1. Unbeliever, come forth, and behold the Income of the Saints, and with a
holy emulation enquire what is thy portion: say as they in the Canticles, What
is your Can. 5. 9
beloved more then another beloved? Say in a melting frame of pity over thy own
soul, What, must you that are called to be Saints have such an Income, as all
these Promises, all these Graces, all these Comforts, Hopes, and Privileges?
And what must I have? Tell thy soul with sadness, If thou art out of this
spiritual union with Christ, then all the fearful Threatenings, all the heavy
Judgments, the Vials of Gods wrath, with eternal judgments and everlasting
torment, is all yours, if you* be not in Christ and become a new creature.
Search therefore and seek: For, such Benefits and such spiritual Incomes have
gracious souls by being in union with a gracious Christ.

2. And last of all, Believers, Live at that rate as becomes the Espoused of
the Lord Jesus. They that have great revenues, fear not wanting; especially if
it be certain and sufficient, then we cast to keep house according, and live
and lay out sutably to our yearly maintenance. Now none can keep a better house
then Believers; for they have such a spiritual Income, that nothing can be more
certain, nothing can be more sufficient. What will not Promises, Graces,
Comforts, Privileges answer, when they are all precious, rich, sweet, and
heavenly? Every of these is by Christ an eternal maintenance, constant,
durable, that waxes not old: Thou may even feed thy very faintings, and
feast thy fears; for there can be no lack, where there is such spiritual and
heavenly supply.

Terror for Professors: OR, Man's Fruitlesness, without Saving Faith.
Jam. 2. 19. Thou believe that there is one God: thou do well: the Devils
also believe and tremble.
CHAP. I.
Showing the import of the Text, with the Doctrine and Parts, for further
Demonstration.

THis Epistle was not particularly written to any Church, but in general to
the scattered Tribes, as may be seen cap. 1. 1. And yet you have the Apostle
often calling of them by this appellation, [Brethren] as in the following
Chapters.

Notwithstanding this, he reproves them (and that sharply) of two eminent
faulrs that were among them. First, in regard of their Partiality; And
secondly, in regard of their Charity. So ver. 3, 4. compared with 15, 16.

And I think these two things the world will never remedy. But that the Saints
should be thus uncharitable, so lofty, and so partial, who would not wonder,
they having so righteous a God, and so merciful a Father? Yet this James found
amongst them. And therefore he comes more close to them in the 5. ver. Hearken
my beloved brethren, Has not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith,
and heirs of a kingdom? Mark how the Apostle comes in with this, as if so be
they were dull of hearing; and therefore he speaks it as whispering in their
ears, as if he were ashamed the world should know that Professors should be
Despisers, and so uncharitable unto their poor Brethren, who were as good as
they were by the Fathers side, and by faith, though not so rich in outward
ornaments and goodly apparel.

Grant, says the Apostle, that you be rich, and great, and goodly in apparel:
yet you need not be ashamed or despise a poor believer; for if he be poor, yet
if a believer, he is as good as thou art; All one in Christ, rich in faith: May
be thou have much more in thy hands; but what of that? the poorest in Christ is
an heir of a kindom; for God has promised this to them that love him, Verse 5.

Take heed therefore none of you be thus partial, as to despise a poor brother
in the faith of Christ, for they and you bear the impress of a worthy name: And
being thus partial as to despise, you blaspheme your holy calling in the
profession of Christ. Verse 7. And know Professors, if you have the faith of
Christ in respect of persons, it cannot stand with saving faith. There is a
faith that will not save, as the 14 Verse has it: But have as large a
profession as you will, if you have not the nature of faith truly operative,
and working in charity and lowliness of mind, all is nothing: Profession
without practice and performance, is but a dead faith, and profits nothing;
for thus he illustrates in the 15, 16, 17. Verses, If a brother or a sister be
naked, and destitute of daily food; and one of you say, unto them, Depart in
peace, be you warmed, and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things
which are needful to the body, what does it profit? the meaning is, have as
many good words as you will, yet if you have not practice in a measure suitable
unto your expressions, you are alone, your faith is but a dead faith: words,
though never so sweet, without works, are but as a sounding brass, and a
tinkling symbal.

From the scope, this will be very clear, That common profession without
spiritual operation, will deceive; and therefore James seems to be zealous
against such that have a great deal of name, but not the nature of true serving
of God. Says he Verse 18. Show me thy faith by thy works: you all boast of
believing, from professing; but the rule is, Show me faith by thy workings; not
from thy boastings or pofessings: You profess, and you boast of faith and your
profession; I must tell you who has faith too; them whom thou know are
damned; they whom thou think scorn to be compared with; yet know, the devils
and damned spirits do believe: Thou believe there is one God; the Devils also
do believe and tremble.

So that we may plainly collect, that the Text holds out a parity and disparity
between the common faith of the world, and the faith of devils; what the wicked
men of the world take in at large, through custom, birth or education, the
devils also may do as much. Man believes there is a God, so do the devils too;
the world believes that God is one, the devils believe so also. There is a
faith that does believe all to be true that God has made or done, and laid
down in his word, sed absque fiducia, but without trusting: and this sort of
faith is not only common to the world, and man, but also to the damned
spirits: And this in the sum of it, is properly called Historical faith: which
sort of faith, I fear is that which most of professos are fraught withal; which
sort of faith, is the faith mentioned in the Text. Most men have faith of this
kind; thus most believe, so does the devil; nay, the Apostle adds, that the
devil does something more; in a sort he outstrips man in that he knows; he also
is afraid; the devil believes Gods sovereignty, power, wrath, justice,
judgment, and he aches and quakes at it; Man also believes as much, but he is
hardened, bold and impious: Gods power, word, works, fear not man, whilst the
devil shakes and trembles at it: Therefore we may collect, That man in some
things has an excess, even of the devils; for though the devil cannot be
converted by the word, yet without the word he is convinced: Gods power and
greatness in his works fear Satan, and afright him, whilst man is bold and
incorrigible; the devil stoops and fears; whilst man is stubborn, the devil
trembles: And thus much for the scope of the words.

I shall draw that which I intend from them, into this Thesis or Point of
Doctrine; and I conceive it to be no more then what the Text affords.

That the common faith of wicked men, is no better then the faith of devils;
and that many men's obedience is not so good.

Before I take the doctrine asunder, let me say thus much in the general, that
many that own God by outward profession, and many that own the devil in a
devilish conversation, must not think it strange to own him in this doctrine;
for it is a truth, if we compare but this Scripture to the Pharisaical
Profession. In that of John 8. 41, 43, 44. the Pharisees were very zealous in
outward profession; and you may see their own confession in the 41 Verse, We
have one father, even God; notwithstanding this, they wanted love to God and
Christ; So the verse following speaks, If God were your father, as you profess
he is, and that but one; yet let me tell you notwithstanding this your seeming
glory, you are of your father the devil, accursed children, sons of a lie, and
his works you do, and will; and this is not so strange as true, if the
judgment of Christ may stand upon these seeming Saints.

And the judgment of the Apostle is the same in the Text; they did profess for
Jesus, and yet he parallels their profession to the devils: You believe there
is one God, so do the devils: And let me say to Christians in name, even in our
times, who can boast of promises and vows, and renouncing of the devil and all
his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked world: know for all these
outward privileges, your seeming sanctity, and outward profession, yet your
practice falls so short, that since nothing will make you serious, and truly
fearing, and truly believing. I will give you an instance which might make you
all afraid; however to be ashamed; for it will be found, that wicked man is
more incorrigible then the very devils; and notwithstanding all your
profession, yet take notice of this example; for though there be some that deny
the faith; yet amongst them that do profess the faith, they stand in their
profession but in computation with the devil; fot though thou believe there
is one God, the devils also do believe and tremble.

The wickedness and waywardness of men forces me to prove and pursue the
Doctrine in these four considerations:

First, That there is a devil. Secondly, That the devils do believe. Thirdly,
That most men's faith is not better then the faith of devils. And Fourthly, That
many men's obedience is not so good; For the Devils tremble.
CHAP. II.
Showing that there is a Devil.

1. THat there is a devil: Note such that are so curious and incorrigible, that
there is a principality, and a power, a prince of the air; and you need not
seek far; for he rules in the hearts of wicked men, Ephesians. 2. 2. The spirit
that now works in the children of disobedience, he wrought in the Apostles
time; but more now by such inquirings: And know, though he cannot compass the
heavens, yet he does the earth; Job 1. 6, 7. Now there was a day when the sons
of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among
them: And the Lord said unto Satan, Whence come thou? Then Satan answered the
Lord and said, From going to and fro in the earth: And if this answer, and the
Text answers thee not, take heed thou art not possessed; for though Satan is not
able to compass heaven, yet he can the earth; he may tempt in Paradise, but not
in heaven: And Adam fell by such inquiries; and they that question thus Gods
works made, want but one step higher to question God himself the maker.

What was he that tempted Christ? Mat. 4. the first man Adam found him to his
cost; the second Adam found him to our comfort and conquest, though to his own
cross; in both was fulfilled that promise, Genesis 3. 15 It shall bruise thy head,
and thou shall bruise his heel: This did Christ accomplish over sin and Satan.
And shall any be so bold as now to question? rather tremble, then thus tempt;
taking that council of rejoicing, not inquiring, Luke 10. 18, 19, 20. I beheld
Satan as lightning fall from heaven; notwithstanding in this rejoice not; but
know it is a truth; and if your names be not written in heaven, your terror too
-- If Christ tell thee he beheld him, thou needs not question further for to
see him: Be but acquainted with thy own heart, and without question thou may
feel him in such temptations that is common to man. Christ indeed brought Satan
by his death into a narrower compass then he was before; For Ephesians. 2. 2.
we were all children of wrath as well as others; but now this devourer cannot
devour Christ's saints and servants, though he seeks it continually: And ask the
saints, and they will tell you, they are sensible of the wiles of Satan; but
desire from their hearts no familiarity, no questionings, for that brings
complainings; no reasonings, for fear of overcomings; not any temptation,
without the Lords sustainings.

But that the Devil is an Angelical creature, that has both power and policy;
consider but these Scriptures:

First, That the Devil is an Angelical creature, observe but 2 Cor. 11. 14. And
no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed Isa. 27. 1
into an Angel of light: And then that he is powerful, the Text tells you, He
can transform himself: And you need not doubt but the devil is a notable
Politician, a subtle deceiver; for he is called An Accuser of the brethren,
seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. But to put you out of doubt, there is
not only a devil, but devils in the plural: there is not only a company, but
a kingdom of damned spirits; not only that Leviathan, Lucifer the great, but
he has a multitude of Emissaries; and therefore let us daily and continually
[the devils do surround us] take heed they do not possess us; he is very
vigilant to enter, to come without sending for, and inquiring after: And
usually he brings a multitude; as one sin, so one devil, hardly comes or goes
alone. We are many; take their own confession, Mark 5. 9. -- And we had all
need to watch; for a daughter of Abraham may be bound by Satan as Mary was,
Luke 13. 16. How was Job vexed, Paul buffeted? And if you that are so curious
on suchin quiries would know, why there is such a multitude of spirits and
places; let me but ask you, what did God make you for? I know you must needs
say, To serve him; and therefore know, for thy disobedience, incorrigibleness
and inquiries was the devil thrown down; and if thou thus followest his motions
and temptations, thou will without question have part with him, and his Angels
in torments everlasting; therefore be not a destroyer and a tormentor of thy
self: Be not wicked nor wilful, be not over wise, nor over curious; for by such
spiculation the devil became a devil, Jude v. 6. For the Angels which kept not
their first station, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in
everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day: It
seems the devil became a devil, by prying into things that were too high for
him, which cannot be commended in us creatures, when so condemned in Angels.
David keeps within his sphaere, and so let us; He would not exercise himself in
things that were too high; and why should we? for this is the fruits of such
enquiries: the evil angels were Angels of light, but now of darkness, hell and
torment; God for their presumptious speculation, threw them out of heaven; and
the devil by his subtily threw thee out of Paradise: Take heed that for obeying
this devil, the Lord throw thee not into hell; Verily thou will not come
thence, until thou have paid the utmost farthing, Matthew. 5, 26.
which to do is altogether impossible, Luke 16. 26. thus much for the first
consideration.

CHAP. III.
Proving that the Devil does believe.

2. AS there is a Devil, so the Devils do believe. The tempting spirits that
daily do surround us, have an historical faith; yea, and more too, a miraculous
faith: What means those expressions, of casting out devils by the Prince of
devils? Mat. 12. 27. They believe that God is the only Sovereign, Omniscient,
Powerful, Infinite; and also they believe their own damnation certain; upon
this ground they spite, and spleen, and envy Gods Elect, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Be
sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the devil as a roaring lion walks
about, seeking whom he may devour: What a combination of devils have we still
seeking and assaulting, spighting and spleening the saints and servants of God?
and therefore gives the Apostle unto us this council, Be ye sober and vigilant,
Resist steadfast in the faith; Watch over your selves; for the devil watches for
your souls, he seeks how he may devour: It is manifest that the devil owned the
Scripture to Christ, that some now adays fear not to deny, Matthew. 4. 6. If thou
be the Son of God, cast thy self down, Scriptum est, for it is written, Psalm.
91. 11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways:
The devil in this quotation owns both God the Father, and Christ the Son: And
this he alleages learnedly and readily, though very fallaciously, leaving out
that that made against himself; for it was written, He should not tempt the
Lord his God; and supposes that which in another passage he takes for granted,
Mat. 8. 29. And they cried out, and said, What have we to do with thee Jesus
thou Son of God? art thou come to torment us before the time? Mark, the devils
believe so much, that he does not only reckon Gods judgments and torments,
but he casts up the time too; though the devil will be tempting at all times,
yet counts not to be tormented before his time.

And if you would know the ground of this, Why the devil does believe, I shall
answer in a word, Because he may accuse such enquirers, that are not true
believers at the last day. The devil is called The Accuser of the Brethren,
Rev. 12. 12. therefore, Rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them; woe to
the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea; for the devil is come down unto
you, for he knows his time is but short; And what says the 10 Verse? For the
Accuser of the Brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and
night: And if he be thus bold with Saints? what will he not cast in against
common Professors? You may read how bold he was with Job, but surely he will be
more bold Job. 1. 2.
against pretenders to truth and faith at the last day, before the
judgment seat of God; so that I may very well reverse that saying of Christ to
wicked men, Think you that the Law, and God, and conscience will only accuse
you: there is one, even the devil, he will accuse you; I cannot say, in whom
you trust, but to whom you practice, whose faith and your faith are parallels:
thou believe there is one God, thou art not without a fellow, though a common
professor, The devils do believe and tremble.

Methinks I hear a moral common professor, who has the faith of the state, or
of the Parish, stand at Gods tribunal pleading, as they in Matthew. 7. 22. Lord,
Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and
in thy name done many wonderful works? So in that day will many plead, at least
in these days, they think such pleadings will serve the turn; Was not I born of
Christian Parents, Baptized into such a faith, lived all my life time under
such a Ministry, professed the Gospel of Christ, as the rest of my friends and
neighbors did, believed the word of God, and do verily believe it is a truth,
from the first of Genesis, to the last of the Revelation? And who can
[considering this] once doubt of my eternal welfare? But know, that
notwithstanding all this, thou will surely miss of it; for if thou have no
better plea, Satan will come in against thee, saying, Thus, If this man, and
this woman may have salvation on such terms as these, why may not I? I was no
common drunkard, or an adulterer; I have known the Scriptures from first to
last; yea, have addressed and professed the common Historical faith in all ages;
yea, I have been as an Angel of light in all forms, and through all times: And
yet notwithstanding my belief, and my profession, I must have no favor, for I
look for none; and why should this person, or that person have any more favor
then I, who had but like faith as I? Common professors, in the fear of him whom
you do profess, if ever you look for favor in that day, do not flatter and
deceive your own souls, by thinking Lord, Lord; for a man may be a
Gospel-professor; yea, a believer of God, his Word, his Truth, and yet so
unsound in the faith, that this sentence may be his, Depart from me, I know you
not, ye workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7. 23.

CHAP. IV.
That most men's faith is no better then the faith of Devils.

3. AS the Devils have an Historical faith, they do believe; so most men's faith
is no better then the faith of devils.

For the proof of this, I need carry your thoughts no further then the Text;
for mark, Thou believe that there is one God, that is at large, and in
common, as most of the world do; Have a name to live, but are dead: A profane
life, and a vain conversation, makes all thy profession vain and fruitless; as
the verse following the Text clearly tells you, Faith without works is
fruitless; and for all thy glorious profession, thou art but a vain man; so
says the text, But thou will know, O vain man, that faith without works is
dead? for though the devil believes to a base end, and thou say thou have
faith to a pretended good end; yet if thou attainest it not, but instead
thereof have eternal torment, what art thou the better? nay rather, how much
art thou the worse?

They that run in a race, run all; but one receives the prize; So many are
runners by common profession; but it is the saving faith only that obtains; it
is not a profession of Christ, but the enjoying of Christ, and living and
loving of Christ, that puts into a true account beyond the devil.

But does not the Text put a commendation I do well? Thou believe that there
is one God, thou do well:

This is that which unlocks the Text, and tells you the meaning of the Apostle;
The devils do believe and tremble.

Thou have a large profession; so has the devil, he has seemings as well as
men have; and therefore he is said To transform himself to be an Angel of
light; and when he does thus, he is most a devil: So when a man professes for
God, but inwardly acts for Satan, what is he better? if seemings be good in
Satan, it is good in wicked men; but if base, because without any fruits to
God, much more in thee, whose fruits are for Satan, notwithstanding thy
profession.

But it may be said, This is harsh to couple man's common profession to the
faith of devils; Is there not several sorts of Faith? as Historical, Temporary,
and faith of miracles? a belief of the letter, and with the times; and a wonder
working faith, as the Apostles had? and of which sort the Apostle Paul tells
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 13. 2. That if he had all faith, so that he could
remove mountains; yet if not charity, all is nothing: and this the Text imports
in those words, Faith without works is dead.

The Question answers it self; for had we They believe and tremble.

Some do make a threefold difference in believing; A believing of God, a
believing De Deo, Deo, and in Deum.
to God, and a believing in God: But assure thy soul, nothing but saving faith,
Christ being in thee, and Christ being for thee, will ever administer any true
and solid comfort.

And if nothing else, what will it profit me, if I have the faith of the times,
and faith of wonders; yea, and all knowledge, of which latter the devil has
abundance? surely no more then he that gains the world, but yet loses his soul;
a miserable and wretched bargain.

That wicked men may gather this truth more clearly, and tremble to know, That
most men's faith is no better then the devils; I will in a word or two give you
the parity and the disparity; wherein the faith of Devils, and the Common faith
of men do agree, and wherein they disagree.

CHAP. V.
Shows wherein the belief of common professors, and the belief of devils,
agree, and disagree.

I Shall begin with the disparity, unlikeness, or disagreement betwixt the
common faith of men, and the faith of Devils.

The first difference lies in this, that the devils are without hope, but
common professors are not; the devil knows himself to be reprobated, never to
be approved before God, but man thinks he shall: And I will not say otherwise;
so long as there is life, there is hope; but take heed this hope make thee not
ashamed through a false faith: Lay hold therefore of present opportunity, study
to be approved. The devils says Jude, Verse 6. Are reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day: Many there be that
live without God in the world, but pretend to have faith; the devil has faith
too: the Text tells you, He does believe; but he does not say, he hopes; and
our usual saying is, If it were not for hope, the heart would break: And know
assuredly, that without spiritual hope, thy soul will everlastingly perish.

2. Though the devils do believe, yet they can have no repentance: But man in
his false faith may be said to have some sort of repentance. Faith sometimes,
as it is taken for knowledge, may check the conscience. A common professor may
have flashings and sorrowings, as Judas had, who was a professed disciple of
Christ: But this sort of repentance profits no more then his faith, which only
makes a gilded outside; like the powder in the pan of the musket, it often
fires, but will not go off: So they that have common faith, may often fire, but
never go off to mortification, because all their faith is but the fruits of the
flesh, but not the fruits of the spirit.

But now this sort of repentance the devil cannot have; but he is seared and
hardened; though James tells you he does believe, it is possible for man to
find repentance, but the devil cannot.

3. The difference between the common faith of professors, and the faith of
devils 2 These. 2. 11.
is in this; man may believe a strong delusion in a lie, that is in the devil
the father of lies: How many are there in the world that hold the truth in
unrighteousness? makes no question to have happiness, without holiness; make no
question to be saved, but makes no conscience? What a strong delusion is this?
that while the devil believes things certainly, and man believes the devil
tempts to make him miserable, and yields unto all his corruptions, and yet
makes no doubt to be happy* Thus for the disparity betwixt the common faith of
men and the faith of devils.

Secondly, take also a word wherein the belief of men and devils has a kind
of likeness and agreement.

1. The Devils believe Gods sovereignty, as well as most men. God is powerful,
infinite, able, says the common professor; this will the devil acknowledge
too; man believes that God is unity; so does the Devil: thus the text is
express, Thou believe that there is one God; this harmony of faith have the
Devils, They believe this and tremble.

2. Man believes the Scriptures to be the word of God; that is, thou art a
common professor, and thou assentest unto this, that God is true, and that the
Scriptures are the written word of God, and all those several passages therein
contained; as of the Creation, Redemption from Adam to Noah; from Noah to
David; from David to Christ; from Christ to the several transactions of the
Apostles; yea, thou believe this very text to be a truth; Why all this and
much more may it be said that the Devils do believe: that they do believe the
history of the word, and something of the mystery of it, may clearly be
gathered from his tempting of Christ, Matthew 4. 6.

3. Grant that thou do believe that Jesus Christ dyed to save sinners; the
Devil believes this too, because he seeks the destruction of souls: And says
the Apostle, 1 John 3. 8. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that
he might destroy the works of the Devil. It seems the Devil made close work
with the hearts of men, that none but Christ could save; the devil believing,
mends his pace to destroy.

Grant therefore that thou have not only a historical faith, but also a
temporary faith; thou followest the times wherein thou live in, believing
according to the Doctrine and Custom; may be thou risest high in thy notion,
and professest the highest and choicest things; yet know, thou still may not
be said to believe, more then what the devil may be said to believe; for
without question he follows the fashion, and suits himself to the faith of the
times in all ages; he tempts under the Law, as under the Gospel; and as the
time grows shorter, and his kingdom weaker; so the Devil is more strong, and
more subtle: this may be cleared from that of Rev. 12. 12. The Devil is come
down unto you, having great wrath; that is, in the days of the Gospel, more
especially at the end of the world the Devil bestirs himself, having great
wrath; and what is the reason? because he knows he has but a short time; the
devil knows that happiness, and a crown of glory is laid up for the Saints; and
that judgment and torment is for himself, and for all his servants; upon this
knowledge he rages most in the last times. Thus much for the third thing to be
opened; before I speak to the last, suffer something by way of Use and
Application.

CHAP. VI.
Containing something by way of Application from the first branch in the
Doctrine.

IF it be so, that the belief of most men is no better then the belief of the
damned, then let us fall to serious examination of every one of our own hearts,
what our faith and profession is.

This is matter of great concerment; and the most subject to self-cousenage:
Men will believe no further then most believe; and most believe no otherwise
then the Devils believe. Search and examine what faith you have: for this is a
truth from Scripture, That the Devils do profess as well as men: and that most
men's belief is not better then the Devils. Say then to your own hearts, as the
Disciples to Christ, Mat. 26. 23. when Christ told the Disciples that one of
them should betray him, they presently put the question, saying, Master, Is it
I? So say of a truth, most men's profession is no better then what the Devils
have; and what is mine amongst the multitude of Professors? Give unto the Lord
a ground of that hope that is in you; for he calls for it by virtue of this
truth: Come in thou Creature; for I have given you rain from heaven, and
fruitful seasons. Come, speak thou common Professor: Thou make thy boast of
God, saying, thou do believe; but know, so do the Devils: thou fear with a
slavish fear; so do the Devils: thou boastest of historical and temporary
faith; but if thou find no more, thou will fall short of heaven and
happiness. Thou art as yet but as those foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. that thought
to be saved by profession; for they went under the notion of Believers, and it
is very probable they had historical and common faith; for they had lamps, but
they had not oil; they had not the fruits of the Spirit, and therefore could
have no entrance. Examine therefore what thy faith is; for most go for Virgins,
that have a name to live by common profession; but an evil and an adulterous
generation are such that have not the signs and seals of the righteousness of
faith, which is only by Christ Jesus our Lord.

2. You that content your selves with this common belief of men, know your
Companions. What though thou have gotten ten thousand Notions? yet if thou
want the fruits of the Spirit of Grace, which is saving Faith within thy
heart, thou art yet but in thy unregenerate estate, and thou sit but in the
same form with the Devil: he is the first in wrath, because he is thy father;
but thou art as yet no better then a child of wrath, because thou art not
begotten again by a lively faith, a faith that is active, and full of love and
longings after Jesus Christ, who is alone within the soul, the hope of glory.
It may be thou have lived thirty, forty, or fifty years: but what Faith have
thou? It may be thou have lived under the teachings of Christ, and under the
offers of grace, and peace, and reconciliation: this is more then ever the
Devil had; and yet he has as much faith and knowledge as thou have, if thou
have not saving, sanctifying faith: for the Devil has a faith of Time, and
Ages; and if thou have not learned beyond him, thou must not sit above him;
take heed thou art not thrown down to him, or below him. What the Papists say
of their Church, that men must believe as the Church believes; so may it be
said of the generality of professors, only not by such a necessity, but such is
most men's practice, That they believe but as the Devil believes: and in a sense
many must give place to the Devil even in believing, at leastwise in obeying.
But know, as you are Companions here to believe alike, so take notice that
without saving faith thou must live alike in torment. It is very like but that
Servant was within the pale of profession, Luke 12. 45, 46. he had a tongue to
say, I am a Believer, and make no question of heaven and happiness; but in his
heart he said, My Lord delays his coming. Here is a profession of one God, as
these in the text had; yet the Lord of that servant may come in an hour, and
cut him asunder, and give him his portion with unbelievers.

3. If the common belief of men be no better then the belief of Devils, only in
the aforementioned differences, as that the Devil is without hope, without
repentance; and both these are annexed yet to the life of man from the Bowels
of mercy: while it is called to day, beg earnestly at the gate of the bountiful
God for mercy and true faith; beg Heaven to cleanse thy leprous soul of lust
and sin, and to give thee saving faith, that thou may outstrip the Devil
before thou dyest: For if thou have all knowledge, and all faith, so that thou
could remove mountains, yet all this is nothing, without Christ be in your
hearts by faith. Say therefore as he does in the Gospel, Mar. 9. 24. Lord, I
believe; help my unbelief. I have a common profession; but what will this
profit me? The Devils do believe, and yet are the first of unbelievers: I
believe Gods sovereignty, that Christ dyed for sinners; yet, Lord, I believe,
help mine unbelief.

And that this may be from thy heart, consider these few particulars.

1. Consider, what will profession profit thee, if thou attainest not the end
of it? They that run, if they do not attain, it is no prize, but rather a
trouble. Men by professing, and not attaining, will come home by weeping-cross:
for as there will be nothing due, so there will be a heavy loss, the loss of
Heaven, the loss of God, his glory, thy own salvation. Consider therefore so to
run, that you may obtain the end of saving faith, which is the salvation of
your souls.

2. Thou have sins of Commission, that are enough to condemn thee, the least of
them being charged upon thee; and without faith in Christ, all must be charged.
But yet consider, if thou could diminish sins of Io. 3. 19.
Commission, what will thou do for sins of Omission? This will be the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, but men love darkness more
then light. And because thou did not believe, thou did not love, thou did
not savor of the grace of God. Consider thy want, as well as thy wickedness:
If thou want a heart-love to Christ, in the best of all thy professions and
performances, thou art but as a sounding brass, and as a tinkling cymbal.

3. Consider what abundance do profess; how few there be that shall be saved.
There is but a little flock, that need not to fear the enjoyment of God and his
kingdom, Luke 12. 32. but there is a multitude that do profess, that think they
shall attain; but the Devil will as soon, because they have not filial fear in
their profession, nor saving faith, the fruit of the Spirit of grace, within
their hearts. Compare but that of Isa. 10. 22. to the practice of the world,
and certainly it may make thee look about; For though the children of Israel be
as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall be saved. This Paul quotes
in Romans 9. 27. and makes it applicable to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews.
This also let Professors now consider: for though I dare not forbid any to
hope, yet I am afraid that through common and National profession most will
miscarry.

4. Consider the character of the last times; There will be but a little Faith,
but abundance of Profession. Every one takes it for granted, that we are in the
last times; and in those times it is remarkable to have but little faith and
love, but without question never more profession; but it is most false, and as
cold as men's charity: which is very significant to be now; for in these days
of ours never was there more profession of the Christ of mercy, and the Christ
of love, but never more coldness and deadness to show works of mercy and love
to one another. And this is no wonder; for when men are wanting to their own
souls in a lively and sound faith, no marvel they are not wanting unto men in a
cold and frozen charity. Men love the world more then Christ and his members,
though they seem by profession to have a love to both. Joh. 3. 19. yet they
rather are in darkness then in the light, because their hearts are evil.

5. And lastly, consider the deceitfulness that is in our own hearts. For what
is most men's security, but even the name of Christianity? and the heart loves
to have it so. All is well, thinks the common Professor, if he has been
baptized into such a faith, or rather into such a formality; brought up under
such Parents, lived under such a Ministry, and accounted of the Parish Church a
member, then they think as well as the best. This is most men's security; and
this is Satan's subtilty to deceive the hearts of men. The Devil has wrought a
notable and cunning design in the world; to make people believe, that if they
be accounted Christians, and in common, in such a Parish, that all is well, and
that they are Christians indeed, and members of the Church as well as the best.
But let us not deceive our selves nor our souls, in being such outside Jacks in
Religion and Gods service and worship; for all are not Israel, that are of
Israel. And surely they must needs derogate, that hold forth the Church of
Christ to Nations and Parishes.

And thus much for the third General, That most men's faith is no better then
the faith of Devils. The last follows, which is, That many men's obedience is
not so good as the Devils is; for he believes and trembles.

CHAP. VII.
Stating the other branch of the Doctrine, with some cautions.

THat the Devils do believe, the Text is plain; and that most men's faith is no
better, I have explained unto you. That which I am now to open, and you to own
as truth, is this,

That many men's obedience is not so good; the Devils believe and tremble.

Take many men as they are under the power and command of God, and draw but
forth their conversation and practice; and do but compare the employment,
submission and obedience of the Devil, as he is under power and sovereignty,
and it will be found, that many men fall short of what the devil does; for he
does believe Gods sovereignty and power, and tremble at it.

Before I give you demonstration, note the terms in the Thesis, or Doctrine by
way of caution.

1. The terms that I put the proposition into, is not all, but many; not
believers, but wicked men; and amongst wicked men, not all of all sorts, but
such that are incorrigible: And how far short or over, moral, and profane, and
common professors go, we shall anon examine.

2. You are to understand, that when I say it is not so good, I do not mean,
that the devil has any good obedience, or wicked men, properly so called, not
any good via eminentiae, sed via comparativa, by way of eminency, but by way of
comparing their practice to Gods superlative commands.

3. By way of caution, know that all obedience both of wicked men, and of the
devils too, is not obedience to answer, but to avoid: not any obedience as
willing or cheerful, but slavish and fearful. The Gaderenes and the Devils
agree in this, in that passage, Mark 5. 12, 17. they both would avoid, and
could not endure to be molested; only this is the difference, the devils
besought they might depart from Christ; the Gaderenes they desire Christ would
depart from them.

That men and Devils are within the verge of Gods power and precepts, it will
appear, if we but compare Jobs first and second Chapters; from whence we may
clearly collect, that the Devil permissively may tempt and strip not only the
wicked, but even Gods own children. But yet observe, he is like a slave
submissive; though he desires nothing more then the ruin of Gods Church and
people, yet he creeps at Gods commands, and keeps within the verge of Gods
power and greatness. Indeed he seeks to devour all, and malice is his proper
work; but if the Lord speaks to the proud waves, Thus far may you swell, but no
further: the Devil may touch Jobs goods, his cattle, and his children; but his
life he must not; and he keeps touch, not out of any desire the devil has to
preserve one, or any wicked person; but would devour all, and ruin all: And
therefore wonder wicked men at Gods goodness in your preservation; and your
friends cruelty in seeking your ruin and destruction; for the devil is our
adversary, though wicked men's supposed friend; and he goes about continually
like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. Who would then be a slave to
Satan? to whom though we are so willing to obey; yet if God did not restrain
him, he would destroy us; and this is all the comfort a wicked man can have in
all his sweets of sin; that though he please the devil, and please himself, but
displease God; yet consider, did not thy displeased God restrain thy contented
devil, he would cut thy throat every moment; and who would be a slave unto such
a slave? or rather, who would not fear and serve such a God, who daily
preserves, and also restrains, notwithstanding thy daily and such notorious
provocations; might not the Lord say, I will avenge my self of these mine
adversaries; and wrath take them, and devil take them; but instead of this he
bridles up Satan; and instead of wrath he pours down mercy and preservation;
and why should not kindeness melt us, and mercy overcome us?

The Saints indeed may comfort themselves in this, that though Satan desires to
winnow them like wheat; yet Christ prays, and has promised, Luke 21. 18. Not a
hair of your head shall perish: They may indeed be pulled off by persecution,
but lost they cannot be; for he has promised the keeping of them, to thy great
comfort; and that tells thee his care in taking account of them, Matthew. 10, 30.

For the prosecution of this more clearly, take notice of these three things;
into which I shall cast the remainder of this discourse:

1. I shall prove the Doctrine, and explain it. 2. I shall give you some
aggravation of the Doctrine: 3. Some brief application; and so conclude.
CHAP. VII.
Wherein the Doctrine is explained, and obedience compared 'twixt men and
Devils.

1. FOr the explanation of the Doctrine, That many men's obedience is not so
good as the Devils is. I shall compare the way and practice of man, with the
way and practice of the devils: And let us in the hearing of it, or the
reading, bring forth conscience to judge the difference; for to that I shall
now and then appeal unto, to clear the point in hand.

Before the judgment seat of God all men appear in two sorts, either sheep or
goats; godly or ungodly; good or bad; and the reason is, because God judges
like himself absolute judgment; and we then shall say, That God is righteous
in all his ways, and just in all his judgments: but now amongst our selves, as
we are in this world, and in our present being and practice, we may judge three
sorts of persons; yea, amongst them that do profess for Christ, you have such
mixtures and interminglings, as special believers, general professors, and
commonly profane persons, which are in a sort professors also: As the Apostle
reduces all sins into that Triplicite, The lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, 1 John 2. 16. so every man and woman may be
brought into one or other of those three considerations. I dare not compare you
amongst your selves by name; but according to your several obedience, I shall
compare it both for quantity and quality, and wager it to the text in hand, and
the instance therein mentioned, which is the devil; for though it be said, that
all the forementioned several sorts of men do believe; so does the devil, and
that with trembling: The Devil believes and trembles.

And because you should not think I would be partial, I shall instance in the
first sort that I mentioned; and do you that are either partial or impartial,
judge.

1. I shall call forth the obedience of true believers. Believers what say you,
you have true faith, but imperfect obedience: And you see from the Text, that
the Devils do believe; and also that they have submission: Now dare you wager?
Yes, may the holy soul say, Satan, all thy obedience it is but slavish; and
therefore trembling Satan may be sent by God, but he seeks all for himself: I
live [may the true believer say] in the perfect law of liberty; but the Devil
in all his submission and obedience under that command that genders unto
bondage. Satan obeys indeed when God commands, but all his obedience is in a
curse whose beginning and ending is in damnation. Satan moves under the power
of wrath; but a believer moves because he is moved; he loves because he is
first loved; and obeys through an infinite obedience, even the submission of
Christ, Gal 2, 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Christ moves the
Christian to know, to work, to walk; he is the beginning and the progress, and
the perfection of every true believers obedience. Every Christian has an
infinite obedience, because Christ is his; and therefore he can triumphantly
challenge all; as Paul does Romans 8. 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods elect? it is God that justifies; none can condemn; it is Christ that
dyed, and is at Gods right hand for us, both to excuse us, and acquit us, by
his own infinite Intercession and Satisfaction.

And though the Devil and wicked men may yield some obedience as God is a Lord
and Sovereign; yet all that either of them can have, has no acceptance,
because all they do or profess, it is but of servile and slavish fear.

But now Christ has brought believers into a near relation; God being their
Father, and himself being their Righteousness, and the holy Spirit their
Comforter, speaking in them the obedience of Christ, which acts them in
power, and spirit, and life.

And now wicked men you being Judges, which is best? the obedience of Christ,
which is the obedience of Saints; for when Christ was obedient unto death, so
were all the Saints: So says the Apostle, Reckon your selves dead, when Christ
dyed; your selves risen, when Christ was raised: And so of all his other saving
benefits; they are all accounted believers: and then judge you, either in
regard of quantity, or in regard of quality. Every believers obedience is
spiritual, as Christ is spiritual; and filial, because Christ was the only
Son; and with him, and through him, all are welcome, because Christ presents
them unto his Father as Sons and Daughters, without spot or wrinkle.

And then as for quality, so for quantity. As believers have spiritual fear,
and love, and obedience; so likewise they have infinite love and obedience:
Christ being infinite in obedience; so is every believer by Christ Jesus; For
he is our Jesus, says the Church; and my Jesus, says the soul: Not only a
Head, and Husband, and Redeemer of his Church, but as full and complete for
Col. 2. 10.
every believer; ye are complete in him who is not only the head of his body
the Church, but every member is in him; and Christ is infinite, and all in all:
so that saying of Solomon. Prove. 12. 26. The righteous is more excellent then
his neighbor: True believers have Christ in them the hope of glory: And Christ
for them all performance.

But may the world say, Indeed if you take in the obedience of Christ: But how
is it in point of their own conversation? do not they whom you account Saints
fall short, and subject to the same passions and infirmities as others?

I Answer, for such that are Saints indeed, Noah, Lot, and David had; yet judge
the scope and end of their practice, by considering what is thy own, and what the
Devils have. May be thou can say, Thou art not guilty of common and base
enormities, such as Drunkenness, Adultery, Swearing etc, but tell me upon what
ground do thou refrain? is it because thou would not grieve the holy spirit
of God? Ephesians. 4. 30. or is it because thou know the curse? upon this last
account the Devil and all wicked men obey; not because they bear any good will,
love or liking to God or his ways, but out of hatred, envy, and slavish fear.

Christ is said to have converse with creatures; and what is it for but to seek
and save that which was lost?

To this end was Christ's coming, crucifying, dying, preaching, praying and
practice: And Believers in their measure tread in the same steps of exhorting
and building up one another, even as Christ has given them example.

But now take the Devil and all his Emissaries; and though they seek
diligently, what is it for but only to devour and destroy? Your adversary the
devil goes about continually seeking whom he may devour; the Devil is
continually in motion, very vigilant and active; but to what end? only to
ruin and confound such whom God means and minds to save. The Devil is very
ready to run on Gods errand, as in that case of Job: but he endeavors
altogether his own end, to murder and devour souls, and to deceive the hearts
of the simple: He may be obedient to Gods Sovereignty; but think of his end,
and give the verdict to thy own soul.

2. Though a believers obedience is better then Satan's, because the obedience
of Christ is theirs; and what they do, they do from a principle of love, and
not of hatred; but what is the obedience of common professors* such that have a
name to live, but are dead; have outward seeming, but no inward sanctity;
having a form of godliness, but not matter and substance, true spirit and life?

The highest of this sort of men's obedience, may be accounted either in
morality, or hypocrisy.

1. For your morality, in that you are common professors, and within the pale
of the national Church; and none can say you are Drunkards, Swearers, or
Blasphemers, but a civil honest man, paying every man his own, relieving the
poor, according to your proportion, I do no body no hurt, as God forbid I
should.

But tell me, what good do thou do? He that is not with me, says Christ, is
against me; and he that gathers not, scatters, Mat. 12. 30. What if one
should give his body to be burned? as it is possible, from the authority of
that Apostle in that of 1 Cor. 13. 3. yet if this should be, and the heart not
linked in love to Christ; all such performances would be like the untimely
fruit of a woman, having no account before the Son of Righteousness: For what
will this amount to more, then what the Devil is said to do? John 8. 44. The
Pharisees did many glorious performances, had a zeal for God, much in alms,
frequent in fastings, paid every man his own, lived a moral life; so that none
outwardly might say, Black was their eye; and yet Christ tells them plainly,
They were of their father the devil, and his works they did; they had not stepped
one step further then Satan, notwithstanding all their performances, because
they wanted single and sincere love to Christ: And that which is remarkable,
our Savior tells them, that though they did not do so plainly the Devils
drudgery; yet they did dig in his Mines, rowed in his Galleys, wrought at his
work; His works ye will do: As the Devil is most a Devil, when he seems to be
an Angel of light: So all seeming profession, without sincere love to Christ,
is from the Devil, and for the Devil; Ye are of him, his works ye do.

2. As morality, so hypocrisy, that which accompanies common professors in all
their performances; And what is this more then what the Devils have? Take your
common professors; and what is their temper in all that they pretend for God,
but like the Laodicean, of a lurkwarm temper, neither hot nor cold: And the
Spirit of God proclaims Rev. 3.
such not worth a casting out, but to be spewed up; an expression setting forth
Gods loathing of hypocrites; as if he should say, I abhor such from my heart;
and will, if men continue with deceitful tongues, and double hearts, throw them
out with a vengeance: Take heed therefore thou hold not a lie in thy right
hand, seem to be for God, his Glory, Gospel, Church and People, and yet
underhand work for Satan, and the destruction of all the truths and Saints of
God, by thy secret, wicked and treacherous dealing. The Devil makes as large a
profession as the best of hypocrites; he professes, yea, in a sort prays too;
as Mar. 5. 12. the devil beseeches Christ to depart; and without question out
of slavish fear was in earnest: And herein the Devil surpasses many an
hypocrite, for the Devils believe their damnation certain; and the hypocrite as
a hypocrite is as certain, but will not believe it. The difference between the
Devil and an hypocrite is chiefly in this, the devil obeys directly against the
mind of God; but an hypocrite indirectly against the mercy and grace of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: The Devil is a known hater, though a great
pretender; but an hypocrite is a secret hater, and a great pretender: The Devil
is known to be a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour; but an hypocrite is
known to be as a Saint, but inwardly a ravening woolf; a pretended Prophet in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves: And coupling these
together, judge you the difference.

3. Let me now compare in the last place, such that are commonly profane; for
though the scales were even before, poysing the belief of common professors,
with the belief of Devils, and that the obedience of either did but answer the
profession of either, morality and hypocrisy being the weight of most men's
Religion; yet there is a sort, whose obedience is worse then the Devils is, and
that is such men, who though they do profess, yet are openly profane, and
incorrigibly wicked; such that are resolved sinners, that remain stubborn and
obdurate under all judgments and mercies, such a person that turns the grace
of God into wantonness, and commits all kind of sin with greediness: Such
persons as these are not so bad, but worse then the Devils are; that practice
in their profession in such a manner, as if they would double damn themselves;
as the Apostle Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 2. 1. such that bring upon themselves swift
destruction, that pull iniquity as with cart ropes, helping forward their own
damnation: Such obdurate persons are not so obedient as the Devils, but are
more disobedient: And that this may appear, mark what the text speaks, The
Devils tremble; but many men are more obdurate, they fear not sin, judgment or
wrath, but are insolent and incorrigible under all.

Although the text for this is very clear, yet for further testimony compare
that of Mat. 12. 43. with Mat. 23. 15. betwixt these two Scriptures you may
make this collection, That there are some that are made devilish by the
sophistry of hypocrites; and some that make themselves more devilish, by
sweeping and garnishing, attiring and priding themselves for Satan, make
preparation for Satan; and both are said to be children of Satan, but by their
own incorrigibleness and devilish hypocrisy far worse. Man is so wicked, that
he does more then the Devil does; for he makes his own estate worse then it
was; And though the Devils instruments are devilish, yet others may be said to
be made by them twofold more the children of hell then they themselves.

When God speaks out thunderings, the Devil couches, he trembles: But how often
has many a wicked man been called unto from heaven, and commanded to come out
of the gall of bitterness, and the bonds of iniquity; but instead of unloosing,
he chains himself more faster, and waxes worse and worse, hating to be
reformed, but making himself more and more deformed, by all impiety and wilful
wickedness. If the Lord speak to Satan to tempt Job, as by Satan's desire he did
permit, Job 1. 6. and 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. and yet observe, notwithstanding the devil
had permission, he keeps within his commission and submission; he has liberty
to touch all but his life; but wicked man as much as in him lies, kills life,
and love, and all.

If Christ say to the unclean spirits, Come forth, they presently obey; as in
that of Matthew. 8. 31. They besought him: The Devils obey and pray; But how many
wretches are there that will do neither? but curse, and swear, and forswear; so
that many do outdo the Devil in wickedness, but come short of him in obedience.

How often has the Drunkard, Swearer, Proud and Licentious persons heard the
call and command of God by his word and works of judgment and mercies? but
when shall we find them trembling, as the Devil does, but rather worse and
worse, like the dog they still turn to the vomit: The drunkard hears the word,
but acts in drunkenness; the covetous wretch still wallows in his covetousness,
notwithstanding the often call of the Word, which commands our conversations
should be in heaven, and in earth without covetousness. Judge you that have but
sense and reason, Who is most obedient? He that trembles at Gods power and
greatness; Or he that hears Gods word of truth and mercy, but obeys not?

How often have wicked men heard Gods command, saying, This is the way, walk in
it; and, Observe that which I command you? But how often have thou rebelled and
cast Deuteronomy. 47. 11.
all behind thy back? How often have the wicked heard Gods judgment rendered
with threatening and vengeance? But when did thou tremble? How often have you
heard the call of Mercy, and the Grace of the Christ of Love? but when did thy
heart melt, and thy eyes shed tears in the consideration of an offended
Majesty, and a precious Savior, whom your wicked hands and hearts have
crucified and slain? Of a truth thou art worse, more obdurate then Satan; for
one of these makes the Devil tremble; he trembles at Gods greatness: but thou
art hardened under all. Sovereignty, and power, and wrath fears the Devil; but
nothing will make wicked men to fear, at least to be filial. And judge you
Righteous, what is the difference.

And if any would know a reason why the Devil is more obedient then many
incorrigible creatures, it is nor wilt be so; for God commands the contrary:
And what though, thou will say, the Devil tempts? know also, the Devil cannot
constrain; but mark the desperate wickedness of thy own base and corrupt
spirit; For this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, but
men love darkness rather, or more then light, because their deeds are evil,
John 3. 19.

CHAP. IX.
A word of Aggravation and Application to Common Professors.

THus having the demonstration, take a word or two of Aggravation, and also of
Application.

1. By way of Aggravation: Know, thou that art an incorrigible profane person,
thou art worse then the Devils are, in regard thou art under dispensation of
Providence, Grace, and Mercy: Thou art taught by judgments, and by mercies,
but cannot be wrought upon; thou have use of means, the Devil has not: the
word of God, and the works of God knocks daily at the door of thy hard and
frozen heart, saying, Sinner return, return. May not I say to desperate and
impenitent sinners, as Christ says of Chorazin and Bethsaida? Luke 10. 13. Woe
unto thee Chorazin, and woe unto thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works had
been done in Tire and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had long ago
repented in sackcloth and ashes: So, woe unto you searedhearted sinners; and woe
unto you that are professors, but still prophaners; had the means of grace been
proclaimed to devils, as unto you, they might have improved more; for under
lesser means, nay without any hopes, they are obedient; yet thou under all
means, yea, all sorts of means, remainest obdurate.

2. The Devil lives not under daily mercies, as wicked and profane men do; God
giving them fruitful seasons, and feeding them with food and gladness; yet how
does the Devil own Gods call, and keep to his Commission, and trembles at his
word and power? but wicked men at neither.

3. Thou live in the sense of temporal mercies, so that thou must needs
confess, thou have in a measure tasted of Gods common bounty and providence;
the Devil has not had the same relish of temporals, nor any offers of
spirituals: But how will this aggravate thy condemnation, when the Devil yields
better obedience, when not one drop of mercy is offered unto him; thou art
nothing more then disobedient, and yet behold a fountain opened of grace and
mercy unto thee.

4. Although the Devil be without hope, so that if he would repent, yet he
cannot; yet the Devil goes when God commands, yea he dreads and trembles at
Gods Sovereignty: So long as there is life, we say there is hope; O be ashamed,
or shame the Devil, for he obeys that cannot repent; repent thou and obey,
least thou be eternally hardened.

5. Salvation by Jesus Christ is that which thou live under in these days of
the Gospel, which is tidings of gladness; and by the Apostle called great
salvation, Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect such great salvation?
that is, more then the Ministry of Angels, even Jesus Christ himself in his own
dispensations is offered and tendered. And if salvation be so great, and the
tender of it so large, as to the worst of sinners, calling upon thee, but
rejecting the Devil, yet the Devil more yielding; this must needs be a great
aggravation; for the Devil trembles under the sense of power and wrath; thou as
an unbeliever art obdurate under the tender of grace and love; and therefore
thou will he unexcusable, whosoever thou art, that living under the means of
grace, neglecting the means; thou will be found a rejecter of mercy; And how
will thou escape? thou bring upon thy self swift destruction, which the
devil would not do.

Lastly, There is this aggravation in every unbelievers misery, that
notwithstanding the Devil be first in torment, yet wicked and incorrigible
persons will be most in torment; for though the Devil be a Prince of darkness,
yet is he a miserable slave; yet if thou live and dye in unbelief, thou will be
a slave unto this slave; yea, all the Devils will tyrannize over thee: And
know, to thy fear and trembling, there is the aggravation of mercy and
providence will burn thee in hell, which will not scorch the Devil. The Devil
shall have the fire of wrath, but the aggravation of mercy will be all
cruelties on such that obey not the Gospel; the mercy of God will be in wrath
and judgment, all will be to wicked men a consuming fire; therefore fear and
tremble, and consider, if mercy will not melt you, wrath and fury will pierce
you, and consume you.

1. As a word of use: What terror is this to such that are implacably wicked!
Oh the fears and torments that will shortly be on such that are wanton and
negligent under mercy, now the day of vengeance is approaching! and think never
so slightly, there is no escaping.

2. Use by way of restraint: Will all be against wicked men at last? What a
misery is it that love and mercy will not constrain you? Now my delight is not
in this to enlarge; but would the love of God in Christ might constrain you; if
not, let the fear of wrath restrain you, or else for certain the Devil will
take you: And who would be a child to such a father, a slave to such a slave?
Do not let the Devil shame thee; but let the wrath of God fear thee, and his
Love and Mercy melt thee.

Last of all, Saints heighten up your spirits and your expectation; though the
wicked now laugh, and you mourn, yet when death comes, their bands begin; no
end of the wickeds torment, nor of your consolation; for it is but a night of
sorrow, and to morrow your redemption shall be completed, Even the expectation
of your faith, the salvation of your souls.

Counsel unto Saints, As they are Sojourners and Strangers in the Earth.
Psalm. 119. 19. I am a stranger in the earth, hide not thy Commandments from
me.
CHAP. I.
Showing the Division of the words, and the Doctrines therein.

A Strange Text, may some say, for this occasion: Why grant it so, yet it is no
more strange then true; and I doubt not to understanding Christians the Text
will very well suit the time, and this present solemnity.

In the former Sermon you had something of the Son; now something from the
Father.

The difference betwixt the Father and the Son, is to be observed, it lay not
in their David and Solomon.
Offices, they were both Kings; David was a King, so was Solomon his Son: but
the one knows much, the other experienceth more; Solomon had abundance of
knowledge, but David more spiritual experience: Solomon tells you of the vanity
of the creatures, but David tells you what he found himself in this world, and
what he found the Lord unto him in his distresses: God was his Rock, his
Shield, his Shepherd, his Tower of Defense, Psalm. 33. 1. Psalm. 18. 2. and in
the Text you have his own experience and esteem of himself in the world, I am a
stranger in the earth, hide not, etc.

The Text is an Argumentative petition of David's, [not to move God] but that
the Lord would move toward him in pity and compassion; as the beggar, when at
the bountiful door, knows he is Lord of nothing, but the Master of the house is
Lord of all; and therefore he tells his condition, I am hungry, cold, and
comfortless, naked, house and harborless; concluding him to be bountiful, he
tells his condition, and therein requesteth pity and compassion.

Even thus does David at the bountiful door of the Lords wisdom, who gives and
upbraideth not. Lord, says David, I am not at home, but in a Country where I
want a guide: I am far from father or friend in this tabernacle of clay; I
sojourn up and down as did my fathers; I am not only in my pilgrim-weeeds, but
in my journey, wandering now here, now there; And whether shall I wander without
directions? guide me, direct me, and rule me; for I am a traveller and a
stranger forlorn, without thy conduct; and take but knowledge of me, and my
condition, and I know thou will grant unto me thy pity and compassion: Thus in
general; but more distinctly observe in the words these two parts:

1. David's confession. 2. David's supplication.
His confession in these words, I am a stranger in the earth.

And then his supplication in this, Hide not thy Commandments from me.

In the first part consider three things.

1. Who is he that thus speaks; and that is David, a man after Gods own heart,
a precious Saint and Servant of the Lord.

2. What he is, and that is in Office a King, by experience a stranger and a
pilgrim.

3. Where he is, and that is in the earth, I am a stranger in the earth; the
word is, Baarets. By which is meant, not only in (...)
the body; but also all that pertains to the body, yea, his Crown, and
kingdom, and his life too, in comparison of his home, his heaven and happiness:
And that earth is usually so taken, I need say no more, but the reciting of
these Scriptures, Psalm. 115. 16. and 24. 1.

What more is needful in the unfolding of the terms, you shall have it in the
further prosecution of the Doctrines therein contained.

These three Truths or Doctrines will fairly be extracted; and I suppose
obvious unto the meanest capacity that consulteth with the words.

1. That the Lords people, or Gods David's, are strangers in the earth.

Though they are present in the body, yet they are strangers, they are not at
home, they being absent from the Lord: And I shall beseech you to feed on it a
little in your meditation; for I shall presently fasten on it for this present
occasion; only give me leave to mention two more Doctrines, which I will but
only name, and so proceed.

2. That Gods children are so far from living without a rule, that wanting,
they beg of the Lord for one; Hide not thy commandments from me.

Contrary to some professors practice, and contrary to such slanders of some
upon Gods children in opinion; for the Spirit of God teaches to live in and
under rule, but not without rule, etc.

3. That it is a Christians duty [if not the creatures of mankinde] to extract
and draw Arguments from their distresses, as praying encouragements.

I do not say from our prosperity, but from our misery and distress. David does
not say, I am a King, or Rich and Honorable, etc. but from his dark and
distressed part, I am forlorn, distressed, a stranger. Christians, consider this
in the midst of your afflictions: What a mercy is it that you may go to God
with them? I am sad and pensive, husbandless, and comfortless; and this as a
praying encouragement; as, The Lord to be thy joy, thy head and comforter, etc.
And creatures, consider this in the midst of all your wickedness and misery,
the Lord hates to hear you curse and swear; but delights to hear thee pray, and
complain that thou art a sinner, and undone without and for want of mercy. But
intending to speak of these some other opportunity, I return unto our present
occasion; which I shall desire to speak unto from the first Doctrine, namely,

That Gods people are strangers on the earth. Gera (...) from (...) ab (...)
incola, inquilinus.


That this is a truth clearly and plainly from the Text, I suppose none will
question: but yet take one Scripture as a proof and parallel; and that is Psalm.
39. 12. Hear my prayer, O God, and give ear unto my cry, hold not thy peace at
my tears, for I am a stranger and a sojourner; or as the word signifies, a
Tenant at will, that lives in such a place where neither father nor friends
were born; such was David, and such was Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; as were all
my fathers: So are all the children strangers advena.
and sojourners, out-commers and foreign born; for so are all Gods children;
they are not born of blood, though of the blood royal; nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, John 1. 13.

CHAP. II.
Shows that Gods people are strangers, and how.

I Shall unfold this Doctrine, first by showing you how, and in what regard the
Saints are Strangers in the earth, and likewise the ground why they are said to
be strangers; and then make use of it to our present occasion.

First, How are the Saints said to be strangers in this earth? are they not
livers, dwellers, and dealers in the earth as well as other of the children of
men: They are so; but yet the Saints are strangers in the earth; and that in
these three respects:

1. In regard of their entertainment and 1. In regard of entertainment and
acquaintance.
acquaintance: I might make these distinct, but for brevities sake in one, and
at once. In these respects the children of God are strangers in the world; as
the children of Israel were in Egypt, so are the Saints now: And how was that?
was it not with hard entertainment, with hard usage? burdens, and bondage was
their greatest privileges: For Gods Israel to be under Taskmasters so many
years, was very strange, and yet very true, Exodus 3. 7. And what more is now
unto Gods children? the world is still an Egypt unto them, it stills strives to
keep in bondage, it tempts and stricks, it entertains with burdens, and
acquaints with Mark. 5. 17.
woes. We know strangers find cold entertainment, because of non-acquaintance.
The world is like the Gaderenes, still crying, Depart ye professors, we desire
neither your company nor acquaintance: How often is it that the men of the
world are not at home, though at home? but wishing this and that, because a
child of God is in his house; he thinks every minute seven till he has done
talking, and done companying; and however his seemings may be, yet inwardly he
says, Depart, I desire not your company nor acquaintance; O that I were rid of
this same fellow, not friend, though he be a neighbor or a Town-dweller, yet
being a professor, he will not be familiar: But now let this worldling have but
one of its worldly brats come in; O what stroaking soothing, and suckering and
shaking of hands, and brother, and brother, and brother in iniquity; he has
all the welcome as at house and home; but to professors, the world is not at
home to them, nor they unto the world; like as strangers, cold in acquaintance,
and cold in entertainment: And the like measure from the world, and in the
world finds Christ himself; he had but little acquaintance, but fewer friends,
but cold entertainment from all: And as he is, so are the Saints in this world,
1 John 4. 17. and let not Gods children look for better; but if we find the
like, let us take up Paul's resolution; and say, and pray, and live, but not in
the worlds crowns nor crosses; but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom or whereby the world is crucified unto us, and we unto the world, Gal. 6.
14.

2. Saints are strangers on the earth, in In regard of their desires.
regard of their desires: True it is, they are not in their persons until their
change comes; but in regard of their affections and spiritual desires, before
their change. Says Paul, Phil. 1. 23. I desire to depart, and to be with
Christ. Heaven is my home, and Christ is my habitation; yea, and however I am
here in the body, yet I am but as a stranger, my affections and desires are
with the Lord; and that at present while we are in the body, we wait till our
change comes: And what is our desire in the mean while? David tells you the
Saints and holy souls desire in their present state, Psa. 73. 25. Whom have I
in heaven but thee? and there is nothing upon earth that I desire besides thee;
yea, though flesh and heart fail, yet my desires faint not, but in the midst of
all my faintings and failings, the Lord is the strength and support of my soul,
and my everlasting portion.

Ask a worldling, Where is your home, and your desires at morning, noon, night?
and they must tell you in the world, and worldly cares; our home and heart is
where our treasure is, laboring all day, and casting at night for the things of
this life: Our conversation is amongst the creatures, this is our home, and our
desires are not to be removed.

But now ask a Christian, Where is your home? alas, say they, not in the body;
though I am in the body, yet I am absent 2 Cor. 5. 6.
from my home, my home is with the Lord; and my desires are to be at home.
Judge world as you will of the worth of the soul, and the esteem of heaven,
which is mine and my fathers mansion; yet methinks that is the place, my
conversation is in heaven, and at present I cannot but desire home. A strangers
will say, Home is home, though never so homely: So say Gods children in this
world; I am, as it were, out of doors, I am but a stranger; but yet I am
hastening and desiring homeward; I have another structure above this poor
rabernacle, in which my desires are centered, and my faith is fixed on a home
indeed not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.

3. Saints are strangers, not only in regard 3. In regard of propriety.
of etertainment and acquitance in the world, and their desires to be in
heaven; but also in regard of their propriety of the things of the world;
though all be theirs, yet they count nothing theirs. Godliness, says the
Apostle, is profitable unto all things, 1 Timothy 4. 8. having promise of the life
that now is, and of that which is to come. Christians have a lawful use and
propriety of creature comforts as well as others; but they dare not interest in
them as do others: The Christians are strangers, and you know they may not hold
and keep as do others; but though all be theirs, as life and goods, death and
stripes; yea, all contentments, yea, things present, are the Saints propriety,
1 Cor. 3. 22. yet they count nothing theirs, but say to every contentment and
comfort, as well as every scorn and cross, These are ours; but in this we fix,
We are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: The 1 Cor. 3. 23.
sum of this is owned and acted by the Saints, as you may see, Phil. 3. 8. And
I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung that I might win Christ: comparing this but with the 7. ver. and
you shall clearly see his propriety: Worldly gain was his, but he counts it
loss for Christ; such a stranger and a trampler was the Apostle upon this
worlds glory, notwithstanding his right in all things; And that this was the
Saints practice, being called unto for Christ, mark their usuage from the
world, Heb. 10. 34. they were companions in bonds, but took joyfully the
spoiling of their goods; there is their propriety; but in that they took it
joyfully, there was their esteem; and that in heaven there was better and more
durable substance; which shows their strangeness to their present possessions;
as the Apostle speaks, as having all things, and yet as possessing nothing; 2
Cor. 6. 10.
and as having nothing, and yet possessing all things: Seeming contradictions,
but real truth, for a Christian to have all and nothing for Christ; yea, though
all be theirs, yet they count nothing theirs. As strangers when they come to a
friends house, though they partake of a friends morsels, and that with welcome,
with freeness, and fullness; yet they will tell you, though it be all good, it is
not so kindly. They like this, and eat that, and taste of all; but say they,
One bit at home is better and more sweet then all; for I am a stranger,
notwithstanding all my entertainment; one dish or one morsel at home is more
kindly and sweet.

So it is with Christians, while in this world: they may have all things with
welcome from the Lord, while in this world, and ofttimes they have many
kindnesses; the Lord spreads a Christians table in the midst of adversaries,
giving a poor soul much comfort, solace, and contentment; yet says the soul,
Notwithstanding all these kindnesses I receive in this world, and that with the
Lords welcome, yet all is not so kindly as if I were at home: Oh my Fathers
promise and providence, it is sweet; but at his house, and from his hand, and
at his table, that is the kindness that is most kindly. Bread is sweet, and
life's a comfort; but the God of all comfort is best of all: And I count not
any thing dear, that I may go home, though all be mine, so that I may finish my
course with joy. Act. 20. 24.

And thus much to show how the Saints are strangers in this world; the Reasons
why, follow.

CHAP. III.
Shows Gods people to be Strangers; and why.

1. BEcause in the earth Christians are not at home, though worldly men Heb.
13, 14. They know this earthen pitcher of all this worlds comforts must be
broken; and therefore they are like prisoners of hope, expecting their
exchange. And therefore the Apostle tells us our condition at present, as being
strangers, 2 Cor. 5. 6. Knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord. And then he tells you not only our state, but our present
desire also, in v. 8. We are confident, I say, and willing. Mark, Saints are
desirous rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord. A
Christians abode is not altogether in the body, while in the body; but however
still their desires are working upward, crying, Our conversation at present is
in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior Phil. 3. 20.
the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Saints are strangers in this earth, because Romans 8. 29. compared with 1
Pet. 2. 9.
not of the worlds lineage, not of that stock or race. Saints, you came of
another kind, of another generation; ye are a chosen generation, of a more
noble family: however you are esteemed as strangers on the earth; it is because
your kindred is in heaven. Joh. 15. 19. If ye were of the world, the world
would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hates you. Mark; the world has a double
enmity Saints have a double enmity from the world.
against the Saints: First, they envy, because they are in the world, and not
of the world; If ye were of the world, the world would love its own; therefore
are ye hated. And secondly, they envy because the Saints are chosen out; for
that they are Christ's friends, therefore are they hated. Christians are to make
the words of Christ good, as well as the world makes them, as the Saints find
by the worlds daily enmity. Says Christ, Joh. 12. 32. And if I be lifted up, I
will draw all men unto me. This he did virtually on the Cross, and in his
resurrection and ascension, as a public person for all believers. And the
faith of Christians is to act much this way. Says the Apostle to the Romans,
Romans 6. 11. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Christ was lifted up in the stead
of all Believers; and Believers are to make their reckoning so, that when he
died they died; Redemption, satisfaction, and justification was all by Christ,
and with Christ, as in the person of all Believers; they were all lifted up
with him. So that that of the Apostle may be triumphed in by all Saints, Romans
8. 33, 34, etc. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that justifies. He justifies Christ, as being lifted up for all Believers; as
on the Cross, as from the grave, as ascending into heaven, as sitting at the
right hand of God interceding for us.

Observe, the principle of all motion upward or heavenward, it is all in
Christ; Jo. 15. 5.
without him we can do nothing: He it is that is the Spring and Principle of
all heavenly heart motion. And if I be lifted up, etc. Not an [if] of doubting,
but of inference. And therefore to bring it home, Christ does draw up the
hearts of all Gods children to have company with their Father, and with their
Brother the Lord Jesus; Heb. 2. 11.
for he is not ashamed to call them so. Saints must needs be strangers on the
earth, when their company, kindred and acquaintance are in heaven. And thus
says John, 1 John 1. 3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto
you. And what was that? That was the manifestation and appearance of our Lord
Jesus in the flesh, as upon the earth, as appears in the former verses. Well,
but to what end was this? To take them off from false fellowship, and persuade
them into the true: for says John, That ye also may have fellowship with us;
implying, that though they were in the world, yet they were strangers. And if
you be Saints, so must you be too. We have but small acquaintance here below:
we are indeed on the earth, but truly we are strangers, we have little
acquaintance or accord with the world, but as passengers we must take our
lodging for a night; and that night here, though we be brethren, we are ready
to fall out by the way; but however we have a Father and a fellowship, though
here but little friendship; yet above, not on earth, but in the heavens, we
have there both kindred and acquaintance; there is our Father, and there is our
friend, and there is our fellowship; For truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.

3. Saints are strangers in the earth, because the world is strange to them.
The Saints have large hearts for the Good of the world, but not for the Goods
of the world. My hearts desire, says a true Child of God, is, That none might
perish, but 1 Timothy 3. 7. To. 10. 1.
that all might come unto the knowledge and obedience of the truth. But they
will not; The world will be strange to Christ, and strange to Christians; and
we must be strange to them, or else be strangers unto the Lord, and unto his
truths. For what says Christ? Mat. 6. 24. No man can serve two masters; for
either he will hate the one, or love the other; or else he will hold to the
one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammen.

I could wish all Moral hearts would consider this, and not cousen the soul by
their double haltings. But now the Saint takes the word of Christ for truth;
and says, Rather then I will be a stranger unto Christ, I will be strange unto
the world; For (Iam. 4. 4.) The friendship of the world is enmity against
Christ. What though we have frowns from the world, and the world will be
strange to us? yet we have favors from our friend: Yea, though in the world we
have a portion of persecution, yet from Christ we have a portion of comfort.
Ioh. 16. 3. In the world ye shall have tribulation, strangeness, and hard
usage; but be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. And this is a
precious favor, Believers, (believe it) against the worlds frowns.

4. And lastly, Saints are strangers in this earth, because there is a
necessity of either being strangers, or friends. The Texts before Mat. 6. 24.
speak a necessity of being one, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon; be in
friendship with the world, and in friendship with the Lord: We must either hate
the one, or love the other; hold to the one, or despise the other. And says
the godly heart, Rather then I will be estranged from the Lord, take the worlds
friendship who will; I will not have it at such a rate as to lose my friendship
with the Lord, For in his favor is life, Ps. 30. 5. What though I am a
stranger and a traveller for a night? I shall be at home in the morning; when I
awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. Ps. 17. 15.
And therefore what though a stranger here? there is a necessity, except I
would lose the Lords favor; but that is better then life. Away therefore
world, away riches, honors, profits! Rather then to lose the shineings of the
Sun, the Moon shall be under my feet: Rather then be estranged from my precious
Father, and my friend the Lord Jesus, all the worlds pomp, glory and pleasure,
all sublunary things shall be under my feet.

And thus much for the grounds and reasons why the Saints are strangers in the
earth: First, because they are not at home; secondly, because their
acquaintance and kindred are in heaven; thirdly, because the world is strange
to them. And Fourthly, because of necessity they must be strangers or friends.

The uses pertinent to the present occasion follow.

CHAP. IV.
Shows Characters for trial, whether we be strangers on the earth or no.

FIrst, by way of trial or examination.

Secondly, of dehortation and exhortation.

Thirdly, of comfort and consolation.

First, If the Saints be strangers on the Heb. 11. 10.
City, whose builder and maker is God; never to set their rest up till they be
at home in their heavenly habitation.

Now to try whether we be such travelers, and in this world strangers, take a
word in these three or four following characters.

1. Do we set up our abode in this world? and what is our esteem of life and
goods, and all that we possess? you know strangers, though they bed and board,
yet they count not any thing as standingly their own, but look and wait for a
remove, and therefore have of all things such present estimation as gain, but
loss; Yea, and I count, says Paul, Phil. 3. 8. all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; and do count them but dung
that I may win Christ.

Second Character: Could you contentedly live here in this world always? or are
you waiters till your change comes? are Jo^ 14. 14.
you grieved that time spins out, and your life must end? or have you a desire
to depart? O yes says the stranger: I could not live here from my friends, my
father, wife P^il. 1. 23.
and children, not for a world, if you would give me my dwelling for nothing, I
cannot be contented: So the Christian, if I might have all the world, yet my
content and comfort is elsewhere; and how shall I get home to my heaven, and
house of happiness? that is my care and daily trouble, not that I would make
more haste then speed, but fain I would be gone, and I care not how soon; Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly, Rev. 22.
that I might come to thee, who art my heaven and happiness.

Thirdly, Have you another place in your eye, then this your present enjoyment?
strangers still think of home; so Saints are still thinking of their eternity,
the home of heaven is still in the eye of faith, and heart of love of every
true believer. Alas, says the poor soul, Here I have no continuing Heb. 13.
14. Finiti ad infinitum nulla est proportio.
City, no continuing Goods, Lands, Livings: And if I had a continued house, I
would be a continued Tenant; for what is earth to heaven? perishing to
perpetuals? finite to infinite? my fathers love is above all. O says the
longing soul, when shall I get home? when shall I appear before my father in
Sion? I am here a stranger and an alien, as were my fathers, and my dear
brethren. My dear Savior had neither Luke 9. 8.
holes, nor houses, nor whereon to lay his head: He had another Kingdom, and
the is mine by faith; I have it in my eye, and this is my daily expectation:
Abraham looked for a City, whose builder and maker was God: And Moses had
respect unto the recompense of reward; and these were strangers and sojourners,
as appears by the Apostle, Heb. 11. 9, 10. verse 26.

The fourth and last Character is this; Examine whether the world loves you, or
if it hates you: The lovers of the world, and the beloved of the world, are not
the children of God, but the children of the world: Christ gives this as a
Christians character, John 15. 18, 19. If the world hate you, ye know that it
hated me, before it hated you: If ye were of the world, the world would love
his own; but because ye are not of the world, therefore the world hates you:
Mark it, If ye were of the world; that is, if you were one of them, and in
their family, having one father, you would have the same friendship; the world
would love his own, not count you strangers, but stroke you as one of her own
worldly brats: But if you are of heavens family, and are travelers through the
world, as through a wilderness, to your Canaan and rest, as the traveller
through a Town, the dogs will bark; so Christians through this world, must
expect the Amalekites at their heels, biting and bawling out, scorning and
reproaching against them. This has been, and will be your portion in life, or
in death. But Saints and Travelers, do not be dismayed; but like the
Traveller, still journey on, holding up your staff (though you never strike)
the Genesis 32. 9, 10.
Lord Jesus, in both your hands of faith and patience: for, The Seed of the
woman shall break the Serpents head; and Christ will be unto his Travelers
both in life and death advantage.

And thus much by way of trial, whether we be strangers in the earth, or not.

CHAP. V.
Persuading souls to be sojourners and strangers; 1. By way of Negation.

IF the Saints be strangers in the earth, then be dehorted and persuaded from
this worlds friendship: Become strangers; though it be your present detriment,
it is but [yet] a little while, and you will be at home. Though here you have
many a weary step, one stride over death, and you are present with the Lord:
though here you have many a frown and momentary affliction, yet then you shall
have an everlasting favor, and an everlasting Father, and an everlasting
fruition.

1. In the Negative; be dehorted not to embrace this present world; and that in
three respects. First, in regard of the evil of it. 1 Ioh. 2. 16. All that is
in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life. Here Is lust, and lust, and flesh, and filth; evil in all, and all in
evil. The whole world lies in wickedness, or in 1 John 5. 19.
that wicked one, which next unto the Devil is the corrupt Heart of man, says
the Preacher in his book of the Creatures, Eccles. 3. 11. He has set the world
in their hearts. Man's heart contains a world; the Microcosmus in the Cosmus:
The little world Man, in the great world Nature, has a world of evil, and a
world of pride. Oh but for the Evil sake, Christians, be estranged, and do not
embrace this present world; it is a world of evil: It is too too much it is in
our hearts; but it is too too woeful, if our hearts be in that. Secondly, in
regard of the danger of it; danger of this, and danger of that: but remark the
danger, as Ioh 1. 2. 15. The Father, the love of the Father is not in you.
What Is that? why, estrangement from the Lord. Demas has forsaken us, says the
Apostle. He speaks it bewailingly, as sensible of the greatest danger in
embracing the present world: He was a stranger to the Faith, a stranger to the
Church, a staggering to the Saints, and to be feared, a stranger to the Lord.
And this danger comes by being an imbracer of the world. O Professors,
Professors, look to your footing, and take heed of faltering; take heed of
being Demas, in forsaking the Lord, and clasping of the world; forsaking the
fountain and the stream, God and his Ordinances, and closing with broken
cisterns, this worlds Cruel courtesies, that are Jer. 2. 13.
no sooner in but out; they are broken cisterns that can hold no water. Hang
about the worlds neck, and kiss it and embrace it never so much, yet it will
prove a Judas to thee; it will kiss thee again, but it will kill thee at last.
And then thus forsaking Christ, who can save thee?

Were it not a madness for a poor Seaman, after he is lancht out into the deep,
that he upon some wandering thoughts should then go out of the ship into the
midst of the Sea, to go unto the shore? might not all the Mariners think there
was little hope of his life? Truly the danger is greater unto every poor soul
that is in the Church by profession, and yet had rather, yea, like Demas, does
go out unto the world for its embraces: All the Mariners, I mean the Saints in
the ship, the Church of Christ, may cry out, it is a thousand to one he is
saved, so great is the danger.

And then thirdly, Do not be an imbracer of this world, but be a stranger, in
regard of the certain uncertainty, and the uncertain certainty. There is no
more hold of the world or the things thereof, then on a fishes tail: Life and
goods, and all the face of things are fading and perishing, uncertain and
slippery; Our life is but a vapor, and all pertaining to life is but meat that
perishes, says the Apostle; Meat for the belly, and the belly for meat, but
the Lord shall destroy both it and them, 1 Cor. 6. 13. The best of all this
worlds embraces, take the glory and comforts of them, as Riches, Honors, gold
and silver, etc. they are but as silver-knives, that will cut as well as
glitter, wound as well as comfort; a^ponds of sweet water, wherein the body may
bathe, but the soul drown; wherewith life is sweetened, but not secured.
Comforts take wings and Man dies; and where is the world? and where is he? Non
reminiscimur post mortem.

2. If Gods people are strangers in the earth, do not let us expect to be
always standards on the earth. Our houses, with mending, and patching and
thatching serve many generations; but yet in time down they will: this great
house of this World will also down, and all the strong posts of it and in it
must to the dust. Now Christians should take up Jobs resolution, Job 14. 14.
All my appointed time will I wait till my Expectabo donec veniat mutatio.
change comes; or rather, I shall expect my change coming. Alluding to the
Soldier that stands Sentinel, expecting of relief, as it were, and so longs
and listens, and listens and longs, but still waits, knowing that his time is
limited, and his hour is certain: So Christians must wait and pray, and watch
and pray; for the stoutest must down to dust. Therefore be ye wise, and lean
only upon the Rock, and not on the reeds of this Earths fabric. Gods people
must not be Atlas, Supporters of the world, but Sojourners; not Standards in
the earth, but Strangers in the earth.

Labor therefore to be stablished in the Faith; but look not to be stablished
in the World. We have no continuing Life, no continuing Riches, no continuing
Comfort or comforts, no continuing City, house or home: therefore let us be
strangers, expecting one to come, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.
Every thing else is but as yesterday; yea, we and ours may be gone to morrow,
as this our Friend to day. And happy is that soul whose Evidence is clear! For
we must not be long stayers nor standards, but strangers; that on Christ we may
both stay and trust, who is yesterday, and to Heb. 13. 8.
day, and the same for ever.

3. As positive, to exhort you to be Strangers in the Earth, take these three
things; and the Lord persuade our hearts into the truth of each, according to
his will.

First, from former Example; secondly from present Experience; and thirdly,
from future Expectation.

CHAP. VI.
Containing positive persuasions for souls to be strangers and sojourners on
the earth.

1. From former example. 2. From present experience. 3. From future
expectation.
1. Be exhoted from former example: Let former example of all the Saints take
place in us, that we may be like-minded as they were; Abraham was so, and Jacob
was so: With this staff, says he, came I over this Jordan; and so were all the
Patriarchs. David was one of the Lords worthies, and Genesis 32. 10.
though a King, yet says he in the Text, I am a stranger; and Psalm. 39. 12. I
am a stranger and a sojourner, as all my fathers were; yea, Christ himself was
so, although he was the King of Kings; although he was the standard for all
Saints, yet he was not a stayer, but a stranger in this world, John 18. 36.
Jesus answered, my kingdom is not of this world; if my Kingdom were of this
world, etc, And that Christians should be of the same mind, not to be troubled
at this worlds losses, he tells his Disciples, and as them, so all believers,
John 14. 1, 2, 3. Let not your hearts be troubled, I go to prepare a place for
you; yea, in my fathers house are many Mansions, and I will come again and
fetch you unto my self* that where I am, there ye may be also: What is the
import of this, but Christ owning of believers as strangers on the earth,
destitute, and afar off from him, his father, crown, and kingdom? and to give
them a word of comfort, amidst this worlds discouragements, he tells them, that
granting they were strangers, yet poor hearts, says Christ, be not troubled, I
will call for you, and receive you, that where I am, ye may be there also.

2. Be exhorted from present experience, to be strangers on the earth: This our
deceased friend, although a standard in his family, yet you see but a stranger
on the earth, a traveller that is now gone to his home, the body to the grave,
the spirit to God that gave it.

The Cedars are emblematical for greatness, yet down they must as well as
lesser shrubs: But the Saints which are Gods myrtle trees, amongst whom the
Lord is said to walk, and take repast amidst the Rev. 2. 1
golden Candlesticks, which are his Church and people; yet not only the
Cedars, but the Myrtle trees must down, it is appointed for all men once to
dye; yea, the Saints, Gods Myrtle trees must down as well as others: this days
experience teaches this, our deceased friend was a standard, a supporter to his
family, and a little pillar of his Country and Commonwealth, witness those
several places of trust and esteem he was often called unto: so that his
enemies being judges, this may not be gainsaid, Eccles. 7. 1. That a good name
is better then precious ointment; and the day of death, (...) de (...)
then the day of birth: Then the day of generation or child hood, says the
Hebrew; hinting that it is better for a child of God to be gone out of this
world, then to be begotten again; to be cropped off, then growing up with a new
life in this world: when a man's conversation is as becomes the Gospel, how
sweet is life, how welcome is death; such a soul may say, and all we may say of
such a soul, Christ is unto thee in life or death advantage.

Present experience speaks much comfort unto us in this our friends departure;
he had a good name, a conversation not criminal, but godly; a Myrtle tree,
standing to and for the truth as it is in Jesus, witness his communications and
actions in his life, and precious brethings of his soul in death; and yet
friends, experience tells us how this flower is cropped, what a stranger he was in
the earth, yea, his own body laboring under and in afflictions of his poor
tabernacle of clay, presents unto me with such a like prospect: Methinks I see,
not only this, but every Christian, going up and down the world in this
tabernacle of clay with legs and arms, like the poor prisoner with his fetters:
The poor prisoner is clogged with irons, goes in pain, waits with patience,
carries the chain in his hand, the iron on his legs, and he steps this way and
that way, but still is straightened, his legs are bound, his arms pinioned, and
his heart careful for his deliverance; even so is the Christian in this
tabernacle of clay, he moves up and down the earth like a poor prisoner laden
with irons; sin straitens him one way, and the world another, he has a body of
flesh and corruption, wherein he is manicled as with fetters of iron, with
which being shakled, he moves here and there, still carrying the chain in his
hand, though fastened on his heels, he expects his fetters to be taken off, and
his clogging cares to be broken, and the prisoner [the Saint] to be relieved
and released: And you that find your selves clogged, and that thus carry your
chain in your hand, waiting for your deliverance, hearken^^ what Christ says
Zec. 9. 12. Turn ye to the strong hold ye prisoners of hope, even to day do I
declare, that I will render double unto thee; who would be a lingering Saint,
having such a precious promise, and such a gracious call? Our friend and
prisoner is gone unto his attainment, experience at present tells you this; And
Christians, what will you do? would you have your Benjamin have a double
portion? then wait for your return: Return, O Shunamite, return: Return, O poor
soul, the prisoner of hope, turn from thy shakels, and turn to thy Savior:
Return unto thy rest; Jesus Christ calls thee from this weak hold on earth, to
his strong hold in heaven: You know 2 Pet. 1. 1.
stayers are not returners, but strangers are returners; our friends are gone
before, let us hasten after like prisoners, longing with like precious faith,
for the same precious experience of the Saints double portion both in grace and
glory.

Thirdly and lastly, be exhorted as from former example, present experience, so
from future expectation: thou expectest to dye; you all know that is the Lords
appointment: Man must dye, and after death the judgment; Heb. 9. 27. but what
is thy expectation? are we like Paul? he was a straightened stranger, but his
expectation and desire was to be with Christ; yea, he counts his present state
a distress, in regard of departing and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. I am in
a strait, says he, desiring to depart: Ah, but whether? what is the Apostles
expectation? why he tells you, it is to be with Christ: Now what is yours? dye
you must, but what is it you expect after death? what company, what place, what
being and possession? speak your expectation, as in the presence of the Lord:
Alas, says a poor soul, what do you ask me? can I tell what or where; but I
trust to be with Christ, and confess that is best; but surely I think none can
say certainly what they expect; but I hope the best as well as others; would
you have me to say certainly? that is more then Paul does, or I think any
Saint. Nay, but do not so reckon: Mark the Apostle, not only in the behalf of
himself, but of others also, 2 Cor. 5, 1. For we know, that if our earthly
house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens: Mark Christians, the Christians
expectation; not that every child of God does come up to this faith of
certainty and assurance, but we are all for to desire it; as all strangers,
they desire home, and know their home, and travel after it, though it be but by
steps and strides, yet a constant pace goes far; so Christians must all keep
journeying and going on, though not coming to this attainment: and thou poor
weakling faith, though thou can not say so much, yet think the more; press
hard, and follow after, though thou can not go so fast as such whose evidence
is sure: Though thou can not say, I know, and we know, yet say, I hope, and
it is best, yea, happy for that soul, whose evidence is clear; though we all
cannot say, We know, yet let us not be sad, but say, We may know: In this
Pronoune We, lies much divinity for the comfort of a Christian; for we know we
have tabernacles of clay, poor bodies of dust and ashes; And why should not we
know we have a building of God, with all such properties, as not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens? Methinks every Christian is like a stranger and
a traveller, that comes into his Inn, and takes up his lodging for a night; the
people bring him meat and drink, and gives him bed and board, but they know not
whence he comes, nor whether he goes; but now he knows himself where he goes,
and whether he would; so Christians, though the world knows not, yet they do --
For we know, etc. I am a traveller, and a stranger, but I have a home, a house,
a heaven, a building, I expect it says Faith, etc. I am a stranger, says
Patience, but I have a building, I wait for it, says Patience: It is but to
day and to morrow, and the next day it shall be perfected, so says Patience; I
must have its perfect work, a little to day, more to morrow, the third day I
shall have possession. I am a stranger in the earth, says Love, but I have a
building: and O how I long for it. Psalm. 42. 2. My soul thirsts for God, for
the living God; when shall I come and appear before God! Now unto such souls
that make out after home, heaven and happiness, with such a triplicity of We:
We expect it, says Faith; wait for it, says Patience; long for it says Love;
to such gathering of a heart in Grace, the Lord does make a gracious answer,
Cant. 1. 11. We will make thee borders of gold, with studs of silver: Mark poor
soul, here is a We to answer thy We; not a Woe, but a We; not to dismark thee,
but to make thee gracious and glorious: Thou that have an I of faith expecting,
and I of patience waiting, and an I of love longing; this is a Christians We:
Now the Lord unto thy soul has his We; We will make thee; I will, says God
the Father; and I will, says Christ the Son; and I will, says the blessed
Spirit: All this makes this We, to make the soul graciously glorious, and
gloriously gracious.

Now be persuaded, O soul, upon this thy future expectation; here thou art a
stranger, living in thy houses of clay, bedecked only with furniture of
infirmity, weakness, and crosses, and a few broken comforts, and cracked
enjoyments; but in heaven there is brightness and purity; there is blessedness
and peace; there is never broken joys, and everlasting comforts; there are
houses richly furnished with furniture free from all infirmity, bordered with
gold, and set forth with silver, all variety interwoven for soul satisfaction:
Hasten, O strangers, O strangers hasten, without lingering; long for this thy
expectation.

But may some say, I know every child of God shall be well provided for of
their heavenly Father; Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
neither can it enter into the heart of man to conceive what the Lord has
prepared for them that love him: but there is that to be passed would make one
fear; the straits of death is not an easy passage; it fills my heart with
grief, and my eyes with tears, at the present sense of my deceased friend; but
what fears and pain, and staggering may it be if I should be called to pass the
straits of death, the Lord knows.

In Answer unto this, and so as pertinent to our present occasion, I shall add
but a word of comfort and consolation; and so conclude the time and Doctrine.

CHAP. VII.
Containing comfort for dejected souls in their loss of Christian friends; and
encouragements for estranged Saints in this world.

3. IF it be so that the Saints are strangers on the earth, then Saints be you
freed from fear; grieve not for the death or departure of the faithful; nor
being faithful, be thou not afraid to dye: To all Gods children death is but a
messenger of life, and a calling from the cross to the crown. You know every
one will hasten to a father or a friends house; and what though there be a
plash of water, and a few briars to go through, if we do wet our feet, or tear
our garments? so long as we are going home, such things are nothing; home and
the father makes us through all Christians, I will not say all your way is
paved and smooth to heaven and happiness: but some rubs, fears and sorrows may
be in your way; but know assuredly, Christ has sweetened the grave for every
child of God; what though you do wet your feet by fears, and pricks your
hearts with sorrow? let the hope of home, and father, and Christ make you be
comforted and encouraged.

Captain Death has taken away a friend now, and he stands in the way to press
thee too; but may not we be comforted in this, My friend was a stranger here,
and he is now gone home to his dwelling place, where father and friends are;
yea, where he shall want for nothing, freed from fears and cares, aches and
pains, but fed with favor, love and life, such dishes that the world never had
at their tables? The Saints indeed have meat in heart and hand, I mean at
present, that the world knows not of; but alas Saints, though this be wine and
milk, yet this is but the first mess in this spiritual banquet. Our Master
Christ keeps the best wine, and the best cheer, and best welcome until the
last: After death every thing to a faithful soul is disht out, and disht up
unto Eternity; the longing soul through the straits of death is satisfied, and
satiates it self at the wells of joy: has bread enough, and drink freely and
fully, yea, bread of life, and water of life; and Christ bids drink abundantly.
In death our rags are indeed put off, but we are not left naked; the Saints
want for nothing; a garment of joy is put on, made of Everlasting; and surely
who would grieve or grudge to be made so gay, and adorned so richly, with such
a feast of sat things, and that days without number? Blessed be God the Lords
children are not at their own finding, while they are here; but after death
what a comfort is it, that the poor child and traveller shall be at home, and
at the fathers finding? Here our fare is with a bit and a knock, as I may so
express it. Our green herbs; the father finds us with a great deal of salt,
and a little suggar; many crosses, but not many comforts, but some the father
feeds us with, that we might not faint; but now when we come home, then our
father will feed us with all sweets, and take away all sours; with all
comforts, and take away all crosses: Here the poor believer looks thinly, and
goes coldly: but were we at home, our father would free us from cold and
hunger: It fares with many of the Saints, as with the Prodigal; you read Luke
15. when he was from his father, he fared hard enough, but he comforts himself
with this, that at home there was bread enough: So Christians, were you but at
home, there is enough to satiate thy soul to all Eternity.

Ah but my friend is dead, and to pass through death, who would not be
troubled?

I Answer, Gods people should not be grieved, but rather be comforted; and for
that I shall but say a word, that you may be comforted both in the death of
friends, and against the fears of death.

1. Comfort your selves Christians in the fears of such a death as may and will
come on you; Consider whatsoever others have, yet a believer has no cause to
grieve, or to be afraid of death; for though a man or woman out of Christ,
dying, dies again; a first and second death has power over every unbeliever,
and so cause of them of fears; but now a child of God cannot be properly said
to dye; death to a godly man or woman, is but Aliquid Mortis; something of
death, but a transit; but an Exodus, a going out, as Moses to go up unto Deuteronomy.
32.
Mount Nebo, and dye; so death to a godly heart is but a going to their rest;
as a man that puts off his clothes, goes to bed for rest and ease, until the
morning: even so the Saints put off their clothes, the encumbrances of this
life, lying down in the grave until the resurrection.

2. What cause of comfort, rather then for grieving in the departure of friends
by death; if they dye as Christians, they dye in the Lord, and then there is
annexed a blessedness to such, Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that dye in
the Lord, they rest from their labors: Who would not take comfort in reading
such Scripture expessions? but much more as lively occasions in the death of
Saints, This is the time for Christians not only to be reading, but rolling
over Scripture promises; for many through death have their greater income, as
life everlasting: And why should the death of any Christian friends to us seem
grievous, when in the sight of the Lord they are precious? Psalm. 116. 15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Christ is
precious unto believers 2 Cor. 5. 6.
in life, and this is a great comfort; but that believers should be precious
unto Christ in his death, is not that as great a comfort? why then Christians,
be not sadded, but revived, not as sorrowing without hope, but joying in your
hope, and longing for the same fellowship; For so long as we are in the body,
we are absent from the Lord; but being absent from the body, we are present
with the Lord. We crop the flowers; but what for? not to fling away, but to put
into our bosoms: The Saints are Gods flowers, and he gathers them and crops
them from the earth by death; but it is to put them in his bosom, says David
and the Apostle, To be present with him, and precious to him; And is not this a
comfort?

O but I have lost a husband, a father, a friend; and who can choose but grieve
in the loss of such a comfort?

Ah but consider, thy friend is not lost, Non amittuntur, sed pr^mittuntur.
Friends, when they dye, are not lost, but gone before*unto thy father, and thy
friend. John 20. 17. says Christ unto Mary, Touch me not, but tell my
brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my father, and your father; and to
my God, and your God: Thus Christians may say, Alas, this earth was not my
friends habitation, nor is it mine; but he is gone home to his father, and my
father; and what should I do to grieve, but rather long to follow to my home
and happiness?

But thou will say, Were your case as mine is, you would grieve as well as I;
for I am left a widow, and fatherless, and friendless; alas, what shall I do? I
am a stranger, and left destitute; and what I shall do with my poor family, the
Lord knows.

I Answer, The Lord does, and has promised To be a father to the fatherless,
and to the widow, Psalm. 68. 5. and to give thee great comfort against such
discouragements, mark the Text; take all distresses, and go to God; tell him
thy wants, thy weaknesses, thy fears, thy cares. David goes unto the Lord,
presenting his distresses as a praying encouragement, saying, Lord, I am a
stranger; so say thou, Lord, I am a widow, fatherless, friendless; what a
comfort is it, that in my wants, I may plead my wants as praying
encouragements, to a promising God for his gracious supply? and this is no less
then the example of David; he pleads his distressed condition in this earth as
a praying encouragement.

MAN'S FOLLY IN Determining by present events, occasioned for these present
times.
Eccles. 7. 14. In the day of prosperity rejoice but in the day of adversity
consider; God has set the one over against the other, to the end man should
not find out any thing after him.
MY purpose is not to dwell upon this Text, nor shall I be curious in the
search after those several expressions therein; for it is not words, but
matter, that is the great requisite in every Sermon: And because I find men and
women so ready to be puffed up, or cast down at this worlds changes, I thought it
seasonable to pick out a Lesson or two from these words; that so God would
please to let us have more stable hearts in these unstable times, and not be
tossed too and fro by every wind of worldly distress or success; he that
rejoices, let him rejoice in God, and not in man's transactions in this worlds
changes; for all such rejoicing is vain.

I shall as briefly as I can, give you something by way of exposition, and then
touch upon some observations from the words: But first take notice that the
Epitome of this Book, is to show the vanity of all creatures, Eccles. 1. 2.
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity; more either in name, or for nature, cannot
well be expressed; not any part free, but it is all; and that not as of a
simple nature only, but also as compounded, It is vanity of vanities. And that
Eccles. 4. 15. and 7. 13.
which I rather mention it for, is, he does it much upon a rational account,
saying in every other verse, I considered, I considered; and withal keeping
still to the object of man's reason, All things under the Sun, as Chap. 1. 3, 7.
and Chap. 6. 1. 12. And certainly if I would be a great admirer of man's reason,
or the will of man, which is the top of it, I know no book more amongst all the
books of truth that speaks for it or to it then this of Solomon's; he puts every
sentence [as it were] upon a rational account, saying, I considered, I
considered times and things, and I find them thus and thus, and so do you, etc.

But now observe, and all you that are so much for man's reason, and will, take
notice of it, that though he calls to a consideration of times and things, yet
he centers not any thing in the creature, but determines all in God, as Chap.
3. 17, 18. I said in my heart, God shall judge the righteous, etc. I said in
mine heart concerning the estate of the Sons of men, that God might manifest
them, and that they may see that they themselves are beasts. So likewise in the
5. Chapter, Ver. 19. Reason nor industry gets not riches, but these are
gifts as from the hand of God: not on man's improvement: No, mark how he
silences man's reason, Chap. 7. 10. Say not thou, what is the cause that the
former days are better then these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning
this: So Verse 13. Consider the work of God: for who can make that strait which
he has made crooked? and also in the Text, God has set prosperity against
adversity, that man should not find out any thing after him: In all these,
though he calls for the consideration of man; yet he says not, if thou will,
God is engaged, but say not in thy heart: men are apt enough to boast and pride
themselves in any figleaves of their own sewing together, whereby to cover
their nakedness; we are too too apt to set up our own wills againt the will of
God, and to be contriving and determining personal and national events; yea,
and for salvation, men will be buying and selling for that too, when in all we
should say, If the Lord please, ascribing all ^n. ^5.
to the good pleasure of his will; and therefore silence thy own reason, and
resolve all into God; for if this Oracle may be believed, all that thou say
or do, is al vanity; yea, the refinedst thoughts or actions without mercy,
are not only vanity, but also vexation of spirit, Eccles. 2. 17. But I come to
the Text, In the day of prosperity rejoice, but in the day of adversity
consider, God has set the one over, etc.

The whole verse contains two things:

1. What man does upon this worlds dion of text.
changes: In the day of prosperity, he rejoices, etc.

2. What the Lord does in or upon this doing of man. Man would be judging
absolutely the things and actings of God by outward appearances of prosperity
and adversity; but mark, God sets one against another to silence man's censuring.

For explication, let us consider

1. What we do upon this worlds changes In the day of prosperity we rejoice,
and in the day of adversity, etc. I conceive we are not so to understand it as
of a thing commanded, as if the Lord commanded us to rejoice in our prosperity;
but as our usual practice is, we do do so: as reasons rule and inclination, for
to be joyful if succesful. A parallel Scripture to this you have Eccles. 11. 9.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes; but know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee unto
judgment: Not that any young men from the authority of this Text are commanded
to walk in the ways of their own hearts, or in the delights of their own eyes;
but it shows what youth would do: So here reasons rule is, to be joyful, if
prosperous: and grieved, if distressed; it is to be understood according to our
practice; it is our inclination, and suits our reason so to do; and therefore
observe, had it been in the day of prosperity mourn, be pensive, and lament;
and in the day of distress rejoice, and be glad; this had been reasons Paradox;
but it is as the course and custom of the world does; in the day of prosperity,
they rejoice, etc.

Here are two days, but much different in light and occasions, a day of
prosperity, a day adversity.

1. What is meant by Day; and this we are to understand a time or season; not a
day Artificial, or a day Natural, but a season, as he speaks in that of Eccles.
1. 2, 3, 4, 5. To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose
under the Sun; A time to be born, a time to dye; a time to plant, and a time to
pluck up that which is planted: So here in the day, that is, in the season and
time of prosperity.

So our Savior in that of Matthew. 6. 34. Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof; that is, in every state, time and condition in this life, there is a
sufficiency of trouble, temptation and encumbrances of evil that does accompany
that time or condition: So here, in the day, in that state and condition. But

2. In the day of prosperity: The day of glory is a prosperous state indeed for
the soul to rejoice in; but I take not this to be meant here: But rather a day
of prosperity, as to a day that is respecting this world; and this most genuine
to the scope, as, All things under the Sun, Eccles; 1. 3. and 3. 1.
and under heaven.

Now that prosperity may be called a day, I shall instance but in two respects:

1. As the day is light and cheerful, so is prosperity; A heavy purse makes a
light heart, is our common Proverb; and let a man be but successful, and there
is no question of his being joyful, Psalm. 30. 6. In my time of prosperity I
said, I shall never be moved: So many a poor heart having a day in this life,
by being careless and secure, benights his soul to all eternity. Thus the rich
man in the Gospel, having a day of prosperity, he sings requiems to his soul,
Soul take thine ease, thou have a day, yea, goods laid up for Luke 12. 17, 18,
19, 20.
many years; but little thinks he of the night following, and the loss of his
soul: And

2. Therefore in the next place, prosperity is called a day in regard of the
bounds and limits of it: Every day has its bounds and limits: So has all this
worlds prosperity; every day has its morning; so has prosperity.

As the babe grows by degrees to be a man; so the poor estate has its
beginning to be prosperous.

2. Every day has not only its morning, but its noon; so has prosperity; as
the Sun after he is risen, mounteth to the Meridian; so man in his prosperity
he has a noon-tyde, wherein all his joy is elevated to the highest pitch; but
does it stay there? No, like the day, his prosperity declines again. And
therefore,

3. Every day has its evening, and night also; so has prosperity; the longest
day, has its period; and so the prosperous purchaser of all his Lands:
Drunkards may rejoice, and worldly hucksters sing, and riches may increase; but
know thy day will have a night; and for all these things thou must come to
judgment: remember therefore in this thy day of prosperity, that every day
has its Sun. God made the greater light to Genesis 1. 16.
rule the day; so let thy day of prosperity have a Sun; yea let the Sun of
righteousness rule thy heart in thy prosperity; serve him whose bounty shines
on thee to make thee prosperous; and so though thou may have an evening, yet
no night of prosperity; for in serving the Sun, I mean thy Savior, thou will
be more and more prosperous: For the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield; the Lord
will give grace and glory; no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly, Psalm. 84. 11.

But now how is it that adversity is called a day? surely considering the terms
as extremes, adversity should be rather called a night.

I Answer, He called prosperity a day Agur, Pro. 30. 8, 9. Give me neither
poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me: Both extremes attended
with vanity; and though he prays against poverty first, yet observe, he reasons
in regard of prosperity, the danger lying in that most; and therefore, says
he, Least I be full and deny thee: the word imports a gainsaying or belying
the Lord: Adversity though it brings fears, yet spiritually considered, as
against our natural inclination, there is better hopes in us, when we are
wanting, then when abounding: It is better to go to the house of mourning, then
to the house of laughter: why? Because the one makes me to consider, the other
to forget and to be careless: Gods regard is to the wanting, and not to the
Wanton, Luke 1. 53. He fills the hungry with good things; But what does he do
with the full and wanton? He sends them empty away.

But Jesurun waxed fat, says the Text, Deu. 32. 15. Well, but what then? he
kicked in his day of prosperity; he spurnd against the Lord; but now in the day
of adversity there may be a reclaiming, a recalling and quickening; in all which
respects it may be called a day. When Pharaoh was in prosperity, he says, Who
is the Lord, that I should obey him? but when in adversity, he said, The Lord
is righteous; and I and my people are wicked; Exodus 9. 27, 28.
entreat the Lord [for it is enough] that there be no more mighty Thunderings
and Hail, and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer: So does adversity
recall the soul, and quicken it, as from the hand of God, Psalm. 119. 67. Before
I was afflicted (...) Vehementissime.
I went astray, but now have I kept thy word: And in the 107 Verse, I am
afflicted very much, deeply and strongly; for so the word signifies, quicken
me, O Lord, according to thy word: And unto these Scriptures join but that of
the Prophet Hosea, Hosea 5. 15. In their affliction they will seek me early;
that is, diligently: So that in these and such like respects, adversity may be
called a day, in that it rouzeth the heart from carnal security into a serious
consideration.

And thus much for the first part, by way of explication, namely, What man does
upon this worlds changes; in the day of prosperity, he rejoices; in the day of
adversity he considers.

But then Secondly, Here is what the Lord does upon this doing of man, He
se^t^th one over against another: to the end that man should find nothing
after him. The sum of which is this, It seems man acts and judges according to
present events; if prosperous, he falls to be joyful; but if ruinous, he falls
to be pensive, to pine and mourn; if things fall contrary, he sits down in
sorrow: But now what does the Lord do upon this doing of man? he weighs both
these different states in which man acts and judges so contrary; and to him
the balance is equal; they are both alike to him; that is, the Lord takes this
worlds prosperity, and he poises it against the worlds adversity; or rather
thus, he takes thee thou rich and prosperous man, and poises thy prosperity,
riches, and honors, and this worlds good; he takes also thee that art in
poverty and abasement, and have this worlds crosses, and he poises that: Now
man thinks a vast difference in each, judges the scale of prosperity to be
abundantly more weighty then the other; but now in the hands of God they are
both alike, the balance is equal, he sets one against another, etc.

In the judgment of this world, Blessed is the prosperous man, he may sing
requiems: every one will bid him good morrow that is rich and prosperous; but
if in poverty and distress, then the world judges thou art forsaken; But to the
Judge of heaven and earth you are alike: The judgment according unto truth, is
of the Lord; but judgment in appearance and our estimation is as men: We judge
a vast difference, distance and esteem between Prosperity and Adversity: But
there is none, says the Lord; as in my hands, the poor man is not forsaken,
though laid low; nor that side blessed that is raised up; they are both alike to
God; for he sets one over against another: And if we would know why God does
thus; the Text gives you a reason* even to show man's wisdom to be but
foolishness, He sets one over against another, that man should not find any
thing after him.

Man in the transactions of Nations or Persons, would be judging and
determining according to present events; but says the Lord, this is not the
way, Judge Luke 1. 52.
not according to outward appearance, but judge righteous judgment: Man's great
and high, is but low and mean; and man's adversity and abasement may be exalted;
but both these are alike to me; the rate and reason of adversity is as weighty
in my hands as prosperity, and prosperity as adversity, etc.

Though man think prosperity and adversity like two parallel lines that will
never meet, but run out ad infinitum, the Lord thwarts them, and makes them
orthogonical, both alike, meeting in him the center of all wisdom and mercy, as
with like esteem, number, weight and measure.

And that this might further be manifest, I shall give you in a word both a
National and a Personal instance.

The first instance is National, which is that of the Jewish State; they were
in prosperity, in outward privileges, and of which they boasted, saying, The
Temple Jer. 7. 4.
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; yea, the Apostle tells us, Romans 3. 1, 2.
That unto them were committed the Oracles of God; they were the Lords people,
as impaled from the world by circumcision: But now what were the Gentiles, but
as the wild olive, as in a barren wilderness, and outcasts and strangers? And
how has God set prosperity against adversity, and adversity against
prosperity, in turning these different states? The high has he broken off, the
mean has he ingrafted in; yea, and in the Jewish poverty, to bring in riches
to the Gentiles; their fall, our rising; their return the glory of the world;
how the Lord has set prosperity and adversity one against another in these
different States of Jews and Gentiles; and how the Lord has done with us in
our late transactions, for to bring to pass this English Commonwealth, any
indifferent heart may easily make out.

2. The personal instance, which also may be National, is, first that case of
Jacob and Esau, as you have it, Gen: 25. 23. compared with Rom 9. 11, 12. Here
were two persons, which likewise were the heads of two Nations, both in one
womb; here was prosperity and adversity, in that one was chosen, the other
rejected; Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated; and yet neither prosperity nor
adversity, considering the persons in themselves, having done neither good nor
evil: And yet to silence all men's reasonings, here are Sons of one Father,
striving in one womb, and heads of two mighty Nations; yet in these, prosperity
is set against adversity, that man should not find any thing after him.

Again, in the 15, 16, 17, 18. Verses following the Text, you may perceive this
to be made good. Says Solomon, All things have I seen in the days of my
vanity: There is a just man that perishes in his righteousness; and there is a
wicked man prolongeth his life in his wickedness; then follows, Be not overmuch
wicked; and Be not over much righteous, neither make thy self over wise; why
should thou destroy thy self etc. Here is one thing set over against another;
man's own righteousness, as well as man's own wickedness may destroy him.

The Lord takes the Self-righteous person, that is righteous in his own eyes;
after he has built himself up, he throws him down again, and lays him amongst
the most wicked, and then raises him up to glory and honor in Christ Jesus: The
sum of which is, man's reason and his own actions would be the only
righteousness; but the Lord silences that as well as man's personal wickedness;
for in both these, call it righteousness or wickedness, adversity or
prosperity* I say in both, a man may commit homicide, be a self murderer and
destroyer; a man may destroy himself by his righteousness, as well as by his
wickedness; the Lord sets one over against another, to silence man's reasoning;
and the result of all being this, that dependence and casting our care should
be on God; yea, he that fears the Lord, shall come forth of them all.

And thus much by way of Explication; the next thing is by way of Observation.

The first thing that I observe, is from the time; Here is a day, and a day; A
day of prosperity, and A day of adversity: From which I gather,

That the consistency of man's life, its all scored out in two days; a day of
prosperity, and a day of adversity.

Every man has his time, and his condition is usually thus intermixed. Mark how
Solomon pairs out the state and life of man, Eccles. 3. Verse 1. unto the 8. A
time to be born, and a time to dye; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up
that which is planted, etc. A time to weep, and a time to laugh, etc. in each
of these is man's life busied, always repairing or impairing; as no time but is
passing, so no state or condition of man's life but growing or decaying.

Man's life is consistent in two days:

1. In regard of shortness. 2. In regard of swiftness. And 3. In regard of
changebleness.
Upon the first and second account consider what Job says, Chap. 8. 9. for we
are of yesterday, and know nothing; or as the words will bear, have little
experience, because our days are a shadow (...) ab (...)
upon the earth. Job was a good Accountant in this worlds changes, but
especially of the state of man's life: And yet he does not say our years, or
months, but days, and that as two, yesterday, and to day, he brings never a
morrow; but tells us, even these are as short and uncertain as a shawdow on the
earth; so is the life of man in his bosom like a shadow, longest in the
morning, shortest at noon, uncertain all day, but surely at night not to be
found. And that our days are but two in regard of swiftness, Job tells us, That
his days are swifter then a Post; they Job 9. 25. 26. Rapidissimi fluminis.
flee away, they are passed away, as the swift ship, that glides strongly and
quickly through the main without stay or stop: even so the days of our life are
but short and swift. Our Savior tells us it is like the grass that to day is,
and to morrow is thrown into the oven: The best of us all can number our days
but into two; namely yesterday and to day; yesterday was ours, and to day is
ours; but to morrow is not mine nor yours, but the Lords. And the Lord help us,
that having but two days, and that both swift and short, that we may apply our
hearts, and employ our time unto heavenly wisdom.

But then Thirdly, as two days in regard shortness and swiftness, so in regard
of uncertainty; The time is certain, but the day is uncertain; who knows what a
day may bring forth? one day is fair, but the next foul; one lowering, the other
serene; yesterday rainy, to day shineing, and usually one or both is intermixed;
the morning fair, the noon orecast; one hour fair, the next hour cloudy; but
always subject unto such like changes: And what else is the consistency of man's
life, but two days of uncertainty? a day of sickness, and a day of health; a
day of poverty, and a day of plenty; a day of strength, and a day of weakness;
a day of youth, and a day of age; this hour crowned, the next crossed; our whole
life is but a certain uncertain condition; like the buckets to the well,
sometimes up, and sometimes down; sometimes full, and sometimes empty; one
while whole, and anon broken; such are the vicissitudes and changes of the life
of man in this present condition; And the reason is, that all things might
appear to be of God, and not of man: The Lord casts all into contrarieties, and
works in them and by them, take them in nature or grace, to the silencing of
the reason of man, who would still be judging according to present events. The
world consists of heaven and earth; the heavens have influence on the earth;
the earth bringing forth as to the heavens; and this by dying, and in dying
living; light and darkness is Gods order, both flying, yet following one
another; death and life is contrary; so is flesh and spirit, yet live in one
another: adversity is opposite, and against prosperity; yet in Gods order they
make a harmony; though to man they are contrary, yet from him they are both
alike; He sets one, etc. So likewise in spirituals, he gives his work out
upon the soul in reasons contrarieties: The north wind, Cant. 4. 16.
and the south wind must blow together, that his garden may flourish, and the
spices be fragrant. Reason would think that the way should be something
suitable to the home; but this is the Lords method unto his dearest children,
that through straights and troubles, temptations and tribulations, they must
inherit the promises, and enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

But now albeit that all in this our present and temporal condition, all is
consistent in two days, A day of prosperity, and of adversity; both these being
set before, which would we choose? I know if reason might make choice, it would
fix on prosperity; and sense likewise, without question, would close with that:
But now what says Religion, and a gracious heart? Says Religion as to my
present state, Give me neither prosperity or adversity, as extremes; Give me
neither poverty (...) Effigies, statutum
nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me, as to maintain my likeness,
Prove. 30. 8. But says a gracious heart, Considering my natural inclination, if
I must choose, I had rather pitch upon adversity; for that will put me to
consideration, which prosperity seldom or never does, but rather into carnal
security.

But may some say, what a sad life then must you needs have?

Well, but says the godly heart, let it be what it will, rather then to forget
God, and be puffed up, this is my choice; And this is both their motto's and
valuation, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

The second observation is from what man does in the prosperous day; he
rejoices in the day of prosperity; he considers not as commanded, but as from
sense and reasons practice. Observe,

That man keeps a measure, according to present events.

If he counts changes prosperous, then suitable thereunto he treads his joy;
but if contrary, he takes up sorrow: If things run thus and thus, says reason,
then I shall do so and so; but if things fall thus, then must I do thus and
thus: If such an interest be advanced, that is suitable unto self; or such
opinions stand, that are suitable to my interest, then accordingly is my joy:
But if mine be opposed, suppressed, and others to be advanced, then on the
contrary we measure out our sorrow, and our grief, keeping a proportion, so
much and so much prosperity, so much and so much joy, and contrary, etc.

And the reason is, because man's reason is annexed to sense; rejoicing, that is
annexed unto prosperity; grief unto distress; but both by reasons rule,
according to their measure in occasions, whether they be exterior, or interior.

Learn hence, a clear difference betwixt Faith and Reason. Reason keeps
measure with every present joy or sorrow: But true faith soars above either:
Divine faith, it fixes on nothing but All sufficiency; in distresses faith acts
above staggerings; and in temptations above (though under) struglings. True
faith is not frighted by the worlds distresses, nor heightened by the world^
success: but in either reason's moved, and bringet forth fleeting joy or
worldly sorrow.

The third Observation is, That all our earthly comforts, and all our earthly
crosses, are but things that are made by him that made all things.

The Lord makes one against another, and values them both alike in number,
weight and measure, which are not to remain, but to be removed: All earthly
Kingdoms, Crowns and Comforts will be shaken, as things that are made; so also
all earthly crosses will be shaken, for that they are made, that those things
which cannot be shaken might remain, Heb. 12. 27.

And if this be so, then here is a comfort and a cross:

1. If all our earthly comforts and enjoyments are but things that are made;
What a cross is this to the carnal, covetous and voluptuous man? All thy
worldly joy, profit, and prosperity, it is but made, and shall not remain; nay,
they must all shortly, if not suddenly, be removed.

Secondly, Here is a comfort to the distressed, and such as are in this worlds
adversity; do not be cast down at another prosperity, or thy own poverty; for
thy poverty is but made, and in a little while shall be removed.

The fourth and last observation, is from the last clause in the Verse, which
hinteth out the scope and end why the Lord sets prosperity and adversity in
such anaequipollence; and that is, To silence man's reason in determining by
present events: He sets one thing over against another, that man should not
find out any thing after him.

Whence observe, That it is a folly for man to judge or determine by the
present even^^ or changes of this world.

Whether it be of Persons, Armies, Victories, States or Kingdoms, it is a great
folly Eccl. 9. 1, 2. No man knows either love or hatred by all that is before
them, all things come alike, to all there is one event; to the righteous, and
to the wicked; to the clean, and to the unclean: So in the 10 Verse of this 7
Chapter, Say not thou, or judge not thou, that the former days are better then
the present; for thou do not enquire wisely Ex sapientia.
concerning this; or not out of wisdom do thou enquire upon this. Sometimes
the wicked are in great prosperity; otherwhiles the godly in great adversity:
And to judge and determine by the present condition, how may we condemn the
godly with the wicked, all things in this world falling alike to all? how
miserably erred the Jews in thus determining upon Jesus Christ in his present
distress? Mat. 27. 40. 43. by determining by the present event, that made an
if, and a piff at the Lord Jesus, calling all in question, Saying, If thou be
the Son of God, come down from the cross: Alas miserable multitude! the Father
had another end; for in sparing of his Son, all souls had been lost: But though
this was the folly of the multitude, the more learned and great ones would not
mistake so: The Scribes and Pharisees they sat in Moses chair, they would not
be so ignorant in Divine things, to judge of Jesus Christ by present
sufferings: But not only they, says the 41 Verse, not only the Elders and
Scribes, but the great Rabbis, the chief-Priests mocked him, saying, He saved
others, himself he cannot save; he trusted in God, let him deliver him if he
will have him, etc. Here is miserable folly from Christ's present adversity: Who
would ever determine by present events, when the Jews thus foiled in the
Savior of the world! upon which David cries out in the behalf of Christ, Many
there be that say of my soul, there is no help, etc.

The reason of so great a folly is:

1. Because we live more by sense and appearance, then we do by faith, and
experience of Gods ordering and disposing of all things: We judge all safe in a
calm; but if once the Sea is boistrous, we like Peter Mat. 14. 30, 31.
determine we shall perish: If things once cross sense, we are strait unsettled
and uncenter'd: And this comes, by reason we make outward appearance to be our
center; were sense but subservient unto faith, we would not show such folly by
judging so unfaithfully; but rather judge righteous judgment. And then

2. The reason of so great a folly is, because we do not only live more by
sense then we do by faith, because we look more upon the present event, then
upon the eternal principal; we are more taken up with the present effect and
instrumental cause, then we are on God, who is the orderer and disposer, and
cause of all causes.

The Jews regarded not the Lords design in the Messiah; but judged by present
appearance, which makes the Prophet complain so, Isa. 53. 3, 4. He is despised
and rejected of men, speaking of Christ, a man of sorrows; but what then? what
did they determine? why, notwithstanding bearing our grief, and carrying our
sorrows, looking upon his present distress, more then the Lords great design:
yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted; they looked more
upon the Lord Jesus present afflictions, then upon the Lords eternal designs.

So in a Summers day, we think it will never be night in such a state or
condition, never any alteration. But now did we but consider the power, and the
Lords decrees, and resolved accomplishments; how he in this world plants and
pulls up; and these things alike to all, as prosperity and adversity: If we did
but consider how quickly he can alter Crowns and Kingdoms, shake and remove,
level mountains, and exalt valleys, we would rest more on God, and determine
less amongst our selves in present transactions.

If there be so great a folly in determining present events; then for the time
forward John 7. 44.
not according to outward appearance, but to judge righteous judgment: Thou in
this latter age have seen or heard of great changes, and eminent transactions;
and how thou have past thy censure, the Lord knows; however, be not unwise, but
learn the will of the Lord in all this worlds changes; for know, unto him are
all enterprises, he has centred all in himself; and do thou resolve to center
all in him also; pass not sentence on this party, or that party; on this
victory, or that loss; knowing that by the King of kings, kings ought to reign,
and by him they are to decree Justice; and it is not the present, but the end
that crowns the act.

Who would have thought the Jewish State, invested with so many privileges,
should now lie waste? And such an Ahashuerus, Hest. ^. 1
with an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces, with such a Homage, as O King,
live for ever, to be all thrown down, and come to nothing: But thus it was, and
something of the Lords dealing thou can not be incapable of in these present
days, wherein we have seen the various turns and changes of States; but center
not on any, nor absolutely determine by any outward or present events; but
still in all these National and Personal changes, rest and resolve into God,
who is the eternal principal; for he sets victory against losses, and losses
against victories; prosperity against adversity, and adversity against
prosperity, that man should not determine by all that is before him.

FINIS.

