Morbus Epidemicus: OR, THE DANGER OF SELF-SEEKING; Discovered in a SERMON
PREACHED Before the Right Honorable, The Lord Major of the City of LONDON, At
Mercers-Chappel, November. 18. 1649.

By JOHN CARDELL.

Romans 14.7, 8. For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself:
For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we dye, we dye unto the
Lord: whether we live therefore or dye, we are the Lords.

2 Cor. 5.14, 15. For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus
judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead. And that he dyed for all,
that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
that dyed for them, and rose again.

Necesse est alterutrum in nobis affectum regnare: ut vel nobis posthabitis
feramur ad Christum, and quae sunt Christi: vel in nostram utilitatem nimium
propensi, defunctorie Christo serviamus, Johan. Calvin. Commentar. in cap. 2.
Epistol. ad Philip.

London, Printed by John Field, 1650.

To the Right Honorable, THOMAS FOOT, LORD MAJOR OF The Famous City of LONDON:
Together with the Right Worshipful, The ALDERMEN His BRETHREN.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
ALl that I shall Preface to the ensuing Sermon, is this, Humbly to acquaint
you, That the publishing of these mean Endeavors (in obedience to your Command,
and more then single motion) will cry aloud in your ears for Justice at your
hands; and for such a piece of Justice, as would render us all exceeding happy,
if God would but strengthen your hearts and hands to go before us, and us to
comply with you therein: For (lo) Judge 16.24
our Enemy, and the Destroyer of our Country [Self] is now apprehended and
brought before you, the worthy Magistrates of this Renowned City: And it may
well be expected from you, That ye should proceed unto some exemplary
Punishment, upon so Hostis Reipublicae and Pestis.
dangerous an Adversary; otherwise (having already both owned, and accepted the
Charge, In the Sermon from page 14, etc.
exhibited against him, as an Enemy to all Piety, Unity and Policy; and owned
it so far, as to Call for this open publication of it) ye will, I know, bear
with my (...), 2 Cor. 3.12.
plainness, in telling you, That ye must (being thus far engaged) either
proceed unto the Condemnation of Self, or else be looked upon as (...), Tit.
3.11.
Self-condemned. Arise therefore (Honored Patriots) unto a speedy and faithful
execution of Justice and Judgment, upon this grand Incendiary; and let all the
world see, That as your Actings of late have been high, and extraordinary, and
far beyond the proportion of former Times and Ages, so that ye have had nothing
in your eye therein, or nothing of your own, so much as the Glory of God, the
things of Christ, and the good of the Public. To persuade whereunto, as it is
the chief scope and drift of the following Discourse, so that these may still
be, the principal things that ye aim at, in all your great, and weighty
Undertakings, is the unfeigned desire, and earnest Prayer of

Your Servant in the Gospel, John Cardell.

Morbus Epidemicus: OR, THE DANGER OF Self-Seeking.
PHIL. 2.21. For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.


THe Apostle directs this Epistle to all the Saints that were at Philippi,
Coherence.
Chap. 1. ver. 1.
as you may perceive from the first verse of the first Chapter of it: And after
his Salutation of them (wherein he wishes them Grace and peace from God our
Father, ver. ^.
and from the Lord Jesus Christ) in the next place he gives solemn Thanks unto
God, for their constant fellowship in the Gospel: In the 3d, 4th and 5th
verses, ver. 3, 4, 5.
I thank my God, says he, upon every remembrance of you, always in every prayer
of mine for you all, making request with joy for your fellowship in the Gospel,
from the first day until now. great joy and rejoicing (and that unto others, as
well as unto themselves) to see Believers constant and unwearied in the
fellowship of the Gospel: There are other fellowships that a man may soon be
weary of, by reason of the many sad Distempers and Distractions that are to be
found in them; but the fellowship of the Gospel (where it is rightly
apprehended, and accordingly embraced) that is so easy a yoke, and so well
lined with love, that it can be offensive to none, but such whose shoulders are
very sore, and not able to bear any thing. Three discoveries of the Apostles
tender care over the Saints at Philippi, walking together in the fellowship of
the Gospel.


The sight of this fellowship among the Saints at Philippi, made the Apostle
very tender over them, and very respective toward them, as may appear by
sundry remarkable expressions in this Epistle of his unto them.

God is my record (says he there) at the 8 ver. of the 1 Chapter.
(...) Quantopere expetam: Mihi videtur in gevere vehementissimu^ in illos
amorem suum Apostolus hoc verbo significare ex Hebraeorum idiotismo: ut autem
significet ex quo font promanet affectus iste, and quo etiam feratur, additam
visceribus nomen, magnum pondus addit seutentiae, ut intimus am^r significetur:
Solent enim Hebrai (...) rachamim id est viscera, omnes teneros ac veluti
maternos affectus vocare. Bez. in loc.
how greatly I long after you all, in the bowels of Jesus Christ; which are
words that have a fullness of love in them, or a fullness of care and tenderness,
that he should long after them, and after them greatly, and greatly after them
all, and after them all in the bowels of Jesus Christ; and that he should be so
serious in it, as to call God himself to bear witness unto the truth of his
heart herein, saying, God is my record, how greatly I long after you all, in
the bowels of Jesus Choist: This was a very full expression of his good
affection toward them.

besides this, a little after in the same Chapter, he goes yet higher; and at
the 24 ver. ver. 24. of the 1 Chapter.
he tells us of a great strait that he was in, and his strait lay between these
two things, He knew not well whether he should desire to be with Christ in
heaven, fully and absolutely; or to continue still among the Philippians; Paul's
strait.
I am in a strait between two, says he, having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, which is far better; nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more
needful for you: Like some tenderhearted Mother, Simile.
that has her Children about her in one Country, and her Husband inviting her
to a place of very great honor with himself in another Country; she is willing
to go to her Husband, but loath to leave her Children: such was the Apostles
strait here in this place; the Philippians loss on the one side, and his own
gain on the other side; their necessity on the one side, and his own felicity
on the other side, did not a little straiten him, and which of these two he
should choose, he could not easily determine: which was another rare unheard of
demonstration of his love and good affection toward them, so far from being
enticed to leave them, by any small part of this Worlds glory, that the glory
of heaven it self could not easily gain, or take him away from them.

But farther yet, and in the third place, another Discovery of the Apostles
great love unto these Philippians (united and walking together in the
fellowship of the Gospel) is here in this Chapter, about the words now read
unto you, and it was this, That now, Vid. Zanch. in cap. 1. hujus Ep.
when he could not come to them himself (being a Prisoner at Rome under Nero)
he was very careful to visit them by another, sufficiently supply his place in
his absence: ver. 19. of this Chapter, ver. 19. of the 2 Chapter.
I trust in the Lord Jesus (says the Apostle there) to send Timotheus shortly
unto you, that I may be of good comfort, when I know your state by him. And
that his great care and love might so much the more appear, in the sending of
this Messenger, he tells them in the following verses, what a one he was (An
extraordinary Messenger) and not only one, of whose fidelity they had formerly
had experience (at the 22 ver. Ye know the proof of him, that as a son with the
father, he has served with me in the Gospel) not only so, but moreover and
besides this, he tells them at the 20 ver. that he was so choice and rare a
man, that he for his part knew no man like him; (...) Neminem habeo aeque
animatum ad res vestras curan^as: Petius onim cum allis Timotheum Paulus
comparat quam secum, and quidem eo cousilio singular et clogium tribuit, ut
propter raritatem majore fit in pretio. Calv. in loc. Text divided into 3 parts.
I have no man like minded by me (in the verse before the Text, that is his
language) to whom I can so safely commend you, or that will so naturally care
for your estate, as this man will; for, says he, this is the present frame and
temper of men's spirits, All seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
Christ's.

In which words you have three things notable: First, Iniquity complained of,
and that is, Men's seeking their own things. Secondly, generality of this
Iniquity, All seek their own. Thirdly, manner how this is done, how men do seek
their own things inordinately, they always do it with a neglect (at least) of
better things, All seek their own, and not the things which are Jesus Christ's.


Now forasmuch as the holy Apostle takes notice of it here, The rise of the
Doctrine.
and puts a mark upon it, for a dangerous Epidemical Disease, that All sought
their own, and not the things of Christ; That I may endeavor fully to open the
nature of this Disease, and show you the bottom of it, Let this be the
foundation or Groundwork of that which follows: That it is a very dangerous
Distemper, either in a person, or in a People, to be inordinately studious, or
inquisitive, about that which is their own.

In the prosecution of this Observation, Three things enquired for the
explication of the Doctrine
and for the better understanding of it, we will enquire three things:

meant here by that which is our own?

seeking that which is our own?

inordinately studious, or inquisitive, about that which is our own?

For the former, that which is our own?

Answer to that, you may please to observe, That there is nothing so strictly,
or formally, or directly said to be our own, as Sin and Corruption, Nothing so
much our own as sin.
together with that Shame and confusion of face, which follows as the just
reward or fruit of sin: and therefore says Daniel, in that humble
acknowledgement or confession of his, Dan. 9.8. O Lord, to us belongs
confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our fathers, because we
have sinned against thee: Confusion of face belongs to us, we have a just Right
and Title to it, it is our own; as Christ says of him that is the Father of
Lies, that when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, John 8.44. or as
it is said of Judas, that when he dyed, he went (...), to his own place, Acts
1.25. So All that is good in us, that is Gods, and all that is evil, that is
Satan's first, and by his means our own. Cum ergo Deus ^a sit per fecte bonus,
ut ^^us omn^a exc^llenti quodam modo bona sint, quaesitum olim est and
gravissime disputatum, unde illud milum natum sit, quod tam late m^^averat, and
quaenam huyus mali cause extiterit. Hoc malum nos a Diabolo invectum esse
dicimus, qui eisi erat bonus a Domino factus initio, tamen libera voluntate a
Domino defecit, and pecca^tt, and homini, ut peccaret, persuasit, authorque
fuit: Hine quicquid est peceiti vel in damonibus, vel in hominibus totum
flaxit. Whitaker. Respons. ad Rat. 8. Campian. Tom. 1. eper. p^g 33.
whatever is good in us, that is Gods, and whatever is evil, that is our own.
Look how far forth our thoughts, or our words, or our ways, are evil and
sinful, so far forth are they said to be our own thoughts, and our own words,
and our own ways in Scripture: If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath from
doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and shall call the Sabbath a delight, etc.
not finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words, Isa. 58.13. The
backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, Prove. 14.14. Thine own
wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backsliding shall reprove thee, Jer.
2.19.

But more particularly and properly, place said to be a man's own, That a man's
own here, wherein he himself has a civil Interest, and that either does or may
stand in competition with the things of Jesus Christ.
wherein he himself has a civil propriety, or a civil interest, and that
either does, or may at any time stand in competition with the things of Jesus
Christ; and thus a man's Life is his own, and a man's Liberty his own, and a man's
Estate his own, and a man's Good Name his own, and a man's Family his own,
together with all those several appurtenances that may serve to render any of
these either comfortable or conspicuous: These things I calls a man's own, his
Life, his Liberty, his Estate, his Good Name, his Family, not because of any
absolute irrespective interest that a man has in any of these things, for so
God alone is the great and absolute Proprietary, he is the mighty God, the
supreme Landlord of all the whole World, and we are all but his (...),
nostrarum facultatum non sumus nos Domini sed administratores atque curatores.
Theophylact. and Camerar. in Luc. 16.1, 1.
Stewards or Tenants at will, and he may say to any of us, when he pleases,
Give account of thy stewardship, for thou may be no longer steward.

But yet I say, People have a civil interest, or a civil propriety in all those
things already mentioned, from that God who has given the Earth to the
children of men; for so the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 115.16. Admonentur ex hoc
versu, Potestates, and Judices terrae, and quotquot terram incolunt, ut
agnoscant Regem suum in caelis, a quo acceperunt, quicquid in hac terra
posside^t, sintque illius verbo obcdicutes and subjecti: Nam is est, qui regna
mutat, potentes sed thus deponit, and regiones fertiles mutat in steriles.
Musc. in loc. vid. Plura ibid. observe. valde digna.
The Heaven, even the Heavens are the Lords, but the Earth has he given to the
children of men: He gives men their Lives, and their Liberties, and their
Estates, and their Good Names, and Families; and as for such as walk honestly,
and unblameably (and that do not make a forfeiture of them, by any sinful
unworthy miscarriage) these things ought to be preserved, and kept inviolably
unto such; and if any one shall go about to wrong or prejudice his Neighbor,
either in his Life, or in his Liberty, or in his Estate, or in his Good Name,
or Family, the party wronged, may and ought to plead Exemption, from the
present Oppression: And they that have Power and Authority in their hands, have
it purposely given them, to vindicate all such; and if they do it not,
Meminerit Magistratus sibi gladtum datum esse a Deo, non ut illum gest^t
frustra: sed ut eo utatur ad vindictam sceleratorum, ac defensionem bonorum.
Piscator. in Romans 13.4. Magistratus vice Dei sungitur, cum in Praemiis dandis
obedientibus, tum in Paenis instigendis contumacibus. Nicol. Heming ibid.
Inductus est itaque Magistratus, ut leges quam diligentissime conserventur,
sontes puntantur, and boni juventur ac soveantur: Et sane lexest mutus
Magistratus, and victssim Magistratus lex animata and loquens. Pet. Martyr. in
cap. 19. lib. Iud.
They bear the Sword in vain, and are not so just and faithful in their places,
as they should and ought to be. And so much for Answer to the first Question,
what is meant here by that which is our own?

In the next place we are to enquire, What Is meant here by seeking that which
is our own? All seek their own, says the Apostle; and what hurt is there in
that? Is it not lawful enough for a man to seek, and look after that which is
his own? May we not without any danger, seek to maintain, seek to preserve, yea
seek to increase that which is our own? Does not the Apostle himself elsewhere
say, that If any provide not for his own, especially for those of his own
house, that he has denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidel? 1 Ep. to
Tim. chap. 5. ver. 8.

For Answer to this, Quaerenda sunt quae Christi, sed interim negligenda non
sunt quae sunt nostra, and quae c^rare a Deo jubemur. Zinc. in Text. Our own
things inordinately sought two manner of ways
a lawful seeking of that which is our own, which the Apostle condemns not
here; but the dangerous evil complained of, or spoken against here in this
place, it is a sinful inordinate seeking of that which is our own; and this is
done two manner of ways:

Either when a man seeks his own, with prejudice to another man's private
interest;

Or else when he does it with prejudice to the public interest of that Nation
or Commonwealth wherein he lives: Whosoever fails in either of these
particulars, he sins dangerously in the pursuit of that which is his own.

First, When a man seeks his own with prejudice to another man's private
interest, which is done three ways.
or apparent prejudice of his Neighbors private interest, now he walks
inordinately; and this is done principally or especially three ways: 1. Either
when a man seeks his own, with detriment to his Neighbor. 2. Or when he seeks
his own, with disparagement to his Neighbor. 3. Or when he seeks his own, with
discouragement to his Neighbor.


Now he is not so careful as he should be, to avoid offenses in the seeking of
his own. 1. When a man seeks his own, with detriment to his Neighbor.


First, when a man seeks his own, to the detriment, or hurt, or injury of
another; now he walks inordinately, and not according to Rule, or according to
the mind of God.

Christians especially should be innocent, as well as wise; holy within, and
harmless without; their Consciences should be void of offense toward men, as
well as toward God: which was Paul's daily exercise, and the same that should
be ours; Herein, says he, do I exercise my self, Acts 24.16. Romans 2.24. 1 Timothy
6.1.
to have always a conscience void of offense, toward God and toward men, Acts
24.16. For, as on the one side, nothing does more Ubi sublimi. or est
praerogativa, major est culpa, and ideo hoc ipso Christiani deteriores sunt,
quia melioresesse deberent: Non enim probant quod fatentur, and impugnant
Professionem suam moribus suis: Magis enim damnabilis est malitia, quam titulus
Bonitatis accusat, and reatus impii est pium nomen: Cumque ipse Salvator noster
ad nos quotidie clamet,
aggravate sin, or sooner cause the Name of God to be blasphemed, then the lewd
lives, and vicious practices of those that profess the Truth, who say they are
Christians, and are not, but of the Synagogue of Satan: so on the other side,
nothing does more adorn or beautify the Doctrine of God our Savior in all
things, or render it more savoury and acceptable among men, then when it is
attended with an innocent, harmless, unblameable Conversation: And therefore
says Christ unto his Disciples, Be wise as Serpents, and withal, innocent as
Doves, Matthew. 10.16. And says he moreover, Sic luceat lux vestra coram
homiuibus, ut videant filii hominum opera vestra bona, and MAGNIFICENT Patr^m
vestrum qui est in caelis: Nos ita vivimus e contrario, ut silii hominum
videant opera nostra mala, and BLASPHEMENT Patrem nostrum qui est in caelis:
Praeter enim paucissimos quosdam qui mala fugiunt, quid est aliud pene omnis
caetus Christianorum quam sentina vitiorum? Salvian. de Gubern. Dei lib. 4.
Let you light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 5.16.

2. When a man seeks his own, 2. When a man seeks his own, with disparagement
to his neighbor.
to the disparagement of another; now he walks inordinately: He that loves his
Neighbor as himself, will be as careful not to defame others, as he would have
others careful not to defame him; he will be as tender of another Good Name,
as he would have another tender of his Good Name; he will be afraid to walk
with slanders toward others, lest others be left, and Quicuriose trqui^unt in
aliena facta, eaque reprehendu^t tenere, and odio quodam preximi ut racliores
sarctiorcsque oideantur: tlli vicissim judicia aliorum, and imprimis judicium
Dei non effugiunt. Polan. Syntag. Theol. ^b. to cap. 41.
providentially ordered to walk with slanders toward him. It is reported of In
ipsa mensa magis lectionem vel disputationen, quam Epulationem potationemque
diligebat, and contra pestilentiam humanae consuetudinis in ea ita scriptum
habebat. Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere famam, Hanc mensam indignam
noverit esse sibi. Possid. de vit. Aug. cap. 22.
Austin, by him that Writes his Life, That he would not endure any at his
Table, that should show any malice against others by Backbitings or
Detractions; and to that purpose he had two Verses written over his Table, to
admonish those that sat with him, that in such cases that Table was not for
them: If the same course were generally taken, to admit of no such talk, either
at our tables, houses or shops, there would certainly be more Prove. 26.20.
peace, and quietness, and love amongst us, then now is to be found.

3. When a man seeks his own, 3. When a man seeks his own, with discouragement
to his neighbor.
with discouragement to another, now he walks inordinately, and not with a
right foot to the Gospel, or so as he ought to walk: Christians in this, should
be as Christ himself was; and it is even admirable to consider, how careful he
has always been to cherish small beginnings, and to encourage young beginners,
to lift up the hands that were ready to hang down, Heb. 12.12. Isa 40.11.
and to strengthen the feeble knees; Isa. 40.11. Mansuetudinem and
misericordiam Christi describit, Varab. in loc. Matthew. 12.
He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the lambs with his
arm, and carry them in his bosom, and gently lead those that are with young: A
bruised reed shall he not break, nor quench smoking flax, until he send forth
judgment unto victory: And as Boni scilicet Domini bonus famulus, and
singularis magistri praeclarus imitator: qui in vestigiis Domini sui ambulans,
patentiora quodammodo and expressiora pedibus suis fecit Domini sui esse
vestigia. Salvian. de Gubern. Dei lib. 3.
He is thus tender himself, so he would have us also to be in our ways and
walkings, and not to Zech 4.10.
despise the day of small things; but still to drive on Jacobs pace, and so, as
that we leave not the Genesis 33.13, 14. See the Conclusion of Mr. Pembles Preface
to his Vindic. Great.
Ewes with young, or the tender lambs behind.

The sum of all is this therefore, How far forth a man may seek his own,
without any prejudice to the private interest of others.
A man may lawfully seek his own in a more private way of acting (for we are
not yet come to the public) Provided, That this be not done either to the
oppressing of others, or to the disparaging of others, or unto the discouraging
or disheartning of others, in any lawful way.

But then withal, this Caution must here be entered, before we leave this,
Caution.
That if a man be seeking his own lawfully, or doing his Masters will
faithfully and sincerely, in a way that is commanded, and that is of Divine
Appointment; If in such a case, some men do suffer, by being either injured in
their Estates, or defamed in their Credits, or disheartened in their
proceedings, A man's seeking his own lawfully, or doing his Masters work
faithfully, is no more to be blamed for this, then the shining of the Sun is to
be blamed for hurting sore eyes, or for extracting noisome savours out of a
filthy dunghill.

And therefore, if ye walk honestly, and unblameably, every one in his place,
and do not Peccatum recipit speciem ex intention Peccantis. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 72.
intentionally seek to injure others, or to defame others, or to dishearten
others, by seeking your own; if any such thing fall out casually, contingently,
or unavoidably from your lawful actings, in such a case, they that find
themselves agrieved, must be content to bear their own burdens, and study to
make a good use of what they suffer, and not blame others for doing that which
was their duty to do.

But secondly, 2. Men seek their own inordinately, when they do it to the
prejudice of the public interest.
Men seek their own inordinately (as I told you before) not only when they do
it, to the prejudice of any private interest, but especially when they do it to
the prejudice of the In bonis temporalibus tenetur quisque personam publicam
vel communitatem sibimetipsi praferre. Benum cuim to^^us pluris faciendum est,
quam bonum un^us alicujus partis: Personis autem public is an^umerandi
sunt^il^i, quos consta^ valde utiles esse Re^-publica Ames. de Conscient. l. 5.
c 7.
publique-Interest of that Nation, or Commonwealth wherein they live.

Now this publique-Interest (that I tell you of, The publique-Interest twofold
Civil and Sacred.
and that is indeed chiefly considerable in this business) it is either Civil
or Sacred; it is either that Civil publique-Interest that men have as men, or
else it is that Sacred publique-Interest that Jesus Christ himself has in each
particular Nation. The publique-Interest of men.


The Civil publique-Interest of men, or of Inhabitants in each particular
Nation, it lies in those Laws, Constitutions or Orders, that are either made,
or to be made, Enacted, or to be Enacted, in ordine ad salutem Populi, in order
to the common safety, or Cum lex sit regula humanorum actuum quorum ultimus
finis est beatitudo, and quidem communis: necesse est eum ad bonum commun^e
semper ordinari. Aquin 1. 2 qu. 90. Art. 2.
public welfare of the whole Body of the People; which Laws or Constitutions
are to be so plainly published or made known, and withal, so equally and
indifferently administered, that they may from time to time be a terror to those
that do evil, and a protection to those that do well; and not like Cobwebs, to
catch little flies, and let the great ones break through; or like snares, to
vex the poor innocent Doves, and let the cunning Dat veniam corvis, vexat
censura columbas. Iuve. Sat. 2.
Rooks alone.

Then the Sacred publique-Interest that Jesus Christ has, The
publique-interest of Christ
is to Acts 2.39.
call as many as he pleases, or as many as 13.48.
were ordained unto eternal life, out of every Rev. 5.9.
kindred, and nation, and tongue, and people, making them Psa. 110.3.
willing in the day of his power, to Mat. 11.29
take his yoke upon them, and to accept of his Isa. 9.6.
Government, and Ps 105.45.
to keep his Laws, and to observe his Statutes, and to acknowledge no other
Lawgiver but himself, in things that are of a Divine, and of a Spiritual
nature; for so the Apostle tells us, that in ordine ad spiritualia, there is
but one Est enim legislator universalis judex, and lex universal^ judicium, cui
omnia omnium jud^^ia subjici and adaptari debent. Davenant. de Iud. and Nor.
sid. cap. 3.
Lawgiver, who has potestatem vitae and necis, power to save and to destroy,
Jam. 4.12.

Now (mark ye) when men shall go about (any men whatsoever) to set up their own
Lusts, their own Wills, own Ends, their own Advancements, their own Party, any
thing in the world that is their own, either above common safety, or above the
Throne and Scepter of Jesus Christ (as Loquimur d^ Pontifice ratione solius
Pontificatus, ac dicimus cum, etiamsi ditionem temporalem nullam haberet, non
posse ullo modo judicari, in terris, ab ullo principe Christiano, five
seculari, sive Ecclesiastico, neque ab omnibus simul in concilio congregatis.
Bellarm de Rom Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 26. Romani Pontifices ad imitationem
Luciferi adorari volunt ut Dii, neque reputant se subditos esse cuiquam, ficut
filii Belial fine jugo; ne^ sibi posse dici, Cur ita facis? nec Deum timent,
nec homines reverentur. Gers. consid. 4. post tract. de unit. Eccles. citante
Field, lib. 3. de Eccles cap. 2.
Popery does in the very formality of it, and every thing else that is
Antichristian) or else when men do but only pretend to common safety, or to
the things of Jesus Christ, merely for their own Ends, and for the advancement,
or lifting up of their own things, this is most abominable Self-seeking, and
that which utterly ruins or pulls down all, as much as in it lies, as having
no manner of consistency, either with the Laws of God or Men.

And thus have I brought you to the sight of the Distemper or Malady here
complained of, The Distemper discovered.
by showing you 1. What Is meant here by that which is our own: And 2. What by
an inordinate seeking of that which is our own.

Now in the next place we are to enquire, great an evil this is, for men to be
thus inordinately studious, or inquisitive, about that which is their own?

appear to be a most dangerous Evil or Distemper, upon a threefold ground or
consideration; it being contrary 1. The danger of Self-seeking: it being
To all Rules of Piety. 2. To all Rules of Unity. 3. To all Rules of Policy.


First, A selfish disposition, or an inordinate seeking of that which is our
own, Contrary to all Rules of Piety.
is clean contrary to all Rules of Piety: And that I may not be too long upon
this, I shall only instance in three Lessons, which true Piety teaches, that
the selfish man can never stoop to, or the man that merely seeks his own
things: A Lesson of Humility. Three lessons that Self can never stoop to.
A Lesson of Contentation: and A Lesson of Liberality.


First, Religion or true Piety, calls upon us to be humble, A lesson of
Humility.
self-denying creatures; Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good:
and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God? Nothing so contrary to Piety, as Pride, or so
full of impiety; and Quid tu igitur superbis terra and cinis? Si superbientibus
Angelis Deus non pepercit: quanto magis tibi putredo and vermis? Bern. de
Advent. Dom. Sermon. 1. Genesis 18.27.
therefore Why are we proud? Poor creatures! what have we to be proud of, who
are but dust and ashes? who must ere long Job 17.14.
say unto Corruption, Thou art our father; and unto the Worm, Thou art our
mother and our sister? Jude v. 6.
The Angels of God that kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, and that are now reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, to
the judgment of the great day, Fugite superbiam fratres mei (quaeso) multum
fugite, Initium omnis peccati superbia: quae tam velociter ipsum quoque
syderibus cunctis clarius micantem aeterna caligine obtenebravit Luciferum:
quae non modo Angelum, sed Angclorum primum in Diabolum commutavit Bern ibid.
they fell by pride, and so do men always; every sin has its rise from pride,
for upon what other account do men sin, but because (through Obad. v. 3.
the pride of their hearts) they either know not, or neglect, or else Prove.
1.25.
contemn the counsel of the Psa. 92.8.
most High God? All sin goes along with pride, and All pride with sin; but
where there is any thing of piety, there must be something of humility, for God
resists the proud, and he gives grace to none but to the humble, Jam. 4.6. He
scorns the scorners, and he gives grace to to none but to the lowly, Prove.
3.34. To none but such as Christ was, meek and lowly in heart, Matthew. 11.28.
The special habitation or dewlling place of God, the two Thrones of God, are
the highest Heaven, and the lowest Heart: O how good, and amiable, and
honorable a thing is it, to be upon the Throne with God! to dwell where God
dwells! for surely, wheresoever he dwells, there Grace dwells, and there Peace
dwells, and there Comfort dwells: All good dwells where God dwells; and (lo)
his Promise is, to dwell with those, that are of an humble spirit; Isa. 57.15.
Thus says the high and lofty One, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is
Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones.

But how can this be ever rellished by the selfish man, or by him that merely
seeks his own things, and that never minds the public good, or the things of
Jesus Christ? How can Self deny it self, Self not able to deny it self, or to
humble it self, or to cleanse it self.
or humble it self, or abhor it self? Can any thing work beyond the Sphere of
its own activity? Can that which is filthy, make it self holy? or that which is
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one, Job 14.4.
unclean, make it self clean? Can the creature first break or unmake it self
quite, and then afterward repair or make it self up again, and be in a better
condition then ever? Is it in the power of the creature to bring light out of
darkness, or good out of evil, or something out of nothing? No surely; God can
do this, and he may do it, when he pleases; but the creature cannot do it; Self
has neither strength nor stomach, neither power nor will to do it.

Secondly, Lesson that Religion or true Piety teaches, A lesson of
Contentation. (...).
is that of Contentation; Godliness with contentment is great gain, or
Godliness with self-sufficiency: 1 Timothy 6.6. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have; for he has said,
(...). 5 Neg. Est negationis conduplicatio ut fit vehementior pollicitatio.
Estius in loc.
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. Paul had exactly learned
this Lesson; Piety had made him perfect, Religion had made him very skilful in
the Lesson of Contentation: Phil. 4.11, 12. I have learned, says he, in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content; I know how to be abased, and I
know how to abound: every where, and in all things I am instructed, both to be
full, and to be hungry; both to abound, and to suffer need: I pray mark, I have
learned, says Paul, I know, and am instructed, he speaks experimentally; as
Laban said to Jacob in another case, Genesis 30.27. I have learned by experience,
that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake: so Paul knew by experience, That
although of himself he was as apt to murmr and be discontented, as any other
man, yet that 1 Pet. 5.10
the God of all Grace, had now given him so much Grace, as to be contented with
his portion.

But now it is a thing impossible, that ever created Self should be satisfied
with it self, No real self-sufficiency among the creatures.
because the creature has no self-sufficiency within its own bounds or limits;
and therefore Zophar says of a wicked man, that Although his excellency mount
up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet even in the fullness
of his sufficiency he shall be in straits, Job 20.6, 22. God never ordained, or
appointed the creature, to be the Center of its own felicity, August. Conf.
lib. 1. cap. 1. Vae animae audaci quae speravit si a te recessisset, se aliquid
melius habituram: versa and reversa in tergum, and in latera, and in ventrem,
and dura sunt omnia, and tu solus requies. Idem Confess. lib. 6. cap. 16.
but to go out of it self, and rest upon him alone, for all manner of
satisfaction; according to that known saying of (p) Austins, Quoniam fecisti
nos ad te Domine, etc. Because thou have made us Lord unto thee, therefore our
heart is unquiet, till it rest it self in thee: and, Return unto thy rest, O my
soul, says David, Psalm. 116.7. that is, unto thy God, O my soul, and unto thy
God in Christ, for there is no beholding God, but in the face of Jesus Christ;
No man knows the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him, Matthew. 11.27.

Thirdly, Another Lesson, Doctrine of great concernment, A lesson of Liberality.
that Religion presses and urges upon those that are Rich in this World, is, To
be free, and to be liberal, to be open-hearted, and open-handed, Psa. 112.9.
to disperse, to give to the poor, to Luke 16.9.
make friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness; 1 Timothy 6.18
to be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; Eccl.
11.1.
to cast their bread upon the living waters, that after many days they may
find it again; Iam. 1.27.
Caecorum baculus, esuricutium cibus, spes miserorum, solamcu lugentium fuit.
Hieron. de Mort. Nepot, Epist. 3.
to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction; to be as Job 29.13
15.16.
Job was, Eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and fathers to the poor,
and to make the widows heart even to sing for joy. I do not know any one thing,
that the Scripture does more frequently or earnestly press, then this, or that
we had more need to press in these hard Times, Pulchritudo divitiarum non in
sacculis divitam, sed in alimentis pauperum est: In illis infirmls and egeuis
melius opes lucent: Discant itaque pecuniosi, non sua, sed ea quae sunt Christi
quaerere, ut illos and Christus requirat, ut illis sua largiatur. Ambros.
Epist. l. 3.
wherein abundance of poor people are even ready to starve for want of
necessaries.

But what says Self to this now, or the man that merely seeks his own things?
Self a great enemy to liberality.
O no, says he, I must not be too free, I must not be too liberal, I must not
give away all, or give away too much; by all means I must take heed of that,
for either I my self may want it, or my children want it, or my trade want it,
or my lusts want it: and so there is little or nothing to be had, where covetous
unbelieving Self rises up, and forbids the practice of this Religious Lesson.

Secondly, inordinate seeking of our own things, as it is contrary to All Rules
of Piety, Contrary to all Rules of Unity.
so to All Rules of Unity, and Peace, and Concord: For what else is it, that
divides people, and that does so mightily disquiet and distract them, but only
this, That Self carries them upon several Principles, unto several Ends, by
several Rules, one against another? otherwise, were it not for this,
Foundations of Agreement.
there are Foundations enough of Unity and of Agreement, both in Civil things,
and in Sacred; and such Foundations as could never be cast down, if men were
not too selfish, or too eagerly bent upon their own things.

For first, In Civil things, if I would have (...); Chrysostom. Hom 14. in Epist.
ad Philip.
another to dwell securely, In Civil things
or to live quietly by me, must not I live quietly by him? If I would have him
to practice no evil against me, must not I be sure to practice no evil against
him? If I would have him careful not to injure me, must not I be careful not to
injure him? If I would have him tender of my welfare, must not I be tender of
his welfare? Does not the very Law of Nature, as well as the Law of God, lay
this Injunction upon us, To do as we would be done by? And so long as ye keep
within these Bounds, and are followers of that which is good, who is he that
will harm you? says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.13.

And I pray what is it, that puts us at any time upon exceeding the limits of
that Golden Rule, Violence offered by Self unto that excellent Rule of Doing as
we would be done by, Mat. 7.12. See M. Perkins on the place, in his Exposition
of Christ, Sermon. in the Mount.
of Doing as we would be done by, but our neglecting the public good, and the
things of Jesus Christ, and our being too eagerly bent upon our own things? We
should agree well enough, if it were not for that, every man with his Neighbor,
and every man with his Brother, and rather bear with one another, in case of
wrongs and injuries, then be at daggers drawing strait, upon every small
offense.

Sacred things, in matters of Faith, or of Christianity, In Sacred things.
there are so many fundamentals of Agreement in these things, that a man would
wonder, how there should be any material difference among those, who are so
many ways united, or fast glued together; as namely, since there is but Ephesians.
4.4, 5, 6. Vid. Piscat hic. Mr. Cartwr. Answer to the Rhem. Annota. Non habent
Dei charitatem, qui Ecclesiae non diligunt unitatem, Aug de Baptism. lib. 3.
cap. 16. Vid. Cypr. de unit. Eccles. Gregor. Nazianz. Orat. 14. Eusebius. de vit.
Constant. lib. 2. cap. 68. and lib. 3 cap. 13. Whitaker. contr. 3. quaest. 4.
Davenant Epist Pacificat. Iren. Ier. Burr. and Al.
one God, and one Christ, and one Spirit, and one Faith, and one Baptism, and
one Body, and one hope of our Calling; since in thus many things we are already
agreed as one, why then do we differ so much, or why do we disagree at all? why
do we not go on still, according to these good beginnings?

The general Reason of it, Why so much difference, notwithstanding all former
unities.
is this, Because when these Principles fall into the hands of formal persons,
or when they come to be managed and improved by those, that are no Christi
extraordinaria gubernatio, and Spiritus sancti salutifera illuminatio, illos
respicit, qui sunt vera and viva membra ecclesia: non autem ill is alligatur
qui obtinent tantummodo locum externum in Ecclesia: Si enim pertinent ad
Synagogam Satanae (quod quandoque accidit) illu^ unum corpus, and unus
Spiritus, and Christus est caput Ecclesiae, ad cos emnino non pertingit,
Davenant. Disp. de Iud. and norm. fid. cap. 18.
true living members of the mystical body of Christ (having only some outer
Room for a while in the Church) there Self interposes, and troubles the waters,
by putting several glosses or interpretations upon these things, no way
consistent with the nature of them, and so causes Nimium altercando veritas
amittitur, A. Gell. Fides est veritatis, non voluntatis, Evangeliorum non
temporum, Hilar. cont. Constant.
jars, and contentions, and quarrels, and several voices to be heard, where
there should be but one voice; and the greatest discrepancy, where there should
be the sweetest harmony.

More particularly, Three special Rules of unity broken asunder by Self.
there are three special Rules, or Ligaments of Unity, that are all dissolved
or broken asunder by Self, or by men's poring too much upon their own things:
Brethren that would dwell together in Unity, 1. They must love one another. 2.
They must be faithful to one another. 3. They must bear with one another.


And you shall briefly see, how Self destroys each of these Bands, or Rules of
Unity.

First, Wheresoever there is Unity, there must be Love; that is a clear case,
Where there is unity there must be love.
and a most sure Rule: And therefore the Apostle calls love, not only As ens
in Logic communicates his being to the ten Predicaments, so is love to the ten
Commandments. Dr. Stoughton L. S. Spouse, page 48.
A fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. and the end of the commandment, 1 Timothy
1.5. but he calls it likewise, The bond of perfectness, or The most perfect
bond, by an usual Hebraism, Col. 3.14. it being that which cements, and soders,
and holds us together more then any thing, even the Sacred bond of love:
Neither is there any one duty, that the New Testament does more frequently or
earnestly press upon us, then this necessary duty, of Love to one another;
which is both the duty, and the beauty, the honor and the Amor impenetrabil is
est lorica, respuit jacula, gladios excutit, periculis insultat, mortem ridet,
si amor est vincit omnia: Chrysol. de bono Past. Sermon. 40.
armor of a Christian.

But now where Self prevails, No sincere love, where self prevails, and is
predominant.
or where there is an inordinate minding of our own things, there can be no
love; for as the praeternatural heat in the body of a sick Feverish man,
consumes the natural heat, and so destroys the man; so carnal sinful self-love,
eats out the heart of all true love: He that loves no body but himself, can
never be supposed to love his Neighbor as himself.

Where there is Unity, there must be Faithfulness too: No greater enemy to
unity, then treachery, Where there is unity, there must be faithfulness.
or falseness of spirit; they can never be firmly united one to another, that
know not how to trust one another. Nulla res v^hementius Rempublicam continet
quam fides. Ciero.
No one thing does more strongly unite, or hold together a Commonwealth, then
Fidelity, says an Heathen Author: Answerable whereunto, is that of the
Apostles, Ephesians. 4.25. Put away lying, and speak every man truth to his Neighbor;
and that upon this ground, Because we are members one of another.

But who more unfaithful or treacherous, The treachery of Self, or vile
perfidiousness of it.
then selfish men, that merely mind their own things? And that can easily turn
either this way, or that way, to this side or to that, according as their own
advantages or occasions shall at any time incline, or persuade them so to do;
yea, it is many times a matter of no great moment, an exceeding small matter, a
very poor mean thing, that will turn these Weather-cocks about and about. We
read in Amos, of some that sold the righteous for silver, and -- Egente^ pro
pari calccorum, hoc est, re vilissima. Tarnov. in loc.
the poor for a pair of shoes, Amos 2.6. And Ezekiel speaks of some, that would
pollute Gods Name among the people, but for -- Propter pugillum Hordei, minima
mercede. Maldonat. hic.
handfuls of barley, and for pieces of bread, Ezekiel. 13.19. Profane Genesis 25.34
Heb. 12.16.
Esau sold his birthright but for a mess of pottage; and Mat. 26.15.
Judas his Master but for Thirty pieces of silver.

Thirdly, Where there is Unity, there must be (...), Iam. 1.4. Heb. 10.36.
Ephesians. 4.2.
Patience mutually to bear with, Where there is unity, there must be patience.
and forbear one another: The best of men, are but men at the best, and in that
respect liable to manifold infirmities; and therefore, if we would agree with
them, we must of necessity bear with them, and give them their allowance;
especially we should do this, that are called Christians: Bear ye one another
burdens, says the Apostle, and so fulfill the law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. He does
not only bid them to bear their own burdens patiently and quietly, but the
burdens of one another also, as well as their own.

There are none that gain so much upon the hearts and affections of others, in
order to their Eternal welfare, as they that are of a meek, and of a patient
Spirit, enabling them to Hic est ille Farellus qui nullis difficultatibus
fractus, null lis minis, convitiis, verberibus deuique inflict is territus
Mompelgardenses, Aqutleienses, Lausanenses, Genevenses, Novocomenses Christo
lucrifecit. Mel. Adam. Decad. in vita Farel.
bear long with very much, that they may win souls to Christ: 2 Timothy 2.10.
Therefore I endure all things (says the Apostle) for the Elects sake, that they
may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.

But how or which way must this be done? How shall a man attain to such a frame
of spirit as this? The same Apostle gives you an excellent Rule for that, Romans
15.1. We that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and
Placere sibi dicitur, qui effertur and gloriatur: de quo non agit hic proprie
Apostolus, sed de co potius qui caeteris contemtis sui unius rationem habet,
idque unum spectat, ut animo suo morem gerat. Beza in loc. Vide etiam Gualther.
and Willet. ibid.
not to please our selves, for even Christ pleased not himself; at the 3 ver.
of that Chapter: as if he should have said, If we do go about to please our
selves; if we do seek our own things merely, and not the good of others, we
shall not only offend against the Example of Christ, but against that Royal
Law of his, which expressly bids us, to bear one another burdens. And thus ye
see, how inconsistent a selfish disposition is, both with All Rules of Piety,
and likewise with All Rules of Unity.

There is but one particular more to be opened, show you, Contrary to all Rules
of Policy.
That an inordinate seeking of our own things, is not only contrary to All
Rules of Piety, and contrary to All Rules of Unity, but contrary to All Rules
of Policy also.

And here I would entreat you to observe, That I take the word Vide Scapul.
Lexic. in voc. [(...)] Budaeum, Pasor. and Alios.
Policy, in the most innocent, harmless intention or signification of the word,
as it betokens Order, or Discipline, or Government; a right composure, or
disposition, or framing of humane Societies into such a way, wherein the
Inhabitants or People may be mutually helpful, or advantageous, or Cur enim per
universos populos diversa and varia jura sunt condita, nisi quod unaquaeque
gens, id sibi sanxit, quod putavit rebus suis utile? Lactant. de Ver. Cult.
lib. 6. cap. 9.
useful unto one another.

Now in every outward Government (what De Rerumpubl. form. carumque
Administrat. Vide Arist. Polit. lib. 4. cap. 7. Platon. Greg. Tholos. de Rep.
Bodin. Keckerman. System. Polit. Polan. Syntag. Theol. l. 7. c 19 Two sorts of
things chiefly considerable in every outward Government. Caesar's speech to the
Mariner in a storm.
Name soever ye put upon it, whether ye call it a Monarchy, or an Aristocracy,
a Kingdom, or a Commonwealth, or whatever else ye please to call it) there are
but two sorts of Things chiefly considerable in it, Salus Populi, and Res
Christi, The public Safety or Interest of the People, with all that comes
under that, and The things of Jesus Christ; whatsoever else is visible in any
outward Government, it either is (or should be at least) subservient unto these
two sorts of Great things: And therefore, as he said to the Mariner, in that
known Story, Perge contra tempestatem fortiter, Caesarem vehis, and fortunam
Caesaris; Bear up stoutly against the storm, thou have Caesar in thy Vessel,
and the fortune of Caesar: so we may say to those that sit at the Stern, and
that Rule over Nations, See that your Tackling be strong, and tite, and good,
having a mighty Charge committed to you; for ye have not only the Lives, and
Liberties, the Estates and Possessions of many thousands of people, But ye have
the things of Christ also, in some sense, imbarqued in the same Ship with you;
though perhaps you your selves think not of it, nor never so much as dream of
any such matter.

But now, The trade of Self either below or against the publique-Interest and
the things of Jesus Christ.
if ye mark the disposition of the selfish man, you shall find, That either he
minds not the public good, and the things of Jesus Christ at all, or else he
minds his own things, more then he does these things; either he drives a trade
below these things, and far short of them, or else he drives a trade against
these things, and in an absolute way of contradiction to them.

First, The selfish man's trade below the public Interest and the things of
Christ.
I say, The natural man, the selfish man, the man that merely seeks his own
things, he frequently drives a trade below the publique-Interest, and the
things of Jesus Christ; that is to say, Provided that he may but have liberty
to Iam. 5.13.
buy and sell, and get gain, to feather his own nest, and to fill his own
purse, and to make his own Hab. 1.16.
portion fat and plenteous, he never cares what becomes of the public, or of
the things of Jesus Christ; let others look after those things, what cares he
for them? As they said to Judas, when they had hired him to betray his Master,
and he came and complained to them, that he had sinned, in betraying innocent
blood; Mat. 27.4. Quid ad nos, hoc est, quid nostra refert, nocentem prodideris
an innocentem? Cornel. Iansan. in Concord Evang. Ad modum Caini loquuntur, vera
progenies Caini. Hug. Grot. Annotat. in lib. Evang.
What is that to us? say they; see thou to that: And so, speak to the selfish
man at any time, about any thing that concerns the public, about any thing
that concerns Religion, or the things of Jesus Christ, What Is this to me? says
he presently, let others look to that: There are too many Acts 18.17.
Gallio 's that care for none of these things.

And although this be a very great and shameful iniquity, The selfish man's
trade not only below, but against the publique-interest, and the thin^s of
Jesus Christ.
yet this is not all the guilt that selfish men contract, by doting too much
upon their own things, unto not only a neglecting, but unto an undervaluing
also, or throwing aside the public good, and the things of Jesus Christ; for
so you shall find, that they do not only drive a trade here below, quite
beneath these things, but against them likewise, or clean contrary to them;
This being the property of all such men, That if at any time any thing of their
own, any profit of their own, any gain or advantage of their own, shall
providentially competition with the public good, or with the things of Jesus
Christ; men that have not yet learned to deny themselves, they must and can do
no otherwise, then let go public, and Vae autem illi cui Christus dicet,
Quasivisti commodum tuum non meum: Il lud obtinuisti: Accepisti igitur mercedem
tuam. Olevian. in cap. 14. Epistol ad Rom
Christ, and all, merely for the satisfaction of their own Qui mavult been
vivere in aeternum male vivet ad tempus, and qui maluerit been vivere ad
tempus, male vivet in aeternum: Damnabitur enim sententia Dei ad aternam panam,
qui coelestibus bonis terrena praeposuit. Lactant. de Divin. Praem. lib. 7 cap
5.
private concernments; Then which, how there can be a readier way, or a
wickeder way to destroy all Government, to pluck it up by the roots, and lay
the Honor of it in the dust, I for my part do not yet understand.

And thus have I endeavored to lay open the Mystery of this great Iniquity, the
nature of this dangerous Malady here complained of in the Text, by showing you
the inconsistency of an inordinate seeking of our own things, with all Rules
either of Piety, or Unity, or Policy. The Application of this follows in some
few short hints, and so we shall conclude.

And first, so dangerous a Distemper, either in a person, or in a people, to be
inordinately studious, or inquisitive, about that which is their own; if Self
be such a destroyer, and such a disturber, Then let no man bless himself in
this, That he has no Inward enemies our greatest enemies. Quid nos decipimus?
non est extrinsecus malum nostrum, intra nos est: in visceribus ipsis sedet,
and ideo difficulter ad sanitatem pervenimus, quia nos aegrotare nescimus. Sen.
Ep. 50
outward Enemy to combat withal, no outward adversary to molest or trouble him;
for if thou have no enemy to contest with but thy self, that is enough: We our
selves are naturally the greatest enemies to our selves; O Israel, thou have
destroyed thy self, says God; thou need no outward enemy to plunder thee, or
to spoil thee, or to rob thee of all good, for thou have done it thy self, Thou
have destroyed thy self, Hos. 13.9.

Secondly, bless your selves in this neither, That no one can lay any open
notorious crime to your charge, about matters that are generally known to be
unlawful, for you may perish even under the abuse of Lawful things must not be
overused Semper ab illicitis, quandoque and a licitis. Greg. vid Luke 17.26. --
29. 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.
lawful things: Though no body can lay any thing to your charge about the
things of another, yet you may perish for ever, by reason of the inordinacy of
your affections and endeavors about your own things; though ye never had any
covetous, eager, griping desire in you, to get into your possession that which
was another, yet you may be miserable enough, either by detaining, or seeking
a farther enlargement of that which is Our own things liable to very much
abuse. See Dod and Cleaver on the 7 Command. in the close of the third outward
breach of it.
your own: A man needs no other misery, neither is he capable of any greater
misery, then that which his own things, in their abuse, may very easily bring
upon him, and that very speedily too: For, The better our own things are, the
worse do our Corruption optimi est pessima.
corruptions make them; the fuller we are of In Saturitate cibi vivens Sodoma,
cibus ignis effici meruit. Fulgent. ad Probam. Epist. 3.
bread, and all other outward enjoyments, the nearer many times to perdition,
and eternal condemnation.

Thirdly, let us from hence be admonished, Quid ergo horum facimus Christiani,
quod Christus, an quod Apostolus jubet? Puto omnino, quod neutrum: Nam tantum
abest, ut aliorum commodis aliquid cum propria incommoditate praestemus, ut
omnes vel maxim nostris commodis cum aliorum incommodo consulamus Salvian. de
Gubern. Dei lib. 3. Serpit hodic putida rabies per omne corpus Ecclesiae, and
quo latius co desperatius, coque periculosius quo interius: Nam si infurgeret
apertus inimicus hareticus mitterctur for as and arescerct: si violentus
inimicus, absconderet se forsitan ab co. Nunc vero quem ejiciet, aut a quo
abscondet se? omnes am^ci, and omnes inimici: omnes necessarii, and om^es
adversarii: omnes d^m^stici, and nulli pacifici: omnes proximi, and omnes quae
sua sunt quaerunt: Ministri Christi sunt, and serviunt Antichristo; Honorati
incedunt de bonis Domini, qui Domino honorem non deferunt. Bern. super Cantic.
Sermon. 33.
rifeness and frequency of this great Evil amongst us, that we are generally so
inordinate in the pursuit of that which is our own; and that the good of the
public, and things of Jesus Christ, are no more heeded, nor no more regarded
by us: For surely this is an Epidemical Disease still, yea is at present The
great Distemper of ENGLAND, even that which has been all along The great
Distemper of all Mankind; Ever since the Fall we have continued the rise of
that first Transgression. In all Times and Ages, Self has been the great
Diana, that all the world has worshipped, and that has still been ready to
eat up all, and to swallow up all that ever came near it; Gifts, Parts,
Victories, Deliverances, Prayings, Fastings, Thanksgivings, all made ready to
bow down to this Idol Self, and to prostrate themselves at the feet thereof, by
too many of us; Seldom has any great work been done in the world, but Self
has put in for a share; yea, its well if the whole has not been drowned in
that dead Sea of Creature-advancement, or Self-exaltation. Acts. 19.27.


A man would admire to see what a narrow crevis Self will creep in at, Too much
of Self in the best of our own performances.
and how insensibly it many times steals upon us, in the very best of our own
performances: As for Example,

When a people set apart some days to Fast and Pray unto God, Extraordinary
Duties instanced in.
and other days to Rejoice, and give Thanks unto God, one would think that Self
should have nothing to do with these people, that say they meet purposely to
humble and abase themselves first, and then to lift up the Name of their God;
And yet mark the language that God himself uses to the Jews, after they had
been a long time exercised in duties of this nature, Israel is an empty vine,
says he; and why? why an empty vine? He Fructum reponit sibi, id est, nemini
est fructuos^: si quid profert eo toto in libidinem suam abutitur. Iun. and
Trem. in loc.
brings forth fruit unto himself, Hos. 10.1. And in Zech. 7.5, 6. When ye
fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years,
Did ye at all fast unto me, says God, even to me? When ye did eat, and when ye
did drink, Did ye not eat for your selves, and drink for your selves? as if he
should have said, Both when ye fasted, and when ye feasted, when ye had your
days of Humiliation, and when ye had your days of Thanksgiving, was it not
still your selves that ye aimed at therein, and not my Glory? O what a deal of
savoury precious ointment has this dead fly spoiled! How exceeding uncomely
has Self made that, which would otherwise have been incomparably beautiful in
the eyes of God and Men!

When Jehu marched so furiously against the Idolatries of the house of Ahab,
Another sad instance of the mischief that Self has done and may do again.
and destroyed Baal out of Israel, and carried that business every way so nobly
and honorably, that God himself gives this testimony of him, That he had done
it according to all that was in his heart, 2 Kings 10.30. Would any one have
thought, that should have seen him in his march, that this man had been a
Murderer all this while, or one that took a direct course, in that very
service to defile himself with blood? And yet, because it was not the Glory of
God, but Virtutes quae carnalibus delectationibus, vel quibuscunque commodis
and emolument is temporalibus serviunt, verae prorsus esse non possunt: verae
quippe virtutes Deo serviunt in hominibus, a quo donantur hominibus; Deo
serviunt in Angelis, a quo donantur etiam Angelis; Quicquid autem bonum fit ab
homine, and non propter hoc fit, propter quod fieri debere vera saptentia
praecipit, ctsi officio vidcatur bonum, ipso non recto fine peccatum est. Tho
Bradwa din de causa Dei lib. 1. cap. 39.
himself that Jehu aimed at in all this, therefore, Yet a little while, says
God, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel, upon the house of Jehu, Hos. 1.4.

And therefore Quum audimus conquerentem Paulum, aurco illo secuto quo virtutes
omnes, effloruerunt tam raros fuisse vere cordatos, ne animos despondeamus si
hodie talis sit nostra conditio: tantum sibi quisque caveat, ne jure in hoc
catalogo censeatur. Calv. in Text.
take heed, I beseech you, 2 Kings 4.39, 40.
weed be not in the pot; that this Eccles. 10.1.
dead fly be not in the ointment; that this evil seize not upon you mortally,
or that it remain not amongst you to ruin you, either at this time, or at any
other time; this capital vice, or grand iniquity, that turns all Blessings into
Curses, and all Mercies into Miseries, and all Administration of Justice into
Murders, and all present Deliverances into farther Bondages, when Self is
merely aimed at in what ye do, and not the Glory of God.

And yet I Appeal to the Experience of any sober, Experience shows, that there
is a superfluity of this naughtiness, or too much of Self every where amongst
us.
discreet, honest, impartial man, that does but transiently cast an eye upon
the present actings of men, whether this be not a season, wherein the Apostles
complaint here in the Text, both may and ought to be renewed amongst us, and
sadly thought upon by us: Doubtless there are in many parts of England, and
more especially here in London, many wise men, and many rich men, and many
learned men, and many valiant men, and many large-parted men, and many
brave-gifted men, But how many among all these do you or I know to be
publique-spirited men? Quod omnes dicit, non urgenda est particula universalis,
ut nullam exceptionem admittas: erant enim alii quoque, qualis Epapbroditu^,
sed pauci: verum omnibus tribuit, quod passim erat vulgar. Calv. and Beza in
Text.
All seek their own, says the Apostle here; and may not we say the very same?
Was it ever truer at any time, then now at this time?

And when we seriously mind, or think upon these things, how exceedingly
should we commiserate or pity the poor Nation, that now lies languishing under
this sad and dangerous infirmity; that is now sick of such a Disease, then
which there cannot be a greater Disease; for in the Satis superque est ei qui
non est captus oculis, ut videat facem praeferre; caco ad videndum non est
satis, ut vel toto sole feriatur. Ioh. Camero Praelect. in Psalm 68. Self the
great and only Distemper that we have now cause to fear.
eye of any seeing man, what can there be more dangerous, then that which holds
forth an absolute repugnancy or contrariety, both to All Rules of Piety, and to
All Rules of Unity, and to All Rules of Policy? And as it is the greatest, so
(as the case now stands with us) it is the only Distemper that we have cause
to fear, the only Disease that has for the present any face of Ruin, or any
appearance of mortality in it, in reference to the public.

It is to this purpose a very considerable expression of that worthy Duke of
Rohan's, concerning this Nation of ours, in his Book of THE INTEREST OF THE
STATES AND PRINCES OF CHRISTENDOM; when he comes to speak in particular
concerning the Interest of England, he says, See page 35. of that Book, where
this passage is mentioned by that Illustrious Duke, as an Aphorism of the late
Queen Elizabeth's.
That England is a mighty Animal, which can never dye, except it kill it self:
And surely at this time, (blessed be God for it) it is no other way like to
kill it self, if Self do not kill it.

And therefore in the next place, last and utmost endeavors, Containing an
Exhortation to publiquenes of spirit, upon several motives: which are
to stir up a mighty Spirit in you that are the Fathers of this Famous City,
and in us all, for the Public, and the things of Jesus Christ.

But here, Vincitur Sermo rei magnitudine, quantoque majus fuerit quod dicendum
est; tanto magis obruitur qui magnitudinem rerum verbis non potest explicare.
Hier. ad Heliod. de Mort. Nepot. epist. 3. Two ways propounded.
in the very Entrance upon this great and necessary work, of persuading to
publiqueness of Spirit: I confess I am (and may well be) at a stand in my own
thoughts about it, having so much to say, that I know not well what to say; --
inopem me copia fecit, Plenty has made me poor. When a man has the public
good before him, and the things of Jesus Christ before him, he has rather too
much then too little, having then all before him that is any way needful to be
spoken to.

But I shall exceedingly contract my self, and draw up all under these two
Heads: Something I shall speak, 1. More generally, or at large to it; And
secondly, Something also more closely or particularly.

In the general, I beseech you to consider,

First, More generally.
that as nothing else has heretofore been so dishonorable and destructive,
unto Po^ quam imperatores Romani caeperunt de industria Christianos atrocitate
suppliciorum a Christo absterrere, nunquam illis been fuit; aut pauci little,
aut nullus fere, ficea morte descendit ad generum cereris. Camer. Prael. ct. de
verb. Dei page 444. Col. 2.
Governors and others (whether among our selves or elsewhere in the World) as
when they have degenerated from the publique-Interest, to lay hold upon
Principles and Practices of Cruelty and Disorder, and so have been ready
Instruments in the hand of Satan, to persecute those that should have been
protected by them. As this has been the ruin and overthrow of Governments and
Governors formerly;

So consider secondly, greater Honor or Ornament unto you then this would be,
If the Lord himself would but please to clothe you with a public Spirit; Job
29.11.
This would make the eye that sees you to bless you, and the ear that hears you
to give witness to you; yea, and besides the many sweet refreshments that
others would receive by this means from you: How could there be any thing more
sweet, or savory, or comfortable in your own bosoms, then this, That ye have
put on high, and holy, and heavenly Resolutions, in the strength of God to live
and dye to the Public, and even to contemn or despise your own things,
Something suggested in the general from hence that is of concernment.
in comparison of the things of Christ? which is certainly the Duty both of
Magistrates, and of Ministers, and of All that are called Christians, even thus
to be, for the Public, and for the things of Christ.

That I. To Magistrates.
Inter homines egregium hominem esse convenit, qui mulitudini prasit: inter
Christianos potestate functurus, non modo egregius homo, sed and egregius
Christianus esse debet: Egregium autem Christianum veco, ^on qui potentia,
robore, and opibus, sed qui fide in Christum, dilectione erga fratres, zelo
Dei, studio justitiae, and sanctimonia vitae caeteris sit Christianis
praestantior; Quibus libertas est eligendi Magistratus, tales ex omni populo
quaerant and eligant. Musc. loc. Com. tit. de Magist. p. 573. See Jethro's
advice to Moses, E^od. 18.21.
Magistrate loses his Honor, and extremely disgraces that high Place God has
called him unto, who has not yet learned to prefer the public good, before
his own private good.

That Damnatur (sc. verbi Minister) si ita quae sua sunt curet, ut quae sunt
Jesu Christi negligat: Hoc enim est quaererc quae sunt sua, non quae Jesu
Christi: Damnatur ctiam, si ideo accedit ad ministerium, and illud exercet, ut
sibi consulat, non autem Ecclesiae Christi: Hoc est enim quaerere quae sunt
sua: Finis quem ^ibi in tuis actionibus proponis, efficit ut dicaris quaerere,
vel quae sunt Christi, vel quae sunt tua. Zanch. in Text.
Minister is no Minister, II. To Ministers.
no fit man for such an employment, that is either wholly ignorant of the
things of Christ, or that is but any way careless or negligent about them; or
that has not yet learned to prefer the things of Christ before his own things,
yea the least and lowest of the things of Christ, before the greatest and
highest of his own things.

That Christian is no Christian, III. To All of us.
he has but a Rev. 3.1.
name to live, and is dead, who has not yet learned to Luke 9.23.
deny himself in Animad verte frater, non tibi licet de tuis quidquam habere
rebus: omnis, inquit Dominus, qui non renuntiaverit cunctis, quae poss^det, non
potest meus esse discipulus: Filius hominis non habet ubi caput reclinet, and
tu amplas porticus, and ingentia rectorum spatia metiris? Haereditatem
expectans s^^^uli, cohaeres Christi ^sse non poteris. Hieron. ad Heliodor.
Epistol. ^.
all his own things, and to Erras frater, Erra^, si putas unquam Christi^num
persecutionem non pati: Tunc maxim oppugnaris, si te oppug^^ri nescis. Idem.
ibid.
take up his cross daily, and to follow the Quocunque te vocat Christus cundum
est propere, altis omnibus relict^: ita rest icierda tibi est vocatio tut, ut
ab omnibus avocamentis, sensus tuos omnes avertas: Jure tao cedendum est, ut
officium facias: tut ratio Christi gloriae neque praeferenda est, neque
aequanda. Calv. in Text.
Lamb whithersoever he shall lead him; saying to Jesus, as the people unto
Joshua, All that thou command me will I do, and whithersoever thou sendest
me will I go, Josh. 1.16.

More particularly, publiqueness of Spirit; look upwards, and look downwards,
More particularly.
look upon God, and look upon your selves, and there ye shall find Arguments
enough for publiqueness of Spirit.

First, look upwards unto God, there being nothing better for any of us, then
to have our thoughts often ascending, rather then descending; especially
nothing safer for Magistrates, that are called to judge others, then to be
often Boni judicis est su^picere non despt^ere. Ferus in Ioh 5.30.
looking up unto that God, who will one day judge them.

And in your looking upwards unto God, Motives to publiquenes of Spirit from
all the three Per^^ns in the Trinity, looked upon
do not any way straiten your selves, but look upon all the Three Persons in
the ever blessed Trinity; look upon them severally, or look upon them jointly,
and you shall both ways find them to be (what they in a due proportion would
have you to be) a public good.

Look upon them severally first, Severally.
and then if your apprehensions of them be not Omnis intellectus qui
phantastica quadam ^ogitatio^e qu^si (...) Dioinam natur^m apprehendit,
s^^u^^^^rum quidem Dei s^^xit inmente, Deum autem non intellexit. Greg. Nyssen.
de vit. Mosis.
fantastical, or vainly conjectural, but Vid. Aug. de Trinit. Zanch de trib.
Eloh. lib. 1. cap. 4. Lombard. Sentent. lib. 1. Distinct. 9. R^^nold. Confer.
with Heart, Chap. 2. Divis. 2. and Al.
pure Evangelical apprehensions, ye cannot but look upon all and each of them
as a public good; God the Father being in himself a public good, Jesus
Christ a public good, The Spirit of Grace and Truth a public good.

Secondly, jointly, as they are three distinct Persons, Jointly. See the Annet.
of H. Ainsworth on this place.
and but one God, and so they are a public good: (x) Hear O Israel, the Lord
our God is one Lord, says Moses, Deuteronomy 6.4. And unto us there is but one God,
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.6. one God, and one Good; and that Good the chief
Good; and therefore the chief Good, Summum b^nu^ est sum publicum bonum.
because a public Good: with all due reverence be it spoken, God himself
could not be the chief Good, if he were not the chief public Good: And
therefore this must needs be the Excellency of Excellencies, the most Qui amat
quod vere putat ^sse summum bonum, id unice amat: Itaque ut id redimat, nihil
non facit, nihil haber pensi: Exemplo sit in Evangelio, qui thesaurum reperit
in agro, agrum emit, and qui scripsit -- Inveni Portum, spes and fortuna
valete, N^l mihi vobiscum, ludite nunc alios. Camer. Collat. cum T^len. page
650. col. 2. Minus te amat, qui tecum aliquid amat quod non pr^pter te am^t.
Aug Confess. (...) 10. cap. 29.
amiable excellency in all the world, to be of a public Spirit; since there
is not a greater excellency, no not in God Himself, then that which this
amounts to.

When ye have thus looked up unto God, Other Motives to publiquenes of Spirit,
from our selves, being looked upon
then reflect or look back upon your selves; Look upon your selves as
Christians, or look upon your selves but as reasonable men; and under both
these Considerations, ye shall have mighty Arguments for a public Spirit.

look upon your selves as Christians, and then what manner of persons ought ye
to be, As Christians. Christianitas est Christo conformitas.
but such as Christ himself was? Godliness is God-likeness; Christianity is
Christ-conformity; and if ye do thoroughly conform to him, ye must of necessity
be of a mavelous large and public Spirit: For never was the world
acquainted with such another Example of Self-denial, with such another
President for publiqueness of Spirit, as that which Christ held forth; which is
plainly and clearly intimated or held forth unto us, by those expressions,
where it is said, that he Phil. 2.7. (...) semetipsum exinanivit Vulg. Exhausit
semetipsum, Tertul. adversus Marcion. lib. 5.
emptied himself, and that he Gal. 2.20.
gave himself for us, etc. that is, All that excellent glory that he was
possessed of with the Father from all Eternity, he gave it all away, he emptied
himself of it all, for the good of the Elect of God, for the benefit and
advantage of poor, sinful, undone creatures: He came from the highest degree of
sublimity, and he stooped to the lowest degree of ignominy; for he did not
only John 17.9.
Pray for us, and Luke 22.44. (...). Grumi sanguinis. vide Crit. Sacr. by E. L.
in voc. (...).
Sweat for us, and Ephesians. 1.7.
Bleed for us, and 2 Cor. 5.15.
Dye for us, but he was made Mark 9.12. (...). pro nilulo habeatar. vid. ^ez.
and Erasm. hic.
vile, and of no reputation; he was Gal. 3.13.
made a curse, yea he was 2 Cor. 5.21.
made sin for us, as ye know the Scripture speaks.

Let me for this, entreat you to cast your eyes more especially upon that one
place of Scripture, 2 Cor 8.9. opened.
2 Cor. 8.9. The Apostle was there stirring up the Corinthians unto liberality,
An Exhortation to liberality 1. Propounded, v. 7.
unto a liberal contribution toward the relief of the poor Saints of God: At
the 7 v. of that Chapter, his words are these, Therefore (as ye abound in every
thing else, in faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and in all diligence, and
in your love to us) see that ye abound in this grace also, this grace of
liberality: And he uses the greatest Argument in the world to persuade
hereunto, to persuade the Corinthians (and in them us) unto liberality; 2.
Argued v. 9. Two things in the argument.
for says he, Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be
rich.

I pray mark, The riches of Christ.
He was rich, says the Apostle; Jesus Christ was rich: How rich was he? so
rich, that he was (...), H^b. 1.2.
Heir of all things: Look how rich God himself was, even Nos autem ci^ites su^
paupertate nul^^te^us faceret, si pauper factus naturalis divir^^^tis in se
d^^itias non haberet: Pauper ergo factus est, (...) f^rmam servi^ ^ives
per^^^sit. secand^m (...) T^^i. Pulgent. contra Sermon. Fastid. cap. 13.
so rich Jesus Christ was: for he Phil 2.6.
thought it no robbery to be equal with God; C. l. 2.9.
The fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily: The Lord himself says of him,
He is my fellow, not only I^^ 41.8.
my friend (as Abraham) but my fellow; Awake, O sword, against my Shepherd, and
Super v^^^^ contribalem m^^m: Ita Symmach. Vid. Ioh. Drus. Fragment. in Zach.
Montin. and Iun. in lo^.
against the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 13.17.

And yet though he was thus rich, great, yet says the Apostle, The poverty of
Christ.
For your sakes he became poor; How poor? so poor, that there was hardly ever
any one poorer, in regard of outward things; for Mat. 8.20.
The foxes had holes, and the birds of the air had nests, but the Son of man
knew not where to lay his head: And all this poverty did he voluntarily subject
himself unto, Possideart opes sub Christo paupere, quas sab locuplete Diab^lo
non habuerant: and suspiret cos Ecclesia divites, quos tenuit mundus ante
mendicos. Hier. ad Hel^odor. Epist 3.
that we through his poverty might be made rich, or that we might be made Ephesians.
1.18.
the riches of God in him: Now says the Apostle here in this Chapter to the
Philippians, Phil. 2.5. (where he still speaks upon the same account, upon the
very same ground or consideration) Let the same mind be in you, says he, that
was also in Jesus Christ; and as he humbled himself, and emptied himself for
the good of you all, even so be ye willing from time to time to humble your
selves, and to empty your selves for the good of one another. -- Thus then as
Christians there are ye see very strong engagements upon you, to be of a
public Spirit.

Or if this were not, yet in the second place, As reasonable m^n.
if ye look but upon your selves as reasonable men, That also calls for
publiqueness of Spirit: For I would but ask any man in this Congregation, or
any man elsewhere, that has but a competency of Reason to guide him in his way,
Do you think that he is a good Commonwealthsman, or a good Patriot, Sanis
hominibus public^ pr^vitis potiora (...) S^^^de C^em lib. 1. cap. 4. (...).
A^^st. Polit. l. 8. cap. 1. (...). Xenophen de Venat.
that prefers his own private wealth, before the good of the Commonwealth?
There is no man that must dare to affirm this, who would not have his own
Understanding to rise up in Judgment against him.

So that the Stone that I have all this while been rolling, it now comes down
with all the weight of Heaven and Earth upon it, purposely to destroy Self
among you, sinful, inordinate Self: And I pray take heed, for by the Christ
(the Shepherd and the Stone of Israel, Genesis 49.24.) is in nothing so much
concerned, as in that which is of public concernment; and therefore in that
respect especially, whosoever falls on this Stone shall be broken, but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder, Matthew. 21.44.
Fall of it (which is very great) it must of necessity either destroy that, or
destroy you; either it must grind that to powder, or else grind you to
powder. The sum of all being this, That if there be any thing of God in you, or
any thing of Christ, or any thing of the Spirit, or any thing of Christianity,
or any thing of Humanity, Then ye must not any longer mind your own things, or
seek your own things any otherwise, then in a way of humble subserviency unto
the public good, and the things of Jesus Christ.

And as for matter of Advice or Counsel herein, attain unto this publiqueness
of Spirit, Containing a word of Advice about the attainment of a public
Spirit. The main difference between Gods Spirit and man's.
I shall say no more to that but only this, That certainly it is in this
respect a very sad thing to be left unto our own Spirits, and a very blessed
thing to be acted by Gods holy Spirit, in all our ways and walkings: This being
the main Difference between the Spirit of God, and man's Spirit, That the Spirit
of man is a private narrow Spirit, but the Spirit of God is a large public
Spirit, and such as will every way reach or extend it self to all the
concernments of a Christian, in one kind and another: And if God Himself once
put this holy Spirit of his within you (which is one of his often-repeated
Promises unto his People) Then so long as ye are acted thereby, Isa. 44.3.
Ezekiel. 36.27. Joel 2.28. Zech. 12 10. Luke 11.13. Ioh 7.33.39. Acts 2.17, 18,
Gal. 3.14.
ye must and can do no other, then prefer the Good of the public, and the
things of Jesus Christ, before any thing else, that does but merely respect or
concern your selves.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
SOme literal faults have escaped in Printing, which the Reader is entreated
thus to Correct: Page 9. line 20. for you read your, p. 19. in the Greek Note
out of Chrysostom, for (...) r. (...), for (...) r. (...), p. 21. in the note,
for Ciero r. Cicero, p. 25. in the note, for Iansan. r. Iansen.


