Gods unusual Answer To a Solemn Fast.

OR, Some Observations upon the late sad success in the West, upon the day
immediately following our Public Humiliation; IN A Sermon before the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, on a Fast specially set apart upon that
occasion; In MARGARETS Westminster, Sept. 12.

Anno MDCXLIV.

BY TH: COLEMAN, Preacher at Peter's Cornhill LONDON, a Member of the present
Assembly.

ESAIAS 1. 15. And when you stretch forth your palms, I will hide mine eyes from
you; yea, though you multiply prayer, I do not hear, your hands are full of
blood.

Rab. Isaac Ben Samuel Adarbe, In Libro Dibre Shalom. (...)

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Meredith, dwelling at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT.
WHat! does Israel turn his back? A good Cause and a cross success may
sometimes meet. Here is the nobleness of a gracious spirit, to bear up then.
The Romans upon such a sad blow, by a congratulatory Embassage to the surviving
Consul, Quod non de Republica desperasset, Livie.
would show an undauntednesse notwithstanding. And, blessed be our invisible
Supporter, this unhappy accident has not at all rejected your confidence in
God: only renewed, and doubled your addresses to God. In that day all our
aims and endeavors were to lay our selves aside, that we might lay our selves
low. In which (with the Woman in the Gospel) I have done what I could. The
days for preparation, and the hours for delivery, (both meeting in ONE)
speeded my pace to the main: In which, resting only upon the never-failing
assistance of Jehovah, with much brevity (wherewith in all things, above all
things I am taken) I hold forth solely, wholly, Scripture In the interpretation
of some Texts whereof, though I vary from the ordinary acceptance, let me
humbly say, that every of them has its ground, and perhaps satisfactory.
Otherwise, though my studies run much that way, (which future times, it may be,
shall evidence) yet I shall freely leave all to their own apprehensions. As
for you (Noble Patriots) Gird your swords upon your sides, and in the might of
the Lord of Hosts, ride on prosperously, upon the word of truth, Psalm. 4^ (...)
meekness, and righteousness: and then your right hands shall make your
friends to see, your foes to feel terrible things. So assuredly hopes, and
daily prays,

Yours cordially in this great work of the Lord Jesus, THOMAS COLEMAN.

A Sermon Preached before both the Honorable Houses of Parliament at an
extraordinary Fast, Sept. 12. 1644.
PSALM. 65. 5. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, O God
of our salvation.
THat which may be known of Romans 1.
GOD, (for something may, though little) that little, then, that Shameful
Little, (as the (...) (...) (...) ignominia.
word seems to import) in respect of our apprehending it, is transmitted to
our understandings in Scripture by such terms, which we peculiarly call
Attributes.

Of these note (as serving to our end) two things.

1. The ground of them, whence they, or at least some of them, rise.

2. The use of them, to which in Scripture they serve.

For the first: They arise from Gods workings, Via causationis
ascribed to God, as to the cause. So from the Creation an act of power, we
call God Powerful; from the admirable order, wherein all things were disposed,
we call him Wise; from the qualification of his Creatures, exceeding good, we
term him Good: so often God is said to be a Terrible God, because by terrible
things he gives his answer.

For the second: These Attributes are not only O God of my salvation: as after
shall be seen. So the Saints in their prayers, according to the subject of
their Petitions, entitle him, Great, Most High, Preserver of men, Hearer of
prayers, and the like. And God himself in those seven Epistles to the Asian
Churches represents himself to each in several expressions, as to the state
of that Church might fitliest agree.

In Scripture God is often called Terrible. The Text gives the ground, By
terrible things he answers. He is called God of our salvation, because that
which is said here of God, is in relation to him as a saving God.

The words then are clear.

1. Terrible things: such actings of thy Power (...)
and Providence, as may strike terror into men, and cause them to tremble,
reverencing thy presence above all gods.

2. In righteousness, most righteously, thou remaining, (...)
notwithstanding those terrible acts, a righteous God.

3. Wilt answer us. It implies the continuation of Futurum denotat actionem
continuam.
an act. This answering is thy course, and ordinary way. Answers are either to
a question, or to a petition. We find no question put forth here, we must
suppose a petition given up, and thus terribly here answered.

The sum of all is this:

We have prayed to our God, his answer is rough, by terrible things: yet in
this answer, in himself most righteous, and in the issue to us, a saving God.

Hence observe three Propositions.

1. Terrible things may be the consequent of the duty and day of prayer. 2.
Such terrible consequences do not at all entrench upon the righteousness of
God. 3. They may be the way, whereby God to a Land becomes a saving God.
Of these in order.

The first Proposition.
Terrible things may be the consequent of the duty and day of prayer.

God may answer our private and public intercedings by terrible things.

Herein note five things, The Ground. The Sutablenesse. The Truth. The
Experience. The Improvement.

1. The Ground.
David's practice here, for

1. It is certain, David was in the duty of prayer: and this is clear,

1. By the title, which he gives to God, Oh thou that hear prayer, verse. 2.

2. By the subject whereabout he was, the prevalency of sin. Iniquities
prevail in their infection (...)
against my soul, in their punishment against my Land. The word reaches both.

2. It is probable, he was keeping a public day of prayer, by those preceding
expressions, verse. 4. Dwell in thy Courts, Goodness of thy house, Holiness of
thy Temple; which hold forth either that he as a public person, was in that
public place deploring the sins, or jointly with others bewailing the
calamities of his Land and People.

Looking on the sins of the times, in his confessions they came so thick upon
him, that they overwhelmed him. Iniquities prevail.

Looking on the miseries, the Drought was so universally burning (for a drought
was the particular calamity) that as a scourge from the Almighty it generally
did spread. And yet notwithstanding his prayers, by such terrible things did
God answer still. Terrible things followed upon this duty and day of prayer.

2. The sutablenesse.
How agreeable is this to our work in hand, the occasion of this days
solemnity?

1. What the occasion is, you know, In a sad and terrible act from the West
has God spoke unto us.

2. When it happened. Give me leave to reminde Aug. 13. a Fast for that Army in
6. Churches, Aug. 28. a public Fast, Aug. 30 this sad dispersion.
you, even the day after the last Public Fast kept in this Kingdom, City,
Place; and not many days after a peculiar Fast for the welfare of that very
Army.

3. It is plain then, that it is an answer, and the thing being terrible, we
take up David's words, and say, By terrible things in righteousness God
answered our last day of prayer.

3. The truth.
We must confess to the glory of the goodness of our loving God, he does not
ordinarily answer thus. Few Scripture examples have we of such terrible
consequences. Days of prayer seldom fail of a gainful return: yet,

1. Thus it seems to be with the Israelites, 1 Samuel 4. 1. The word of Samuel
was for all Israel. His daily (...) The common translation, To all Israel, is
harsh, a^ though Samuel set them on a work that they might be ruined.
words and prayers were for his people, and for their good, and particularly
for a comfortable success in this Expedition. Thus fortified with this holy
man's prayers, they set the battle in array against the Philistims, and fell
down wounded before them once and again. A terrible answer!

2. And thus sometimes does God appear to the rest of his children, else why
do they often complain

1. Of their prayer shut out? Lam. 3. 8.

2. Of their prayers not admitted, God hiding himself in such a thick cloud
that they cannot pierce thorough? verse. 44.

3. Of Gods being angry with the prayer of his servants? Psalm. 80. 4.

And is not this answer terrible, or is it not terrible, because no answer?
Thus God sometimes, and yet but sometimes: that is our happiness: Why hidest
thou thy face at times in trouble? Psalm. 10. 1. so (...)
the Original.

4. The experience.
And so now has God dealt with us: what the answer is, and that it is an
answer, was said before. And a terrible thing is this answer in two respects.

1. The great hopes conceived of it. 2. The probable consequences from it.
1. The great hopes we had of this Army, makes ^his sad blow so much the more
contrary to expectation, and that is a circumstance which much imbitters; such
were the miseries of Jerusalem. The Kings of the earth would never have
believed, neither would the inhabitants of the world ever have thought, that
the enemy should have entered the gates of Jerusalem, Lam. 4. 12. This
occasioned bitter sighings in the Prophet. O God thou have done terrible
things, because such, as we looked not for, Isa. 64. 3.

But you were to blame for such expectations, for

It may be so, all are apt to boast themselves in the arm of flesh, strength
of man, legs of horse, and the like; yet this was not without good ground: for
the loss is contrary.

To complete preparations in the Spring, this Army was terrible with Banners.

2. To continual assistance from the City, I mean spiritual. It was sent
forth with fasting and prayer, followed with fasting and prayer, not only
giving them their share in the Common prayers for the whole, but giving them
one portion above their brethren. Thou shall not go forth with us (say David's
soldiers) but thou shall help us from the City, [by thy prayers to the God of
battles, and so shall thou be as good (...)
as ten thousand soldiers.] See, hence our hopes, yet our hopes are perished.

2. The probable consequences from it: that which may follow upon this, may be
most terrible: noterrour like that which hereupon may sit close to the amazed
spirits of tender hearts, I mean Thoughts of astonishment.

I speak not now of the profane thoughts and Atheistical words of the men of
Belial, Where is now your God? What gain from your fastings and prayers? Where
is the truth and stability of those promises, you have boasted on all day long?
Though those are stinging.

But oh the amazed thoughts of Saints themselves! How will they be dejected!
It Is not new, but an experiment as ancient as the Scripture it self, for Gods
own to be affrighted, and with fear to become dumb at the proceedings of the
Lord in the temporary dispences of the acts of providence.

1. Hear what David says generally, Psalm. 60. 3. Thou show thy people hard
things, thou dealest with thine own in severity, layest them low, and by so
doing thou make Us to drink the wine of astonishment. Many strange
cogitations, that astonish us, do hence arise, So speaks God himself, Zech.
12. 2. Behold, I make Jerusalem a cup of trembling to all people. A cup of
trembling, not actively, as though Jerusalem should do something, but
passively, the condition wherein I will place Jerusalem shall cause trembling
to all that hear of it. When I shall bring distress upon them, and they hear
that God has dealt with his own City thus; and among all particulars, this
one principally amazeth, because Judah (whom you would take for a friend) shall
be in the siege against Jerusalem. (This the words will bear.) And I tell
(...).
you, no one thing do we so much stand astonished at, as this, that many of
our Judahs, whom the Countries and Counties of this Kingdom chose as Patriots,
and entrusted with their all, should perfidiously now draw their swords with
other children of iniquity to ruin it.

2. Hear how Job particularizeth those astonishing (...).
thoughts that probably follow such unexpected calamities. My soul is weary of
my life, I am even amazed to the death. I will leave my complaint upon my
self; or rather, I will help my complaint against my self, (according to the
nature of tender and wounded hearts, aggravating and imbittering every thought
and apprehension whatsoever.)

But observe the particulars: It is good for the Lord to oppress: God
despises the work of his hands: He shines upon the counsels of the wicked.
Strange thoughts! But the most remarkable instance that ever I met with, is the
Prophet Habakkuk: He Cap. 1. and 3. of his Prophecy expresses his astonishing
thoughts in a strange manner: I may cry long enough, ere God Verse 2.
will hear, and pray and pray again, but He will not save. Oh say not so
Habakkuk: there are promises to the contrary. Promises! A promise is worth
nothing, that is out of date. The word of God is but a loose hold, Verse 4.
judgment never goes forth from him. I tell you, God Verse 14.
minds his people no more then he does a fish: and the like. Hereupon Isaiah,
cap. 45. 9. Woe to him that strives with his Maker. This is Habakkuk, (say the
Jewish Expositors) and the words are to be read by way of complaint: Oh the
man, the man Habakkuk, Habakkuk that strives with God! whom also they affirm
to be that Watchman, cap. 21. 7, 8. that seeing horses approaching, cried out
by reason of his amazement, A Lion. These are terrible consequences, and argue
the answer to be terrible.

5. The improvement.
If such terrible consequences may follow our prayers, look upon all these
acts and answers with a right eye.

1. There is a double consideration of Gods doings. 1. An overly superficial
view of their outside. 2. A serious wise searching after God in them.
2. There are also two sorts of men employed therein. 1. The ordinary and
common sort, which look only upon the shell. 2. The godly judicious hearts,
that see more in things then what appears.

For these note these Scriptures.

Psalm. 145. 6. Men, all men, all sorts, will speak of thy terrible acts, can
relate things done. But I (David) will speak of thy glorious honor, and
declare thy greatness in them.

Psalm. 64 9, 10. Some only see them, the terrible act it self, and these flee
away, as amazed; but others shall be able to hold forth the work of God in
them, because they consider wisely of his doings: Job 18. 20. They that come
after him shall be amazed at his day, as they that went before him were
affrighted. A verse of a difficult, if of any sense. How can they that go
before be affrighted at that which follows? they that come after, the ordinary
vulgar sort, the hindermost, (...)
the lowest sort, they are amazed at the terrible things, that often come to
pass: but the Ancients (...) (...).
and Wisemen, they balance them, weigh the occurrents, and seek by a serious
view to find out the thoughts of the Lord.

Let this be our endeavor, not being like the foolish Philistims, and the
Officers in their Army, (...) 8
when the Ark was brought into the host, the Soldiers cried out for fear, Woe
unto us, who shall deliver us out of the hands of these mighty Gods! Who?
replied the Officers, Never fear these Gods, for these are they that smote the
Egyptians with all the plagues: This God has not another Arrow in his Quiver,
not another (...).
Weapon in his Armory, he spent all his Darts against the Egyptians, or if any
left, upon the rebellious Israelites in the wilderness, Therefore be strong,
etc. This their way was their folly; Be we wise, and mind, etc

The second Proposition.
Such terrible consequences do not at all entrench upon the righteousness of
God.

God is true, and as true, so he does afflict: Thy judgments are righteous,
('it is David's acknowledgement) and of very faithfulness thou have afflicted me:
Though we be punished, yet remains he faithful, and just, and good.

And this righteousness of his is clear even in such terrible answers.
Because they may be

1. According to our desires. 2. According to our deserts.
1. According to our desires.
I suppose in this passage Desires rectified, and Prayers, such as they ought
to be, and then terrible things may follow, yet our prayers not by them
crossed. For observe,

In every right desire, and prayer of faith, there are four things: all which
I gather from

Psalm. 17. 1, 2.

1. Howsoever our hearts are inclinable to decree a thing, as Job speaks, that
is, to fasten on the particular, which we would have, prescribing as it were to
God, how he should answer; yet faith makes a secret reference thereof to the
good pleasure of God, and in that does rest: Hear the right O Lord: though I
feign would be answered thus, yet if another kind of answer be right in thy
eyes, give that; for, Hear the right. Who knows but this terrible occurrent
was the right, and so agreeable to the prayer of faith?

2. Hear me no farther in my praying cries, then as they proceed from lips not
fained. If there be dissimulation in my hand, shut out my prayer. And Hosea is
punctual in giving the Character of prayers proceeding from lips fained, in
Chap. 7. 14.

1. If heart and mouth agree not. But they have not cried to me with their
hearts.

2. If it be only a general confused inarticulate (...)
supplication, and deprecation, praying or humbling. themselves that they might
not be single.

A praying frame is in request, the fashion of the times. But no particular
fixed express mourning for such or such causes, or consequents, sins or
miseries. They howled.

3. If only for fear of evil. They pray indeed, but it is when they are
ready to drop into Hell, when they are on their beds of sickness, and death,
lest they should be damned. Upon their beds.

4. If it be only for the baser and earthly part of the mercy; for peace, that
their persons and estates may be safe; for plenty, that they may have enough:
They assemble themselves, they troop together, come with the people of God to
Fasts and public humiliations, but it is for corn and for wine. They look no
higher.

5. If they walk not in the strength of their prayers, endeavoring holiness
afterward in the fear of God. They rebel against me.

If this description lay hold upon our spirits, and presents to our view the
state of our hearts, here in this terrible act is no crossing of our prayers,
because they proceeded from fained lips.

3. This is my request: Let the issue, the consequent, that follows upon my
prayers, appear to be thy work, that thy hand is in it, (be it what it will
be) and I am satisfied. Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: Let that
which is decreed upon for my prayer come from thee. So that if God inables us
to see his hand in this sad act, it is according to our prayers: Can we but
see, that it is a sentence came from Gods presence? this terrible doing then is
our answer.

4. Let the uprightness of my heart be accepted, (...)
Let thy eyes behold uprightness, and I am contented. If God do any way
evidence his acceptance of our duty, to our spirits, we shall see and say, The
duty and a day of prayer, and such terrible consequents may stand together,
without any intrenchment upon the righteousness of God: Go thy way, eat thy
Eccles. 9.
meat with joy, and drink thy wine with a cheerful heart, for God now
accepts thy work.

Thus this answer may be as we desire.

2. According to our deserts.
If the answer be deserved, then may God be righteous. Is there not a cause why
the most righteous God should answer us by terrible things? Let me here
(according to my method and manner) discover from Scripture, causes of the
successelesse proceedings of our Armies, and lay them down positively, leaving
the particular application to every man's heart. And I deduce them to three
heads.

The sins of Former times. Our Armies. Our selves.



I. Of former times.
Hos. 10. 9. O Israel, thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah. Now whether
you refer this to the horrible abuse of the Levites Concubine committed in
Gibeah of Benjamin, as some do, or to their sinful way of asking a King, done
in Gibeah of Saul, as others do; it is all one to the point in hand. It was a
sin committed some hundred years before Hosea was borne, yet this by him was
charged upon them now, and plainly said, that for this, the battle against the
children of iniquity could not overtake them. This particular was taken to
heart by you, since this sitting, when by an Ordinance you called upon the
Kingdom to be humbled for the blood shed in the Marian persecution. If such an
Ordinance were reprinted, with some additions concerning mixtures in Gods
service, and violence against Gods servants under the Prelaticall tyranny, it
might possibly do much good.

II. Of our Armies.
Moses, Deuteronomy. 1. 41. and seq. specifies three particulars, that made them turn
their backs in the day of Battle.

1. Profaneness. You would not hear, but rebelled against the Lord. God is
not with Israel, says the Prophet. Oh how it is to be wished, that a holy
Cause were managed by holy Agents, and that when our Armies remove, they would
put from them every evil thing.

2. Self ends. Every one his own severally, few the public solely. Verse 41.
Ye girded on every one The Weapons of HIS War; as if a different war to (...)
every soldier. It was a war of credit to one, of revenge to another, of
profit to a third: as that outlandish Captain ingenuously confessed to one,
commending, that for conscience he was come over to maintain the true
Religion: Nay, nay, said he, I neither know what Conscience or Religion is, I
am come over to fight for my Credit and my Pay.

3. Wilful putting themselves into disadvantages. Verse 43.
We will go up to the hill. No, said Moses, the Amorites are above at the top;
they have a great advantage Abarbinel.
against you; yet you would presumptuously go up to the Hill: but what
followed? The Amorites came against you, and chased you, as Bees do, and ye
were destroyed before them.

III. Of our selves.
Here is a wide field. I mention three.

1. The first from Hagg. 1. Slacknesse in the work of Religion, in promoting
the ways of God, and establishing his truth: and more particularly, our not
walking sutably to our conditions, our insensiblenesse on these days of
humiliation. No man put on his best array, says God of Israel. We are an
unhumbled people. Many clear evidences whereof (besides others) are our
unseasonable -- feasts.

2. Carelessness in keeping, and dealing with delinquents. 1 King. 20. 42.
Because thou have let go out of thy hand the man of my curse, whom I have
devoted to destruction, thy life shall go for his, thy people for his people.
Thy punishment shall not only be personal, but National, thy People,
Soldiers, Armies, all lie at stake for it.

I could wish some care used in this, lest an answer be put into the mouth of
the adversary, to evade that which perhaps is not of least use in the
justification of this Cause in hand. The controversy has sometimes been
stated thus: That the Supreme Court of Judicature may by force of arms fetch
in delinquents to be punished, though they be protected by the Royal Person.
It Is true, Religion, Liberties, and other things, are now intwisted within the
same controversy; but the other being one, and perhaps a maine part, what can
be replied, when the not censuring of delinquents in our power shall be thrown
before us? etc. There are several persons, and several punishments: we press
not severity; let actions be weighed, and a just proportion observed. Look to
all degrees, and spare none: and among the rest the Prelates, whose offenses,
in case they should not be found capital, that device of sending them to New
England, transcends all the inventions I ever met with.

3. No care for the restitution to every man of his losses. This is a pressure,
and followed with wars. Asa oppressed some of his subjects, and the remainder
of his days was unquiet: From henceforth thou shall have wars. How mindful
was Abraham, that (...).
every man should have his own to a shoe latchet? Genesis 14. 23. And no less
David, 1 Samuel 30. 25. when some of his soldiers through weariness were
disabled to follow. The cry of many a poor undone man is great; make the
spoiler return the theft to the uttermost Farthing. These are some parts of
our ways: and if these or the like vices abound, when God answers terrible
things, why does living man complain? In these still remains he righteous in
himself, and to us a God of salvation. Which is

The third Proposition.
Such terrible consequences may be the way, whereby God to a Land becomes a
saving God. Oh God thou art terrible out of thy holy places, Psalm. 68. ult.
That evidence which we have of thee from holy duties, is terrible, yet herein
the God of Israel is he, a God prevailed with, a saving God.

Herein observe three steps.

1. There is a time, a set time, when God is a saving God to his people. Thou will arise, and have mercy upon Sion, for the time, the set time is come, Psalm.
102. 13. The vision is yet for an appointed time, it will surely come, and not
tarry, Hab. 2. 3. There is a time both for (...)
man to work for the Lord, and for the Lord to work for man: When the former
must show himself a God-serving man, and the latter will show himself a
man-saving God.

2. This time, this set time, is only to be taken from the fit disposition of
the receiver. Gods hands are stretched out all day to give, but man has
sometimes put off his coat, and is loath to put it on; is not ready to open
when the Beloved knocks.

3. Terrible answers thus dispose: they prepare Gods way, hasten his coming.
God is saving, by desolating the adversary, by prospering his people. These
terrible answers fit both, the wicked for desolation, the righteous for
consolation: the one by hardening, the other by selfe-viewing.

Observe we then here the ripeness of them both for their several ends; of the

1. Wicked for destruction. 2. Good for salvation.
1. When is a wicked people ripe for ruin, and what are the signs of its
approach? The probable conjectures hereof are from four grounds. Their

1. Combination in wickedness. 2. Hurtfulnesse to others. 3. Security. 4.
Profaneness.
All these the Prophet Nahum cap. 1. 10. positively lays down, and says
expressly, that when these are found, they shall be consumed as stubble fully
dried. But hear the particulars.

1. Their combination in sin, and mutual strengthening the hands of iniquity:
while they be folden together, as thorns, inwrapped one within another for
their more firm establishment and resistance. When hand joins with hand, when
our Prelacy had strengthened their interests with their own combined resolves,
backed herein with the countenance of Supreme Authority, and had made the tie
(as they hoped) indissoluble by a devised Oath; thus folden together like
thorns, we saw them suddenly on a flame, like stubble fully dry.

2. Their hurtfulnesse. Like thorns, tearing the clothes and flesh of such as
came within their reach. When a wicked one is grown so pestilent, that a man
cannot in safety speak to them, choosing rather to have to do with an angry
Lion, and a raging Bear, then sin lies at the door. Oh how untoward were our
Prelates and their Courts become! Thousands whom they chased, as Bees do,
drove out of the Land, imprisoned, fined, confined, silenced, deprived, ruined,
rending them like thorns, can witness.

3. Their security: crying to themselves peace and safety, then shall come upon
them sudden destruction, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. When they shall be drunken as
drunkards, one, yea a principal adjunct whereof is to be mindlesse of the
times and the calamities. Woe to those that follow strong drink. Why? Because
they regard not the work of the Lord, nor consider the operation of his hands,
Isa. 5. 11, 12. Of all men a drunkard is least fit to mind Gods doings. Many
among us, about three years agone, had set these since-felt miseries far
away out of their sight, and as for any Items or Caveats given that way, they
puffed at them; so drowned in ease, and drunken in security were many the very
day or night before God took away their pride. Consider, and be mindful.

4. Their profaneness: drunken as drunkards, abominably vicious. What sin is
not a drunkard guilty of? When the cry of Sodom reaches to heaven, and the
sins of the Amorites are full, the heavens rained vengeance on the one, the
earth spued out the other. See thou one wicked overmuch? he shall perish out
of his time. Beholdest thou the breaking out of filthiness, and sin touching
sin? these are stubble fully dry, ready for the fire See page fol.
: these are conjectures of their end, and probabilities of desolation nigh at
hand: And unto the height of these they mount up by no step sooner, then by
Gods answering his servants prayers by terrible things. Then they combine,
their party gets strength, and Gods people pay for it, then they scratch like
Thorns, and rage like Bears: They flatter themselves in their ways, and say,
I shall never sit desolate. Then profaneness compasses them as a chain, and
having hearts as full of mischief, as Hell is of horror, drunken with
prosperity, are carried on with fury. But in that day their thoughts perish,
they are gone, and are no more.

When pride compasses the wicked as a chain, (...)
and violence covers them as a garment; when they are corrupt, and speak
wickedly; when they set their mouths against heaven, and live as if there were
no God in Israel: then suddenly shall they be destroyed, and that without
remedy.

2. So on the other side, there is a time when, and a disposition whereby the
Saints are fitted for mercy, prepared to receive God as a saving God. This
fitness see held forth in two Scriptures.

1. From Psalm. 24. 4.
Here the qualifications of one that shall ascend into the hill of the Lord are
set down: viz. He that has

1. Clean hands. 2. Pure heart. 3. A soul not lift up to vanity.
1. Clean hands. Hands are the instrument of action, and points us thereby
to an holy employment.

2. Pure heart, or judgment; clear in the principles and spiritual grounds
of the work.

3. A soul not lift up to vanity. Affection not wrongfully fastened on that
which is nothing, transitory, and hurtful.

That person then by these terrible occurrences is prepared to receive a saving
God, that has a heart

1. Holily employed. 2. Clearly convinced. 3. Rightly affected.
I. Holily employed.
The hearts employment is only to make its address to God, by prayer and
supplication to seek to him. So David, Psalm. 105. 4. presses, and withal
shows in what particulars we must seek him.

1. Generally, Seek the Lord. Seek him, to find his hand in his works; seek
him, to gain his favor to his works.

2. Particularly. In seeking him

1. Seek his strength, spiritual support from him under these terrible
answers; that we may be able to stand fast.

2. Seek his face, his gracious acceptance of you and your prayers in your
several addresses to his Throne. Seek the Lord; seek his strength; seek his
face.

II. Clearly convinced of two things.
1. Of his own sin. 2. Of the righteousness of God.
1. Of his own sin, and just demerit of the terror. I will go and return to
my place, till they acknowledge their offense, Hos. 5. 13. Gods assisting and
prospering presence may be withdrawn from a Nation, he may be gone to His
place; he may contract, and as it were confine himself to the souls; and faith
of his Saints, which is one of his dwelling places, till that Nation be clearly
convinced that they are justly punished for their transgression.

2. Of the righteousness of God. Mich. 6. 5. Remember but the particulars of
Gods proceedings; use any and all means you can, that you may be brought to
know the righteousness of God.

III. Rightly affected. This is when the heart is carried after
1. The purity of Gods ways, of Religion. It is the time, the set time for God
to arise, and have mercy upon Sion, when his servants take pleasure in her
stones, and favor the dust thereof Psalm. 102. 13.

2. The public good. The Centurion, Luke 7. is said to be worthy of help
from Christ, because he loves our Nation, verse 5.

2 From Lam. 3. 26.
This Scripture also has a threefold qualification of one fitted for the
salvation of God. It is good that a man should both. -- Or after the Original,

The good man, and he that hops, and silently waits, is for the salvation
of the Lord.

1. The good man.
A godly sanctified man. His privileges are many. Happinesses belong unto him.
Psalm. 1^.
All those rays of light, that stream from Sion, are (...)
his peculiars, God does thence bless him, Psalm. 128. in three things, (and
these likewise happy in him.)

1. In himself. 2. In his family. 3. In his Country.
1. In himself. He shall share in all the common comforts of the Land. What
mercy soever is given to the public, is given to him. He is always remembered
in the favor, God brings to his people, and his particular visited with the
Lands salvation. Is the Nation glad? In that gladness he rejoices. Psalm. 105.
4. etc.
Is Gods inheritance refreshed when it is weary? In it and with it he does
glory.

He shall see, that is, enjoy, share in the good of Jerusalem all the days of
his life.

2. In his family: He shall see his childrens children. A just man walks in
his integrity, and his children are blessed after him, Prove. 20. 7.

3. In his Country: Peace upon Israel. The Lord (...)
has blessed thee since my coming, says Jacob to Laban, at my foot.
Blessings are sent to every place where the Saints feet tread. Abraham was the
worlds blessing, and God commanded so. Be thou a blessing. We have blessed you,
we have made you a blessing, you, your selves to others. Psalm. 118. 26. But in
spirituals, from the house of the Lord, that is the maine of Gods salvation. A
godly man is for the salvation of God.

2. And he that hops. Blessed are they that wait (...) To say, the man
naturally living, is too flat.
for him, Isai. 30. 18. Why is the living man (the man spiritually living)
sorrowful? is Jeremies mournful demand. He himself answers, Man suffers for
his sin. And we say, most of the sorrows, unhappinesses, sad conditions of the
people of God, and their agents, is for sin, for this sin, Their earthly
confidence. They do not partake from God of salvation, because they do not
hope in God for salvation. Jacob (it is probable) began to settle a little to
the things of this world, making that to him a firm possession, which his
father esteemed but as a temporary abode, And Jacob DWELT in the Land wherein
his Father was a stranger, Genesis 37. 1. And see him presently sadded in Joseph
his darling. Judah feared Joseph because of his dreams, upon Reubens
forfeiture he hoped after a Kingdom, which those dreams seemed to bequeath to
Joseph; in this he was loath to be prevented, unwilling, that any, that a
brother should step in between a Kingdom and his issue. If this were removed,
all were sure. Judah sticks not at it; his brothers slaughter is spoke of, his
sale effected, and so his person made incapable, the thing impossible, and
Judahs sons are heirs apparent to a crown. Thus far earthly policy bore up. He
that remembers Er and Onan, will assert what here is said. The spiritual
believer, not the Politician, is for the salvation of God. Joseph himself is
become a Courtier, and a Favorite: his experience had fully informed him, how
changeable were great ones favors. He hoped by affected neatness, and
Courtlike (...) on (...) Genesis (...).
behavior to keep himself in grace: whereby he became ensnared almost to his
ruin. He that hops.

3. And is silent, patiently undergoing what God (...)
lays on him. This is the Lords doing, says Moses. And Aaron held his peace,
says the Text. You have heard of the patience of Job, and know what end the
Lord made. Be silent to Jehovah, and under his hand, and verily thou shall be
fed. For, the good man, and he that hops, and silently waits, that, that is
he that is for the salvation of the Lord.

These are the several qualifications, that ripen both the wicked and the
righteous for their ends respectively, and in them both does God appear a
saving God.

The sum of all is: Terrible answers harden the wicked, and make them
irreconciliable to the ways of God. They make them to combine their strength,
that they may be as Thorns to hurt the man that is more righteous then they.
These terrible things plunge them into security and profaneness, and makes
them as stubble fully dry. But the same so prepare the Saints, so exercises
their thoughts, convinces their judgments, and regulateth their affections,
so sanctifies their persons, exciteth their dependence, and quieteth their
spirits, that they shall quickly perceive God in this way to be the preserver
of men.

Again, terrible answers last not long. A day, a night, an hour, a moment, a
little moment do in Scripture phrase express the duration of Gods frown; and
whilst thus, it is but as a Chirurgions lancing in order to healing. He
terribly speaks when he intends certainly to save. The men in Hosea's Hos. 6. 1.
time apprehended so much, and thorough a terrible appearance saw God a saving
God. Come, let us return to the Lord, etc. Or rather thus: Go ye, and we will
return to the, etc. Ephraim was now under Gods hand, they had walked after a
sinful Commandment, and God had rent them, and was departed: then they under
the burden of pressures and sin thus cry out: Go ye, O ye servants of the
Lord, go ye on in your most righteous ways, and we also, we will return to
the Lord. What? to the Lord? see you not how terribly he deals? have you any
hopes of being received? We confess, he at this present answers by terrible
things, he has indeed torn us, but this is the way to a cure; he has torn,
and he will heal, yea otherwise we could not be healed; to effect it
therefore, He WILL smite, he will lance, and search, and so he will bind us
up. Thus in his terrors is he a saving God. But they are bitter for the time,
and should they lie long, we should be oppressed, therefore after two days he
will revive us, and in the third we shall stand up, and be found. The rod
shall not long lie upon the lot of the righteous. God is often corrective, never
destructive.

But the point is evident, and usual. I draw on to a close.

Jehoshaphat and we are in a like condition. Danger appeared, prayers are made,
God is sought unto, the enemies grow strong. Look yet nearlier, of the things
requisite for such a time, they want much, have little; no courage, no
strength, no arms nor armies considerable, no might to resist such a company
coming against them; the King is at his wits end, he knows not what to do,
he is overwhelmed with fears; the people they run to God to be informed what
to do, they are drowned in tears; discoveries are made to both; the Scouts
from the enemy come running with terrible tidings, Oh Jehoshaphat,
Jehoshaphat, an enemy, an enemy, a numerous army marching furiously, already
entered, and possessed of some strong places, etc. Thus they. A Prophet from the
Lord, divinely inspired, from spiritual promises, gave strong encouragement;
Be not dismayed, fear not numbers, mind not the persons, consider the Cause;
think not who the men are, but whose the Cause is: The battle is not yours,
but Gods: He will be with you as a Man of War: this terrible alarm is the way
wherein he will be to you a saving God. As for you, Set your selves; Stand
still, and see the salvation of God.

1. Set your selves. This is our duty, we must not be idle, God blesses us in
all we put our hand to; Go down against the enemy, do your best; let the
Soldiers march, the battle be ordered; set your hearts to; compose your
spirits; have an eye to the Covenant; look up to heaven; let the soul be
believing, the body be doing; set your selves in a right posture either way,
that neither may your faithless hearts lose your God, nor your disorders, the
battle. Set your selves.

2. Stand still: be silent, quiet,

1. From fears and discouragements: neither fear nor doubt the success, that
belongs to God, not to you; have an eye to your own, your affections, your
aims, your manner of managing; refer the rest to him to whom it belongs:
Trust you in God, when the wicked bend their bows. Hold your peace from any
sinful distrustful passages, and then for the event, let come on us what
will. Job 13. 13.

2. From shunning dangers by false ways. Let no man's judgment fail him.
There is no safety in falsehood: a compliance is odious to all. A Castle is a
refuge for a day, or so; flight prolongs the misery; sinfully then to betray
the Cause, or trust reposed in us, is to run into the danger we would avoid.
Remember Sampsons wife and father in law: The Philistims threatened to burn
them, nothing but a treacherous betraying of Sampson can prevent it; rather
then they will hazard themselves, they will break the bonds of relation. By
their enticements Sampson is deceived. Mark the end. He falls into the snare he
shunned. The Philistims come up, and burn them both with fire. Behold the
severity and justice of God, who brought their fears upon them.

So true is that of the Prophet, That shall be no confidence (...). ^6.
to the house of Israel which brings their iniquity to remembrance. These are
not the ways therefore that God approves; stand still in a full dependence on
him; leave him to work his own ends by his own ways. He is wise. Hold you your
peace. Stand still, and

3. See the salvation of God, brought to pass three ways to the people of God.

When their 1. Prayers 2. Persons 3. Cause
get the victory.

1. When their prayers are victorious. So sometimes God fights: so Moses
subdued Amalek: Jehoshaphat his enemies: and Hezekiah Senacherib: for prayer
has in it a power preservative, and destructive, and in this Mount is often
God seen.

2. When their persons get the victory. In all the prevalent proceedings of the
Saints, the victory is of God: ordinary means of Soldiers, Weapons,
Stratagems, a strong City, are subordinate to God. He uses them, and effects
by them what he pleases.

3. When the Cause stands up against all oppositions, though with the loss of
the persons, Religion gets the upper hand by the sufferings of the professors.

Lift we up therefore both eyes and hearts, and see, and behold a saving God,
when tempestuous round about him. Gods answer the last day was Lightning, and
an horrible Tempest: this drove us to our shelter, where being freed from the
fury of the storm, we may with delight behold the refreshing drops intermixed.
This days employment is this covert, wherein our desire is to meet, to find
God an hiding place, as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. The sign
of it, and our duty after it is to double our diligence after this day, to
enlive our spirits in the ways of the Lord. Jacob being blessed by Isaac, met
with a cross consequent, a purpose of Esau to murder him. A terrible answer.
This makes his fathers house unsafe: he leaves it, but sadly, and against his
will. And Jacob went out from Genesis 28.
Beersheba. He was gone, verse 7. yet verse 10. he went. Probably he set
forward, and yet hanged back. His father, his mother, his family, his native
Country, all are clogs: But at last gone he is: and in the way at Bethel, God,
the God of his Fathers meets with him. By a banishment the God of his salvation
appeared to him. Then Jacob lift up his feet Cap. 29. 1.
and journeyed. Then he took heart to him. God, we hope, will make this day our
Bethel. From this day forward, up and be doing. Double thy prayers, pains,
purse. Ride on prosperously because of the word of truth and righteousness:
that the right hand of the Lord may bring valiant things to pass for us and
our Armies. Once has God answered by terrible things, but he will do so no
more. Therein he crossed not his righteous nature, though he concealed the acts
of his mercy. If he give us grace to improve it aright, the end will show, it
was the way whereby he became to us a saving GOD.

FINIS.

