COLCHESTERS TEARS: Affecting and Afflicting CITY and COUNTRY; DROPPING From
the sad face of a new War, threatening to bury in her own Ashes that woeful
TOWN.

Faithfully collected, drawn out into a moderate Relation and Debate, humbly
presented to all Freeborn Englishmen;

By several persons of Quality.

Who much doubted and desired to see the Truth in the mist of various relations
obscuring the same, but now convinced by their own eyes, do conceive
themselves bound to give out this brief Narrative, to satisfy all
unprepossessed civil and moderate men, and good Christians, who truly love
Jesus Christ, their King, City, and Country, and sincerely desire the
settlement of Peace and Truth.

Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand of the
Lord has touched me,

Job 19.21. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if there
be any sorrow like to my sorrow which is done unto me; wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger,

Lament. 1.12. London, Printed for John Bellamy at the three Golden Lions in
Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1648.

A brief Narrative of the woeful state of distressed COLCHESTER.
We are neitheir unwilling to look back upon all our former doubts and
dissatisfactions, nor willingly are we unmindfull to look forward upon any
thing that may clear our judgments in the right understanding of truth, and
the true state and carriage of the cause of this woefully divided, and if God in
mercy prevent not (like to be) undone kingdom: And though with all the
understandings God has given us, we have labored to judge of things as they
have lien before us in their nature, grounds and in order unto their proper
ends, yet we find our selves so far Christians, that we are drawn and
enforced oftentimes to judge many things evil by reason of the miscarriages
therein, which in themselves simply considered, we have judged good, and had
entertained good thoughts of before.

Loving Friends, and all you freeborne Englishmen, Give us leave to propose and
offer to all unprepossessed moderate men a few of our most serious renewed
thoughts: Do we not all desne the same thing? Peace, a happy peace? pacem te
poscimus omnes, and the Lord grant it. But God forbid that any of us should
embrace sinful security in stead thereof, dote upon or rather dream of our
own peace one with another whilst God is not at peace with us, and whilst the
proper foundations of peace and love, Gods truth rightly understood, Scripture
truth is not advanced. We judged our government to be good, but shall we say
it cannot be mended? our King to be wise, but shall we say he needs no
counsel? our Laws to be just, but are they perfect? our Church to be
reformed, but have we no blemishes? our nation to be strong, but are we not
divided? our Army to be valiant, but are they invincible? our City to be
rich, but are they not proud? our countries to be populous, but are they
religious? Ah sirs, if any thing be amiss, shall no hand go about to mend,
but all to mar, ravel and make it worse, is there none to plead with God, no
balm in Gilead, no kissing of the Son lest heee be angry? or are men become
more implacable then God, and earth more unreconcileable then heaven? where are
the specious pretenses of enemies, when their designs and actings Boatman-like
row another way, then they look? where is the faith of friends when there is
so little love? where is the old English honor memorable in the subduing of
forain foes, whilst England makes a prey of it self? And when is our former
ancient renown again to be settled, when every man even in disorderly ways
rises against another, and all laboring to dig a grave for the Kingdom, and
to bury poor England in her own sad ashes and woeful ruins? Have we no
hearts to mourn for our distractions, no eyes to see our approaching
destruction? what no heads to contrive, nor hands to help in a time of need?
are our hearts so hard that they will never melt? are our eyes so big swollen,
or rather blinded, that we cannot, or which is worse, will not see the flames
kindled ready to seize on our own houses? has either divine justice so
blasted, Satan bewitched, or we perverted our own judgments, that we should
now grow weary of being longer happy, and be content to sit down and quietly
embrace our own misery?

We moderate men did judge heretofore the frame of our Church to be very far
out of order, and her constitution diseased, when the most unpolished stones
were laid nearest to the foundation; the strongest pillars and helpers of the
building were struck down, the windows bedawbed with paint to hinder, not
help the light, the dress more regarded then the complexion, and the lome on
the walls more affected then the bread of life. But we judge it now too
bastardly to spit in her face, too Cham-like to call her whore, to mock at her
nakedness, and abuse her sons and best children, invade her patrimony, spend
her portion unthriftily, and cast off all her first love.

We did judge the body of Religion by the greatness of the shadows formerly,
and yet we know, the bigger the shadows grew our Sun was the lower, night the
nearer, and have found the beast of the field the fiercer after their prey; But
yet ( Pan-like) we would not whilst we have either grace or wit left us be
content to embrace Bulrushes, lest the dirt they grow in stick to our fingers;
and not the body of holiness, but the dark shadows and forms of Religion,
and not the power under the bare notion of light be our portion; we have ever
judged it our duty to obey our King first in God, and then for God, and God
knows our consciences are the same they were. But no honest man nor wise
subject can in wisdom make him a God, nor good Christian give him that which
belongs to God; if the King act as a man, and discover any infirmity, he mends
the matter when he acts as a King, for that wraps up and includes power qua
King; but when he would put forth regal power and yet mixes infirmity
therewith, will any judicious man affirm that infirmity to be his power?

We have ever judged the Laws of the Land to the defense of our just
liberties, and our liberty to be supported by those just and prudent
foundations of the Law: But were were heretofore in some measure, and now
better satisfied that there are Laws of higher concernment that must not be
neglected, and liberties more to be valued then those pent up within the
straits of the creature here below; modest men have seen many pretend, making
conscience of the Laws of men, that make none of the Law of God; and those
that pretend conscience in order unto Gods Law, whom no tie will hold to render
them just toward men; we look then to see men square when they are both
pious and just, their consciences being answerable to those rules, and that
each of those rules has according to its excellency the prioritie or
prehemencie in the dictates of conscience.

Though we, some of us heretofore could not so fully close with every branch
of the national covenant, yet we ever judged, and in reason could not deny
but it was in many respects not only lawful, but very requisite, and safe for
any man to wrap himself up in Covenant with God, and the rather in respect of
those two golden rules that seem upon a review and second thoughts had
thereon, to line out a man's path to keep him from error, and danger, viz.
According to the word of God, and according to my calling; but as we cannot on
the one side (in our weakness) apprehend how any with safety can take it with
reservations, explications and meant all reservations of his own, or resuse it
in the true grammatical plain sense thereof, without strong inclinations to
some degrees of suspicion, or at least indifferency in Religion, or more
prudentiall reservations, then (as we now judge since God opened our eyes a
little better) will well consist with true zeal, and sincere affection to God,
who as he has voluntarily entered Covenant with us infinitely redargues our
folly in rejecting him.

We have ever had loyal and religious thoughts in obeying of and praying for
our King, and therefore his Majesty might expect us in all duty, and in all
due and safe ways to beg and humbly to pray his Majesty's restoration to those
rights which are properly and truly his own in all due, safe and honorable
ways from the hands of men, who have often begged mercy and favor for him at
the hand of God; but we could never make it out that those rights which God for
the present has deprived him of rather by the evil counsels and unrighteous
ways of his loyaltie-pretending friends, then by any undue violence of his
loyal subjects not enemies, that those rights we say were ever designed by
him to be recovered by the infirmity of them who had lost their power; and
without authority, because without his Commission, or at least without clearly
legal Commission and authority, that they should take upon them to invade the
undoubted, and to the King and his liege people well known both legal and
regal power of his Parliament, and under color of saving the King to destroy
his people, and to lift up his Throne upon the ashes and ruins of the Houses
habitations, and safeties of his Majesty's loyal subjects; this is that which
we humbly hope and pray that all moderate men will a little look into, and by
the sad example of mournful and much lamented Colchester take warning in time.

We profess in the presence of God, we have with both our eyes and serious
second thoughts, reviewed to the lowest stone this new raised war, breaking out
under color of defense of his Majesty, and our own rights of petitioning. And
some of us have told some of the ringleaders in this sad cause, that if they
would lay the ground so as honest and civil men might go upon it with them; if
they would cast their platform, and make answerable declaration thereof to the
moderate party of the kingdom; if they would give us some assurance that his
Majesty would govern (if once advanced by conquest) by Parliamentary and not
by absolute Sovereignty, and that (since as it was alleged that the Army did
awe City, Country, Councels, King and Kingdom) that there might be some
expedient found out, as of necessity there must be to satisfy not fight them,
lest we should but fight the Sword out of one hand into another. How we might
be satisfied that these Soldiers would lay down the Sword at his Majesty's
foot, and submit to his will, and his will be kept within the proper bounds of
faith by protection, we should, these things being done, freely have closed on
that side.

But when to our great amazement the ringleaders of that great design
confessed themselves uncertain in their grounds, doubtful in the persons they
acted, disavowed the end clearly by the greatest of them designed conquest:
and when we begun by the persons acting, and those that were for them the most
active in this new war, to go higher to look into their designs, we clearly
saw the too rigid, angry and undone spirits of the Kings old Soldiers reaching
further then we profess our hopes could follow in the pursuance of this
kingdoms peace thereby. And when we saw their heat and have to be doing,
prevent their wisdoms and counsels; their parties (though considerable)
appear so disorderly by reason of their have, their disorder not backed with
answerable valor, and their want of valor produce no other effect but ruin
to themselves, and sorrow to the poor Country, hoping some ease and relief by
them who have bin hitherto Egypts staff, a staff of Reed to his Majesty, and
his poor undone party, when we say their sincerity produced no better a
cause, their cause was accompanied with no more courage, and their courage
failed them to engage their enemies sometimes upon equal terms, sometimes
upon great odds on their side; we have an old proverb, one true man will beat
three thieves, we will not apply to offend any, but laboring our own, and
satisfaction giving to moderate men; we profess, we could not see (being
standers by) but they had been right in their cause, courage and good
consciences, they being brave bred English men, but that they might with more
valor and success by the blessing of God have somewhere engaged their
enemies. And yet,

How came 4. or 5000. in Wales to rout 10. or 11. or 12000? How came 2. or 300.
about Bury in Suffolk to drive out of that strongly Barricadoed town 4. or
500? How came as they said 20000. in Kent to be routed, stormed and beaten by
3. or 4000? How came Langdale to refuse engagement with Lambert in the North,
and draw away? How were Pomfret forragers snapt, the party at Houn sloe Heath
and St. Needs taken in part, and the rest dispersed; and that which we mainly
drive at, how was that numerous heap of men of 7. or 8000. themselves said
driven into Colchester by 4. or 5000? for that number we believe at the
uttermost was the Generals Army at that time. Nay, and to admiration, how came
that strong party of 1000. men besides horse issuing the other day out of
Colchester upon Sir Thomas Barnardistons regiment to be beaten in again by a
small party of green Soldiers, but about 200. men, and they as well as all
the rest taken in great disorder too? We profess we cannot but see something
to our admiration in these things. And though we have been so far men as
weakly to stand in doubt, and much to question rather then resolve our selves
what to do or say almost hitherto, yet we are so far Christians (though we
will not judge causes by the events infallibly, or designs always by their
successes) that we profess our selves bound in conscience to publish to others
a brief Narrative hereof what we have seen and found working convictions upon
us.

We shall first give you the narration of things seen, and then of that which
credible reports from eyewitnesses and eare-witnesses coming out of the town
do testify, wherein we must humbly crave leave in the detestation of such
horrid things as our English Nation abhorrs to hear, and in hope it may make
them blush that had ^ands therein, and others to beware of believing any thing
but what they have from those that are moderate in opinions, yet as much
misliking baseness as any other, we crave leave therefore to show our selves
offended because we have been too moderate, we fear, and indifferent formerly,
and have been too much given to be carried away with deceits and delusions put
upon us by that lying spirit which now runs through the kingdom, and no
greater reason makes us to abhor more then because we would not be of the
number of those that believe lies, and will receive no truth, but that which is
agreeable to their desires or opinions; many instances whereof some of us had
in our travail North and South very lately, where sometimes if any of that
angry party that we were to submit to, believe formerly did report any against
our sight or knowledge, we must neither believe our own ears, nor our eyes
before their relations without offense. And this we profess in Gods presence
we found too true in many places, but most of all, to our grief we speak it,
we found this most in the City, and the good Lord pardon and pity it in our
near and dear friends. And this gave us the greatest satisfaction we have
received, and humbly offer to you as follows.

What specious pretentences, gilded shows, and fair varnishes this now sad
tragedy had laid over it to color the same, we need not relate, what promises
and strong engagements of Protection during their abode at Colchester, what
hopes they gave of passing speedily away without molesting or wronging any man,
we shall not trouble you to relate, calling God and their own consciences to
witness, who approved their entrance and labored therein; But alas, alas, we
tremble to mention or think of that which was presently acted by those unkind
guests amongst their then seeming joyful friends; soon was it brought about to
make the persons, houses, families and estates a prey of some five or six who
did visibly oppose their entrance, (for so few God knows were sensible of this
new felt danger, and so general was that woeful error, which all were
surprised by in that strait): And then they must needs make enemies,
roundheads, rogues, and what not, of any other that was too civil for their
company, or too rich to go unplundered; It was not a matter of any great
difficulty to bring on the Townsmen to act in this common calamity, who were
before so generally corrupted in their judgments, and ready to act that way of
their own accords. What sad hearts and dejected countenances, and bitter
sighs may we imagine some godly Minister, gracious women and humble hearted
trembling Christians expressed their grief by in this heavy and dolorous day
of affliction now laid upon them! yet this now poor place for seven years last
past in others wants having abounded, and it is to be feared grown rich,
lifted up, and too much forgetting her said condition, the Lord humble their
hearts and bring them to their ^ates, and affect all us with it, who have
through the goodness of our God escaped this heavy rod; they many of them
staid some for husbands, some for wives, some for children, some for parents,
some for masters, some for trades, estates, and other interests, and relations;
until the Lord brought the sword nearer, first by cutting off that passage
toward the Suffolk quarters, who took the bridge and the East gate street
with a party who kept the Church over against the Hith: then the Suffolk
Forces on one side entered the Hith, Town, and Church, and my Lord Generals
Forces on the other, and striking down toward that street leading from the
Town to the Hith took all to Eastgate, then they entered Sir John Lucas his
house couraigiously, beat out Gorings Forces, and the next day in the Evening,
the Lord Generals men to admiration of us standers by with very little loss
and much Gallantry took that strong place, called the Gate house, with the Fort
and Church, and so my Lord Gorings party was driven and coopt up in the high
Town, and presently began that fearful sight and and woeful spectacle of
firing all round the walls, the streets on both sides being by my Lord Gorings
party set on fire, and from the time of the taking the Gate house all that
night for about a mile in length continued burning and flaming, that some of us
being a mile distance had light almost to read a letter so far, and a terrible
red duskie bloody Cloud seemed to hang over the Town all night, and so furious
was the fire by reason such stately and goodly buildings were burnt thereby;
that many times the flashes mounted aloft, far above house, Churches, or any
buildings, and continued with such horror, cracklings heard a mile or two from
the town, and with such lamentable outcries of men, women and children, that
it is beyond expression to relate, how much more to moderate men standing by,
it was more then merciless cruelty to act.

And not herewith contented the next night after set fire on the Northstreet
needlessely, which so enraged the Auxiliaries of Suffolk, as well as the
firing had angered the Trained men, That any ingenuous may easily judge that
they have so far taken the firing of their neighbors houses to heart that if
ever they come to try them, it is very likely they in the Town have so hardened
their hearts against them, that they will find them no more green Soldiers
then they found the Traind men green soldiers upon their sad salley at the
Turnpike, and are like to find as little favor from them, as they found at
their hands whose houses they fired and turned them and theirs (without so much
as letting them have time to take their goods and wares) a begging to the wide
world. And on Wednesday night after, which was the fifth night, several good
houses were turned into ashes with the goods therein; In all which, three
things seem to trumpet forth their cruelty, and by these flames do offer
light whereby the dim sight of all men that will see may behold the grizly face
of woeful desolation, looking assuredly into those houses where strugglings of
two Armies do happen: First, their burning needlessly, where as there is a
greater question, whether for a man's own defense, a man may burn at all; by a
man's defense he escapes but the evil of punishment, but by burning and
without consideration giving, is the evil of sin, to burn, and so more to be
avoided then the former. Secondly, their not giving warning before they burn
usually, unless they can get some thing of the Masters of the houses to save
them, and then presently to set fire to them, and run into the Town, and cry
out that the round heads fire the Town, and we think that he that is the Master
of cruelty is the very father of lies. Thirdly, they have entered Covenant with
several in East-street not to fire, and taken money, some say 14. l. some 15.
and some 40. l. into their hands, and then presently have fired the same houses
themselves, and lay the fault upon the roundheads, nay they were demanded
whether they would fire or no, and did promise if so, to discover it, and were
offended that the man should ask any more when they had promised him warning
thereof, and yet did fire it presently without warning, notwithstanding. They
come out and plunder every day, as far as they dare, those people who stay in
their houses, in hope to prevent fireing, they force many to swear that they
have no more money or else they will kill them within, etc. Nay they seized on
one Mr. Hughes, took his money, and swore God dam me, the rogue has more money,
and swore again, that if he would not swear by the same oath God dam me that
he had no more money, that he would presently kill him, and so Mr. Hughes
denying in a trembling troubled state, still would not swear, the Soldier
drew his sword, and Mr. Hughes went mad thereupon. They come out of the town,
fain themselves Roundheads, get what will be had by fair or foul means, take
persons or goods, that may be serviceable to them, and fire the rest, and these
things and many more of this nature, are acted daily before the eyes of
hundreds, against hundreds of families to the undoing and the disinhabiting of
above six hundred Families, in the suburbs of that woeful Town, for so many
were given in to be ruinated, at the least, besides many thousands in the
Suburbs and Country dis-inabled, yea and in the City damnified and having
Estates there, are almost undone, by loss already sustained in that place; and
the Lord knows when the fire of his wrath and their burnings shall cease too;
As for those outrages committed in the Town, we have them but by credible
report, yet because diverse agree in the reports we think fit to name them, but
only thus; the Inhabitants are much straightned in their provisions, as it may
be a two penny or three penny loaf in a family of course bread per diem, and if
any complain for want, they are checked, and told that they must not complain
until horse flesh be worth nine pence or ten pence the pound, and reply was
made by one, hearing awoman complain for food for her self and her child, God
dam me, That child would make a great deal of good meat well boyld.

First, Much filthiness might be named of women, attempted some, forced
others, shreeking, crying, flying, and sometime scapeing; sending their
husbands out forcibly, and fall on their wives in their absence: Secondly, all
persons and sorts, seem to be tainted till it come to their Ministers, one of
them breaking three or four locks to come by a woman, and she no way to escape
but by shriking and crying out, nay Sir Charles Lucas himself had ensnared a
woman, if my Lord Goring had not come in, and called upon him to go to one of
the Forts, as a fitter place for him then there, for said he your Gunner is
proved false, he went away, and the woman came away, fled over the wall, told
her neighbor this story, and that if this providence had not happily fallen
in, she could not have escaped his hands, but with dishonesty or death: the
most memorable is the answer of a gentlewoman, who if she did not yield had a
Pistol set to her breast, yes says she, I shall cheerfully embrace your
Pistol and my death, but not you. Thirdly, as for violence in their temporal
rights, their guests are Masters and Masters of Families in all they have are
their slaves, and are at their disposing, so that if any stir, presently a word
and a slash, nay inhumanely a maid seeing some injury offered to the person and
goods of her Mistress, in defending her Mistress, has her fingers tied, light
matches put to them, and burnt her fingers to the stumps, All which and more if
we took delight in this element, are daily acted, beside those heavy trialls
laid on women with child, and others newly brought a bed, they and their
children and all they have driven into some field or backsides, or streets,
where they ly open to bullets to dash them and theirs in pieces every moment.
How sad a spectacle it is to see goodly buildings, well furnished houses, and
whole streets to be nothing but ruinous heaps of ashes, and both poor and
rich now brought almost to the same woeful state, to see fick people scarce
able to stand upon their legs, and women, some presently upon their delivery,
some ready to be delivered, Infants in their Mothers lappes, and some hanging
on their Mothers breasts, all turned out of harbor, and left helpless to lie
on the cold ground; to see poor and rich men late of good quality now equal
to the meanest, toyling and sweating in carrying some mean bed or other away,
or some inconsiderable household stuff out of the burning, all of them with
wailing, weeping, ghastly countenances, and meager thin faces, shifting and
flying in distraction of mind they scarce know whither, to hear the lamentable
cries of people, coming from the Town, old, young, women, children, poor and
rich, lying before, and crying unto the Generals guards to pass, and
bewailing their folly in entertaining such guests, as now will be sure to
provide for themselves, and leave the Town, People, especially (if there be the
face of Religion, or civility on them) to shift for themselves; we profess we
have heard some soldiers in their returns from the Guards, rejoicing to be
out of the mournful ditty of people, desiring to pass the Guards, but not
permitted, because then the soldiers would easily drive away the Inhabitants
from their own houses, and support themselves the longer by that provision
which is left.

The Lord make their hearts sensible of that smart, whose hands are so filled
with cruelty to others; for God knows, the worst we wish to those that are our
adversaries, if not implacable foes to Jesus Christ, is, that God would change
their minds, humble their hearts, and save their souls from (the certain
issue of this their rage) wrath to come: The Lord also bring the hearts of that
people in and about the Town, to a true sight of the cause wherefore this
great wrath is come upon them; we judge not, but remember 2 Chr. 36.16. that
amidst the many other provocations, that the immediate cause of Jerusalems
ruin, was mocking the Messengers of God, despising his words, and misusing his
Prophets, till there was no remedy: And the good Lord work all these sad
providence upon all our hearts, who are the grieved and woeful spectators of
the miseries they feel, and we fear, because we do deserve as well as they:
And now O you in the Town, whose designs we had great expectation of, and
whose manifestors rendered you formerly to us the moderate party of the
Kingdom, formerly under a far other notion then those flames and desolations
discover now; give us leave to bespeake you, and give us to understand, what
was the cause of your flying into a walled Town, when (if your cause, courage,
and consciences had been right, as we then hoped) you might have fought it out
with the choice of the advantage of your own ground, and being then as many as
your enemies, have trusted God the just Judge of heaven and earth for success?
why did you suffer your selves to be coopt up by those you seem (in your
answers unto) so much to contemn, and never but once in almost two months to
look out upon your besiegers, and then by a great party upon terms of
advantage taken, make a poor flourish, run in again with loss and shame, from
an unprovided party, not past a quarter so many as your selves? why do you use
that poor Town so hardly, and your enemies so gently, as if you would now tell
us your cause or courage were not so good as before, or else only intended to
be first revenged of your sad friends in Colchester for entertaining you, and
then bury the Town it self in the same grave that you have dig'd for the
Suburbs. Ah sirs! why did you kindle those flames which have (as a Limbeck set
up in sad Colchester) drarned the eves of all the moderate party of the
Kingdom, by this de^p^nkindn^ss^. Perhaps you will say your own desire
enforced it; wh^t? w^^ you enforced before ever you had tried your own
strength? who would have had a hand in that which the child that is yet unborne
shall curse the hand that acted it to all posterity? or if your fear did
enforce you to make such a distance 'twixt your walls and the remaining houses;
how did you overcome your fears to steal cut to burn and ruin houses and
persons, three or four days after the great burning was by Gods mercy to our
admiration quenched, as if you took delight to exercise your cruelty on the
houses of them you had first undone without necessity? Ah unkind friends, whom
we are grieved to complain against, and yet enforced to be angry with for such
bitterness and unnatural dealings, we had hope that you would (like those old
Ministers of our sick State) first have brought a necessity upon your selves
for want of courage, and then made that necessity to usher in your great
discurtesie to your best friends; how can you look us (moderate men, well
affected to you heretofore) in the face, when you have made us blush and hide
our heads as we hear these things? how can we speak or dee for you, who have
undone your selves and us in undoing your best friends? why did you and we
complain here to fore against the Armies violence, when your deeds justify
them, and strengthen their hands to take revenge on all that have sided with
you? if the eye of the moderate part of the Kingdom looked on them as enemies,
can they look on you now as friends? if an odium in the Kingdom and City was
grown upon the Army, does not this course take it off of them and set it upon
you? if they had done more evil then this, and less service then you have
done for the King and Kingdoms deliverance, they might expect heavens just
guerdon in due time; but what good can be in these^ cruelties or desolations,
or what wages can be the crown thereof in the issue? they were low in the
kingdoms eye, it is true, but you tell the Kingdom now, and let them see in these
flames a necessity of their service, if they will not make you their masters:
Many of them are blamed (perhaps much blamable) for their opinions in points of
religion, but are your judgments sound whilst these spots are found in your
present conversation? Some were offended for some of them arrogating to
themselves to be our saviors, and do not you think more will be angry with you
for being our destroyers?

How should you think, and what fools we think now were we to imagine, that
they should by Almighty God be used for our King and Kingdoms salvation, that
could scarce many of them to our knowledge (until under your command) keep
themselves from the gallows? and that they should set the people free, who
were well known to be more willing to prey upon, then to pray for, or act for
the people of Englands freedom? What honor did our prudent King see you could
do him, who has not given you so much as Commission to act by? what honor
could you add to his crown, by putting fire stones in stead of pearls
thereinto, and enforcing as we now see loyal subjects, to take it away for a
time from his use, lest it should be prostrate to your violence? what strength
can be contributed to us by your infirmities? or what stability be added to our
Religion, his throne or our tottering state, by such wretched, ignoble, and
weak props, as we now fear the hand of heaven never cut out for that end? We
profess our selves so filled with astonishment, that we find it true, durum
esse satyram non seribere; and amongst other things we much admire at four
things. First, That Cholchester should entertain a party whilst pursued by an
enemy, bring war to their doors, and might have easily been seen neither able
to defend themselves against their friends nor enemies. Secondly, That the
Kings party should be so weak as to think, that because the Parliaments Army,
as some judged, looked to be their Masters, therefore they would give themselves
up into their hands to become professed slaves. Thirdly, That Presbyterians and
Independents should endanger to lose the substance of Religion for the shadow
of a name, and in making out a platform of government, upon which the devil
has mounted so many Ordinances of men, or rather engines of the devil
(divisions we mean) as threaten not only the battery, but the demolishment also
of the strongest holds of truth and true love, which Jesus Christ by grace has
fortified the hearts of believers his saints by. Fourthly, That the City, who
must needs aim at two things chiefly, the advancement of their honor, peace,
and safety, and the ending of these broiles 'twixt King and people, by parley
rather then victory, lest he that conquers finding his adversaries purse empty,
should at last make himself amends out of their treasures; that they should
not as much labor to preserve Gods interests as their own, to preserve the
Parliament as the King, and to avoid tumults amongst themselves, rather then to
take sides one against another, thereby to make the flame of the Kingdom, to
seize on the metropolis of the Kingdom, which God prevent for his mercies sake.

The Church it is clear mist it, when her Fathers turned Tyrants and robbed her
children of their bread, and her Nurses became step-dames to rule in the
Fathers house at their pleasure, and turn the best and quietest children out of
his doors; and now God has taken away their power, and ceased their hatred,
are not our infirmities, and the childrens want of love found as dangerous
prognostics of Gods dishonor, and our ruin now as before?

The King mist it, he denies not in many things, which he was ill advised unto
by former bad Ministers of State, who when questioned, had nothing to fly to
but the Kings power, to cover those infirmities of theirs, a thing therefore
inexcuseable, because it has so mixed infirmity with power, that ever since
that, which properly was and is power, is made subject to be questioned to be
infirmity; and are all Ministers of State now better principled? or all that
are better principled rightly in order to pious and prudent ends, rightly acted
now? The Parliament mist it we think, when they suffered too much of the old
frame in Church and Commonwealth to be pulled down at once, before a new
Platform (far easier then (we think) to have been contrived then now) was
provided; and shall any be so bad Members now as to conclude, because they did
not then what they could, being mistaken in the mixture of time for the
fitness thereof, that therefore they will never do us any good, as some
(striving to fell the bough of the subjects privilege, whereon they themselves
do also stand) do affirm, and so weakly conclude, because the Parliament did
not then that good which they have perhaps unduely hoped, therefore they will
strive to undo it, and themselves against that which they in honesty have
covenanted should see performed. The Army say some mist it in bringing on the
sword to enterfeer with the Counsels of the Kingdom; but have they not as
conscientiously submitted, are they not not now in midst of many
discouragements diligently employed? and if their necks where on the block for
that fault, if it be concluded to be a fault, shall all their former good
services be forgotten, and that never be remitted? the City was in fault (many
affirm) at first, and now at last, for striving both times by tumults to
disturb the Kingdoms Counsels; and in so full a body it is no wonder if there
be many bad humors, if once stirred, dangerous tumults and swellings. But have
they been always well used, has not the Kingdom needed their purses and been
supplied? come come; he that has money must have friends, or else our friends
may be to seek when we have need of them and money too; away away, we say, with
all these particular accusations and exceptions one against another, and all
those apologies, defenses, and justifications of our selves. We must live
together, O let us love one another, let the strong bear with the weak, and
the weak not despise the strong; let the aged instruct the young, and the
young honor the aged; the poor give respect to the rich, and the rich love and
relieve the poor; the Minister more care for the slock then the fleece; and the
labourer not be denied his, nor reverence due for his work sake; let Gentlemen
keep hospitality for their poor neighbors, and poor neighbors give them that
honor that may encourage them to dwell amongst them; let all strive to give
encouragement to the husbandmans labor who provides bread, to the shepherds
vigilance who provides clothing, the Scamans hazzards who brings in wealth, the
Tradesmans industry who improves our commodities, the Merchants care who seeds
our treasures, and in a word, to every man's serviceablenesse to the whole body
politic: Let the Country maintain the Parliaments privileges, the
Parliament defend the Countries liberties; let both and all support the honor
of the King, and the King strive to secure and defend them both, and all both
King and people lift up the great interest of Kingdoms, the Gospel servants
and Ordinances of Jesus Christ: Let every one in his place endeavor to do his
own duty, every man sweep his own door, and throw the first stone at his
brother who can find himself innocent we have al of us many infi^mities the
Lord cover them, all of us wandering from the way, let us pity one another,
help one another, advise one another, comfort one another, and pray one for
another. And

Let that man suspect he carries within his breast a heart of stone, that he
has no English blood within his veins, and that he has not remaining so much
as the common affections of a Christian, but has lost all his bowels, who has
no compassion, compunction, and affliction of soul, for the mournful,
disconsolate, desolate state of mistaken, misled, misused, dolorous, dying and
undone Colchester.

FINIS.

