GODS WISDOM JUSTIFIED, AND MAN'S FOLLY CONDEMNED, Touching all manner of
Outward Providential Administrations, IN A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable
House of COMMONS, Ian. 31. 1648.

By John Cardell.

Matthew. 11.19. Wisdom is justified of her children. LONDON: Printed by John
Field for Henry Cripps, and are to be sold in Popes-head-Alley. 1649.

HONORATISSIMO CELEBER RIMO QUE SENATUI DOMUI COMMUNIUM IN SALUTEM REI-PUBLICAE
ANGLICANAE FOELICITER IN PARLIAMENTO CONGREGATAE.
Concionem hanc suam Publica Jejunii solennitate nuper habitam, Exile quidem
and perexiguunt, obedientiae tamen suae and observantiae Testimonium, D.D.D.

JOHAN: CARDELL.

Die Mercurii, 31 Ianuarii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Millington do give
the Thanks of this House to Mr. Cardell, for his great pains in his Sermon
preached before this House this day; and that he be desired to print his
Sermon, wherein he is to have the like privilege of printing it, as others in
like kind have usually had.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parl. Dom. Com.

GODS WISDOM JUSTIFIED, AND MAN'S FOLLY CONDEMNED, Touching all manner of
outward Providential Administrations: In a Sermon Preached at the late Fast
before the Commons House of PARLIAMENT.
PSALM. 73.21, 22, 23. 21 Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my
reins.

22 So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.

23 Nevertheless, I am continually with thee: thou have holden me by my right
hand.


THis Psalm ( De Psalmi authore non auxte disputo, quanquam mihi verisimile
est, quia ejus canen di Provincia mandata fuerit ipsi Asaph, Nomen ejus Poni,
praeterito Davidis nomine, sicuti res per se notae saepe taceri solent. Calv.
in Loc.
composed by David for Asaph) contains a Declaration of David's being under a
very sore and grievous Temptation; together with the way or means of his
deliverance from that Temptation.

David tempted, and upon what ground.
The Temptation it self arose from the great Prosperity that he saw amongst
wicked men; for so he says at the 3. ver. I was envious at the foolish, when I
saw the prosperity of the wicked: for there are no bands in their death; but
their strength is firm: They are not in trouble, as other men; neither are they
plagued like other men, etc. v. 4, 5.

The greatness and danger of the Temptation.
Upon this occasion he was so mightily perplexed and troubled, and so exceeding
hard put to it, that he was even almost quite lost: My feet were almost gone,
says he, Ver. 2.
my footsteps had well-nigh slipped; I was even ready to say, Ver. 13.
Verily, I have cleansed my heart in vain. and washed my hands in innocence.
This was the sore Temptation that the Psalmist was here under.

The way of his deliverance from the Temptation, two ways propounded.
The way or means whereby he did recover himself from under this Temptation,
that is here propounded, or set down two ways; 1. More generally, and then more
particularly.

1. More generally, ver. 16, 17.
More generally in the 16 and 17 verses; (...) I thought to know this, etc. that
is, when I tho^^^ to out wrestle this Temptation, to unfold this mystery,
concerning the prosperity of the wicked, and the adversity of the godly, by my
own strength, I could not do it, says he, It was too painful for me, until I
went into the Sanctuary of God; and then I clearly saw the end of these men,
and how God is pleased to set them for a while in slippery places, etc. This he
lays down in the general.

2. More particularly in the* Text.
But then in the words of the Text, he tells us more particularly of his
Trouble, and of the way or means whereby he came to relieve himself; Thus my
heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins: So foolish was I, and
ignorant; I was as a beast before thee: Nevertheless, I am continually with
thee; thou have holden me by my right hand.

In which words you have three things notable: Wherein three parts.
1. David's trouble. 2. The ground of his trouble: and 3. The relief that he had
against his trouble.


His trouble in the first words of the Text, 1. David's trouble.
Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins.

The ground of his trouble in the next words, 2. The ground of his trouble.
So foolish was I, and ignorant; I was as a beast before thee.

And then the relief that he had against his trouble, 3. His relief against it.
that follows in the last words, Nevertheless, I am continually with thee; thou
have holden me by my right hand.

To begin first with the trouble that was here upon (...) spirit, My heart was
grieved, says he, 1. Of David's trouble, together with that which did at the
first occasion it.
and I was pricked in my reins: But upon what occasion? What was it that
troubled him on this manner, but his poring too much upon the outward prosperity
of wicked men? And from thence ye may observe,

As here ye see, that which troubled the spirit of David, and that went to the
very heart of him; that which pricked him in his reins, it was not any inward
trouble about his own estate and condition, or any thing that did any way
respect, the good of his soul; but it was something from without that did it:
The outward Prosperity of wicked men was that which dazzled his eyes, and that
which occasioned all this trouble to him.

this Use of it, and so proceed unto that which follows, as that which I mainly
intend.

Because we are so apt to be ensnared by outward worldly objects, therefore we
should take heed of giving our selves too much liberty that way, to gaze upon
every vain foolish object that presents it self unto us.

Especially our care should be, to keep our hearts and our affections at a due
distance from the things of the world; Psalm. 62.10. Abraham Dives, Dives Job,
David Dives, and quid Abraham beatius? Quid Job fortius? Quid David sanctius?
Chry. fol. Sermon. 28.
and not think our selves ever the better, because we have them, or ever the
worse, because we want them, by reason of that extreme vanity or emptiness that
is in them.

Its a dangerous thing to plod too much, to pore (...) vehemently upon earthly
things: How many men have been undone that way, by looking too much after
worldly Profits, and worldly Pleasures, and worldly Preferments, and by
fantastical imaginations of a greater Happiness in these things, then is to be
found in them?

Ye see David here, a choice man, a man of an excellent spirit, 1 Samuel 13.15.
the man after Gods own heart, when once he was engaged upon this study, what
ado he had to wind himself off again; and though he did get off at the last,
yet ye see how near he was to a fall, what a deal of trouble it cost him, and
what a mighty storm it brought upon his spirit, before he could get off:
Therefore I say, Let us be sure never to meddle, never to engage upon earthly
studies and contemplations, without being sufficiently fenced and armed
aforehand, with very Spiritual and heavenly considerations. And thus much
briefly concerning David's trouble here, together with that which did at the
first occasion it, namely, The outward Prosperity of wicked men.

From this remote cause of his trouble, The nearest cause of David's trouble.
let us in the next place come to consider of that which the Text here mentions
as the nearest cause of it; Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my
reins: So foolish was I, and ignorant; I was as a beast before thee. Ye see
David here lays himself very low before the Lord, Note.
and so have the servants of God been always wont to do, upon the discovery of
their failings: But I pass that also. And from David's acknowledgement here of
his own ignorance, and folly, and bruitishness, to have been the cause of all
that trouble that was upon his spirit, you may observe from thence in the next
place,

And therefore David lays all the blame upon himself here, he does not any way
accuse God, Clear from the Text.
or charge him foolishly, as the manner of too many is, Job. 1.23.
in such like cases; but he does accuse himself, and condemn himself of too
much ignorance, and folly, and weakness, that he should be so mightily puzzled,
and so excessively troubled about such a poor thing as this, The outward
Prosperity of ungodly men: And it must needs be so, that it is nothing else,
but our own ignorance, and folly, that troubles us in cases of difficulty about
Providential Administrations.

Because we may be sure of this, The reason of it.
That God cannot be unmindeful of his Covenant with, or of his several Promises
and Engagements unto his own People: This is as sure, as that which is most
sure, and as clear, as that which is most clear, That God will certainly order
all the great Affairs of the world in that way, which may chiefly tend unto the
advancement of his own Glory, Prove. 16.4. Romans 8.28.
and the good of his own People; and therefore though this present Temptation
here had cast David into a very sad distemper, and bereaved him for a while of
his right understanding, yet as soon as ever he had recovered himself again, he
presently starts up, and the first words he speaks are these, Yet God is good
to Israel, Verse 1.
and to such as are of a clean heart before him; as if he should have said,
Though I in my foolish distemper was apt to think otherwise, and to speak
otherwise; though I was ready to say, That God dealt hardly with his own
People, in keeping them low, and in setting up the right hand of their
Adversaries; yet, Now that I am come to my self again, and, Now that I have
been in the Sanctuary of God, to be taught there, and to be instructed there,
now I perceive, That this may be done without any the least impeachment or
violation of Heavenly goodness: And so from diverse other instances, and by
diverse other Arguments, I might easily make it evident, That nothing in God, or
from God, can justly occasion any trouble or grief of heart to those that are
his People.

Ten several Cases, wherein our own ignorance and folly discovers it self about
Providential Administrations.
But yet notwithstanding there are ten special Cases, wherein our own ignorance
and folly does either cause miscarriages, or else groundlesly occasion very
much sorrow, and trouble, and grief of heart unto us about Divine and Heavenly
Dispensations.

Case of outward Prosperity, we will begin with that first, Of outward
prosperity propounded. Job 10.3. and 29.6.
because that is the Case of the Text here. When we see God at any time shining
upon the Councels of the wicked, and washing their steps with butter, as Job
speaks of himself; when we see God casting a great deal of Wealth, and Honor,
and secular Preferment upon them, and in the mean time denying such things unto
his own People, this we are apt to stumble at, and to be offended by reason of
it, and to think that God is herein more kind to others, and more indulgent
over them, then over his own People. David's Case here
This was the ground of David's trouble here in this Psalm; at the 12 ver. V. 12.
The ungodly they prosper in the world, and they increase in riches: They are
not in trouble, as other men; V. 5.
neither are they plagued like other men: But says he, As for my part, all the
day long have I been plagued, V. 13.
and chastened every morning; and thereupon he was even ready to say, the words
were at his tongues end, and he had much ado to refrain from saying, That he
had cleansed his heart in vain, and washed his hands in innocence.

But now it is merely our own ignorance and folly that causes us thus to
misconstrue these dealings and dispensations of the Almighty. For I pray
consider, Resolved.
is it any prejudice to Believers, that God keeps them low in this world,
purposely to wean them from it, and to fit them thereby for a better world? Or
is it any privilege to others, to be put into large Pastures here below, on
purpose to be fitted, and fatted thereby for the day of slaughter and
destruction? Ioh 21.30.
Consider of it, and then tell us whether the former be any prejudice to Saints,
or the latter any privilege to sinners.

Besides, we know that a little in love (from God especially) is better then a
great deal in wrath, and in anger; Artabazus apud Xenophon:
as he said in the Story, That the Kiss the King gave to another, was better
then the Golden Cup that he gave to him: And as we know that a small quantity of
Silver, is better then a far greater quantity of Copper, or Brass, or Iron; So
says the Psalmist, even A little that a righteous man has, Plus percipit boni
justus unicus, quam omnes simul improbi, ex cunctis facultatibus suis. Iun. in
Loc. Justus facultatibus exiguis contentus, faelicior est improbo ditissimo.
Vat.
it is better then the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16.

Case wherein our own ignorance and folly discovers it self, Of Inequality.
and troubles us, and causes us to be much offended, it is in case of
disproportion, Prop.
or very much inequality: As when we see the Adversaries of Judah to be many,
very numerous and many, Isa. 11.13.
Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, 9.21.
but both against Judah; When we see whole multitudes plotting, and combining
against a few, and those multitudes appearing in themselves, and in outward
respects, to be far bigger, and broader, and wiser, and stronger, then such as
do withstand them; When we see a multitude of Lions, as it were, intending
themselves against a few silly Lambs, this frequently causes fears, and
faintings, and despondencies, and many miscarriages in the world.

Res.
But this also discovers too much weakness, and folly, and incogitancy; for they
that have God with them, although they be never so few, they can never be too
few: for its all one with God to save with many, or with those that have no
might; 2 Chro. 14.11.
and he once complained in Gideons case, Judge. 7.2. Etiam cum vincitur multis
militibus victoria est a Deo: At id non ita fit perspicuum sicuti quando cum
PARVA MANU hosts Profligantur: Pet. Mart. in Loc.
That there were too many for him to give Israel the day; but he never
complains that he has too few: God can never be at a loss, or any loser that
way: for the less of the creature, the more of himself still in all great
enterprises, whose Grace is sufficient for us, and who delights to show forth
his own great Power, in our great weakness; My Grace (says he to Paul) is
sufficient for thee; for my power is made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9.

Another Case, wherein our own ignorance and folly discovers it self, and
troubles us, and is apt to cause miscarriages, it is in case of some very great
Extremity: Of some great extremity.
Prop.
As when Pharaoh had gotten the poor Israelites at that mighty advantage, that
they had nothing but the Red Sea before them, Animo and corpore anxii propter
hostem propinquum ejularunt potius quam invocarunt fide. Iun. in Loc.
and him and his Host behind them, then they began to be very much afraid, and
to cry out unto God, and to say unto Moses, Because there were no Graves in
Egypt, have thou taken us away, to dye in the wilderness? Wherefore have thou
dealt thus with us? It had been better for us to serve the Egyptians, etc.
Exodus 14.11, 12.

But now this also bewrays too much Ignorance and folly amongst us, too much
weakness a great deal, Res. Murmur adversus Deum, non excusatur periculis
imminentibus ubi potissimum Divinae Bonitatis memoria vigere debcat. Muscul. in
Psalm. 106. Genesis 22.14.
to be inordinately fearful in case of any great extremity; for God by his
Providence brings his People into straits, and difficulties and dangers, on
purpose many times to take occasion from thence to magnify his own great
Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness toward them in their Deliverance. Saints
extremities are Gods opportunities, and in the Mount of Straits will he be
seen. And evermore ye shall observe amongst them among the People of God, Note.
That when there is but A little danger, then there is but A little Deliverance,
and when there is A great danger, then there is A great deliverance in the womb
of that danger: And God has more ways then one to save his People by, he can
do it either by means, or without means, or above means, or contrary to means,
as ye have been often taught and told.

Another Case wherein our own ignorance and folly discovers it self, Of very
much unworthiness. Prop.
and troubles us, it is in case of very much unworthiness felt and apprehended
by us. Thus many poor creatures reason against themselves, and think, That
Mercy belongs not to them, That Free Grace cannot save them, because of that
infinite unspeakable vileness that they are now experimentally made acquainted
withal: And this also causes much diffidence in other respects, amongst many,
when they have prayed for mercies, they know not how to believe that ever they
shall receive those mercies, because of that infinite disproportion that they
find, between the great mercies of God, and their own present temper, of very
much unworthiness.

Res.
But here also we are to note, That although it be very good, and very necessary
for people to be sensible of, and experimentally acquainted with, their own
great unworthiness, yet this is but a very weak pretense; yea, to say the
truth, it is but a very ignorant plea against the workings of God, for the good
of his People: For when God has a full intention to work, and to save, or to
do any great thing for his People, it is not any unworthiness of theirs that
can possibly disappoint, intercept or hinder him. Neither is God any way moved
to pity, or to show mercy by any such matter, as the creatures worthiness,
which indeed is not; or if it were, Etiam in meritis nostris nulla fiducia
collacanda, quia nulla plane sunt, proprie loquendo. Polan. Syntag. Theol. l.
9. c. 8. Gratia non est Gratia, nisi sit omni modo gratuita. Solus Christus pro
nobis suscepit fine malis meritis paenam, ut nos per illum sinc bonis meritis
consequerentur gratiam. Aug. contr. 2. Epist. Pelag. l. 4. c. 4.
yet would it prove too weak a Loadstone to attract or draw the infinite love
of Almighty God toward it; and therefore is the Scripture very clear for this,
That whatever God does for his People in a way of love, he does it freely; and
nothing more free then his Grace: I will, says he, heal their backslidings,
loving them freely, Hos. 14.4. And not for your sakes do I this, be it known
unto you, says God: And therefore whatever my ways are, in a way of loving
kindeness and tender mercy toward you, yet still be ashamed and confounded for
your own ways, O house of Israel, Ezekiel. 36.32.

Another Case, wherein our own ignorance and folly will be stirring to trouble
us, and to cause miscarriages, it is in case of aggravated sinfulness: Of
aggravated sinfulness. Prop.
As now, that a person, or a people should provoke God to the very day, to the
very time and hour of their deliverance; nay, after he has saved them, and
delivered them over and over, and done very great things for them, that still
they should go on to provoke him publicly, privately, secretly, variously,
frequently, and that God should still go on to do good to such a person, or to
such a people, and complete their deliverances for them; This is it that
staggers the knowledge, and the belief of many.

But for the stating of this also, to say indeed, Res.
That God might justly not save, or not deliver such a person, or such a people
any more, that have thus highly provoked him; to say, Judge. 10.13. Psalm. 95.11.
Heb. 3.11.
That he might justly swear in his wrath against them, That they shall never
enter into his rest, in regard of their own sinfulness and vileness, that is
safe enough.

But to say that God cannot, or that God will un save such a person, or such a
people, that savors of too much ignorance, Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded, Grace
did much more abound ((...)) superabundavit. Bez. magis exuberavit: Eras.
Bonitas invicti non vincitur, and infinita miscricordia non finitur. Fulgent.
Ais mihi; peccata peccatis adjeci, and qui jam cadens erectus fucram iterum
cecidi: and conscientiae meae vulnus jam pene curatum exulceratione recruduit:
Quid trepidas? Quid vercris? Idem semper est qui ante curavit medicum non
mutabis: experimentum adjutorii non expectat, qui tanguoris tui novit originem:
Unde dudum curatus fueras, inde iterum curaberis. Ambros. lib. de Paenit. cap.
12. ad init.

Cogita scintillam si in mare ceciderit, non poterit stare, aut apparere*
Quantum scintilla ad mare se habet tantum hominis malitia, ad Dei clementiam
imo non tantum modo, sed and long supra: Nam and Pelagus tametsi magnum sit
mensuram recipit: Dei vero elementia [sive miscricordia] mensuram non habet.
Chrysostom. de Paenit. Hom. 3.


and that they know not the Scriptures that reason on this manner; for this of
old was just the Israelites case, they had sufficiently provoked God, before
they were delivered out of Egypt, and after they were delivered too, when
Pharaoh pursued them to the very brink of the Red Sea, and put them to that
great hazard there, which we spoke of before to you; just there, at the very
brink of the Red Sea, when God was about, and where he was about, to work out
the greatest deliverance for them; Then, and There did they provoke him to his
very face, and sin most desperately against him. So the Psalmist confesses,
Psalm. 106.7, 8 Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered
not the multitude of thy mercies; But provoked him at the Sea, even at the Red
Sea: And what then? what followed thereupon? Did not God drown them in the
Red Sea, for this high provocation of theirs? No, says the Psalmist, though
they provoked him at the Sea, and even at the Red Sea, yet Nevertheless he
saved them for his Names sake, that he might make his mighty power to be known:
He rebuked the Red Sea also, and it was dried up, and he led them through the
depths, as through the wilderness.

Another Case, wherein our own ignorance and folly discovers it self, and
troubles us, it is in case of outward meanness: Of outward meanness. Prop.
As when we see God passing by those Instruments, that to us seem most likely,
and most worthy to be used, and making choice of other Instruments, that to us
seem most unlikely, and unworthy to be used, how apt are men in such cases to
despise the day of small things? To scorn, Zech. 4, 10.
reproach, and calumniate the great works of God in the world, upon this very
ground, because maintained, and upheld, and carried on, by such Instruments as
are to them so despicable, that they know not how either to think well of them,
or to speak well of them; at this very day this lies as a very great stumbling
block in the way of many.

But let us herein also be ashamed of our own ignorance and folly, and know,
Res. Tunc vero potissunum clucet Dei Potentia illa omnem captum humanum
superans, cum vel agit ipse quidpiam (...), vel infirmissimis instrumentis ad
res maximas perficiendas utitur. Beza in 2 Cor. 12.9.
That God (the wise and the holy God) he delights to bring great and mighty
things to pass, by very unworthy, and very unlikely Instruments, and such as
men despise, to the end, that his own Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, and
Glory, may be so much the more conspicuous, and apparently visible in what he
does.

And therefore, O the severity, the great severity of that passage or sentence
from the Apostles own mouth, 1 Cor. 1.26. Ye see your calling, Brethren, how
that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called: But, says he, God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to
confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to
confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things
which are despised has God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to
naught the things which are, Quidnam eaquae non sunt appellat? eos scilicet qui
nibil se arbitrantur propter nimian eorum exiguitatem. Sic incredibilem
significavit (...) cum per eos qui nihil esse videbantur, magnos subigeret,
Chrysostom. in loc.
that no flesh might glory in his presence, but that he that glories might
henceforth learn to glory in that Christ alone, who of God is made and
appointed to be, even All in All unto us ( Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption) as it there follows in the conclusion of that
Chapter.

Another Case, wherein our own ignorance and folly is very apt to trouble us,
and to cause miscarriages, it is in case of some carnal disappointment of ours:
Of Carnal disappointment. Prop.
As thus, when God is pleased at any time to stir up promising Instruments to
do us good, men that we hope will act for us, and be a means to deliver us from
all manner of base bondages, and unworthy slaveries whatsoever; in such a case,
how apt are we to Idolize such men, and such means, and to put more confidence
in them, then in that God that uses them, and that imploys them, and without
whom, they can of themselves do nothing.

And when we have leaned so hard upon these Staves, that they begin to crack,
and break under the weight of our Carnal Confidence, then, when The Staff of
Beauty and Bands is thus far broken, Zech. 11.10, 11
our hearts begin to flag and to fail us, and the Staff of our Hopes that
breaks too; and so foolish are we, and ignorant, as to conclude, That because
we have not deliverance in this way, that therefore we shall never have it in
any other way; or because God comes not just at our time, therefore we are apt
to conclude, That he will also fail us at his own time, which he never does,
and which is evermore the best time. Gods time the best time.


Res.
And therefore our wisdom would be, patiently and quietly to wait upon God, and
not to limit or confine him, either unto Times, or unto Means, Isa. 30.1^. Lam.
3.26. Hab. 2.3. Heb. 10.36, 37 Psalm. 27.14. Romans 4.18.
but to leave it wholly unto himself, and unto his own free disposition, to do
us good both when he pleases, and how he pleases, and by what means he pleases;
and so we shall both free our selves from a great deal of trouble, and give God
the Glory that is due unto his Name, upon all such like occasions.

Another Case, wherein our own ignorance and folly is very apt to trouble us,
and to cause miscarriages, it is in case of Humane Improbability: Of Humane
improbability.
Very apt we are to measure God by our selves, Prop.
and to conclude, That because we cannot do such a thing our selves, nor the
Creatures for us, that therefore God cannot do it neither: I might give you
many Instances for this; Instances of this.


You may see it first in Moses, an eminent Believer, Numb. 11. from the 18 ver.
1. In Moses. Number. 11. v. 18. etc.
and so on; when God had told Moses there, That he would give the People flesh
to eat, not for one day, or two days, or five days, or ten, or twenty days, but
for a whole Month together: Says Moses to God upon this, The people amongst
whom I am are very many, V. 21.
they are no less then Six hundred thousand footmen, and thou have said, I will
give them flesh to eat for a whole month together: But Blessed Lord, says
Moses, How shall this be done? V. 22.
Shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them to suffice them? Or shall all
the fish of the Sea be gathered together for them to suffice them? Here was
unbelief now, and a measuring of Gods power thereby, according to the Creatures
power; a shortning of the Divine power, or a shrivelling up, as it were, of the
Everlasting Arm of God, according to the rate of Humane Improbabilities; as may
appear plainly by the words that follow, And the Lord said unto Moses, V. 23.
Is the Lords hand waxed short? Thou shall see now whether my word shall come
to pass unto thee, or not.

Elisha prophesied that great plenty in the gate of Samaria, 2 King. 7. That
Lord there spoken of, In that great man spoken of, 2 Kings 7.
on whose hand, the King leaned, He answered the man of God, and said, Behold,
if the Lord should make windows in heaven, might this thing be? which thing ye
know did afterward come to pass, and he that questioned it, was trod to death,
because he did not believe it, 2 King. 7.20.

Psalm. 78. Psalm. 78.
Can God furnish a table in the wilderness, say they? Behold, he smote the
stony Rock indeed, and the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed; But
can he give bread also? Can he provide flesh for his people? Thus foolish, and
weak, and ignorant are we, in measuring Gods strength by our own strength, and
Gods power by our own, when left unto our selves.

Res.
Not considering, That what is Impossible with men, is possible with God; Matthew.
19.26.
and that what cannot be done by us, may yet very easily be done by him, who is
not only Potent, but Omnipotent; not only Mighty, but Almighty.

Another Case, wherein our own ignorance and folly discovers it self, it is in
case of outward Impunity: Of outward Impunity. Prop.
Men are apt to imagine, That because Divine Vengeance does not presently seize
upon them, so soon as ever they have offended; because sin and sorrow do not
immediately succeed one any other, take one another by the heel, Genesis 25.26.
as Jacob did Esau, therefore they are apt to think, and to conclude. That they
may still go on to do what they list themselves, and that they never need fear
being called to a Reckoning, or to an Account for any thing: Because sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily, says Solomon, Hoc magistratus
Admonear ne paenam sceleribus Justam and debitam differant, nisi velint terram
scelerum veluti diluvio obrui. Cartwr. in Loc.
therefore the hearts of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil,
Eccles. 8.11.

Whereas Divine Wisdom, Res.
that would teach men otherwise, and make them to understand and know, That
Gods forbearance is no acquittance in case of Impenitency: Quod defertur non
aufertur.
But that he has his times of Reckoning with all men, and those times are
stated too, set, pre determined; and look what one Executioner either cannot
do, or will not do, that another shall do: And therefore, though Agag thought,
That the bitterness of death had been past, when Saul refused to meddle with
him, yet he was deceived, Agag hewed in pieces by Samuel, though spared by
Saul, 1 Samuel 15.
for when Samuel comes to deal with him, he goes roundly to work, and hews him
in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal, 1 Samuel 15.23.

And although Joab and Shimei did both escape unpunished all the days of David,
yet when David drew nigh to his end, he calls for his Son Solomon, that was to
succeed him, and gives him a special charge concerning those two men; Thou have
with thee, says he, two such men, Joab and Shimei, Joab and Shimei cut off by
Solomon, though both unpunished all the days of David, 1 K. 2.
and thou know what kind of men they have been, how Bold they have been,
and how Bitter they have been, and how Bloody they have been, and therefore, do
thou unto them according to thy wisdom, and let not their hoar heads go down to
the grave in peace, 1 Kings 2.

And the Apostle speaks of some whose judgment now for a long time lingers
not, Some under the Gospel whose judgment lingers not, neither does their
perdition slumber.
and whose damnation slumbreth not, 2 Pet. 2.3. that is, It always lies at the
door, It is always awake, and never asleep; yea, he says, that it neither
sleeps nor slambers, but is always in the greatest readiness to come and seize
upon them, whenever God appoints, or gives it a Command to do so.

10 Case. Of Divine Sovereignty.
Tenthly and lastly, Another Case, wherein our own ignorance and folly discovers
it self, and is apt to cause miscarriages, it is in case of Divine Sovereignty:
Prop.
As thus some argue against the very Decrees and eternal purposes of Almighty
God, that would measure every thing that is said to issue from God, Sic de Dei
decretis Philosophantur, ac si exigenda essent haec inscrutabilia, ad rationis
humanae december pedam: Atque hinc istae impactae Calvinistis Blasphemiae illos
quodvis flagitium afonte Bonitatis arcessere: illos Deum Tiberio
truculentiorem, and Diabolo (horrendum dictu) nequiorem efficere. Dr. Pride. de
Abs. Dec. 1: Lect.
by the Line of Humane Reason: what say they, Cast men away by absolute
irrespective Decrees, before ever they had any being, before ever they knew how
to do either good or evil; what a cruel unreasonable thing is that? Thus your
Arminian Doctors are wont to argue in their Writings.

Res. Voluit igitur Deus in hominibus quantum ad aliquos quos praedestinat suam
representare Bonitatem per modum miscricordiae parcendo, Et quantum ad aliquos
quos reprobat, per modum justitiae puniendo, and haec est ratio quare quosdam
eligit, and quosdam reprobat and quare hos elegit in gloriam, and illos
reprobavit, non habet rationem, nisi divinam voluntatem. Aquin. 1 part. Sum.
Theol. Qu. 23. Art. 5. Ita Zanch. de Not* Dei. lib. 5. cap. 2. Whitak. Tom. 1.
oper. p. 693. and Alii.
But foolish vain man, says the Apostle, who art thou that disputest against
God on this manner? shall the thing formed say unto him that formed it, Why have
thou made me thus? Has not God the same power over the creature, that the
Potter has over the clay, to make one vessel to honor, another to dishonor at
his pleasure? Romans 9.20, 21.

And so in Gods disposing of men's outward Estates and conditions, Men not
satisfied with the Divine Sovereignty of God in the disposition of their
outward estates and conditions.
how do they therein also murmr and repine at the Divine Sovereignty of God?

If God give men abundance of outward favors, Peace, and Plenty, and Liberty,
and Prosperity; if he still go on to heap Mercy upon Mercy, and Blessing upon
Blessing, Victory upon Victory, and Deliverance upon Deliverance, then perhaps
he shall have some small Thanks returned him, some Lip-labor service done him,
then it is Bless God and live.

But if God turn the stream, and carry things clean another way, then says Jobs
wife to him, What do thou still retain thine integrity? Job 2.10.
Is it necessary that thou should still wait upon God? No; it is not Bless
God and live then, but Curse God and dye.

Have we not seen a great deal of this wickedness within our selves lately,
among foolish, ignorant, An experiment of it among our selves.
brutish people, vexing, and fretting, and fuming at present Providential
Administrations, and consequently flying in the very face of God himself, for
not ordering things just as they would have him? Has not this been a
predominant piece of folly a long time amongst us, to be discontented at
Instruments, and to neglect the chief Agent, in all our Troubles.

In Matthew. 7.6. Matthew. 7 6. opened.
our Savior there compares graceless persons unto Dogs and Swine, saying, Give
not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast pearls before swine: And truly
they are like unto Dogs and Swine in nothing more, then in respect of
Judgments and Mercies; for when Mercies come, then they are like unto the
Swine, that feeds upon the Acorns, and never looks up to the Tree from whence
they fell; and when Judgments come, they they are like unto the Dog, that
barks, and bites, and snaps at the stone, and never regards the hand that threw
it.

And thus you see how mavelous apt we are to trouble our selves, and in
several Cases of this nature, dangerously to miscarry, through our own
ignorance, and folly, and bruitishness, and not by reason of any the least
defect or fault that is to be found in Divine and Heavenly Dispensations.

God not unrighteous, or any way to be blame, however things frame in the
world. Psalm. 145.17. Zeph. 3.5. Psalm. 92.15.5.4.
For however things frame in the world,, we must still retain this conclusion,
That the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works; a just
God he is, and one that will do no iniquity, neither is there any
unrighteousness in him: There shall no wickedness dwell with him, or so much as
come near him; he is at an infinite distance from all unrighteousness, yea and
he orders All things here below, according to the exactest way of
Righteousness, and Holiness, and Justice, and Wisdom; he is not only
Righteous, and Holy, and Wise, and Merciful, and Faithful in himself, and of
himself; but in those very dealings and Providential Administrations, wherein
men appear to be unrighteous, and unholy, and unwise, and unmerciful, and
unfaithful, yet in those very ways, and actions, Magna laus videlicet Deo, ut
ab informitate se vindicet, forma una esse contentum. Bernard. de consid. l. 5.
c. 7. Nihil in se, nisi se habet. Idem. ibid.
and dealings, God is still the same, he varies not one jot, but is what he
ever was, and what he ever will be still, no variableness with him, nor so much
as any shadow of turning: In the unrighteousness of men, God is righteous; In
the profaneness of men, God is holy; In the follies of men, God is wise; In
the cruelties of men, God is merciful; and In the treacheries of men, God is
faithful.

Nay more, In those very things, wherein men are left unto themselves, Cum
igitur Deus sit universalis provisor totius entis ad ipsius Providentiam
pertinet ut permittat quosdam defectus esse in aliquibus particularibus rebus,
ne impediatur bonum universi perfectum: Si enim omniae mala impedirentur multa
bona deessent universo non enim esset Vita Leonis, si non esset Occisio
Animalium nec esset Patientia Martyrum si non esset Persecutio Tyrannorum.
Aquin. 1 Par. Sum. Theol. Qu. 22. Art. 2.
and permitted to be most unrighteous, and most unholy, and most unwise, and
most unmerciful, and most unfaithful, many times in those very things does the
Righteousness, and the Holiness, and the Wisdom, and the Mercifulness, and the
Faithfulness of God most eminently appear, for the good of his own People;
only so foolish are we, and ignorant, and as so many beasts before the Lord,
in our not being able to discern this: and that is it that grieves our poor
hearts, and that troubles our spirits, and that pricks us in our reins, and
that frequently occasions so many woeful miscarriages, and misdemeanors amongst
us.

Thus much for the Explication of the Truth propounded.

The Application follows. Applicat.


And according to the Nature and Exigence of this Service, I shall apply it
both ways: Ad Populum, To The People. Ad Parliamentum, To The Parliament.


ignorance and folly is really the cause of all that trouble that comes upon
our Spirits, Ad Populum.
concerning all manner of present Providential Administrations, In all cases (of
difficulty especially) Gods wisdom to be admired, and our own folly
acknowledged.
and not any thing either in God, or from God; This then should teach us in all
Cases whatsoever (and especially in difficult cases) still to admire the Wisdom
of God, and to acknowledge our own folly; for that's the proper Character of a
true Believer, to be still abasing himself, and lifting up God; to have high
thoughts concerning God, and good thoughts concerning God, and low mean
thoughts concerning himself; yea, though there be no apparent Reason sometimes
above ground, Inde locum non habent contumacium murmurae querelarum, quia quod
Deus fieri voluit, constat non aliter fieri debuisse quam voluit. Ambros. de
vocat. Gent. lib. 2. cap. 1.
or in open view, for that which God does, yet Wisdom is still justified of her
children; and all that God does must needs be very good, even because he does
it.

And therefore ye see when David had perfectly recovered himself here, and
clearly overcome the Temptation that he was under, he spends all the rest of
the Psalm in abasing himself, and setting up God; I was foolish, says he, and I
was ignorant, and I was as a beast before thee: But yet nevertheless, I am
continually with thee thou have holden me by my right hand; Thou shall guide me
with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory: Whom have I in heaven,
but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee: My flesh and
my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever:
and, It is good for me to draw near unto him, etc. And this may we also do,
look what David here did, the same may we do; it is not only lawful, but
necessary for us, to do the same: we may blame our selves, but we must not
blame our God; we may accuse our selves, but we must not accuse him; we may
utter complaints to God, but why should we mention any complaints against God,
either directly or indirectly?

When ye are sick, or when ye are weak, or when ye are poor, when ye are
wronged, or when ye are oppressed, injuriously dealt with in any kind, ye may
complain to God, that is very lawful; but ye must not complain of God, for
that is very sinful, and indeed unreasonable, for he can do you no wrong: He is
my Rock, says the Psalmist, and there is no unrighteousness in him, Psalm.
92.15. He is and can be no otherwise, then Righteous in all his way, and holy
in all his works: Est autem Deus per suam essentiam bonus sicut and per candem
lux est, ergo sicuti ita est lux ut tenebrae in eo non sint ullae sic ita est
bonus, ut nihil in eo queat esse mali. Zanch. de Not. Dei l. 4. c. 1. These. 4.
As he is so light, that there can be darkness in him, so he is so good, that
there can be no evil in him.

You may observe from hence likewise, That a man seldom or never knows the
bottom of his own heart; he is seldom acquainted with the weakness, the folly,
the ignorance, The Saints advantage by Temptations.
the bruitishness of his own Spirit, till he comes to be tried, and hard put to
it, in one case or another. That hour of Temptation that was here upon David,
that drew forth this humble Confeseion or acknowledgement from him, So foolish
was I, and ignorant, and even as a beast before thee: Those hard Chapters, and
dark Lessons, and obscure Texts, that the People of God meet with, sometimes in
the Word of God, and sometimes in his Works, these things discover to them (and
withal they put them upon admiring) the unconceiveable depth of Gods Wisdom,
and the extreme shallowness of their own wisdom.

And then in the third place, We see here likewise the ingenuity of holy men
formerly, The ingenuity and faithfulness of holy men formerly.
and how faithful they were, not only in keeping a Register themselves, but in
giving us a Register also, even of their failings, which are a very great
advantage to us, if rightly interpreted, in very many Respects; As in this very
particular here that we are now upon, If such a man as David, when he came to
be tempted, In David here.
if he had cause to say, So foolish was I, and ignorant, and even as a beast
before thee: And if such a man as Agur, In Agur, Prove. 30.2, 3.
a man so eminent for wisdom as he was, if he found cause to say, as there he
does, Prove. 30.2, 3. Surely I more brutish then any man, I have not the
understanding of a man; I have neither learned wisdom, neither have I the
knowledge of the holy; I say, if these men found so much fault with themselves,
and if they saw so much defectiveness in themselves, in point of wisdom, then
what may we say of our selves, that are so far short of them? How much more
ought we to be humbled, upon the very same consideration? But I pass that also,
though very considerable by us at all times, and especially now at this time,
wherein we are solemnly met, to humble our selves in the presence of the Lord;
and I do not know any thing that can be mentioned, of a more abasing nature,
then this very Consideration that has now been suggested.

But in the fourth place, We see likewise from hence how far even good men may
sometimes fall short in their present Apprehensions, Godly men may sometimes
fail, and fall short in their apprehensions, concerning Divine and heavenly
Dispensations.
concerning Divine and Heavenly Dispensations: If a man had gone to David here,
before he received satisfaction himself, to have consulted with him, or to have
taken his judgment concerning the estate of the wicked, and the estate of the
godly, in all likelihood he would have given out very dangerous counsel; and
such as Peter gave unto Christ, when he wished him by all means to decline his
sufferings; when Christ spoke of suffering many things, and of being killed,
and raised again the third day, Far be it from thee Lord, says Peter, this
shall not be unto thee, Matthew. 16.22. Mat. 16.22.
How mightily was Peter mistaken in that Case, and David in this, until he went
into the Sanctuary of God? But to leave that also and

In the fifth and last place, since we see clearly from hence, what it is that
troubles us, and that frequently causes us to miscarry, let us therefore
consider of some way, whereby we may get above this ignorance, and folly, and
bruitishness of Spirit, that the Text here speaks of; for certainly could we
but do so, we should thereby ease our Spirits of a great deal of sorrow and
trouble that now they are obnoxious unto, The way to ease our spirits of a
great deal of trouble is to get above our own ignorances.
by reason of these things: what says David in the Text here? My heart was
grieved, and I was pricked in my reins; and then he goes on with this as the
cause of it, So foolish was I, and ignorant.

Now for the avoiding of this amongst us, this ignorance and folly, the only
way is, Ignorance and folly how to be avoided.
to enquire after Wisdom, and to search for Understanding; according to that of
Solomon, Prove. 4.7. Prove. 4.7.
Wisdom is the principal thing, and therefore get wisdom, and with all thy
getting, get understanding. Wisdom moved for upon a double Consideration.


And this I do the rather move for, upon a double Consideration:

First, because of that great defect or want of wisdom, 1 Consid. From that
want of wisdom that has always been in the world.
that both has been and is apparently to be seen in the world: In all times
and ages, a truly wise man has been a very choice piece, a very rare
commodity; Look among the Jews of old, that had the lively Oracles of God
committed to them, and that had more helps, and means, and advantages to make
them truly wise, then all the world besides: and yet it is even admirable to
consider, what a foolish people they were, and even more brutish then the very
bruit creatures: Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner (says God by the Prophet
there) and the Ass his masters crib; Sensus est perspicuus ego, inquit, cos
adoptavi in silios, and feci populum peculiarem and partem meam, ac funiculum
haerelitatis meae, appellavique eos primogenitos: illi autem ne hoc quidem
fecerunt quod bruta faciunt animalia, ut beneficis vinceventur, and
intelligerent Pastorem and Nutritium suum. Hieron. Com. in loc.
but Israel does not know, my people do not consider: And again Jer. 8.6, 7. I
hearkened, and heard, but they spoke not aright; no man repented of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one turned to his course, as the
horse rushes into the battle; yea, the Stork in the heavens knows her
appointed time, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time
of their coming; but my people know not the judgment of the Lord. [Mark,] My
people; if it had been any body else, a man would never have wondered at it, but
that God should say this of his own people, that was very strange.

And in the New Testament, Jam. 3.13. there where the Apostle falls professedly
and expressly upon this point of Wisdom, says he there, Who is a wise man, Iam.
3.13. Vera sapientia, and scientia polleus, ostendat eam operibus honestae and
mansuetae conversationis, tanquam ejus germanis and perpetuis fructibus. N.
Herming. in loc.
and endued with knowledge amongst you? As if he should have said, If there be
such a one to be found amongst you, If ye can furnish me with such a man, let
him now stand forth, and show his face, and let him show out of a good
conversation his works, with meekness of wisdom; But the words do clearly hold
forth thus much unto him that understands them, That it is not easy to meet
with such a man, that is able to show out of a good conversation his works,
with meekness of wisdom.

2 Consid. From the many mistakes that are in the world about wisdom.
Secondly, Though there has been, and is, so great a defect of this wisdom
abroad in the world, yet few men think so; most men think they are wise, and
that their wisdom shall dye with them; and few there be that will own so much
ignorance and folly as David does here assume, or take home to himself; but
even they that are most foolish, would yet be reputed wise. Its a notable
speech to this purpose, that Zophar has in Job, ye must not take offense at
the similitude, because the holy Ghost uses it; Job 11.12. Job 11.12. cap.
says Zophar there, Vain man would be wise, though man be born like the wild
Asses colt; that is, though man by Nature be not only like unto the beasts
that perish, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 49.12, 10.
but like unto the dullest of beasts, the Ass, and the dullest of Asses, the
wild Ass, and the dullest of wild Asses, the wild Asses Colt; yet for all
that vain man would be wise, that is, he would fain be reputed so, though he be
not so. In other cases men and women are content to be reputed as they are;
they that are lame, and they that are blind, and they that are deaf, and they
that are dumb, are willing to bear the burden of these Infirmities, and to be
looked upon as they are: but no man would be reputed, or looked upon as a fool,
every man would be wise, as Erasmus said in a Book that he wrote concerning the
Praise of Folly ( Moriae Encomium, it is called) Male Audit stultitia etiam apud
stultissimos, Folly has an ill name, Erasm. Mor. Encom. ad init.
even among those that are most foolish: And this frequently hinders people
from enquiring after wisdom, even their want of knowing that they want it; and
therefore it was a sage speech of one of the wiser sort among the Heathens,
Puto multo^ potuisse ad sapientiam pervenire nisi putassent se pervenisse. Sen.
de Tranq. An. cap. 1.
That many might have been wise, if they had not thought themselves wise, if
their own Wisdom had not stood in their light; and Professing themselves wise,
they became fools, says the Apostle, Romans 1.22. Now I say, Since there is so
much want of Wisdom, and withal, since there are so many misperswasions in the
world about it, and since the thing is in it self so excellent and so
necessary, that the holy Ghost calls it The principal thing, These
Considerations should stir us up to be so much the more diligent and curious in
our Enquiries after it: How to attain wisdom.
And for the Attainment of it,

content to tread that unsmooth, and unpleasant, and unbeaten path of Wisdom,
which the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 3.18. he speaks of it there, not without
some seeming disadvantage as to his hearers the Corinthians, who had a great
Name for Wisdom, who looked upon themselves, and were looked upon by others, as
a very knowing people; Corinth being a rich opulent City, Vid. Alsted. Chronol.
Vrb. Antiquis. Aul. Gell. Noct. At. lib. 14. c. 6. Itiner. tot. sacr. Script.
by R.B. printed at London, An. 1629.
full of Goods, and full of Gifts, and full of Parts, and full of Pride, (which
things are very seldom or never asunder in such like places) but yet for all
that, says the Apostle to them, in the place aforementioned, Let no man deceive
himself, he means in point of Wisdom; but, If any man among you seems to be
wise, or would be reputed wise, 1 Cor. 3.18.
then here is his Rule, Let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. If thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding: If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid
treasures: Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God. Solomon ye know took this course, he begged of God, A wise
and an understanding heart; he made that the main of his desires, 1 Kings
3.9.4.33.
and thereupon God gave him a large heart for wisdom, even as the sand upon the
sea shore; he was able to discourse of every vegitable, from the Cedar in
Lebanon, to the Hysope that grew out of the wall.

Search the Scriptures; it stands upon Record, unto the perpetual praise and
commendation of Timothy, That from a child he had known the holy Scriptures,
which (says the Apostle to him) are able to make thee wise unto salvation,
through faith in Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 3.15.

brings me to a fourth particular, which I mention last of all, as the total
sum of all; and here I shall desire both to fix mine own heart, and the
Auditory also, making that the end of this Sermon, which either is (or should
be at least) the end of every Sermon; namely this, The knowledge of God in
Christ the end of preaching. 1 Cor. 2.2. 2 Cor. 4.5. Phil. 3.8.14.
The knowledge of God in Christ. If in all such difficult Cases as have been
already mentioned, ye would still understand the mind and will of God, and
know what to do, then ye must of necessity have acquaintance with God, in and
by Jesus Christ, who is called ye know, The Counselor, Isa. 9 6. and, The
wisdom of God: We preach Christ crucified, says the Apostle, to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; but unto them that are called,
both Jews and Greeks, Christ the Power of God, and Christ the Wisdom of God,
Christum crucifixum vocat primum DEI POTENTIAM, id est, cum qui virtute suae
Deitatis potenter dissolvit opera diaboli, Principem hujus mundi ejecit for as,
mundum denique vicit, ac morti mors fuit, quum potenter ex morte resurrexit:
Deinde cundem Christum crucifixum vocat DEI SAPIENTIAM, id est, cum qui
sapicutissimum Dei de nostra salute consilium non solum nobis patefecit, verum
etiam exequutus est. Piscat. in loc.
1 Cor. 1.23, 24. And as for all that wisdom that men possess out of Christ,
there is, shall I say, a cloud upon it? yea and more, there is not only a
cloud upon it, but a curse upon it, and it will appear to be no better then
mere foolishness and madness in the latter end.

God has begun to do it already, and he will do it yet more abundantly, he
will certainly find a time to convert or turn all that strength into weakness,
Note. 2 Samuel 15.31.
and all that wisdom into foolishness, that flows not out of the fullness of
Jesus Christ the Righteous. John 1.16. The wisdom of Christ durable.


But now the wisdom of Christ, that is durable and abiding, and not only
lasting, but everlasting, and the longer ye have it, the better you will like it
still; and this is it that David was here possessed of, he could not outwrastle
the Temptation he was under, until he went into the Sanctuary of God; and
though he did go into the Sanctuary, yet if God had not met him there, and
revealed himself to him there, he might have gone out, as wise as he came in,
but he found God there, God was with him there to resolve him of his doubt;
yea, he was with him continually: And that's his relief here, his Sanctuary, his
Refuge, My heart was grieved, says he, and I was pricked in my reins, through
mine own ignorance, and bruitishness, and folly; but then here he relieves
himself, even with that which follows, Nevertheless, I am continually with
thee; and though I should chance to let go my hold of thee, yet thou will never
let go thy holdfast of me, Thou have holden me by my right hand. Thus much to
us All.

Ad Parliamentum.
Now to your selves (Honored Worthyes) who are the Representative Body of this
whole Nation, I shall humbly crave leave to suggest something from hence unto
you.

2 Timothy 3.1. (...) Tempora molesta sive difficilia.
The God of Heaven, by his Providence (the Wise and the Holy God) has called
you to a very great Work, in a very difficult and dangerous time: And how will
ye do to manage this great work, if the Wisdom now spoken of, be not eminently
present with you, if ye be not as Angels of Light, 2 Samuel 14.17.
to discern between Good and Evil? Surely no other Garment would so well become
you at this time, as this of Wisdom; We could not have thought upon any thing
more suitable to you, or more seasonable for you.

To this purpose be pleased to observe, How the Holy Ghost it self preaches
this Doctrine to you, how Wisdom it self does in a special manner call upon such
as you are, To be instructed, and to be wise, etc.

In the second Psalm, and at the beginning of it, 2 Ps. br. paraph.
the Psalmist having there declared the Design and Plot of great ones against
God, and Christ, The Design of great ones against God and Christ, v. 2, 3.
in those words, The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take
counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, saying, Let us
break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us: And having withal
declared the fruitlesness, The vanity of that Design, v. 4, 5, 6.
and the vanity of that Design, in saying, He that sits in heaven shall
laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision: He shall speak unto them in his
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure; and yet have I set my King upon my
holy hill of Sion; that is, the Design of God by Christ, that shall still
prosper, and take effect, and go on; and all those great ones that oppose it,
they shall be most miserably shattered, destroyed and broken.

Hereupon his Counsel to such as are not yet privy to the design, to take heed
of being drawn in, v. 10, 11, 12.
counsel is, at the 10, 11, 12. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be
instructed, ye Judges of the Earth: Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling; Kiss the Son, etc. Thus you see how he leads you from the Streams to
the Fountain, from the Watercourse to the Wellhead; Be Wise first, and Be
Instructed, and as a means to bring in Wisdom and Instruction, Kiss the Son,
left he be angry, and ye perish from the Way, if his Wrath be kindled but a
little: blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

If his Wrath be kindled but a little, etc. and certainly, his Wrath is now
kindled not a little, his heart is fully set, and engaged upon the business,
and he will have All down that are implacably bent against him, High and Low,
Rich and Poor, Noble and Ignoble, Learned and Unlearned, All must either bow or
break, Zeph. 2.11.
stoop or starve (For he will famish all the gods of the Earth) and therefore
now, at this time especially, Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

And besides this general Consideration of Wisdom, as that which would now be
very useful, and profitable, and seasonable; Give me leave to deal a little
more particularly, Two things before the Parliament at this time, requiring
much exactnes in point of wisdom.
and to observe, That there are two Things before you at this time, that will
certainly require very much exactness in point of Wisdom, namely, Liberty and
Justice.

Touching the former of these, matter of Liberty, The Liberties of the People,
1. Liberty.
and The Liberties of the Saints: I shall not therein take upon me to prescribe
to you (for that is no part of my Work, neither is it any part of my purpose so
to do) only this experimental observation I shall crave leave to make out from
your former Proceedings, and it is certainly very considerable by you, That so
long as ye took those two things into serious Consideration, Godliness and
Honesty, and told us plainly, 2 Timothy 2.2.
That under your shadow they should live; Lam. 4.20.
so long as ye held forth this in your Declarations, and went on accordingly, I
am persuaded, That All that while ye had as much encouragement from God
himself, and from good men, as could be expected or desired: But when once your
motions began to be retrograde, and the people saw clearly, Dangerous to depart
from just and honest Principles, upon any pretense whatsoever.
That diverse amongst you intended nothing less, then what was thus fairly
pretended, then I pray consider what followed, Nothing but trouble upon
trouble, and vexation upon vexation, and breach upon breach, until ye were
almost even quite Broken all to pieces: and therefore whenever any thing
comes to be debated, that concerns either of these, or both these together, The
Liberties of the People, and The Liberties of the Saints, then look up unto God
for Wisdom, and for Counsel, and for Direction, (and the Lord give you Wisdom,
and Counsel, and Direction in it) For certain it is, That there are hardly any
Rocks more dangerous to break upon, then these two are.

Then for that other work of Justice, 2. Justice.
that has been long expected from you, and that ye seem now to be fully
engaged upon: I shall not therein prescribe to you neither, only point at some
few things, Nehem. 6.9.
that may (through the Blessing of Heaven) be a means to strengthen your hands
in that great and necessary work.

To this purpose be pleased to consider, Two things noted concerning Justice.
That Justice is both a very comprehensive Virtue, and a very curious Virtue.

First, 1. A very comprehensive.
It is a very Comprehensive Grace or Virtue.

(...). Atist. lib. 5. Ethic cap. 1. Fr. Eustach. Tract. 3. de Virt. and vit.
Sect. 2. Qu. 1.
The Moralists observe, That all Virtues are contained in Justice; he that would
be Just, He must be Prudent, and He must be Valiant, and He must be Temperate,
and He must be Faithful: In a word, He must not absolutely come behind in any
Excellency whereof he is capable; He must be a very exact man, that would be a
just man.

2. A very curious virtue.
Secondly, As it is a very Comprehensive, so it is also a very curious Virtue;
you have seen, I suppose, Justice oftentimes pictured with a pair of Scales in
her hand: and indeed, it is a very fit Emblem, or Resemblance of the business:
For as in a pair of Scales (if the Beam be good, and the Balances even) it is,
ye know, a very small matter that will turn the Scales either this way or that
way, one way or another, and so here: Now to set and keep the Scales even, in
this high point of Justice, that they may not incline too much on either side,
upon any sinister indirect Principle, there are, I conceive, three things
essentially requisite thereunto: Three things requisite to keep the scales even
in point of Justice.
1. Wisdom. 2. Courage. 3. The fear of the Lord.
Wisdom to discern, 1. Wisdom. Sicuti est aliquando misericordia puniens ita
and crudelitas Parcens. Aug. Maced. Epist. 54.
Courage to execute, and The fear of the Lord to moderate.

First, there must be Wisdom to discern, to see and foresee who are fit to be
spared, and who are fit to be punished; for there is both misericordia puniens,
and crudelitas parcens, as the Father speaks; there is both A punishing mercy,
and A sparing cruelty: whilst ye spare some, ye may be very cruel to others;
yea, let me tell you, That if ye take not heed, in sparing some, ye may be very
cruel to your selves: ye know what the Prophet said to Ahab, Because thou have
let go a man out of thy hand, whom I appointed to utter destruction; therefore
thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people, 1 King. 20.42.

Secondly, As there must be Wisdom to discern, 2. Courage. The Parliament
encouraged to do Justice, upon a threefold consideration.
so Courage to execute, and to carry on the work vigorously. And here give me
leave to say, and not only to speak it, but also to prove it, That you have all
the Reason in the world to take Courage in this business, since ye have for
certain the highest Encouragements to it, that can be expected.

For first, consider, 1. From the Alsufficiency of God, in his promise of being
with those who are with him in this work. 2 Chronicles. 19.6
That the Work it self is Gods Work, and that he has engaged himself by way of
Promise, to be with you in it; as Jehoshaphat said unto the Judges, when he
gave them their charge, and it was very excellent counsel, even that of his, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. says he there, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but
for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment; with you, not only to observe
you, and to assist you, and to direct, and bless you, but also to protect and
defend you; and if God be thus with you, then (as the Apostle says) Who can be
against you? Romans 8.31.
What can the Creatures of God do, to hurt or hinder you, if the God of the
Creatures will but undertake to shield you, and to protect you, and to carry on
his own Work by you? 2. From the weakness of Adversaries, who are to be dealt
with in a way of Justice.


Secondly, Consider the extreme weakeness of those who shall oppose you in this
Work, and you shall find them to be All so weak, and so feeble, from Head to
Foot, from the Highest to the Lowest, that it is not possible for any man of
any Spirit, who has to deal with them as Adversaries, to be afraid of their
faces.

And that this may appear to be so, Be pleased to observe, By what Metaphors or
Allusions the Holy Ghost sets out those that ye are to proceed against in this
business: Let me to this purpose but only mind you of two or three Scriptures
briefly; Hos. 10.7. As for Samaria (says God by the Prophet there) her King is
cut off, Discovered from three places of Scripture. 1 Pl. Hos 1 7. 2 Pl. Psalm.
37.20. 3 Pl. Psalm 62.3. Quemadmodum parier vitiosus intusque corruptus subito
impetu cadens non modo scipsum frangit propria mole, sed conterit in minutas
parts, ira hostibus suis David inexpectatam ruinam denuutiat and qua prorsus
conterantur. Calvin. in loc.
like the foam upon the water: And again, Psalm. 37.20. But the wicked shall
perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of lambs; they shall
consume, into smoke shall they consume away: And yet farther, Psalm. 62.3. How
long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all of you, as a
bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence. Now I pray consider, whether
any of these things are in any measure to be feared by you: What? a Parliament
afraid of a little foam upon the water? Afraid of a little smoke out of a
Chimney? Afraid of a bowing wall, or of a reeling fence, that if ye do not pull
them down the sooner, they will break down of their own accord, and it may be
break down you too? Do not ye know how dangerous a thing it is, to dwell in an
old ruinous house, that is ready to drop down upon your heads, without
repairing, or rebuilding? And do ye not likewise know this to be at present,
the sad condition of the Kingdom? Has not long experience taught some of you,
how many decayed ceilings, and how many worm eaten beams, and how many rotten
posts, and studs there are, that will never serve again, that must of necessity
be removed, or else all will come down about our ears, and destroy us utterly,
and it may be speedily too? I beseech you, consider these things.

And then in the third place, 3. From former Experiences. Job 5.19.
yet farther to encourage you, consider what God has already done for you; how
he has delivered you in six troubles and in seven. And take heed, I pray, of
sinning against your own experiences: Consider the Fears, the Straits, the
Plots, the Difficulties, the Dangers, that are already past and gone: Greater
then which, you can hardly meet with again.

Remember but the wonders (I had almost said, the miracles) of this last
Summer, when the Sea began to roar against you, and when the Land threatened to
bear you no longer; when the Malignant party in both Kingdoms were desperately
enraged against you; And I know not how many thousands of them, a second time
up in arms against you, and nothing to stand, between you and all this danger,
but a poor despised, unpaid Army; and yet, what a wonderful, what a sudden,
what an unexpected, what an unparalleld deliverance, did the Lord work out for
you, even by that very Army: And what, after all this, and more then all this,
that God has done for you, will ye now despond, and grow faint in your mind?
Shall your hands still hang down, Heb. 12.12.
and your knees wax feeble, and your hearts wither like the Grass? Will ye
still be like Ahaz in that case, Isa. 7.2.
wherein it is said of him, That his heart was moved, and the heart of his
people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind? I beseech you take
heed of faithless fears, and of unworthy despondencies, after all the mighty
appearances of God for you, which have been so managed from time to time, as if
they had been purposely given out, to encourage you unto this work, and in this
work, that now ye are in hand with.

3. The fear of the Lord.
There is yet a third thing requisite, to keep the Scales even in point of
Justice; and that is, The true fear of the Lord: Consider but two or three
places of Scripture for that, and I have done.

That Is a very considerable place to this purpose, 2 Samuel 23.1, 2, 3. 2 Samuel
23.1, 2.3. opened.
Now these are the last words of David, The words of dying men ye know, they
use to leave a very deep impression upon the spirits of those that hear them:
Now (says that Text) These are the last words of David, David the son of Jesse
said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob,
the sweet Psalmist of Israel. These were his last words, The Spirit of the Lord
spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue. The God of Israel said, The Rock of
Israel spoke to me. And the thing that he comes to at last, after all this holy
Rhetoric, and Gallantry of expression, it is this, He that rules over men,
must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Exodus 18.21. Jethroes advice to Moses
concerning the choice of Magistrates.
And says Jethro to Moses, Exodus 18.21. Thou shall provide out of all the
people, not only able men, and men of truth, and men that hate covetousness,
but men that fear God also; And let them be rulers of thousands, and rulers of
hundreds; rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens; and let them judge the people,
etc. But above all, me thinks, that case of Micaiahs, 1 King. 22. Micaiahs
case, 1 King. 22.
is very considerable to this purpose; and I mention it the rather, because it
is not ordinary to meet with such a case; I do not for the present remember the
like in all the Book of God again, all things rightly considered: For if ye
read that Chapter, The disadvantages that he there went upon.
you shall find, That the poor man (one poor single despised Prophet) was
there upon all manner of disadvantages, in what he was going about.

appear before two great Kings, the King of Israel, and the King of Judah,
whilst both of them were sitting upon their thrones in their Parliament Robes,
as awful an outward appearance, Verse 10.
as most ye shall hear, or read of.

message clean contrary to what no less then four hundred Prophets, had
endeavored to prepossess the minds, Verse 6. compared with 2 Chronicles. 18.5.
and to forestal the judgments of those two Kings withal.

messenger that came to call him, he told him what the other Prophets had done,
and wished him by all means to do the like. Verse 13.
The words of the Prophets declare good unto the King, with one mouth; Do thou
so too, says the man to him, Do not thou by any means occasion any trouble, or
breed any disturbance, say as they say, and then all shall be well. Yea, but
all this would not stir Micaiah an inch from following God, His words are, As
the Lord lives, V. 14.
what the Lord says unto me, that will I speak: What those four hundred men
have said, That Is nothing to me, says Micaiah; Look what God would have me to
speak, Duty belongs to us, events to God.
that I must speak, and that I will speak, come of it what will, or let what
will be the fruit on 't.

But now I pray observe, what it was that poized the spirit of the Prophet in
that case, or that kept the Scales even; and you shall find it to be this, He
saw those two great Kings sitting upon their thrones, and withal, He saw the
Lord sitting upon his throne; Verse 19.
and he was much more afraid to offend that one God, that he saw sitting upon
his throne, then both the other Kings, that he saw sitting upon their thrones.
And thus ye see, how the fear of the Lord did regulate and order the Spirit of
that holy man, in a right manner before the Lord.

And I beseech you consider, That this (...) not only useful for us; It is not
only written for our admonition, that move in a sphere below you, and under
you; Romans 15.4.
but It is also written for your admonition, as well as for ours; and it is
useful for you, as well as for us. What more useful for those that sit upon
earthly thrones, then to see God sitting upon his throne?

1 King. 18.3. Neh 7.2. Job 1.1. Prove. 23.17. Eccles. 11.13. Acts 10.2. Timor
domini Janitor animae, Bernard. Quid est, quaeso, Sapientia Christiani? Quid
nisi timor and Amor Christi? Salvian. ad Eccles. Cathol. lib. 4. Initium
sapientiae est in timore Christi, perfectio in amore. Id. ibid. Fides facit
formidinem. formido facit solicitudinem. Solicitudo facit perseverantiam.
Tertul. contr. Marcion.
Let me humbly commend this as a remarkable meditation, from hence unto you,
That certainly under Heaven, there is not a more excellent qualification, then
for men in all transactions of an high nature, To have their hearts continually
over powered, and over awed, with the true fear of Gods holy name and presence.

And therefore, that ye may manage and carry on this great work of Justice and
Judgment, according to the will of God: Besides Wisdom and Courage, see to this
also, John 1.16.
That out of the fullness of Christ ye be of quick understanding in the fear of
the Lord; and then according to his example, who is your great Lord and Master,
Ye shall not judge after the sight of the eye merely, nor reprove after the
hearing of the ear; but with righteousness shall ye judge the poor, Isa. 11.3, 4.
and reprove with equity for the meek of the Earth.

FINIS.

