HVLS PILLAR OF Providence erected: OR The Providentiall Column, setting out
Heavens care for Deliverance of that people, with extraordinary Power and
Providence from the bloud-sucking Cavaliers, who had for six weeks closely
besieged them.

By T. C. Minister of Gods Word.

ISAIAH 26.1. In that day shall this Song be sung in the Land of Judah, we have
astrong City, Salvation shall God appoint for walls and bulwarks.

ZECH. 3.2. Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire.

Imprimatur

CHARLES HERLE.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Rounthwait, 1644.

To the Reader.
But where are the nine (says Christ.) The Lord longs much to see us after he
has freed us; in our distress we long for deliverance, and being delivered he
longs for acknowledgement. Deborah after her victory awakened her self with
so loud an instigation, on purpose to awaken others, That she might not return
with the leprous Samaritan alone in her acknowledgment. Thus this holy-man,
Gods faithful Minister, and our dear brother, an eyewitness to the great
and wonderful work done by our God for that beleagured Town, the
deliverance, a mercy he had a share in, and thousands, and our selves: It was
the place of refuge to many persecuted and plundered Families, and to ours and
his; here were met in one from the two spoiled Counties of York and Lincoln,
of all sorts a great multitude. Here we comfortably enjoyed our peace; here
publicly and privately we jointly sought it is peace, of the fruit whereof it
is now a partaker from the God of peace. And therefore in all places and ages,
that it may be said for Hull, what God has done, as we can do no more, so no
less then clap our hands, and being of the number of the Lords redeemed ones,
cry out and say, God has done great things for us, whereof we are glad: And O
let all places be filled with the same glory.

Tho: Micclethwait. Philip Nigh. Th: Coleman.


To the Lords dispersed and scattered ones, beloved of the Father in the Son,
gathered together from diverse Quarters and Countries into Hull, the Nest of
Gods providence, Grace Divine, and greeting Christian.
TO you beloved the fair and strong hand of heaven has bin fully manifested,
at first plucking you as a brand out of the fire of the enemies fury, that
watched for you where you lived, and now again the same hand of heaven has
visited you with new favor, putting the proud adversary by, and cutting his
comb, when he was ready to chop you for the pot, in the place where you
sojourned. Remember now Salomons Scripture, The Lord was angry with him,
because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared
unto him twice. He has twice appeared mavelous in mercy to you, and looked
upon you as no stranger in the place where you were strangers. Remember the
day, wherein these thoughts took you up continually, what shall we do, whither
shall we go, what way shall we fly, what course shall we take, that may be
pleasing to God, safe for us. And now let me tell you whither you shall fly,
even unto the Lord with thankful hearts who has so wonderfully magnified his
favor toward you. I have seen a failing in the Town hitherto, as secure as
if never in danger, as proud as if no matter of humbling, as profane as if
great deliverances did not bring great engagements to holiness, as
unthankefull, as if not beholding to God, as superstitious, as if the master of
Ceremonies, and not the Father of mercies had saved them. But do not you fail
too, let the Town be beholding to you for your prayers and your praises, be
you their Masons to help to make up the breaches of their walls, their country
husbands to amend their hedges, and make up gappes where Gods wrath might
breake-in. The Lord give you patient hearts in these oppressing times and hard
charges, and abundance of thankfulness to Jehovah Nissi the Lord your Banner,
that both you and the Church of God may be clothed with the garments of
salvation.

Divinae Providentiae Sacrum,
THat Indian Hand had some reason it seems, which put upon it that name of the
I Will of Providence, the special hand of heaven ruling and leading the searching
adventurers to this place; and bringing them through long labors and hard
endeavors to pitch and plant on that ground. And before I have done with this
narrative and discourse; I shall make it good, that there is ground for the
naming of this Kingston or Hull, A Town of Providence.

Where, as on a Stage of Mercy, Divine Providence has of late acted parts of
love, care, power, kindness gloriously, before, and for unworthie both
Spectators and receivers: The Lord has so done his mavelous works, that
they ought to be had in remembrance of all them that fear him.

If any be such a stranger in Jerusalem, as has not heard nor known the
things, that are come to pass in these days, I will inform him, (to quicken
my self, and others to gratefullnesse,) how the Lord has heated the furnace of
his love, and care for Hull, seven times hotter then he has done for any town
in England. And gladly would I have the Land to take notice of it, because
though the Sun rise in one corner of the Heavens the East; yet the light, heat
and influence of the Sun fills the whole Earth, and cherishes every creature.
So, though the best part of the Kernel of this deliverance falls particularly
into Hulls mouth, and the people there, both in-dwellers and the Lords
sojourners, yet doubtless it sends much good influence, and reviving beams into
the Gospells cause, now quarrelled for, into the Church, into this Kingdom,
into the Parliament, into the armies on foot, for the rescuing of our Realm,
from the paws of the Lion, and the bear: the Churches Lion, that would
oppress it with Antichristianisme, and popish prelacy, and the Common wealths
savage Bear, that would devour Truth, justice and righteousness, and leave
neither law, nor liberty nor rights, for the Subject, but what must come out of
the bosom of licentious Atheism, where will and power shall create Magistracy
and the acts of it. Now that the Lord has banished such bloody and cruel
Gaolers, which laid upon all that came under their power, iron yoakes and
fetters, how can we do less then seek out the author of this deliverance,
and give him the cordial and real acknowledgements of thankful spirits,
which either speaking, writing or printing may make known to our little world
of England, least the glory of God, which, of all other things should never
know a funeral, and be buried in oblivion, be any way obscured or ecclipsed.
And surely if we enquire after the father, and mother, and nurse of this
amiable and comfortable child of salvation, which we can never look in the
face, but it makes us smile with joy: we can find none to own it, but only
Providence divine, which has done all. This has been so clearly and manifestly
stirring, from the Alpha to the Omega of the action, that we silence all
subservient Ministers, and ministered helps, as strength, guns, swords,
munition, care and industry, and only write God with great letters and
figures, and make all other great helps, to be but as a great cipher without
divine concurrence. When we name Providence, as the superintendent and
superefficient of all, we understand not chance or fortune, the Ethnickes
providence, nor that of the Stoickes, who made providence a fortune or
fate-telling old-woman, to administer all things, as the universal soul of
the world. But by it we understand the special care, and love of God toward
his, which is at great cost, and charges of infinite power, foresight and
wisdom, to work in all and every individual thing for his people, Lilius.
Cyrald. de dijs Gent. Syntag. 76.
and having wrought it, to make it again be directed to work for their good.
And if at Delos the blind Heathens for some conceived blessing could erect a
Temple and call it, (...), The Temple of Providence: Do not Christians owe as
much to Jehovah, as they to their Jove? Shall not our Delos, our Hull be
called, (...), The Temple of Providence, where it has been most admirably
conspicuous, and efficacious for deliverance. It is well known, Rome blush,
Pagans and Heathens blush, in being more unjust and unhonest then they: or make
the devil and bell blush, to see them more zealous and deep blasphemers, then
they. In these actions all their royalty and cavalerisme consist. What a
special hand of heaven was that, prevented this Marquess (whom blood not in
his own veins, but blood plenteously shed out of all the veins of the North,
has raised to this title of Marquess) from being governor of it at first,
when his Majesty sent him and offered him for that purpose to the Town. The
prevention of such a Hornet, that he was not set over his Bee-hive, deserves
our tongues to speak as loud as the Egyptian Magitians, and to say, this was
Digitus Dei, the finger of God. For say he had bin the resident ruler here;
what an influence of mischief would he have sent hence against London,
Parliament, and all the places under the rule of well ordered justice and
peace? How would this have been the (...), the scumme-pot, into which would
have been gathered all the living and working villainy or Atheism of Dunkirk,
France, Holland, Flanders, etc. And what Country soever would have sent
men-beasts, that in a mercenary souldiarie are willing, to sell their souls in
any war, yea will take the pay of hell, to fight against heaven? But blessed
be the eye of heaven, that watched, and the hand of heaven that wrought another
way, and brought this key of the kingdom to hang at the Parliaments girdle,
that they should not be in an hourly fear of this, as of a Northern Algiers,
or nest of Sea and land Pirates. Why is Newcastle and not Hull in their power,
a continual vexation to the good cause? There is no reason of it, but what
lies in Gods breast and bosom, so he liked, so he would have it.

Under Sir John Hotham the Lord began to put this Town, as a signet ring on
his finger. How did the Lord animate the Governor and his small forces to
stand unappaled before his Majesty, when he comes in his own person, and with
all his power he could then make, to demand, nay to command the rendering of the
Town into his power, yet even then God made worms stronger then the Lion,
when Hotham royally stood and feared neither Herald, nor Proclamation, nor the
voice of a provoked King, which is the messenger of death O that this fine gold
had never changed! But O the misery of foolish man, made drunk with authority
and power! Hotham honored like a King, feared as an Emperor; sitting in
peace, that might have had the Country for the good cause wait on his whistle;
how has he degenerated and soiled all his fair burning light, in ending with a
ducking down of the socket, breathing at last with a vaporous, and ill savoured
exit. Time will try, and justice will boult out (I fore-judge not, nor
anticipate our Judges of this cause.) Whether justly father or son Hotham, or
both, be guilty of miscarriages in the North, at York, of the Queens entrance
u^ interrupted, of Scarboroughs and Chomeleyes base Apostasy, of the West
crying out of the rising Sun, and saying, all her misery came from the East,
where Egyptian reeds did not only fail them, but pierce them, and help them
to be covered in that Chaos of tyranny, wherein that good and goodly Country
now lies low and poor, only rich (besides Gods secret favor) in fullness of
oppressions and cruelty. I leave these servants to the judgment of their
master, who will make their sins appear as midnight, or their righteousness
as midday in due time: I know it is indeed thought and said, in relation to
Hotham and Cholmley, that Scorborough and Scarborough are the springs of most
of our misery in the North. Let others say as they please, Gods candle in fit
season will seek out darkest corners. Let the just have his righteousness for
clothing, and let the unjust be arrayed with his own confusion, and shame as
with a cloak. Proceed we to the change of Governors and see miracles, and
great pieces of extraordinary providence in that. In one morning gates, walls,
block-houses, arms, men, commanders, guns, ships, all that is called strong,
is easily and quickly yielded to the power of the Town, no bloodshed, no
soul lies gasping, no streets know streams of blood, but water, for all this,
why, this is wonderful, friends, kindred, dear ones, in places of trust, yet
none resisting, but yielding up office and power, as being overcome with power
and reason for it, or both. So great a thing, so long and strongly settled, so
easily altered and turned without combustion and broil, would make an Atheist,
that saw it, name God and Providence, for that very actions sake. Besides, the
enraged Town, against their suspected Governor, being so calmed into justice,
and prudently reserving father and son, to be weighed by the Parliaments
balance, and not precipitately cutting out for themselves, was a special
favor of God, to honor them with so well a carried business. Then lo again
the Artifice, and rare working of Architectonicall providence; verily thou art
a God that hidest thy self O God of Israel the Savior. At this present,
things are thus carried at Hull, the noble Fairfax is in his Western
declination, and Beverly is ready to be chopped for the pot, by the assaulting
enemy. Mark how the wheel runs. From Beverly the enemy is repulsed with shame
and loss. But in the West, two or three days after, the swarms of New
Castles waspes sting the Army of the honored Fairfax, there he and his
heroic Son, after fair hopes loose the day, quit the field (though to the
great cost of the adversary) and leave that noblest part of the Country in the
hands of the ignoblest men (if inhumanity be ignobility) where as they were
bred and principled, so they maintain it, there is no good play unless some
play the devil in it. How have they imitated that infernal paternity of
theirs, by being as cruel and unmercifull to that worthy people, as hell could
make them. Then thorough what dangerous paths and parts of Countries did the
Lord bring honored Fairfax, and his son, and the remainders of his scattered
Army? How did the Lord hard before this fore defeat, make Hull ready for them,
whose prayers and longings waited for such a Governor at the gates of heaven?
Compare but the times of these things falling out, that Hul should be made fit
to receive a Governor, fit to succor a dispersed people, who fled from a
bloody sword and spear. Let Hull and Western dispersed ones, and the whole
kingdom contend about it, which of them has the largest share of fatherly
providence in this thing. O the providence is much for us, may Hull say, that
we should receive so faithful and right a Governor in our necessity. It is
providence for us may West say, that we should get succor there. It is
providence for us, may the whole kingdom say, that so quickly the government
was settled there, and though there was so great a wound, yet the Lord quickly
prepared a good and great plaster. How deep is the Lords wisdom in his
doings? How can he strangely, at one and the same time, win and lose, cut and
cure, wound and heal, throw down and raise up his people, and make one and
the same cloud both dark and lightsome?

Let the people of God observe it, they never have any notable fall or
affliction, but God gives them some notable rise after it, to stand on high
ground again, and to meet with some comfort and blessing succeeding it, of
such a depth and latitude, as entered not into their imaginations. And now
Rabshakeh railes and Thrasoes boast, and every (...), now opens his mouth, and
laughs to see Christ lie laden with a cross in the streets of Leedes and
Bradford. Now the Irish Prelate, the bishop of Derry, must turn the Psalms of
David into a scornful Jigge, and must not only abuse the Saints of God, but
the Scripture of God. The Ministers pulpit is his stage, which has bin
commonly the: May Pole where scorners of Gods Saints have danced themselves
giddy, and there he pretends he will stir them up to give thanks to God, and to
God alone, in these words of David: I will not trust in my bow, neither shall
my Sword save me, but thou have saved us from our enemies, etc. Ps. 44.6, 7.
But he forgetting his theme, so dotes on his Marquess, Si perga^ ad acuta
reru^, plus toge laesere rempub. qua^ toricae. Tertull de pallio.
that he must needs make him the bow and the sword, as though he by his care
and wise carriage had freed now all Yorkshire from oppression and from the
crushing of the Parliaments friends, and now there was nothing but one poor
corner of caitiffs, all sedition and faction now laid gasping within the walls
of Hull. Let not Bishops speak of oppression, for they have bin Pharaohs most
cursed taskmasters, set up to afflict the Israel of God. Nor let York be the
tribunal at this time, to judge the dispersed of Christ, that are met in Hull.
After that way, Sr Bishop, which you call sedition, there are such Saints serve
God, as the latchet of whose shoes (saving the reverence of your bicorned
miter) you are not worthy to loose. Well sedition and faction lies gasping
within the walls of Hull; what then? Why then New Castle and his Army must come
hither to the funeral of it, if it lie gasping, it will die shortly, and they
will be so officious, as to come and close our eyes, and carry us to our grave;
or if we be not so near death, they can think of such a thing as this, Come
let us kill them that the inheritance may be ours.

About the 4th of September, that goodly Town of Beverley falls into the hands
of a merciles adversary; ours beholding their great numbers, and considering
the state of the Town to be such, as it could not be held against them, though
our numbers had bin trebled. Whereupon warning is given to retire and leave it,
and some no doubt were to blame, that left some lesser pieces of Ordnance
there, and did not timely convey them away, which they might have done.
Beverley smarted then on all sides by enemies cruelty, by friends negligence,
presently is the Town made bare and stripped naked, and compelled to speak
largely of the little charity, and mercy of the promoters of the Catholic
cause, who are semperide^, inhumane and barbarous. Hard before their coming,
one Bushel a kinsman of the infamous Bushel (who is filled with more then
four pecks of an Iscarioticall spirit) came with a Tinker, himself acting a
bad metal man with him, to view both Beverleyes and Huls works, having done
it, were at length taken prisoners, and found to be bad metal. Having
swallowed Beverley they make Hull ready for the dresser, and their cursed Cooks
made a great fire, hoping this Town should be their roast-meat. They begin
their siege, and have all kind of furies redressed with snakes to torment us.
With them are come, as goads in their sides, to set them on, and as candles in
the dark to guide them, the fox-heads, subtle, cunning, and busy spirits of
Hull, which she had vomited out, whose names are in the book of the generation
of vipers, which have watring teeth to eat thorough their mothers bowels. The
poor arrayed and forced souls are made to tugg and work worse then the slaves
at Adrianople, day and night, to raise Mounts and Works with turves and
baskets, to brew our ruin. It will not be amiss, to see how God works the
deliverance of his people with many cross thrids, and makes a smooth web in
the end of that, which has many knots in the beginning. Whereas at their first
coming we had a springtide that might have flown with streams of molestation
to them, and hindered their works, if ours could have agreed to cut the banks,
and lend them some salt water, yet so it pleased God to divide the consults and
conclusions of men about it, that this is hindered, and thereby they exceedingly
furthered, in hopes to warm themselves at our fire. Nay, when afterward there
were found Propositions, upon rational grounds, of daming up the fresh water,
so as it should overflow very much to the much annoying of them, it may be to
loss of all their pieces, and for much comfort to us, out of Town for ground
and cattle, for helping them within Town with sufficiency of fresh waters;
yet it pleased the Lord to throw all these devices out. Divine providence bids
this humane providence stand by and step out of the way, that not Joab, but
David might have the name of the day. Humane help and industry is good,
though oftentimes evil in the abuse, when men make them vails and curtains to
hide the divine face, that we do not so much see and admire the beauty of it.
God thus in one and the same business weds together our comfort and his glory,
even by those things that seem to forbid the banes. Ours had soon after the
beginning of the siege, a sallie out with a good number of men upon them in
their quarters at Anlabie, they had some intelligence, though it was early in
the morning, ours had some prevalence, and our soldiers some were too busy
fingring their carriages, and looking after pocketings, so as though we brought
diverse of theirs prisoners, and some of them were slain, yet we also had some
of ours taken, that we might take our selves for our sin, that must needs pick
the Lords day morning for such a work, as we being the assaulters, might have
well found another day for it. Every night the enemy gets a fresh work, and
with new incroaches and approaches, comes nigher us, so that in the morning we
stand wondering, to see what is done that night. In the space of 6 weeks siege,
they seem to have so bestraitned us, as there is no hopes of deliverance; but
that their hopes and ours are not alike. The Cater-pillars that follow the
camp, are invited from York, and those parts, to come, and carry away the
plunder of the rich and goodly Town of Hull.

I shall dispatch the particulars of Gods singular providence in the remaining
part, to the happy upshot of the business, by borrowing 15 branches of this
salvation, as I find them fitly summed upon a Sermon at the low-Church, on the
solemn day of thanksgiving, and celebration of so rare a piece of providence
in the fore-noon, October. 18. being the seven-night after, only putting in some
additions of enlargement, as quickening colors to make the picture look more
lively. The text discoursed on, as the bellows to blow up the flame of praise
was Isa. 25.9. And it shall be said in that day, lo this is our God, we have
waited for him, and he will save us. This is the Lord, we have waited for him,
we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. In which, after many other things
the Sermon proceeded to urge rejoicing in Gods salvation after this manner. We
should not only speak of Gods acts, but as the Prophet David says, we should
wisely consider of Gods doings, and gather up ramenta auri, all the filings and
little sparks of gold, because mercies are a singular and rare metal.

From the 120. Psalm there are 15. Psalms, which are called Psalms of degrees,
which it is thought by some are so called, because there were 15. steps or
degrees to that part of the Temple, where men were to worship the Lord, on
which the sacred Choristers of divine music sung these 15. Psalms. How ever
that were so or no, our Temple of praise has 15. notable steps or stairs, on
which we may stand and sing our Psalms of degrees, which have in them contained
so many Hallellujah's for so many remarkable branches of our salvation. That we
may the better take notice of them, let us gather them together and make them
faggots of juniper or sweet-wood, to kindle our fire of thankfulness.

1. The first branch of this salvation, is the special providence of God, in
making such an union, as soldiers, townsmen, seamen, strangers were all
united closely as one man, to stand courageously against the common enemy;
whereas they without did hope there would have bin a division within, and that
division would have bin the mother and sure seminary of confusion and ruin.
For dividing and destroying commonly go together, as Ps. 55.9. or are but a
very little while parted asunder, A kingdom (a town) an house divided against
it self cannot stand, Divide and Impera come from the brains of the old
divident, who set up a school of Arithmetic in paradise, and taught the
unhappy rule of division betwixt God and man. Division commonly puts an enemy
into the Imperative mood. But blessed be the God of union, who is but one, and
made this people of one heart, and one way in this business, though a people
as likely to fall into bad pieces as any.

2. A second branch, with sweet berries growing on it, was the Lords care to
give food to his people and preservation of the mils, which in all probability
they might have attempted to beat down, or fire at the first, as well as they
attempted it at the last, by raising a work hard behind one of them. Yea though
they had pinned us fast in 6 weeks together, yet the Lord provided better meat
then Quails, and though we had not Manna from heaven, yet we had rain from
heaven, which stood us in very good stead, when our fresh water was cut off. So
many Beeves and sheep were preserved from those great cattle stealers, that
meat a good while was cheaper in the siege then out of it, and I believe the
proud enemy in a great part of the Army, would have licked their lips at our
fragments. David thinks we have good reason to praise the Lord with our whole
heart, even for giving meat to them that fear him. Ps. 111.1. and 5. verses.

3. A third branch of saving mercy, was in the firing of the North block-house
blown up in a part, where the powder-barrels and hand Granado's, ill companions
being together, and some fire coming to that Assembly, it blew up with a
terrible blast, a part of that strong building, yet for all this Gods power and
mercy ordered it excellently, the Lord commanding the fire and fury to be
within on our side and not to the enemies part, that they might have no
advantage at all by it. The Lord if he had so pleased might have made a
fearful rupture by it, and opened a gap for them, which they that were so
prodigal of man's blood, would with fury have set upon, though it had cost them
a thousand men. Further when the blast in one room had beaten open the window
into another, and the flame entered into it, where there were 12. barrels of
powder more, and some with loose covers being opened, it pleased the divine
dispenser to suspend the flame, and it reverently held and drew back from
seasing upon that powder, which in all likelihood might have done far more harm,
both to murdering of more men, and dismounting the ordnance. Nor did the enemy
escape in this kind, for they had a magazin blown up and their store of
Granado's, which they had provided for us. Ours, as it did us some hurt, so it
did them no good at all. Blessed be the Lord, for so special a branch of his
salvation.

4. When their great bullets of 35. lb. weight, both roast and raw, hot and
cold, came so fast and frequently into the Town, and all over it, they having
a great mark to shoot at, and likely to speed where ever they fell; yet though
day and night they came into streets, houses, beds, the Lord so charmed and
charged them, that but 3 were slain by them, a man, a woman, and a child.
Heaven found strange means, to conjure these bullets into quietness, and stop
their force. One quarreled with a poudring-tub, another stuck in paste, which
was a providing for food, and was choked in dough; another drunk it self our
friend in a barrel of wine; another burnt the bed-clothes, and spared a woman
in the bed, so as she slept still soundly and quietly, having so hot a
bedfellow, till she was by neighbors wakened and pulled out from the fiery
danger. They aimed at our Churches, when we were met together for the word and
prayer, yet never hurt any in the Church, going or returning. But in their
quarters and at York fame rang another peale, of many hundreds slain in the
town, and diverse coming to, and going from the Church. We allow those two
Universities of lies, the one of Oxford, the other of York their poetical and
lying license. We have found those two Africaes always bringing forth
monstrous things, and lies of a prime magnitude. We are begun to think, that
it may almost gain the strength of a proverb, that Yorks printer, minter and
minster, (when they print or preach of the Parliaments affairs) seldom vent
small lies. The soldiers complain of their minter, for minting too much false
money, and for their minsters Sermons, aiming at our cause, they smell very
little of truth or charitable divinity; and their printed Pamphlets are
notorious. Pardon this digression and going out of the way to cudgel a liar.

5. When they were so near, as within reach of Granado's as they trusted, yet
we heard but only of 3 or 4 of them, and those were either short or over: where
they dug deep into guts of earth, but touched not any man. What would they
have done, if the Lord had given these hot officers of his anger leave to come
into market, Churches, streets, houses, what terrible marks would they have
left of their burning and tearing footsteps.

6. Our issuings out proved mostly succesfull to us, though with small
strength, but always hurtful, to the cost and loss of the enemy, loosing
men, and having some work pulled down by ours, they flying as driven away.

7. Our horse were happily preserved, and safely conveyed into Lincolnshire,
when our fresh water and fodder was so little, as staying they should have had
short commons, and many of them would have perished being foodles, and all of
them would have bin useles, because of the enemies propinquity and nearness.
God reserved them for another place, where they were serviceable in a glorious
victory.

8. When the state of the Town was very depressed, and earthly hopes were at a
low nepe, our men being few, and worn out with day labors and night-watchings
and fightings from their works, there being not sufficient for number to manage
the works well, and clothe the walls, if the enemy should approach nearer. In
that very nick of necessity, God sent us a competent number of soldiers, with
that good Commander Sr John Meldram, that did exceedingly animate and put fresh
spirits into our wearied soldiers, and very much conduce to our great help.

9. When on a sudden, a company of their picked and resolute spirits, with fury
and strength had almost got one of our best works, the west jutty, and were in
a manner possessors of it, yet ours slew and discomfited them, so as diverse of
them were slain, some 15. and some taken prisoners. The rest fled away with
wounds and shame, as full of cold fear, as they came full of strong water, of
which the slain and taken notably savoured, having fired their spirits into a
desperatenes with the spirits of hot waters. In all the time God so wrought for
us, we held the works we had. And this deserves a finger to point at it, a
tongue to praise for it.

10. The Lord pared away from the strength of their numerous Army, by a
reigning sickness among them, by the running away of many, and by diverting a
part of their forces into Lincolnshire, that they might be something weaker,
and more fit for us to deal with them, though still their numbers did treble
ours.

11. Mavelous was the Lord in the prevention of their firing the Town and
shipping, which they were mad to do, and confident would be done, either by
their wildfire, or wild bullets glowing hot (they imitating the fiery darts of
their father, the wicked one) yet the Lord kept them from lighting on
combustible matter, or easily fire-catching stuff. They were so confident of
burning us, that they caused country people diverse times to stand on an hill,
and promised the^ with great oaths and damning language, they should presently
see Hull on a light fire, but God sent no fire to consume their sacrifice in
token of acceptance. They are served with the Germane proverb, Deus non audit
felium preces, God hears not cats prayers to accept them, that is curses and
execrations, more unwelcome to God then the harsh cries of cats. No, when their
Apostle M. Thruscrosse (who no doubt is wel-pleased that the cross is found in
his name) speaks of winning Hull, he tells them they must fast and pray, or else
never think to win it: for, says he, you fight against a praying people. He
foresaw curses, that come from a tongue and heart set on fire of hell, could
never set on fire Hull, and therefore he gave them more ghostly counsel. And
they report from Pomfret, which I annex, that a man, and they name the man,
came from that Town toward Hull, big with expectation and hope to see it on
fire, and when he returned he found his own housing fired. So wisely and justly
does God meet with men in unjust and cruel ways. Besides firing, they were by
the same providence prevented of blocking up the river, when on Lincolnshires
side and Holdernesses, they were begun to make forts, but by some of our men
landing were driven away, and the fort was razed down.

12. In compass of six weeks, all which time they begirt us with that strait
and troublesome girdle of a siege, by our sallyings out, and all their bullets
sallying in among us, not 60. persons as it is thought were slain in all of
ours, few or none of note, when it is certain of theirs above 2000 are perished
by sword, bullet, sickness and abundance of them fairly tried their heels and
deserted them. Some of their Commanders of note, Lieutenant-Col. Levinston,
Serj. maj. Boyard, Cap. Knight, and many others, which they conceal from us in
the dark book of secrecy, went to their last bed in the dark chambers of death
before Hull. Diverse of their Captains that had complete companies went back to
York with ragged remains of some 9 or 6 of those they carried out thence, and
many in great numbers, grievously wounded to make up their black triumph some
went with them, and after them others, to adorn their glorious carriages.

13. It was a notable favor of heaven, that such a resolute and courageous
spirit was raised in ours, as that they went out, and set upon the enemy, the
wednesday 7 night before, being Oct. 4. and beat them out of two of their
works, slew and took some, and brought in many of their muskets, which they
running away left. One of those works they h^d newly raised behind our
wind-mil, which was a very hopeful one for them, and was likely to be very
damagefull to us, had it bin let alone but that night. But God was in some sort
visible that day, giving ours power to beat those wild and furious cocks on and
off their own dunghill. And that Wednesday was a fairly ominous preface to the
next Wednesday, which was voluminous to us in big mercies.

14. Further, when this day of blessings, Oct. 11. the day whereon the siege was
raised, was well gone on for us, the other gathering much fresh force, came on
formidably against ours, insomuch as our soldiers are body and soul for a
retreat, and shameful retire. See now how hoavenly providence comes in to
succor. Ours were basely timid, and prophesied dangerous things to themselves,
from the enemies fresh and full appearance, where one sudden cloud of fear,
was likely to be the black mantle or curtain, to hide the light of a very
hopeful day. Some good spirits of Captains and soldiers were as much
tormented with shame, to see so sick a fit upon our army, as the retreaters
were tormented with fear; whereupon some Commanders, and by-standing spectators
did earnestly beg and beseech they would turn again and face the enemy, and
some of the horse courageously leading the way, and giving a f^esh onset, it
animated the foot, where the Spirit of the Lord set up a Standard in their
spirits, and they fell on bravely, and out of weakness were made strong, Heb.
11.34. and turned the enemy into smoke, which fled before them as driven by
the wind, showing many backs, but few faces against ours, in which backs they
see fair printed the adversaries defeat, and their own victory. God so blesses
this new assault, that they take from them their great guns, 9. of them, some
greater, some less, beats them from their strong and great works with very
little and small loss of ours, in which great pecces and works many of them
trusted, more then in the great God. Our Cap. Rainsborow by a mistake was
taken, but for him we had many of theirs fell prisoners into our hands.

This 11. of Oct. was a great and glorious day, that such multitudes of men out
of many and strong works, from many and great guns should be beaten and driven
away by them, that came to assault them in the open field, is a rare example of
success to the Parlia. battles, and is as notable a piece of pure military
valor, as has fallen out since the beginning of these wars. The soldiers, that
went home by weeping and bleeding cross, do cry out of our stratagem to
retreat on purpose, and then with renewed strength to come and ruin them.
Indeed it was a brave stratagem and a rare plot, but it was Gods stratagem and
a plot of providence, which we never contrived nor thought on, till his waking
thoughts brought it about. How comfortably did the whole Town almost look over
the walls that whole day, and see this salvation of God?

15. Lastly, being thus breakfasted on wednesday, that night they sup with
fears and curses, and hasty purposes of being gone from us. The Lord on a
sudden sweeps them away, they steal away the remaining Ordnance in the night.
A spirit of fear lends them wings to fly, they go away with shame, loss and
stinging consciences: So that the siege is raised, wh we expected not; the
enemy is gone suddenly, we looked not for it. Many of them left their muskets
and other weapons in the works, and though it was a very sore day of rain, yet
away they must, they dare not stay for fair weather. Presently our state is
marvellously changed, we hear not of their guns, we receive no more ridings of
their fiery bullets, we are delivered and yet doubt whether we do but dream of
it. How are our fears and foes suddenly vanished, and we quickly restored to
walking on fresh ground, breathing in fresh air, having enough of fresh water,
and many comforts our enemies had straightened us in? They gave out they raised
the siege, because of the wet weather, and I believe it; for they had some
case-shot among them, with store of other bullets; which made that a wet day,
though it was very fair, in that it could not but rain good store of bad blood.
God has overcome us and overflown us in our desires: we looked but for a
little, and the sea of mercy has broke out and drowned us with a deluge and
cataclysme of blessings.

The Country mourns, yet God made us to laugh. They are impoverished every way
in their moneys and goods and men: their best tables, trees, timber are taken
and laid in the ditches by the enemy, to help the conveyance of carriages and
ordnance from work to work Only their hasty and Eagle-flighted fear has done
some this kindness not intended, that they have filled the barns with corn, and
in an unkind kindness (as having no time to thresh it out, to sell it, or carry
it away) have left it for the owners, who find it, at their repossession,
gathered to their hands by servants whom they never set on work. Nor is this
all, God when in his mercy he flows, he overflowes. On the same 11h of Oct. he
gives us a glorious victory in Lincolnshire, as free, fair and full as the most
have bin got fince the unhappy hatching of these wars, so as that day has
given them an astonishing blow, that they have staggered ever since, and know
not on what ground to tread, God following them with soul-stupifying terrors.
These are the full branches of the Lords saving providence, the first fruits of
our expected harvest in this miserable country of Yorkshire, where some 80 not
of the meanest Gentry have proved drunk with the Queens cup, full of Roman
intoxicating spice, and have made a mad market-venture of their names,
families, estates, bodies, souls, only to preserve the Papists relics, and
the Prelates micers and damask cassocks among us. Now these furious
Salamanders and fansie-frantick spirits, begin to see, their busy action may
come to end in miserable passion, because they doted on their lady Mary, and
have forsaken the Lord Jesus in his cause. Take we but these 15. acts of grace,
put we them together as so many letters, and see if they do not evidently
compose these a words, Divine Providence, which ran in and through the whole
action, and therefore all tongues should sold the divine Praise. Especially o
Hull thou have by this day fallen into great debt to God, who has taken away
thine Alastors and Furies from thee. Let thy Motto be that of the L. Boyls in
Ireland, as I have heard, Gods Providence is mine Inheritance. Bless God from
the ground of thy heart, that though they were proudly and audaciously
disposing of thy houses, streets, and great men's estates, thus and thus, this
to, that commander, that to this officer, and gladding themselves with the rich
spoils of their presently to be caught prey, yet there is not one of the to be
found in thy town or houses as possessors, but only as prisoners. What a mercy
is it, that thou art not filled with that lustful and letcherous vermin, with
that spawn of cruelty, that to their power would destroy souls as well as
bodies. Let a Minister of ours of good credit witness their virtues, who being
late their prisoner at Cottingham, was carried into a chamber, where an Officer
of theirs lay in bed with 2 whors at once, and there was another bed at feet,
where another lay with another whore. This virtuous provost Marshall showed the
whares to him, and told him he did this to vex the round heads, not caring at
all, or remembering that it vexes God more.
Surely Rome has need to send out a new Bull, for the comfort and pardon of
these beasts. Without doubt this is the only way to maintain the Liberty of the
Subject, and the known Laws of the Land, and these men go the direct way to set
up the Protestant Religior. It were well they had grace to purge their hearts,
as well as these unholy ways to purge their reins But God has given them over
to act all wickedness with greedines and impudency, so far as they have a famous
whore, a minion to one of their. Lords, who goes openly among them with her
pistols, and bears the name of one that has a troop. Al these virtues Catholic
and Cardinal should have bin acted in thy streets and houses o Hull, to make
thee as miserable a seen as unhappy York. Either study Hallelujabs and holiness
al thy days, and set forward some new act of reformation for thy men and
manners, to the honor of God, or else thou art the unhappiest Town, that this
day stands upon English ground. Set up a royal pillar in the marketplace, and
in golden letters engrave this deliverance: or set up an holy statue of
heavenly purposes in your hearts, to be a more holy Town, less proud,
luxurious, etc. or else by this I testify to all the land, God has some other
scourge for thee, to which he will reserve thee, who has hither to preserved
thee. O that you were wise, that as God has bin Al for you, so you would be
something more then heretofore for him, or else this great mercy will undo you.
Be persuaded to sing the mercies of this day, so long as you have a day. Call
it not the soldiers, nor the seamans work, but only the Lords, who only does
wondrous things. When God is found so much a blessed Dative, Calv. in opusc. in
praefat. ad Bald. con.
take heed thou be not a cursed and unjust Ablative, as Calvin says, one
Baldwin was named for lurching things from his fellow-students.

By this I have endeavored to lay out in plain colors this large salvation,
that the land may know it, and when they hear of extraordinary mercies, they
may name Londons mercies, Glocesters deliverance, and Hills salvation. By this,
as a performance of my vows in part, I publish the goodness of God to me and
those with me, that under the shadow of Divine Feathers were preserved in the
circumvallation of Atheistical and cruel spirits. And by this let me admonish
all the Lords scattered ones, (...). 2 Pet. 2.4.
who have found the salutary and saving breathings and blasts of the celestial
Zephyrus of special providence, to fall down and say with Heze. The living, the
living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: the father to the children shall
make known thy truth The Lord was ready to save me: there fore we will sing our
songs to the stringed instruments all the days of our life, Isa 38 19, 10
Henceforth let Cavendish remember the signs in Nottinghamshire, armed with his
Arms and Motto, Cavendo Tutus. This will be as good a Monitor for setting upon
Hull, as for them that enter a Tavern or Ale house: and as it is his own, let
him betime draw practical Rules from it. For his shattered and bullet-batter'd
Army, let them fly to their old Letany, From Hell, Hull, Halifax deliver us,
and leave out their God damn me, for their damnation in hell will be worse
then their confusion at Hull. Nor need they wish it, and so earnestly desire
it; for S Peter says, the damnation of such sleeps not, and if it did sleep, I
am sure this sect of God damnists are likely to wake it, that it shall have but
a short sleep. I conclude with a Text for thee O Kingston upon Hull, comment
upon this thy deliverance with Ezra's words, and with suitable works. Seeing
thou our God have given us such a deliverance as this, (...) 9.13, 14.
should we again break thy commandments, and ioyn in league with the people of
these abominations? Would thou not be angry with us, till thou had consumed
us, so that there should be no remnant, nor escaping? Admiration was the mother
of Philosophy, let it be the mother of your Divinity, in this thing to admire
the Lords wonderful mercy, wisdom and power, that did so act and work for an
handful of his people, whom he might have thrown out of the way, and there
could no Judge or Jury have found him guilty of any thing for it, but justice
and righteousness in the action. Wherefore season all your hearts with sense
of unworthiness on our part, and ample apprehensions of goodness on his part,
that the flame within and without, may always keep you in heat with this fire,
burning you up with admiration of spirit, and exaltation of God, both in
language and life, till you be ready to live and die in David's temper, Ps 72,
18.19. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondroue
things. And blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and let the whole earth be
filled with his glory. Amen and Amen.

FINIS.

