The CARD OF Courtship: OR, The LANGUAGE OF LOVE; Fitted to the Humors of all
Degrees, Sexes, and Conditions.

Made up of all sorts of Curious and ingenious DIALOGUES, Pithy and pleasant
DISCOURSES, Eloquent and winning LETTERS, Delicious SONGS and SONNETS, Fine
FANCIES, Harmonious ODES and Sweet RHAPSODIES.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for Humphrey Moseley; and are to be sold at his shop,
at the sign of the Prince's Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

To the longing Virgins, amorous Batchelors, blithe Widows, kind Wives, and
flexible Husbands, of what Honor, Title, Calling, or Conversation soever,
within the REALM of GREAT BRITAIN.
Soluble Souls,
THey say, that Bacchus and Cupid, as they were one day going on hunting, took
Minerva in a net; giving us to understand, that none so seemingly austere, but
one time or other has an itching desire to sport himself in Adonis Grove. I
confess it comes near to a Syllogism in these times (when Mars and Bellona sit
as Rectors over all hearts) to set Venus and her Son in opposition against
them, as it were to thwart the current of the times: but I hope you (Gentlemen
and Ladies, Citizens and Lasses) are not so far in love with the bellowing of
the Drum, or the clangor of the Trumpet, that the sweet and harmonious tunes of
Love shall prove unacceptable unto you: for if so, my self, (who have been
forced through whole Forests of briars, by the malice of the times) of all men
living, have the least reason to whisper these soft numbers in your ears. I
dare not so much injure the ensuing work, as to crave pardon of the severest
Stoic or austerest Cynick for my wantonness, since not a loose line is
scattered throughout this Volume, as also, because I know (in private) the
curstest carper of them all, will hug me for their pleasure (if not for their
profit) For those nice Ignoramusses who slight all Courship as lascivious, al
Complements as trivial and enormous, I shall only say this unto them, that
love (I mean not such as that of Semiramis, or Messalina) is the Author of all
perfection: The greatest Doctors are but Dunces, till love has refined them,
and they know what his power is; they after that becoming witty and courtly
Inditers: for necessity finds out the art, the lovers ardent affection
compelling him to find out all ways for the attaining his Mistress love;
discoursing unto her his loyal affections in smooth or pleasing terms, or else
touching them sweetly or daintily in writing curiously, and with a courtlike
phrase, which art because I here undertake to teach, I have named my work The
CARD of COURTSHIP; wherein are included such variety of conceited Courtships,
that (I dare boldly affirm it) you cannot wish for that favor, which you may
not there gather. I beseech you crop them with a courteous hand, which shall
for ever oblige me to importune for you at Loves footstool, beseeching him to
use you according to your several constitutions, granting you the full fruition
of your desires in all afety and tranquillity, So wishes

Your devoted servant, Musophilus.

The Card of COURTSHIP OR, The language of LOVE.
To the Reader.
Here Cupid, in a quaint disguise,
Covered with leaves, in slumber lies:
Yet does he not himself so hide,
But all thy spirits will be tried,
If this Volume thou turn over,
And he awake, wanting his cover.
Here many hearts as victims stand:
Here read, how beau^y to command,
Though rugged, like the Panthers skin;
Here thou may learn to love and win.
Or if so happy's thy condition,
Thou of thy love have the fruition;
Here such pleasures thou may find,
So sweet, and of so various kind,
That rockt into a pleasing dream,
Thou Wilt wish I Would had an ampler theme.
The Arabian wind, that gently blows.
Blushes to the bashful Rose,
Yields not an odor of more price
Then flowers set in this Paradise.
Read: I am sure, thou wilt not repent thee;
And I am happy to content thee.
Complemental Dialogues.
A Virgin licensed by her Father to make choice of whom she likes best for her
husband, Imagine you hear one who dearly affects her, courting her after this
manner: their names suppose to be AMANDUS, and JULIETTA.

Aman. NOw, Lady, your Fathers goodness has left you to your own dispose; and
I the admirer of your virtues, have free leave to present my best affections:
Then save that creature, whose life depends on you; whose every power ownes not
himself, but you: you are that Deity to whom my heart presents its first
devotion, and in a holy flame, remains a Sacrifice, till you please to accept
it.


Juliet. I should prove to my self unjust, in the neglect of one that nobly
loves me; therefore what affection I may bestow, and yet retain my freedom (I
mean that freedom, by which I may on just occasion withdraw my heart) I were
ungrateful should I not present it.


Aman. May I become the scorn of time, and all men's hate pursue me, when I
prove so foul, to give occasion you call back your love.


Juliet. Cease these hasty protestations; I assure my self, the pureness of
your soul is without spot or blemish; and while you so continue, I shall boast
me happy, in the glory of such a choice.


Aman. O let me fly into your bosom! on your lip confirm my happiness; there
study some new way of number, to multiply my bliss. The treasuries of grace and
nature were quite exhausted, to accomplish your perfections.


Juliet. Fie, fie; leave for shame.


Aman. What, dearest?


Juliet. This superfluous Language. I am none of those Ladies that are
enamoured on Poetic raptures, hugging the Verse, but spitting at the Author:
none of those that are taken with flattering Acrosticks; and to have their
names so disjoynted in an Anagram, that 'twould puzzle ten Magicians to put
them together again. I esteem not Golden Language, and I Will tell you why;
because 'twas seldom bestowed on man, but to gild over a Copper Soul within
him.


Aman. Can you be so cruel, to deem my Language feigned?


Juliet. Nor am I. I grant you, Love and Poesy are divine, commonly infused
together: yet ordinarily, it is tied to rules of flattery.


Aman. Far be it from me, to speak a Language should displease your ear.


Juliet. Well; more Oratory would but bring the rest into suspicion whether it
be real: let it suffice I love you; and if all occurrents suit my expectation,
it sha'n't be long ere Hymen seal the contract. Farewell.


Aman. Farewell, excellent Mistress.


Eugenia, and Flavia, two near neighboring Damsels, discourse of their loves;
resolving not to marry old men for money.
Eug. FLavia, I kiss your hands.


Flav. Eugenia, I pray you pardon me; I saw you not.


Eug. I says you have fixed thoughts, draw your ^ys inward, that you see not
your friends before you.


Flav. True; and I think, the same that trouble you.


Eug. Then it is the love of a young Gentleman, and bitter hatred of an old
dotard.


Elav. It Is so, witness your brother Francisco, and ^^e rotten carcass of old
Rodorigo: had I a hundred ^earts, I should want room to entertain his love, and
the others hate.


Eug. I could say as much, were it not sin to slan^er the dead. Miserable
wenches! how have we ^ffended our fathers, that they should make us the ^rice
of their dotage, the medicines of their griefs, that have more need of Physic
our selves? I thank ^^y dead mother that left me a woman's will, in her ^ast
Testament; that is all the weapons we poor Gyrles can use; and with that will I
fight, against ^ather, friends, and kindred, and either enjoy Fo^o ^osco, or
die in the field in's quarrel.


Flav. You are happy, that can withstand your ^ortune with so merry a
resolution.


Eug. Why? should I twine my arms to cables, ^^t up all night like a watching
Candle, and distill ^^y brains, through my eyelids. Your brother loves me and
I love your brother; and where these two consent, I would fain see a third
could hinder us.


Fla. Alas, our sex is most wretched; no sooner born, ^ut nursed up from our
Infancy in continual slave^^y; no sooner able to pray for our selves, but they
braile and hud us so with sour awe of parents, that we dare not offer to bate
our desires: and whereas it becomes men to vent their amorous passions at their
pleasure, we (poor souls) must rake up our affections in the ashes of a burnt
heart, not daring to sigh without excuse of the spleen, or fit of the mother


Eug. I will plainly profess my love; it is honest, chaste, and stains not
modesty Shall I be married (by my fathers compulsion) to an old mandrake, who
is able to beget nothing but groans; a hunting-golding, a fallen pack-horse? No,
no; I Will see him freeze to crystal first. In other things, good Father, I am
your most obedient daughter; but in this, a pure woman. And in troth, the
temper of my blood tells me, I was never born to so cold a misfortune: my
Genius whispers me in the car, and swears, We shall enjoy our Loves; fear it
not, wench: and so farewell, good Elavia, farewell, farewell.


Fla. Farewell, merry-hearted Eugenia.


Corvino, a rustisk clown, complements with Beancha, a Kitchin-maid.
Corv. HE that says I am not in love, he lies de cap a pe: for I am Idle,
choicely neat in my clothes, valiant, and exream witty; my meditations are
loaded with Metaphors; Songs and Sonnets flow from me as fluently, as Heigh,
gee; not one shakes his tail, but I ^igh out a passion: thus do I to my
mistress; but ^las, I kiss the dog, and she kicks me. I never see a wanton
Filly, but I say, There goes Beancha; nor a lusty strong Als, but I remember my
self, and sit down to consider what a goodly race of Mules would inherit, if
she were willing: only I want atterance, and that is a main mark of love too.


Bean. Corvino, What price bear Wheat and Saffron, that your Band's so stiff
and yellow? why Corvino, not a word! Prithee what business in Town? how do all
at Totnam? Grown mute! what do you bring from the Country?


Corv. There it is; now are my floud-gates drawn, and I Will surround her. What
have I brought, sweet bit of beauty? a hundred thousand salutations of the elder
house, to your most Illustrious honor and worship.


Bean. To me these Titles? is your basket full of nothing else?


Corv. Full of the fruits of love, most resplendent Lady; a present to your
worthiness, from your worships poor vassal Corvino.


Bean. My life on it he scraped these Complements from his Cart, the last load
he carried to the City. But what have you read, Corvino, that makes you grow
thus eloquent? why, you talk nothing but warbling Rhapsodies!


Corv. Sweet Madam, I read nothing, but the lines of your Ladyships
countenance; and desire only to kiss the skirts of your Garments, if you
vouchsafe me not the happiness of your white hands.


Bean. Come, give me your basket, and take it.


Cor. O sweet! now will I never wash my mouth after, nor breath, but at my
Nostrils, lest I lose the taste of her fingers. Beancha, I must tell you a
secret, if you will make much on it.


Bean. As it deserves: what is it?


Corv. I love you, dear morsel of modesty, I love, and so truly, that I Will make
you mistress of my thoughts, Lady of my revenues, and commit all my movables
into your hands; that is, I give you an arnest kiss, in the high way of
Matrimony.


Bean. This the end of all the business?


Corv. Is this the end of all this business, most beautiful, and most worthy to
be most beautiful Lady?


Bean. Hence fool, hence; farewell Co^idon.


Corv. Why now she knows my business, she put up the fruit in her lap, and
threw away the basket; it is a plain sign she abhors the words, and embraces
the meaning. O lips! no lips, but leaves besmeared with Mildew. O dew! no dew,
but drops of Honey-combs. It Is a rare morsel of dripping: O how happy shall I
be to recreate my chine with her! I Will follow her, were I sure to be basted
with Salt and Vinegar.


A Citizens wife, in love with a Suburb-Gentleman, confers with a Curtizan how
to obtain his love, and yet not purchase her husbands discontent. Their names
suppose to be, ARMELINA, and DECOY.
Arm. FAin would I meet the Gentleman.


Dec. Pish, Feign would you meet him? why do you not take the course?


Arm. The means is easily resolved, what think thou?


Dec. Thus: meet him at Mr. Strouds house, the Phoenix; there is a Gossips feast
to morrow-night.


Arm. O but my husbands Jealous Eyes!


Dec. When husbands in their rank'st suspicions dwell,
Then it is our best art to dissemble Well,
Put but these notes in use that I Will direct you,
He Will curse himself that ere he did suspect you.
Perhaps, he will solicit you, as in trial,
To visit such, and such: still give denial;
Let no Persuasions sway you; they are but fetches
Set to betray you; Jealousies, slignts, and reaches
Seem in his sight, to endure the sight of no man:
Put by all kisses, till you kiss in common.
Neglect all entertainment: if he bring in
Strangers, keep you your Chamber; be not seen.
If he chance steal upon you, let him find
Some book lie open, against an unchaste mind.
Manage these principles but with art and life,
Welcome all Nations, you are an honest wife.

Arm. Here, Lady, convey my heart unto him in this Jewel: against you see me
next, you shall perceive I have profited: in the mean season, tell him I am a
Prisoner yet on the Masters side, my husbands Jealousy, that masters him as he
does master me; and as a Keeper that locks Prisoners up, is himself imprisoned
under in his own key, Even so my husband, in restraining me, With the same
ward bais his own liberty.


Dec. I Will tell him how you wished it; and I Will wear My wits to nothing, but
these clouds shall clear.


A young Citizen, Courting his Neighbors daughter. Their names ANTONIO, and
BEATRICE.
Ant. GOod morrow, sweet Beatrice; in exchange of this kiss, see what I have
brought thee from thee from the Exchange.


Beal. What mean you, Sir, by this?


Ant. Ghess that by the circumstance: here is a Ring, wear't for my sake; twenty
Angels, pocket them, you fool. Come, come, I know thou art a Maid: say nay, and
take them.


Bea. Sir, I beseech you, fasten no more upon me, then I may at ease shake
off. Your gift I reverence, yet refuse: and I pray tell me, Why do do you make
so many errands hither, send me so many Letters, fasten on me so many Favors?
what is your meaning in it?


Anto. Hark in thy car, I Will tell thee: Is It possible so soft a body should
have so hard a soul? Nay now I know my penance; you will be angry and school me
for tempting your modesty. A fig for this modesty; it hinders many a good man
from many a good turn, and that is all the good it does: but if thou but
knew, Beatrice, how I love thee, thou would be far more tractable. Nay, I
bar chiding when thou speakst: I Will stop thy lips if thou do but offer an
angry word: by this hand I Will do it, and with this hand too.


Bea. Sir, if you love me, as you say you do, show me the fruits thereof.


Ant. The stock I can; thou may see the fruits hear after.


Bea. Can I believe you love me, when you seek the shipwreck of my honor?


Anto. Honor! there is another word to flap in a man's mouth. Honor! why
should thou and I stand upon our honor, that were neither of us yet right
worshipful?


Bea. I am sorry, Sir, I have lent so large an ear to such a bad discourse; and
I protest, after this hour, never to do the like. I must confess, of all the
Gentlemen that ever courted me, you have possessed the best part in my
thoughts: but this course language exiles you quite from thence. Sir, had you
come, instead of changing this my honest name into a Strumpet's, to have
honored me with the chaste title of an honest wife, I had reserved an ear for
all your suits; but since I see your rudeness finds no limit, I Will leave you to
your lust.


Ant. You shall not, Beatrice.


Bea. Then keep your tongue within more moderate bounds.


Ant. I will; as I am vertous, I will. I told you the second word would be a
marriage: it makes a man forfeit his freedom, and walk up and down ever after,
with a chain at his heels. Marriage is like Daedalus his Labyrinth; and being
once in, there is no finding the way out. Well, I love this little property most
intolerably; and I must set her on the last, though it cost me all the shoes
in my shop. Well, Beatrice, thou see my Stomach is come down: thou have my
heart already, there is my hand.


Beat. But in what way?


Ant. Nay I know not the way yet; but I hope to find it hereafter, by your
good direction.


Bea. I mean, in what manner? in what way?


Ant. In the way of Marriage, in the way of honesty. I hope thou art a maid,
Beatrice.


Bea. Yes Sir, and I accept it; in exchange of this, you shall receive my heart.


Ant. A bargain, and there is earnest on thy lips.


A courtship (eloquently carried on both sides) between a youth, and his
formerly-sollicited fair one. Their names suppose to be RADOLPHUS, and TOMASO.
Rad. WElcome, fair one; I hope my pardon's sealed, for this presum'ng on what
you might call rudeness


Toma. You have shaped an Apology altogether needless, to excuse a guilt, when
none appears: I owe much to your virtue; it does command my thoughts.


Rad. Which are so glorious, I must admire the actions that express them. I
hope your judgment does not call it ill, that my intemperate anger, being
grounded on virtuous suspicion (last time I saw you) did transport me beyond a
moderate passion: I am satisfied; your innocence has cleared my jealousy.


Toma. Sir, it is a noble resolution: pure love's a virtue Nature only
teaches, and born with generous spirits that distinguish the object truly;
slighting those respects, that work on groster minds.


Rad. Fairest, I shall use no other circumstance, or paint a passion my reasons
eye allows, though my first sense conveyed the knowledge of your outward form
and full perfections, which must needs contain a richer inside: Virtue seldom
dwells, but in a glorious frame. I love your goodness, which outvies your
beauty: in my newborn wishes, I have determined you the partner of all that is
mine: my estate's not very mean; if it were, Zeal should supply: I Would strive to
merit the free gift of your self; and in exchange, return my self.


Toma. Sir, I could answer you in your own words: for I presume your thoughts
are noble, like your self, unmixt with flattery courtships insection, and the
poisonous breath that makes pure love suspected, whether it be sound, or
plastered, to deceive our credulous weakness, till it has possessed us with
some foul leprosy. Your handmaid yields to what agrees with honor; if the
meanness of her condition may presume to call her honest credit so.


Rad. How do you bless me, as suddenly as my desires could shape a means to
work it! instantly the Church shall seal the bargain.


Tom. Would you not deliberate? Those acts are lasting, and concern the being
of all your after-life.


Rad. It Is heavens providence that has disposed it: thus I seal my vows.


The Lover having an hope now to attain his Mistress grant, presents her a
Ring, with this Eulogy.
WHile this involves your heart, and Master-vein,
Imagine you are lost to your disdain:
This mystically whispers in your ear,
(With your strange coyness) I my doubts cashiere,
Sweet, let it be so; do as I intend,
And (like to this) our love shall have no end.
The Persians, who adore the rising Sun,
Will have each morn a Flamin for to run
Six times about a circle, to content
Great Jove, upon his Temples battlement;
Thereby mythologizing (sure) that he
Will love his creatures to Eternity.
This typifies, we ought to love for ever,
And that no harsh fate ought our loves to sever.
But Rings are nothing: if true love we want,
Our hearts must be hemmed round with Adamant
Impregnable against assault and Batt'rie,
Not to be taken by fear, or won by Flatt'rie.
This seems to say, what songs heavens quire shall sing
Whenas my arms shall be thy bodies Ring.
A pleaing Dialogue between a witty Lady, and a silly Gentleman: Their
(supposed) names CRISPINO, and PAMELA.
CRISPINO. I Sent you a Letter, Madam.


Pam. I received it (Sir) to my great happiness.


Crip. How did you relish it, Lady?


Pam. Excellent well (Sir) you write most elegantly. Oh that I had your Genius!


Crisp. I have twenty as good as these lying by me; they shall be all at your
service.


Pam. You are too much a Courtier: I must chide you: I did never deserve those
Epithets your Paper throws upon me.


Crisp. Epithets! I beseech you, Lady, to impute that to the fretfulness of my
brain. If any thing rare slipped my pen, whereby I may incur your Ladyships
indignation, I Will recant it publicly.


Pam. I will enjoyne you no such penance, for it is an injury easily remitted:
it is the glory, they say, of Lovers, to Hyperbolize.


Crisp. Hyperbolize! What Is that? I have not the word yet in my Alphabet. I
hope, Lady, you harbor a better opinion of me, then to imagine I would
Hyperbolize with you; that were immodest.


Pam. Not at all (Sir) I think.


Crisp. By my faith (Lady) but it is: do you think I know not what
Hyperbolizing is? that were simplicity. If any thing within my letters may be
drawn within construction of Hyperbolizing, condemn not me for it: by my
service, Lady, I had no intention to stretch so far to your dishonor; it shall
^each me wit to write my Letters hereafter.


Pam. Sir, you do me too much satisfaction, your error being a small one.


Crisp. It Is your favor, when I commit a Peccadille against your brightness: I
confess I deserve to be extinguished your presence for it. I did love you,
Lady, (as I remember) when I was an Infant.


Pam. How (Sir!) I hardly understand you.


Crisp. We are infants, you will grant, when we cannot speak; and I loved you
full five months and a half ere I had power to tell you of it, I am certain.


Pam. I was not worth so much (Sir.)


Crisp. Nay, for that (Lady) I Will show my self deserving: were you worthy, it
were less art of mine to love you; that were a poor thing: I do not stand on
worth, Lady; I would not have you think so ignobly of me, that I affect you for
your worth; I had rather (upon my honor) have you in your smock, then all the
Ladies in the world stark naked.


Aam. Now your language is coarse.


Crisp. My love is sure, and like the Sun transparent.


Pam. Now you complement; I know you are excellent at it.


Crisp. Troth not I, Lady; I cannot complement; I do but refulgent your beauty,
whose mellifluous voice peirces the Air: 'faith, Lady, credit me, I never could
complement in my life. Let me see; Most fair,
Whom young Apollo courted for her hair.


There are Poetical furies in the City; but I converse not with them.

Were ever checks of Roses, losks of Amber,
Ordained to be imprisoned in a Chamber?
Lady, I do but piddle, a pretender, I know nor how to complement.


Pam. You now (Sir) complement unto the height.


Crisp. Alas, not I, I cannot make verses neither.

Thy dain'y seal of virgin-wax,
That nothing but impression lacks.

Pam. You are an excellent Poet, I perceive (Sir.)


Crisp. I Will tell you, Lady, a strange thing; you see these trifles: before I
was in love, I could not have made an Acrostick in a day, sometimes two.


Pam. Now you can make Chronograms.


Crisp. I think I can; and Anagrams, for a need.


Pam. Sir, you are wondrously improved; Love has inspired you richly; I
perceive Cupid is a mute too.


Crisp. I cannot sleep anights, for the multitude of Verses that are capering
in my skull.


Pam. I wonder you are not mad.


Crisp. You may, but I have a gift to help it; I allow my self set times to
vent them, they would blow me up else.


Pam. As how, I pray (Sir?) I long to hear this.


Crisp. Why thus: in the morning, when I have said my prayers in verse (which
fall from me, and I never think on 'em) next my heart I scribble out an Ode:
after my breakfast, I fall upon a Satyr: when I have railed my self into a
fresh stomach (you understand me) a matter of two hours I dream, as it comports
with our British Bards to sleep; then, I say, I dream familiarly an Heroic
Poem.


Pam. Dream! how mean you (Sir?)


Crisp. Lady, while you live, your dreaming Poe^s are the best, and have
distilled raptures; I mean, spirits that converse with them, and reach them
what to write. This I set down before I eat again; after, I walk upon the
strength of supper into the Park, and ruminate an Elegy: at return, I do
discourse of Epigrams, and Epitaphs, upon some one or other of my kindred.


Pam. It Is now your course for your Heroic Poem; 'twere best you slept (Sir:)
I Will take my leave.


A m^rry Pastoral Dialogue, maintained between two Shepherds, viz. CLAIUS, and
CLEOPHON.
CLAIUS. WHich is she, among the Swains,
On whom the gentle Claius dains
To cast a sheeps-eye, nod, or wink,
But does her self immortal think?
Who, indeed, has such a face,
So full of a bewitching grace?
My head loves pillow where he does rest,
As safe as Magpie in her nest:
My sorehead sweetly is bespred
With Violets, and Tulips blew and red:
The amber Couslip, and the coral Rose,
Precious complexion of my sweeter nose:
My eyes are elements from which fall showers
That make my cheeks a spring of several flowers:
So is my head a nosegay growing on one stalk;
My body is the garden, though it walk;
And there is no woman but may well
To the worst part about it smell.
My arms are Dragons, that defend all these
Now viewed in me, living Hesperides.

CLEOPHON. Who looks on Claius, that will not suppose
The blushing Piony growing on his nose?
The yellow Primrose, that in woods had went
To flourish, springs up in his amber front.

CLAIUS. When they on Strephon will not gaze,
On me they stare, with much amaze;
And when on him, as on a clown,
With lowering looks they scowle and frown;
Let gentle Claius but vouchsafe
To let them look on him, they laugh.

CLEOPHON. And well they may; for when they look upon
Thy face, they view all fools conjoined in one.

A Dialogue (for the recreation of the Reader) supposed between BOMBO, and
JACOMO.
BOMBO. I Tell thee, honest Jacomo, that I
No more affect a woman, then the sky
Does birds that soar in it; they are as vain,
Inconstant as the flying showers of rain.

JACOMO. And for my part (friend Bombo) there is no maid,
Whether in homespun gray, or silks arayd,
But when she Jacomo does view,
Though I hye, but will pursue;
Throw her eyes out on my shape,
Call me Pigmey, pretty ape:
Some there are that do suppose
Loves hot fire is in my nose,
With which they scorcht, for pity cry,
Blow it out, Jacomo, or we die.
Other say my head's a bell,
My hair the ropes that ring the knell;
Here Is a Leg as neatly made,
As any over a woman laid;
A thigh proportionable, I take it;
O the maids long to see it naked!
A tail, some say, does hang thereby,
Which none must know but thee and I.
I have a back too, though I say it
That should not, can bear any weight:
Full limbs, with sinews strong and plump;
A lusty chine; and for my rump,
It Is so well made, and firmly knit,
The widows all are mad for it.

BOMBO. Women are shadows, fly away,
When followed, or desired to stay:
But if you slight them, they will sue,
Follow, entreat, nay fly to you:
But if stiff and strong you stand,
You may treat them at command;
But lie down, the pretty Elves
Will straight fall under you of themselves.
Like my Spaniel, beaten, they
Will lick your lips, and with you play.
This is the sole reason why
They love me so doggedly.
Women are slippery as Eels;
Their minds are light as are their heels;
And every one's for what she feels.

JACOMO. Who would trust a woman, when
They are the only curse of men?
Sirens sing but to entice
The men to a fools paradise.
Hyenas spoke but to betray
To certain ruin; so do they.
Crocodiles shed tears of slaughter;
Women weep when they mean laughter.
Inconstant, cruel, false, unkind,
Are attributes that suit their mind.

A Dialogue between GALFREDO, and ROSANA.
ROSANA. SIr, I cannot sinde how I am guilty of any cause may prompt you to
suspect either my love on duty.


Gal. I believe thee (dear Rosana:) but this injunction is so severe and
strange, it cannot choose but puzzle thy consent at first.


Ros. Sir, make it known; I cannot be so flow in the performance of your will,
as you are to reveal it.


Gal. Thy breath is far more sweeter then the smoke ascending from the Phoenix
funeral-pile; I could kiss thee, even engender on thy lips.


Ros. You were not wont to be thus pleased: show me, good Sir, which way I may
require your passion; speak the suit you talk on.


Gal. Dear Rosana, I do love thee, love thee, and would enjoy thee.


Ros. How (Sir) dare you divulge to me such brutishness? indeed the beasts
promiscuously do mix, but man made in the likeness of the Gods, orders his
actions to a safer end. Fare you well (Sir) I dare not hear you further.


A Dialogue between DANDALO, and LAURIANA.
DANDALO. DEarest Mistress, when shall my ardent love be made completely happy
by the enjoying that, which it makes the object of desire? shall this fair
morning be consecrated to Hymen?


Lau. Worthy Sir, so great is the Antipathy betwixt your birth and fortune and
my condition, whose inferior aim dares not be levelled higher then its
equality, makes (cowards policy) fear to be sole and true excuse of my delay;
for (Sir) were you once satiated with the thing you call pleasure, your edge
taken off, I know not what there is in me can whet new appetite, or revive a
dying love.


Dan. Why? I Will keep thee like my wife; be constant to my pleasure, be sure
I Will serve thy will with full content: my credit 's safe: to keep a Mistress
youths excuse may serve, but an inferior match brands my posterity.


Lau. Sir, I do hate your base desires; may your soul lusts still keep you
company, until abuse and shame teach you amendment; what a brave Orator is
sin! how it can paint it self with golden words of pleasure and delight!


Dan. I never could brook these women-preachers: Fare you well, Lady.


Lau. Would you could (Sir) so soon take leave of Lust.


A rough Soldier, in discourse with a soft Lady.
ALLINDRO, and IPHIGENIA. ALLINDRO. NOw, Lady, are you in have? or do you
slight a presence may challenge your observance? I am come confident of my
merit, to inform you, you ought to yield me the most strict regard your love
can offer.


Iphi. Sir, I am not (though I affect not self-conceited boast) so ignorant of
my worth, but I deserve from him who will enjoy me, a respect more fair and
court like.


Allin. The blunt phrase of war is my accustomed language; yet I can tell you
you are very handsome, and direct your looks with a becoming posture; I must
speak in the Heroic Dialect, as I use to court Bellona, when my desires aim
at a glorious victory.


Iphi. You Will scarce conquer a Lady with this stern discourse; Mars did not woo
the Queen of love in arms, but wrapped his battered limbs in Persian silks, or
costly Tyrian purples, spoke in smiles to win her tempting beauty.


Allin. I Will bring well-manag'd troops of Soldiers to the fight, draw big
battalia's like a moving field of standing corn blown one way by the wind,
against the frighted enemy; the Van shall save the Rere a labor, and by me
marshaled shall fold bright conquest in the curles. Peneian Daphne, who did fly
the Sun, shall give her boughs to me for ravishment, to invest my awful front;
and this shall prostrate (spite of all opposition) your nice soul to my
commanding merit.


Iphi. These high terms were apt to fright an enemy, or beget terror in
flinty bosoms. Can you think a timorous Lady can affect her fear, yield the
security of her peace and life to the protection of her horror? you must not
persuade my thoughts, that you who vary to the scene of love, can act it
presently.


Allin. Slighted (Lady!) it is a contempt inhumane, and deserves my utmost
scorn: I must find one more pliant.


Some person of honor being enamoured on a country-Genilewoman, a dispute
supposed between MONTALTO, and GENTILLA.
MONTALTO. YOu have no fear ( Gentilla) to trust your self with me.


Gent. I can (Sir) forget my self so much, as to forget you are my Lord, etc.
and in a wilderness could have no thought, with the least prejudice upon your
virtue.


Mon. You have the greater innocence at home; my intents are fair enough, and
you may stand the danger of a question: pray how old are you?


Gent. Although it be not held a welcome complement to our sex, my duty bids me
not dispute. I am Fifteen, my mother says, (my Lord.)


Mon. And are you not in love?


Genesis I must not charge my self with so much Ignorance, to answer that I
understand not what it means. I know the word, but never could apply the
sense, or find in it a passion more then ordinary.


Mon. Cupid has lost his quiver then; he could not be armed, and let you
escape, whose sole captivity would be more glory then the conquest made, (as
Poets feign) upon the Gods.


Genesis It Is language with which you are pleased to mock your humble handmaid.


Mon. But this assures him blind.


Genesis He would deserve to lose his eyes indeed, if he should aim a shaft at me.


Mon. Lady, you have a heart.


Genesis To which no other flame can approach, then that which shall light it to
obedience of your will, and my good mothers.


Mon. Obedience to my will? what if it were my will that you should love?


Genesis Sir, I do love.


Mon. Love with the warm affection of a Mistress?


Genesis Him whom I affect (Sir) must not presume to fold me in his arms, till
Hymen's torches shall burn bright. Him whom I love, must be my husband (Sir.)


Mon. What if some great man court you for his friend? This age affords few
women, but they will now and then hold up their laps, and let love enter in a
golden shower: But I shall take a fitter time for this -- Your servitor.


Genesis Your Handmaid.


A rich, but simple Gentleman, thus wooes and wins a counterfeit Lady, who not
unwillingly yields to his suit: their names suppose are PVPILLVS, and FLAVIA.
Pupillus. HOw, and how stands the business?


Flav. Nay, you know best.


Pup. Perceive you not an alteration, or transmutation in my outward person?


Flav. Methinks your words fall off your tongue with a more becoming grace.


Pup. Think ye so? be wise and catch 'em as they fall; they may inspire you.


Flav. you are strangely Metamorphos'd since I saw you.


Pup. O Lady, If your heart be stone, I would it were broken.


Flav. I have heard men wish their Mistress heart wounded, never broke.


Pup. P'shew, my love is not like other men's, that will whine, and cry, look
pale, and wear night-caps; no, my love is a bouncing love, and makes no more of
cracking a Ladies heart, then a Squirrel of a nut: but hark you a word in you
ear (for I would not have any body know it) I am inspired.


Flav. Now by Diana, is it true?


Pup. I have said it; be wise, and have me.


Flav. O you men have such strange ways to play upon poor women!


Pup. Nay there is but one way I Would play upon you.


Flav. And will dissemble most egregiously.


Pup. Who, I dissemble? why I Will be judged by all the world; yet all my acts
are not simple.


Flav. Nay, I almost believe you have not a thought but what is merely innocent.


Pup. If you will but marry me, there is not that desire or inclination, which
you shall have, but I will strive with my best part to satisfy; what would you
more?


Flav. I must confess you promise fair:


Pup. And will perform as well.


Flav. Alas! my Virgin-feares bid me I should not yield. I know not what to do.


Pup. Come, I know what to do, and you will but say I once.


Flav. Why then I wholly yield me yours.


Pup. That Is well said, this kiss in earnest; come we'll not stand long upon
the business, but be married presently: I must provide Ribbond for the
Courtiers; but that cost may be spared, now I think on it, for their Hats are so
stuffed with Favors already, they will find no room to wear 'em: come then
march forwards.


Hymen! O Hymen! snuff thy torch, and see,
A pair of Lovers lead their way to thee.
A Gentlewoman flattering her Suitor (who was none of the wisest) with hopes of
enjoying her, thus rccosts him: Their names suppose to be SYLLI, and CAMIOLA.
Camiola. YOu see how tender I am of the quiet and peace of your affection, and
what great ones I put off in your favor.


Syl. You do wisely, exceeding wisely! and when I have said, I thank you for it,
be happy.


Com. And good reason, in having such a blessing.


Syl. When you have it; but the Bait is not, yet ready; stay the time, while I
triumph by my self. Rivals, by your leaves; I have wiped all your noses,
without a Napkin; you may cry Willow, Willow; I Will only say, Go by, go gaze
now where you please: your lips may water, like a Puppies, over a Firmety-pot,
while Sylli out of his two-leav'd Cherrystone-dish drinks Nectar. I cannot hold
out any longer; Heaven forgive me, it is not the first Oath I have broke; Lady,
I must take a kiss or two, only for a preparative.


Came. By no means; if you forswear your self, we shall not prosper: I had
rather lose my longing.


Syl. Pretty soul, how careful it is of me! Let me buss yet thy little dainty
foot for it: that I am sure is out of my Oath.


Came. Why? if thou can dispense with it so far, I Will not be scrupulous; such
a favor my amorous Shoemaker sometimes steals.


Syl. O most rare Leather! I do begin at the lowest, but in time I may grow
higher.


Came. Fie, you dwell too long there: rise, prithee rise.


Syl. O I am up already.


A civil Complement, between a great Lord, and an honorable Lady: their names
are GIOVANNI, and FIORINDA.
Giovanni. Madam, THat without warrant I presume to trench upon your privacies,
may argue rudeness of manners. But the free access your princely courtesy
vouchsafes to all that come to pay their services, gives me hope to find a
gracious pardon.


Fio. If you please not to make that an Office in your construction, which I
receive as a large favor from you, there needs not this Apology.


Gio. You continue as you were ever, the greatest mystery of fair entertainment.


Fio. You are, Sir, the Master, and in the Country have learnt to outdo all
that in Court is practiced; but why should we talk at such distance? Sir, give
me leave to say you are too punctual: You are welcome, Sir; therefore sit and
discourse as we here used, for we have been more familiar.


Giov. Your Excellence knows so well how to command, that I can never err when
I obey you.


A Gentleman, accidentally seeing a Gentlewoman whom on the sudden be
exceedingly affects, thus courts her.
Man. LEt me not be thought rude (beauteous Mistress) that being altogether a
stranger to you, I dare assume such considence, as to proclaim my self your
Votary, and without a blush say I love you. If you beheld your self with my
eyes, or sympathized of my passion (which though young of growth, has a firm
fixed root) you would not (I presume) tax me of giddie rashness, that I suffer
my self so soon to be bound in loves fetters.


Wom. Sir, you are an overhasty lover, to imagine I can at first sight of your
person be surprised, and yield: they must be strong allurements, must rempt a
bashful Virgin, still inured to no companion but her fears and blushes, to
give her heart away, and live in thraldom to a stranger.


Man. Love (bright Mistress) has Eagles eyes; it can beget aquaintance, even in
a moment, suddenly as time, the time that does succeed it.


Wom. Sir, it seems you have studied Complement.


Man. Sweerest beauty, to make the addresses of my lovesick heart plain and
apparent to you, that you may search through my soul, and find it all your
creature, give me your patient hearing.


Wom. It Is a request might tax my manners, should I deny it to one that 's
noble (as your peron promises.) Use your pleasure.


Man. Which consists in viewing your bright beauty, the Idea of all perfections
which the Jealous heavens durst ever lend to earths divinest Lady. Mine (Lady)
is a holy intellectual zeal, past imitation, should those who trace me take the
constanty of Swans, or never-changing Turtles.


Wom. Sir, he is a foolish lover, who, to gain his mistress, dares not promise
what you have uttered: but I must have more then verbal assurance of your love.


Man. By your fair self, I am real; do intend what I have told you, with as
much true zeal as Anchorites, do their prayers; and do implore you, as you have
mercy in you, to take pity upon my loves stern sufferings, and redress them, by
your consent to take me for your husband.


Wom. I dare not, Sir, to give away my self upon so slender arguments, as your
own bare report of true love: time and experience may produce, what yet I must
not hope to hear on.


Man. Honor me then so much, as to permit me wait you home: and when that task
is done, and I must part from you, as exiles from their native soil, pray
think on me, as one that has placed his full extent of bliss in your enjoying:
think you are the Landwrack, by which the brittle Vessel of my hopes must
through loves swelling ocean be directed, to a safe harbor.


Wom. You are too powerful in your speech: you will put your self unto a tedious
trouble to gain a thing; which when you are possessed of, you will repent your
travel.


Instructions (directed by the Author primarily to the vulgar, yet he exempts
not some Gentlemen) host to demean themselves to their Mistresses.
YOu must not acoast her with ^^shing, as you were so wzie, with your Lady,
Sweet Lady, or most super-excellent Lady; nor in the Spanish garb, with a
state-face, as you had been eating of a Radish, and meant to swallow her for
Mutton to it: nor let your words come rumbling forth, other'd with a good
full-mouthed Oath, I love you: but speak the language of overcomming Lovers; I
do not mean that strange pedantick phrase used by some gallants who do aim at
wit, and make themselves stark asses by it; praise their Mistresses by the Sun
and Stars, while the poor Gyrles imagine they mean the signs their Mercers or
Perfumers inhabit at: But you must in gentle, free, and genuine phrase, deliver
your true affections; praise your Mistresses Eye, her Lip, her Nose, her Check,
her Chin, her Neck, her Breast, her Hand, her Foot, her Leg, her every thing;
and leave your Roses and your Lilies for your Country-Froes to make Nosegaies
of.

A gentleman sollicites a virtuous Gentlewoman to have the use of her body,
only to prove her: Their names suppose to be ROBERTUS, and LUCRETIA.
Rob. ARe you still resolute (my dearest Mistress) to persist in your strange
tyranny, and scorn my constant love?


Luc. Do not, Sir, abuse that sacred title which the powers celestial glory in,
by ascribing it to your not desires; pray rather clothe them in their own
attributes; term them your lust, Sir, you wild irregular lust.


Rob. This is coyness, a cunning coyness, to make me esteem at a high rate,
that Jewel which you ^eem to part from so unwillingly: (Merchants use ^t, to
put bad ware away:) think how much gold and silver thou shall gain, in the
exchange of one poor trivial commodity: that thing called Honor, which you so
much stand upon, is merely an imaginary voice, an unsubstantial essence; and
yet for that thou shall have real pleasures, such as Queens, prone to delicious
Luxury, would cover, to sat their appetites.


Lucr. Away, Sir, you have a cankered soul; and know, Sir, not your estate
(were you rich Croesus heir) shall buy my honor.


Rob. Pray, sweet, forgive me; seal it with one chaste kiss, and henceforth let
me adore you as the saver of my honor (had I meant as I said.) My truth and
sames preserver, by heaven, I did but try you (I must confess) having a great
amb't'on to prove them liars, who extolled your worth. Had you yielded to my
desires (my looser heart by your consent extinquisht) I should have esteemed
(yea, divulged it to the world) that you were but a piece of counterfeit gold,
a fair house haunted with Goblins, which none but a madman would enter to
possess: but I have found your worth, and beg your pardon.


Lucre. You have it, Sir, although 'twas not well done to tempt a woman's
weakness. Fare you well, Sir.


Rob. Farewell, the best of women.


The wooer (that he may the better facilitate his full to the mistress) thus
enters into conserence with her maid.
Wooer. SWeet Beancha, thou art entirely loved of her whom I love more then my
own life; thou art present at all her critical minutes; rub'st her toes, and
helpst to pull her smock ore her ears: prithee, when opportunity shall conspire
with time, and thou hear'st thy Mistress praising or pitying her wooers
(mentioning me amongst the rest) let me have thy applausive vote: I know thou
art prevalent with her, 'bove all her other menials.


Maid. Sir, you have amply obliged my gratitude, and (indeed) have bought my
suffrage. Sir, expect my utmost oratory on your behalf.


Wooer. Sweetest Beancha, I am spaciously bound to thee, and shall ever
continue thy beneficial friend: prithee wear this Diamond for luck-sake:
there is twenty good Angels immured in that one stone; I give them as thy guard:
take heed, Beancha, that thou prove true unto me, the stone will lose its virtue
else.


Maid. Fear not my fidelity: Sir, did you but know how I solicit for you --


Wooer. Nay, my Beancha, do not think I have least doubt of thy past pains, or
future perseverence. If I obtain this Gentlewoman, thou shall have cause to
thank that fate that destined thee for this employment. But prithee deal
heartily with me; how stands the affections of thy mistress toward her fiery
suitor Mr. E.N? I fear, the vastness of his wealth will excuse the shallowness
of his wit, and make him gracious in her eyes.


Maid. Never doubt him, Sir: my Mistress, though she hold it not convenient
quite to eject him from her presence, harbors not one good thought of him: she
has professed to me in private, that in her esteem he is a mere stick of
sugar candy; and indeed, she sees quite through him. But, if my desires do not
delude my hopes, you are the Jason, Sir, that win this Medea, and the Golden
Fleece to boot: nor do I doubt it.


Wooer. Thou sing'st sweetly in my ears: touch but this string, and I could
stand a frosty winters night, shrouded but with my shirt, to hear thy melody.
If our united strength can but take in this fort, we'll mutually triumph, and
share one happiness. Some two hours hence, I mean to view my goddess. Farewell,
my best Beansha.


Bean. Your best wishes wait on you, worthy Sir.


A Gentleman fired with the report of a rich (but nice widow) having abruptly
forced himself into her company, thus sollicites her.
Man. YOur pardon (lovely widow) for my bold intrusion. The blind boy
hathwings, to signisie expedition; is ever armed, to show that he can make way
(if need be) through the strictest opposition. The fame of your feature, and
not the report of your wealthy possessions, has put me upon this practice (I
mean, this unexpected visiting you) which so many mortals (either funished with
too much temerity, or else not qualified with sufficient audacity) have
(hitherto) feared to attempt, weakened (it seems) with a double wound; the
austerity of your deportment, and the radiant refulgencie of your Star-like
eyes: the first more painful then the latter; and the latter more
insupportable then the first.


Wid. Indeed, Sir, you have amply discovered your self to be more rash then
wise, more giddy then grave, and more perverse then politic. What have you
heard of me, that might encourage you to this supercilious sawciness? I must
tell you, Sir, that you have proclaimed your own unworthiness, with your own
tongue, by this wayward way of wooing. Do you think, Sir, to ingratiate your
self into my favor by your daring Impudence? He that prescribes himself the
way to gain a good opinion from me, must win it by his obsequious care, not by
his abrupt arrogancy.


Man. Fair Widow, let me implore remission for this first fault; my future
carriage toward you, shall be but one contiuned series, commixt of love and
service. When I first hearkened to the breath of Fame (too thrifty in divulging
your rare feature) I felt the flames of true affection hovering about my heart:
but this inch of time that my eyes have been so blessed to gaze on your bright
beauty, Cupid has cast all Aeina in my bosom; and without you be pleased to
afford me love, I shall expire in flames, and be converted to an heap of
Cinders.


Wid. You have the art for to paint out a passion: but were it granted Cupid
thus has caught you, count you me, Sir, so levious, as to return a grant of
what (perhaps) is not in me to give, unto a man merely a stranger unto me
(before this interview) an acquaintance of half an hours growth? Sir, I must
know your breeding, and your worth; your substance, and the temper of your
mind, ere I assent unto a second marriage: but if heaven keep me sixth to my
resolves, were there no better feeders of Pedigrees, then I am like to prove,
Nature will have no cause for to complain of her too numerous breed.


Man. Dear Widow, you shall have a full testimony of me: my birth's not mean,
my education has been virtuous; nor is my estate yet sunk beneath the degree
of fear. But do not say, (nor for both the Indies think) you will end your days
in solitude, and like the melancholy Phoenix, engender with your self;
twill-give the babbling vulgar cause to think, that your dead husband was no
complete man; or that your self, by some default in nature, takes no felicity
in amorous acts. O sly this single life! Venus has two Doves to draw her
Chariot: Daphne was metamorphos'd to a tree; curel Anaxeret, to a marble
statue: but flexible Ariadne, converted to a glorious Star, her brows ingirt
with a bright wreathe of Saphires. Nor was there any kind and gentle semale,
propitious to her lover, or her wedded mate, but the all-powerful Ports have
divulged them for eminent constellations, pleasant flowers, and mates for
Goddesses.


Wid. This is vain Poetry. But Sir, because I will not seem too rigid, or
christen my self cruel; hereafter, when I know you better, have learnt what you
have been, and what you are, you may expect as much as may be thought, from her
who hugs her not proudly obstinate; must think him truly man, whom she can
honor; hates not the poor, yet loves not beggary; and would in all things be a
complete woman.


Man. May I then have the promise of such happiness, as in the mean time, til
your doubts are solved, to have access unto you. By all things virtuous, no
unbeseeming errand, unbecoming gesture, or distasteful act, shall give you
cause to hate, or me to fear: only debar me not sometimes to see you.


Wid. You have your wish, Sir: as you are a Gentleman, I dare not to deny you
such a favor; yet let not your visits be too frequent, too early in the
morning, or too late at night. Sir, this large dispensation had not been, were
I not confident of your noble thoughts, and what you (seemingly) sincerely
promise.


Man. You bless me above measure.


A friend meeting an acquaintance of his accidentally at the Tavern.
The fir. MR. E.D. Bacchus has much befriended me, to guide my feet to such an
happiness as to embrace you here, whose company I have ever called, my chief
solace.


The sec. Sir, you are pleased to take notice of him, who is altogether
unworthy your acquaintance, and whose utmost ambition is to be listed amongst
the number of your humblest servants.


The first. O friend! you strive to be acute in your responsions, and would
fain oblige me your creature, by your voluntary submissiveness. With leave of
your self, and this your worthy friend, let this room hold all three. But why,
dear friend, have you so long absented your self from my dwelling?


The sec. Sir, I hope you have not been in prison, or have commenced a suit in
Law, or been visited with sickness, that swist time (in your opinion) seems to
flag his wings, or to have sprain'd his feet. It is but six days since
(accompanied with our loving mate Mr. I.R.) I supt with you and your fair wife,
at your own mansion.


The first. You have resolved my querie. Six days (said you?) why to me (who
love you) by computation it appears six months. Pilades and Orestes slept
beneath one roof; Damon and Pithius never took two ways: our friendship has
been long, let it be lasting. Do you not know my self? all my Demesticks,
whatever I call mine (my wife excepted) are at your command.


The se. Sir, I have ever been beholding to you, and do confess your many
bountious favors are far beyond the hope of my requital: I love not, Sir, to
heap upon the tally.


The first. Now you wrong your judgment, and desert, your first fair
principles: this language does imply, you dare not trust my goodness: this
(dear friend) deserves severe amercement: I will prescribe your penance; you
shall for one whole fortnight rest beneath my roof; nor eat nor drink but in my
company; this to begin from the first minute that we leave this place: and as a
tie unto this stipulation, pledge me this bowl of sack.


The second. You may command your creature; I Will pledge you, with a hearty
zeal; although I fear you by this solemn contract have but found out a way to
charge your self. --


The first. No more of that (dear friend.)


A young man who has formerly solicited, and received a repulse, thus renews
the onset, and prevails.
Young man. SWeetest, I hope your late refusal of my love, is altered now, by
your more gentle pity. My constancy carries more strength about it, then to be
blasted with your first repulse. Forced forward by the cause of my affection, I
must again be advocate, and hope my suit will be effected.


Maid. Sir, I beseech you, make me not thus the subject of your mirth or
complement: your soul is too secure (however you are pleased to talk) in its
own manly virtues, from surprise of weak affection.


Young man. Your bright eyes, like heavens blessed light, when from a mist of
clouds he peeps, and gilds the earth with brightness, can quicken and fire even
marble hearts, with love; thaw souls of Ice. A malefactor's fears are more upon
him ere he do come to his trial, then when he hears the Judge pronounce the
sentence of his death; it is so with me; and I should be more blessed, to hear
that voice of yours, with a severe refusal strike me dead, then live tormented
in a sad suspense, ignorant of my destinies


Maid. Sir, could I frame my Virgine-thoughts to love, they should be fixed on
you: but I am so well content and settled in a Virgin life, I cannot wish to
change it.


Young man. Alas, fair maid, Virg'nity is but a single good, a happiness which,
like a Misers wealth, is as from others, so from your own use, locked up and
closely cabin'd, since it admits no communication of its good. When you shall
in the state of marriage freely taste Natures choice pleasures, you will repent
you much you ere affected a single life.


Maid. You have prevailed: receive me freely. I am yours for ever.


Young man. Let this kiss seal the contract.


The parting of two friends.
The first. SIr, I am infinitely sorry, that my emergent business will not
permit me yet longer to enjoy your company.


The second. Sir, you best know your own occasions; I shall not desire to
detain you a minute longer then you may safely swear 'twill prove no detriment
unto your state.


The first. You are noble in all your deportments; and shall engage me firmly,
if you will but please, about to morrow this time, to honor me with your person
at my house.


The sec. Sir, I shall wait on you the hour you wish; but with assured hope to
find you no nonresident.


The first. Else let me forfeit your fair friendship. Farewell, my worthy
friend; I shall expect you.


The second. Except great Jove once more contract two nights in one, to sport
with his Alemena, and Morpheus drive Sol's chariot, I will not fail. Much
happiness wait on you, Sir.


An humorous conceited fellow meeting an old (but painted) Gentlewoman. Their
names, CACADROMO, and Mistress FULSOME.
Cac. Save thee, sweet parcel of paint; you come from the Oil shop now.


Ms. Fuls. How, Sirhah! from whence!


Cac. Why, from your scurvy face-physick. I have met thee often in this angle
of the City. To behold thee not painted, inclines somewhat near a miracle.
These in thy face, were deep ruts, and foul sloughs, the last progress thou
made to thy suburb-bawd. There was a Lady in France, that having had the
Small Pox, flayed the skin off her face, to make it more level; and where
before she looked like a Nutmeg-grater, ever after she resembled an abortive
hedgehog.


Ms. Fuls. You are a soolish knave; do you call this painting?


Cac. No, no; but you call it carreening of an old morphew'd Lady, to make her
disimbogue again. There Is rough-cast phrase, to your plastique. Farewell, old
crone of Cappadocia.


Ms. Fuls. Now the curse of Cuckolds light upon thee.


A friend having brought one of his acquaintance home, thus entertains him.
JULIO, COSMO. Jul. Sir, I have too much intrencht upon your patience, to bring
you thus far, for so poor a welcome.


Cos. You have obliged my gratitude above thought: your heart I see's as fairly
spacious, as this your well built, richly surnisht fabric. I am too poor in
Courtship, to express how I accept this favor.


Jul. You abound in all perfections. Please you sit, and taste those homely
cates my house affords, which I present unto you with as awful love, as mortals
offer incense to the Deities.


Cosm. You prompt me what to say, Sir: those words transvers'd, would better
fit my utterance.


Jul. Pray, Sir, let this be but a formal entrance unto our future friendship:
I am obliged to you for many favors; in the performance of which courtesies,
you have shown your self the legitimate son of your most worthy father, as well
heir to his Virtues, as his Lands


Cosm. Sir, Challenge all my services, as your own; command whatere is mine:
all my faculties shall be employed, to practice retribution.


Jul. Sir, I thank you, and shall be ever pressed to gratify your goodness.
Pray, Sir, eat; how relish you this Greekish wine?


Cosm. It Is precious as the milk of Queens; I have not drank the like: great
Ottoman himself quaffs not a purer liquor. Sir, to our future amity.


Jul. I most cordially thank you. My house was never furnished until now, your
presence makes me happy.


Cosm. Sir, You too much grace your servant.


Jul. Sir, you want what I wish, some choice dishes, which would persuade you
feed more freely.


Cosm. Lucullus, were he here himself, could not repine at this repast: I am no
Gurmundizer, nor yet am guilty of their ridiculous gestures, who must have
every bit sawc'd with this word, Sir, I beseech you eat; and rise as hungry,
but more fools by far, then when they sat down.


Jul. You are in all respects your self, Sir. But 'faith, since we are so
opportunely met, let us not part so coolly. Though my own wine be good, the
mischief is, I have no bush hangs at my door, no linen aprons to squeak Anon,
Sir: the name of Tavern, adds to our desires. Me thinks absurdities dance round
about me, when I drink healths at home.


Cos. Sir, Bacchus will reward you for your courtesy entailed unto his Priest.
My service waits upon you.


Two Gentlemen (acquaintance) meet in the streets.
VALASCO, PEDRO. Ped. MY dear friend Valasce, now in the name of good
fellowship, what has been the impediment that has hindered you from visiting
me these many weeks? I hope you are not turned Stoic, nor in love with Cato's
beard, or Diogenes his Tub. Are the Table-books, Bowling-allies, and Taverns,
now grown useless? Thou were a Courtier, when there was a Court. I hope these
dog-daies are not so dangerous, but we may sport and quaff with Imitation, and
deal for wholesome flesh, without being at the charges to disburse to Panders
and Porters, for a cloudy conveyance to our own lodgings.


Vala. Sir, You are mightily mistaken, if you conceit I am one of Chrysippus
Scholars ( Aristippus I will allow to be my Master.) These froward times cannot
transmigrate an Anchorites soul into my breast; no, I retain my merry temper
still. I throw Size-ace, till I lose to my shirt; bowl away Crowns as
Counters; not give ore till my pockets look like the picture of famine, lean
and empty; and I walk after the bowls with my hands behind me, to denounce who
plays fairest, not daring to bet: there is a rub, you will say. I am still the
same I was when you saw me last, in feature, gesture demeanor, and all other
appurtenances; only my will is not to you as formerly. I must tell you, Pedro,
that you have forfeited the name of a friend: and by all my hopes, were it not
that the thought of our former amity suppressed those flames of fury in my breast,
I now should kill thee.


Ped. Valasco, I know you think I am so much a man, as not to fear your worst
of anger, were you Alcides second, and grasped Joves thunder bolt; much less
with supple hams, and suppliant hands, to creep to you, and beg your
absolution. Had I been guilty of that breach of friendship, which you unkindly
do suggest, I would maintain and justify my error, maugre your sword or
buckler. But how, Sir, have I wronged you?


Vala. The Blade Don Bombo, two hours since I met, who told me, eight days ago
you and he supt together at your Mistress Scorpiona's lodging; where, in
discourse what truely-noble sparks the Inns of Court now yielded, he rankt me
amongst the rest; but you with scorns and taunts, before your Mistress,
proclaimed me nothing worth; a man of a dull sense, only a valiant voice; with
many other most unfriendly terms, so base, I hate to name them.


Ped. Now by the Gods, Valasco, that Rogue Don Bombo has abused us both: thee,
by a false and slanderous information; me -- But I Will not stand to talk; I Will
make cutworks in the villains skin, and slice his throat so wide, next time he
drinks his mornings draught, he shall go near to spil his liquor; he shall
confess before you, or else under his hand recant this lie, and eke record
himself a branded Rascal. Will that atone you, and renew our loves?


Val. I have ever harbored noble thoughts of you, and shall esteem your
friendship ever precious, worthy the acceptance of a Deity. Chastise this
Rascal till he cries peccavi; and, like to broken bones, which, distocated by
some unhappy accident, set by a skilful hand, unite more firm then ever, our
friendship shall take birth anew; we'll be another Pilades and Orestes.


Ped. No more of this: my deeds shall speak my real thoughts: let us to the
Tavern, Bully, and there, over full-crown'd cups, join our right hands. Ho,
Coachman! hurry us, in thy four-wheel'd pouch, to that Argolian Bachanalian
Clifton, who keeps the golden Fleece securely safe; yet hangs it as a sign,
even at his door. His marble vault (alone) includes Nepenthe: the Co^sick-grape
is only his. Away, away.


Two Merchants on the Exchange; Mr. Main Mast, and Mr. Topsaile.
Main mast. MR. Topsaile, your best wishes ^nviron you; you see I keep my word.


Top. Good faith I saw you not. All happiness wait on you, sweet Mr. Main Mast;
you are a strict observer of your time.


Mainmast. I ever was so, Sir. Time's an old cross-penny father, and must be
waited on obsequiously, he fl es ye else. But what is the news from Neptune's
Sea? how goes things in the great and watery world? are your ships rib'd with
riches? is Aeolus propitious to your Vows; his bag-cheek'd Boys not too
robustious? Ha? I Am sure I find a great decay of Trade. Tritons, attended by a
crew of Sword-fishes, are turned most desperate Pirates: no traffic, no
commerce with foreign Nations. Alas that ere I lived to see this day.


Top. Had I had the sage Ulysses power, for to seclude all winds from Seas
save Zephyrus, my foreign trade could not have been more prosperous, then
till within these few years: but now, it is true (with storms on land) perpetual
gusts at Sea shake all commerce to nothing; yet I bear up still, and as my
name, Top and Top-gallant like, I plow on Neptune, and return safely home,
with all my purchases. Cesars motto's mine, man: next him, I sure shall be
recorded to have been dame Fortunes only favorite. Veni: with English wares I
did arrive in Spain. Vidi; I had a rich return. Vici: I came home with a merry
wind. Tityre tu patule quae nunc non est narrandi locus.


Mainmast. Learned Mr. Topsaile, the Gods of the seas befriend you marvellously.


Top. I Am much bound indeed to the old blue-beard, Neptunus; to his Sons the
Trytons, his Daughters the Mermaids, and his couzens the Whales. But no more of
this: many words will not fill a man's belly: should we talk this two hours,
there would be little use of a pick-tooth. My much-honour'd friend, Mr.
Mainmast, shall I be so happifi'd this night, as to enjoy your company at the
carving out of a Shoulder of Mutton, cutting up of a pair of Coneys, and
carbonadoing of a cold Capon?


Mainmast. Sir, you shall command the exercise of my teeth, and the silence of
my tongue. I Will wait on you, Sir.


Tops. O Sir, you teach me what to say: I am your humble ereature, and very
happy in the society of so worthy a friend. Nay, Sir, let me alone for
complements, if I set upon it. Come, good Mr. Mainmast.


The Wooer sending his Mistress a pair of white-frin'gd Gloves.
WHen on your whiter hands these Gloves you draw,
Remember Cupid, and his spotless law.
Mortals do wrong him much, with sly pretense;
And when they love, they Doctors do commence
In Cunning's college, whenas love is free;
There is no craft in perfect amity.
These are fringed round: Phylacteries were good,
Till by the Pharisees died deep in blood.
The color which Narcissus took, when he
Converted to a Daffadil, here see;
Which Hieroglyphically seems to tell,
In hating me, you love your self too well.
How happy are these skins, that may at pleasure
Kiss your fair hands, and rifle all loves treasure!
But these must be compelled that thing to do,
For which I sigh, and pray, and weep, and woo.
But know (bright fair one) when my task is don,
You shall not need (like these) to draw me on.
Complemental LETTERS Fitted to all Humors and Inclinations; useful and
delightful.
To the Intelligent Reader.
Cupid, here, has taken wing
(Larke-like) to the heavens does sing.
Peneian Daphne here displaies
Her arms, and shrouds him with her bays.
A vast pile of Sabean gums,
Smocking with fat Hecatoms,
Thou may behold, and cheer thy sense
With choice Idalian frankincense.
Harmonious echoes do invite
Thee to attention and delight.
If Humors do not Judgment blind,
A Zoylus I Will not fear to find.
One of a law and humble birth, falling in love with some great Lady, thus
presents his service.
Gracious Madam,
YOu are a Lady in whom consists all that heaven has raised to perfection. I
am too poor to enjoy so great a Treasure; and shall be ever, till I grow
immortal; which alone rests in your power to make me. It Is not your birth or
fortune that I court, heavens witness with me: for had you been an humble
shepherdess, and I a Monarch, this love had been, 'cause 'twas decreed by Fate.
When I first saw you, methought my soul was forced to obey a Trance; and as a
Vision, my amazed sight heheld you. The revolution of those Star-like eyes
deserves a new Astronomy, to contemplate it. I know I catch at a Star, and
attempt to fathom Clouds; but it is not that thing called danger, that can
affright me: Were you enclosed with rocks of marble, whose lofty tops knew no
distance betwixt the Skies and them, I would, with winged speed, seal those
aspiring Walls; and, in despite of all that durst detain you, bear you in my
arms, beyond the reach of danger. You have been pleased, bright Anaxerete, to
smile upon your poor Iphis; the radiant luster of your eyes has exhaled those
dull and foggy vapors, that clogged my soul with the contemplation of my great
unworthiness: O continue those soul-reviving beams, since without their
comfortable influence, I must freeze to Crystal, and perish more miserably then
the wrath of Gods or Men (united) can possibly shower upon the caytiffhead of
any desolate mortal.

Bright Goddess, Your humble admirer, and sworn Servant, etc.

An Amourist being forbidden by his Mistress any more to Court, by Epistle or
otherwise, declares himself thus.
Dear Mistress,
YOu have given me command not to love; which I confess I have ill obeyed: but
you know, Mistress, that forbidden things are ever most coveted by mortals;
which is the reason that I have not had the power, since your forbidding me^ to
think of any other thought, but of loving you, Mistress, there is no kind of
duty that I owe you not; there is no cruelty of chance or Fate, to which I
shall not willingly expose my self, to obey you (...) but either cease you to
forbid me love, or otherwise forbid your Image to pursue me; since that follows
me everywhere, and leaves me not I berty or thought, but what it does inspire.
You man as well forbid the water for to descend, and fire to mount on high, as
command me to forbear to love you; which I must do, though in doing so, the
fire of love parch me to cinders.

Cruel Mistress, Your constant lover, not to be shaken off by frowns or
threats, etc.

The Lover having received an utter denial of his profer'd service, so that he
is out of hope to accrue his desired hapiness, takes his leave of his Lady thus
mornfully.
(Fair, fair one)
CAn law or torture fright his soul, who is every hour extended on the wrack?
No: since you despise me, 'twill add unto my future happiness, when love shall
know I Am one that di'd your martyr. And for my body, when entombed in earth, a
Cypress-tree shall spring up from my grave, under whose shade such mournful
lovers as are punished with disdain, shall come and pay sad tribute of their
tears; which by that charitable air which does convert the falling dew into a
frost, shall be congealed, and raise to my sad memory a lasting monument of
transparent crystal.

So dies your distressed Martyr, R. H.

The Lover being to pass beyond the seas, or otherwise to absent himself a
while from his Mistress, takes leave of her, thus.
My dear,
SO leave the wintered people of the North, the minutes of their summer, when
the Sun departing leaves them in cold walls of Ice, as I leave thee (my only
happiness on earth) commanded from thy presence by an irresistible Fate. But
though we are severed for a time, a span o^ time, 'twill increase our joys,
when next we meet; when we shall join again in a confirmed unity for ever:
such will our next embraces be (my dearest) when the remembrance of former
dangers (our parents angry frowns upon our loves) will fasten love in
perpetuity, will force our sleeps to steal upon our stories. These days must
come, and shall, without a cloud or night of fear, or envy: till when, keep
warm my soul within thy bosom.

Thy devoted servant, T. B.

The Amourist having failed to meet his Mistress at a place appointed, thus
excuses himself.
Mistress,
I Attended in much fear, and with more patience, the space of three hours,
this morning, in my chamber, expecting every minute some ominous embassy from
you, to scourge me into a just penance, for neglect (as you may suppose)
offered unto you yesterday, in not waiting on you according to my promise: but
anxieties (to my great content) proving abortive, I have assumed the confidence
to apologize thus for my contempt. My hearts joy, I know you think that your
self is the Loadstone that attracts my soul (though I confess I have hitherto
found your heart like a peble, (mooth, but stony) and that when I am restrained
from your sight, like a melancholy vegetive, in the absence of the Sun, I hang
down my drooping head. Think not that I desire to withdraw from so worthy a
servi^ as I esteem yours; under whom I choose rather to suffer extreme tyranny,
then elsewhere to live beneath the perfectest Empire. But so it happened, that at
the very hour when I was preparing to come and wait on you, a Messenger bathed
in sweat, came to certify me, that my Uncle (of whom I have received a large
Legacy) lay even at the point of death, earnestly wishing to behold me ere his
departure to the invisible land: the performance of whose desire, was the only
occasion that impedited my attendence on you. I humbly entreat you (Mistress)
to accept of this true narration, as a sufficient excuse: which shall continue
you in my opinion,

The glory of my thoughts, sovereign Good of my life, and extreme felicity of
my soul, R. T.

The Lover having found his Mistress basely inconstant, takes his last farewell
of her thus.
Lost Love,
SInce I must write to one that has scorned to answer my Epistles any time
this month, take it not in favor of you; it is not to you, but to this paper
that I tell my thoughts; so to disburden my self of them, as that I may never
more have them in mind, except to detest their causer. You have not deceived
me: for I long since foresaw the instability of your mind. If yet you did tell
me the cause of this your infidelity, if not able to find a just occasion, you
took the pa^ne but to search a pretense that were colored with salfe
appearance, I would herein excuse you against my self. This then is my comfort,
that you have no other reason for your change, then your own inconstancy: and
though I have not ties enough to stay you, yet have I resolution enough to let
you go; and have as much patience in your loss, as I ^ad contentment in your
possession. Adien for ever. And because you shall be certainly assured, that I
now as perfectly hate you, as heretofore I dotingly affected you (to perpetuate
your memory) I will fix this Epitaph upon your Tomb.

Epitaph.
Here remains a piece, that Shame
Does forbid to own, or name:
She was once as this a stone,
Till conversion made her none:
Then, her beauty stained her soul;
Being fair, she was most foul:
Loved, yet hated all; it is crossed;
Whom she loved, she hated most.
She was skilled in Language too;
Every Nation did her woo.
She could French interpret well,
Till she fashioned how to spell
Through the Nose. If any pass
On this tender yiedling grass,
To view this piece, do not weep;
It Is a passion they may keep.
Only Clarity bids us say,
She is happy now she is clay.
The Lover being prohibited the sight of his Mistress, either by the strictest
opposition of her Parents, or the persuasive counsel of her guardian, sends her
this Letter.
Dearest Love,
THere is no longer means of living absent from my life: since you are not with
me, I am no more my self. I may be forbidden the seeing of you, but never the
loving of you: or if they will for bid, yet they can never hinder me. Such as
owe me most good will, do testify the least unto me, and that by reason of my
affection: but I choose rather to be little obedient to them, to be the more
faithful to you. Live you then in this assurance, if you will not that I die;
and become assured likewise, that my life shall sooner be extinct, then that
fair flame that daily does consume it.

Divine Mistress, your humble creature, happy to serve you, A. S.

A Maid, or Widow, having afforded her Suitor a final answer (perhaps)
contemned and affronted him, may upon change of thoughts, seek toregain his
love, thus.
(Worthy Sir)
IF there be no greater Cor'sive unto the mind of one, then that which forces
us (despite of our selves) to seek to those whom we have before (and that
without just cause) notoriously offended, then certainly am I the most wretched
creature living: for (as now) there is no means left for me to escape from
ruin, but only by thy help (sweet friend) alone, who have more reason to wish
my overthrow, then my good fortune or health any way at all, in that thou have
found such extreme and barbarous discourtefie in me. Nevertheless, if
thygenerous and gentle mind, cannot feel this injury (done unto thee by a silly
Maid) then I beseech thee, think no more upon my offense; but burying it deep,
under thy feet, do that for my sake, which the bearer hereof shall make thee
privy to: and then shall thou quickly perceive, what great satisfaction I will
make thee, for my fault committed; granting unto thee that which thou shall
most desire. Give credit unto this Messenger; assuring thy self that I am

Thine most obliged M. L.

A Captain, Colonel, or common Soldier, falling in love with some gentlewoman,
thus manifests his passions.
(Fair gentlewoman)
IF it be an irrevocable doom, that men, be they never so valiant or
courageous, shall be subject unto a braver and more livelier force then their
own; I hope you will not marvel overmuch, that I humbly yield to your divine
graces; and, as a captive your to beauty, prostrate my self a prisoner at your
feet. But as mortal men deserve no countenance from the heavens, until they
have by many proofs testified their faithful and dutious service toward them;
so, I will not presume to importune you to affect me at all, much less to yield
me any guerdon for my pains, until that by my dutious service I show my self
(in some part) worthy your gracious smiles. Mine only request to you is, that
it would please you to have me in your lively remembrance; and not to
entertain another, as your loyal Servant, before you shall have just occasion
to discard and give me over: for as (no doubt) it will be little pleasing unto
you (hereafter) to repent you, that you have made a worse choice then of my
self; so it will be far more bitter unto me, then a most desperate death, to be
discharged from serving her, whom I love more then my own heart, and cherish
more then my own life, yea then my own soul, which is (now) wholly yours,
seeing that he that is the owner of the same, is the inviolable slave to your
incomparable self.

A. R.

LETTERS in Verse: With other curious Conceits, and fine Fancies.
To the Reader.
Behold, Apollo does invite thee,
Yet a third time to delight thee:
A pleasant Tempe, planted well
With Flowers of odoriferous smell;
In the midst whereof do chill
Aganippe waters drill.
The Muses, whose sweet melody
Draws Jove down from the arched Sky,
Charm Pluto's self, and all the Fiends;
To heaven climbes, to hell descends:
Hand in hand, now in a Ring,
Invite thee, for to hear them sing.
Enter, and take thy free delight:
And 'cause (perhaps) thy Appetite
Cannot with one dish sated be
I give thee, here, Variety.
The Lover being forced from his Mistress presence.
(Mistress)
Banished from you, I charged the nimble wind,
My unseen messenger, to speak my mind
In amorous whispers to you; but my Muse,
Lest the unruly spirit should abuse
The trust reposed in him, said it was due
To her alone, to sing my love to you.
Hear her then speak, bright Lady, from whose eye
Shot lightning to his heart; who joys to dye
A Martyr in your flames: O let your love
Be great, and firm as his! then naught shall move
Your settled faiths, that both may grow together,
Or (if by Fate divided) both may wither.
Be constant, as you are fair: for I foresee
A glorious Triumph waits of the victory
Your love will purchase; showing us to prize
A true content; there only love has eyes.
Divine Lady, yours more then his own, etc.

The Lover being anxious of his Mistress constancy.
Fair,
SWeet, if you like and love me still,
And yield me love for my good will,
And do not from your promise start,
When your fair hand gave me your heart;
If dear to you I be,
As you are dear to me:
Then your I am, and will be ever;
Nor time, nor place, my love shall sever,
But faithful still, I will persever,
Like the constant marble-stone,
Loving but you alone.
But if you favor more then me
(Who loves thee still, and none but thee)
If others do the harvest gain,
That Is due to me for all my pain,
If that you love to range,
And often for to change:
Then get you some newfangled mate;
My doting love shall turn to hate;
Esteeming you (though too too late)
Not worth a pebble-stone,
Loving not me alone.
The Lover being transported in his fancy, complements in an high style with
his Mistress.
FOrsake with me the earth, my fair,
And travel nimbly through the air,
Till we have reached the admiring skies,
Then lend sight to those heavenly eyes
Which blind themselves, make creatures see;
And taking view of all. When we
Shall find a pure and glorious sphere,
We'll fix like stars for ever there:
Nor will we still each other view;
We'll gaze on lesser stars; then you
See how by their weak influence they
The strongest of men's actions sway,
In an inferior orb below:
We'll see Calipso loosely throw
Her hair abroad, as she did wear
The self-same beauty in a Bear,
As when she a cold Virgin stood,
And yet inflamed Joves lustful blood.
Then look on Leda, whose fair beams
By their reflection gild those streams,
Where first (unhappy she) began
To play the wanton with a Swan.
If each of these loose beauties are
Transformed to a more beauteous star
By the adulterous lust of Jove;
Why should not we, by purer love?
Life of my life, a devoted servant to your excellent perfections, etc.

Dearest,
Let one grief harm us,
Let one joy fill us,
Let one love warm us,
Let one death kill us.
A Maid, or widow, returns this merry answer to her hot Lover whom she affect
not.
I See thee (gentle Frank) most merry,
Though firm thy faith, and sound as berry:
Love gave me joy, and fortune gave it
As my desire could wish to have it.
What did thou wish? tell me (sweet lover)
Whereby thou might such joy recover,
To love where love should be inspired,
Since there is no more to be desired.
In this great glory, and great gladness,
Think thou to have no touch of sadness?
Good fortune gave me not such glory
To mock my love, or make me sorry.
If my firm love I were denying,
Tell me, with sighs would thou bedying?
Those words in jest to hear thee speaking,
For very grief, my heart is breaking.
Yet would thou change (I pray thee tell me)
In seeing one that does excel me?
O no; for how can thou aspire
To more then to thy own desire?
Such great affection thou do bear me,
As, by thy words, thou seemst to swear me:
Of thy desert, to which a Debtor
I am, thou may demand this better.
Sometimes (me thinks) that I should swear it,
Sometimes me thinks thou should not hear it:
Only in this, the pip does greive me,
And thy desire not to believe me.
Sir, yours very dubiously affectionated, not to be cammanded, or waited on, by
you, etc.

The Lover being discontented at the absence of his Mistress, he being in the
City, she in the Countrcy.
Dearest,
THe lesser people of the air conspire
to kep thee from me: Philomel with higher
And sweeter notes, wooes thee to weep her rape;
Which would appease the gods, and change her shape:
The early Lark, preferring, for soft rest,
Obsequious duty, leaves his downy nest,
And does to thee harmonious duty pay,
expecting from thy eyes the break of day;
From which the Owl is frighted, and does rove
(As never having felt the warmth of love)
In uncouth vaults, and the chill shades of night,
Not 'biding the great luster of thy sight.
With him, my Fate agrees; not viewing thee,
I Am lost in mists; at best, but Meteors see.
Soul of sweetness, thy humble creature, etc.

The Lover angry at his Mistress unsufferable contempt, may (if he will) thus
vent himself, in an invective manner
(Scornful Tit)
SInce just disdain began to rise,
And cry revenge, for spiteful wrong;
What once I praised, I now despise,
And think my love was all too long.
I tread to dirt that scornful pride,
Which in thy looks I have descride.
Thy beauty is a painted skin,
For fools to see their faces in.
Thy eyes, that some as stars esteem,
From whence themselves (they say) take light,
Like to the foolish fire I deem,
That leads men to their death by night.
Thy Words and Oaths, are light as wind,
And yet far lighter is thy mind.
Thy friendship is a broken reed,
And thou a gigling maukes indeed.
My own, and can command my self, H. D

The Lover betwixt hope and despair to attain his Mistress love, she telling
him she has vowed never to marry.
Dearest mistress,
EVen as my hand my pen to paper lays,
My trembling hand my pen from paper stays;
Lest that thine eyes, which shining, made me love you,
Should, frowning on my suit, bid cease to love you:
So that my nurfing murdering pen affords
A grave, a cradle, to my newborn words.
But whilst like clouds tofs'd up and down by air
I wracked hang, 'twixt hope and sad despair;
Despair is beaten, vanquished from the field,
And unto conquering hope my heart does yield.
If of my eyes you also could bereave me,
As you already of my heart deceive me;
Or could shut up my ravished ears through which
You likewise did my enchanted heart bewitch;
To root out love all means you can invent,
Were all but labor lost, and time ill spent:
For as these sparks, being spent, which fire procure,
The fire does brightly burning still endure;
Though absent, so, your sparkling eyes remove,
My heart still burns in endless flames of love.
Then strive not against the stream to no effect,
But let due love yield love a due respect;
Nor seek to ruin what your self begun,
Or loose a knot that cannot be undon.
Why were you fair, to be sought of so many,
If you live chaste, not to be loved by any?
For if that Nature love to Beauty offers,
And Beauty shun the love that Nature proffers;
Then either unjust Beauty is to blame,
With scorn to quench a lawful kindled flame;
Or else, unlawfully if love we must,
And be unlov'd, then Nature is unjust.
A marble heart, under an amorous look,
Is of a flattering bait the murdering hook;
For from a Ladies shining frowning eyes,
Death's sable dart, with Cupids arrow flies.
Since then from chastity and beauty spring
Such various streams, where each a bide as kin;
Let Tyrant Chastitie's usurped throne
Be made the seat of beauties grace alone;
And let your beauty be with this suffis'd
That my heart's City is by it surpised
Raze not my heart, nor to your beauty raise
Blood-gilded Trophies of your beauties praise.
For wisest Conquerours do Towns desire,
On honorable terms, and not with fire.
Cruel fair one, thy bleeding servant, T. P.

The Lover having word brought him of his Mistress departure.
Dearest,
I Am engaged to sortow, and my heart
Feels a distracted rage. Though you depart,
And leave me to my fears, let love, in spite
Of absence, our divided souls unite.
But you must go: the me lancholy Doves
Draw Venus chariot hence: the sportive loves
That wont to wanton here, hence with you fly,
And, like false friends, forsake me when I die.
For, but a walking Tomb, what can he be,
Whose best of life is sorc'd to part with thee?
Bright Goddess your humble admirer.

The Lover absent from his Mistress beyond the Seas, sollicites her thus.
My dearest Mistress,
STar of my life, if these sad lines do hap
The raging fury of the Sea to escape,
O let your hand then be their blessed Port,
From whence they may unto your cies resort.
Fountain of bliss, yet wellspring of my woe;
O would I might not justly term you so!
My dearest dear, behold the portraicture
Of him that does all kind of woes endure;
Of him whose head is made a hive of woes,
Whose swarming number daily greater grows;
Of him, whose senses like a rack are bent
With diverse motions, my poor heart to rent;
Whose mind a mirror is, which only shows
The ugly image of my present woes;
Whose memory's a poisoned knife to tear
The ever-bleeding wound my breast does bear:
And that poor heart, so faithful, constant, true,
That only loves, and serves, and honors you,
Is like a feeble Ship, which, toine and rent,
The mast of hope being broke, and tackling spent;
Reason the Pilot dead, the stars obscured,
By which alone, to sail it was inured;
No Port, No Land, no comfort once expected,
All hope of safety utterly neglected;
With dreadful terror tumbling up and down;
Visions uncertain, waves to mountains grown.
I must confess, that when I do consider
How ill, alas, how ill agree together,
So peerless beauty, and so fierce a mind,
So hard an inside, and so soft a rind;
A heart so bloody, and so white a breast;
Such proud disdain, with so mild looks suppressed;
And how my dear (O would it had been never
Accursed word! O would it had been ever)
How once, I say, till your heart seemed estranged
(Alas) how soon my day to night was changed!
You did vouchsafe my poor eyes so to grace,
Freely to view the riches of your face;
And (which was greatest bliss) did not dildaine,
For boundless love, to yield some love again.
Despair it self cannot make me despair
But that you will prove as kind as you are fair;
And now at length, in lien of passed woe,
Will pity, grace, and love, and favor show.
O spare, O spare my yiedling heart, and save
Him whose chief glory is to be your slave:
Make me the object of your clemency,
And not the subject of your tyranny.
So shall you restore a dying Lover to perfect health, fulfill the Decree of the
Gods, and make him transcendently happy, who at present languisheth in a dying
despair, ready to be offered up on the altar of your beauty. R. H.

The Lover assuring his Mistress that her doubts are vain, and he is unmoveably
constant.
WHy do thou (my dear mistress) doubt my love
Which beauty bred, and virtue still does nourish
That any other object can remove,
Or faint with time, but still more freshly flourish?
No; know, thy beauty is of such a force,
The fancy cannot flit, that is with it taken;
Thy virtue such, my heart does hate divorce
From thy sweet love, which never shall be forsaken.
So settled is my soul, in this resolve,
That first the radiant stars from heaven shall fall;
The heavens shall lose their influence, and dissolve;
To the first Chaos shall be turned this all,
Ere I from thee (dear mistress) do remove
My true, my constant, and my sincere love.
Thine while his own, A D.

The Lover hearing of his Mistress departure, bewailes thus.
Dear heart,
What Is death, more then departure? the dead go
Like traveling exiles, are compelled to know
Those regions they heard mentioned often; it is thou art
Of sorrow, to say, who dies does depart.
Then weep thy funeral-tears, which heaven, to adorn
The beauteous tresses of the weeping morn,
Will rob me of; and thus my Tomb shall be
As naked, as it had no obsequie.
Know, in these lines sad music to thy ear,
(My sad dear Mistress) you the sermon hear
Which I preach ore my hearse and death: I tell
My own live's story, ring but my own knell.
But when I shall return, know, it is thy breath,
In sighs divided, rescues me from death.
Thy lamenting faithful Servant, E. D.

Five Lyrick Pieces.
To my noble friend, Mr. Theodor Lo.
GO, pale-faced paper, to my dear,
And whisper this into her ear:
Though I absent am, yet she
Keeping thee, embraces me.
Let no rude hand dare to touch thee;
Care not, though a thousand grutch thee
Of that bliss, which, in her hive,
Thou enjoyst, till I arrive:
And be sure, thou do not fly
From the glances of her eye:
Where she goes, be thou about her;
Gad not thou abroad without her.
Let not any dare to see
What Is between my love and thee:
Nay, and when she haps to sleep,
Gently to her bosom creep;
Where (I charge thee) rest till she
With her kisses waken thee.
Go, and prosper for a space,
Till I rob thee of thy place.
The resolute Lover.
WHat care I, though she be fair
Hair, snow-like hand, or sun-like eye,
If in that beauty I not share?
Were she deformed, what care I?
What care I, though she be foul
Hair, swarthy-hand, or sunburned eye.
So long as I enjoy her soul?
Let her be so, what care I?
Dim sight is coz'ned with a gloss
Of gaudy gown, or hum'rous hair;
Such gold, in melting, leaves more dross
Then some unpolisht prices share.
Be she fair, or foul, or either,
Or made up of both together:
Be her heart mine, hair, hand, or eye,
Be what it will; why, what care I?
The Lovers protestation.
PRetty wanton, prithee say,
Did you see my heart to day?
Marks to know it you shall find;
Always constant, true and kind:
Wounds about it, it does bear;
Drops are tricklig, here and there:
In which wounds you will find a dart
Shot by you, into my heart.
If you saw it, do not blush;
The wounds are fresh, and blood will gush
Into your face; and you be known
To cover more then is your own:
Send it back; but let it be
Sound, as when it came to thee.
Do not think for to deny it;
These are tokens will descry it.
How can I subsist and live,
When my own you will not give?
Yet if you will send to me
Yours in fair exchange, I Will be
Mute, and not report that I
Suffer by your cruelty.
Then I prithee, let me know,
If you will exchange, or no.
Question.
WHat is that freedom which men call
A blessedness to sport withal?
Or what those joys, which Lovers deem
To equalize their best esteem?
I long to know, that I may see
The difference 'twixt those joys and me.
Answer.
Then know, loves joies are such as still
Are subject to Fates supreme will;
And every hour the Lover finds
Cross friends, cross stars, and stormy winds;
Till Seas grow calm, and we arrive
At loves eternal peaceful hive.
If patience then may bring me ease,
Swell big, a while, you boyst'rous seas.
Cupid, to an inexorable young man, disdaining his Deity.
YOu, fair mortal, think not I
Privilege a star-like eye,
Or the choicest fair on earth;
I can blast them in their birth.
Yet, that you might feel desires
Quenching loves Idalian fires;
Amongst a many young men more,
I preserved thee, to adore
My deity: but now I see
Thou disdain'st my power and me.
Therefore, by my Paphian bow,
My complaints must let you know
That a strange complaint of late
Beat a parley at my gate;
And so ent'red, that the gods
With that uproare grew at ods;
Insomuch that they me sent
Messenger of punishment,
In my mothers sacred name,
You a Traitor to proclaim,
Against the Laws of love and beauty,
And to what you owe by duty,
To the Ethereal powers, and me
Canceled by ubiquity.
By my bow, and slaming dart;
By the Lovers bleeding heart;
By the hand, and by the glove;
By the eye that captived Jove;
I command, and summon thee,
At loves Bar to answer me
To what we shall there object
Against thy scorn and base neglect.
Fail not, mortal, as you will
Answer your ensuing ill.
Ad eundem.
PAle-cheek'd mortal, now your eyes
Return their luster to the skies,
No hue rosy-red does guide
The welcome Lilies, as a bride;
Nor are the Lilies fresh and gay,
As they were the other day.
The present guilt does make it known,
Vigor lent is not your own.
Venus, now, the Queen of Love,
Is in presence, and must prove
You a disobedient heir
To her glorious hemisphere.
Paphos Archer hates to own
You a brother to his throne,
And must here a witness be
To your inconstant constancy:
Therefore, on this gold-leav'd book,
In which Lovers often do look,
Lay your hand, if you be free;
Swear, and damned ever be.
See, he is guilty; take him hence
To a scorching residence.
Hence to trial: Themis now
Against thy guilt does set her brow:
And beauty calls; you must appear
At loves bar, and answer there.
Empta poenitentia.
I Ack to his Jug, in feeling passion swore,
He would approve her a polluted --
Whose tempting outward look, and borrowed locks
And inward filthiness gave him the --
Thou lie (quoth Jug) 'twas what thy money bought,
How dear soere thou paid'st, I gave thee naught.
Experto credentum.
HOw durst Capritius call his wedlock whore,
But that he speaks it plusquam per narratum?
Nam ipso test; what require you more,
Unless you would have it, magis approbatum?
Nequicquam verba.
WIll woes his wench, with words of eloquence,
Wishing he might her corpse Enthalamize,
And of his love impart that influence,
Which with her liking best may sympathize.
She, who regardless, at his speech does spurn,
Says, it is not words of art must serve her turn.
An invective against my old she-enemy, my most audacious Aunt, now very
desirous to marry.
Sweet Aunt,
MOre rich then wise, and yet more wise then fair;
years add gray Trophies, to enrich thy hair:
Rather then live to love, dye with despair.
Whenas sad comets in the skies appear,
Some strange disaster then approaches near;
Which in our doubtful souls begots a fear.
Thy nose is that disaster: for in thee
No less then thousand comets we may see,
As symptoms to ensuing misery.
Below thy nose, an hill we may desery,
Darkning the light appearing from thine eye,
Within that hollow concave where they lie.
Eye, Nose, and Chin, since you in darkness be,
Premeditate before you visit me,
And raise young cinders to your venery.
And in nightshade, meet with your shadow, where
Some Incubus, by chance, may get an heir,
Making the world accursed with such a pair.
Or if thy withered hand (begot by time)
Should with thine eye, nose, chin, and face combine,
Without discordant, to make some man thine;
Know, gumless wooer, that diseases thirst
To seize thy hand, where the Apoplexy must
Bring thee, ere long, unto thy neighbors dust.
Or if thy withered thigh desires to know
The sweet content that in young men does flow,
Convert a tear into a flood below.
So may some cripple, wanting Alms, supply
Thy almost-desperate necessity.
And please both nose, gums, chin, thigh, hands, and eye
A Lovers passion, wanting the society of his Mistress.
1
Dear heart, remember the sad hour
When we were fore'd to part;
How on thy cheeks I wept a shower,
With sad and heavy heart.
About thy wast my arms did twist:
Oh then I sighed, and then I kissed.
2
Ten thousand fears and joys in one,
Did such distraction frame,
As if the liveless world would run
To Chaos back again;
Whilst my poor heart, amid these fears,
Lay bathed in my milk-warm tears.
3
When I thought, and thinking wept,
How friends and fate did lowre
On thee Leander; how they kept
Thee from thy Heroes Tower;
While thunder groaned, and heaven did weep,
To rock thy sense in silent sleep.
4
The will of Fate must unresisted stand:
O who can it oppose?
"Necessitie's a Tyrant, and
"No mean in mischief knows:
Else might my fairer love and I
Unsever'd live, till one did die.
5
Just so the hungry infant from
His mothers duggs is taken,
When his weak arms yet spread along,
More dulcid milk to gain:
And nothing brings the Babe to rest,
Until he sleep upon her breast.
6
Thus being banished from my love,
And forced to leave her sight,
No thought but those of her can move
In me the least delight:
But like true steel, my heart does pant
To touch the loug'd-for adamant.
7
Oh let no storm of discontent
Be clouded in your brows:
Dear friend that have my being sent,
Give being to my vows.
You Will much engage my heart, if when
I say she is mine, you will say amen:
Such kindness to our true-love shown,
Shall bind us doubly then your own.
Loves inconveniences.
LOve is a sickness full of woes,
All remedy refusing;
A plant that with most cutting grows;
Most barren, with best using:
Why so?
More we enjoy it, more it dies;
If not enjoyed, it sighing cries:
Heigh ho!
Love is a torment of the mind,
A tempest everlasting;
And Jove has made it of a kind
Not well, nor full, nor fasting:
Why so?
More we enjoy it, more it dies;
If not enjoyed, it sighing cries,
Heigh ho!
A Diologue between a Shepherd and a Dam'sel.
Shep. BOnny wight, whatere you be,
Luck be in your company:
Are you Diana? say to me.

Dam. None such, good Shepherd.


Shep. Dest and trim one, mickle glee,
Be ye what you please to be;
Some disaster's near to ye.

Dam. Never, never more.


Shep. Welladay! now by my creed,
And my merry oaten reed;
Sike another rousing sigh
Would well split me, gay and blithe.
Let a clowtish clown partake
Why this sobbing dole you make.

Dam. Ah me! unfortunate.


Shep. Wonderment of woe, relate,
If simpleness you might not scorn,
How you hapt to be forlorn.

Dam. The story would too tedious be,
Shepherd, to relate to thee.

Shep. Be not all too keen, bright star;
If my pertness went-too far,
Mercy is the doom I sue:
Good things never meant more true
Then the silly Shepherd did,
Late when he your sorrow bid
Discourse the means; Merry Pan,
And the sagest Gods do scan
Wherefore was it. Well a near,
Yon foul mucky cloud, I fear,
Will besprint us, Phoebus waine.
If so list you but to daign
A poor Shepherd's entertain,
Welcome should you be (my bliss)
Nothing uncomely is, I wis,
Though not courtly. Answer make;
Will you my small feasting take?

Dam. I Will go: for wheresoere I rest,
Sorrow must be my only feast.

Shep. Welcome, Welcome, Welcome still:
Never with a freer will
Was welcome spoken: by the sky,
Welcome, welcome, heartily.
Alack, alack, the rotten South
'Gins to open his dewy mouth;
Time to hide you; maiden meek,
Enter my cave, I you beseek;
O thou white one, bonny gyrle,
Welcomer then heaps of pearl.

The Lovers alarm to his Mistress.
RIse, Lady Mistress, rise;
The night has tedious bin;
No sleep has fallen into my eyes,
Nor slumber made me sin.
Is not she a Saint then, say,
Thought of whom keeps sin away?
Rise, Mistress, rise; and give me light,
Whom darkness still will cover;
And ignorance darker then night,
Till thou smile on thy lover.
All want day till thy beauty rise:
For the gray morn breaks from thy eyes.
A Supplantor.
FAirest will thou still be true
To a man so false to thee?
Did he lend a husband due,
Thou did owe him loyalty.
But will curses, wants, and blows,
Breed no change in thy white soul?
Be not fool to thy first vows,
Since his first breach does Fate control;
No beauty else could be so chaste.
Think not thou honour'st women then,
Since by thy conscience, all disgraced,
Are robbed of the dear loves of men.
Then grant me my desire, that vow to prove
A real husband his adult'rate love.
The Shepherds complaint.
Neighbor Swains and Swainlins, hear me:
It is Strephon bids you hear:
Leave your pastures, and come near me;
Come away; you need not fear.
By my soul, as I affect you,
I have naught that can infect you:
O then come,
Hear a tongue
That in discord keeps a part,
With a wo-surcharged heart.
Never was Swain on plain more loved,
Or could do more feats then I;
Yet one grief has now removed
All my whilome Jollity:
All my lays be quite forgotten;
Sheep-hook broken, pipe, bag, rotten.
O then come,
Hear a tongue
That with flattering speech does call,
To take long farewell of all.
I am not, as once I was,
When my Chloris first did suite me;
Nor when that same red-hair'd Lass,
Fair Bellina, did invite me
To a garden, there to play,
Cull, kiss, clip, and toy all day.
O then come,
Hear a tongue
That in wooing terms was flowing,
But through woe, has spoiled his wooing.
All I can or will desire you,
When my breath of life is spent,
That in love, you would inter me
(For it will my soul content)
Near unto my Father hearse,
And bestow some comely verse
On my Tomb;
Then my tongue
Shall throb out this last adieu,
Never were truer Swain then you.
A Dialogue between two Lovers.
Question. WEre ever chaste and honest hearts
Exposed unto so great distresses?

Answer. Yes: they that have the worthiest parts,
Most commonly have worst successes
Great fortunes follow not the best:
It Is Virtue that is most distressed.
Then Fortune, why do we admire
The glory of thy great excesses;
Since by thee what men acquire,
Thy works, and not their worths expresses?
Nor do thou raise them for their good,
But to have their ills more understood.

The Authors suit, to Cupid.
I Will not love; I love to rest:
Cupid is an ungentle guest,
Except without his weapon's he
Will lodge in my tired Fantasy.
Better stand the shock of thunder,
Which cleaves hardest Rocks in sunder,
Then oppose the sturdy blow,
When the blind Boy bends his Bow.
Prithee Cupid, cease to smile;
It Is a courtship base and vile,
To laugh, and stab unto the heart.
I will praise thee, and thy dart,
While at others, thou do throw it:
I love to hear on 't, not to know it.
A Salyrical Description of Love.
LOve is of man the fatal rock
On which his ship of ease does knock,
And splits him with the sturdy shock.
He never yet felt any pain,
That has not known the lovers vain,
Whose greatest grief is greatest gain.
No Ill so nigh the heart does sit,
As does this fierce tormenting fit:
Death is more pleasing (far) then it.
Our souls, with hope, it does torment,
Whilst naught but massacres are sent:
To dye is better far content.
Love then most cruel, void of grace,
Ought to be cursed in every place;
No God, but Devil, in this case.
The Changes:
Or, all think not of love alike.
Worthi's he the bright of day,
Who does loyal love obey.
Cupid only I do love;
Him I worship still above.
Happi's he, that by the same,
Wisdom to himself does gain.
Worthi's he the bright of day,
Who does loyal love obey.
O how sweet is that warm fire,
Which our hearts heats with desire!
To our souls no sweetness is
Half so dulcet as is this.
Worthi's he, etc.
Blessed love, without all crime,
Two souls pleases at one time;
Then does love his lover right,
When his love he does requite.
Worthi's he, etc.
Of two souls, he makes but one,
In two bodies all alone.
Love more happy cannot be,
Then when we loving couples see.
Worthi's he, etc.
Pleasure none upon the ground,
Like to love, is to be found:
Pleasures pass as transitory;
Love does still remain in glory.
Worthi's he, etc.
The answer, being a contradiction of the former assertion.
Worthy is he of dark night,
That in Cupid does delight.
NOthing in this world can be
Sweeter then our liberty;
Which love often takes away,
And then all our joys decay.
Worthy is he of dark night,
That in Cupid does delight.
Love does never sorrow miss,
(Who grieves) male-contented is:
But love (thus) does Lovers sting;
Does not love then sorrow bring?
Worthi's he, etc.
Who that soul has ere seen eased,
Upon whom fierce love has ceaz'd?
The Mistress, and the Servant both,
Often through love their lives do loath.
Worthi's he, etc.
Gods from heaven have chased and sent
This vile Boy, us to torment:
Nor are we him to endure,
That such plagues does us procure.
Worthi's he, etc.
Then most wretched him I deem,
That of this blind Boy does esteem:
Worser plague there is not of Ills,
That consumes still, yet never kills.
Worthy is he of dark night
That in Cupid takes delight.
A Farewell to Love.
To my most courteous Friend Mr. John Phillipson.
Love fare thee well; live will I now
Quiet, amongst the green-wood bow.
ILl betide him, that love seeks;
He shall live but with lean cheeks.
He that fondly falls in love,
A slave (still) to grief shall prove.
Love fare thee well; live will I now
Quiet, amongst the green-wood bow.
What an Ass and fool is he,
That may, and yet will not go free?
I can love her that is fair;
But so, as if I grasped the air.
Love fare thee well, etc.
I like not these Dames so smooth,
As would have men court and love:
For as constant I them find,
As the Sea is, or the wind.
Love fare thee well, etc.
Once I loved one, that was kind;
But she did what pleased her mind.
Better it is never to be born,
Then live as another scorn.
Love fare thee well, etc.
To lovers, what good does the Sun,
If by his beams they be undon?
Love's as bitter as is Rue:
Blessed are those that never it knew.
Love fare thee well, etc.
A fond Lover does not merit
Name, or fame, of man to inherit;
Since he is foe to his own health,
And huggs diseases, as his wealth.
Love fare thee well; live will I now
Quiet, amongst the green-wood bow.
A Rhapsody.
Now must the Gods above,
And all the heavens that move,
Of my Mistress praises sing,
Such, as through the earth may ring.
Now must we frame chaplets fine,
And, with the Laurel green, combine
The fruitful Olive, that our hair
May yield a persume through the air.
My Love, may thou always flourish,
Although my self do die and perish.
To the same.
If nothing fair I see, but what is thy face;
If thy bright look is loadstone to my eyes:
If thy rare parts (as blessings) I embrace,
Have I not reason, then, in dutious wise,
Thy gracious self for to implore?
Since thee (a Goddess) I adore.
He that finds salve to cure him of his grief,
By a fair hand; of that shall he not make
Account; when he thereby may get relief,
Whereby his sickness from him he may shake?
The wounded Deer to herbs does go:
Love wounds us; love must cure our woe.
So then, in this my worse then captive state,
These lines I offer to thy deity;
Not doubting, but, though hapless be my fate,
I from my self shall find some remedy.
Of thee I beg, some help to have:
In thee it lies, to kill, or save.
The dying Lover.
NOw that Boreas with his cold
Does this County round infold,
And his Isicles displaies,
Whilst the verdure green he slayes;
I must end my life ere long,
With a sad and mournsul song.
Now that more then cruel pain
Makes my hopes to be but vain,
And that love makes me distill
Salt tears (signs of my kind will)
Needs now must my lives term end,
Unto the heavens to ascend.
Now that such is my sad care,
That I Am droven to despair;
That cross Fates me strive to greive,
Why should I desire to live?
Better it is to dye, then still
Follow us what works more ill.
Now that sighs, and sobs, and tears,
The subject of my verses bears;
And whilst this plague usurps my heart,
I Will try if I can make it smart,
By a death that one day may
Make me victor, every way.
Now that skies, with lightning blast,
Force my pleasures not to last;
And that the sun no more does shine,
I must yield to tempest Time:
Loyally I lay me down,
And go willing to my Tomb.
Now that cold and chilly fear,
Still does dog me, everywhere;
Seek I must, by cruelty,
For to end my misery:
For an end to every thing,
Gentle death (none else) does bring.
Now that burning fire (o'r-bright)
Has my sense consumed quite,
Leaving naught with me but groans;
Thus I do rid all at once.
The Lover to his Mistress.
LUckloss, and lucky, both at once am I;
With fear, and hope, I tremble as a reed:
Luckless by beauty (thine by destiny)
Lucky, because I am thy slave indeed.
For (then thy face) there is nothing is more fair;
Then thy sweet eyes, naught more divine or rare.
One while I hope, another while I fear;
Nor can there any thing my fancy please;
It grieves me to see the heavens, though clear;
So much I doubt thy favor to displease.
Then thy fair face, there is nothing is more fair;
Then thy sweet eyes, naught more divine or rare.
The united Lovers.
WHo ever saw so fair a sight,
Love and Virtue met aright,
And that wonder Constancy,
Like a comet to the eye?
Sound aloud so rare a thing,
That all the Hills and Vales may ring.
Look, lovers, look, with passion see
If that any such there be;
As there cannot but be such,
Who do feel this noble touch.
Sound aloud so rare a thing,
That all the hills and vales do ring.
The Lover to his Mistress, upon her apparelling her self in black.
SInce that thou have victory
Ore my dearest liberty;
Why with black, that form of thine,
Do thou cloth so rich and fine?
If thou wear'st it for to witness
(As a friend) my sad distress,
Happy I, since for my sake,
Thou the color sad do take.
Sweet, (my life) content be thou,
That this black weed I bear now:
Hapless was my life, and so
Sad my life in the end should show:
To me these sad clothes alone
Appertain, as signs of moan.
Nature, in one body never
Black and white (at once) does bear:
From my black all hate be wide,
With which I my crosses hide.
He that in despair does rest,
Black does bear for color best.
(Cruel) this not colour's thine,
Since thine eyes bright and divine,
Sacred as the hallowed day,
Chase the gloomy night away.
My heart wounded thou do make
The habit of a conqueror take;
And let me alone with this,
Since my fitting color it is.
Live thou in eternal glory,
While I dye (as desperate sorry.)
Whilst this dye thou put'st on thee,
Thou depriv'st of comfort me.
Change then this same weed of dole,
Fit for a departing soul:
Give to me the color black,
With it the flitting Ghosts to track.
The forsaken Lovers complaint.
1
UNto the soundless vaults of hell below,
I Will (with my greifes remediless) amain;
Whilst frighted Ghosts, as pitiful, shall show,
And flinty rocks remorse take of my pain.
Yea death it self my bitter pains shall know,
To witness that my life in hell has lame.
For Lovers true can never dye indeed;
Whose loyal hearts a heavenly fire does feed.
2
My body laid along within my grave,
Shall show its tears, its torment, and its love;
And for my mind, did never change nor wave,
Far brighter then the sun, the same shall prove.
By me, my Ladies picture I will have,
Which (though being dead) afresh will make me love.
Like to the fire, in ashes covered;
Which (though it show no flame) yet is not dead.
3
Love is not tamed by death, but still does live,
Although that life does flit and pass away:
Then (Lady) think not though by death thou grieve
My body that thou love can make decay,
As long as fancy does by beauty drive
Into my soul: no, this will 'bide for aye.
Within my heart the beauty printed is:
Love in my Tomb to harbor will not miss.
4
Think thou I Will leave to love thee, being dead,
When thy fair portraicture revives my sight?
Voices from Tombs (they say) have some men lead,
Restoring them unto their senses right.
Then how much more, ought love be honored,
Whom (then the greatest Gods) is more of might?
Then think not when my corpse buried you see,
That from thy love (as thou would) I am free.
5
List to my monument, and thou shall hear
How I will sigh (for without soul) thy fire
Shall hold me up, whilst living I appear
(Being dead) as before my death I did desire.
Nor deadly pangs thereof, will I once fear,
Nor part from thee, as thou would fain require.
For in thy life so cruel the have not been,
But in my death as loyal I Will be seen.
6
Yet is my fortune better far, then thine;
For without breach of says (as thou have done)
I shall have leave to plain those Ills of mine,
Thou think in killing me a martyrdom
More tedious then before me to assign:
But thou art deceived; a wrong race have thou run:
For whilst I lived, thy rigor was my bane;
But being dead, I am freed from my pain.
The despairing Lover.
ELsewhere declare
Thy wosul care;
And leave the skies:
Thy wosul plaints
Thy heart that taints,
They do despise.
See, they look red,
With rage o'respread,
And horror too.
It Is they, in grief,
Without relief,
That us undoo.
He is a sot,
That thinks not
That from that place,
Through destiny,
Most wretchedly,
Comes our disgrace.
Then better it is
For death to wish,
And end our days,
Then still in strife,
Lead such a life,
So plagued always.
For death's our friend,
When he does end
Our bitter smart;
And through the same,
Does rid our pain,
With his keen dart.
A Knell.
GOme list and hark;
The bell does toul
For some but new
Departing soul.
And was not that
Some ominous foul,
The Bat, the Night-
Crow, or Skreech-owle?
To these I hear
The wild wolf howl,
In this black night,
That seems to scowle.
All these, my black-
Book shall inrowle.
For hark, still, still
The bell does towl
For some but now
Departing soul.
A warning to the Grave.
HArk now every think is still,
The Skreech-owle, and the whistler shrill:
Call upon our Dame aloud,
And bid her quickly d'on her shroud.
Much you had of Land, and Rent;
Your length in clay's now competent.
A long war disturbed your mind;
Here, your perfect peace is signed.
"Of what is it Fools make such vain keeping?
"Sin their conception, their birth weeping;
"Their life a general mist of error,
"Their death a hideous storm of terror.
Strew your hair with powder sweet;
D'on clean linen; bathe your feet:
It Is now full tide, tween night and day:
End your groan, and come away.
A mournful Ditty, on the death of a drowned friend.
FLow streams of Equid salt, from my sad eyes,
To celebrate his mournful obsequies:
R. S. is dead; he is dead, and I remain,
To draw my poor life in continual pain;
Till it has paid to his sad memory,
Duty of love, O then most willingly,
Drowned with my tears, as he with waves, I dye.
Of women in general.
THere are some holy, but some apt to sin;
Some tractable, but some that none can win.
Such as are virtuous, gold nor wealth can move;
Some vicious, of themselves are prone to love.
Some grapes are sweet, and in the garden grow;
Others unprun'd, turn wild; neglected so.
The purest oar contains both gold and dross;
The one all gain, the other naught but loss:
The one disgrace, reproach, and scandal taints,
The other Angels and sweet featured Saints.
DUst is lighter then a feather,
And the wind more light then either:
But a woman's fickle mind,
More light then feater, dust, or wind.
A Dialogue between ENDYMION and EXPENDITION.
Ex. WHat, ho, Endymion! how the Dormouse sleeps! A wake, for shame; open thy
wink a peeps


End. What stir you make? I come with speed I can;
(And too much speed) for I have tired my man.

Expe. Who, Dulman?


End. Yes.
I thought the Knave would shame us,
And play us one horse trick for Ignoramus.

Anagrams.
A good Patron's Anagram is, PATREN, Anag. PARENT.

An evil ones, PATRON, Anag. ROPEAN'T.

CHEATER, Anag. TEACHER.

Teacher you are, for you have taught me more
Then I was taught in all my life before.
Bliss or Bale: No medium in love.
IF you reward my love with love again,
My bliss, my life, my heaven I will deem you:
But if for love, you render me disdain,
My bale, my death, my hell, I must esteem you.
A Madrigal.
WHosoever longs to try
Both love and Jealousy;
My fair unconstant Lady let him see,
And he will soon a jealous lover be.
The Lovers Letany.
FRom a fair face, and a false heart;
From the force of Cupids forked dart;
From a wagtail'd wench with an -- wart,
Libera me.
From an oiled skin, and a false hair;
From towsed, fullied, and o'er-jaded ware;
From a painted Fro of St. James his fair,
Libera me.
From a wanton hag, and a noseless Jone;
From entering the pass a Frenchman has gone;
From her that will for a shilling be won,
Libera me.
From a City-decoy, and a suburb-Bawd;
From a Panders gripe, and a courtesans fraud;
From a parcht Parachito, whose face is flau'd,
Libera me.
From a drunken female, who spreads her thies;
From an old woman that has lust in her eyes;
From a common strumpet who seems to be nice,
Libera me.
The Bride-maids Song.
FRom the Temple to the Board,
From the Board unto the Bed,
We conduct your maidenhead;
Wishing Hymen to afford
All the pleasures that he can
'Twixt a woman and a man.
A Song to be sung the marriage-night, by two, in parts.
The first.
THine, O Hymen, thine, O she
Whose beauties verse, Caliope,
Sing to marriage-rites an Io.
Io to Hymen.
The second.
To thee (Apollo) is my suit;
Lend me, a while, thy silver Lute,
O what a woe it is to bring
A Bride to bed, and never sing
Io to Hymen.
Ambo.
When she is old, still seem she young;
When she is weak, to her be strong;
Be Cyprus both, and Paplos here:
Love sing with merry cheer,
Io to Hymen.
Ad eundem; the bridegroom being wanting at bedtime.
DRop golden showers; gentle sleep,
And all the Angels of the night,
Which do us in protection keep,
Make the Bride dream of delight.
Morpheus, be kind a little, and be
Deaths true Image; for 'twill prove
To this poor bride, that then th art he:
Her lord is absent from her love.
Thus with sweet sweets can heaven mix gall;
Come quickly, Bridegroom, or not at all.
Song.
SIng sweetly, that our notes may cause
The heavenly orbs themselves to pause,
And at our music stand as still
As at Joves amorous will.
So now release them, as before,
They Have waited long enough: no more.
The description of a matchless beauty, written at the request of the most
brave and gallant Lady, the Lady L. S. during my residence at Winchester, 1648.
HEr hair like hemlocks, careless fall,
To deck her amorous eyes withal;
As fiery as the evening, where
We read the next day will be fair.
Her curious forehead well does show
Where Carbuncles in number grow.
But the beauty of her nose
Would fright a man out of his clothes,
To dance a naked round-delay
When on the tobacco-pipe you play;
And the pale brightness of her lips,
Does force the Sun to an eclipse.
Her cheeks of fat and soggy stuff,
Like the running dropsey, swell and puff.
But oh, the apples on them grow,
I think were rotten long ago.
Her precious neck and breasts display
Her skins antiquity: for they,
Like a dried dunghill, chop and break,
Until her snout begins to leak.
Her parched fists defy the Sun;
For all the malice he has don
Cannot change her hide; nor any stain
Corrupt it, for it is died in grain.
Her spacious belly, and her waste,
Have grease sufficiently to baste
A herd of swine: they have such store,
A Shambles cannot purchase more.
Her thighs like two Colossus seem,
Proportioned with her bodies teem:
And those which bear her ponderous betch,
Are mighty columns full of itch.
But some, that have her hoofes espied,
With fear the fools fell down and di'd.
Yet all this while, I have forgot
Her tongue, as still as Cannon-shot.
All parts of her, I cannot display;
The rest unseen, the Devil may.
She is the wonder of our age;
Nor lacks she ought but a large cage.
Englands Elyzium.
An Heroic Poem intended.
THou fertile Island, seated in the sea;
Whose waves do dance, by music of the Moon;
That on thy banks pretty Lavolta's play,
As if they would entreat thee take a boon.
Receive all fish that is food, and bless the store:
For never monster shall come near thy shore.
Thou little world, yet all without the world;
Thou second Eden, seated in the west:
From thee thy fountains in seven mouths are hurled;
Such as from Nile, the garden door so blessed.
Humber, ware, Tine, Dee, four so have their names;
Severn, and Owze, the last and richest Thames.
No beasts of danger live upon thy earth;
No Panther, Tiger, ought procuring harms:
To Lions, Dragons, thou do give no birth;
Yet with them both, thou do support thine arms.
Lions we have not, as in other parts;
But we have men, with Bears and Lions hearts.
A Song.
FOolish I, why should I grieve
To sustain what others feel?
What, suppose frail women leave
Those they loved, should I conceal
Comforts rest
From my breast,
For a fickle brittle woman?
No, no, no;
Let her go:
Such as these be true to no man.
2.
Long retired have thou been,
Sighing to the barren Rocks;
Nor by sheep, nor Shepherd seen:
Now return unto thy flocks.
For shame away;
Do not stay
With these moving loving women:
They remove
From their love;
Such as these do often undo men.
ODES.
ODE I.
A Dialogue between a Lover and his Mistress.
Lov. HEnce loose alluring looks; no more of love;
No more thy seeming virtues shall deceive

Mis. I know my dearest speaks but this to prove me
How well I love: thou think it does not grieve me.

Lov. Thy beauty was a bait, to draw mine eye.


Mis. And with thy look my heart was set on fire:

Lov. I thought to find a suiting soul in thee:


Mis. Thy love's the I mit that bounds my desire.


Lo. Thy looseness makes my love's date now expire.


Mis. Where then thy vows?


Lov. Gone with thy seeming worth.


Mis. And made to me.


Lov. no: virtue brought them forth,
Which failing, now no fuel feeds my fire.

Mis. My heart's the harbor, where thy hopes must stay.


Lov. The ground not good, the Anchor draws away.


ODE. 2.
Adrastus, Clariana. Adrastus. Do not thou, Clariana, read
Amorous volumes in my eyes?
Does not every motion plead,
What I Would show, and yet disguise?
Senses act each others part;
Eyes, as tongues, reveal the heart.

Clariana. I saw love, as lightning, break
From thy eyes, and was content
Often to hear thy silence speak:
Silent love is eloquent.
So the sense of learning hears
The dumb music of the spears.

Adrastus. Then there is mercy in your kind,
Listening to an unfeigned love:
Or strives he to tame the wind,
Who would your compassion move?
No; you are pitious, as you are fair:
Heaven relents, overcome by prayer.

Clariana. But loose man's too prodigal
In the expense of vows;
And thinks to him kingdoms fall,
When the heart of women bows.
Frailty to your arms may yield;
Who resists you, win the field.

Adrastus. Triumph not, to see me bleed:
Let the Bore, chased from his den,
On the wounds of mankind feed:
Your soft Sex should pity men.
"Malice well may practice art:
"Love has a transparent heart.

Clariana. Yet is love all one deceit;
A warm frost, a frozen fire:
"She within her selfis great,
"Who is slave to no desire.
Let youth act, and age advise;
And then love may find his eyes,

Adrastus. Hymen's Torch yields a dim light,
When ambition joins our hands.
"A proud day, but mournful night,
"She sustaines, who marries lands.
"Wealth slaves man: but for their ore,
"The Indians had been free, though poor.

Clariana. And yet wealth the fuel is
Which maintains the Nuptial fire,
And in honor there is bliss:
They are immortal who aspire.
But "Truth says, No joys are sweet,
"But where united hearts do meet.

Adrastus. Roses breath not such a sent,
To persume the neighboring groves,
As when you affirm, content
In no sphere of glory moves.
"Glory narrow souls combines;
"Noble hearts love only joins.

ODE 3.
A Lover expecting his Mistress presence.
BRight dew, which do the field adorn,
As the earth, to welcome in the morn,
Would hang a jewel, on each corn,
Did not the pitious night, whose ears
Have often been conscious of my fears,
Distill you from her eyes as tears.
Or that my Mistress for your zeal,
When she her beauties shall reveal,
Might you to Diamonds congeal.
If not your pity, yet howere
Your care I praise, against she appear
To make the wealthy Indies here.
But see, she comes: bright lamp of the sky,
Put out thy light; the world shall spy
A fairer Sun, in either eye;
And liquid pearl hang heavy now
On every grass, that it may bow,
In veneration of her brow.
Yet if the wind should curious be;
And were I here should question thee:
He Is full of whispers, speak not me.
But if the busy teltale day,
Our happy enterview betray;
Lest thou confess too, melt away.
ODE. 4.
1.
I Can love, and love entirely,
And can prove a constant friend:
But I must be loved as dearly,
And as truly to the end.
For her love no sooner slaketh,
But my fancy farewell takes.
2.
I cannot endure delaying;
I must have her quickly won:
Be she nice (though not denaying)
By her leave, I then have don.
For I am not yet at leisure
To wait for a doubtful pleasure.
3
With beauty I will not be blinded,
Yet I will none foul affect:
With wealth I will not be winded,
If in behavior be defect.
Beauty stamed, such love dies;
Wealth decayed, such love flies.
4
Gifts do good; yet he is silly
That therein expendeth store:
If he win not (tell me) will he
Not be merely mocked therefore?
It is better to be keeping,
Then to sow, not sure of reaping.
5
Be she rich, and fair, and gained,
If I sickleness do find,
My desires are quickly wained;
I can steer with other wind.
For virtue I have vowed to choose her:
When that fails, I will refuse her.
A Riddle.
WHat Bythebird, ones thought is understood; which flies with such swiftness,
that it is not seen of any, but conjectured and known by the outward signs and
gestures of body.
Bird is that so light,
Her place that never changes?
She flies by day and night;
In all the world she rangeth.
Over the Sea at once she flies,
Mounting above the lofty skies;
She Is never seen by eyes:
And who does seek to show her,
Has been accounted wise;
Yet sometimes we do know her,
Only the walls by viewing well
Of her close house where she does dwell.
Another.
NOr life nor virtue have The corn; which being sown in the earth, and seeming
dead, casts forth a green blade, and in time grows to be ripe in despite
of all storms and foul weather. It nourishetch mankind, and therefore is
honored by them as a father.
I, lest I dye:
I borrow of my buried Trunk chief strength:
Though I am dead, ore time yet triumph I,
Ore time, that every thing consumes at length.
What Is dead, disdained is; yet all afford
Me honor, and their chief preserver name:
All men may rightly call me their best Lord,
Since (without me) the world they cannot maintain.
Yet though so much good does from me proceed;
Yet thankless worldlings do not stick at all
To cut me off in summer with great speed,
And beat me into little powder small.
Yet had I rather cruelly thus perish,
Then fail with my best strength mortals to cherish.
Poesies for Rings.
THou art my star;
Be not irregular.
Without thy love,
I backward move.
Thine eyes so bright
Are my chief light.
This intimates
True Lovers states.
My life is done
When thou art gone.
A double Poesy.
This has no end,
My sweetest friend.
Our loves be so,
No ending know.
Poesies upon Bracelets.
AS love gives life to every part,
So this gives life unto my heart.
This chastely lies, and lives with me:
Oh that I might do so with thee!
Another.
How might I triumph in my bliss,
If love were where my Bracelet is!
For then should love do no such harm,
To wring my heart, but wreath my arm.
A wish.
Eyes hide my love, and do not show
To any, but to her, my notes;
Who only does that cipher know,
Wherewith we pass our secret thoughts.
Belie your looks in others sight;
And wrong your selves, to do her right.
Songs and Sonnets.
Song 1.
TAke, O take those lips away,
That so sweetly were forsworth;
And those eyes, like break of day,
Lights that do mislead the morn.
But my kisses bring again;
Seals of love, though sealed in vain.
2.
Hide, O hide those hills of snow,
Which thy frozen blossoms bears;
On whose tops, the pinks that grow
Are of those that April wears.
But first set my poor heart free,
Bound in those joy-chaines by thee.
Song 2.
O for a Bow I of rich Canary,
Fat Aristippus, sparkling Sherry,
Some Nectar else, from June's dairy:
O these draughts would make us merry!
O for a wench! I deal in faces,
And in other daintier things:
Tickled am I, with her embraces:
Fine dancing in such fairy rings.
O for a plump fat leg of Mutton,
Veal, Lamb, Capon, Pig, and Coney:
None is happy, but a Glutton;
None an Ass, but who wants money.
Wines indeed, and Girls are good;
But brave victuals seast the blood.
For wenches, wine, and lusty cheer,
Jove would come down, to surfeit here.
Song 3.
Tell me, Jove, should she disdain,
Whether it were greater pain,
Silent in thy flames to dye,
Or say I love, and she deny?
Flames suppressed, do higher grow:
Should she scorn, when she does know
Thy affection, thou shall prove
A glorious martyrdom for love.
Better to loves mercy bow;
She may burn as well as thou.
Oh then, timorous heart, proceed:
For wounds are death, that inward bleed.
Song 4.
Charm, O charm, thou God of sleep,
Her fair eyes, that waking mourn;
Frightful visions from her keep,
Such as are by sorrows born.
But let all the sweets that may
Wait on rest, her thoughts obey.
Fly, O fly, thou God of love,
To that breast thy dart did wound:
Draw thy shaft, the smart remove;
Let her wonted joys be found.
Raise up pleasure to a flood
Never ebbing; new joys bud.
Song 5.
When that I poor soul was borne,
I was born unfortunate;
Presently the Fates had sworn
To foretell my hapless state.
Titan his fair beams did hide;
Phaebe clipped her Silver light:
In my birth my mother did,
Young and fair, in heavy plight.
And the nurse that gave me suck
Hapless was, in all her life;
And I never had good luck,
Being maid, or married wife.
I loved well, and was beloved;
And forgetting was forgot:
This a hapless marriage moved;
Greiving, that it kills me not.
With the earth would I were wed,
Then in such a grave of woes
Daily to be buried,
Which no end nor number knows.
Song 6. The Fisher-mans Ditty.
THough the weather jangles
With our hooks and angles;
Our nets be shaken, and no fish taken;
Though fresh Cod and Whiting
Are not this day biting
Gurnet nor Cunger, to satisfy hunger;
Yet look to our draught.
Hale the main bowling,
The Seas have left their rolling,
The waves their huffing, the winds their puffing;
Up to the topmast, Boy,
And bring us news of joy!
Here Is no demurring; no fishes stirring;
Yet something we have caught.
Song 7.
What motions, times, and changes?
What ways? what uncouth ranges?
What slights? what delusions?
What gladness (in conclusions)
Have risen of such sorrows?
One faith yet all these borrowes;
And one good love assures,
And all misfortune cures.
And since from grief they vary,
Good Fortune, come, and tarry.
Song 8.
My heart in flames do fry
Of thy beauty,
While I
Dye:
Fie;
And why
Shoulst thou deny
Me thy sweet company?
My brains to tears do flow,
While all below
Does glow:
Foe;
If so,
How can thou go
About to say me no?
Song 9.
1.
THis Lady ripe, and calm, and fresh,
As Eastern Summers are,
Must now forsake both time and flesh,
T'add light to some small star.
2.
Whilst that alive each star decayed
She may relieve with light;
But death sends beauty to a shade
More cold, more dark then night.
3.
The saucy faith of man does blind
His pride, till it conduce
To destine all his abject-kind
For some eternal use.
4.
But ask not bodies doomed to die,
To what abode they go:
Since knowledge is but sorrows Spy,
It is not safe to know.
Song 10. The constant Lover.
TImes change, and shall (as we do see)
And life shall have an end;
But yet my faith shall ever be
Whereon mine eyes depend.
The days and moments, and their scope;
The hours, with their changes wrought,
Are cruel enemies to hope,
And friends unto a loving thought.
Thoughts still remain, (as we do see)
And hope shall have an end:
But yet my Faith sha'n't wanting be,
My hope for to defend.
Sonnet I.
Cupids craft.
I Played with Love, Love played with me again;
I mocked at him, but he mocked me indeed:
He would not let my heart his art exceed;
For (though a boy) yet mocks he does disdain.
A friend he is to those that do not fain.
My jests (it seems) do true affection breed:
And now if Love is not revenged with speed,
My heart can witness it with earnest pain,
That one may love, and jest it out again.
Song II. Being a Pastoral Ditty.
1.
IN this green mead, Mine eyes, what do you see;
The Bagpipe of my Nymph, so passing fair?
Unless my senses dream, so should it be;
For sure this is the Oak, where, with despair,
She leaned unto; and here the grass yet lies,
And field, which she did water with her eyes.
2.
Jove, I thee pray, if this I do but fear,
And if my dream do fall out sure or no,
By all the love to Nympths that thou did bear,
Open mine eyes, the truth that I may know.
Help me to pray him, green and flowery Mead;
Help me to pray him, Oak, with branched head.
3.
This Bagpipe of my Nymph I will devise,
To hang it here (fair Oak) to honor thee:
A worthy Trophee, though before mine eyes
Lying disgraced; For tears they cannot see.
If it be sure, or if I dream in vain,
Spoiled in this mead with parching sun and rain.
4.
That gracious Nymph, who gave my heart the stroke,
In this green Mead I saw (a heavenly Prize)
And (if I dream not) leaning to that Oak;
Nay sure I did behold her with mine eyes.
O that she had but seen me then again,
Or that I had but seen, and dreamed in vain!
Sonnet II.
Cupid was angry with my merry face,
Because I ever laughed him to scorn;
And all his followers (hapless and forlorn)
I mocked in public and in private place:
Wherefore he armed himself to my disgrace,
When time a fit occasion did suborn:
But I despised his flames, his power did scorn.
Nor did I any of his hests embrace:
Who seeing that he built upon the sand;
Since by a face he could me not devour,
He showed me, then, a fine and dainty hand;
Which once beheld, it lay not in my power
For to remain unconquered; no, nor would
I be delivered now, although I could.
Song 12. An invitation to love.
PLeasures, beauty, youth attend ye,
Whiles the spring of nature lafteth:
Love and melting thoughts befriend ye;
Use the time, ere Winter hastes.
Active blood and free delight,
Place, and privacie, invite:
Do, do, be kind as fair;
Loose not opportunity for air.
She is cruel, that denies it:
Bounty best appears in granting.
Stealth of sport as soon supplies it,
Whiles the dues of love are wanting.
Here Is the sweet exchange of bliss,
When each whisper proves a kiss.
In the game are felt no pains;
For in all, the loser gains.
Sonnet III.
THey say love swear, he never would be friend,
If mortal jealousy were not in a place;
And beauty never be in any face,
Unless that pride did on her thoughts attend:
These are two hags, which hideous hell does send,
Our sweet content to troube and disgrace:
The one, the joy of love, to pain does chase;
The other pity from the heart defend.
Beauty, and love, were both forsworn by me
And thee; my making my unsure estate
In joy and happiness so fortunate;
Because since first thy figure I did see,
Being so fair, yet prouder wast thou never,
Nor I in love, that could be jealous ever.
Song 13.
LOve, if a God thou art,
Then evermore thou must
Be merciful and just.
If thou be just, O wherefore does thy dart
Wound mine alone, and not my Mistress heart?
If merciful, then why
Am I to pain reserved?
Who have thee truly served,
While she, that for thy power cares not a fly,
Laughs thee to scorn, and lives in liberty.
Then if a God thou woulst accounted be,
Heal me like her, or else wound her like me.
Sonnet IIII.
THe Bat, that lurketh in a stony wall,
Flies here and there, assured of her sight;
When that the signs of darksome night she sees
Approaching on; contented therewithal:
But when she spies Apollo's beams so bright,
Her fault she does acknowledge, and recall.
So now of late it did to me befall;
And with my wandering mind it well agrees.
For I did think there was no other light,
Nor beauty, but in her who did invite
My senses first to love: but, to my thrall,
When I beheld my Mirabel, bedight
With beauties, and such grace angelical;
Then by and by I knew that heretofore
I plainly erred, but never could do more.
Song 14.
ARe women fair? yes wondrous fair to see too;
Are women sweet? yea, passing sweet they be too.
Most fair, and sweet, to them that inly love them;
Chaste and discreet, to all save those that prove them
Are women wise? not wise, but they be witty:
Are women witty? yea, the more the pity.
They are so witty, and in wit so wily,
That be you never so wise, they will beguile ye.
Are women fools? not fools, but fondlings many:
Can women fond, be faithful unto any?
When snow-white Swans do turn to color sable,
Then women fond will be both firm and stable.
Are women Saints? no Saints, nor yet no Devils:
Are women good? not good, but needful evils.
So Angel-like, that Devils I do'n't doubt them;
So needful Ills, that few can live without them.
Are women proud? I, passing proud, and praise them:
Are women kind? I, wondrous kind, and please them;
Or so imperious, no man can endure them;
Or so kind-hearted, any may procure them.
Sonnet V.
AS many stars as heaven contains, strive
To frame my harm, and luckless hap to show;
And in the earth, no grass nor green does grow,
That to my grief the least of comfort gives.
"Love unto fear subjected, ever drives
"A soul to coldest ice. O bitter woe,
That he whom Fortune contradicts so,
Continually, with Jealousy, must live!
The fault (dear Mistress) I must lay on thee,
And all my grief; on thee I do complain
(O cruel soul) that pity do disdain:
For if thou had but taken part with me,
I would not care, though against me did conspire
Heaven, Earth, and Love, and Fortune, in their ire.
Song 15. All woman are not evil.
1.
THey meet but with unwholesome Spring,
And Summers, which infectious are:
They hear, but when the Mer-maid sings,
And only see the falling star;
Whoever dare
Affirm no woman chaste and fair.
2.
Go cure your Fevers, and you will say
The Dog Days scorch not all the year:
In Copper-mynes no longer stay,
But travel to the West, and there
The right ones see,
And grant all Gold's not Alchymie.
3.
What madman (canse the glo-worm's flame
Is cold, swears there is no warmth in fire?
'Cause some make forseit of their name,
And slave themselves to man's desire;
Shall the sex free
From guilt, damned to the bondage be?
Sonnet. 6.
Written to the Authors first Love.
Is It, that my pocl-hol'd face does beauty lack?
No. Your sweet sex sweet beauty praises;
Ours, wit and valor chiefly raises.
Is It, that my muskless clothes are plain and black?
No. What wise Ladies love fine noddies,
With poor-clad minds, and rich-clad bodies?
Is It, that no costly gifts mine Agents are?
No. My free heart, which I present you,
Should more then Gold or Peal content you.
Is It, that my Verses want invention rare?
No. I was never skilful Poet:
I truly love, and plainly show it.
Is It, that I vaunt, or am effiminate?
O scornful Vices, I abhor you:
Dwell still in Court, the place fit for you.
Is It, that you fear my love soon turns to hate?
No. Though disdained, I can hate never;
But loved, where once I love, love ever.
Song 16. A Pastoral Dialogue,
Penned at the command of my noble friend, M. Theodorus Lo Esquire, on the
attaining his Mistress love.
MELIBEUS, ERGASTUS Mel. SHepherd, why do thou hold thy peace?
Sing, and thy joy to us report.

Erg. My joy (good Shepherd) would be less,
If it were told in any sort.

Mel. Though such great savours thou do win,
Yet deigne thereof to tell some part.

Erg. The hardest thing is to begin,
In enter prises of such art.

Mel. It is not just we should consent
That thou should not thy joys recite.

Erg. The soul that felt the punishment,
Can only feel this great delight.

Mel. That joy is small, and does not shine,
That is not told abroad to many.

Erg. If it be such a joy as mine,
It cannot be pensill'd out by any.

Mel. How can that heart of thine contain
A joy that is of so great force?

Erg. I have it, where I did retain
My passions of so great remorse.

Mel. So great and rare a joy as this,
No man is able to withhold.

Erg. But that the greatest pleasure is,
That in low language cannot be told

Mel. Yet I have heard thee heretofore,
Thy joys in open songs report.

Erg. I said I had of joy some store;
But not how much, or in what sort.

Mel. Yet when a joy is in excess,
It self it will unfold.

Erg. Thus then my joies I do express;
I clip my Arnageld.

Sonnet VII.
SHe that denies me, I would have
Who craves me, I despise:
Venus has power to rule my heart,
But not to please my eyes.
Temptations offered, still I scorn;
Denied I wish them still:
I Will neither glut my appetite,
Nor seek to starve my will.
Diana double clothed, offends;
So Venus naked quite:
The last begers a surfeit, and
The other not delight.
That crafty girl shall please me best,
That No for Yea can say;
And every wanton willing kiss
Can season with a Nay.
Song 17.
1.
WHen to her Lute Althea sings,
Her voice revives the leaden strings;
And does in highest notes appear,
As any chaleng'd echo clear.
But when she does of mourning speak,
Even then her sighs the strings do break.
2.
And as her Lute does live or die,
(Led by her passions) so must I:
For when of pleasure she does sing,
My thoughts enjoy a sudden spring.
But if she do of sorrow speak,
Even fresh my heart the strangs do break.
Sonnet VIII.
1.
LIke the Violet, which alone
Prospers in some happy shade,
My dear Mistress lives unknown,
To no looser eye betrayed:
"For she is to her self untrue,
"Who delights in the public view.
2.
Such her beauty, as no arts
Has enriched with borrowed grace:
Her high birth no pride imparts;
For she blushes in her place.
Folly boasts a noble blood:
She is noblest, being good.
3.
She Is cautious, and never knew yet
What a wanton courtship meant,
Nor speaks loud, to boast her wit;
In her silence eloquent.
Of her self survey she takes;
But 'tween men no difference makes.
Song 18.
A Country-Courtship, written during my abode at S.r. E. D's house in Wilishire.
1.
CHloris, my only Goddess, and my good;
Whiter then is the untrodden snowie way,
And redder then the rose but late a bud,
Half blown, and plucked with dew by break of day.
To view, more comely then the Plane-tree's shape,
And sweeter then the ripe and swelling grape;
More pleasant then the shade in summertime,
Or the sunbeams in winters coldest prime.
2.
More fresh then any cool and trembling wind,
Morenoble then the fruit that Orchards yield;
More jocund then the tender Kid by kind,
When full it skips, and traverseth the fields;
More flowery then the rich and pleasant mead,
With painted flowers in midst of May bespread;
More sost then spotless down on Cygnets breast,
Or the sweet milk, and cheese-curds yet unprest.
3.
Clusters of Grapes do beautify my Vines,
Some golden purple-red, all fair and full;
Of part whereof I make most dainty wines,
And part of them I keep for thee to pull:
And with thy hands, most delicate and fair,
Gather thou may ripe Plums, by goodly pairs,
Under the shadow of thy boughs, to ease thee.
4.
Here I have Damsens, Nuts, and colored Pears,
With Peaches fine, that would each eye invite;
And every tree, and fruit this Island bears,
All for thy service, pleasure, and delight.
And as my heart, to please thee, I have bowed;
So have all these, the self-same office vowed,
In Autumn (if thy husband I might be)
Chestnuts and Medlers I would keep for thee.
Sonnet. IX.
The Lover embracing his Mistress.
A Bout the husband-Oak the Vine
Thus wreaths to kiss his leavy face;
Their streams thus Rivers join,
And lose themselves in the mbrace:
But Trees want sense, when they infold;
And waters, when they meet, are cold.
Thus Turtles, bill, and groan,
Their loves into each others ear;
Two flames, thus burn in one,
When their curled heads to heaven they rear:
But Birds want soul, though not desire;
And flames material, soon expire.
Song 19.
Sung by three Beggars. IRUS, BRUNELLO, FURBO. IRUS. BRight shines the Sun,
play Beggars, play,
Here Is seraps enough to serve to day.
What noise of Vials is so sweet,
As when our merry clappers ring?
What mirth does want, where Beggars meet?
A Beggars life is for a King.
Eat, drink, and play, sleep when we list,
Go where we will, so stocks be mist.
Bright shines the Sun, play Beggars, play;
Here Is scraps enough to serve to day.

BRUNELLO. The world is ours, and ours alone,
For we alone have world at will;
We purchase not, all is our own;
Both fields and streets we Beggars fill.
Nor care to get, nor fear to keep,
Did ever break a Beggars sleep.
Bright shines the Sun, etc.

FURBO. A hundred head of black and white,
Upon our downs securely feed;
If any dare his Master bite,
He dies therefore, as sure as creed:
Thus Beggars lord it as they please;
And none but Beggars live at ease.
Bright shines the Sun, etc.

Sonnet X.
DIsdain, that so does fill me,
Has surely sworn to kill me;
And I must die.
Desire, that still does burn me,
To life again will turn me;
And live must I.
O kill me then, Disdain,
That I may live again.
2.
Thy looks are life unto me,
And yet those looks undo me:
O death and life.
Thy smile some rest does show me,
Thy frown does soon o'erthrow me:
O peace and strife.
Nor life nor death is either;
Then give me both, or neither.
3.
Life only, cannot please me;
Death only, cannot case me:
Change is delight.
I live, that death may kill me,
And die that life may fill me
Both day and night.
If once Desire decay,
Despair will wear away.
Song 20.
Sung by a Shepherd and a Shepherdess: AMYNTAS, AMARILLIS. Amynt. THe cause why
that thou do deny
To look on me, sweet Fo, impart.

Amar. Because that does not please the eye,
Which does offend and grieve the heart.

Amynt. What woman is, or ever was
That when she looks, was not moved?

Amar. She that resolves her life to pass,
Neither to love, nor to be loved.

Amynt. There is no heart so fierce or hard,
That can so much torment a soul;

Amar. Nor Shepherd of so small regard,
That Reason will so much control.

Amynt. How falls it out, love does not kill
Thy Cruelty with some remorse?

Amar. Because that Love is but a Will;
And Free Will does admit no force.

Amynt. Behold what reason now thou have
To remedy my loving smart.

Amar. The very same binds me as fast
To keep such danger from my heart.

Amynt. Why do thou thus torment my mind,
And to what end thy beauty keep?

Amar. Because thou call'st me still unkind,
And pitiless, when thou do meet.

Amynt. Is it because thy cruelty,
In killing me, does never end?

Amar. No; but because I mean thereby
My heart from sorrow to defend.

Sonnet XI.
1.
Amphion, O thou holy shade,
Bring Orpheus with thee;
That wonder may you both invade,
To hear my melody.
You who are soul (not rudely made)
Up with material ears,
Are fit to hear the music of these spheres.
2.
Hark, when my Mistress Orbs do move,
By my first moving eyes:
How great's the Symphonie of love?
But it is the destiny
Will not so far my prayers approve,
To bring you hither; here
Is a true heaven, and Elysium there.
Song 20.
LOose your lids, unhappy eyes,
From the sight of such a change;
Love has learned to despise;
Self-conceit, has made him strange:
Inward now, his sight he turns,
With himself, in love he burns.
If abroad he beauty spy,
As by chance he looks abroad;
Or it is wrought by his eye,
Or forced out by Painters fraud:
Save himself, none fair he deemeth,
That himself too much esteems.
Coy disdain, has kindness place,
Kindness forced to hide his head,
True desire is counted base;
Hope with hope, is hardly fed:
Love is thought a fury needless;
He that has it, shall dye speedless.
Then mine eyes, why gaze you so?
Beauty scorns the tears you shed;
Death you seek to end my woe;
O that I of death were sped!
But with love, has death conspired,
To kill none whom Love has fired.
Sonnet XII.
LEt the silence of the night,
At my will, her duty show,
Harken to me, every wight,
Or be still, or speak but low:
Let no watching dog, with spite,
Bark at any, to or fro,
Nor the Cock (of Titan bright
The foreteller) once to crow.
Let no prying Goose excite
All the Flock to squeak a-vow:
Let the winds retain their might,
Or a little while not blow,
Whilst all ears I do invite,
To hear the Ditty I bestow;
In the which, I nill recite
Her deserts, which ever grow,
Nor her beauties, so bedight,
Fairer then the Rose, or snow;
Nor her virtues exquisite,
Which no man deserves to know;
For into Seas infinite,
With a small Bark, it were to go.
I will only sing and write
In what miseries I flow;
That in sorrows I delight,
Praising Love's all-conqu'ring bow:
Wishing to eternal night,
(To end my sorrows) I might go.
Song 22.
THine eyes so bright
Bereft my sight,
When first I viewed thy face:
So now my light
Is turned to night;
I stray from place to place.
Then guide me, of thy kindness;
And I will bless my blindness.
Sonnet XIII.
NOw do the birds, in their warbling words,
Welcome the year;
With sugared notes, they chimup through their throtes,
To win a Phear.
Sweetly they breathe the wanton love
That Nature in them warms;
And each to gain a mate does prove,
With sweet enchanting charms.
He sweetly sings, and stays the nimble wings
Of her in the air:
She hovering stays, to hear his loving lays,
Which woo her there.
She becomes willing, hears him woo;
Gives ear unto his song:
And does (as Nature taught her) do;
Yields, su'd unto not long.
But my Dear stays, she feeds me with delays,
Hears not my moan:
She knows the smart, in time will kill my heart,
To live alone.
Learn of the birds, to choose thee a Phear,
But not like them to range.
Have they their mate but for a year?
Yet let us never change.
Song 23. A Riddle.
I Saw a hill upon a day,
Lift up above the air;
Which watered with blood always,
And tilled with great care.
Herbs it brought forth,
Of mickle worth.
Pulling a handful from that ridge,
And touching but the same;
Which leaving near unto a bridge,
Does cause much sport and game,
(A thing scarce of belief)
Lamenting without grief.
Sonnet XIIII.
IN heaven the blessed Angels have their being,
In hell, the Fiends appointed to damnation;
To men and beasts, earth yields firm habitation;
The winged Musicians, in the air are fleeing.
With fins, the people gliding,
Of water have the enjoining;
In fire all else destroying,
The Salamander finds a strange abiding;
But I (O wretch) since I did first aspire,
To love a beauty, beauties all excelling,
Have my strange adverse dwelling,
In heaven, hell, earth, water, air, and fire.
Song 25. Loves Labyrinth, to Mistress Mary Lo.
LOvers do make themselves like conquered slaves;
Sometimes themselves most valiant they do fain,
Sometimes great Lords, with many other braves;
Sometimes thrown down, and vanquished again.
Their wounds, their joys, their pains their pleasures make:
And happy comfort in their prisons take.
A thousand times they curse their hapless stars,
Despising life, and happy death Implore,
Yet in the end, so valiant in those wars
Of life and death, and other passions more,
That thousand deaths, they say they pass and try,
And yet they never make an end to dye.
They give, They gain, They heal, They wound, They ply
Their soul, Their life, Their harms, Their hearts, Their tears:
They joy, They live, They burn, They plain, They die
With hap, With hope, With heat, With grief, With fears.
And so in all their lives, and what they say,
There is a strange confusion every day.
Epithalamium, Or A nuptial-song.
LEet now each field, with flowers be painted
Of sundry colors, sweetest odours glowing;
Roses yield forth your smell, so finely tainted;
Calm winds, the green leaves move, with gentle blowing.
The Crystal rivers flowing.
With waters, be increased;
And since each one, from sorrow now has ceased,
(From mournful plaints and sadness)
Ring forth, fair Nimphs, your joyful songs for gladness.
Of that 'sweet joy, delight you with such measure,
Between you both, fair issue to engender;
Longer then Nestor, may you live in pleasure,
The Gods to you, such sweet content surrender,
That may make mild and tender
The Beasts in every mountain,
And glad the fields, and woods, and every fountain,
A bjuring former sadness.
Ring forth fair Nymphs, your joyful songs for gladness.
Let amorous birds, with sweetest notes delight you;
Let gentle winds refresh you, with their blowing;
Let Ceres with her best of goods requite you,
And Flora deck the ground where you are going;
Roses and Lilies strowing,
The Jasmine, and the Gillow-flower,
With many more; and never in your bower
Taste of houshold-sadness.
Ring forth; fair Nymgps, your joyful songs for gladness.
Sonnet XV.
ANother Cupid raigns within my breast
Then Venus son, that blind and frantic boy:
Diverse his work, intent, and interest;
His fashions, sports, his pleasures, and his joy.
No sleights, deceits, nor woes, he does inspire;
He burns not like to that unseemly fire.
From Reason, Will cannot my love entice,
Since that it is not pleased in this vice.
Song 26.
In praise of the Country-life, to my noble friend Mr. Jennings.
AMbition here no snares nor nets regards,
Nor Avarice for Crowns does lay her baits:
The people here aspire not to etates,
Nor hunger after favors and rewards.
From guile, and fraud, and passions, as we see,
Their hearts are ever free.
Their faith's not vain,
Both good and plain:
Their malice small,
They just to all:
Which makes them live in joy and quiet peace,
And in a mean sufficient for their ease.
Sonnet XVI.
ONce early, as the ruddy bashful morn
Did leave Apollo's Purple-streaming bed,
And did with Scarlet-streams the East adorn;
I unto my dear Mistress chamber sped:
She (Goddess-like) stood kombing of her hair,
Which like a sable veil did cloathe her round:
Her Ivory Komb was white, her hand more fair;
She strait and tall, her tresses trail'd to ground.
Amazed I stood, thinking my Dear had been
Turned Goddess, every sense to Sight was gone.
With bashful blush she fled, I once being seen,
Left me transformed (almost) into stone:
Yet did I wish so ever to have remained,
Had she but stayed, and I my sight retained.
Song 27. The Insatiate Lover.
AS soon may water wipe me dry,
And fire my heat allay;
As you with favor of your eye
Make hot desire decay.
The more I have,
The more I crave:
The more I crave, the more desire,
As piles of wood increase the fire.
The Authors conclusion.
REst, good my Muse, and give me leave to rest;
We stive in vain;
Conceal thy skill, within thy sacred breast;
Though to thy pain.
The honor great, which Poets wont to have,
With worthy deeds, lie in oblivions grave:
Each man will hide his name,
Thereby to hide his shame;
And silence is the praise their virtues crave.
2.
To praise is flattery, malice to dispraise;
Hard is the choice;
What cause is left for thee, my Muse, to raise
Thy heavenly voice?
Delight thy self on sweet Pernassus hill,
And for a better time reserve thy skill;
There let thy silver sound,
From Cyrrha-wood rebound,
And all the vale, with pleasing music fill.
3.
Then shall those fools, that now preser each Rhyme,
Before thy skill,
With hand and foot, in vain assay to clime
Thy sacred hill:
There shall thou sit, and scorn them with disdain,
To see their fruitless labor all in vain,
And they shall fret with spite,
To see thy glory bright,
And know themselves thereto cannot attain.
EMBLEMATICAL FANTASTICKS; More emphatical and numerous then all ever yet
printed.
To the Reader.
Search thou all books upon earths globe
Lee Heelme, and ride the Astrolobe;
Such Fancies here I hold to view,
Can nowhere else be seen by u.
2 2 1 is odds, i c:
6 2 6 most even b.
1 2 2, and 2 2 6,
At Barly-break may play fine tricks.
2 2 6, and 6 2 1,
May b in hell, when u are gone.
two hearts joined in one Dis-joy'd cannot be,
If Love do say, Amen, I c.
For where two hearts love mutually,
There the Affections bb.
pillory Put in thy foot
Or pay; it is no boot
To strive, for u were drunk to day.
Thus it is with cups and pipes to play.
horns be his good luck,
Well branched, such as wears a buck
Whose eyes staring ever b
Upon the crest of cuckoldry The Crest of Cuckoldry: A y^llow field, a pair of
horns, and a key



a harp is Music I would wish,
A Carp me thinks is finest depiction of fish
and a coney
And good Canary for my money.
U Drawer wash the jugs and glasses
So that each man may see two faces
When he looks on them. Next bring hither
Tobacco, and six pipes together.
Beneath a tree 2 lovers sat:
a hand from heaven pointed at
three suns. U must imagine none
But would have run, it is 10 2 1.
But them I saw sit still and dally.
1000 kisses on the Tally
They carved, and held hands rose up,
Meaning to drink a spiced cup
No sun or moon or stars can thwart
Those hearts are slue'd by Cupids dart
What bird that flies in heavens eye
Whose beak chirps not Loves melody?
A Song.
A Shepherd sat beneath a tree:
Quoth he, My fears and doubts B,
Lest Cupid with his bow and dart
Should freshly wound my wounded heart
Why should the luster of a face
eye hand or foot prevail,
That I must dote, to my disgrace,
While Cupid does my force assail?
His crook his and his bag
His pipe lay broken at his feet:
The birds that on the trees did wag,
In mournful quires did sing full sweet.
No snake nor toad durst there appear;
Sylvanus did command them thence:
No saucie Huntsman durst come there,
To chase the coneys from their residence
The gods, by their almighty power,
For this sweet Shepherd kept this Bower.
O Why should u so captious b?
No fault I would have lovers c
In their beloveds. Those 2 nice
Me thinks are still yy.
Question.
GOod Sir, how came you lose your nose
Answer.
With walking in those mists arose
In Pric-ardy.
Question.
Indeed it is true,
The French many makes to rue.
Whenas thy once go down,
Hold fast thy hair upon thy crown
Answer.
No matter, it is but a French Jig;
And I can buy a wig
a lover's knot untwin'd cannot b.
two hands two hearts make 1 i c.
r great brags deeds? or can he be
True 2 1, has broke with 3?
He Is knavish yy, and never was true:
Besides, in means he doubles u.
An l of Pudding cannot suffize
His gut that is of III size.
Ever in a wandering Maze
Are those that do on Beauty gaze:
Still perplexed, full of Fears;
Their hours are months, their months are years.
concrete poem arranged as a maze Lovers see more wonders then
Madmen when they are alone:
If once possessed, forty to ten,
If love leav them til life is gone.


concrete poem arranged in a spiral Round about all in a Ring
A Lovers Obiit set us sing
Strew red Roses Lillies Fine,
The Hyacinth and Iassamine:
Bring green Time and Eglansine
yea and Vervain most Divine
about about With nimble pace
While This holy Ground We Trace
lo Peans sing we all
To Cupids bow Aeth^^^^.


concrete poem in the form of a door Broken sleeps, tormenting nights,
Such as Death it self affrights;
Leanness, roving, idle praises,
Curses, blessings, strange
Fantasies, Fevers, Agues, and Despair,
First built Loves Castle
in the Air.
Foolish Mortals, do not post
To enter here, unto your cost.
Cupid's Messengers will come,
DESIRE and INCLINATION,
You need not fear,
Will bring you here,
To taste those Ills
That thousands kills.
Force not your selves,
Ye foolish Elves,
To dote
Upon a Note
is sung
By her is young.
For know, one time or other you shall prove,
(Maugre your wills) there is a god of love.


Additional amorous Discourses, Poems, Dialogues, Letters, etc.
A Young Gentleman being taken with the love of a Lady, thus accosteth her.
Suppose the name to be FORTUNATUS, and ADRASTINA.
For. ALl hail, thou model of divine perfections: may all the blessings heavens
can send to mortals, shower down upon your head. Vouchsafe to cast one
favorable look upon a creature wholly devoted to your service; and let not
rigor steer your actions, to play the tyrant over him, whose heart is vowed a
Sacrifice to your love.


Adrast. Pardon, Sir, a woman's weakness, if she take the boldness to say, her
shallow capacity cannot apprehend the height of your Oratory: yet must I render
thanks for your wishes, and wish that I could be so thankful as to meet you in
an equal affection: but since affection cannot be forced, you must pardon me,
if I say, I cannot love.


Fortu. Not love? heavens forbid that so great cruelty should reside in so
divinely fair a creatrue. Let not such harsh speeches proceed from so sweet a
mouth, unless it be out of a Maiden bashfulness; whose very strongest negatives
do but affirm a grant: such I both hope and wish is your denial.


Adrast. I must confess, Sir, your thoughts I cannot hinder; yet would I gladly
persuade you to believe the truth, that my denial is unfeigned: however, I
shall willingly submit my weaker judgment to the government of your better
understanding.


Fortu. Divinest Lady, to whose beauty I am be holding for whatever I have;
since you have been pleased to honor me with so high a title as is that of
your governor, give me leave to command (but alas, it is impossible) or at
least to beg (which is most suitable) one salve from those Srar-shining eyes,
which have shot forth their conquering darts at my lovesick heart, making me
acknowledge the conquest yours, my self happy in your being victorious. O
heavenly Adrastina! govern and direct me; for I am wholly given over unto thee.


Adra. Sir, Were I but ascertained of the truth and reality of your affection,
I might perhaps meet your love with an equal burning; but --


Fortu. Pardon, sweet soul, my interrupting you. If my love be not real, let me
be an object of all men's scorn, and let the heavens, (as a just guerdon of my
dissembling) shower down upon me their most horrible plagues: but if it be
love, chaste and real love, let our souls meet in a reciprocal affection, and
be imparadized into fruition of each other.


Adrast. As far as a Virgins modesty will permit her, hereafter I shall be ever
ready to accomplish your desires, and obey your commands; and in the mean time
be confident, that I am entirely yours. But time calls me away. All happiness
attend you.


Fortu. And as in you all virtues shine, so upon you may all the blessings both
of heaven and earth wait.


A Letter to a Gentlewoman requesting Love.
COnsidering with my self, most divine Lady, the many virtues wherewith nature
has in a superabundant measure adorned you, and then weighing the
insufficiency of any service I can do you; my trembling hand is scarce able to
hold the pen, and my stammering tongue dare hardly express that which my
afflicted heart desires to manifest unto you: yet love, which holds in his
dominion my enflamed heart, forces me to lay open to your sweetest self the
secrets of my love-tormented breast. Excuse then, I humbly beseech you, these
humble lines, that invisibly present to your sair hands an humbler suit then
can be expressed. I beseech you to extend a gracious hand, to stay a fainting
soul from sinking, that without you is as nothing, whose worth and remembrance
gives me being: for I desire not to be, where your being is not; It is that
only that betters my joy, and makes me sensible of content, there being no
content equal to the enjoying a companion of so great worth. To conclude, I
shall expect the sentence of my life or death in your answer, and remain so
perfectly yours, that I can say nothing near it, when I say I am,

Madam, your most faithful, most obedient, and most affectionate servant.

Another to a Gentlewoman desiring his forbearance to visit her, etc,
WIth what words sufficiently to set forth my affection, and with what
expressions high enough to manifest the constancy of my love, because I cannot
tell; I shall appeal to your self, whether the sincerity of my actions, and the
integrity of my words, be not able to justify me. And I dare appeal to heaven,
whether or no my words have in the least manner tended to dissimulation,
swerving from professed truth, or my actions digressed from nature: but since
your rigor pleases to command, I shall withdraw my person; yet in lieu of
return, will leave my heart with you; and maugre fate, subscribe my self,

Mistress, ever thine, in an unalterable affection.

A Gentleman debarred the society of his Mistress, thus writes to her.
SInce my misfortunes are so great, that those most happy opportunities we
formerly enjoyed by a mutual intercourse and converse, are at present vanished,
I cannot but by these manifest the constancy of my affection, which shall
remain even to my latest gasp. I hope, nay am confident, that you will not
now, after the heaping on me so many and so great favors, estrange your self:
and for my part, I am and even will be, wholly thine. And since my endeavors
have been so happy to win your favor, they will double in length, and redouble
in goodness, the remainder of my days. All my right in all things, is yours,
and your demand my content: you are my joy; and my greatest height of happiness
is to enjoy you. Your person is the food of my thoughts, the relief of my
wishes, and the repast of my desires. Your love to me, is a continual hunger,
after which I daily, earnestly, more and more long; your absence, my extreme
famine, which makes me pine away with grief. And if any poor endeavors of mine
may be but pleasing to your most virtuous self, I shall esteem my self most
happy, when most serviceable to you: And, in the mean while, shall rest
assured of your love, as you may of having his heart, who is

Yours inseparably.

A Gentleman having made his suit by speech, thus seconds it by writing.
THat I should begin my Letter with the declaration of my love, seems to me
altogether preposterous and unnecessary, since I manifested it to you so long
since: But I may well bemoan my ill fortune, that cannot yet gain your good
opinion of me, to credit your words, but that you still think me one of those
who are altogether faithless. Is it my lot, for Love, to reap Disdain? Let me
but know wherein I have offended, and my life shall answer my misdemeanour. All
I desire, is love, your love; because nothing can satisfy love, but love. I
could enlarge: but, lest I be too troublesome, I will say no more, but that I am

Your affectionate servant.

Her Answer.
Sir,
I Received a Paper from you, which I here answer, to clear my self of that
accusation (of being scornful) which you cast upon me. That I do not forget
you, witness this: but yet I am so far from being pleased with your Letters,
that I can hardly bear the reading them, especially since they proceed from a
deceitful heart, as I believe yours is. If then you love me, as you profess,
show it in this, That you trouble me no more with your Letters; in hopes
whereof, I remain,

Sir, Your, etc.

His Reply.
My Dearest,
THat you do not forget me, is my only, my chief happiness; but, that to think
of me, should move you to impatience, is my greatest misery. What greater
torment, then to love, and not to be loved again? Heaven and earth are not able
to parallel so great cruelty. But your words, that you cannot believe my
seigned vows, carry with them a killing accent. O heavens! bear ye witness of
my reality and sincere affection. I love you, as I profess: but by obeying your
command, a breach might be made into the love of

Yours while he lives, and even in death.

Another.
ACcording to my duty, and the obligements that lic upon me, for the
manifestation of my loyal constancy, I do hereby humbly kiss your hands.
protesting that my love increases and renews, with the day, more and more. The
Sun in its greatest splendour, has been over-pow'red with clouds, and darkened
with mists; and sometimes even the most constant affection has been scandalized
with disloyalty. Let Envy then pine it self to death, and let Malice burst it
self with rage; yet will I remain constant, yet will I be unremoveable, never
to be altered from my settled resolution, which is to be

Yours wholly and only.

A Gentleman to his Mistress, having won her consent to affection.
THe thoughts of those many great favors I have received from you, especially
your grant of affection, drive me to so high a rapture of joy, that I am
neither able to contain my self in any bounds, nor yet to express the ardencie
of my affection. What shall I say? I am so full of love, that there is no room
in my heart for any thought but of thee. Happy I, who am blessed with the love
of so heavenly, so virtuous a companion. Now shall cuhearts seed on pleasures,
and our eyes behold the bliss of each other in the full comfort of all content:
we will sleep in love, and wake and walk in all sulness of joy; enjoying in our
hearts more delights, then either Nature affords, or Art can express: among
which, this shall be chief, That thou art mine, and that I am

Thine, etc,

A Gentleman crossed in his affection, thus writes to his Mistress.
THere is no creature in this spacious fabric of the whole world so wide,
either of Sense or Reason, which being diseased or afflicted, but does find,
by mere instinct of nature, some present remedy to help his infirmity, Man
only excepted, who can find no medicine, by whose secret virtues he may allay
his grief. This now I know by proof, and therefore speak by experience. But it
is not to complain of you, that I now take pen in hand, but only to lament my
unfortunate birth, that has brought me into so unhappie a predicament, as to be
contemned of you. And I protest, I have called my soul to an account for all
her actions, but cannot accuse any one of them. Go then, my Paper, and, in your
Masters name, first humbly kiss her hands, then tell her she can never heal the
wound she has made in her Faith, and my Love; which I am resolved to carry
with me to my grave; hoping that the heavens, moved at last, will, through my
patient suffering, make me as dear to you, as you are now cruel to me. However,
no earthly thing shall hinder me from serving you: for I will rather die, then
be inconstant in my love; and will flee, with the hazard of my life, the
reproach of disloyalty.

A Gentleman going into the Country, after this manner writes his Adieu to his
Mistress.
TO tell you of my constancy, I think is unnecessary, since you find it; and
to declare in what a continued course of perseverance, my faithful affection
has gone, from its very beginning to this present, would make my Letter swell
to a Volume. Besides, so perfect a thing as my love to your divine self, as it
will suffer no question, so it seems to receive injury by addition of any words
unto it. I could not but write to you, not knowing whether you would be pleased
to grant me the favor to see you, or make me happy in the fruition of your
company before my departure. And when I am abroad, my actions shall testify
that you are always in my heart. And if I can be so happy to keep a room in
your thoughts and memory, it will be my greatest comfort in my loneliness, and
my chief joy in my recess, etc.

A Letter protesting love.
WIth how great pleasure do I now, whilst I sit alone, recount my happiness in
my love, which, in my greatest me lancholy, is my chiefest and most most
pleasing comfort! If you knew but the delight that I take in the remembering
your dear self, you would wonder at my felicity. I cannot tell how to express
my affection. I love, I love you, yea you alone, with an everlasting and most
virtuous affection. But this is too short: since then words sail, services and
actions shall take their place; whose real performance shall prove a perfect
demonstration of the never-altering, never-dying affection of

(My Dear) Yours devoted, to eternily.

A Gentleman in the Country writes to his Mistress in London.
IT is not length of time, distance of place, or absence from you, can any whit
lessen my love, or put the remembrance of your most dear self either out of my
mind or heart. And seriously, were it not for the want of your dear company, I
could be content always to be here: but you are the Star on whom both my good
fortune and welfare depends; you are the Loadstone, whose virtue attracts,
keeps, possesses my heart and thoughts, wherever my person is. This very
thing makes this place tedious to me, in that I am debarred of your society:
but if the place were sweetened with your presence, I should account every tree
a Paradise, and every tree would seem an Elysium, etc.

A Gentleman writes to his displeased Mistress.
IF ever any man could on a sudden be thrown down from the highest pinnacle of
Joy, to the lowest gulf of infinite unsupportable miseries; certainly I am he:
for your (causless) anger has filled me with such a confusion of thoughts,
that I know not which way to turn my self. But now at last I have got my pen to
paper; which does in all humility crave pardon of you, if in any thing I have
offended, or were guilty of what you mislike; and withal, promises such an
amendment for the future, as shall never incur the danger of your dislike. And
if ever my thoughts did receive so much as a fainting in their affections; if
they have not continually with more and more ardor from time to time pursued
the possession of your favor, then let heavens most horrible plagues fall upon
me. Do not then use him so hardly, who would for your sake hazard himself and
all his future hopes. Nay, though you should be cruelly severe to me, yet let
me say thus much; There is no one in the world that does, or shall more
cordially affect your person, or more really wish your good, then my dejected
self, and

Your despised servant.

A Letter requesting love.
SEeing the many virtues that so resplendently shine in you, and that heavenly
beauty wherewith Nature in an extraordinary measure has eariched you; unless I
were blotted with a stupid senslesness, I cannot but acknowledge you divine,
and able to command Cupid to let fly a shaft where you please. Hoping
therefore your ingenuity will admit my unpolished lines without a superficial
complemental gloss, or the rich accent of a ceremonial eloquence, (which could
I use; I would not) yet censure me not to be altogether void of Oratory, when
my style is bound to be friendly; and the best lines are drawn from the center
of a strong affection. Know, I love: nay, start not, Madam, at that word, since
you can so easily prescribe a remedy for my love-inflamed heart. Love is all I
crave; which with modesty may be granted to

(Madam) Yours to eternity.

A Letter from a Gentleman in the Country, to his sweetheart in the City.
OF all earthly things, there is nothing wherein I take so much pleasure, or
whence I receive so great content, as in the fulfilling your commands; which
are so repleat with virtue, that I cannot but admire, nay adore the person in
whom so much good resides. What then are all my services? even not worthy to be
taken notice of by so great virtuous deserts. Should I not adore, should I not
serve, should I not with a most constant affection love your dear self, I might
well be branded with the base stain of stupidity. I protest, were the place of
my being a Paradise, and were my company all Saints; yet, without you, should I
receive little pleasure in the one, and less comfort in the society of the
other. You are always present in my heart and thoughts; and as I walk alone in
the fields, heaven can bear me witness how often it has heard me record your
name; and with what joy I was wrapped, when the solitary woods with a pleasing
echo reiterated the same, etc.

A Letter suing for Love.
Dear Madam,
I Cannot but in all humble reverence, by these, as much as they can, manifest
that affection which my stammering tongue knows not how to express, nor my
unable pen to delineate. Oh that my heart were transparent! there would you see
a Seat ordained for your virtuous and sweetest self; a Palace of Love, where
affection daily waits, to do you service; a Castle altogether impregnable, till
'twas over-pow'red by darts of love, shot from your eyes, by the string of
virtue. How then to express a gratitude sufficient to answer your goodness, is
a thing altogether impossible, your virtue being as unlimitable as my
affection: but such as I can, I willingly offer; my self, my love, yea my whole
fortunes, I humbly present you withal. You have taken me out of my self; and my
thoughts are not so often in mine own breast, as where you are. You are the
Loadstar of my thoughts, and the life of my desires, with whom alone I desire
to pass my life. No marvel, if all love, if all desire, if all affect you: for
worth and desert cannot lie unregarded. I resign my self as your prisoner, and
as a Trophee of your victories, to remain

Yours in life, and even in death.

A Letter of complement from one friend to another.
Sir,
I Doubt not (nay, I am confident) that you will wonder, that after the ungrate
silence of so many bypast years, I should now begin to make an apology: but,
I hope, my negligence acknowledged, will obtain a parden. Desiring therefore
that you will think of me with favor, and impute my fault, not to a willing
ingratitude, but to a too great distance. But why speak I of distance? it was
not that could make me hold back my due respects; but an incertainty, nay, I
may truly say, an impossibility to send, was my chief, nay my only reason:
yet I hope a good occasion will now ere long bring us together, and afford us
that opportunity of renewing friendship, which I have long wished, and shall in
no mean measure rejoice at last to enjoy: then shall be a time of more real and
full expressions of my respects toward you, then can find compass within this
narrow page: then shall be a time, when, by a return of courtesies for received
obliging favors, I shall endeavor to repay that friendship which I well
understand I owe unto you. And till I can be happy in the fruition of this
time, know that I study gratitude, and shall ever seriously endeavor to seem
as I am, and be as I seem,

SIR, Your most obliged servant.

A Gentleman thus writes to his dispeased uncle.
SUch and so great has been my former unhappiness, that those which should have
been the tenderers of my service and respects, could have no intercourse: but
seeing that it has pleased God that the mutual love (which should before have
proceeded from one to another to the comfort of both) has again received a new
birth; I hope that all injuries and bypast discontents laid aside, you will
look upon me with a favorable eye.

You know, worthy Sir, that I have a long time sailed in a deep Sea of
affliction and sorrow, which still has increased and flowed in upon me, and
will continue, unless your love and favor extend it self not only to the
pacifying the impetuousness of its waves, but also to the bringing it to so
low an ebb, as I may safely come to the solong-look'd for shore, etc.

To a friend, for a received courtesy.
THere has no one experiment or occurrence happened in my time, which has
more commended and confirmed my judgment and skill of inspection into a man,
then this performance of yours: for I must ingenuously confess, at the first
acquaintance I had with you, I read that same reality and civility in you,
which now I see lively acted by you: so that I know not whether I should
applause my judgment more, or congratulate my happiness in your acquaintance,
from whom I have received a courtesy of that nature, as cannot be expressed,
without a due consideration of, and reflection on the high consequence and
concernment of it, together with a ready thankfulness to you the author
thereof; of whom I may justly say, that it has not been so truly occasioned
by some, that Forgetfulness commonly waits upon Absence, but that you will have
it falsified of your self: which not only augments, but heightens the
courtesy beyond the attempt of requital. And if you have any occasions wherein
I may serve you, command me freely, as

Your friend and servant.

Another.
I Have hourly before me so many Monitors and Remembrancers of my engagement to
you, as is sufficient to convert Ingratitude: in which respect, how am I
troubled to discharge this debt! which is so great, that you must not expect an
entire payment, but to take it out in several acknowledgements, as opportunity
shall favor me. And since the best way to cross out the score of your merit,
is to begin early to make payment, I cannot omit to give you hearty thanks for
your favors, which have perpetually engaged

Your very friend.

A Letter of Complement.
Sir,
MY unwilling error of not answering your Letter, I am confident your sweet
indulgence will readily pardon. I could wish you were truly sensible, how
happy I conceived my self in this fortunate opportunity, as literally to
present you with these best of wishes I have often (with no small ambition)
sought personally to neliver, That the choicest of all joy and happiness may be
showred down upon you. And for that I yet remain in your remembrance, is my
singular happiness, and your mere goodness: for, from my own worthlesness, and
the strong conceit I had of your change, I could not but collect a total
eclipse of your favorable aspect. And that you will be pleased to bear with
this my conceited prolixity, is the earnest desire of

(Sir) Your very humble servant.

A Letter to his Mistress.
GO, happy Paper, by command;
Take liberty to kiss a hand
More white then any part of thee,
Although with spots thou graced be.
The morning-air perfumed in May,
The glory of the clearest day;
The firstborn Rose of all the Spring;
The Down beneath the Turtles wing;
A Lute just reaching to the ear.
Whatere is soft, or sweet, or fair,
Are but her shreds, who fills the place
And sum of every single grace.
As in a child the Nurse descries
The mothers lips, the fathers eyes,
The uncles nose, and does apply
An owner unto every part: so I
In her could analyze the store
Of all the choice ere Nature bore.
Each private piece to mind may call
Some worth, but none may match it all.
Poor emblems! they can but express
One element of Comeliness:
None are so rich to show in one
All simples of perfection:
Nor can the Pencil represent
More then the outward lineament;
Then who can limn the Portraicture
Of Beauties live behavior?
Or what can figure every kind
Of Jewels that adorn her mind?
Thought cannot draw her picture sull:
Even thought, to her, is gross and dull.
A Song.
1.
KEep on your Mask, and hide your eye;
For with beholding you, I die:
Your fatal beauty, Gorgon-like,
Dead with astonishment will strike.
Your piercing eyes (if them I see)
Are worse then Basilisks to me.
2.
Shut from mine eyes those hills of snow;
Their melting valley do not show:
Those Azure paths lead to despair.
O vex me not: forbear, forbear.
For while I thus in torments dwell,
The sight of heaven is worse then hell.
3.
Your dainty voice, and warbling breath,
Sounds like a sentence passed for death:
Your dangling tresses are become
Like Instruments of final doom.
Oh, if an Angel torture so,
When life is done, where shall I go?
A Poet to his Mistress.
THat I do love, it comes to me by kind;
That I love much, it much delights my mind:
That I love you, it is my choice of heart;
That I love you alone, it is your desert.
I love, yea much, yea you, yea you alone;
By kind, mind, heart, desert, and all in one.
Another.
HEr Face, her Tongue, her Wit,
So fair, so sweet, so sharp;
First drew, then bent, last knit
Mine eye, mine ear, my heart.
On his Mistress.
IF any do desire to know
Where the flowers of Virtue grow;
Where content, delight, or mirth
Does inhabit upon earth:
Let them resort to me, and I
The place thereof will soon descry.
Where Is Piety without deceit,
Where Love without Strife or debate;
Where Beauty's mixed with comely grace,
Virtue resideth in that place.
And in my Love all these do meet;
No marvel then if she be sweet.
The Question.
1.
I Ask thee, whence those ashes were,
Which shrine themselves in plaits of hair?
Unknown to me. Sure each morn dies
A Phoenix for a Sacrifice.
2.
I ask thee, whence those ruddy blooms
Perched on her cheek in scarlet gowns?
Unknown to me. Sure that which flies
From fading Roses, her cheek dies.
3.
I ask thee, whence those Airs which fly
From birds in sweetest harmony?
Unknown to me. But sure the choice
Of accents echoes from her voice.
4.
I ask thee of the Lily, whence
It gained the type of innocence?
Unknown to me. Sure Nature's deck
Was ravished from her snowie neck.
5.
I ask thee, whence those active fires
Take light, which glide through burnisht air?
Unknown to me: unless there flies
A flash of lightning from her eyes.
The Answer explicatory.
1.
O No; heaven saw men's fancy stray
To idolize but dust and clay:
That emblem gave, that they might see,
Your beauties date but dust should be.
2.
O no; that Rose, when June is past,
Looks pale, as with a poisoned blast:
And such your beauty, whenas time,
Like winter, shall o'rtake your prime.
5.
No; Philomel, when Summer's gone,
Hasts to the woods, her rape to moan;
(Unwilling hers) ashamed to see
Your (unlike hers) unchastity.
4.
O no; the Phoenix shuns that place,
And fears the lustful sires embrace
Of your hot breast and barren womb,
As death, or some perpetual Tomb.
5.
O no; those stars that fly but the sight
Of what you act in dead of night:
Ashamed themselves should Panders prove
To your insatiate beastly love.
The affirmative Answer.
1.
ASk me no more, whither do stray
The golden atoms of the day:
For in pure love heaven did prepare
Those powders to enrich your hair.
2.
Ask me no more, whither does haste
The Nightingal, when Summer's past:
For in your sweet dividing throat
She winters, and keeps warm her note.
3.
Ask me no more, where those storms light,
Which downward stoop in dead of night:
For in your eyes they set, and there
Fixed become, as in their Sphere.
4.
Ask me no more, where Jove bestows
(When June is past) the fading Rose:
For in your beauties orient deep,
All flowers as in their beds do sleep.
5.
Nor ask me more if East or West
The Phoenix builds her spiced nest:
For unto you at last she flies,
And in your fragrant bosom dies.
The Moderatrix.
1.
I Will tell you where is another Sun
That sets as rising it begun:
It is my self, who keep one sphere,
And were the same, if men so were.
2.
What need I tell, that life and death
May pass in sentence from one breath?
So issue from mine equal heart
Both love and scorn on men's desert.
3.
I Will tell you in what heavenly hell
An angel and a fiend do dwell:
It is mine eye, whose glassie book
Sends back the gazers diverse look.
4.
I Will tell you, in a diverse scale,
One weight can up and downward hale.
You call me Thistle, you a Rose;
I neither am, yet both of those.
5.
I Will tell you where both frost and fire,
In peace of common seat conspire:
My frozen breast the flint is like,
Yet yields a spark, if well you strike.
Conclusion.
Then you that love, and you that loath,
With one respect I answer both:
For round about me glows a fire
Can melt and harden cross desire.
A Dialogue between a Maid and a young Youth.
Maid. STay, lovely boy, why flee'st thou me,
That languish in these flames for thee?
I Am black, it is true, and so is Night;
And Love does in dark shades delight.
The whole world, do but close thine eye,
Will seem to thee as black as I:
Or ope't, and view what a dark shade
Is by thine own fair body made,
That follows thee where-ere thou go:
Ah, who (allowed) would not do so!
Let me for ever dwell so nigh,
And thou shall need no other shade but I.

Boy. Black maid, complain not that I fly,
Since Fate commands antipathie.
Prodigious will that union prove,
Where night and day together move.
And the conjunction of our lips,
Not kisses make, but an eclips;
In which the mixed black and white
Portend more terror then delight.
Yet if my shadow thou will be,
Enjoy thy dearest wish: but see
Thou take my shadows property,
Which hastes away when I come nigh:
Else stay while death has blinded me,
And then I will bequeathe my self to thee.

Epigram in Amorem.
LOve is all eyes, admits of no delay,
And the row great hardships makes an easy way.
Epigram in eundem.
LOve, like a clouded star, does shine most bright,
Where somewhat covered by misfortunes night.
In praise of his Mistress.
1.
I Have a Mistress for perfections rare
In all men's eyes, but in my thoughts most fair.
She is a model of divine perfections;
Fortunes darling, Natures wonder:
She is the sweetest of all sweet complexions,
And of future joys the founder:
In whose sweet looks are blessings three;
Beauty, and Love, and Modesty.
2.
Of all her sex, she is the only splendour,
And an ornament to Fame:
For they are few can equal praises render
To her more-then-matchless frame.
Whhm if the Trojan Paris had but seen,
Beauty had had no other Queen.
3.
She is the only Jewel I desire:
I can but wonder at her beauty:
She is the noble Lady I admire,
To whom I owe submissive duty.
Her modest comely shape it so exceeds,
That (to her) sweetest Roses seem but weeds.
Fairest, to your praise, I dare affirm and tell,
Some may come nigh, few match, but none excel.
Epigram in Amorem.
O Heavenly Love, that can without control,
In such a happy woe involve my soul!
Who tells me that? Love woe? no; it is a stem
Branching from Heavens Imperial Diadem.
A roll of faults the great Tevent.
Comoedian brings,
And says they are the meanest of Loves stings.
The Ovid. and alii. Jove.
Poet sings the Deity of Love,
And its descent brings down from mighty
Which shall I credit? (for they disagree)
The Poets sung his divine Pedigree.
Then all confess with me, infer hence even,
All Is thoroughly good that does come down from heaven.
Though Viz. Love.
thou were fatal, yet I still would cry,
If Love be death, then let me ever die.
To his Mistress Fidelia.
SHall I court Beauty of the richest dye,
In fixing dimness on the clearest eye?
Making spectators proud, if but one glance,
Or smile from it, do on them wondering chance.
Then blame me not; for my Fidelia's fair,
Her beauty never sullied by bold air.
Shall I court riches, and account my self
Well matched, if wedded but to worldly pelf?
Cease Envy then, and henceforth blame not me:
For why? Fidelia is too rich for me.
Shall I seek noble birth, and think it a grace
To match my self with one of noble race;
Hoping to be esteemed, 'cause men may see
The empty boast of a long Pedigree?
Then come, Fidelia; for we will enlarge
A Muster-roll more lasting, with less charge.
Shall I court one that is chaste, who is as free
From all black deeds as purest Lilies be
From spots, before that ruder hands do smutch
Their unstained beauty with a sordid touch?
Such is Fidelia, whom the Tu^tle-dove
Alone resembles in her chastest love.
Shall I court Verrue, and account her best
To be accepted as my constant guest?
Come then, Fidelia, thou most blessed soul,
Who do all virtues in thy self inroul.
Who Will blame me now? Fidelia's fair, chaste, good,
Possessed of riches, come of noble blood.
And now, Fidelia, do'n't you think that I
Have said ought here, that may be thought too high:
Nor think I flatter, pray: for if you be
Such to none else, by -- y' are to me.
A SONG. His Mistress sad and grieved.
1.
CAn any see my Mistress frown,
And yet not with her be cast down?
The Sun, as mourning, light withdrew;
Day clouds it self in sable hue.
I in her countenance did see
How great a darkness soon would be.
2.
The grief that did my Love annoy,
Anticipates our next days joy:
The heavens, with her, are sad, and cloud
Their shining beauty in a cloud;
Distilling down themselves in rain,
That sorrow should such beauty stain.
3.
Can I be merry, and she grieve?
Shall I mine eyes from tears reprieve,
Since melancholy has possessed
(My only Joy) thy lovely breast?
Oh no! her sadness I can'n't see,
But with a loving sympathy.
4.
See how her tears bedew her cheeks;
Her sighs her inward sadness speaks.
How can my joys increase or grow,
Since you, my Sun, are clouded so?
Help (Heavens) to cheer her, or I die:
Her grief's my endless misery.
A Song, out of my History of F. and A. A Gentlewoman singing to her Lute,
sends forth this Ditty.
1.
IS not (sweet Lute) my chaste life best?
No foolish thoughts ever come near
My unpolluted maiden-brest,
That make me either doubt or fear.
Come then, my Lute, and help me with thy play,
To pass some trifling idle hours away.
2.
Poor silly souls! guided amiss
Into belief by Poets tales,
That such a thing as Cupid is,
Whose arrow levelled never fails
But I (my Lute) am free: help me to play,
With thy sweet notes, some trifling hours away.
3.
Thus will I keep my Virginity,
Seeking to get no other mate,
Whereon my bale or joy shall ly,
Then thou my Lute, who first my state.
Come then (Companion) help me with thy play,
To pass some trifling idle hours away.
Song 2. ex eadem.
1.
IN setters bound, I freedom find;
And though I am with cares oppressed,
Yet have I now content in mind,
And am from troubles quite releast.
How can this be? In Loves Gyves I am bound,
Yet joy and freedom in my love have found.
2.
Since Fortune then has rockt my sense
Into a sleep which fancy pleases;
I will not seek to give offense
To her who thus my torment eases;
But with a quiet silence will submit,
Enforced by Love's power unto it.
Song 3. ex eadem.
COme, Philomel, thou messenger of Spring;
Tune thy more pleasing notes, and to us sing;
And of thy fellow-fingers get a Quire,
To chant such consorts as exceeds desire.
See! it is done: hark how the pretty birds
Set out their notes; how freely they afford
Their harmony, which with delight our souls
Into a sweet felicity inrouls.
See how the sportive winds, with gentle gales,
On yond' bough kisses constantly entails;
And they as 'twere with willing bendings meeting,
His persever'd and constant profer'd greeting.
Would you know why the birds so pleasant are?
Why winds and trees such love t'each other bear?
It Is this; That I should with a loving fear,
As they me teach, know, Adrastina's here.
Certain Complemental Letters, and Forms both to begin and end all Epistles.
A Letter of Love.
IF I were to wish a titular happiness, it should only be, now to know by what
name, of somewhat more then ordinary neerness, I might tender my best respects
and affection toward you: but such is my unworthiness, as has no such power
in any small proportion to be endeared to your goodness; though, of all other
earthly things, I most earnestly desire the accomplishment: it would make me,
of now miserable, to approach to some possibility of comfort. I confess I love
you, first, in your person, whose feature merits beyond admiration; secondly,
your virtuous worth and unparalleled qualities, rarely found in these giddy
times, (both suting in a fit way to imparadise the possessor) has forced many
to attempt the attaining, and has taken me, whose resolution was quite retired
from such apprehensions, etc.

Another.
I Beseech you, Madam, excuse my boldness, in taking in hand to discover unto
you the Martyrdom I suffer for your excellency: which is so much the more
ardent, in that I keep it close and covert: yet cannot the reverence I bear you
have so great a sway, but that my affection forces me to discover it self unto
you. Be pleased then, in your most mild nature, and more temperate
consideration, to vouchsafe with patience to hear my humble suit, and to apply
some Cordial to my wounded heart, which lies both hopeless and hapless, unless
your mercy daign a cure. O bitter () constant only to aversness; in all that
tends to my consolation, unconstant; One day promising success to my
well-cherished and aspiring hopes, the next day punishing my desires with
cruelty: now wringing my hopes with a willing consent, and making my soul bathe
in the stream of heavenly contentment; and immediately thrusting my heart out
of Paradise, into the wild desert of Discourtesie; thus continuing rather to
kill, than cure the wound given by thy dear self, etc.

A Letter from one friend to another.
IF I had begun my friendship with thee for the increase of thy riches, it
should now have vanished, because Fortune frowns on thee in the decay of thy
wealth: but such could never have been rightly called Friendship, but mere
Flattery: but you know my heart is yours in a perpetual friendship; insomuch
that if there be any thing wherein I may employ my self to pleasure you, you
may command me, as him who is gladly ready to accomplish your will, and to wait
upon your commands.

One writes after this manner to a Slander.
UNto thee, which speak evil of me, I intend not to answer evil, lest
thereby thou should be deterred from saying evil by me, that is to say, from
praising me: for who is more rightly praised, then he of whom evil is spoken by
an evil man? And be not angry that I call thee evil, since it is so far from
being evil said, that nothing can be said better.

A short and witty Letter to a friend.
THou supposest thy self to be contemned, because I visit thee not by my
Letters: I might despise, though I should write unto thee: for if I contemned
thee, then durst I write unto these Answers, either that I am busied, or that I
cannot spare so much time for thee. Farewell.

A Letter to a forgetful friend.
I See in thee the old Proverb shall be verified: for thou have sent me that,
which, at my last being with thee, thou did promise. I find my self grieved,
if thou have forgotten it; but it increases my trouble, if thou have not
forgotten it. To forget, is the property scarce of a friend: but not to give
according to promise, when it is remembered, is the known (or at least,
suspected) badge of an enemy. Hereafter, either never promise, or perform
better: for, much more friendly had it been, to have absolutely denied that,
which I so earnestly requested, then not to perform that, which you so
liberally promised: then had we still been pares, equal; for I had received no
injury, in regard you owed me nothing: but now I take my self to be wronged,
because you are and must be in my debt, seeing you promised it me. And yet it
will not enter into my belief, nay, nor into my thoughts, that you are of those
people, whom their promises bind not. But that hereafter I may not have cause
to believe it, I would wish you to keep such promises to your self. Only this
I request, that if you will perform unto me that benefit, yet leave off to be
injurious, in forbidding me to hope any longer in vain. To conclude, I shall
think my self obliged to you, if you give me that which I request; and shall
greatly wonder, if you give it me not. Farewell.

A Letter of Thanks for courtesies.
Sir,
I Had thought, by my Letters, several times, to have returned you thanks for
those many favors I have and do daily receive from, your hands, lest I might
have been thought ungrateful, or esteemed rude: yet still deferred I the time,
as not willing by my haste to trifle time from your more serious affairs. But
now the thought of the greatness of your friendly love to me, makes me break my
longkept silence (to avoid the stain of uncivil and proud, and to give you
thanks not only because you bestow on me so great commendations, but in regard
of your friendship. To you ought I to make recompense, even above my power; for
whose sake, no labor should be spared, but even the most difficult things
achieved, by (Sir)

Your most affectionate friend.

A Letter to a friend, to put him in mind of some business.
IT is very well known unto me, that no neglect has at any time kept you back
from satisfying my desires, which, through your innate goodness, you have ever
reputed as your own. And now not only the offer which with a willing mind you
have many times made; but also the experience which I have had of you,
emboldens my Pen to trouble you. My business, therefore, and the urgency of
mine occasions, constraining me to make use of that love and affection whick I
know you bear me, in being mindful of those things whereof you know, that they
may not fail for want of a manager; hoping to be pleasured of you, as of him in
whose care I fix my trust in all things: in return whereof, you shall dispose
of me, as of

Your perfect and real friend.

A Letter of request to a friend.
THe hopes and fidelity which I have always had in you, and the offers which
many times, with an affectionate mind, you have made unto me, does comfort me
in my affliction, and move me in this my necessity to have recourse unto you;
remaining confident, that your deeds will be correspondent unto your words, and
that you will help me. Hoping therefore your willingness, and not doubting your
ability, I desire that you would aid me against the contrarieties of my adverse
fortune, whose impetuousness, without your assistance, will make me lose my
self and you.

Your ready friend to serve you.

A Letter to a friend.
COnsidering with my self the small puissance of my weak Pen, and with what
authorized eloquence it were necessary to fill my Letters to you; I am as it
were astonished, and especially for the receipt of your copious Epistles: but
my unable hand being unable that way, knows only how to teach me to subscribe
my self

Yours, etc.

The Answer.
YOur phrase of speech is so neatly adorned, and so eloquently compacted, that
it will ask much time of a knowing Pen to make a sufficient and suitable answer:
therefore I, who am ignorant, must not think to do it. But though I have not
that Oratory that were requisite, yet must I enforce my self, for duty-sake, to
write you some part of an Answer, that so you might rather blame me for
insufficiency then ingratitude. Hoping therefore you will not so much look at
the style, as the hand; and pardon the failings, because your friend's, I
remain, etc.

A Letter of Thanks.
THough at the present, through Fortunes unconstancy, and the contrariety of
the times, I find my self unable to make a return sufficient for your deserts;
yet I trust that you will so accept of my good will, as to esteem me thereby to
have satisfied for every default of my unfortunate Fortune, taking the will for
the deed. But if ever Fortune, who is changeable, do again lay aside her
cruelty, and smile upon me, blowing with the wind of Prosperity upon the sayls
of mine honest intent; there is not a man in the whole world, that more largely
shall dispose of me and all my possibilities, then shall your goodness, etc.

Another.
IF God had so enriched me with his favor, that I had been as able to have
made a retaliation for so many your benefits, as I find my self not only able
and willing, but even desirous to render you infinite thanks; assure your self
I would have been as ready to the satisfaction of the deed, as the good will.
Therefore, as far as extends at this present my weak ability, I mind not to
be ungrateful to you. I give you therefore most hearty thanks for your
courtesies to your undeserving servant; and offer my self always unto you, in
all that shall be possible for me, etc.

A Letter of News.
Sir,
I Hope you will pardon my silence hitherto, seeing these times befit none but
Satyrists to write, who in their railing terms can best paint out men's actions,
and give your ears better satisfaction then our threadbare Rhetoric, which
becomes nothing so ill as News, especially if bad: therefore I could wish, that
Feet as well as Hands might guide my Pen, that so I might become Satyrist, and
better acquaint you with that of which I shall speak a little in brief. We are
here in a halting condition, by the loss of those members which were lately cut
off; and expect every day a final ruin, unless, like the snake after
dissection, we can assume our own genuine parts, and so again become whole,
etc. No more at present, but that I am

SIR, Your assured friend.

A Letter to a friend.
Sir,
THough I love to be free with a friend, yet am I ever loath to over-burden a
free friend, and making Friendship my rule. I hope I shall not transgress,
though I make bold to put you in mind of me: and seriously, had I not a
present occasion, I should neither be so importunate nor troublesome. The
performance of this, will add a stronger tie to our friendship. And as I
rejoice in the happiness of my enjoying such a friend; so I will be bold to
say, You shall never have cause to repent or be ashamed of the friendship of

SIR, Yours assuredly to serve you.

A Letter of excuse for not writing.
IF in times past I have not written unto you, as my duty was, it has been for
the urgent business and great affairs that hindered me, and not but that my
whole trust and confidence has always remained in you: And chiefly, when I
record with my self the singular love which you have always with great reality
expressed toward me. And because it is better to express some part of my duty
late, then never; I am moved to write unto you these presents, that you may
participate with me of my profit and prosperity, as you have formerly of my
adversity; aiding, counselling, and favoring me, more then I could think to
deserve of you, etc.

A Letter of Thanks.
ALthough I have no business whereof I may write unto you; yet nevertheless,
the great love equal betwixt us, will not suffer me to let slip any messenger
that goes toward you, whereby I may testify my thankfulness to you for the
pains you have taken in my business: and know, that I confide so much in you,
that I entrust and trouble you still further, desiring your assistance; and if
you have any occasion to use me, I shall serve you most willingly: and if you
will visit these parts, you cannot be more welcome to any friend, then you
shall be to him, who rejoices in the happiness of your acquaintance; the
continuance whereof he as much desires.

Yours, etc.

A short Letter to all his friends.
YOu are many, which at once demand Letter from me; and behold, I send unto you
that are many, but one only Letter: for it be hoveth to send one only Epistle
to many, whom only love: the which shall be as good as many, when many of you
shall read it.

Diverse Forms of Subscribing and Superscribing Letters.
Subscriptions.
YOur most obedient son.

Yours affectionately.

Yours in a perpetual friendship.

Yours to serve you in all things to his power.

Your most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate servant.

Yours living and dying.

Yours in an unalterable affection.

Yours inseparably.

Your real and ready friend.

Yours to be commanded.

By yours assured.

Your faithful friend for ever.

Your loving father.

Your very dutiful daughter.

Your obliged kinsman.

Your friend and master.

Your trusty servant, to do your commands.

Your Lordships humble honourer.

Yours to my latest gasp.

The humble admirer of your incomparable beauty.

Yours faithfully, though neglected.

Yours eternally, even in death.

Yours sans complement.

Superscriptions.
TO the high and mighty Lords, the States General of the United Provinces of
the Netherlands.

For the Right Honorable my very good Lord, R. Earl of Essex.

For the high and mighty Prince, Lewis 12. King of France and Navar.

For the Right Honorable, the Lord Viscount Say and Seal, etc.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir P. R. Knight, of Eaton in Bedford-shire.

For the Worshipful Master A. Merchant and Citizen of London.

For his assured and trusty friend, Mr M. P.

For his approved friend T. M. Esquire.

For his most loving father Mr E. C.

To his loving son C. L. at his chamber in Grays-Inne, these.

For his trusty and faithful servant, D. E.

For his desired friend M. T. aboard the Antilope i^ the Downs.

For my very dutiful daughter E. M.

To his loving Master, Mr. E. P.

For the dearest to me of all earthly creatures, Mistress M. K. these, with my
love and service.

To my best beloved choice, Mistress A. C.

For my dear uncle, G. M. Esquire.

For his hopeful kinsman, H. L. (...).

FINIS.

