A Collection of SPECIAL PASSAGES AND Certain Informations of all the most
memorable Accidents, and Remarkable Truths, FROM London, Westminster, and
diverse other parts of this Kingdom, from Monday October. 17. till Tuseday
November. 1. 1642.
With a summary Collection of all the Declarations, Orders, Messages,
Remonstrances, Petitions, Letters, and other passages that have been published
by Order of both Houses of Parliament. And what other Relations of News have
been any other ways published within that time from all other Parts. Collected
for the satisfaction of all those that desire to be truly informed.
London, Printed for Francis Coals, November. 2. 1642.



THere was a Declaration published by Order of both Houses of Parliament,
setting forth the present condition of this kingdom, That his Majesty by advice
and assistance of the evil and wicked counsel about him has raised an Army,
which are maintained with the spoils of the Kings subjects; giving them leave
to exact moneys by force, plunder and spoil all sorts of people. That this evil
counsel does not only hinder his Majesty from exercising the Justice of a King
toward his people, but even that honor which is observed betwixt enemies;
That Sir Io. Hinderson (a Papist) one of the Kings party, labored with one
David Alexander a Scothman to kill Sir John Hotham but he refusing, his
Majesty sent twice for him to Beverly, and when he came, had public talk with
him and gave him a sum of money, which he received. That the said Sir John
Hinderson also conspired with the said Alexander to fire the Lord Generals
Magazine, but by great providence was prevented.

That such of the Trained Bands as refuse to serve his Majesty have their Arms
taken from them; and that the Cavaliers by their cruel oppressions have so
exhausted those Parts where his Majesty has been, that they now persuade him
to march toward London, that so they might make the like spoil in all those
fruitful Countries in the way; and satisfy their long expected hopes out of
the rich wealth of the City of London.

To prevent all which miseries and dangers, the Parliament do conceive it
fitting that good provision be made by loan and contribution to maintain the
Lord Generals Army, and that that Army do always attend the removes of the
Kings Army, to prevent them in their spoils of the Country.

That those Countries through which the Kings Army does pass, do associate
themselves, and draw all their Forces together for their own defense, according
to the direction of their Deputy-Lievtenants and other Officers; And that they
have Powder, Munition, and Ordnance, in readiness upon all occasions.

That all those who in the City of London or else where shall wear any of the
Kings Colors shall be examined and disarmed.

As also in that Declaration the Houses make several excellent Queries
concerning the grounds of this war, the result whereof in short is, That it
is not fear of some Innovation or alteration in Religion or Church Government
that has occasioned this war; for that the Parliament have fully declared
that they intend to take away nothing but the Government of Bishops, which have
been so evidently mischievous and dangerous to the Church and State; Nor is it
to uphold the authority, Prerogative and honor of the King, as is so vainly
alleged by them; But the true cause and matter of the quarrel is, That
Priests and Jesuits may domineere and govern in the Kings council as
formerly, That the Bishops may suppress powerful preaching, and introduce the
Popish Religion under color of the Protestant profession, That the Earl of
Bristoll, Lord Digby, Master Iermyn, and other Traitors may govern the affairs
of State, and be distributers of Preferments; That Delinquents may escape the
Justice of Parliament, and triumph in the spoils of honest men, That through
our troubles the Rebels in Ireland may prevail, That We may cease to be a free
Nation, and become the object of cru^lty and oppression at home, and of scorn
and infamy abroad, etc. With this Declaration, there were certain Votes
published, resolved upon the Question by both Houses of Parliament, viz. That
such persons as shall not contribute to the charge of the Commonwealth in this
time of imminent necessity, shall be disarmed and their persons secured.

That the Fines, Rents, and Profits of Archbishops, Bishops Deans and
Chapters, and such notorious Delinquents, who have taken up Arms against the
Parliament, or have been active in the Commission of Array, shall be
sequestered for the service of the Commonwealth.

That the Kings revenue* rising out of Rents, Fines in Courts of Justice,
compositions for Wards, and all other his Majesty's reve^ues, shall be paid
into the usual places of receipt, but not issued forth, or paid out but by
order of Parliament.

There was also a Declaration published by order of the House, subscribed by
Colonel Sandis at the Randevouz at Worcester, October. 11. in vindication of
himself from those calumnious a persions cast upon him, by the letters of the
Lord Faukland and Secretary Nicholas, who write that he was dead, and a little
before his death should say, That death did not so much trouble him, as that he
had endeavored to defend so bad a cause, which he was drawn unto as well by
his own ambition as by persuasions of others, and that he wished that all the
Actions of the Parliaments Forces might hereafter prove unsuccesfull, desiring
God and the King would so g^ve him for his great sin of Rebellion; To which
words, the Colonel does seriously pro^^^t, that the apprehension of death did
never so nearly touch him, but that if God shall ^nce restore his strength
(which in good measure he has already done) he will with as ^^ch alacrity and
courage endeavor to maintain the cause he has undertaken with his dearest
blood as ever he did, nor was he drawn into it by ambition, or other
persuasions, the^ such as w re backed by the best of Arguments, namely,
Religion, the houour and security of the King, the privilege of Parliament,
and liberty of the subject, And that in his grea^est danger of death, his
conscience did clear him from the guilt of Rebellion or tumultuous thoughts,
And that the chiefest motive which carried him on to this Action was loyalty to
hi^ Sovereign, and love to hi^ Religion and Country, etc.

By Letters from Cornwall, it was informed that Sir Ralph Hopton with his
Accomplices in Pendennis Castle, has made great spoil in pillaging and
plundering the Country, that Sir Bevill Grevill, Sir Nicholas Slany, Sir Rich.
Vivian, and Master Arundell, all Array men, are the chief Confederates, and
amongst them have raised about 2000 men, which pu^s ^he Country into great
fear, that they have possessed themselves of Lanceston and Salt Ash, and are
now bending their Forces against Barnestable in Devonshire but they have
provided themselves well against them, by the means of Master Perd a Member of
the House of Commons, and have moun^ed 16. Pieces of Ordnance to defend the
Town.

From Manchester it was informed that the powder and Match sent down thither by
the Parliament, was intercepted by the way by Sir Edward Mosely in
Staffordshire, but they have got some supply of match and powder from out of
Cheshire, and have lately sallyed out of the Town, and taken 12. Gentlemen
(which were their chiefest enemies, and Array-men) prisoners, and that the Ea.
of Derby being not able to make any further assault against them, is marched
with his ragged regiment consisting of not above 400 men to the King, bu^ it is
said that the King is not pleased with him, in that he brought no greater a
company to his aid.

From Newcastle it was for certain informed, that the plague continues there
very hot, but the Earl is gone into Northumberland to rais^ Forces for the
King, he and diverse other Gentlemen, and some of them convict Papists, have
received Commissions from his Majesty to raise 8000 Papists in Durham and
Northumberland and other parts there abouts; and they intend to compel the
Protestant party to billet them, and have already put the same in execution in
some places thereabouts.

The King sent a Writ of ease to Sir Io. Brampston Lord Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench, and the like to the Lord Chief Baron in the Exchequer; Whereupon
the Parliament were necessitated to appoint Judge Berkley though a prisoner in
the Tower to sit on the Essoyne day, for the continuance of Writs, otherwise
the Subject had lost the benefit of all Actions commenced, that are not come to
Judgment: It is reported that the King intends to make Judge Heath Lord Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, and Serieant Henden Lord Chief Baron, who are both
with his Majesty. The Copy of the Oath by which they are to be sworn, his
Majesty has sent for.

The Lord Mayor of London has put Master Hall the sword bearer out of his
Office, for his malignancy against the Parliament, and for saying that the
Prentices of London might have Actions against the Mayor, for cutting off their
long lo^ks.

Tuesday the 18. of October.
SIr John Meldrums letter to the King, a real thing, wherein with most
excellent expressions he excuses himself to his Majesty, for his great
averseness and reluctance against all the late proceedings which have been
attempted in his Majesty's service; setting forth the great zeal he always
had to the service of King James of blessed memory; and to his now Majesty's
service at Rochell, and other occasions, which may justly vindicate him from
any aspersion that may be cast upon him either of ingratitude or disloyalty:
But for this war it has been occasioned by the unsettled and unconstant
appetites of some factions and turbulent spirits about his Majesty, whose
attempts are and have been to force a woeful divorce betwixt his Majesty and
people, which of necessity can bring forth nothing but predigious issues, such
as will not only shake the foundation of Monarchy, but also overflow the
fertile and pleasant fields of this Kingdom with streams of innocent blood,
which might be more safely reserved for more honorable employments, then
profusedly spent in the ripping up of the bowels of one another of his
Majesty's subjects by this intestine war: Setting forth to his Majesty the
miserable events that have followed upon other Kingdoms upon the like
occasion: by all which in conclusion he labors to persuade with his Majesty,
that he would no longer be inexorable to the persuasions, counsels, and
petitions of his good subjects, inviting him to adhere to his great Council
the Parliament, who are only able to make his Majesty no less happy and
glorious then any of his Royal Progenitors; And that his Majesty being
sensible of the common calamities would leave his evil and wicked Counsel,
and join himself to his Parliament, that so some proper occasion may be
represented, whereby every true and loyal subject may be encouraged to offer
up his sacrifice of blood for the honor and safety of his Majesty and his
Dominions. Io. Meldram.

There was another book printed, of the examination of Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir
Io. Steell, and some others, at the Commons House Bar, and Articles of
Treason pretended to be exhibited by the Commons against them; But all a mere
lie, the said parties being still in rebellion at Pendennis Castle in Cornwall.

There was a book published by Order of Parliament, of Master Darells
confession before the House of Commons concerning the report raised by him, of
Master Pyms taking of a bribe of thirty pound; who confessed that the said
report was notoriously false, and that he had no true ground for the raising
of any such Report, desi^ing the favor and pardon of the House for his folly
and offense in reporting the same. Whereupon the Commons ordered, that he
should make acknowledgement of his offense at their bar, which he did
accordingly upon his knees; And also ordered that he should make the like
Acknowledgment at the Kings Bench Bar, the Chancery Bar,
Common-Pleas-Barre, and Exchequer-Barre, upon the first day of the next full
Term, and that he should put in good bail to perform the same accordingly.

A relation of News from Ireland, by which it is credibly informed that the
Adventurers Forces under command of the Lord Forbes on the 23. of September
last took a Castle from the Rebels, called the Knights of the Valley's Castle,
not far from Limbrick, In which they found a 1000 bushels of Wheat, 3000
weight of Butter, and great store of Barley, Malt, and salted Beef; As also
that the Lord Forbes has taken in the River of Limbrick a French Ship which
came from S. Mallos, wherein were 120 barrells of powder, 500 Arms, and 35
Butts of Sack, which were intended to assist the Rebels.

Other certain News for the Day.

Both Houses passed a Vote, that they will accept of the 51 Commissioners that
are to come out of Scotland to Treat for the Peace and safety of this Kingdom;
And that according to their defires, they shall bring such a Convoy along with
them as they shall think fitting; A Declaration of thanks being ordered to be
returned to the Scots for their brotherly affection, and to inform them that
the Parliament have admitted the Clergy nominated by them into the Assembly, to
Treat of uniformity of Religion, and that they have passed a Bill and sent it
to his Majesty for the Assembly of Divines by the 5th of November next. In that
Declaration for safe Conduct, the Duke of Lenox and the Lord Roxborough are
excepted, the Duke of Lenox being voted a Delinquent, and the L. Roxborough
being one that came along with the King in a warlike manner to the House of
Commons, upon the accusing of their five Members.

It was for certain informed that Sir Christopher Wray and others of the
Deputy Lievtenants for Lincolashire, have raised some Troops of Horse to send
to Captain Hotham in Yorkshire to assist him against the Earl of Cumberlands
Cavalleers.

By Letters from the Army it was informed, that the Lord General having notice
of the Kings intention to march from Shrewbury, has divided his Army into
three Brigades, one part whereof he has sent under command of Sir William
Balfore to Warwick, to secure the passage that way either to Oxford or
Coventry, and another part to Kittermaster and Beudly with the Lord Wharton and
others; which Brigade marched in s^ght of Prince Robert for two miles together,
but no encounter; The other Brigade is with Lord General at Worcester, with
which he intends to march close after his Majesty upon his remove; Also
informing that the moneys which the Parliament sent to the Lord General came
safely down to his Excellency, notwithstanding Prince Roberts vigilance to
intercept the same.

The Earl of Warwick this day came from Sea to attend the service of the
Houses, and has left Captain Batten Vice Admiral in his room: It is said
that the Houses will give him a Commission to raise Forces in six Eastern
Counties.

Sir Dudly Carlton, one of the Kings servants, has left his Majesty's Army,
and this day came to London.

Wensday 19 of October.
THere was a relation of news from York, by which it was informed, that the
Malignant party have gathered a great head there, and plundered diverse Houses
in that City, forcing the Inhabitants to contribute toward the designs of the
Cavalliers; That they have committed to prison diverse Aldermen that refuse to
adhere to them, That they threaten to be the death of such Ministers as will
not preach as they would have them, That they have committed S^^ John Bourchier
to York Jail, That the Lady Melion being about ^o send her goods by water
toward Hull, had all her goods, money, and plate, to the value of 1000 l.
taken by the soldiers, as they were putting into a Barge; that the chief
Cavalleers that bear sway in the City of York, are Sir Francis Worthley, Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, Sir I^^llay, Master Francis Nevill, and others, the Earl of
Cumberland stands for a Gypher, they do what they please without his advice,
That here is 1000 foot and three Troops of horse a arched toward Cawood where
Master Hotham is.

By another Book it was informed, that the Lord General has sent instructions
to the Counties of Derby, Warwick, Northampton, and Coventry, to raise the
power of the Counties, and stand upon their Guards, to secure themselves from
the Cavaliers, who plunder every place where they come, without distinction of
persons and do now endeavor to draw his Majesty toward London, intending to
plunder by the way.

There was a Book published of the Queens resolution discovered by some Letters
read in the house of Commons from Master Strickland; Also another book of the
Examination of Sir Edw. Rodny, Sir Edward Berkly and some others taken in
Somersetshire, but they were both mere inventions: and two or three other of
the same nature.

Other certain News for the Day.

Both Houses taking into consideration the great danger that may happen to the
whole Kingdom, if Sir Ralph Hopton and his Accomplices should persist in their
Rebellious courses in Cornwall, committing such outrages as they daily do,
appointed the Earl of Pembrock to be Lord General for the Western Counties,
viz. Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Hampshire, Do^set, Devon, Cornwall, and the Isle
of Wight; and have given him a Commission with the like power the Earl of
Essex has, to raise Forces and to march with them against Sir Ralph Hopton,
and all others in this Rebellion, and to fight with, kill, and slay all that
oppose him.

At a Conference of both Houses, It was declared upon good proof, that his
Majesty has granted Commis^ion to the Earl of Newcastle for the raising of
Papists: and diverse notorious Papists in Northumberland, and Bishopric of
Durham, and Lancashire, have the like Commissions, and that there is 6 or 8000
Papists to be presently raised; That Sir John Hinderson, and Colonel Cockeram
are sent into Denmark to raise 10000 Danes, that are to be brought to
Newcastle and join with the Papists Army that are now in raising. That there
are diverse Irish Papists lately landed at Chester and gone to his Majesty; and
that Doctor Cook of Chester discoursing with them how they durst have the
impudence to see his Majesty, They replied, that the King knew them to be
better subjects to him then he was, and no man should be heard by the King that
complained against them; and the said Irish Rebels are now with the King, and
in great favor; and that Prince Roberts Physician is a notorious Rebel and
indicted of high Treason in Ireland. Upon consideration of all which
businesses, the Commons moved the Lords, that the Parliament, City of London,
and whole Kingdom might enter into strict association, with life and fortunes
one to defend another, against the Kings forces or any that shall oppose them,
and that such as refuse their persons, to be secured and their estates to find
horse and foot as they were able: To which the Lords agreed, and ordered that a
Declaration for an Association should be drawn up and tendered to the City of
London a Common Hall with all convenience.

Information was formerly given to the Parliament against Alderman Wright, that
he had not assisted the Parliament with money, or plate, proportionable to his
estate; and thereupon an Order issued out for the disarming of him, as one
dis-offected to the Parliament; But upon further information it appeared that
he has lent 1500 l. to the affairs of Ireland, and to the propositions of the
Parliament 200 l. with proffer of 300 l. more: Whereupon it was ordered by the
Commons, that the former Vote shall be taken off, and he freed from any
restraint or imputation of dis-affection, and his proffer thankfully received.

The Lord Coventry since his coming from the King, as a testimony of his
affection to the Parliament, has sent 1500 l. in plate to Guild Hall upon the
propositions.

This day the May or of Worc^ster and Alderman Green of the said City, being
apprehended by his Excellency for betraying the said City into the hands of the
Cavaleers, were brought up to London with a strong Guard and committed to
prison, and with them came a Wagon load of plate, contai^ing twenty two
hundred weight, which was sent to Guild Hall.

Thursday the 20.
THere were this day 2. Books published in print, and both of them very lies,
and mere inventions: One of them was A Relation of the securing of Windsor
Castle for the Parliament, by Dragoneers pretended to be raised in Essex,
Middlesex, Buckinghamshire, Barkshire, Surry, Hampshire, and other Counties,
though no such matter. Another was of The Kings Resolution to come up to London
with his Army, and that the Earl of Essex had stopped his passage by breaking
down diverse bridges, whereby they were now so environed with Rivers that they
could not pass^. The same day it was informed by letters that the King, with
Prince Robert and the Army, was within five miles of Coventry, and that the
King lay at Sir Robert Fletchers house; the Earl of Essex also the day before
advancing from Worcester, having sent all his horse before, intending himself
to be upon the Kings Army very suddenly.

Other certain News for the Day.

By letters from Yorkshire it is informed, that the Lord Fairfax, understanding
that the King has granted Commissions for the raising of Papists, has
renounced the Articles of Neutrality, and is raising Forces to assist Captain
Hotham: That Captain Hotham has secured Cawood Castle, and Selby, in despite
of the Cavaliers, and that Sir Christopher Wray, Sir Hugh Chomley, and Mr
Hatcher have raised three Troops of horse in Lincolnshire to assist Captain
Hotham; and that Sir William Savile is laboring to make his peace with the
Parliament, and renounceth the Cavaliers.

It was also credibly informed, that the Earl of Pembrook is proclaimed
Traitor in Wales, and all his Rents and Revenues there sequestered by order of
his Majesty.

Letters from the Lord General informed, that the King with his Army is
removed from Shrewsbury, and has left the trained Bands with the Marquess of
Hartford to guard the Town, that the King is marched toward Coventry, and
that the Lord General the day past advanced with his Army from Worcester after
his Majesty, his Excellency only leaving behind him one Regiment for a garrison
at Worcester, and the Earl of Stamford at Hereford: his whole Army consists
of 18 Regiments of Foot, besides the said two Regiments, 61 Troops of horse,
and 46 pieces of Ordnance. It was also informed, that when the Wagons that
carried the forty thousand pound to his Excellency to pay the Army came to
Oxford, news was brought that Prince Robert had vowed to have the money;
whereupon they stayed at Abington for two or three days, and the Countries
came in in such abundance to aid them, that they were guarded to the Army with
many thousand men, which Prince Robert heating of, le^t pursuing of it, and
swore a great Oath, That the money was too hot for him to meddle with.

Judge Berkley (according to the Order of Parliament) came this day as a
Prisoner from the Tower, to the Court of Kings bench to adjourn the Term, and
sat all the forenoon in that Court, and Judge Foster in the Common Pleas,
expecting the Kings writs; but none came: Whereupon they sat again in the
afternoon, and about five a clock the writs came, whereby they ^djourned the
Terms November. 18. according to the Proclamation. The Kings writs were dated
at Bridge-north October. 14. 1642.

The Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London (according to the Order of Parliament)
have made diligent search in the houses of all such disaffected persons as
refused to contribute to the propositions, and have taken from them all such
Arms as they could meet withal, a further course being suddenly to be taken
for the securing of their persons.

Friday the 21.
THere was a Declaration and Ordinance of Parliament published, giving power to
all his Majesty's loving subjects in the kingdom of England, to be approved of
by the Commissioners of the Admiralty established by the Parliament, to furnish
with all manner of provisions, and send to sea, what ships and pinnaces they
shall think fit, and to take, surprise, and seize upon at sea, all manner of
ships, vessels, goods, and merchandise belonging to the Rebels in Ireland, or
any other persons that they shall find or understand to have aided the said
Rebels with Arms, Ammunition, or Victuals, by sea or land: and also to seize
and surprise all manner of ships and other vessels, having on board them Arms,
Ammunition, or Victuals, bound therewith to the kingdom of Ireland, or any of
the dominions of the same, not having on board them a pasport or license from
the Commissioners of the Admiralty aforesaid, or from the chief Governors of
Ireland appointed by his Majesty, with consent of both Houses of Parliament,
and to invade the said Rebels in any Ports, Harbors, Creeks, Havens, Islands,
Castles, Forts, Towns, or any other places in the possession of the Rebels,
and to take, seize upon, surprise, vanquish, destroy, or kill them, and to sack
and pillage any such place or places; and to take or surprise all manner of
pirates and sea-rovers, and their ships and goods whatsoever: And that all such
as shall set forth any ships or vessels for the service aforesaid, shall have
and enjoy as their own proper goods, all ships, goods, moneys, plate, arms,
victuals, pillage and spoil, as they shall take from the ^ebels in Ireland, or
any other persons assisting them, without any account thereof to be made; only
reserving the tenths accustomed in such cases to be paid to the Admiral, and
to be disposed of by order of Parliament, etc.

There was a Book published, of the Judges Resolution on the Kings Bench in
Westminster Hall, concerning the Kings proclamation for adjourning of
Michaelmas Term, but a very lie, the said Judges speaking not one word
concerning it, but adiourned the Term according to the proclamation. There was
another Book or two published, but not worth the reciting.

Other certain News for the day.

An Order was made by the Parliament, for the speedy sending of ten Merchants
ships, for a Winter guard for Ireland, and they are to take all prizes they can
meet withal, according to the Declaration formerly spoke of to that purpose.

It was informed that the Counties of Worcester, Hereford, Glo^cester, Wilts,
and Dorset, are entered into an affociation to defend themselves for the King
and Parliament, against any force that shall come against them.

By letters stom Chester it was informed, that since the Kings remove from
Shrewsbury the City is very quiet, and they have cleared the Town of the
Cavaleers; that the Commissioners of Array are now much quieter then formerly;
but while they had hopes of his Majesty's continuing near them they used great
violence against the well affected party, forcing them to lend money, and those
that refused they committed to prison. Yet notwithstanding his Majesty sent to
borrow 2000. li. of that County, they have not got above 200. li. throughout
the shire.

Saturday the 22 of October.
THere was a declaration and protestation published from both houses of
Parliament to the Kingdom, tending to this effect, That they do protest
before God and the world that no private passion or respect, no defigne against
his Majesty, either against his person, or just authority, has engaged them to
take up arms against the Authors of this war; That they have used all
possible means to assure his Majesty of their loyalty and obedience to him,
and resolution to defend his person and estate with their lives and fortunes:
That for the avoiding of blood by occasion of this war they drew up as humble a
petition as possible might be, and sent it to the Earl of Essex to present to
his Majesty, for the delivery of which Petition his Excel. sent twice to his
Majesty, but his Majesty refused to receive the same from his Excellency. By
which and other evidences the Parl. are fully convinced, that the Kings
Counsels and resolutions are so engaged to the Popish party, that all hopes of
peace are excluded, and that it is intended to give satisfaction to the Papists
by the altering of Religion, and to the Cavalleers and other soldiers by
exposing the wealth of the Kingdom to be sacked and plundered by them. That for
the better effecting hereof, great numbers of Papists have of late in show
conformed themselves to the Protestant Religion, by coming to Church, and
taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which their own Priesis have
encouraged them to do. And that at first his Majesty would not seem to
entertain any Papists in his Army: But now Commissions have bin granted to
raise an army of Papists; and Prests, and Jesuits have bin released out of
prison. All which is contrary to his Majesty's solemn Oaths, Protestations,
and execrations, so often taken to maintain Religion and the Laws of the Land.
That Sir Io. Hinderson, Collouell Cockram are sent to Hamburgh and Denmark to
raise Forces for the King, and that diverse of the Rebels in Ireland named are
about his Majesty; And diverse others accused of Treason by this Parliament, as
the Lord Digby, O-Neale, Wilmot, Pollard, Ashbornham, and others.

That diverse Priests and Jesuits in foreign parts make great collections of
money to further his Majesty's designs against the Parliament, and great
means are made to take up the differences betwixt some Princes of the Roman
Religion, that so they might join their Force for the extirpation of the
Protestant Religion in this Kingdom. For all which reasons both houses do
declare, That they will enter into a solemn Oath and Covenant with God to
defend this cause with their lives and fortunes against the Kings Army, and all
of that party shall ioyn with them in this wicked design: And that the
parliament will Associate themselves, and unite with the City of London and all
other of his Majesty's Dominions to the end aforesaid. And lastly, the
parliament do declare that they do expect our brethren of Scotland according
to the Act of pacification, will also ioyn with them in the said cause etc.

There was also a letter published by Order of the House sent from M. Copley
Muster-Master General to the Earl of Essex Army, who was sent by his
Excellency to the Earl of Dorset the second time to move his Majesty to receive
the petition of the Houses, by which letter the former passages of his
Majesty's refusing to receive the petition is confirmed, wherein is also set
forth the desperate and wicked carriage of the Cavalleers about his Majesty,
exclaiming against the parliament, and all that seem well affected to them, and
swear heavy oaths that they have now taken a course with those Lords about
the King that would not comply with them, and have locked up his Majesty's ears
and tongue, that he will neither hear nor speak to them, and that the Earl of
Dorset and some others were treacherous and cowardly, and did discover the
Kings intentions, but now the King had learnt to keep his Councels from them;
and gave out other vile and approbious speeches, swearing that they would
neither give nor take quarter.

By an express from the Army it was informed, that the King had left Coventry,
and lay the last night at Southam, and intends to go this day to Banbury: That
the Lord General it marching close after his Majesty, and is within ten miles
of him, the Lord General once more desiring the Parliament that they would
take care for the securing of the malignants in London in case his Majesty
should come that way.

This afternoon there were six of the Lords and twelve of the Commons met the
City of London at a Common Council in Guild Hall, and tendered them the oath
of Association to be taken throughout the Kingdom: The Earl of Northumberland
made a Speech to the City declaring the cause of their coming, and after him
Mr Pym read the houses Declaration concerning the Oath of Association and the
Oath it self, and made a short Speech concerning it. And after him the Earl
of Holland made a most excellent and learned Speech with diverse reasons and
demonstrations exciting the City to the said business: the Citezens were much
taken with his brave expressions, And the proposition was most cheerfully
embraced by the City.

Monday the 24. of October.
THere was a Letter published which was written by one Master Tempest a Papist
to his Brother an Officer in the Kings Army, which Letter was intercepted and
showed to the Parlia^^nt. The letter expressed diverse scandalous relations and
some truths, viz. Concerning the seige of ^anchester, that it is a very weak
Town, and no considerable strength in it, and that the Lord ^^ange Earl of
Darby beseidged it with 8000. foot and 700. Horse and Cannon enough, but ^he
the pooreliest off that ever was heard on: That concerning Yorkshire Captain
Hotham (...) Sir Edward Roades bear a great sway there, dispight of the
Archbishop, Sir Devoyne. Andrew Young, and sir Ralph Hansby, great malignants,
and that Yorkshire in general is (...) to the King, except some heroicke ones
(as he terms them) that will take no new impressions. That the Priests and
Jesuits in Lancaster Goal are set at Liberty, and diverse Catholic
^^mmanders admitted, and all well enough that way.

That one General Reoyne lately come out of Sweden, is gone to the King to
join with ^^^nce Robert.

Also another letter from a Malignant in Shrewsbury, who writes that the King
went from ^^^ce on the Wednesday before from Bridge North, and some of his
forces to Sturbridge. That (...) King is 16000 strong. That the King has
commanded his Army that they plunder not at all (...) that he caused Judge
Heath, who he says is now Lord Chief Justice, to sit with a Commis^^^^ of
Oier and Terminer whereat six of the Kings Soldiers were cast for Plundering
and stea^^^g.

That the Kings Mint is now come to Shresbury and one Master Bushel does Coin
every day, (...) that boundance of Plate is brought thither from several
Counties, especially from Wales (...) Cornewell, and that also the Press for
Printing is come thither.

That Sir Richard Newport is made a Lord, and has given the King 10000 pound,
The King ^^uld have knighted the Mayor of Shrewesbury, but he refused it.

That the Sunday before the King took a Protestation and the Sacrament upon
it, to defend (...) Protestant Religion established by Queen Elizabeth and his
Royal Father,

That Prince Robert on the Tuesday before had been at Brumingham and demanded
2000. ^he Town, but the Inhabitants were fled to Coventry, Upon Thursday he
marched to Mereden (...) miles from Coventry, and the King with him, intending
to go to Banbury, from thence to ^^ford, and so London, or Windsor, etc.

There was a submissive and Petitionary Letter published sent from the Lord
Littleton Lord ^^^per of the Great Seal; the effect of which Letter in short
was, that their Lordships would ^^^igate his offense in leaving of them, and
that his penitent submission may be his sentence, and ^aking away of the Seal
(which he willingly offers to his Majesty, may be his punishment (...) that
their Lorships will spare any further censure of him, and recommend him to his
Majesty's ^^^ce and pardon for all that is past, etc.

Other certain news for the day.

Upon consideration of the great danger the Kings Children at Saint James House
Westminster ^^ld be in, in case the Cavalliers should come to London, the
Parliament Ordered that for their ^^e security they should be removed to the
Lord Cottingtons house in Broadstreet London, and (...) the Earl of Pembrooke
should be their Protector.

^n Order was made for the speedy raising of 5. or 6000. Seamen and others for
the Guard of River of Thames, and to be drawn up for land service upon any
imminent occasion, and to be ^^^oyed under the command of the Earl of Warwick,
who is appointed for General for the East ^^elve Companies of the Trained
Bands for London, were sent to Windsor Castle to Guard the ^^e, for that it was
informed that the King intends to come thither with his Cavalliers.

The Like Order was taken that the speedy raising of Garrison Soldiers for the
City of London Suburbs, and the setting up a Court of Guard and Fortifications
and Outworkes in the field.

Master Griffith a Minster and Person of Saint Mary Mandlins Old-Fishsteet
London committed to prison for preaching diverse late Scandalous and Seditious
Sermons, etc.

It was informed by Letters from the Army that the Lord General came with his
Army 6^^ miles from Warwick, and the King with his Army the same night lay
within 4 miles of (...) That the Kings Cavalliers had been at Banbury, but the
Townsmen denied them entrance stood bravely upon their Guard.

That on Sunday morning an Alarm came to the Lord General that the Enemy was
(...) three miles, and that the King would there give them Battle, whereupon,
they marched in^^ field and drew into Battalio in the Valley called the vale of
the Red Horse, and the Kings (...) within two miles from them upon a high hill
called Edge Hill, drawing into Battalio, that (...) forces by all relations
were about 14000. and all the forces that the Lord General had with (...) that
time were not above 10000. The Kings forces at the first had the wind and the
field, th^^ tell began on Sunday about 12. of the clock, and the Ord^ance
first playad for 2 or 3 (...) there was no good relation of the fight that day.

Tuseday the 25. of October.
THere was an Order of both Houses published to the City of London and Suburbs
for the (...) setting up of Courts of Guard, Posts, Bars, and Chains in all
such places as shall be th^^^ necessary and convenient for the defense and safe
Guarding of the City and Suburbs, and (...) charge thereof to be borne by the
Inhabytants of the several Parishes respectively, and if any ^^^son shall
refuse to contribute their proportions as they shall be rated, that the names
of such ^^^sons shall be certified to both houses of Parliament, that such
further order may be taken the^^ as to them shall be thought convenient, and
that a competent number of the Trained Bands (...) Voluntieres belonging to
every Parish shall day and night attend with their Arms in or ne^^^ their
Court of Guard, and shall seize and arrest all suspicious persons, Ammunition
or Arm^^^^ sing through their Parishes, and acquaint the Parliament therewith,
who will take order co^^^^ing the same.

There was also another Order from the Houses, That all persons within the City
of Lond^^ Westminster, Suburbs and Bourough of Southwarke be required to shut
up their shops, and (...) bear their Trades and other ordinary employments,
that so they may with the greater (...) and freedom and freedom for the
present to the defense of the said places, and put in (...) and performance of
any such commands for the defense and safety thereof, as they shall (...) time
to time receive from both Houses of Parliament, the Committee for the defense
of the k^^^dome, the Lord General, or the Lord Mayor and Committee for the
Militia.

Another Order was also published by the Houses to exempt such persons in the
City of L^^don and Suburbs from the strict observing of the duties of the Fast
during this present (...) as shall upon that be employed upon the Trained Bands
or otherwise for the defense of the (...) of the Fast, but only to such
persons as shall be so employed as aforesaid.

There were two or three other Books published, but mere lies not worth the
name (...)

Other certain news for the Day.

Upon information to the Houses of the great disorders that have of late been
at Paul's Ch^^^^ London in Service and Sermon time on Sundays, by the
malignants of the City, there was (...) Order drawn up from the Houses that
the Lord Major should take care that Paul's should (...) henceforth during
these distractions be shut up to prevent the like disorders, and that (...)
should be neither Service nor Sermon used there on Sundays at all.

There were three officers of the Lord Generals Army namely one Captain
VVillson, L^^^tennant VVhitney and Leiuetennant Shankes that came this day post
to London, and (...) brought to the Parliament and examined, it appeared that
they had run from their Com^^^^ ^he beginning of the Skirmish, and had possessed
the Country as they came along with false ^^^nors telling them that there were
20000. Ri^^ed on both sides, and other false reports ^^ere upon they were sent
to the Gatehouse by order of Parliament.

Upon information that the Country Trained Bands about Winsor came in
voluntariely to ^^ard the Town and Castle It was ordered that the 12. City
Companies should be sent for ^^^k again and employed for the safety of the
City.

Wednesday the 26. of October.
The Houses of Parliament kept the Fast at Saint Margarets Westminster Docter
Usher Bishop (...) Armagh preached in the forenoone and Master Case in the
afternoon.

A little before the end of the evening Sermon the Lord Wharton and Master
Stroud came to ^estminster from the Army, and they writ a note and sent it to
the Minister to read o^^^^ly in the Church at the end of the Sermon, which note
in short, discovered the success of the ^^^ttle on Sunday last, the effect
whereof was that the Earl of Lindsay Lord General of the Field (...) his
Majesty is hurt and taken and also the Lord Willoughby his sone Sir Thomas
Lunsford (...) Edward Stradling and Colonel Vavasor, and that they are all now
prisoners in Warwick ^^^stle.

That they have also taken six Colonis his Majesty's Standerd five Wagons
laden with Ammu^^^ion and plate, a Coach, and eight pieces of Ordnance, the
King and Prince being all the time (...) ^he fight at Sir Edward Copes house at
Hanwell, that the Kings loss was 3000. men, and but ^^^o. of the Parliaments.

That the rest of the Kings Army were routed, and the Earl of Essex remains
Master of the ^^^ild.

There was also a further relation of the Battle but not so perfect as is here
afterward related.

Thursday the 27. of October.
There was a Declaration of both Houses of Parliament published to this effect,
whereas di^^^rs Rebels Traitors and other ill affected people in pursuit of a
wicked design to alter Religion ^^^d subvert the laws, are marching against
the Parliament and City of London to distroy the ^^^e and have plundered
spoiled and distroyed diverse of his Majesty's good subjects in their ^^^ffage,
to the great danger of the Parliament City, and whole Kingdom; for the
prevention ^^hereof, both Houses have Ordered that the Committie for Militia of
the City into London be ^^horised to take a speedy course to put the City
into a posture of defense, and to fortify all p^as^^ges within liberties as
without and to raise the Trained Bands and other forces of the City both Horse
^^^d foot, and to lead and conduct the said forces as well without the
liberties as within, and to ^^^e battle and fight with all that shall aproach
with any force against them, or raise any insur^^^ction within the same, and
them to invade resist repress, subdue, kill and slay, and by all o^^er means
to destroy; And to do all things else needful for the preservation of the
Parlia^ent and City either by land or water, observing such further directions
as they shall re^^eive from the Parliament the Committee for the safety of the
Kingdom, or the Earl of War^^ck their Lord General; And for so doing they
shall be protected and defended by the au^^ority of Parliament.

There was also an Ordnance of Parliament published to this effect. That
whereas diverse persons are or shall be employed in the present War, who have
little or nothing to maintain ^^emselves their wives and children, but their
own labors. Both Houses have Ordered and ^eclared that they will provide
competent maintenance and allowance for all such persons as ^^all be maimed or
hurt, and in case any such persons be slain that they will make provision ^or
the livelihood of their wives and children. And in case any persons of estate
shall be slain (...) die in this service they will take the estate, wives and
children of such persons into their pro^ections, And in case any of their
estates shall be unsettled at the time of their deaths, they will (...) always
assistant to the friends of the party dead, in ^etling of their estates for the
most (...) ^^vantage of their wives and children etc.

Other certain news for the day.

The Earl of Warwick is made Lord General for six Eastern Counties, and has
a h^^ Commission for the raising of forces, and to kill and slay all that come
against him. Essex (...) to show their zeal to the Parliament and love to the
Earl of Warwick are raising a great s^^ of Voluntieres, part whereof are
already come to London to serve the Parliament.

There was a Letter intercepted and brought to the Parliament; writ from
Secretary Nichol^^ to the Earl of Cumberland, the substance of the said Letter
is inserted in Satterdayes news.

The Lord Fairefaxe and Captain Hotham have done excellent service in
Yorke-shire, and driven the Earl of Cumberlands Cavaliers and all the
Malignants into York City, they having no other place left them to take
sanctuary in, but it is hoped they will be soon forced from thence also.

It was informed by an Express from the Army, that the Lord General with his
Army is safely come to Warwick, and that the Earl of Lindesey since their
coming thither, is dead, the rest of the prisoners remain in Warwick Castle,
the King as is conceived is about Oxford, and intends as it is reported to
m^rch to London, but the Lord General will very suddenly advance from Warwick
after his Majesty.

There was an Order drawn up by the Parliament, that the Ordnance and other
Ammunition that is at Chattam should be fetched from thence and laid up safe
in London for more security, to prevent treachery and that the Kings ships
that are lately come from the fleet into harbor should be presently unrigged
and their Ordnance to be also laid up in London.

The Earl of Pembrooke Earl of Holland Lord Say and Leale Lord Wharton and
Master Strode according to an Order of Parliament met the City of London, at a
Common Council at Guild hall this night to acquaint with the passages of the
late fight and some other matters, whose several speeches are here afterward
f^lly related. The Earl of Westmerland being taken by the Trained bands of
Northhampton was this night brought to London with other delinquents and
committed prisoner to the Tower*

Friday the 28. day.
THere was a Letter published by order of the House in discovery of the battle
at Kynton which was signed by M. Denzill Hollis Sir Phil. Stapleton, Sir Thomas
Ballard, Sir Io. M^^drum and Colonel Charles Pym, in which letter the former
passages were confirmed I need not agaeine write but observe some other
passages which that letter speaks of viz. That part of the Kings left came up
toward the Lord Generals right, and charged them: and sir Phillip Stapletons
and Sir William Belfores horses, with my Lord Roberts and sir William
Constables Regiments of foot, bravely answered them, and charged them so home
thrice together, that they forced all the Musketeers of two of the best
Regiments, to run in and shoud themselves within their Pikes, not daring to
shot a shoot and so stood, but then the Lord Ceneralls Regiment and the Lord
Brooks came up and charged altogether, and forced that stand of Pikes, and
wholly broke those two Regiments, and slew and took almost every man of them,
and then the who^e body of the Kings foot ran a way, and the Army was routed,
the prisoners before spoke of was then taken, Sir Edmund Verney who carried the
Kings Standard was slain by a Gentleman of Lord Generals Troop, The Lord
General himself took the Standard and gave it to his Secretary M. Chambers,
but he suffered it to be taken away by some of the Troopers, whereby (...) was
at first missing but since found, The Kings forces were forced out of the field
into their own quarters, the Lord Generals forces continued in the field all
night, and the next morning drew into battalia, expecting the enemy would make
a fresh onset, but they were gone over the hill-quite away and never appeared,
the Lord General with the Prisoners went to Warwick o^ Monday, but the Army
staved in the fields to bury the dead; Sir William Balfore did excellent
service in the fight and broke a Regiment of foot with green colors took
their Cannon, and pursued them half a mile upon execution, Also sir Philip
Stapleton, who when five troops of ememies horse returned from pursuit of the
left wing, charged them with his single troop, and (...) them to flight, there
was of note none lost of the Lord Generals side, but Colonel Essex ^^d the
Lord Saint John dangerously wounded, There was a George found in the field by a
com^^n soldier, and bought by Captain Skinner for twenty shillings, which was
sent to the Par^^^ment to view. There was very many men of great quality slain
on the other side, the Kings ^^t was most of them run away, and the rest of the
force very weak, and should have been ^^rsued by the Lord Generals forces,
but they were necessitated to refresh their men for two or ^^^ee days: and
then God willing they intend to address themselves to finish the work.

The Lord General did gallantly adventure himself that day in the front
against the enemy, posing himself to great danger.

Other Certain news for the day.

Several orders were drawn up to be sent into all the Maritine Counties in
this Kingdom, ^^t they should place diligent watch over their Shipping, and
apprehend all persons that cannot ^^^duce their warrants from the Houses or
Tickets from the Farmours of the Custom House.

A Committee of the Commons were appointed to sit every afternoon to receive
all dispatches ^^t come from the members of the House in the Country and to
examine any delinquents and ^^^mit to custody if there be cause, and to send
such instructions and directions into the Coun^y as at any time they shall see
needful.

And an other Committee were appointed to take into consideration what moneys
horse and ^^te are raised in several Counties, and to take order for the
advancing thereof, and consider of ^^e Kings return.

Saturday the 29.
THere was a book published of the several speeches which were spoke by the
Lords to the (...) City of London, at a common Council in Guild Hall, upon
Thursday night the 27, of ^ctober.

The First that spoke was the Lord Wharton, who made a full discovery to the
City of the fight Kinton, the substance in effect was the same that is formerly
related, only some passages were ^^rted which I shall nominate. As 1. of the
occasion why so many of the Lord Generals for^^ were absent at the time of the
fight, which was for that a Regiment of foot, and a troop or ^^o of horse was
left at Hereford under the command of the Earl of Stamford, to prevent the
^^elsh for falling in upon Gloucester shire, and the river of Severne and so
into the West, also a ^^giment of the Lord Saint John's and Sir John Merricks at
Worcester, which place is seated ^^on the river of Severne, and intercepteth
all force that comes from Shrewsbury into the ^^est, there was another
regiment of the Lord Rochfords left at Coventry, also Colonel Hamp^^ and
Collonell Granthams Regiment and ten or twelve troops of Horse were a days
march ^^inde, by reason of the Lord Generals sudden march, who brought some
powder; ammunition ^^d artillery after the army, so that at the time of the
fight there was with the Lord General but ^^ven Regiments of foot, and about
forty Troops of horse.

That the Lord General in his own person came up to the charge at several
times, once with ^^owne troop of horse, and with his own Regiment of foot,
which were raised in Essex.

That they took the prisoners before named. viz. the Earl of Lindesey, Lord
Willoughby his ^^ne, Colonel Lunsford and his brother slain, Sir Ed.
Stradling prisoner, and diverse others of ^^lity the Lord Awberney Colonel
Vavasor, and sir Edward Munroy a Scotch man of great ^^^litie. That by all the
information that can be gathered: there were three thousand of the Kings ^^ne,
and but thace hundred of the Parliaments. That by all that could be gathered
there were ^^t twenty of our men killed with the Kings Cannon. That Colonel
Hampden Colonel Gran^^^^^ and those other ten Troops formerly spoke of, came
not to the Lord Generals army, (...) about one a clock at night. That the
Lord General kept the field all night and next day ^^^s, but the Kings forces
never appeared but some scattering men of three or four troops of none that
came to bury their men, and however it was fully reported there was no sign^^
Monday or Tuesday, etc.

After the Lord VVhartons, M. Strode made a speech to the City, confirming the
former, re^^ made by the Lord Wharton, further adding, that the two regiments
raised in London for the i^ Books, and Master Hollis, and the one regiment
raised in Essex for the Lord General, w^^^ chief men that wone the day, that
by these men that were ignominiously reproached by the (...) of Roundheads did
God show himself to be a glorious God. I will add one thing wh^^ worth the
observation, that the same day that this fight was, which was the 23. of
October, 1^^^ the same day twelve month, viz. 23. October 1641. did the
Rebellion break forth in Ire^^

After Master Strode, the Earl of Pembrooke made a speech, but the chief
occasion of (...) speech was concerning a letter which was intercepted writ
from Secretary Nicholas to the E^^^^ of Cumberland in the North, dated the
twenty foureth of October, which letter was read ten^^^^ to this effect.

The Scretary writes to his Lordship that the King takes special notice of his
vigilance (...) care of the business in Yorkshire, and the care he has of the
Lady Duchess of Buckingham that raised some 10000 horse and foot, and have
disarmed all such persons in Cornewell, w^^^ they esteem to be disaffected to
the King, and are marching into Devonshire to do the (...) there, and that
they intend to meet the King at London; That there is also in Wales about
(...) or seven thousand men raised for the King, which are to be under
Marquess Hartford, and be ^^dy to come to his Majesty: But the Secretary
writes that he hoped there will be no need their help, for that he says
(however falsely) the King has lately given the Earl of Essex (...) a blow,
that they will make no have again to adventure themselves in that cause; And
that morrow being (the 25 of October) the King marches toward London by
Oxford.

After the reading of this Letter the Earl of Holland made and excellent
speech, chiefly ^^^cerning the Letter, showing them what is threatened by it,
viz. A great Army of the King come against the City, and commanded by such,
that intend no less then the utter destroying the City, their persons, and
estates, and this not all, but that if they can destroy the City, (...) whole
Kingdom must submitt and yield to them, wherefore he desires them to consider
(...) God has kept the first blow from them and delivered them as from an
iminent danger by the (...) power of his hand and let that be an encouragement
to them to pursue all things that are for glory, and the defense of Religion
and cause: Further adding, that he only recommended (...) unto them, that it
might hasten them forwards to the work, well knowing, and resting cons^^^^
that they are not wanting of piety, courage, and resolution to defend
themselves, the Parlia^^^^ and Kingdom, etc.

After this, the Lord Say and Seal made a speech further to second that
business, wishing t^^ that they would not be wanting to themselves, and then
there was no cause fear that d^^^ which is threatened by the Letter, nor any
thing that can be done by the Kings broken Army those things that are falsely
buzzed abroad by malignant party into the City; there is no s^^^ danger, but in
security, in sitting still: further adding, that it was not a time for men to
think being in their shoppes and getting a little money, but let every man
shurt up his shop, and (...) his Musket, and come forth freely to serve his
God, Religion, Country and Parliament; had diverse other excellent expressions,
but they would be too tedious to relate here.

After this the Lord Wharton made a second speech to inform them of some
passagas that had before omitted in his Relation of the fight, which was that
Prince Robert with his Tro^^ whilst the Armies were fighting fell to pillaging
of the baggage and most barbarously (...) Countrymen that came in with their
Teemes and women and children that came with the which business the Lord
Wharton urged to the Citizens as a motive to raise up their hearts of work
which was before pressed to them, for that the chief aim of the Cavallsiers
is p^^^^ and baggage, and plundering, and the way by which they would come by
it is murdering (...) destroying, wishing them to be of good courage, for if
the Enemy do come the Lord General ^^ll not fail soon to be on the back of
them, by which means they will be enforced to lie be^ixt two Armies, which by
Gods blessing will bring things to a very short Conclusion.

After this the Earl of Holland made a second speech further to incite the
City to make ^^gilant and careful preparations for their own security, and
that they resolve and act both ^^gether, telling them that it is conceived the
Army would be at Oxford that night, which place ^^ing within such a distance,
as within 3. days they may march to London, it being therefore ^ore than or
little necessary to provide against this, as a danger that may be suddenly
upon us.

After the Earl of Holland, to conclude all, the Earl of Pembrooke made a
second speech desire^^^g the City as a thing which would much conduce to the
safety of the City, to take care of the ^alignant party which is amongst them,
and now while they have time to secure them* for if ^^ey be let alone till a
time of distraction, they will then appear much more boulder then now ^^ey are
etc. Finis. A Copy of a Proclamation was also published which was agreed upon
by ^^e Lord Justices and Council of Ireland, and published 19. August 1642.
The effect whereof ^as to annull and make void all protections which have been
unduely granted to the Rebels, (...) certain Commissioners in diverse Counties
in Vister, and that they shall be proceeded against ^^pprest and subdued as
traitors and rebels to the King.

There was an other book published, called the second part of Vox populi,
Being the peoples ^^^port unto the King, upon the several appeals declared in
his Majesty's name, an excellent ^^^ract, but too large to be here inserted.

Other certain news for the day.

BY Letters from Holland it was informed, that the Queen intends to stay there
all this winter, and that Colonel Goring is come to the Queen. That the
States of Holland do de^^^re to hold a fair correspondency with the
Parliament, and that upon a late Assembly there, The ^tates in general have
concluded for the more better preservation of the union and peace between
^ngland and them, to stand as neuters, and that no aid shall be sent from
thence to assist neither ^^rtie. By order of a Parliament, a member of the
House of Commons is to be sent into Flan^en with a Declaration against their
sending of aid to the Rebels in Ireland, as being a breach of ^^eir treaty of
peace with this kingdom. The like thing is in agitation for the sending of a
^ember of Parliament into France for the same business, It was informed that
^^e Lord Herbert at his house near Lambeth, has about 400. Guns of a bigger
bore than Mus^ets and some other Arms, whereupon there was an order granted
from the Parliament for the ^^arching of the said Lords house, and to seize
upon all arms shall be found there.

The Lord Major this day came to Westminster and had his Oath administered to
him in the ^^uall way in the Exchequer Chamber but in a private manner.

That evening the Trained Bands of London according to an Order of Parliament
apprehen^ed diverse Malignants in several wards in London, some of them being
Aldermen and other Citizens of good worth and diverse of the Malignant Clergy
and three parsons for the present are ^ecured in London house by Paul's and
Croseby house in Bishopps gate street.

On Monday and Tuseday there was noe book or other relations published worth
the nomi^ating, from the Army it was informed that the Lord General is
advanced from Warwick and ^n Monday came to Northampton and on Tuseday to
Alisbury, the Kings forces having pillaged and spoiled Banbury, have left the
Town and are now at Abington where they have made ^he like work and at other
Towns thereabouts, the King as it is roported went from Oxford to Abington on
Monday or Tuseday last, but which ways he intends to march is no ways
certain* But you shall have some further relations for the two last days in
the next Collection.

FINIS.

