THE EXALTATION OF CHRIST In the days of the Gospel: As the alone High Priest,
Prophet, and King, Of Saints.

By THOMAS COLLIER, sometimes Teacher to the Church in York.

1 Cor. 2.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ and him crucified.

(...). LONDON, Printed, by R. L. for Giles Calvert, at the black Spred-Eagle,
at the West end of Paul's. MDCXLVI.

The Epistle to the Reader.
PIous Reader, such is the transcendent Excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, that we may say of it, as the Arist. Anima,
Philosopher sometimes spoke concerning the Soul of Man. Praestat paucula
exmeliora scientia degust ass, quam de ignobiliore multa: that is, A small and
dim understanding of it is to be valued far above any other science: And the
Apostle esteemed all things loss and dung, [(...)] for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus: Phil. 3.8. Now that thou may grow in the knowledge
of Jesus Christ, here is offered to thy diligent perusal a little Treatise,
wherein Christ Is exalted in all his Offices; It contains three parts, the
first treats of his Highpriests Office; the second contains his Prophetical
Office; and the third handles his Kingly Office. Thou must not expect
Excellency of speech, and the enticing words of man's wisdom, but thou may
(by Gods blessing) learn something more of the excellency of the Knowledge of
Christ Jesus, and may find the tongue of the Learned speaking a word in
season to thy weary soul in the plain and powerful evidence and demonstration
of the Spirit, and such is the excellency of Scripture learning, which
contains in it florem delibatum, the flower and quintescence of
soul-saving-knowledge, that it will abundantly satisfy the hungry soul: A man
may have excellent knowledge in other things and yet perish, but this is life
eternal to know God and Jesus Christ, John 17.3. There are some shinings forth
of the eternal Power and godhead in the creatures, [(...)] So that the
invisible things of him from the creation of the World, are clearly seen being
understood by the things that are made: we know the diffused brightness of the
Sunbeams is not so pleasant in large windows, nor can the bright shinings of
him who is invisible be so clearly, sweetly, pleasantly discerned in the
creatures, as in the face of Jesus Christ, in whom dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, Col. 3.9. And in whose face the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God has shined in the hearts of his Justified-sanctified ones, 2 Cor.
4.6. and therefore by way of eminency Jesus Christ is called [(...)] the
Brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his substance, Heb. 1.3. O
how excellent then is the true knowledge of Jesus Christ? and how acceptable
will this little Treatise be unto those who with a spiritual appetite are
enquiring after the true knowledge of Christ in all his Offices. The Author
being far distant from the City, could not see to the correcting of his Book,
and it is an usual thing for some faults to escape the Press un-corrected in
such a case, which thou may amend with thy pen as thou read; and for any
material thing which thou apprehendest not sound, carry it to the Touchstone
of the Word, Try all things, and hold fast that which is good, And as we would
have others moderate in censuring us [Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim]
go and do thou likewise, and if but a mite of knowledge shall be (through Gods
blessing) by this his labor added to thy understanding, let God have the
glory, and the Author has his end.

Thy friend, and the Truths servant, Hanserd Knollys.

The Table.
A ADmire, We are to admire the Wisdom of God, page 42. The love of God, 45.
The justice of God, 48. And the power of God, page 50 Agreement between Christ
and the Jewish Highpriests, page 16

B BAptism and Circumcision are not one, 96. proved ibid. Baptism is not come
in the place of Circumcision, page 100 Believers, the justice of God as well as
his mercy pleads for them, page 50 Blood of Christ makes peace, page 19

C CHrist to be lifted up, how 2, 3. When he is exalted, 10, 12, 13. He is the
Saints righteousness, 11. He is meat and drink to them, 14. He is their
clothing, 15. Sin laid upon him, 35. He bare the sins of his people, ibid. He
is the wisdom of the Father, 43. His offering what, 16. He excels the Jewish
High Priest, 27 Wherein he does it, 18, 19. How he bears the names of the
Saints upon his heart, 21, 22, 23. How he taught his people before he came in
the flesh, 84. He is the Teacher of his people, now he is in heaven, 85. How
be teaches his people, 114. His Kingdom in this world is twofold, 203. Why be
rules in it, page 237 Circumcision and Baptism not the same, 96. Proved, page
97 Church of the Jews under the Law, and of Christ under the Gospel how they
differ, 94. The Jewish Church Typical, page 94 Commands of the Gospel, what,
page 60 Covenant, the misunderstanding of it, what evil it brings, page 109

D DEny why men should Deny themselves, 147. Why Christ teaches men so to do,
page 151, 154, 155 Difference, between the Jewish High Priest and Christ 16,
17, 27. Between the Jewish Church and the Christian Churches, 94 Between the
Jews privileges and the privileges of Christians under the Gospel, page 101

E EFfects of receiving Christ, page 75 Effects of the Kingdom of Christ in the
sule, page 220 Eternity, God loved his from Eternity how, page 39 Evil, the
misunderstanding of the Covenant, what Evil, page 109 Exalted, When Christ is
Exalted, 12, 13. How be is to be Exalted, 15. Why he is to be Exalted, page 247
Excellency of the grace of love among the Saints, page 176

F FAith, Why God gives it to his people, 66. What it is to live by Faith, 165.
How it overcomes the Devil, 188. When we live by Faith, page 190 Fiery Serpent
what, page 248 Foolish, Why the Virgins, Math. 25. called foolish, page 57

G GOd laid sin upon Christ, 35. He has nothing against the Saints, 57. His
glory and the Saints good joined together, page 146 Gospel faith what, page 122
Grace, man cannot fall away from Grace, page 25

H HIghpriest, Christ is the Highpriest of his people, 15. The Jewish
Highpriest, and Christ the High priest their agreement, 16. Their difference,
page 17.

I INtercession of Christ, 40. How he Intercedes for the Saints, 41. Whether
it be part of his satisfaction, page 41 Joy, peace with God the ground of it,
page 77 Justice of God to be admired, 48, 49. It pleads for Believers, page 50

K Kingdom of Christ in this World twofold, 203 The effects of it, page 220
Kingly Office of Christ, 202. Kingly power in Israel after the flesh, a Type of
Christ's Kingly power in the spiritual Israel. page 95 Knowledge of Christ
brings men to the knowledge of themselves. page 117

L LIve by says what. 165. How the soul does live in the want of the full
enioyment of him. page 103 Love of God to be admired, 45 It is free, Ibid.
Full, 45. Everlasting, 47. What love is, 170. Properties and effects of it,
172. It is quieted in the single enioyment of Christ, 174. It slights all
hardships, 175. Love among the Saints, the excellency of it, 176. It covers a
multitude of infirmities, 178. It is an everlasting grace, 179. How it is
manifested. page 193

M Man's righteousness what. page 10 Marter of Christ's Kingdom spiritual. page
223 Miracles, How Christ Works them at this day. page 199

N NEw, Why Christ's commandment called new. page 169 Natural conscience and
the Law have a conflict, 217. How to know it. page 228

O OBedience the fruit of faith. page 123 Offering of Christ what, 16. The
offering of the High Priest what. page 16, 17 Offices of Christ, 15. Priestly
Office of Christ, wherein it consists, 32. Office of Christ as Prophet, page 82

P PEace with God, the ground of a Christians joy. page 77 Power of God to be
admired. page 50 Priests, Christ has made the Saints Priests. page 71
Privileges of the Jews and of Christians, their difference, 101. Privileges
under the Gospel what, page 101 Prophetical office of Christ. page 82

R REconciliation wrought by Christ. page 32, 33 Remedies against corruption
oppressing the soul, 64, 65. against temptations. page 71 Resting in any thing
beneath Christ what an evil. page 57, 58, 59 Righteousness if Christ only
iustifies, 11. Righteousness of man what. page 10, 15 Rule for Baptism, not
one with the rule for Circumcision, 97. The Scripture the rule by which Christ
teaches his people. page 92

S SAints, Why oftentimes sorrowful, 20. They are made Priests, 78. God has
nothing against them, 78. Their estate happy in the world to come. page 80
Selfe-denyall, 124, 125. Selfe-sinfull, 125. Selfe-righteous, 127.
Selfe-wisdom, 131. Selfe-profit, 134. Selfe-pleasure, 135. Self-love, 141.
Self-will, page 142 Selfe-sufficiencie, 144. Selfe-ends. page 145

T TEach, Christ teaches those whom he teaches to know themselves, 109. To
believe, 121. How we may know when Christ teaches the soul, page 156. seq.
Type, The Jewish Church a Type of the Christian Church, 94. Kingly power put in
Israel after the flesh, a Type of the spiritual power Christ has in his
Church. page 95

V VIrgins, Mat. 25. Why called foolish. page 57

W WIsdom of God to be admired, 42. Christ the wisdom of the Father. page 43
Word, The Word is the rule by which Christ teaches his people. page 86 World
to come, what benefit to the Saints. page 80 Work of the Devil, Christ
destroys two ways. page 205

Errata.
Page 14. l. 7. for her. 1 He p. 23. l. 11, your. thou p. 26. l. 3. for hear no
pray, r. hear nor pray, p. 66. l. 7 as r. us. p. 67. l. 19. two r. few. p. 76.
l. 8. the r. thou P, 79. l. 14. stay r. way, p. 88 l. 4. walk r. work. l. 15.
to r. too, p. 89. l. 10. That is mentioned, is the first, r. The first that is
mentioned is, p. 100. l. 10. once, should the type r. once come, the type
should p. 103. l. ult. or r. are, p. 118. l. 25. dele, o, p. 132. l, 22. put in
not, p. 140. l. 17, was not so, r. was so, p. 186. l. 1. for freed r. frets, p.
187. l. 24. fire, r. fiery, p. 198. l. 14. add, r. and, p. 219. l. 10. enough, r.
ere now, p. 225. l. 26. profess, r. proceed, p. 233. l. 4. dele It.

THE EXALTATION OF CHRIST The alone High Priest of SAINTS. CHAP. I.
JOHN 3.14. And as Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so it behooves
the Son of man to be lift up, etc.


THis text presents you with the exaltation of the Lord Jesus, and the manner
of it.

Occasioned by a discourse between Christ Jesus, and Nicodemus: from the
beginning of the Chapter, these words being a part of that discourse, and they
are the words of Christ who is truth it self and cannot lie, the faithful and
true witness the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last of all truths, and
heavenly mysteries of the Gospel.

The text divided in two parts:

In this Scripture you may be pleased to take notice of two particulars: first,
an act to be done, Christ lifted up: Secondly, how it must be done; even as
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, etc. I shall not meddle with
that title by which Christ is pleased to describe himself (the son of man) I
might note that Christ is the son of man, and so true and perfect man, as
well as God, Romans 3.4.

But I shall rather pitch upon the main glorious Gospel truth held forth in
this Scripture, and the truth or conclusion is this.

Doct. That the Lord Jesus Christ now in the days of the Gospel, is to be
lifted up even as Moses lifted up these pent in the wilderness.

Christ is to be lifted up now in the days of the Gospel.

Note. 1 Christ is to be lifted up in the preaching of the Gospel.

2 In the soul of believers.

1 In the preaching of the Gospel, and that first for justification and life,
as the alone Priest Atonement and peace maker, between God and his people.

2 He is to be lifted up as the alone Prophet, to teach as the alone King and
Lawgiver to his Church and people: And this is to be done both in the preaching
of the Gospel, and in the hearts of believers.

1 In the preaching of the Gospel, Christ is to be lifted up for justification
and life, this was the end for which Christ came into the world John 10.10. I
am come that ye might have life, and that ye might have yet more abundantly,
o beloved, Christ came to give life to dead souls, John 5.25. The dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live: and this
life Christ communicates to his, in giving his life to purchase life for his
own, who were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. And so freely and fully
ustifies all whom he intends to save, Romans 3.24. And this justification
although free, through the redernption that is in Christ, yet we come to
participate of that justification by faith, Romans 3.26, 27, 28. And the
preaching of the Gospel is the Isntrumental means in the hand of God working
faith, Romans 10. from ver. 14. to 17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God: therefore Christ is to be exalted in the preaching of the
Gospel, for justification and life, that men beholding him, may have life by
him.

See this truth confirmed, Mat. 10.27. What I tell you in darkness, speak ye
in the light, and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye on the house tops:
Note, what Christ does tell his servants in the dark? he tells them that he is
their life, and their light, their justification, reconciliation; and peace,
and he tells them in the dark in secret, that there is no light or life to be
attained in any creature or thing beneath the Lord Jesus, and Christ having
called them to it, this they are to speak in the light, and to preach it upon
the house tops, that is publicly, to make it known to all, that men through
the blessing of God may come to the sight of it.

This was the commission Christ gave to his Disciples, to lift up Christ for
justification, and life, in the preaching of the Gospel, see Luke 24.47.
compared with Mar. 16.16, 17: In Luke the Text says, And that repent once and
remission of sins should be preached in his name among all Nations: And in
Mark Go preach the Gospel to every creature, he that believes and is
baptized shall be saved etc.

Note. In the first, remission of sins is to be preached; in the second,
salvation through believing: and both these in Christ, remission of sins in the
name of Christ salvation and life through believing in Christ, who is the alone
justification of believers, so that justification, remission of sins, etc.
through Christ is to be held forth to the view of the soul, that the soul who
is a sinner may by the power of God come to see the Son; that is to see that
remission of sins, that justification that is held forth in Christ, and so come
to be made partakers of it: This you shall see farther confirmed by a second
word from heaven, Act. 5.20. Go. stand, speak in the Temple, all the words of
this life, that is, all the words of the Gospel of Christ, the means God has
appointed by the workings of his Spirit, to discover life unto the souls of
men.

And secondly, as Christ thus requires it, so likewise the Apostles practice
it, you shall ever find them exalting Christ, so the Apostle Peter, Act. 4.12.
exalts Christ to the heavens above all, Neither is there salvation in any
others for there is none other name given under heaven among men whereby we may
be saved, but by the name of Jesus (Hark you) beloved friends, here is Christ
exalted his name above every name, for the remission of sins, salvation, and
thus, is Christ to be exalted above all duties, creatures, every thing, Act.
5.42. and daily in the Temple, and every house they ceased not to preach and
teach Jesus: What did they teach and preach of Jesus? they preach justification
by Jesus in opposition to all legal righteousness, Act. 13.39. And by him all
that believe are justified, from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the law of Moses: This is the Sermon (beloved) the Apostles
preached Jesus Christ dying, and rising again, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. For I delivered
unto you first of all that which I also received, that Christ died for our sins
according to the Scriptures: And that he was buried and rose again the third
day, according to the Scriptures: this the Apostle Paul preached first of all
unto them justification and life by Christ, Romans 4.25. Who was delivered for
our offenses, and raised again for our justification, that he dyed for sin, and
was raised again for justification, this is the first Sermon you see the
Apostle preaches; and it is, that he is ever endeavoring to make it more
abundantly clear to the souls of the Saints. Romans 10.4. He is the end of the
Law for righteousness, to all them that believe. Romans 3.20. And that by the
deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified, Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a
man is not justified by the works of the Law but by the faith of Jesus, for by
the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. Thus, beloved, you see the
Disciples of Christ, they cease not to teach, and preach Jesus, that Christ is
indeed the Mesiah promised, Act. 9.22. the very Christ that he died and rose
again for our justification that the Saints participate of this justification
and life by faith in his blood: thus the Apostle Peter came preaching and
exalting Christ for remission of sins Act. 5.31. Him has God exalted with his
right hand, a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance and remission of
sins, according to Christ's commission Luke 24 47. so is the Apostles practice,
preaching peace by Jesus Christ, Act. 10.36. Who is Lord of all.

Note And this they preached as the command of Christ, beloved, and not as the
idle fancy of their own brain, as the servants of Christ are now charged by
those ignorant of the righteousness of God, going about to establish a
righteousness of their own, Romans 10.3. but beloved, they, and so, we, that are
the Ministers of Christ, thus exalt Christ, preach justification and peace by
Christ, by the command of God, so Act. 10.42, 43. And he commanded us to preach
unto the people, and to testify that it was he which was ordained of God to be
the judge of quick and dead, and to him all the Prophets give witness, that
through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall have remission of sins:
Note, beloved, this is the command of God, where is it commanded? why, Mar.
16.16, 17. he that believes shall be saved, that is, shall have his sins
pardoned, his person justified, and so be everlastingly saved, that is, by
faith the soul comes to eye it, and apply it, to see it and to hand it: for
beloved, the word saved, implies all, that free, and full salvation, held forth
in Christ to believers, which is a salvation from all their enemies, Luke 1.71.
That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate
us: but especially, and in the first place, that we shall be saved from sin,
that we might through faith in his blood receive remission of sins, be saved
from sin, for this Jesus signifies a Savior, see a blessed word, Mat. 1.21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins,
and this salvation God has commanded to be preached, this remission and
salvation the Prophet witnesses, Ier. 31.34. speaking of the Covenant of
grace, the Gospel Covenant, he says, For I will forgive their iniquity, and I
will remember their sins no more, etc. and this remission of sin is to be
preached among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, and Luke 4.47. and in some
measure this has, and shall be performed, Act. 13.46 47 48,

2 Christ is to be exalted and lifted, as in the preaching of the Gospel, so in
the hearts of believers, which I shall endeavor to speak a word unto, before I
come to speak of Christ's exaltation in his offices: I say, he is highly exalted
and lifted up in the hearts of all that rightly believe in him, so the Apostle
Paul desires to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. and
indeed beloved, he that rightly knows Christ crucified, knows enough,
therefore the same Apostle says, Gal. 6.14. God forbid, that I should rejoice
in any thing else, save in Jesus Christ and him crucified. Christ crucified is
a Christians only joy, only delight; therefore the Apostle Paul prays, Romans
15.13. That God would fill them with all joy and peace through believing, and
why? by believing, the soul comes to enjoy this crucified Christ, and so
justification, and peace, Romans 5, 1.

Question. But some may say, how shall I know that I do indeed exalt Christ in
my soul?

Answer. First, Christ is then exalted in the soul, when the Lord brings over
the soul to look upon Christ, as its alone justification. O beloved then is
the Lord exalted, when the soul comes to see that there is nothing but
emptiness in it self, when the soul can through the power of God cast down
all at the feet of Christ, and look upon all its own righteousness as dung
and dross in comparison of Christ, so the Apostle Paul Phil. 3.7.8.9. the
Apostle having in the 5 and 6 verses laid down what he was once in diverse
particulars in his own righteousness, he amongst all the grounds, (as once he
thought them grounds of comfort) one and the least was, he walked as touching
the Law blameless: but what things were gain that is, I counted gain, and
rested upon them, I now count them loss for Christ's sake, yea doubtless, I
count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord, and ver. 9. and be found in him not having my own righteousness which
is of the Law but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith: o here is a soul exalting Christ above all, laying
all his own righteousness low, even as low as dung and dross in comparison of
Christ: o what says thy soul to this, now man, woman, did ever see thine
own righteousness, or at least thine own unrighteousness? has the Lord
opened thine eyes to see a vanity, an emptiness in that you once trusted? has
the Lord let forth a glimpse of his glory into thy soul, shining down in the
face of Jesus? can you say, Yea donbtlesse, I account all things but loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. Is thy soul carried
forth above, and beyond thy self to the Lord Jesus as thine alone
righteousness? see Esaias 45.24, 25. Su ely shall one say in the Lord, have I
righteousness and strength, ver. 25. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel
be justified, and shall glory. In the Lord Christ thou see thy justification,
and in him thou gloriest, thou can say, God forbid, I should glory in any
thing below Christ, Ier. 23 6. This is his name by which he shall be called,
The Lord our righteousness, the Lord our covering, our justification, this is
the ground, when thou can look upon Christ as thy alone righteousness and
justification, and so seeing an excellency in the knowledge of Christ in this
particular.

2 A soul then exalts Christ, when it looks so upon Christ, as that it is
carried with a principle of love after him, and it is by love as it were glewed
and knit up to him, so the Apostle Romans 8.35.38. Who shall separate us from the
love of God? and when love constrains thy soul to follow God, 2 Cor. 5.14. the
love of Christ constrains us, and when love so glews and knits thy soul to
Christ, that thou take him as the wife takes her husband, for better for
worse, as we use to say: when thon can follow Christ in all conditions, to
trial, prisons, death, nothing severs thee from him, when as with Abraham thou
go forth from thine own Country, thy sins, sinful companions, and
followest Christ, not knowing whether thou go, whether to liberty or prison,
that makes nothing with thee, Heb. 11.8. By faith Abraham obeyed and went forth
of his own Country, not knowing whither he went, this flows from faith, Gal.
5.6.

3 When the Lord Jesus is the alone delight and joy of thy heart, believe it
beloved, if the soul exalt Christ rightly, he will be thy delight and joy,
thou will be able to sing the song of Mary, Luke 46.47. My soul does magnify
the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices in God my Savior; there will be joy and
peace come in through believing, joy unspeakable and full of glory, according
to Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again, I say rejoice, etc.

4 The soul that truly exalts Jesus, is satisfied in the enjoying of him, and
now the soul has enough, when it has Christ, let who will have the world,
sin, pleasure, I have Christ says the soul, a goodly portion, now the soul
is fitted for any condition, come affliction, persecution, the soul glories in
all, because it enjoyes God through Christ in all, 2 Cor. 11.30. after the
Apostle has mentioned his afflictions, he concludes that he will glory in all,
see Chap. 12.9.

5 Lastly, when Christ is all in all to the soul, then does the soul rightly
exalt and lift up Christ, when it enjoys a fullness in Christ in the want of
all things, and sees an emptiness in all things without Christ, this the
Apostle could see and say, he is all and in all, Col. 3.11. Christ is all and
in all, he is the way, the truth and the life, John 14.6. He is the light and
life of men, Ioh. 1.4. He is meat, drink and clothing as we use to say, to
the Saints, he is their meat and drink see John 6.55. My flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed: o beloved, revery believer spiritually eats and
drinks the flesh and blood of Christ that is, lives upon Christ, he does not
build upon ordinary prayers, duties, no, no, give me Christ says the believing
soul, Christ in hearing. Christ in preaching, in the Supper of the Lord etc.
Believe it, beloved, nothing lesle then Christ can satisfy the living, the
believing soul and likewise in temporal things, the believer sees all
purchased for him by the blood of Christ, and so in every creature, he lives
upon the flesh and blood of Christ, and believe it beloved, thus every believer
lives upon Christ, see ver. 53. Then Jesus said unto them verily verily I say
unto you, except yea eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you
have no life in you, (hark you friends) He: that does not thus spiritually
eat and drink the flesh and blood of Christ has no life in him: a sign of a
dead soul that lives upon ordinary creatures without Christ.

2 Christ is clothing and covering also, he covers the nakedness of men and
women that believe, see Rev. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me, etc. white
raiment that thou may be clothed: what is this clothing? the righteousness
of the Saints, see Rev. 19.8. The fine linen is the righteousness of the
Saints, Christ Jesus is the Saints righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. Jer. 23.6. and
so the Saints covering. The Saints spiritually enjoy Christ also in their
external clothes and covering, so that I say, he rightly exalts Christ in his
soul, that sees Christ to be all, and in all to him, etc.

I shall now come to the exaltation of Christ in his offices, in the days of
the Gospel, Priest, Prophet and King, in these is Christ to be exalted.

1 He is the great High Priest of his people, Christ Priest
and in this particular he is to be exalted in the days of the Gospel, that
is, as the alone atonement and peace maker betwixt God and man.

The Leviticall Highpriests under the Law were a type of Christ our great
High Priest under the Gospel.

Therefore, for my more clear proceeding, I shall endeavor to unfold unto you
what was the Office of the High Priest under the Law, wherein Christ and the
Jewish Highpriests agree, and wherein they differ.
and wherein Christ our Gospel High Priest, and those Highpriests agree: and
wherein they differ.

What their office, is, and wherein they agree, for those Highpriests in all
their administrations, typed forth Christ our High Priest.

1 The Office of the High Priest, it was to offer sacrifice for the sins of the
people, Exodus 28.29. Levit. 9. from the 1, to the 7, ver. this has Christ done,
he has offered sacrifice for sin, and herein Christ does not only agree with
those High Priests in offering sacrifice for sin, but he differs also,
excelling those Highpriests, for they offered sacrifice it is true, but it was
the flesh and blood of creatures, a lamb, a ram, goats, bulls, etc. Levit
9.3.4. Heb. 9.13, 22.

But Christ Jesus, he offered not the blood of goats and calves, but his own
blood, Heb. 9.12, 14. his own body, Heb. 10.10. Christ has offered himself a
sacrifice, Ephesians. 5.2, Christ has loved us, and given himself for us an
offering and a sacrifice to God, etc. so you see Christ exceeds in the very
first, in the offering, in the Sacrifice, he offers his own body, his own blood
upon the cross a sacrifice for sin, and indeed those legal sacrifices were
but a type of Christ our sacrifice, and in themselves could not do away sin,
but as they directed to Christ, therefore Christ is called the lamb slain from
the beginning, or from the foundation of the World, Rev. 13.8. and 1 Pet. 1.18,
29.

2 The Highpriests by offering sacrifice were to make a tonement and peace for
their own sins, and for the sins of the people, Levit. 19.7. Moses said unto
Aaron, go to the Altar, offer thy sin offering, and thy burnt offering, make
an atonement for thy self and the people, Chap. 15.30. The Priest for the
unclean woman, was to offer a sin offering, and a burnt offering, to make an
atonement for her before the Lord: This was the end wherefore he went into the
holy place, Cap. 16.3. To make an atonement for the children of Israel before
the Lord, ver. 34. This Christ our High Priest has done: hark you beloved,
Christ our High Priest has offered sacrifice, and by his sacrifice he has put
away sin, made an atonement, that is peace and reconciliation between God and
man, Romans 5.10, 12. Being enemies were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son: Nore, here is Christ reconciling by his death, Christ a sacrifice dying,
and so reconciling: you shall see all along the Scripture that it is Christ a
Sacrifice, Christ dying, that is, our reconciliation, our atonement, and
peace, Ephesians. 2.13. They which were sometimes afar off, are made night by the
blood of Christ, ver. 14. he is our peace, ver. 15. having abolished in his
slesh the enmity, etc. ver. 16. and that he might reconcile both unto God in
one body by the Cross, etc.

You see Christ has made peace by his blood, having abolished in his flesh the
enmity of the Law, made reconciliation by his cross, see Col. 1.20. and making
peace how? through the blood of his cross, it is by the blood of his cross,
by his death, wherein he offered himself a Sacrifice for sin, that he has
made peace for all his people.

Note, in this also, that Christ our High Priest exceeds those Jewish
Highpriests: Christ our High Priest has indeed made peace and reconciliation
for sin, he is our peace: and that the Jewish High Priest could not do, their
Sacrifice could not make peace farther then the soul was lead unto Christ, see
Heb. 10.1. The Law having but a shadow of things to come, can never with those
sacrifices that they offer, make the comers thereunto perfect, and ver. 4. For
it is not possible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sin,
Christ has done that which the blood of bulls and goats could not do, that
which never a High Priest in the world could do, he has taken away sin, he
has made peace, and every believer receives the atonement from his hands, Romans
5.11. By whom (namely Christ) we have now received the atonement.

O beloved! What do your souls say to this? Christ has wrought peace for
every soul rightly receiving him, he has done that which the Priest could not
do, he has done that, thou thy self could never have done, if the Load
help thee rightly to look to him: and this he has done in offering himself a
Sacrifice for sin, dying upon the cross.

How should this inform poor creatures where to look for their peace and
atonement? O do not loook for it in duties, in teats, in professions, it is
not crying but dying that will take away sin; it is not tears but blood that
will make peace, Col. 1.20. Heb. 9.22. Without blood there is no remission:
believe it, if ever thou have peace, thou must have (...) from a Christ dying,
Romans S. 33, 34. Who shall lay any things to the charge of Gods elect? it is God
that justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, etc. He
dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification, Romans 4.25. it is
through him who has given himself a Sacrifice for sin that you must come to
see your sin pardoned, if ever you see it pardoned.

O how do poor ignorant blind creature deceive themselves, seeking peace where
it (...) not to be found, in duties, tears, etc. The dig broken cisterns to
themselves that will hold no water, They, (that is the reason they are so
empty,) compaesse themselves about with sparks of their own kindling, Esaias
50.11. that is the reason they ly down in sorrow, they seek the living among
the dead, that is, living consolations amongst dead works, and that is the
reason they find it not: believe it beloved, if ever your souls enjoy true
peace, it must be let into your souls by a dying Christ, if ever you are saved
it must be by eying of, and believing in the Lord Jesus, Esaias 45.22.

3 The High Priest was to bear the names of the children of Israel in two
srones between their shoulders Exodus 28.12. so has Christ born, not only the
names, but the sins of his people also upon his shoulders, 1 Pet. 2.24. He has
born our sins on his own body on the cross. He which knew no sin, was made
sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, believe it,
beloved, those sins and corruptions that so much trouble the souls of Saints,
he has borne them all himself, he himself bare our iniquities upon his own
body.

4 The High Priest bare the names of the children of Israel on a breast plate of
judgment, for a memorial before the Lord continually: Exodus 28.29. He bears
their names, and judgments before the Lord, etc.

So does Christ, our High Priest, bear the names of his people; yea, their
nature, and judgments upon his heart, before the Lord continually: he presents
them before his Father continually. Now Christ may be said to bear the names
of the Saints upon his heart.

First, In his continual presenting them to himself, and Father, (without
spot) righteous in his own righteousness, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.

Secondly, In respect of their neernesse unto him. Beloved, that that comes to
a man's heart: comes near him: the Saints of God are as near unto him as his
own heart: he that touches them, touches the apple of his eye: he that
persecutes them persecutes Christ, Acts 9.4. O, therefore, let men take heed
how they persecute Christians; It were better a millstone were hanged about
their necks, and they cast inco the Sea, then offend or persecute the Saints.

But the Saints, whom the Lord has, or shall call, are upon his heart, in
respect of his love unto them. Beloved, the elect were upon the heart of Christ
from all eternity: Ephesians. 1.4. That was the reason, why he comes into the
world, to take your nature, your sins, become sin and a curse for sinners: It
was his love, The elect of God was so upon the heart of Christ from eternity:
and he will give his heart blood before he will lose one of them. O what do
your hearts say to this (deer brethren and sisters) is not here comfort for
your souls? o thou art perhaps afraid whether Christ loves thee: this is the
complaint many times of the gracious soul: but know this, you, to whom, God
has given faith in his Son, thou art upon the heart of the Son in respect of
means, in respect of love, he loves thee more then thou can love him, for
God is love, John 4.26. He bears thee upon his heart (poor soul) and what
can thou desire more? see Cant. 8.6. see what Christ says of his Church,
Chap. 4.9. and 6.5.

Thirdly, The Saints are upon the heart of Christ in respect of his remembering
of them. The righteous shall be had in continual remembrance, Psalm. 112.6.

O here is comfort for the poor afflicted souls of the Saints! it may be, you
are under affliction, either external or internal, and art ready to complain,
as once David did, as if the Lord had forgotten to be mercisull, Ps. 13.1, 2.
what ever thy condition be, God has not forgotten thee, no no, thou art upon
his heart, thou art near and deer unto him, thou art very precious unto him, he
has set thee as a seal upon his heart, and he cannot forget thee.

Object. But you will say, perhaps, will not God forget me when I forget him? I
I have a wicked deceitful heart that gives me the slip, when I come to pray,
and the name of the Lord is not so precious upon my heart as I wish it were
many times.

Ans. But God will not forget thee, Esaias 49.15, 16. Can a woman forget her
sucking child, from having compassion on the Son of her womb? yea, they may
forget yet will not I forget thee. Behold, I have engraven thee upon the palms
of my hands, thy walls are continually before me, etc. O blessed word, the Lord
will not forget, thou art not only upon his heart, but upon his hands, also,
ever in his sight, his eye is ever over thee for good.

Fourthly, The Saints are upon the heart of Christ, and there he will keep
them, Those which thou have given me have I kept, and none of them is lost,
etc. Joh. 17.12. Ah blessed word! able to bear up the spirits of the Saints, to
whom God has given faith: o you poor doubting Christians, who are sometimes
afraid that your hearts will deceive you, and perhaps are ready sometimes to
complain with David, I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul. So thou art
ready to say, o this wicked heart of mine, o this proud, this stubborn heart of
mine, I am afraid least all is nothing, and that I shall one day fall by it: O
beloved, you (to whom God has given faith) are upon the heart of Christ, and
if thou can but once see thy self there, it is enough, thou need not fear
thy falling. Do think (man, woman) that Christ has set thee there for
nothing? no, no, he will keep thee there: it is true, were the power of
standing or falling left to thy self, then thou might well doubt, but thou
art kept by the power of God, through faith: 2 Pet. 1.5. thou art preserved at,
and in the heart of Christ, his love is so to thee that he will not lose thee.
none shall pluck thee out of his hands, he loving thee once, will love thee to
the end, however some pretend a falling away from grace, after the soul comes
truly to believe in the Lord Jesus, but it is but a vain fancy, and an
imaginary conceit, for it is a part of the Covenant of grace on gods part, to
keep thee from falling. Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, and
they shall not depart away from me.

Fifthly, The High Priest was to bear the iniquity of the holy things in a
plate of pure gold on their foreheads, before the Lord, always, that they
might be accepted before the Lord, Exodus 28.37, 38. So Christ bears the
iniquity of the holy things of the Saints, the best Saints, I mean the most
holy, is not able to perform any duty to God, but there is a great deal of sin
in it, iniquity cleaves to it, now beloved, as Christ has borne all the rest
of the sins of the Saints, so he bears all the sin, all the iniquity of the
holy things of the Saints, O comfort for the Saints, thou caust not hear, noe
pray without sin, why? Christ bears all the iniquity of thy holy things, he
presents thy person and prayers to God without spot, Ephesians. 5.27. There is
never a prayer put up unto God in the name of Christ in faith, but Christ
presents it, John 16, 23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, it
shall be given you, see Rev 8.3. The Angel Christ Jesus stands at the Altar,
and having a golded censer with much insence, that he might offer it or add it
to the prayers of the Saints, o beloved, here is a blessed word for the souls
of the Saints, whether particular Saints or Churches: Christ adds to your
prayers much incense, the incense of his own merit.

Sixthly, The High Priest was to go once a year into the most holy place,
within the vail, Exodus 30.10. Levit. 16.2. and 34. compared with Heb. 9.7.

So is Christ our great High Priest, Heb. 4.14. passed into the heavens, within
the vail, into the Holy of Holies, chap. 9.12. Neither with the blood of goats
and calves; but by his own blood, he entered once into the holy place, having
obtained eternal redemption for us: What does Christ there? why beloved, as he
has made peace and reconciliation for his people, so he is entered in within
the veil to make intercession for them: Heb. 7.25.

The second particular is, wherein Christ and those Highpriests differ, Christ
excels the Jewish Highpriests.
wherein Christ exceeds them: It is true, that in all these Christ excels them,
for they were but the Type, Christ the substance.

1 Christ exceeds those Highpriests, as he was the Son of God, Heb. 4.14.
Seeing then that we have such a great High Priest, Jesus the Son of God, let us
hold fast our profession, Chap. 5.5.

The Jewish Highpriests were Aaron and his sons, Exodus 28.16. Numb. 18.1. but
Christ our High Priest is the Son of God, He was declared to be the Son of God
with power, by his resurrection from the dead, Romans 4.

2 They offered the blood of bulls and goats, of lambs and rams, as you heard,
Heb, 9.12, 13. but Christ offered his own body and his own blood, ver, 14.
Chap. 10.10. He offers a better Sacrifice, having obtained a more excellent
Ministry, by how much also he is a Mediator of a better covenant, established
upon better promises, Heb. 8, 6.

3 They first offered for their own sins, and then for the sins of the people:
Levit. 9.7.

But Christ our High Priest, offered himself a sacrifice for the sins of his
people only: for he had no sin of his own, there was no sin found in his
mouth: he was the innocent, holy, harmless, lamb of God, slain, without
spot, or blemish: Heb. 9.14. He offered himself without spot or without fault
to God. Herein Christ wonderfully exceeded the Highpriests: they, it is true,
had holy garments, made them, Exodus 28.2. typing forth what holiness it was
meet a High Priest a Peacemaker, should have; likewise typing forth what
perfection of holiness which was in Christ: he was the perfection of that
type, see Heb. 7.26. For such an High Priest became us holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, made higher then the Heaven: the High Priest
had holy garments, Christ is holiness it self. Beloved, here was a meet
Sacrifice, to be offered for poor sinners: had he not been such a one, he
could not have taken away sin: therefore such a one became us.

4 The Highpriests they offered many sacrifices; once every year they went
into the holy place: Exodus 30.10. Heb. 10.3. But Christ our High Priest,
offered himself once for all, Heb. 10.10. By which will we are sanctified
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all; and after he
sat down on the right hand of God: a wonderful Gospel mystery! under the
Jewish Priests, and there was a remembrance of sin in the consciences of the
sinners, though holy, and godly: for that ministration, could never take away
sin, Heb. 10.11. that is, never take away, the everlasting guilt of sin: they
held under those sacrifices, but present pardon, and so present peace, every
new sacrifice being a new remembrance of sin. But by Christ our Highpriest, who
has offered himself once for all, and by that one sacrifice, we have obtained
eternal redemption, Heb. 9.11.

Object. Had not the believing Jews eternal redemption by Jesus Christ under
the legal Priesthood?

Answ. It is true, they had but by that Priesthood they had it not so sealed to
their souls at once, but had their peace coming in by new sacrifices: there
was ever conscience of sin, a remembrance of sin, if they had had everlasting
pardon come in at one sacrifice, there need not to have been an offering for
sin again, Heb. 10.1, 2. but we under the Gospel, who believe, have obtained
everlasting redemption, that is, see all our sins past, present, and to come,
done away, by one sacrifice, so that now there remaynes no more conscience of
sin, Heb. 10.1. that is, sin does not lie upon the conscience of believers
unpardoned, but they see all done away in Christ.

Use. This may inform you of the reason, why so many poor creatures, go
without comfort: they have their comfort by fits, as we use to say, namely,
when they can pray well, and their comfort comes in from their duties; an
argument of a legal spirit. They pray to get peace from hence: these things
will never make you perfect, that is, bring you perfect and true peace, but
Jesus Christ, who is the same yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, brings
in true and perfect peace, eternal redemption to the souls of his people.

5 The Legal Highpriests were but for a time, till Christ: but Christ our
High Priest is an everlasting High Priest, a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck, Heb. 11.5, 6. verse. 20. Melchisedeck was without beginning, that
is known, and without end, so is Christ without beginning and without end, Heb.
7.3. Hence it is that all that ever Christ (as he is a High Priest) has
purchased for his people, is like himself, everlasting: everlasting
reconciliation, everlasting life, etc.

6 Lastly, the High Priest entered into the holy place, within the veil once a
year: namely, into a worldly Sanctuary, indeed-type of Heaven, Heb. 9.1, 3, 4.
but Christ as he has obtained a more excellent ministry, Heb. 8.6. so he is
not entered into the holy place made with hands which are the figures of the
true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us.
Heb. 9.24. O blessed word for believers! Christ our High Priest is entered into
the very heavens, to appear for his people, as he undertook to bear their sins,
and pay their debts, so he now ever apppears personally for his people, and
thus you see beloved that Christ is our great High Priest, and wherein he not
only answers the Legal Highpriests, but also exceeds them.

The second particular to be considered is, that Christ Jesus as he is Priest,
is to be exalted and lifted up in the days of the Gospel, and that both in the
preaching of the Gospel, and in the hearts of his people.

1 In the preaching of the Gospel Christ is to be exalted, as the alone
High Priest, the atonement, peacemaker, and reconciliation, between God and
man: and that in opposition to all legal righteousness, or peace, sought for
in a legal way: beloved, thus Christ was exalted in the days of the Apostles,
Acts 10.36. Peter came preaching peace by Jesus Christ: and in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, it is the main drift of the Spirit of God, to discover, yea to
exalt, to lift up Christ, the alone High Priest, holding forth the dignity, the
excellency and utility of his office.

And this was received always in the hearts of the Saints, Christ our
High Priest, Christ our peace, Ephesians. 2.14. for he is our peace, etc.

Now to speak more punctually to the Priestly office of Christ, it consists in
these two particulars, partly in Reconciliation, partly in Intercession.

1 In Reconciliation, that is, in reconciling God to man, and man to God: Now
it is true, God was ever reconciled to his elect in his Son from all eternity,
for he loved them in his Son, Ephesians. 1.4. from before the foundation of the
world: he never looked upon them but in his Son, yet so, as with relation to
his death, so working peace. Beloved, this was the great design of God in
sending Christ into the world to make peace and reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. To
wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, namely the
elect (amongst the Gentiles, who were always counted for the world, see Romans
11.11, 12, etc.) not imputing their sins, etc. This was the great work God had
to do in the world, when he manifested that great mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy
3.16. God manifested in the flesh etc.

And this Christ has done (beloved) he has perfected it, and finished it,
see 2 Cor. 5.18. and all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself
by Jesus Christ, so also, Romans 5.10.11. and Heb. 2.17. Wherefore in all things
it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful
and faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to God, why? to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people, a blessed word for all believers.
God is reconciled to them in his Son, God is at peace with them, this was the
end wherefore Christ came into the World to make peace for the Saints, and to
give life unto them, hence it is Christ says, John 10.10 I am come that ye
might have life, and that ye might have yet more abundantly: hence it is, that
the Gospel of Christ is called the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15. and the glad
tidings of peace, Esaias 57.7. the Covenant of the Gospel is a Covenant of peace,
Esaias 54.10. Ezekiel. 37.26. God is a God of peace, and at peace with believers,
Romans 5.1. 1 These. 5.23. and Christ is a Prince of peace, Esaias 9, 6.

Thus you see (beloved Christians) what peace and reconciliation here is
wrought by Christ for all believers, a God of peace, a covenant of peace, a
Gospel of peace, God has reconciled us to himself through his Son, for he is
our peace, who has made both one, and broken down the middle wall of
partition, and made us Gentiles one with the Father through faith, having
abolished in his flesh the enmity, to make to himself of two in one new man,
so working peace, that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the
cross.

The second thing considerable is, the manner how he makes this peace, and that
is first in bearing their sins: 2 In laying down his life and blood: In bearing
their sins, beloved, Christ bears all the iniquities of all his people. Esaias
53.4, 5, 6. surely he has borne all our griefs, and carried our sorrows, he
was wounded for our iniquities, and bruised for our transgressions, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed: and
the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.

Note, First, God laid sin upon Christ, Secondly, Christ bare them, Thirdly,
their God condemned them.

1 God laid sin upon Christ, All we like sheep have gone astray, but he has
laid on him the iniquity of us all, it is all laid upon Christ, so that now the
sin of all the elect, becomes the sin of Christ, they are laid upon Christ, He
is become sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2
Cor. 5.21.

2 Christ bare the sins of his people, God did not only lay sin upon Christ,
but he bare it, 1 Pet. 2.24. he bare our sins on his own body on the cross,
and so has born our grief, and carried our sorrows: this is the way beloved,
by which Christ has made peace for his people in bearing their sins, there was
no other way left for reconciliation between God and man, but God must become
man, that so he might bear our sins, and so our griefs and sorrows, that he
might be bruised for our iniquities, and that the chastisement of our peace
might be upon him.

3 There God condemns sin, and Christ now bears not only sin, but justice for
sin, mansins, justice is offended, and that must be satisfied; Christ steps
in, he takes the blow, he becomes surety for sinners, stands in our room, and
pays the debt, see Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh, God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
for sin condemned sin in the flesh. Note beloved, God did not only lay sin
upon Christ, but Christ bears it, and there God condemns it, where God finds
sin there he condemns it: God condemns the sin of his people in the flesh of
his Son.

O what does thy soul say to this, dear Christian? before ever thou could
be reconciled to thy God, Christ Jesus must bear all thy sins, and the
condemnation of them in his own body. O see, see man, what a burden thy sins
were to thy Savior, if thou have any interest in him, follow him to the mount
of olives, see him in his agony, Luke 22.44. sweating drops of blood, great
drops of blood, trickling down to the ground, this was the weight of thy sins
laid upon thy Savior, before ever thy peace was purchased, see him upon the
cross (bearing thy sins and my sins, man, woman (if we have any interest in
him) and the condemnation of them) crying out, My God, my God, why have thou
for saken me? beloved, it went heavy with our Savior.

Use. Learn hence to take heed of sin, do not take delight in any sin, truly
beloved, if you love the Lord Jesus, you cannot love that which was such a
heavy burden unto him, o beloved, how should justified saved persons take
heed of sin, of every sin? the least sin that thou can imagine took hold on
Christ as well as the greatest, o therefore take heed of pride, of anger,
foolishness, vanity, the least sin is much unbecomming Christians: o beloved,
how seasonable comes in that earnest exhortation of the Apostle? Romans 12.1, 2.
Christ having given up himself for your sins, that you give up your selves
your souls and bodies, a holy, living, acceptable sacrifice to the Lord.

2 As Christ has made peace in bearing the sins of his people, so also in
laying down his life and blood for them: beloved, before ever there could be
peace and reconciliation made, Christ must dye for it, give his life and blood
for it, all those ceremonial sacrifices under the Law were a type of a dying
Christ, hence it is that he is called a Lamb slain from the beginning: beloved,
Christ having undertaken to become a High Priest, a peacemaker between God and
man, nothing less then his blood could do it, Heb. 9.22. Without blood there
is no remission: no justification without blood, Christ's dying is a Christians
justification. Romans 5.9. being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved,
etc. no purging of sin without blood, Heb. 9.14. how much more shall the blood
of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself, purge your
consciences from dead works to serve the living God? Rev. 1.5. who has loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, etc. there is no pardon and
so no peace without blood, Heb. 9.22. Thus beloved you see that all must be
done by blood, and that by the blood of Christ too, the blood of all the
creatures in the world, nay of all the men in the world, was not able to
redeem, to make satisfaction for one soul, nay, for one sin, nothing less
then the blood of Christ could do it, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. silver and gold could
not do it, the blood of creatures could not do it, Heb. 10.5. It is not
possible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sin.

Object. But some may say, that God had never any thing against his elect, he
ever loved them from eternity, Jer. 31.3. I have loved thee with an everlasting
love, Ephesians. 1.4. he chose us in him from before the foundatien of the world.

Ans. True, God ever loved his elect, and ever intended mercy and love unto
them, yet he so loved them as with relation to the death of his Son, and from
everlasting determined to satisfy his justice, to take away sin and work peace
by the death of his Son, and the truth is, that God had as really an eye to the
death of his Son from all eternity, and saw it as actually then, as if Christ
had then suffered, see Ephesians. 1.4. He chose us in him, from before the
foundation of the werld, in him, with relation to his death, to his making
satisfaction for sin, not that God could not have made the Saints at once, and
have saved them presently, and never have suffered them to sin, but this is the
way God in his wisdom appointed to manifest his mercy on the vessels of
mercy: and his justice on his enemies, so that now beloved, God having
appointed this to be the means to bring sons to glory, there could never have
been any remission, any peace, but by a dying Christ, therefore he is called, a
Lamb slain from the foundation of the World, Rev. 13.8. and indeed, Christ was
as a lamb ever slain in Gods account, and he beheld all things as present, and
saw both the work of creation, redemption, and glory of his Saints, from all
eternity.

The second part of Christ's priestly office, consists in his intercession at
the right hand of the glory of his Father, Romans 8.34. Who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that dyed, year ather that is risen again, who is even
at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. He
ever lives to make intercession. Beloved, this is one part of Christ's Priestly
office to intercede for the Saints.

Note beloved, Christ intercedes, 1 In the Saints. 2 For them.

1 In them, Romans 8.26, 27. The Spirit it self, (to wit of Christ) Gal. 4.6.
Makes intercession for us, or, in us according to the will of God, that is,
God by his Spirit, helps us to ask things according to the will of God, for
we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit helps us, etc.

2 He makes intercession For us, also he ever lives to make intercession. O
blessed word for the Saints! he makes intercession for every particular
Saint, he makes intercession for his Churches, for us says the Apostle, and
through him it is, we have access with boldness, unto the Father, etc.

Object. But some may object, did not Christ make satisfaction, peace, and
reconciliation when he dyed upon the cross, when he said, It is finished?

Ans. It is true that Christ in his death, and resurrection finished, the work
of man's justification, Romans 5.9. being justified by his blood: and he made
peace and reconciliation, Col. 1.20 having made peace by the blood of his
cross: but we are not to understand by Christ's interceding any new act of
Christ, done, either in way of satisfaction, or justification: neither are we
to understand that Christ sits in Heaven pleading with the Father in words, as
a counfellour pleads a cause before the judge; but Christ is in Heaven with the
Father at his right hand, that is, in glory with him, presenting our persons,
and in presenting our persens, all our services, in his own person: not by any
new act of doing, but by the worth of his merits, the excellency of his person,
the near relation of the Saints to himself, viz. members of his body; so that
now God cannot look upon the Son but he must behold the Saints in him, he
having so near a relation to his Father, both by his personal presence, and
the excellent worth of his merits (whose blood spoke better things then the
blood of Abel) Heb. 12.24. he continually makes intercession to God for the
Saints, Esaias 53.12. He has poured out his soul to the death, and he was
numbered among the transgressors, he bare the sins of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors: here you have the whole priestly office of
Christ 1 Bearing sin, and so working peace, 2 Making intercession by that means
for transgressors.

Use. If so that Christ Jesus is to be exalted, and lifted up as the alone
High Priest in the days of the Gospel, hence will properly arise four words
of application. 1 A word of Admiration. 2 A word of Information. 3 A word of
Exhortation. 4 A word of Consolation.

Use. First, a word of Admiration, O what cause have the Saints to admire God,
who has manifested himself in his Son? I say to admire him. 1 His Wisdom, 2
His Love and his Mercy, 3 His Justice, 4 His Power, all manifested in his Son,
to and for the good of sinners, whom he makes Saints,

1 How should the Saints admire his wisdom? truly beloved, the wisdom of God as
in other things, so in this particular (making peace by the blood of his Son)
is very admirable, the wisdom of God wonderfully appeared in the whole work of
God, with relation to the creation. Job 37.14, 15, 16. Chap. 38.4, etc. and
this the Saints should be acquainted with, that their hearts might admire him.

But the redemption of the Saints is much more admirable, for beloved, this was
Gods end in making a world, that he might set forth his wisdom in the
redemption of the Saints, Esaias 40. The Lord speaking as it seems, with relation
to the coming of his Son, a Savior, ver. 11. he shall feed his flock like a
sheepherd, and gather his lambs in his arms, etc. says, ver. 13. Who has
directed the spirit of the Lord, and who was his Counselor? with whom took he
counsel, and who instructed him? etc. certainly none beloved, there was none
to do it, for he determined his whole work, both of creation and redemption
before all things: if there had bin any being then for any of the sons of men,
who could have inve^ted such a way, such a means of recovering, of reconciling
fallen man? truly none but the God of wisdom, and therefore Christ is called
in Scripture the wisdom of God, Luke 11.49. therefore also he is called the
wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1 21. we preach Christ the wisdom of God, etc. Chap. 2.7.
But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, the hidden wisdom which God
ordained before the world began. Note, beloved, the Lord Jesus Christ, the
wisdom of the Father, him in whom the Father manifests his wisdom, was
ordained before the world began, Ephesians. 3.10, 11. it is called the manifold
wisdom of God.

Well may it be called manifold, for it is infinite, there is no numbering of
it, Ps. 47.5. Great is the Lord, and of great power, of his understanding there
is no number.

How should this take off from the Saints all cares and fears concerning the
things of this world? he who is infinite in wisdom; wisdom it self has taken
care for thy soul, for thine eternity. Doubt not, but rest upon him, his
wisdom shall be for thee, he will so order, and dispose of all thy actions,
as shall be most advantageous for his own honor, and thy good. And know this,
that nothing comes to pass but by his wise disposing hand of grace: nay, he is
made unto thee, that believe, wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30. o admirable mercy, that
the God of wisdom, should not only, wisely contrive a way for the reconciling
of sinners to himself, but should become their wisdom, he is made to us
wisdom, admire at this, all the sons and daughters of God: what, God himself
become your wisdom! then truly, thy solly shall not harm thee: o thou art
ready to say I am so foolish, so ignorant, etc. o poor soul, it matters not,
it is mercy thou see, thy solly, for the truth is, thou must be a fool that
thou may be wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. and 4.10. that is, thou must renounce all
thine own wisdom, as folly; for it is self-wisdome that is the greatest enemy
to Christ. Therefore let no man deceive himself, If any man amongst you seem to
be wise in this world, let him be a fool that he may be wise.

2 What cause have the Saints to admire God in Christ, for his love? o
admirable love! what, God to give his Son to become a propitiation for the sin
of sinners? Is not this rich grace, and mercy? for God to take upon him the
nature of man, and the sins of men, to make peace and reconciliation for men?
what soul can behold this love, this mercy, and not stand admiring in the
enjoyment of it?

Beloved, this love of God manifested unto men, it is Free, Full, Everlasting.
Love, it is free without desert, there was nothing in man for to procure it,
he has loved thee freely, poor soul, Hos. 14.4. I will heal their
backsliding, I will love them Freely, for mine anger is turned away, Beloved,
God loved freely, for he loved his before they were, Ephesians. 1.4. he loved them
freely, for he loved them when they were sinners, Romans 5.8. the manifestation
of it, is free, for it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy, Romans 9.16. 1 Cor. 1.27. he manifests it unto them,
when they would none of it, when men had rather keep their sins then receive
Christ, as a Priest, and an atonement, so Paul Act. 9. the Lord meets him and
over powers him, when he was going in a way of persecution, as it is in Esaias
65.1. I am sought of them that asked not for me, and found of them that sought
me not, etc. God first seeking and finding, causes the creature to seek after
God.

2 It is full grace and love, great love, John 3.16. God so loved the world,
that he gave his Son, etc. O unspeakable love, that nothing less then the Son
of God can serve for a gift, and truly beloved, nothing less could have done
the deed, and therefore nothing less could be given from a God of love, who
intended in his gift to do good to man, John 4.9, 10. Herein is love, not that
we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for
our sins, and herein is the love of Christ manifested to become a Priest, a
Sacrifice, to lay down his life for sinners. John 5.13. Greater love then this
has no man, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Here is great love,
love to be admired of all the Saints.

3 This love of God manifested in the Son, is everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. I
have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore in loving kindness have I
drawn thee. Hark you, (beloved friends) God has loved his people from
everlasting, and he will love them to everlasting, John 13.1. Having loved his
own, which were in the world, he loved them to the end, that is, for ever:
Hence it is that the kindness of God is called everlasting kindness, Esaias
54.8. In a little wrath I hid my face frone thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, etc. his mercy is
everlasting mercy, Psalm. 100.5. For the Lord is good, and his mercy is
everlasting, and his truth endures to generation and generation. His Covenant
made with thee who art a believer, is an everlasting covenant, Esaias 61.8. I
will make an everlasting covenant with them says the Lord, a Covenant that
shall not be removed, Esaias 54.10. neither shall thou depart out of it, Jer.
32.40. and hence it is that the joy of the Saints shall be everlasting, for
indeed, were not Gods mercies, Gods Covenants, etc. everlasting, There could he
no true joy, but this is that which occasions both true and everlasting joy and
consolation, 2 These. 2.16. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, even
our father, which has loved and given us everlasting consolation, and good
hope through grace, etc. Note, beloved, here is everlasting consolation flowing
from the love of God, and truly the consolation could not be everlasting, were
not that love communicated through grace everlasting. Here is admirable mercy,
admirable grace, free full, everlasting.

3 The Saints have cause to admire God in his Justice, for beloved, those two
attributes of God are admirably exalted in this one particular, giving Christ a
reconciliation between God and man, his love and his mercy is exalted, in that
he to accomplish his own end in a way of grace, gives his own Son to become an
offering for sin, to this very end and purpose, to reconcile and save sinners,
John 3.16. 2 Cor. 5.19. such was the love of God from all eternity, that
nothing could hinder their design of grace. The Jews, that had a hand in
putting Christ to death, shall have a part in that mercy and grace purchased by
his death: Acts 2.37, 38. For they did nothing but what God in his counsel had
determined, Acts 4.28.

Now as the mercy of God was herein admirably exalted to men, so is his
justice, his severity also, Romans 11.12. Behold, therefore the goodness, and
severity of God, etc. Behold, here is goodness and severity, mercy and
justice, to be admired.

First, the mercy of God is here admirably manifested, In freely choosing some,
and secondly, his justice in leaving others: First, His mercy in choosing some
in his Son to life and glory, Romans 9.23, 24. That he might make known the
riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto
glory, even us, whom he has called, etc. here is the mercy of God wonderfully
made known unto the sons of men: and note, that this mercy was never manifested
but in a way of justice: justice must be sarisfied for man's transgression: now
that God may show mercy without any wrong to his justice, he gives his Son to
take upon him man's sin, and to suffer for the sins of his people, that so mercy
and justice might meet together. An admirable work of grace; where God shows
mercy, and his justice is satisfied. Never any mercy to be expected, but where
justice is satisfied: it is in vain for thee, o man, to expect mercy out of
Christ: there justice is satisfied, if ever thou have mercy, it must be there,
therefore Christ calls, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me, etc.

Now, beloved, the Saints may admire of, and rejoice in the justice of God: for
the justice of God is for every believer, and is as ready to plead for them, as
the mercy of God. A creditour, that is honest, he will be ready to acquit and
clear the principal, when the surety has paid the debt, and made full
satrsfaction, and to declare, that he has nothing against him: it is true the
surety may pay the debt, and the principal not know it, and he may be afraid
and troubled; but when the surety shall come and tell him that the debt is
paid, and the creditour satisfied; and when the creditor shall send his bond,
and discharge under his hand and seal; now this satisfies the man, and now he
is clear, and comforted, now he walks boldly.

So it may be with the poor soul; Christ has paid thy debt, he has
satisfied the justice of his Father, but perhaps thou want the assurance of
it: beloved, to whomsoever the Lord has, or shall give faith, there it is
sure: the Lord has sent his Ministers to proclaim it to your souls, That
whosoever believes shall be saved; and here he has sent his word to confirm
it unto you, and if that will not satisfy, thou shall have his seal too,
Ephesians. 1.13 And justice is now ready to plead for such a soul, to acquit him,
I am satis fied, I have nothing against him: and so justice is thine, and for
thee, who (indeed) believe.

2 The Instice of God is manifested in leaving others in a lost condition,
herein is the severity of God admirably manifested, especially of the Saints,
see Romans 9.22. What, if God willing to show his wrath and make his power known,
endured with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath made up to destruction?
see Chap. 11. the elect obtained mercy, the rest were hardened, o how should
the Saints admire at this justice? what? God to leave so many in a
hardened-blinde-perishing-condition, and show mercy to me: O wonderful! what
should God see in me more then in such and such hardened ones? what? God show
mercy, perhaps to one, and leave twenty, a hundred, in a hardened, lost
condition, and shall I be one of the small number? O beloved, how will the due
consideration of this mercy and justice, this goodness and severity of God,
set your selves: work to admire God, and to praise him? this is the new song of
the Saints, Rev. 5.9. And they sung a new song, saying, thou art worthy to
take the book, and to open the seal thereof, for thou have redeemed us to God
by thy blood, out of every kindred and tongue, and people and nation: O this is
that which will set thy soul a praising God indeed, when thou shall see
people, tongues, nations left, and thou taken out of them, some taken, perhaps
one or two out of a family, others left; one or two out of a generation, others
left; some few out of a City, a Nation, and others left. O beloved, the due
consideration of this one thing, will occasion your fouls to sing that song,
that none else could ever learn, Rev. 14.3. They sung a new song, and no man
could learn that song, but they which were redeemed from the earth (called out
from earthly men) from Nations, peoples tongues, etc.

4 The Saints have cause also to admire the power, the almighty power of God,
working salvation for them, he does declare himself to be the Al-mighty God,
able to do whatsoever he pleases, he is able to save, he is able to work
salvation for his people which way he pleases, and the power of God is
manifested in Christ, working salvation for his people, see Esaias 63.1. I that
speak in righteousness mighty to save, behold the Lord Jesus is called the
mighty God, Esaias 9.6. and a mighty redeemer, Prove. 23.11. and their redeemer is
mighty, he shall plead their cause, etc. and truly beloved, he had need be
mighty, for he has undertaken a mighty work, the redemption and salvation of
sinners, and this appears to be a mighty work, 1 Because none else could do it:
beloved, God has done such a work for his people, that no creature nor created
power in heaven or earth could do it, Esaias 45.21. There is no God besides me,
a just God and a Savior, there is none beside me, none can save beside God,
Hos. 13.4. There is no Savior besides me, therefore in vain is salvation hoped
for from the mount ains, truly in the Lordour God is the salvation of Israel,
Jer. 3.23. Beloved, it is in vain to look for salvation from the hills and
mountains, from creatures, or any thing beneath the Lord Jesus, There is none
other name given under heaven whereby we may be saved, but by the name of
Jesus, Act, 4.12. O beloved, how should the Saints praise God, and admire him
for that great and glorious salvation he has wrought for his people: this is
the song the Saints sing unto his praise, Rev. 7.10, 11, 12. And they cried
with a loud voice, salvation to our God, etc. blessing, and glory, and wisdom,
and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever
and ever, etc. They sing forth Gods saving power, Who is a God able to save
after this manner?

2 It appears to be a mighty work, exceeding the work of the creation, or any
of the rest of the works of God, if we consider the several circumstances, or
concomitants thereunto appertaining. Beloved, the Lord made the world with his
word, he spoke the word and it was done, but it was not a word that could save
man being fallen, no, no, beloved, there is more to be done, first, God must
take upon him the nature of man, that is, the seed of David, Romans 1.3. of
Abraham, Heb. 2.16. he must bear the sins of sinners, 1 Pet. 2.24. and their
curse, being made a curse for them, Gal. 3.13. and their condemnation, Romans
8.3. And to effect this great work of man's salvation, He that was in the form
of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, was found in the form
of a servant, became obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross, Phil.
2.6, 7. here is a great work before man's salvation is accomplished: was there
ever the like work wrought by God, greater then the creation? there a word does
it, here must be blood, not of an ordinary man, but of the Son of God, greater
then the destroying or building of Nations or Kingdoms, here a word does it,
Jer. 18.7, 8. here must be blood, Heb. 9.22. Thus you see, beloved, the
admirable power of God, manifested in this work of reconciliation.

2 Use. If Christ be the alone High Priest, the alone reconciler and
peacemaker betwixt God and man, as you have heard he is, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is
one God and one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Then here
is a word of information, to inform us of the vanity and folly of those that
create to themselves other grounds of peace and comfort besides Christ.

Note first, that there are many that do thus create to themselves other
grounds of comfort, other Saviors besides Christ, notwithstanding the Lord
has said, there is no other name given under heaven whereby you may be saved:
yet believe it many there are, that rest upon duties and performances, and make
that the ground of their consolation, Jer. 2.12, 13. They have forsaken me the
fountain of living water, and have dug unto themselves, cisterns, broken
cisterns, that will hold no water, my people, that is, not only mine by
creation, but by profession, yet they forsake me, and dug cisterns to
themselves: how do men love to draw water out of their own cisterns? to create
comforts to themselves, to kindle sparks of their own fire, until the Lord
bring them off from it: Mat. 25.1, there were five wise virgins, and five
foolish, the foolish have lamps, a profession, and in that they rest, without
oil, that is, Christ his grace and mercy: and note, Christ says, the
Kingdom of heaven is like ten virgins, and it may be the state of the Church
for all that I know, men shall content themselves that they are members, and
boast themselves, and comfort themselves in it, with a name of Christians, a
name that they are alive, and yet are dead: therefore it nearly concerns you,
beloved, to look to it: it is not enough that you hear, profess, pray, or be
members of Churches, unless Christ be yours, there is nothing else can make
peace but the blood of the Covenant and many there are, that shall deceive
themselves.

2 See the sin the evil, of trusting upon any thing, beneath Christ.

1 It is a vain and foolish thing, therefore the five Virgins, Mat. 25. are
called foolish Virgins, and well might they be called foolish, they content
themselves with Lamps without oil: how long is that Lamp likely to burn, that
wants oil, think you? so that professor, that wants Christ. It is a foolish
thing for a man to be content with the shell without the kernel, the shadow
without the substance. Beloved, all things without Christ, is but a shadow, it
will prove nothing: he is the substance of all Ordinances, and professions:
farther then you have Christ in them, they are dead. O how foolish would you
count that man, that woman, that should strive to catch the shadow, leaving the
substance? It is a vain thing without profit, the vanity of it is this, they
deceive themselves, they think they have something; when they have nothing.
Revel. 3.19. Because, thou say, thou art rich and increased with goods, and
have need of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, and miser able,
and poor, and blind, and naked: this is thy folly, this is thy vanity, thou
think, that thou have much to say for thy self, because thon have gotten a
form of godliness, when the truth is that all (without Christ) is nothing,
nay, less then nothing, vanity: they cannot help thee, certainly Christ died
in vain, if any thing beneath himself can save thee, Galath. 2.21.

But secondly, to create comforts to thy self, beneath Christ, is an evil and
a bitter thing; certainly, beloved, it will prove very evil and bitter one
day, either here when discovered to thy soul, or else hereafter, when too late.
See Jer. 2.19. Know therefore, and see that it is an evil thing, and a bitter,
that thouhast forsaken the Lord thy God. An evil end bitter thing to forsake
the Lord Jesus, the fountain; and to rest upon any other thing beneath himself.

Object. What is the evil of it, perhaps you will say?

Ans. The best end of it is sorrow, certainly sorrow must needs follow it. Esaias
50.11. Behold, all you that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with
sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have
kindled, this shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall ly down in sorrow.

Question. What is the reason, poor souls walk so sadly and so sorrowfully?

Answer. Is it not because they forsake the Lord the fountain, and dig
eisternes to themselves? kindle a fire of their own, and then sit down, and
think to comfort themselves? and hence it comes to pass, that so many poor
souls ly down in sorrow: it is not thy case poor soul? thou set up this
duty and that duty, this prayer, and that ordinance, and expectest comfort in
them, and thou would fain compass thy self about with those sparks of
prayers and duties, etc. and this makes thee ly down in sorrow, and all because
thy soul is not carried through these to Christ, who is the substanee of all
Ordinances.

3 It is a shameful thing to rest upon any thing beneath Christ, certainly,
beloved, it will make you ashamed one day, either here or hereafter: see Romans
6.21. What fruit had you then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? the
end of those things is death. What were those things? deeds of darkness, and
certainly to rest upon any thing beneath CHRIST, is a deed of darkness, and
will cause shame: see Ier. 17.13. O Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake
thee shall be ashamed. And they that depart from me shall be written in the
earth, they have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living water. O beloved,
will it not be a shame, when men shall profess Christianity all their days,
when they shall hear, and pray, and perform duties, resting in those things,
and when they shall come to appear before the Lord Jesus, shall be rejected?
Esaias 45.16. They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them together,
that are makers of Idols, that rest upon any thing beneath Christ, where is the
Lords Israel, ver. 17. shall be saved with an everlasting salvation, etc. and
they that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion that shall never be removed,
Psalm. 125.1.

4 Lastly, to trust in any thing beneath the Lord Jesus is a cursed, damning
sin, so it is, to those that live and die in that condition, see Mat. 7.22, 23.
Many will say in that day, Lord Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and
in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works? and
then will he profess to them, I never knew you, depart from me ye that work
iniquity. O beloved, this will be the sad sentence pronounced against all that
shall come before Christ at the last day in their own righteousness, see Luke
13.27. depart from me ye workers of iniquity, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

3 Use. A word of exhortation, If it be so that Christ be the alone High Priest
and peacemaker, between God and man, O how should this stir up your souls to
look to Jesus for salvation? do not mistake me, I shall not set you upon this
duty as if it were in your own power to do it, it is God that works both to
will and to do of his own good pleasure, but as a means by which God may come
in with power upon thy spirit, working up thy soul above thy self to his Son,
and to encourage any poor soul to whom God shall be plesed to come in
graciously in his own means

Note first, God calls thee to look above and beyond all, to himself, in his
Son, see Esaias 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth;
and Esaias 55.1. O every one that thirsts, come, buy wine and milk, without
money and without price, wherefore will you spend your money for that which is
not bread? O beloved, God would not have poor souls, for which Christ dyed, to
spend their time for that which is not bread, he has given Christ the living
bread for that very end and purpose. God has given his Son a Sacrifice, a
peace offering for sin, so making reconciliation for the sins of his people, he
has put in us the word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20 Now then we are
ambassadors for Christ (says the Apostle) as though God did beseech you by us
to be reconciled unto him, that is, to receive this reconciliation held forth
by Christ in the Word. O beloved, what do your souls say to this? is
reconciliation and peace with God through Jesus Christ worth the owning? is it
worth the receiving? men and women consider of it, Act. 13.26. Men and
brothren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever among you fears the
Lord, to you is the word of salvation sent: to whom ever among you God shall
give an eye to see it, and a hand to receive it, to you it is sent.

2 Consider Christ is ready to receive when ever you come unto him, he will
not put you off, John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me,
and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. O beloved, the Lord is
ready to receive sinners, the worst of firmers, the greatest of sinners:
believe it, the Lord never did nonever will cast forth a poor sinner, that
comes to him in truth, that is, who the Father draws to him. See the Parable of
the prodigal son, Luke 15.20. his father seeing him afar off, ran and met him
and embraced him: o the readiness of God, to embrace poor sinners, that come
unto him! witness Mary Magdalen, Saul, Acts 9. The betrayers and murderers of
the Lord of life Acts 2. All which manifests the readiness of God to receive
sinners: and believe it, he would never invite thee, he would never give thee
a heart willing to come to him, did he not intend willingly to embrace thee.

2 Exhortation, for the Saints: if we have such a High Priest, making peace
and reconciliation for us; o beloved, how should this encourage us to hold fast
our profession to the end, this is the use the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Hebrews makes of it, Chap. 4.14. Having then such a great High Priest that is
passed into the Heavens, the Son of God, lee us hold fast our profession, or
confession, let us hold it fast, with a strong hand (so the word signifies)
(...), hold fast your profession, with a violent or strong hand. Now there are
three things that are all most ready to make a poor Christian (many times) to
throw away his profession. 1 The power and strength of corruption. 2 Inability,
and indisposednesse to that which is good. 3 Those hard temptations and
trials, that they are liable unto in their Christian progress. Against these
three diseases will flow in from Christ our great High Priest, reamedies
answerable, even to the satisfaction of the soul.

The first is, the power and strength of corruption: this is that which
troubles thee, is it not, poor soul? o thou have such a body of sin, such a
vile, cursed nature, thou artready to cry out, as the Apostle Paul. O wretched
man, that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? And as Esaias Chap.
6.5. Woe is me, I am undone, I am a man of polluted lips, etc. and this makes
thee almost ready to throw away thy profession.

To this I shall propound a threesold remedy, all flowing from a crncified
Christ, from Christ as he is our High Priest.

1 That all the sins of believers, were condemned in the flesh of Christ, Romans
8.3. (...), it signifies the pronouncing of guilt, and so of condemnation,
upon Christ. Beloved, Christ has born the guilt and punishment of all thy
sins, to whom he has given faith in his blood: all those lusts and
corruptions that so much trouble thee, he has born them all, 1 Pet. 1.24. He
bare our sins in his own body on the cross, etc.

2 He has destroyed the power of all thy sins, as he is a High Priest: See
John 3.8.9. For this cause the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy
the works of the Devil: Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin, that
is, as he is born of God, he does not sin, willingly with his mind: he can say
as the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.17. It is no more I that do it, but sin, that is, I
( Paul, borne of God) do not sin. O here is the power of sin destroyed! though
there is, and will be, the Being of corruption. So, 1 John 1.18. If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us: now consider
(beloved) is not the power of fin destroyed in thee? Do thou not look upon
it as thine enemy? would thou not be rid of it? O that is thy desire; why
then be not dismayed, it is the condition of all the Saints, to have sin raging
in them: Christ has destroyed the power of sin, it shall not reign over you,
Romans 6.14.

3 Christ thy High Priest will have thee to live, in, and upon him out of, and
above, thy self: therefore he is pleased to let alone in the Saints, A prick in
the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet them: he will have thee to fetch
all from himself, Col. 3.3. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ
in God: dead to sin; and dead in your selves, not able to act or do any thing,
but as you are carried on by the power of God, John 15.5. Without me you can do
nothing, Christ is, and will be, all and in all, to your souls, Col. 3.11. If
all sin in the Saints were subdued, and they made perfect in this life, I mean
pesonally perfect, otherwise they could not live by faith upon another, and so
should not be in a dependencie upon Christ: this was Adams condition, and he
quickly lost it: but it is the wisdom of God, and it is much for our good, to
keep as always in a dependencie upon himself, where our stock remains: for our
life, our consolation, our salvation, it is all hid with Christ in God, and
therefore it is sure, although we have not the full enjoyment of it in this
world: God keeps his people always in a way of believing, and so causes them to
live by faith, and when they are made meet for such a way, namely perfection,
perfect freedom from all sin, that is, when Christ shall change their vile
bodies, and give them glorious bodies, then they shall be made like unto
Christ, but not before, Phil. 3.22. John 3.2. O consider of it I beseech you
(brethren) you would fain be glorified in a state of mortality, what need of
faith then? this is one end why God gives faith unto his people, that they
might live comfortably in their patient expectation of what God has promised,
Heb. 10.35, 36. Chap. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of things not seen: not seen
with a carnal eye, not enjoyed-after a carnal manner, but eyed by faith, and
expected by hope, and so comfortably waited for. Esaias 28.16. He that believes
makes not have, therefore that which you and I have to look to, is this,
whether Christ be ours? whatif there be lust and corruptions? if thou have
Christ he is thy life, 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has life, if thou
have the Son thou have life, he is thy life, and in him it is thou art to live,
he it is that is thy fullness, thy all and in all.

The second thing that troubles the Saints is their inabilities to perform
duties: O thou can not pray without sin, thou can not perform any duty as
thou would, and should, thou can say as the Apostle, When I would do
good, evil is present; and for to remedy this, consider and be sure of these
two things.

1 That Christ has done all for thee, so that thou art not to look to thine
own righteousness, that righteousness that is of the Law, but the
righteousness that is of God through faith, Phil. 3.9. What does trouble thee
poor soul? o thou can not pray, that troubles thee. Why, considerfirst,
Christ has trayed for thee, John 17.9. and certainly he was heardin all things
that he prayed for, his Prayer stands effectual for every believer to the end
of the world.

2 He by his spirit makes intercession in thee, Romans 8.26. with sighs and
groans which cannot be expressed.

3 He makes thy prayer acceptable, presented in his name, Ioh. 16.23.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you, look upon
Christ thou shall see him performing all righteousness, for thee that art in
thy self unrighteous, doing all for thee that can do nothing for thy self,
he has prayed for thee that can not pray, nay, he does still breath in by
his spirit into thy soul, sight desirings, groanings (and sometimes)
expressions, and then accepts of his own work is thee.

3 What ever thy weakness is, he passes it by and pardons it, see Micah 7.18,
19, 20. Who is a God like unto thee? that pardons the iniquity, and passes
by the transgression of the remnant of his people: thou may think God hides
his face from thee, when thou see thy Iusts to be strong and prevailing but
he will turn again, he will have compassion on thee, he will subdue thine
iniquities, etc. see the Covenant of grace, that Covenant which Christ has
purchased with his blouse Heb. 10.29. see Heb. 8.12. For I will be merciful to
their unrighteousness, and their sins and their unrighteousness will I
remember no more: thou art afraid thou art so dead, so unprofitable, so unlike
Christ, that he will not own thee, but be assured, it is a part of the Covenant
of grace in the administration of it, to pardon all thy sins, 1 John 2.2. If we
sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is a
propitiation for our sins. Christ is thine advocate to plead thy case, look to
Christ who is thy propitiation, thy peace.

Object. O but I have a cursed wicked nature, there is nothing in it that is
good, I cannot pray nor perform duties, certainly now Christ has shown mercy
to me, and made a difference between me and the world, he expects something at
my hands answerable to his mercy.

Ans. 1 It was the condition of the Apostle Paul. Romans 7.18. I know that in me
(that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing, thou have nothing that is good in
thee. it is true, no more had the Apostle Paul, When I would do good evil is
present, etc. thou can not pray nor perform that good thou would, no more
could the Apostle, v. 19. for the good that I would do, I do not, that is. I
do it not as I would do, free from sin, from corruption, evil is present O
this is thy case, I know it is, and this was the case of the Apostle Paul, it
is my case, and shall be thine, while thou and I live in this world.

2 I answer, Christ Jesus knew very well before ever he gave his life and blood
for thee, a Sacrifice for sin, that thou would have a cursed nature, a
disposition in thee to that which is evil, even after he had manifested his
love unto thee, he knew that thou would not be able to pray or perform any
duty without sin, nay, he never intended it should be otherwise with thee or
me, while we are in this world, and that is the reason he gives us such
comfortable words to assure us that those corruptions committed after faith,
shall be pardoned, Heb. 8.12. for these sins are indeed contrary to the holy
and pure nature of God, but he pardons them: and now do think that Christ
would give his life and blood for thee when thou wast an enemy to him, and so
reconcile thee to himself and Father? and now when he finds sin and
corruption in thee, inabilities to perform holy duties, etc. which he knew
would be in thee before, do think he will now reject thee and cast thee off?
no, no, he will not cast thee off, do not think it, nay know it, that God
expected no better of thee, he knew that thou would have a vain foolish
mind, full of passion, pride, and the like, farther then he gave thee power to
subdue it, he knew that without him thou can do nothing, John 15.5. o
therefore be not discouraged, look to the Lord Jesus thy High Priest, who has
reconciled thee when thou were an enemy, Romans 5.8, 9. But God commended his
love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us: much
more now being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him
ver. 10. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of
his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved.

3 A Third thing that many times troubles the Saints, it is those temptations
and persecutions they are liable to in this world, for the name and sake of
Christ.

For this I shall propound these five considerations, as remedies, all flowing
from Christ our great High Priest.

1 Consider that he has made the salvation of every believer sure, Esaias 55.3.
The Covenant God makes with his people is the sure mercy of David, I will make
an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, that is of
Christ: It is sure the devil may rage and men may rage, but they shall never
be able to prevail, Mat. 16.18. The gates of hell shall not prevail, etc. Fear
not hell, thy High Priest has the keys of death and hell, there shall not one
soul go in there more then Christ thy High Priest permits, therefore fear
not him that can imprison, banish, kill the body, and cannot kill the soul,
but fear him that can kill both body and soul: be not afraid to confess
Christ before men and devils, they shall never be able to separate between God
and thy soul, see the confidence of the Apostle Paul, and this was his
comfort, and this will be thy comfort, Romans 8.35, 38, 39. Who shall separate us
from the love of God? I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor Angels
nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: true it is, afflictions will come,
storms and tempests will arise, but you being founded upon the rock Christ
Jesus shall stand, see Mat. 25. The rain descended, and the floods came, and
the wind blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded
upon a rock: a poor weak soul, carried out of it self to Christ, built wholly
upon him, shall stand, when perhaps some that have seemed to be far more
glorious professors, building upon the sand, upon duties and professions, shall
fall.

2 Consider that Christ thy High Priest has gone before thee in every
condition, therefore it follows, Heb. 4.15, He was in all points tempted like
unto us, yet without sin. O how should the consideration of this help thee
through thy temptations: art troubled with sin? so was Christ with thy sin, yet
himself without sin, he was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. yea, and a curse for sin too, and
that thou shall never be, Gal. 3.13. art troubled with the Devil, with
temptations, it may be to pride, to the world? etc. so was Christ Mat. 4. Art
persecuted? so was Christ; art contradicted of sinners? so was Christ, Heb. 12
3. art mocked? scorned? set out at naught? so was Christ, John 8.48, 52. art
accused perhaps for an Incendiary, or pervertor of the City, of the Nation? so
was Christ, Luke 23.2. They began to accuse him, saying we found this fellow
perverting the Nation.

3 Consider that Christ has not only gone before in the Saints sufferings,
whereby he is sensible and feelingly sensible of all the Saints sufferings,
but he goes with them, into their sufferings. Consider, Christ will be as deep
in thy affliction as thy self; he takes all as done to himself, Acts 9. Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou Me. Christ will go with thee into thy affliction,
Esaias 41.3 When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through
the rivers they shall not over flow thee, when thou walk through the fire,
thou shall not be burnt: and Esaias 41.10. Fear not, for I am with thee, (what
to do? not for nothing) I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea, I
will uphold thee, with the right hand of my righteousness: and this you see
verified, Dan. 3.25. Acts 12.7, 8, and 6.25. in all which Christ manifested his
gracious presence, both for support and preservation.

4 Use. Is a word of consolation beloved, all the Saints consolation flows from
the manifestation of Gods love in Christ their High Priest.

Many are the consolations that issues forth to the Saints from this full
fountain of grace, all received in by faith: a Christians justification which
he receives by faith, it comes in by the blood of CHRIST, Romans 5.9. Beloved,
it is Christ dying, that is a Christians justification, Romans 8.33. and that is
the reason why the Apostle is so careful to make known a crucified Christ, 1
Co. 15.3. Christ dying for sin, because it was the first truth to be received
for a sinners justification: but now beloved (supposing I speak to those that
have received this dying, Christ as their alone justification) I shall rather
pass this first particular, and come to speak of the true effects of this
receiving Christ: and all flows from Christ, as our High Priest.

The first is reconciliation and peace with God: every man and woman that have
indeed received Christ in a way of believing, as they are justified; so they
have peace with God: this is a truth, the Lord help you to see it, Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ; And this peace Christ has made for us, by his blood, Col. 1.20. And
having made peace by the blood of his cross, etc. this is a sweet mercy, a
rich grace, for a poor sinful creature, to be reconciled to, and made one
with the God of Heaven: think upon it (beloved) is not this a ground of
consolation? now God has nothing against thee, to whom he has given faith in
his Son; although it is true, the Devil, he will have much against thee, the
world, that is the men of the world, will have much against thee, for thy
religion, as once those against Daniel 6.10, 11, 12. nay, thou may have much
against thy self; yet God has nothing against thee; he is at peace with thee,
Christ has made peace for thee: and secondly, thou have nothing now against
God: perhaps when thou wast in a natural condition, before faith came, the
mightiest have some hard thoughts of God, like the evil servant in the
Gospel, Luke 19.20, 21. thou thoughtest God to be a hard master: time was
perhaps, that thou thoughtest, do what thou could, yet thou should be
damned; but now thou see that God has given Christ to do all for thee to
bear all thy sins, to perform all righteousness, to make true and perfect
peace: thou can say, or at least may say it, God has given al faith, as
the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.14. He is my peace. O blessed word! what comfort may this
afford your souls? I speak to you believers, it is your portion: what ever men
may do unto thee, yet God is thy friend, he is at peace with thee; what ever
man or Devil has against thee, there is nothing in heaven against thee, a
high privilege for poor christians! that can look upon Christ as their peace.

The second spring that flows forth from hence is joy and consolation, peace is
a fruit of justification, joy a fruit of peace, and all flows from Christ our
High Priest the fountain, received by faith: here lies the ground of a
Christians joy; Peace with God, Romans 15.13. The God of hope fill you, with joy
and peace through believing: through believing of what? that our peace is made
with God, through Christ. This is the alone ground of joy, I mean in the first
place: it is true that when once a soul attains to this, he then shall have
cause to rejoice in every good thing of God, wherein God is honored, or the
Saints benefited, as Acts 15.3.

But this is the first fundamental ground of joy, Romans 5.11. And not only so,
but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus, by whom we have now received
the atonement, when once your souls come to receive the atonement, the peace,
that is, Christ who is our peace, then your souls will rejoice indeed, with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.

What do your souls say to this now? is your peace made with God? and cannot
ye rejoice? Is God become thy friend, thy true friend, thine everlasting
friend, and can ye not rejoce? Me thinks, your hearts should leap for joy.
What if thou have corruption stirring in thee? What if thou art persecuted for
the name and sake of Christ? yet rejoice. See Luke 6.22.23. Blessed are ye when
men shall hate you, and shall separate you from their company, and shall
reproach you, and cast out you, name as evil, for the Son of man's sake,
rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, and this the Apostle Paul does, 2 Cor.
12.9, 10. Most gladly therefore will I glory in mine infirmities, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me, therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake,
Me thinks your souls should rejoice in the Lord always, as Phil. 4.4. Rejoice
in the Lord always, and again, I say rejoice, that soul that has fled to the
Lord Jesus who is the alone hope set before us, may have strong consolation,
Heb. 6.18.

The third ground of consolation is, that the Saints are made Priests to the
Lord, and so can now through Christ have access with boldness to the throne
of grace: every believer is made a Priest in Christ, and note this by the way,
that those that dare attribute that name to themselves, by way of office, it is
no less then blasphemy against the Lord Jesus, but every believer is made a
spiritual Priest to the Lord, and so the Church. a holy Priesthood, to offer
up acceptable Sacrifice to God by Jesus Christ, not propitiatory sacrifice,
that belonged to Christ alone, but yet acceptable sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye
also as living stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to
offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Beloved, here
is your privilege, let it be your comfort, that now you are made a holy
priesthood unto God, you may come boldly to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16. Let
us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace, through that new and living
stay, which he has consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his
flesh. Beloved, is not this a mercy, that God should make way for sinners to
come unto his presence, and to have access unto him, Ephesians. 2.18. Chap. 3.12.
and that with confidence of acceptance: Now thou may go to thy Father, and
make all thy wants known unto him, and lay open all thy wrongs before him, as
those Act. 4. from the 24. to the 30 verse.

The fourth ground of consideration that flows from Christ thy High Priest, it
is that assurance of in joying everlasting peace, joy, and glory with himself
in another world, after the resurrection of the just, there shall be a fredome
from sin, and a freedom from sorrow: a time will come when there shall be a
deliverance from those miseries; that the best of the Saints are now incident
unto. Note, beloved you shall be freed from sin: O thou have a body of sin now,
and thou could be contented to part with any thing to be rid of sin why thou
shall be rid of it one day, and thy vile body shall be changed, and made like
the glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3.21. 1 John 3.2. Then thou shall be rid of
the Devil and wicked men, there shall be no Devil to torment thee, the
accuser of the Brethren shall be cast down there shall be no wicked men to
persecute thee; here will be a glorious deliverance for the Saints, when there
shall be no bad thing to them, no bad person amongst them: hence it is that
there shall be no more death, nor crying, nor sorrow, for the former things are
passed away, Rev. 21.4. and they shall not only be freed of those former
things, but they shall possess the same glory with Christ. Col. 3.4. When
Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in
glory, and Romans 8.17. If so be that we suffer together with him, that we may be
glorified together, and this glory is conferred on the Saints by Christ Jesus.
John. 17.24. Father, I will that they which thou have given me, may be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory. Note here, 1 They were given to
Christ to the end that he might redeem them and save them, John 6.39. And
secondly, those whom Christ has redeemed, he will not leave them till he
bring them into his presence, to behold, and to be made partakers of his glory.

THE EXALTATION OF CHRIST The alone PROPHET of SAINTS. CHAP. II.
I Come in the next place unto the Prophetical office of Christ, wherein he is
also in the days of the Gospel to be exalted. In the handling of which, I
shall first show you from the word of life, That he is the Prophet and teacher
of his people, and secondly, that he is to be exalted in the days of the
Gospel, as the alone teacher of his people.

First, that he is the Prophet and teacher of his people: now for the better
proceeding in the unfolding of this particular unto you, I shall go along
comparatively, holding forth the Prophetic office of Christ, by the Prophets
under the Law.

Now there were three things ordinary to the Prophets under the Law, viz.
Teaching, working miracles, and foretelling of things to come.

Now in all these three, Christ answers them, yea, and excels them all, for he
himself is the substance of all their prophesies, John 1.45.

1 It was the work of the Prophets to teach the people, so Moses a type of
Christ; both in respect of Law and worship, God taught Israel by him, so Esaias
1, throughout: Jer. 1.5, 6, 7, Chap. 2. and all the Prophets. In this Christ
has manifested himself wonderfully to be a Prophet: this part of Christ's
Prophetical office (to wit, as he is the teacher of his people) may be
considered under these three heads: First, as he was a teacher of his people,
before he came in the flesh. Secondly, When he was in the world Thirdly. Now he
is in heaven.

1 before he came in the flesh: Christ taught them by the Prophets, therefore
you have ever the Prophets in the Old Testament saying, The word of the Lord
came unto me, Jer. 1.4. Cap. 2.1. This Peter confirms, 2 Pet. 1.20.21. For the
prophecy came not in old time by thye will of man, but holy men of God, spoke
as they were inspired by the Holy Spirit: No Scripture is of private
interpretation, that is, men did not speak of their own private spirits, not
that private men (as they call them) may not interpret Scripture, there is no
such thing in the word, but the truth held forth to us in it, is, that holy men
that writ the Scripture, did not speak their own minds, their own fancies, but
spoke as they were inspired by the holy Spirit, and hence it is, that upon good
grounds, we receive the Old Testament for Scripture, because it is the Word of
God.

But 2, Christ performed his Prophetical Office when he was in the World, he
then taught personally Mat. 5.12. He teaches his Disciples in the Mount, he
teaches a very long Sermon, the longest Sermon we read of in all the Gospel, it
continues to the end of the seventh Chapter, Mat. 13.1, 2. you have Christ
teaching multitudes in a ship by the Sea shore, he continues his Sermon almost
throughout that Chapter, speaking to them in parables. In John, you have Christ
often teaching, in the third Chapter, teaching Nicodemus, in chap. 5, 6, 8, 9,
10. and almost in every Chapter, you have Christ teaching the Jews.

But beloved, in the third place, Christ is still a Prophet to his people now
he is in heaven, which is the principal thing I intend to speak unto. In the
handling of which I shall endeavor, First To prove from Scripture that Christ
is still the Prophet of his people. Secondly, By what rule he teaches his
people now he is in Heaven. Thirdly, The manner how he teaches. Fourthly, The
matter what he teaches.

1 That he is a Prophet still to his people, now he is in heaven, he never
fails teaching his people, he is still powerfully present with his people now
he is in heaven, Mat. 28.20. I will be with you to the end of the world, hence
it is that Christ says, John, 6.45. And they shall be all taught of God: and
Christ when he ascends promises to send the Holy Spirit, what to do? to teach
his people, Ioh, 14.26. But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance: and this is the new Covenant, the Covenant of
Grace, Heb. 8.10.11. I will give my Laws into their minds, and write them upon
their hearts, and they shall all know, me from the least to the greatest, for
they shall be all taught of the Lord, Esaias 54.13. so that you see Christ is
still teaching and leading his people as a Pophet in the way he would have them
to walk.

The second particular propounded was, by what rule Christ teaches his people
now he is in heaven, and that is by his Word: the word of God is the alone rule
by which Christ teaches his people, now he is in heaven, therefore he says,
John. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life,
and they are they that testify of me: and Esaias 8.20. To the Law, and to the
testimony: if any speak not, according to this rule it is, because there is no
morning in them.

Ob. But some may say, this was before Christ's ascension into heaven.

Ans. True, but the same rule holds still, see it confirmed after Christ's
ascension, Gal. Co 6. He that walks according to this rule, peace shall be
upon him, and upon the Israel of God. Mark it, he that walks according to
this rule, peace shall be upon him, etc. Note first The Word of God is the rule
of a Christians life, and secondly, they are to walk according to it, see 2
Pet. 1.18, 20. We have also a more sure word of prophecy, wherento you do
well, that yoe take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, etc. A
sure word of prophecy, that is the Scriptures, and note in ver. 20. he
confirms the Scriptures for that end, Know this, that no prophecy of the
Scripture is of any private interpretation, but holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Spirit: now the Scripture brings a sure word of truth.
It is that which ought to be the rule of the Saints in all their actions, and
believe it, Christ never teacheh contrary to this Scripture. If this be truth,
how may this reprove two sorts of people? First, those that cast off Scripture,
and refuse to walk according to it, under a pretense of being lead by the
Spirit, and so above Scripture, refusing to receive the Scripture, as the rule
by which Christ teaches, looking upon the Scripture as nothing to them.

It is a very sad thing, that men professing Godliness, should fall into such
absurdities, in receiving such principles as are destructive to the very power
and being of godliness, how can a man walk if he have no rule? how can a man
walk without his compass, his line: he knows not when he is in or when he is
out, so it must needs be with those that cast off Scripture, they cannot know
when they walk according to the mind of God, or when they do not.

Object. Christ has promised, to write his laws in the hearts of his people,
and that they shall be all taught of God, and that he would send his spirit,
which should teach them all things, Ergo, for those thus taught of God, it is
to legal for them, to walk by Scripture.

Answer. First, those that deny some Scripture, must by the same ground, deny
all: and if one Scripture be not a truth to me, and to be received in any
practice, how can I judge of the truth of another: and the truth is, that
those, that will believe, but on that Scripture which they have a mind to
believe (rejecting the rest) do not rightly believe any: there is the same
ground to believe all, as to the believe one, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.

2 I answer, If you do indeed believe these Scriptures to be a truth, I make
no question, but you will anon believe the truth of the whole Scripture, these
being opened in comparing them with other Scriptures.

First, Christ promising to find his spirit, etc. I answer, that it was a
particular promise made to the Apostles most principally; and in some measure,
to all the Saints. Two things here mentioned in this Scripture, are most
principally to the Apostles.

1 That is mentioned, is the first, He shall bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you: Note, the Disciples of Christ
were with him, saw his miracles, heard his word: but now when Christ is gone to
heaven, he will send his spirit, which shall bring all things that Christ spoke
or did, (necessary to be be remembered; for our information and consolation) to
their remembrance: that they might leave it upon record to future generations;
and this promise of the spirit properly belongs to the Disciples of Christ, who
were both eye, and ear witnesses of all he did or spakes: and this may
confirm us admirably in the truth of the Gospel, it was you see, written by
the immediate inspiration of that Spirit of promise, bringing it to the
remembrance of those that wrote it, and by no means serves to destroy the rest
of the Scriptures.

The second thing promised is, That it shall teach them all things: note, here
also an admirable word, Christ tells his Disciples, that that spirit, he would
send them, should teach them all things, that is, all things that God intended
to make known to man, for their rule and direction in this life: and this
without question, Christ who is truth it self, made good to his Disciples.
Therefore I hope this does not serve to destroy Scripture, but to confirm it
abundantly: for if Christ did (as without question, it is blasphemy to say he
did not) teach his Disciples all things, then are the rules prescribed by the
Apostles in their Epistles true, and perfect rules, and you, and I are bound in
duty, as we will approve our selves Christians, to submit unto them, to
receive them, as the holy, promised truths of God.

Object. But Christ makes this promise not only to the Disciples, but to all
the Saints also, for all Scriptures is written for our learning. etc.

Ans. True, but in the first place it is to the Disciples, that they might
leave us a perfect pattern from himself, and in this there is much comfort for
the Saints, that we have in the Scripture, truth and all truth, needful for a
Christian to know: and secondly, this promise is made good to all the Saints in
its measure, God gives them his spirit to understand the Scriptures, and
therefore it is, that the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, and for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be
perfect and thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Note, it is the Scriptures
that thoroughly furnishes or perfects the man of God, to every good work: and
we are said to be built upon the Apostles and Prophets, that is, the doctrine,
the truth, laid down by the Apostles and Prophets, Christ himself being the
chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20.

And for the second Scripture, that God has promised, to write his laws in the
hearts of his people, and they shall be all taught of God, etc. It is true, God
makes this promise good, he writes his law in the heart; where he once corres
in a way of grace: that is, he puts his spirit in them, makes them freely
willing to walk according to the rule of Scripture: for the spirit and the
word, do answer each other. If any man will say he has received the spirit of
Christ, and refuses to walk according to the rules of Christ, he is alyar, 1
John 2.4, 5, 6. and the truth is not in him.

It is true also, God teaches all his people, they are all taught of God: but
how? God does teach, and lead into all truth, by the rule of Scripture;
therefore Christ says in his prayer, 1 John 17.17. sanctify them through thy
truth, thy word is truth: see then what a sweet harmony is held forth in all
the Scriptures: the spirits teaching and leading; it is still according to the
Scriptures. The spirit of Christ, where it is, leads into truth, and that truth
is contained in Scripture. Now for any man to say, he has the spirit of
Christ, and yet cast away Scripture, or for every man to say, he has the
spirit of Christ, and yet cast away Scripture, I must give him leave to say it;
but he must give me leave not to believe him: and also to tell him, that it is
a diabolical lying spirit, that casts away Scripture, if any man speaks not
according to this rule, it is because there is no truth in him. Esaias 8.20.

A second sort of people that are here to be reproved, are those that pretend
to be all for the Scripture, and yet walk not up according to the rules of
Scripture: without question, those whom Christ teaches, he teaches to walk
according to the rules that he prescribes them.

Of these there are two sorts, 1 those that do not rightly divide between Law
and Gospel, between Legal rules, and Gospel rules. 2 those that instead of
following the rules of Christ follow the rules and inventions of men; that wait
for what men will prescribe, resolving to make that their rule.

First, those that do not rightly divide between Law and Gospel. And of these
there are both Ministers and people, not rightly dividing the word of truth, as
the Apostle exhorts Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.15. And this is ignorance which remayns
to this day, upon the hearts of many, whom I question not for their godliness,
and honesty; yet God has not taught them to this day, that clear difference
between Law and Gospel: and the ignorance of these men consists principally
under these five heads. 1 In not understanding the difference between Gospel
Churches and the Church of the Jews. 2 Gospel Ordinances and the Ordinances of
the Jews. 3 Gospel privileges and the privileges of the Jews. 4 the
difference between Gospel Ministers and the Ministers of the Law. 5 The
difference between the Gospel, and the Legal Covenant.

1 The Church of the Jews, before, and the Church of Christ under the Gospel:
some say, the Church of the Jews was a type of the Church of the Gospel, both
Jew and Gentile: and hence do draw this conclusion, That as the Church of the
Jews was National, so the Churches of the Gentiles under the Gospel must be
National: and that it is the duty of the civil Magistrate, to compel all in
the Nation to the Christian Religion: now here lies the mistake; 1 It is true,
the Church of the Jews was typical, the body of the Jews being the natural
seed of Abraham, and so all that was of Abraham's posterity, were born members
of the Church: the Church of Christ under the Gospel, are the spiritual seed,
the seed according to the promise, Romans 2.29. He is a Jew which is one
inwardly, Cap. 4.16. none are to be looked upon as the sons of Abraham by
natural generation, as they are borne of the bodies of believers under the
Gospel: see a clear Scripture. Gal. 3.26.29. Ye are all the children of God
by faith in Christ Jesus, and if ye be Christ's; then are ye Abraham's seed,
and heirs according to the promise. Observe it, you must first be Christ's,
before you are Abraham's seed, not Abraham's seed as soon as you are borne, it
is by faith that ye are manifested to be Christ's, and being thus manifested by
faith, then they are Abraham's seed according to the promise: Abraham's promised
seed are only believees, such as are indeed Christ's. It is true, some may
profess faith in hypocrisy, of whom we having no ground to the contrary, are
bound to receive, but none are indeed Abraham's seed, but they that are Christ's.

2 The kingly power of Christ put in Israel after the slesh, was a Type of the
kingly power of Christ, ruling in and over his spiritual Israel: their
compelling or enslaving those that would not submit to that government, holding
forth that power Christ has left in his Churches, spiritually to slay those
that walk inordinately in any Church of Christ, according to that Scripture,
Luke 19.27. As for those mine enemies that would not that I should reign over
them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. It is true, this shall
perfectly be fulfilled at Christ's second coming, but in its measure it is, or
ought to be fulfilled of every true Church of Christ, according to Act. 3.23.
Whosoever will not he are, that is, submit, to the Prophet, shall be cut off
from amongst the people, that is, cut off by excommunication; as a dead and
withered branch: this is the first ground of mistake between Church and Church.

The second is between Ordinance and Ordinance? they judge baptism to be one
with that of circumcision, and therefore is to be administered upon infants, as
well as circumcision, and this is the ground of much confusion at this very day.

Now for the clearing of this argument, I shall lay down these grounds.

1 That the Scripture no where says it, that baptism is one with
Circumcision, therefore it may be a delusion: nay, to say what the Scripture
says not, is but a mere fancy, and invention of man: Now there is but one
Scripture that is mentioned for this purpose by those that stand most strongly
in this opinion, and that is, Col. 2.11, 12. mentioning circumcision, that, to
wit, that circumcision made with hands in ver. 11. says ver. 12. being buried
with him in baptism; here, say they, the Apostle says, baptism is come in
the room of circumcision: judge your selves, whether there be ever such a word
in the Text, whether it be not a mere forged and forced interpretation: but
say they, the Apostle is here persuading the Collosians from Circumcision, and
therefore mentions Baptism, as come in the room of it. I answer, this is also
forged, for the Apostle does not in any measure tax the Collossians with this
error of holding circumcision, throughout his Epistle, only in the 11. ver.
he says, They are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands:
holding forth unto them, what they have in Christ, namely, righteousness
through the circumcision, that is, the righteousness of Christ, for Christ
being circumcised, performed all the righteousness that circumcision required.
This is the first ground. The Scripture no where says that baptism is one
with circumcision.

2 The ground why baptism is not one with circumcision, is, because the rule
for baptism under the new Testament, is not one with the rule for circumcision
under the Law: the rule for circumcision was, that every male child of the
natural seed of Abraham, was to be circumcised the eighth day, the rule for
baptism under the Gospel, is, that whosoever believes, man or woman. Jew or
Gentile, shall be baptized, Mark, 16.17. with Mat. 28.19. Act, 8.12. Both men
and women, hearing and believing, were baptized, so that the command for
circumcision and baptism, do in no case agree, the one is for males only,
the other for believers, both men and women.

3 Circumcision has its authority in other things, as namely, 1 In the
circumcision of the heart, the cutting off of sin, lust and corruption, it is
called in the forementioned Scripture, the circumcision made without hands,
Col. 2.11. see also, Romans 2.29. Circumcision is that of the heart, in the
spirit, and not in the letter, this was the type of circumcision. And 2 it
typed forth Christ his fulfilling the righteousness of the Law, to which
circumcision had a relation Romans 2.25. and so of the Christians freedom by
Christ, Col. 2.11. we are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands
in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of
Christ. Note, it is by the circumcision of Christ, that is, by that
righteousness: Christ being circumcised, and so bound over to fulfill the Law,
has performed for us (namely) who believe.

4 Baptism has no where those titles given unto it which circumcision has,
as namely, a Covenant, Genesis 17.10. A seal to Abraham, Romans 4.11. baptism is
no where called a seal, neither do I read of any seal to the believer, but
the Spirit of God, although it is true, this of baptism has (though for all
that I know) groundlesly been called a seal: Yet it is true, the spirit of God
in it, may convey comfort to the souls of the Saints, as in other Ordinances.

5 Baptism and circumcision differ in the thing it self, the one being the
cutting off the foreskin of the flesh, only of the males, the other the
dipping in or under water, of believers, men or women, In the name of the
Father, Son; and Holy Ghost.

6 They differ in the ends, the end of circumcision was, 1 To confirm to
Abraham's and to his posterity, that Christ should come of that seed, therefore
it was annexed unto that promise, Genesis 17. No such thing in baptism, that
holds forth Christ coming, Washing away the sins of believers in his blood,
Acts 22.16.

2 To type forth Christ, who being circumcised, was to perform perfect
obedience for all his elect, and so bring in everlasting Spiritual
circumcision, that is Righteousness: out baptism holds forth a conformity in
the believer, to this Chrise in his suffering, in his death and but all. Romans
6.4, 5, 6.

7 Circumcision was no type of baptism because baptism is but a type it
self: Now for one type to type forth another, I conceive is very absurd, for
Christ was the substance of all types, and therefore of this.

8 Lastly, Circumcision was no type of baptism, for they were both on foot
many year together, all the time Christ preached in the world: baptism was the
substance of circumcision, then when the substance is once, should the type
have been abolished.

Object. But if it be objected that baptism came in the room of circumcision,
because that circumcision was the means by which the Jews were admitted into
the Church, and so is baptism to us.

I Answer, I suppose baptism is not come in the room of it, proved, first it
is true, Baptism is that which gives visible admittance after the
manifestation of faith into the Church of Christ, Act. 2.41. As many as gladly
received the Word, were baptized and added, but circumcision did not admit the
Jews into the Church, for they were borne members of that Church, and
circumcised because members: note this, if circumcision gave admittance to the
Jews into the Church estate, then they were no members before they were
circumcised, and then the Jews when they came over Jordan, into the land of
Canaan, were no Church of God, for there was none circumcised but Joshua and
Caleb, as you may see, Ios. 5.2. where circumcision is renewed: but it was an
Ordinance God required of the children of Israel merely ceremonial and
typical, as all the rest of the Jews ordinances were: thus you see, what a
great mistake here lies in the not rightly dividing between Ordinance and
Ordinance.

A third ground of men's ignorance is, in not understanding the difference
between the Jews privileges, and the privileges of the Gospel: hence it is
that men are ready to argue for Gospel privileges: O say they, it was the Jews
privilege, that their children should be circumcised, and is the Gospel
straiter? have not Christians more privilege under the Gospel, then the Jews
under the Law? is there not more liberty, grace and glory under the Gospel then
under the Law? Why then should not the infants of believers be baptized, as
well as Abraham's natural seed circumcised?

Ans. It is true, there is indeed, more liberty, grace and glory under the
Gospel then under the Law: but we are to understand what the Christians
privilege is: The Jews Privileges would be a christians bondege: this you say
was the Jews privilege, that their children were to be circumcised: it was
such a privilege, as binds them over to the whole Law, Rev. 2.25. Gal. 5.3.
but perhaps you will say, What advantage then had the Jews, land what profit is
there in circumcision? Romans 3.1. that is, what benefit then had the Jews by
circumcisions? see verse the second, much every way, chiefly because that unto
them were committed the Oracles of God, the Oracles, that is, the Ordinances of
God was amongst them, namely, circumcision and worships, etc. wherein Christ
was typed forth to those which had faith, the world being without those
Ordinances wherein Christ was thus prefigued.

Quest. But what are our privileges under the Gospel?

Ans. We have the substance, they had but the shadow: we have Christ indeed, as
a Church of Christ: they had but the Type, we have the righteousness typed
forth to them in circumcision: they had the Oracles of God amongst them, these
were privileges unto them, yet indeed were held under much bondage by those
Oracles, the Law ever ready to condemn them: our privilege is, that Christ
has set us at liberty from these privileges. which would be to us indeed
yoaks of bonlage, Gal. 5.1. And he has made the Law, A Law of liberty to the
Saints, that they may rejoice in that Law, from which they are set it liberty
by Christ.

In a word, there is never a privilege that can be mentioned that the Jew
enjoyes, but would be a Christians bondage.

The Christians privileges under the Gospel, they are all spiritual, and so
are their Ordinances, Phil. 3.3. We are the circumcision that worship God in
the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, having no confidence in the flesh. So
that (in a word) the Christians privilege is, that they have received Christ
the sum of all the Jews privileges, ceremonies and sacrifices, all is in
Christ, which the Christian only by faith enjoyes.

Tell me, what privilege it is for a poor infant to have a little water
sprinkled upon him? will it confer grace, or will it not? will it regenerate,
as you have been taught? O Ignorance! the Lord cause it to vanish: can the
Infant, if elected, make any use of this orodinance, or receive any thing held
forth in it, to the eye faith? nay, he cannot: faith is required in those that
participate of Gospel ordinances; and indeed, men and women, or to be
baptized, because they are regenerate not to regenerate them.

God owned the Jews under a covenant of works, and so indeed (for the most part
of them) they were but a carnal people: and they had carnal, typical
ordinances, and a worldly sanctuary, Heb. 9.1, 2. but God owning his church
under the Gospel, in a covenant of grace, Acts 20.28. Heb. 8.10, 11. has
given us more spiritual ordinances, and these ordinances, are always presented
to the eye of faith, in those that receive it: our privilege is that we are
freed from the covenant of works and bondage, under which the Jews were held,
Gal. 5.1, 2, 3. verse. 13. and so being free from that covenant, Heb. 8.7, 8.
are freed also from those carnal, and legal ordinances, from all fleshly and
carnal privileges, in the spiritual enjoyment of the substance of all,
Christ Jesus, who is our light and life; our All in all.

A fourth ground of men's coming short, and not walking up according to the
rules of Scripture; is, in not understanding the difference between Priest and
Priest: and this may be taken notice of under a twofold consideration.

First, in not understanding the difference between the Jewish High Priest the
type, and Christ our High Priest the substance, who has in deed made present
peace and reconciliation for all his people. Hence it is, that many agracious
soul, comes short of that peace, of that consolation, which otherwise they
might enjoy, and not eying Christ their Priest and Sacrifice, they themselves
are ever sacrificing for peace, and yet no longer then they are offering
sacrifice, can they have peace; and so they come short of walking up with God
according to the Gospel, being filled with joy and peace through believing.

The second is, in expecting that from those, who (indeed falsely) have
appropriated that title of Priest to themselves: which they are to expect from
Christ, as namely, Teaching. O how have those men been, and still are to this
day, set up as Christ, amongst many people, making their words their rule? as
if it were not possible such learned men might err; and I conceive it arises
partly from the misunderderstanding of that Scripture, Mal. 2.7. The Priests
lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth, for
he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. Now this usually is applied to the
Ministers, who have given themselves the title of Priests, and that the people
should seek the law at their mouths: and indeed, they themselves have done,
what in them lies, not only to bring people into this error, this ignorance,
but to keep them in it; whereas Christ is indeed the alone Priest, the
substance of the lews type; And the people are to seek the Law at his mouth,
for he is the messenger of the Lord of hoasts, he is called the messenger of
the covenant, Mal. 3.1. the alone Prophet and Teacher of his people.

Object. But Christ has appointed Ministers to teach his people: are not the
people to seek the Law at their mouths?

Answ. 1. Not by virtue of that Scripture, for Christ is the alone Priest, and
there is none in that office beside him: though it is true all the Saints are
Priests, and the Church a holy Priesthood.

2 We are to receive nothing from any man as truth but what he brings from
Christ; and therefore our duty is to try all things, and hold fast that which
is good. We are men subject to error, and it is our duty, to try the truth of
what is delivered, and not receive any thing because, another says it; but see
whether the Lord has said it: therefore the Apostle says, Gal. 1.8. If I, or
an Angel from Heaven, teach you any other dectrine, then that you have
received, hold him accused: And the Noble Bereans were commended for searching
the Scriptures, to try, if those things preached were truth, Acts 17.11. If the
Bereuns try the truth of Paul's doctrine, by the Scriptures, who spoke by divine
inspiration from Christ, much more should you search and try the truth of
things delivered; and not build your faith upon any others word, but the word
of Christ, your High Priest, who keeps knowledge for you, and has promised
to teach you, Esaias 54.13.

The fifth and last ground of men's (I mean still those that have some
knowledge of God) coming short of answering the rules of the Gospel, is their
ignorance, in not understanding the difference between covenant and covenant.

God owned the lews as they were a body, a Church, under a covenant of works,
but the church of the Gospel under a covenant of grace: It is true, the
covenant God made with Abraham Genesis 17. from the first verse no the fifth, is a
covenant of grace, and by virtue of that covenant he promised to be 2 God to
Abraham's natural seed, but he never owned Abraham's natural seed in a covenant
of grace, if so, then they must all of them have been saved, for the covenant
of grace is sure to those that were under it, see Esaias 55.3. it is called An
everlasting covenant, even the sure mercies of David, Ier. 32.40. I will make
an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do
them good, but will put my fear in them, and they shall not depart from me.
But God never made such a covenant with Abraham's natural seed, nay the truth
is, that God never intended such a thing, neither to Abraham nor any man in the
world, to make a covenant of grace with their natural seed, for God himself
says of the Jews, the seed of Abraham, Though the number of the children of
Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet but a remnant of them shall be saved,
Esaias 10.22, 23. with Romans 9.27. now the covenant under which God owns his
church, under the Gospel, is an everlasting covenant, Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. when
God promises this covenant in Ier. 31.3, 32. Behold, that day is come (says
the Lord) That I well make a new covenant, not according to the covenant I made
with their fathers, when I took them by the hand, to bring them forth out of
the land of Egypt, which covenant they brake, etc. This covenant of works it
was under which God owns the children of Israel as a church, to which
circumcision has a relation, therefore called a covenant, Genesis 17.10. binding
to to this covenant, the Law, Gal. 5.3. Romans 2.25.

Now there are two evils that usually flow from this misunderstanding of the,
covenant.

The first is this, (that seeing the covenants are one and the same, under
which God owned the church of the Jews under the Law, and now owns the church
(...) Gentiles under the Gospel, (which (...) is not so) the conclusion is
drawn, that we must lay the foundation of Gospel churches, and Gospel
Ordinances in the Law, and hence it is, that men are so hardly drawn off from
their legal principles, we must have national Churches, we must have infants
baptized, the ground arises from the Law, because the Jews were a nation all
church, and their males were baptized. O gross legality! Is not this to deny
Christ to be come in the flesh, 1 John 4.3. Truly if it be not, I confess I am
yet ignorant of what God intends in that Scripture. O how hard it is, to bring
learned wise men to lay the foundation of their practice in the Gospel? It is
almost impossible, nay, I had almost said altogether impossible, if God do not
mightily work to persuade them, that Christ Jesus as a Son over his own house,
is faithful in all things, giving exact rules in every particular, for the
well ordering and governing of his house, that is, the Church, 1 Timothy 3.15. and
for the administration of every ordinance: although Moses himself has said.
Deuteronomy. 18.15. A Prophet shall the Lord thy God raise up unto thee of thy
brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear, If the Lord (...) you once to see
that ye are not under the Law but under grace, Romans 6.14. Then you will be
contented to receive your rules from the hands of grace, the Lord Jesus Christ.

A second evil, that flows from hence is this, many a poor soul (for want of
a clear apprehending of the difference between the covena^n, the one of works
the other of grace) are held under much slavish fear and legal bondage; the
poor creature looks upon the law, the covenant from Mount Sinay, ( Exodus 19.
and 20. chapters.) Where is nothing, but fear and dread: and hence it is, that
no longer then the creature can work, can it have comfort; and the reason is,
because it has been ever set upon working out salvation, not remembering that
blessed word of truth, Heb. 12.18. to 23. For ye are not come to the mount that
might not be touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto blackness and
darkness and tempest, etc. ver. 23. but unto mount Sion, etc. Believers are
not come to mount Sinay, to burnings, blackness, and darkness, they are not
called to a covenant wherein is the administration of condemnation; that is
done away to believers, 2 Cor. 3.7, 11. But they are come in deed to mount
Sion, to the city of the living God, to the covenant of Grace, where is mercy
and pardon in its administration, Heb. 8.12. To the blood of sprinkling which
speaks better things then that of Abel, where is nothing but cause of joy and
gladness: joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. All which many a
poor soul is deprived of, for want of a right understanding, between the
covenants of Law and Gospel.

Thus have I plainly (though very briefly) endeavored to lay open the grounds,
or true causes why, many men and women, though otherwise godly; yet come short
of walking up with God according to Scripture rules: I must leave it to the
great Prophet Christ to reach your souls.

The second sort of people, that comes here, to be reproved, are those that
pretend to be for Scripture, yet indeed, do make the prescriptions of men
their rule: that resolve, what ever the Magistrate requires or commands, they
will do: a very sad thing! and as much to be lamented, that ever men that would
be counted Christians, should set up man in the room of God, see what a
dreadful curse is pronounced upon such, Jer. 17.5, 6. Thus says the Lord
(note, it is the word of God) cursed be the man that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm, whose heart departs from the Lord: What is the curse?
ver. 7. He shall be like the hearth in the desert, he shall not see good when
it comes, he shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness.

Note, The curse consists in two particulars.

1 He shall be barren like the hearth in the deserts: dry, empty, poor,
nothing of God in him, O this is it that is the cause men grow so barren, dry,
empty, because they rest upon man, they durst not entertain thoughts of going
farther then they conceive the Magistrate intends, ministers admire, why so
many gracious people leave them, they see they are grown barren through their
dependencie upon men, the curse of God is come upon them, they are like the
barren hearth in the wilderness. Professors wonder why they are left of their
companions many of them, why they are barren, empty, they cannot profit by
them, and all because they trust upon men, they dare not entertain thoughts of
submitting to Scripture farther then the Magistrate goes along with them, and
therefore it is that they leave them.

A second curse is, They shall not see when good comes, this is the reason
why so many, choice learned men see not that good which is coming that truth,
that grace, that glory, that God lets shine through the Gospel) into the souls
of many of his people, but they oppose it and persecute it, the curse of God
being upon them, blinding them because they trust upon man, and make flesh
their arm, and their strong confidence, and had rather deny truth, then suffer
affliction with the people of God: but blessed is the man that trusts in the
Lord, and whose hope is the Lord, ver. 7. He shall be fruitful as a tree
planted by the rivers of water, etc. O take heed of receiving, or (at least) of
resolving to receive rules from man in matter of worship, without an exact
trial of it by the word of God. If ever men should again, as I trust it shall
not be, but I say, if it should be so, that men should as those Mat. 15.9,
teach for doctrines the traditions of men, yet that you would not receive those
traditions for your Scripture, for in so doing you can do no less then incur
that curse of being made like unto a barren hearth in the wilderness, etc.

The third thing propounded concerning Christ as he is a Prophet, is the manner
how he teaches his people now he is in heaven, and that is, 1 Ministerially, 2
Spiritually, 3 Powerfully.

1 Ministerially, by his Ministers, yet ever according to the rule, viz, the
Scriptures thus Christ when he ascended to heaven, sent forth his Disciples,
Mat. 28.19, 20. and promised to be with them to the end of the world, and you
shall ever find Christ teaching by this means, Act. 2. Peter preaches, the
Jews are converted, Chap. 5. and so the 8.12, Philip preaches the things
concerning Jesus, and they believed, and in the churches Christ, has appointed
Ministers with their gifts, sed Ephesians. 4.11. and all for the edifying of the
body of Christ, so that this is the first means by which he teaches, Romans
10.14, 17. How then shall they call on him on whom they have believed? How
shall they believe on him, of whom they have not heard? How shall they learn
without a Preacher? ver. 17. Faith comes by hearing, etc. 1 Cor. 5.19, He
has put in us the word of reconciliation.

2 Christ teaches Spiritually, The Word and the Spirit go both together: the
word is but a dead letter in it self, farther then the Spirit goes along with
it, therefore Joh. 6.36. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits
nothing, the words that I speak are Spirit and life, but if the spirit goes
with the word, then the word proves Spirit and life: the Spirit works freely
in the preaching of the Gospel, the word is but an instrument in the hand of
the Spirit, by which it works, see John 3.8. The wind blows where it
lists, so is every one that is borne of the Spirit: so it is the Spirit that
works in the word, and by the word.

3 He teaches powerfully, where Christ comes he teaches powerfully, therefore
the Gospel is called, The power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16. For I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, it is the power, of God to salvation, to every
one that believes, 1 These. 1.3. For our Gospel came not to you in word only,
but in power and in much, assurance, etc. So that the Gospel, it is the power
of God you see: that it is that, wherein Christ manifests his power in teaching
poor ignorant, unknowing creatures, therefore it is said, Mat. 7.29. that He
taught them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, that is, his Word
had a commanding power and authority over their spirits: beloved, if Christ
once comes to teach your spirits, he will come with power, with authority, he
will make a separation between thy soul and thy sins, he will pluck thee off
from thy base lusts and cursed practices, as once he did Saul, Christ came with
power and great authority upon him, and took him off from his persecution, and
makes him a preacher of that truth which before he persecuted, and so will
Christ deal with thy soul, whoever thou art that cleavest as close to thy
sins, as thy skin to thy flesh, he will fetch thee off from it, if thou belong
unto him.

The fourth particular propounded, was the matter, which Christ our Prophet
teaches.

First, he teaches man to know himself, for it is life eternal to know God
and Jesus Christ, John 17.3. and therefore you shall ever find men (in
Scripture) appointed by Christ for the work of the ministry, to preach the
Gospel, (that is) a crucified Christ, Peter, Act. 2.36, 37. preaches Christ
crucified, brings them to know that it wa Christ indeed whom they had
crucified: so Philip, Act. 8.12. preaches the truth that concern the Kingdom
of God, and the name of Jesus: So Paul, 1 Cor. 15.3. preached that Christ dyed
for sin according to the Scripture: this is the first thing to be preached,
Christ and glad tidings by him: and therefore surely this is the first thing,
that Christ effectually teaches where he comes.

Object. Must men be taught the knowedge of Christ before they know their own
misery, by reason of sin? surely no man will accept of Christ unless they see
a need of him.

Ans. It is the sight and knowledge of Christ, that brings men truly to see,
and know themselves. Saul Acts 9. thought himself a very holy and happy man,
till he met Christ on the way: and note, Christ teaches him in the first place
the knowledge of himself; Who art the Lord (says Saul) I am Jesus of Nacaroth
(says Christ) whom thou persecutest. Christ did not tell him of his sin; O
thou (...) accursed, persecuting creature, do ask whole am? thou had more
need know thy self, etc. No, no, he discovers himself unto him; and this I
am sure was Gods usual dealing in the Gospel: those whom he taught, he taught
them first to know Christ: and this, Christ our Prophet, must teach thee, if
ever thou be taught: it is not man's wisdom that will help thee to the knowledge
of Christ: See 1 Cor. 1.21. For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by
wisdom knew not God; all the wisdom in the world, cannot teach thee, to know
God, it may spoil thee, and undo thee, but not help thee, Col. 2.8. Beware
lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, that is, through the wisdom of man:
man's wisdom may; nay will (if God prevent it not) spoil you for ever: for
there is no greater enemy in the world in it self (man's corrupt nature so
working with it) to hinder man in the true knowledge of Christ, then man's
carnal wisdom, and learning: see Romans 8.6. For the * wisdom of the flesh is
death, so the word in the Grecke is, * (...) see 1 Cor. 1.20. Where is the
wise? where is the Scribe? etc. Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world? O take heed of resting upon humane wisdom, arts and sciences, they are
dangerous things, if the Lord prevent it not, for a malicious devil, and a
deceitful heart, to deceive you withal.

Secondly, Christ teaches these whom he teaches, to know themselves, and
that as I have said, by a reflecting back upon themselves, from beholding of
Christ. They come now to see themselves cursed, lost creatnres, and believe it,
every one whom Christ effectually teaches, he teaches them to know
themselves, to be poor, lost and undonecreatures in themselves. Thus Christ
brings those, Acts 2.37. from beholding of Christ, to behold themselves; and
make them cry out, Men and brethren, what shall we do? etc. and so Saul, Acts
9.5, 6. after he had seen Jesus; I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, etc. and
then he sees himself a poor creature, and comes trembling, and astonished,
and said, Lord, what would thou have me do? So if our Christ come, he will
make you see your selves sinners, with a witness: and this thou can never do
savingly, unless Christ teach thee: Saul could persecute and think he did
well, till Christ meets him, and shows him his sin, but he could never see
himself a persecutor, till Christ taught him, Saul perfecutes, but he
confesses, he did it ignorantly, through unbelief, 1 Timothy 1.13. So there are
many that out of zeal, are persecutors of Christ in his Saints; but they do it
ignorantly, they are persuaded, that it is their duty, and that they do God
service in it, as Christ himself) foretells, John 16.2. (but I dare say as
Saul said of himself) it is through ignorance, out of zeal; thinking they do
God good service, that it is their duty so to do. Did they know, that in so
doing, they persecute Christ, who indeed takes every wrong done to his, as to
himself, I dare say, they would not do it: but it is the power of Christ that
must come upon their spirits, before they can see it: O men can hardly believe
it; tell such a man that persecutes and imprisons the Saints, (as did Saul)
that they persecute Christ, they will not believe it; they will be ready to
say, as Hazael, 2 Kings 8.13. when the Prophet Elisha tells him, what great
wickedness he should commit, verse. 12 What am I a dog? that I should do this
great thing? so many men who are bitter enemies to the Saints, ready to do any
mischief unto them, yet cannot be perfwaded, that they are the men, that
persecute Christ; What I such a dog, to persecute Christ? God forbid, yet can,
and will persecute the Saints. Beloved, consider of it; Christ takes any wrong
done to them, as done to himself, Acts 9.4. Why persecutest thou Me?

3 Where Christ comes in power, he teaches men to believe: this he taught when
he was upon the earth, John 6.29. This is the work of God that they believe on
him whom he has sent: and verse 47. Verily, verily, he that believes on me,
has everlasting life, Chap. 3.18 He that believes on him, is not condemned,
and verse 36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life, etc. And
this was it he gave in commission to his Disciples to preach, Mar. 16.16, 17.
To preach the Gospel to every creature; he that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved, and this Paul preached, Acts 16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and you shall be saved etc. and this Christ does not only teach to the care,
but to the heart also where he comes in power: this he taught his Disciples,
Mat. 16.16. and John 6.69. We believe and are sure, that thou art Christ, the
Son of the living God. And this he taught all that ever came to him
effectually, Acts 2.41. All that gladly received the word, that is the truth
held forth in the word, the glad tidings of life by Christ preached in the
Gospel, and this is the work of Christ, Heb. 12.2. the gift of Christ, Ephesians.
2.8.

Quest. What is that Gospel faith Christ teaches to his people?

Ans. It is a believing of that record God has given concerning his Son, with
a depending upon him for Justification and Life.

1 It is a believing of the report God has given concerning his Son: that is,
that he is the Son of God, Mat. 3.17. the son of man, God and man, Romans 1.3, 4.
Col. 2.9. That he is a mighty God, the everlasting Father, the prince of peace,
Esaias 9.6. That he came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. To save
them from their sins, Mat. 1.23. and from all their enemies, Luke 1.71. This is
the record God has in Scripture given, concerning his Son, and faith is
required to believe it, John 5.10. He that believes on the Son of God has the
witness in himself, he that believes not God, has made him a liar, because
he believed not the record God gave of his Son, that is, to believe that he is
the Christ the Auointed sent of God, and fitted for the work to save sinners,
ver. 1. with ver. 11. This is the record that God has given to us eternal
life, and this life is in his Son.

2 Faith is a dependancie upon this Christ for life, flowing from a sensible
apprehending of all that fullness that is in him, John 6.68. When many
Disciples went from Christ, Jesus said to the twelve, Will ye also go away?
Simon Peter answered and said, Lord, to to whom shall we go? thou have the
words of eternal life: we believe, and are sure, that thou art the Christ, the
Son of the living God, mark here is the Apostles faith, We believe thou art
the Christ, thou have the words of eternal life, therefore, whether shall we
go but to thee? If all forsake thee yet we cannot, whether shall we go? Here
is faith, when a soul believes indeed Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of the
living God, and there leaves it self, sees no way or means else in the world
of help, but sticks close to the Lord Jesus in a way of dependancie: and this
none can do, but by the power of God, see Mat. 16.17. Jesus answered and said
unto him, blessed art thou Simon, flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in heaven, and none can call Jesus the Lord but by
the Holy Spirit, etc. 1 Cor. 12.3.

Now the fruit of this faith is Obedience, where ever Christ works this faith,
it produces obedience, Romans 1.5. By whem we have received Grace and
Apostleship, to the obedience of faith, so is the word in the Greek. Faith is
a working grace, it is not idle where it is, it works by love, Gal. 5.6.
Circumcision avails not, nor uncircumcision but faith which works by love,
Christ is ever teaching a believer, and he receives this teaching, by faith
which works by love, and constrains the soul in whom it is, to submit unto
the teachings of Christ, which still is according to Scripture, as you have
heard.

Quest. What does Christ teach a believer after he has given him faith?

Ans. Christ teaches many things to his Disciples which they receive by faith,
and they may be called (in some sort) the fruits of faith, because by faith we
receive them, and submit unto them, but they are indeed the fruits of the
spirit, which Christ our Prophet gives to his people, Gal. 5.27. but I shall
confine my self in the discovery of the teachings of Christ to the Saints
under three heads: The first is Self denial, 2 Universal obedience, 3 To
live by faith.

The first is, self-denial, and this Christ teaches in the first place where
he comes, (I mean) to a believer, for self-denial is a fruit of faith: how can
a man deny himself till he sees something out of himself worthy thy of his
love? See Christ teaching this lesson Luke 9.23. If any man will be my
Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up the cross and follow me. Christ
teaches his Disciples to deny whatsoever is of flesh, in the creature: Now
there are ten things in self, which Christ teaches his in some measure to
deny, and to lay all down at his feet.

There is, 1 Self sinful. 2 Self righteous. 3 Self wisdom. 4 Self
glorying, and boasting. 5 Self profit. 6 Self pleasure. 7 Self love. 8 Self
will. 9 Self strength and Self sufficiency. 10 Self ends.

First, Self sinful, or sinful self: now it is true, that it is in it self
all very sinful: whatsoever is of self, is sinful. But for the more clear
opening of this grace of self-deny-all, I branch it forth under these heads,
the first is Sinful self, where Christ is, he teaches men thus to deny
themselves: they cannot sin willingly, see 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of
God, does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
that is, he cannot sin with a mind to sin: he denies his sin, he loves not his
sin, therefore he is able to say, It is no more I, that do it, but sin that
dwells in me, as the Apostle, Romans 7.17. and therefore he is ever at enmity
with his sin, and lusts; the grace of God teaching him to deny them: Titus
2.11, 12. For the grace of God that brings salvation to all men, has
appeared, teaching us, that denying ungodlines, and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present world. The grace of
God manifested in the Gospel, teaches men that rightly receive it, to deny
themselves, to deny all ungodlines, and worldly lusts: believe it, this is the
grace of the Gospel, it is not as some pretend, a Gospel of liberty, to sin,
but such grace as teaches men to deny sin, who-ever he be that takes liberty
in sin, under a pretense of grace, certainly, it is not that grace that brings
salvation, that teaches men to deny ungodliness and sinful lusts, that
teaches them to live soberly in respect of themselves, righteously toward
men, and godlily toward God.

This is the effect of the grace of the Gospels Saul a persecutor, shall be so
no more, Zacheus an oppressor shall be so no more: it makes a separation
between a man and his lusts, and between man and his sinful courses, as Job.
40.4, 5. Behold I am vile, and what shall I answer the? I will lay my hands
upon my mouth, once have I spoken, but I will not answer, yea twice, but I will
proceed no farther. So when once the grace of the Gospel comes, then it makes a
man lay down all sin and lust, whatever it be, as Saul, Acts 9.4, 5. once have
I spoken, but I will proceed no farther, perhaps once I have been a persecutor;
yea twice, but I will proceed no further: once I have been light, vain,
prodigal, walked unbeseeming the Gospel of Christ, yea twice, but I will
proceed no further: this grace teaches men to deny ungodliness.

2 There is righteous self, that is in self apprehension, though it is true,
none can do good, and the best actions out of Christ are but filthiness, yet
such a disposition there is in nature, that is ever apt to have high thoughts
of it selie, they that know any thing know it.

But when Christ comes, he teaches men to deny it, to cast off all their own
righteousness as filthiness: see Paul, who was (indeed) full of self
righteousness before his conversion (as himself confesses) Phil. 3.5, 6. He
was circumeised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the Tribe of
Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, and touching the Law a Pharisie, concerning
zeal persecuting the Church, touching the righteousness which is in the Law
blameless, here was a righteous soul, who would think now this man should
have any need of a Christ? but follow him a little, and see the change, all
this must be denied, cast off and rejected, as a thing of naught, as filthy
polluted things, see ver. 7, 8, 9. But what things were gain to me, those I
counted loss for Christ, that is, those things that I once esteemed gain, all
that confidence that I had in the flesh, I see they were all nothing, I was
content to lose them all for Christ, Yea doubtless, and I account all things
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for
whom I have suffered the loss of all things (that is, all that was mine own)
and do count them dung that I may win Christ. Beloved, here is selfe-denyall
in a wonderful measure, to account all your own righteousness but as dung or
filthiness, that you may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness which is of the Law (the Apostle exclaims that, casts it away)
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by faith: here is a denying of righteous self, a rejecting of all his own
righteousness as nothing nay, as very filthiness, and believe it, where
Christ comes in some measure, he teaches this lesson. I confess, this is a
very hard lesson, flesh and blood cannot attain it: herein lies the great
mystery of the Gospel, which appears to flesh and blood to be the greatest
folly: for a man to deny himself, his dutles, prayers, best actions, cast them
down at the feet of Christ, as dung and dross. O it is a hard lesson, yet such
a lesson as the Saints must learn, yea, and do learn it, in some measure from
Christ: See Mat. 25.37. The righteous shall say, Lord, when saw we thee hungry,
and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink. Note it, the Saints dis-own all
that ever they have done, they take no notice of it, they do not remember it.
It was not that whereon they built their consolation: they looked to the
righteousness of Christ and there they lay their salvation: And note again,
Christ remembers the good works of the Saints, when they do not remember it
themselves. O it is a sweet thing to be above these things, then Christ will
remember them: but when men live upon these things, and come to remember duties
as a ground of comfort, then Christ will not remember them, see Mat. 22.23.
Christ will profess, I never knew you. Now the want of this grace in this
particular, it occasions two evils, the first and best of them is, and that
even to the Saints, it deprives them of much comfort and spiritual peace: the
poor soul looking upon its duties, seeing the weakness, the imperfection of
them, he is troubled and complains, and doubts and questions its condition,
and all for want of self denial, that is not looking for any thing in those
duties. I dare say that the Saints duties kills them in their own apprehensions
more then any other of their sins: but if the Lord help you to deny your
selves, that is, not to expect any thing in duty, but lay it down at the feet
of Christ, and to live upon Christ your All in all, you shall find abundance
of influence of grace, and new manifestations of love, and in your duties you
shall have more fellowship and communion with God, then ever: it is your
expectation of comfort in your own righteousness that deprives you of it: and
just it is that it should be so, nay, it is a mercy that it is so, for if God
should give thee thy desire in duties, thou would then live upon them, and
undo thy self for ever.

The second evil that flows from hence is, that men do indeed destroy
themselves by this means: that is, it is an isntrumental means by which they
destroy themselves, as all men are destroyed by some means, and that is sin:
and by this sin, self righteous, men destroy themselves: men living and
dying, trusting upon their duties destroy themselves: and this is that which
makes men spiritually proud, lifts up men when they have least cause, when they
live upon their own righteousness: But Christ teaches his to deny themselves.

3 There is self wisdom in every man and woman naturally, and this Christ
teaches his to deny all, men are naturally too wise for Christ, so were the
Grecians, 1 Cor. 1.22. The Greeks seek after wisdom, There is a great deal
of carnal earthly wisdom, that naturally dwells in men, and this wisdom is
enmity against God, and Gods wisdom appears foolishness unto it, see what the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3.18. If any man among you seems to be wise, let him
become a fool that he may be wise, for the wisdom of the world is faolishnesse
with God. Here is an exhortation for a Church to take heed of selfe-wisdome:
you and I have need to learn this wisdom, the Lord help us in it, to see our
selves fools: see who is the right fool, Prove. 28.26. Who so trusts in his
own heart is a fool. The readiest way to attain wisdom, is to lay all our own
wisdom down at the feet of Christ: the Apostle Paul had boundance of humane
wisdom and learning, yet he abases himself, he accounts all, not only his
righteousness, but wisdom also, but dung and dross, all loss in comparison
of the excellency af the knowledge of Christ Jesus. This is true wisdom
indeed, truly to know God in Christ: this is that wisdom which is from above,
that brings life eternal with it, John 17.3. I beseech you consider of it,
has Christ taught your souls this lesson? is your wisdom heaven-borne
wisdom? or is it earthly? is it your own wisdom? I am. 3.13, 14 15. Who is a
wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you? let him show out of a good
conversation his works with meekness of wisdom, but if ye have bitter envying
and strife in your hearts, glory not, ly not against the truth, this wisdom
descends from above, but see ver. 19. The wisdom that is from above, it is
first pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of-mercie and good
fruits: it is all heavenly, like him whose it is: but man's wisdom is all
earthly, sinful, and devilish: which Chist teaches his in some measure to
deny.

4 There is naturally in every man. self boasting. and self glorying in the
creatures own wisdom, and apprehended self excellency: but where Christ
teaches, he gives power against this cursed fruit of the flesh, in some measure
there is a disposition of nature even in the Saints, to be exalted, and that
above measure, not only in their own personal excellency, but in those
graces received from Christ. The Apostle Paul was sensible of both, in 1 Cor.
9.27. where the Apostle says, he beats down his body, etc. There was a lifting
up and the Apostle was sensible of it: he found that in him that which was
enough (had not God let him see it, and helped him in it, as he apprehended,
notwithstanding his preaching to others) to make him a cast away, so also, a
Cor. 12.7. Least I should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of
revelations, the Lord sent me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to
buffet me: that was to pull him down, that he might not be exalted in himself:
there is in every child of God a natural disposition to spiritual pride, he
that knows any thing knows it: The Lord teach you and I to search our own
hearts in this particular, and give us power against it, see 2 Cor. 6.1. Having
such promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, etc. This is the filthiness of spirit that the Saints are liable unto:
truly we have little cause to glory in any thing, except in Christ Jesus: What
have thou (says the Apostle) that thou have not received? and if thou have
received it, why do thou yet boast? 1 Cor. 4.7. therefore (the Prophet says)
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength,
but let him that gloryeth glory in this, that he understands and knows the
Lord.

It is the exhortation of Christ to his Disciples, Luke 10.20. Rejoice not that
the Devils are made subject to you, but rejoice rather that your nanaes are
written in heaven: and this lesson, the Apostle Paul learned, and every
Christian in some measure must learn, Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should glory
in any thing, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

5 There is self profit, which every man naturally is apt to look after. O
how hard is it for a poor creature to deny himself? How hard is it for a rich
man (says Christ) to enter into the Kingdom of heaven? The world is a common
bait, wherewith the Devil inticeth man to sin, as Judas, Ananias and Saphyra
Act. 5. Nay, Christ lumselfe is set upon with this temptation, Mat. 4. O this
profit, the love of money, is the root of all evil.

But where Christ comes teaching effectually, he teaches the soul to deny it
self, to look upon the world as a very empty thing: he gives power to overcome
the world, Whosoever is borne of God over comes the world, and this is the
victory that over comes the world, even our faith 1 Ioh. 5.4. Now the soul
sees that it is his duty, not to look only on his own things, but every one
on the things of another, Phil. 2.4. Now he has learned to sympathize with
the body, and every member, he looks not upon himself at a distance from the
meanest member, making himself equal to them of the lower sort.

6 There is self. pleasure also, and this of two sorts.

1 In delighting in pleasures, of these the Apostle speaks of, 2 Timothy 3.4. They
shall be lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of God: Beloved, it is much
unbeseeming Christians to be lovers of pleasure, see 1 Timothy 5.6. But she that
lives in pleasure, or she that lives delicately, is dead while she lives.
Now beloved, Christ takes off his people from these pleasures, by presenting
better pleasures to them, he makes them drink of the river of his pleasures,
Psalm 36.8. so that the Saints are not without pleasures spiritual, and that
abundantly and eternally, Psalm. 16.11. At his right hand are pleasures for ever
more: But God takes off his from those earthly, carnal pleasnres, which is
indeed dangerous and destructive, Prove. 21.17. He that loves pleasure, shall
be a poor man: it is true spiritually as well as temporally: carnal carthly
pleasures and profits, are two great enemies to the power and being of god.
linesse, Luke 8.14. cares, and riches, and pleasures is that which choaketh the
Word, that men bring forth no fruit to perfection.

A second sort of Self-pleasure is, when men resolve to please themselves O sad
word! that men should have such a disposition to please themselves: but where
Christ teaches, he teaches men in this case to deny themselves.

Now this may be considered under a twofold relation either to God or our
brethren.

1 To God, where Christ teaches effectually, there the soul will rather deny
it self then God. It will rather please God then it self: Christ, who is the
Saints pattern, did, always so walk as to please God. John 8.29. For I do
always those things that please him, to wit, the Father. Now Christ as he was
man in our flesh, pleasing the Father always in all things, and so was our
pattern; so he teaches his the same lesson. This is a Maxim in Religion, That
whosoever chooses to please himself, rather then God, Christ has not taught
him. 1 These. 4.1. We beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus,
that, as ye have received of us, how yeought to walk and please God, so ye
would abound more and more. As if the Apostle had said, that which ye have
received of us is, that ye ought to walk according to the example of Christ,
to please God. This is the doctrine, that we have taught you, we beseech and
exhort you by the Lord Jesus, That ye abound more and more in this grace. This
is an excellent choice grace, to please the Lord: ever to have that in thine
eye to please God, though thou displease thy self, that is, thy fleshly
carnal self, Col. 1.10. O this is a soul taught indeed by the spirit of God,
when he prefers the pleasing of the Lord before himself, or carnal friends, or
any thing: see Prove. 16.7. When a man ways please the Lord, he makes, even
his enemies to be at peace with him: when a man seeks to please God, in walking
answerable to the rule of God, though he displease his enemies, God will make
those enemies to be at peace with him.

1 This being rightly learned, is that which would carry you along through all
oppositions in a way of truth: perhaps somethings, yea, some truths, may seem
hard to a poor creature to be submitted unto; perhaps the poor creature
resolving with flesh and blood, which will have its bouts even in the Saints,
Romans 7.21. may be ready to conclude sometimes, if I submit to this way, to this
truth, I must expect reproach, persecution, perhaps loss of liberty, estate,
yea, life and all: now it would wonderfully please carnal reason to deny such
a truth, to hide and conceal such a truth in unrighteousness: but when a soul
comes to this; it is my duty to please God; therefore has Christ required it:
will it please the Lord Jesus? O then I dare not but do it: come what will, I
cannot but do it, truly you who indeed love the Lord Jesus, that Love will
constrain you to please him, although you displease your selves.

But secondly, those who are taught of God will rather displease themselves,
then displease their brethren, the Saints. This is a necessary lesson, a
gracious soul will displease himself rather then the Saints: this is a lesson,
that both you and I, have need to learn; and I doubt we come shot in our
practice of it. I speak not either to blame or shame any of you, I have more
against my self in this particular then against you all: but I speak to
inform, to forewarn both my self, and you in this particular: but to prevent
any mistake or misunderstanding of what I shall speak concerning this thing, I
desire, before I proceed, to let you to know, that I do not intend that you
should be men-pleasers, that is, that ye should so please one the other, as to
suffer any sin in each other, without reproof, or admonition in love; therein
you come to hate one the other. Neither be ye externally in show only such, for
the Apostle reproves such, speaking of the duty of servants, Ephesians. 6.6. Not
with eye service as men-pleasers: but so pleasing the Saints, as in that you
please God, 2 These. 2.4. So speak we as not pleasing men, but God. See Gal.
1.10.

But to proceed, it is the duty of the Saints so far to please their brethren,
as to deny themselves, as the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 10.33 Even as I please all
men in all things; not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that
they may be saved: the Apostle seeks to please all men, that he might win
some to the Gospel, which is every Saints duty: much more then to please the
Saints in love, rather then in every thing to seek to please our selves. It is
this Self pleasure that is the cause of so much division amongst the Saints.
How hard a thing is it for one Saint to stoop to the weakness of another? love
would cause us to stoop to each other, and to perform every service of love
each to other, Romans 15.2. Let every one of us please his neighbor, for his
good to edification: And why? verse. 3. For Christ pleased not himself, etc. If
your hearts and my heart, was not so molded into this form of doctrine, as
that you could count it your joy to please you brethren, that you could choose
rather to please a Saint, then to please your selves, and so every one to have
this heart of love toward each other; what comfortable life of love in the Lord
might the Saints live? Whereas one the contrary, when every one stands off to
please himself, men run an end, to have their own minds: what whisperings? what
bitterness, will arise even in the Saints? nay, how do they come sometimes
even to byte and devour one the other, as the Apostle speaks?

But my beloved, I hope better things of you: I speak not to condemn, but to
forewarne, both my self and you of this great evil, which too much creeps in
among the Saints: and to let you see a glimpse of the amiablenesse of that
grace of love, which is so useful amongst the Saints.

7 There is Self love naturally in every man: so the Apostle fore-tels, 2 Timothy
3.2. Men shall be lovers of their own selves and that Professors too, and that
in the last days. See Verse 1. Now Christ who is the Saints Prophet, and
Teacher, he teaches them to deny this self love: (not that a man may not,
love himself, love his soul, love to enjoy good. Prove. 19.8. He that gets
wisdom loves his own soul: So likewise, 1 Pet. 3.10. but that he should not
love himself and himself only, this is sinful love, Christ Jesus never
taught this love; but a man may to love himself, as that he love his brethren
also; nay, he may so love himself, as that he love his brethren as himself,
Romans 13.9. Thou shall love thy neighbor (to wit, thy brother) as thy self:
This is the love Christ teaches where he comes, and he does not only teach it
in word, but in example also; be may be said so far to deny himself, as not to
love himself, in comparison of that love manifested to us; he loved us better
then he loved himself; our life better then his own life; for he gave his own
life freely, to purchase life for our souls: here was great love, John 15.13.
Greater love then this has no man, that he lay down his life for his friends,
and we ought to be followers of Christ in this grace of love, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. Be
ye followers of God, as dear children, and walk in love, even as Christ has
loved you, and given himself for you.

8 There is self will also, and this Christ teaches the Saints to deny, and
to submit unto the will of God: this Christ our pattern has given us an
example, who came not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him:
It is my meat and drink to do the will of my Father, John 4.34. In his prayer
before his suffering, Mat. 26.39. Not as I will, but as thou will.

O blessed example, to be imitated of all the Saints! What? Jesus Christ deny
himself, his own will, and shall not the Saints do it, his Disciples and
followers? But Christ has not only given us his example, as our pattern, but
he has exhorted us thereunto also, Mat. 7.21. Not he that says Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my
Father, etc. Ephesians, 6.6. the Apostle exhorting servants to be obedient to their
masters, says, not with eye service as men pleasers, but as the servants of
Christ, doing the will of God. This self will is a cause of much stir and
division in the world, I had almost said amongst the Saints.

What is the cause of this war and blood but self will? I mean next under
God, one will establish one Religion, another will establish another Religion:
one will establish Episcopal, another will establish Presbyterian Government;
or else the Kingdom must rue it: being stirred up thereunto on both sides by
the Clergy, and is likely to bring ruin upon the Kingdom, if God prevent it
not; in teaching those whom it concerns, that they have nothing to do in
either side, to compel men to any Religion: that it is the will of men, and
never the will of Christ, to give his Kingdom and Dominion minion to the will
of men, to the will of the Magistrate.

This self will is that causes stirs and troubles in families, the husband
will have his mind, and the wife will have her mind: this causes stirs in
Churches amongst the Saints, when every one will have his own mind: his own
way, will please himself, whoever be displeased. O how sweetly might the Saints
live if the Lord teach them to deny themselves?

9 Christ teaches to deny Self sufficiency, and self strength: there is a
natural disposition in the creature to think that it has power in it self,
to act to wards God: and those that hold freewill, make it a part of their
faith, that although in word, they seem to deny freewill, yet indeed they hold
it; and that the creature acts of his own strength, and may fall from grace,
or may stand if he will: but where Christ comes in power, he teaches men to
deny this principle, John 15.5. Without me you can do nothing, and the Apostle,
that had experience of the workings of God, consesseth it, 1 Cor. 15.10. I
labored more then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God in me, and Phil.
2, 13. It is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure.

10 And lastly, there are self ends also: and these Christ teaches his to
deny. There is a natural disposition in the creature to seek himself and his
own ends in every thing. Phil. 2.21. For all seek their own, and not the
things that are Jesus Christ's, therefore the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his own, but seek ye one another wealth: Christ
teaches his in some measure to lay down all self ends at his feet, and to
seek him and his honor, so that now what ever the Christian does, it is for
Christ, if he preach it is Christ, and for Christ, 2 Cor. 4.5. We preach not
our felves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus
sake: All that ever the Saints do, they do for the honor of Christ, 2 These.
1.11. and why? they are not their own, they are bought with a price, therefore
they are to glorify God in their bodies and spirits, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.

Quest. May not a Christian seek himself in any case? may he not seek his
own good?

Ans. Is without question a man may seek his own good, but he may not seek
himself. 1 He may not seek himself alone, but first, the glory of God, and
in seeking to glorify God, he must of necessity seek his own good, for God
has so conjoined his glory, and the Saints good together, that it is
impossible to glorify the Lord, but the good of the Christian must be included
in it, for this is the Saints rule, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31.
this is the Saints privilege All shall work together for good, to them that
love God, Romans 8.28.

There are many base and self ends, that professors may have in their actions,
as those John 6. that followed Christ for the loaves, more then for love to
him: so it is possible that men may follow Christ for outward and by-ends,
although I confess I see but little ground, why men shall now turn Christians
for the world, for they are like to enjoy least of it, as the Scribe that came
to Christ, and would follow him whither soever he went, he thought to gain
something by Christ, Mat. 8.20. but Christ tells him, that he was not like to
gain what he expected: The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
nests, but the Son of man has not where to rest his head: and therefore he
had no house of preferment for him. It was a good resolution of the Scribe, had
his end been as good to follow Christ whither soever he went: this is the noble
resolution indeed of every one that rightly comes to Christ, to follow him,
whither ever he leads him: they follow him through good report, and bad report,
through any tribulation, to the Kingdom of heaven.

But those that come to Christ in expectation to gain the world, they are
likely (for all that I know) to miss of their ends.

Some come that they may get heaven, and so they pray, preach, do all to get
heaven by it, but they are like to miss of their end. Mat. 7.22. Luke 13.26.

Some profess that they may be counted Christians amongst others, as the
Scribes and Pharisees, they did what they did to be seen of men, Mat. 23.5.

But these are not the Saints ends in their duties, they seek Jesus of
Natereth, a crucified Christ, and his glory, and therein they glory and
rejoice, Gal. 6.14.

Thus you see when Christ teaches effectually, he teaches men to deny
themselves, and sindeed there is good reason for it, that it should be so.

1 There is great reason that man should deny his own righteousness, or else
he is like never to partake of Christ's righteousness: Christ will be the alone
justifier, or elsone justifier, he will be all or none at all, Gal. 2.16, 21.
Col. 3.11. Therefore the Apostle Paul who once had as much selfe-righteousnesse
as another man, he thought himself once alive, but when Christ came, he taught
him to lay down all that was his own at the feet of Christ, and to suffer the
loss of all things, that seemed gain to him before, that he might win Christ,
Phil. 3.8.

2 There is a necessity for Christians to deny sinful-selfe: And that.

1 As they stand in relation to Christ, who is their justification, for is it
the natural property of grace to subdue sin, to purge forth iniquity, Christ
dwells in every justified believing soul, and where Christ dwells, there cannot
be a love unto, and a delight in sin, 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God,
does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because
he is borne of God, he does not sin, because his seed remains in him, that
is, the spirit of grace and of Christ remains in him, that now he cannot
sin, because borne of God: that is, as he is a man born of grace, he cannot
sin, he cannot sinwith a mind to sin, with a delight in sin, therefore the
Apostle Paul says, Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God that brings salvation,
teaches men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and
righteously, and godly, in this present evil world: it is the property of
grace, to teach men to deny ungodliness.

2 There is great reason why it should be thus: and that,

1 With relation to the great contrariety that is between Christ and sin,
Christ and Satan, for all sin is of the devil. 1 John 3.8. He that commits
sin is of the devil, Christ and Satan, Christ and sin, which is Satan's work,
are one of the effects of his work, are open adversaries each to other, and sin
and Satan are absolute rebels against Christ, so that they cannot possible
dwell together in one and the same soul: that is the reason, Christ in the
Saints is ever weakening and subduing sin and Satan, he ever teaches the Saints
to deny sin, it being so contrary to his holy and pure nature, they being made
partakers of the same divine nature, 2 Timothy 1.4. their spirits are ever carried
forth against sin.

2 The Saints cannot but deny sin as they stand related to Christ, in relation
to his glory, Christ is holy, and he will have a holy people, that may be for
his praise and honor, 1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, why? That ye should show forth
the praises of him, who has called you out of darkness into his marvelous
light. Christ has made you and I holy, that so we might show forth his praise,
that is, that so we might give occasion to praise God.

Are not the eyes of the world upon the Saints, expecting much from them?
although it is true, they do not, nay, they cannot love holiness, yet they
expect the Saints to be holy, and to deny sin: are they not ready to watch
opportunities to scandal Saints and truth withal, and would it not be a very
sad and grievous thing, if those that profess themselves to be for Christ,
should give just cause of offense? would it not be very dishonorable to the
name of the Gospel and profession of Christ,? therefore Christ teaches men and
women where he comes to deny ungodliness and sin, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this world. It is his exhortation, Mat. 5.16. Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in heaven: Let your light shine before the men of the
world, that they may have no cause to speak evil, but rather cause to glorisie
God: Let your light so shine before the Saints that they may rejoice and
glorify God. A close walking with God is that which gives great cause of joy
and rejoicing in each other, and an occasion of praising God, one for another:
so the Apostle, Romans 1.8. I thank God through Jesus Christ for you all, that
your faith is spoken of through all the world: How was their faith spoken of?
it was the fruit of their faith, their obedience in walking up with God,
answerable to that faith they professed, for by our works we manifest our
faith: so likewise, Phil. 1.3, 5. the Apostle thanks God for their constant
fellowship in the Gospel, from their first submitting to it: This is a cause of
joy. But on the contrary, for such as bear the name of Christians, to live in,
and delight in sin, to be vain, and carnal, and earthly, this is a cause of
sorrow and weeping, amongst Saints. Phil. 3.18. For many walk, of whom I told
you before, and now tell you weeping, they are enemies to the cross of Christ,
they cause the cross of Christ, and the way of Christ to be evil spoken of,
a cause of sadness indeed to the Saints.

3 Reason, Why Christ teaches his to deny self wisdom, self love, self will,
and all of self, is, because they are to take up their cross and to follow
Christ: that is, they must expect reproaches, afflictions, tribulations for the
name and sake of Christ. John 16.33. In the world you shall have tribulations.
Now what wise man in the world, can or will suffer reproach, the loss of the
world, and the worlds reputation, the loss of friends, liberty, ease, it may
be of life it self, in a word, all that is near and deer to the carnal man?
what man but a fool (thinks the wise men of the world) is there, that will
lose all on such light terms, as the gaining of a crucified Christ.

A man not taught of Jesus, as the truth is in Jesus, can never suffer with
comfort and joy: these things the Saints are like to suffer for the name of
Jesus. Self wisdom, and self love, will come in: O says wise selse, when it
eyes that persecution, those hardships, that are like to follow those that
follow Christ; May I not pass by such atruth, and such a practice, and it be a
Christian, and get to heaven? what need I to adventure my self upon such
hardships, when perhaps for the neglecting of such, or such an opinion or
practice, I may attain my liberty, my good reputation? Is it not a sad thing,
that men professing Christ, should thus consult with flesh and blood? the
Apostle Paul did not so, when he was converted to the faith of Jesus, he
consulted not with flesh and blood. Gal. 1.16. It is self wisdom, and self
love, that sets men to consulting with flesh and blood: but flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50. That is a man not taught of
Christ, not made partaker of his divine nature, and grace, bearing only the
image of the earthly Adam, cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

When a man shall come to submit to Gospel Ordinances which are contemptible
in the eyes of the world, for which he is like to suffer shame and disgrace,
here is need of self denial. O says the self denying Christian, Let me
submit to Christ, to every truth; to every ordinance, although I suffer loss
in the world, reproach, and shame from my friends, and acquaintance; though I
loose the love of my best friends; whether father, mother, husband, wife, etc.
yet says the self denying Christian, Christ has said, that who so loves
father, mother, wife, or children, more then me, is not worthy of me: and the
love that CHRIST has shed abroad in my heart by his Spirit, Romans 5.5.
constrains me to deny my self, and follow Christ in all conditions. 2 Cor.
5.14. Thus you see the self. denying soul, and none else, is meet to be a
Diseiple, a follower of Christ: he is ready to take up the cross daily and to
follow him.

4 Christ teaches his to deny self sufficiency, and self strength, that so
they may be able to hold out in the evil day, when a day of adversity comes,
when a man is put to it, either by his spiritual or temporal enemy, Blessed are
they then, that trust in the Lord, Psalm. 2.12. Men standing upon their own
strength are gone. Esaias 40.30. The youth shall faint, and be we ary, the young
men shall utterly fail: that is, those that apprehend a power in themselves to
stand, but Verse 31. They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength,
they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they
shall walk and not faint. If men stand upon their own strength, they are like
to fall: Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. But they
that see an insufficiency in themselves, and trust upon the name of the Lord,
shall be as mount Sion that shall never be moved, Psalm. 125.1. but abides for
ever. Christ would have his work, to be a perfect and fair work: his covenant a
sure covenant, Esaias 55.3. Therefore he undertakes, not only to bring men and
women intocovenant, but to keep them there, Ier. 32.40. I will not turn from
them, they shall not depart from me, says the Lord. But if Christ had left the
power of standing to man, he might have been as likely to fall away as Adam,
nay, and more likely, for there is a body of sin left still in the Saints,
matter for the Devil to work upon; but Adam was without sin, therefore there
is no possibility for that man to stand, that stands upon his own strength.
But it is in the strength of Christ the believer stands; without me ye can do
nothing, John 15.5. You cannot pray, or perform any duty acceptably, Romans 8.26.
much less stand and hold out to the end against all spiritual oppositions, a
Christian is to encounter withal.

The fifth and last reason why Christ teaches this grace of self denial to
the Saints is, that so they might live in love and peace one with another. If
every Saint should seek to please himself. and love himself, and to have his
own will in every thing; how is it possible love and peace should be continued
amongst the Saints, if there should not be a bearing with, and forbearing one
with another, if the strong should not bear the infirmities of the weak, and
not please themselves? but God has so tempered the body together, that they
should all seek the good of each other in love: that there should be no Schism
in the body, but that the members should have the same care one of another, as
of themselves, 1 Cor. 12.25. that every one might secke, not their own, but one
another good. That they might all grow up together a complete body, a holy
temple in the Lord.

Use. 1 A word of examination and trial, has Christ bin thy Prophet? has he
taught thee this lesson of self denial? this is a very needful use, not only
for carnal men, but for Saints: it was the exhortation of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
13.5. Examine your selves, prove your selves, know you not, Christ is in you,
except ye be reprobates. Christ is in every Saint; and if there, what does he
there? Surely he is not there for naught, he will be ever teaching the soul,
he will be there as they Prophet, showing thee the way thou shall walk in.

Consider a little now, I beseech thee, has Christ taught thee to deny thy
own righteousness? can look upon it all as filthiness? or else art thou
stuffed and filled with thine own righteousness, lifted up as high as the
heavens in thine own conceit? like the proud Pharisee, I thank God I am not as
bad as other men. I pray and perform duty, I have a good heart, and as good a
mind to God as any man. If this be thy condition, the Lord Jesus has never
been thy Prophet: thou art yet in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity: Thousayst thou art rich, and want nothing, when the truth is (if
the Lord open thine eyes to see it) thou art poor and miserable, and wretched,
and blind, and naked.

Has Christ taught thee to deny ungodliness and sin? or else can thou take
pleasure in unrighteousness? I dare say it, that some there are in the world,
that have high thoughts of of themselves, yet indeed, make a mock of sin, take
pleasure in unrighteousness: if this be thy condition, the Lord Christ has
never taught thy soul, 2 Pet. 1.9. Christ teaches to be holy, and humble; he
gives power against sin, and Just, 1 Cor. 6.9.10, 11. Consider you, who have
been taught of God, has he taught your souls this lesson, to deny your own
wisdom, will, end, strength, and all? to lay down all as nothing, at the feet
of Jesus? The Lord help you and I a little now to examine our selves how much
of self yet remayns, self wisdom, self glorying and boasting, self love, self
ends: O how does the Devil crowd in these things into the souls of the
Saints, the Lord help you and I to see it, and give us power against it?
certainly if it be with your souls, as it is with me, you have some experience
of these things: hardly can you perform any duty, but self will present it
self to your view in one shape or another. Now where Christ teaches he ever
sets the soul a work against those sins, and causes the soul ever to have
high thoughts of it self, and to have high thoughts of God, and of the Saints,
esteeming every one better then himself.

2 Wherein you find you come short in this duty, self denial, look up to
the Lord for help and assistance, it is the Lord that teaches, to profit:
therefore if you want any thing, the exhortation of James is, Ask of God who
gives to all men liber ally and upbraydeth none, Jam. 1.5. For every good gift
comes down from God, ver. 17. Therefore have recourse to heaven, make known thy
condition to the Lord Jesus, this thou may do, thou ought to do it, thou
must go to God and tell him what thou want, what grace thy soul needs,
tell him thou have a poore-selfeseekeing-heart that will not stop farther
then he bends it, and bows it, look to him and he will help thee, come unto
him and he will ease thee, and give thee thy hearts desire.

Note this one word where God has begun this work in any measure, though you
find much of self, and it is thy burden, yet here is a ground of comfort for
such a soul: it is mercy thou see that evil of self, that is in thee, and
that it is thy burden. The comfort is, 1 that Jesus Christ has been thy
Prophet: he has taught thee in some measure to deny thy self, and given thee
a desire after the perfection of this grace. 2 That where Jesus has began this
work he will finish it, he will perfect it to the days of Christ. 8 Thou may
live upon him henceforth, and expect teachings from him; new manifestations,
new discoveries of grace and love, new influences of power from himself as thou
stanlest in need for his own honor, the Saints good, or thine own consolation,
Heb. 13.5. Thus much for the first, which is Self-denial.

2 Where Christ becomes a Prophet, he eacheth that soul to yield universal
obedince to himself: this is an effect of the teaching of Christ. Mat. 28.20.
teaching them to observe and do all things whatsoever I shall say unto you,
and Acts 3.22, 23. A Prophet, shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, him
shall you hear in all things, etc. And this obedience Christ does not only
require as he is a King, but he teaches it as he is a Prophet See Esaias 54.13.
And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace
of thy children: It is the covenant of grace, Heb. 8.10. I will put my laws
into their mind, and write them in their hearts, etc. He will make them a
willing people, he will teach them to yield willing obedience, he will teach
them to do spiritual things with an appetite, with a mind to them: now this
obedience flows from faith, it is a fruit an effect of faith, Romans 1.5. Christ
first teaches faith, and then obedience.

Quest. What are the great commands of the Gospel.

Ans. 1 Love is the great command: and where true faith and love is, there will
be the effects of it: 1 Timothy 1.5. Now the end of the commandment is love, out
of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. This is both the
beginning and end; the first and last, in the Law of the Gospel Love; first God
out of love has given us a law, we out of love yield obedience to it: James
calls it the royal Law, Jam. 2.8. If ye fulfill the royal law according to
the Scripture, thou shall love thy neighbor as thyselfe.

2 Now this love is manifested, 1 To Christ. 2 To the Saints.

1 To Christ, and that, first in keeping his commandments, Joh. 14.23. Jesus
answered and said, If a man love me, he will keep my words, ver. 24. he that
loves me not, keeps not my sayings. Love will cause those in whom it is to
submit to Christ in every thing, 1 John 5.3. This is the love of God, that we
keep his commandments: that is, here in is our love to God, made manifest, in
keeping his commandments.

Quest. What are the commands of Christ to his children with relation to
himself?

Ans. His command is first love as you have heard. 2 Obedience flowing from
her: this obedience is first to Gospel commands. 2 In a Gospel manner. 3 To
Gospel ends. First, it must be to Gospel commands; we are to hear Christ in
all things, not Moses: Act. 3.22. him shall you hear in all things, etc.
believers are to receive every command as from the hands of Christ, John 15.14,
Ye are my friends, if you do whatsoever I command you.

The first command that Christ requires of believers, and that next after faith
received, is Baptism, Mar. 16.17. He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved: so likewise, Mat. 28.19. Disciple Nations, and baptize them: this was
the first thing in the commission, to be submitted to, and it was ever so in
the Apostles practice, which must be our pattern, Act. 2.41. As many as gladly
received the Word (that is, believed the truth of the Gospel, and gladly
received the Lord Jesus, the sum and substance of the Gospel) were haptized,
so Act. 8.12. They believed and were baptized, both men and women, so Act. 16.
Lydia and the Goalar: In a word, this was the first duty that ever the Saints
performed, the first ordinance that ever they subscribed to after faith
received: in the Scripture there is neither precept nor president, either to
baptize before faith, or after, to teach faith, or else after faith is
received, to neglect or slight baptism, it being a command of Christ: love in
the Saints compelling them to yield obedience to every ordinance of Christ for
his own sake, with an expectation of a farther discovery, and manifestation of
love and grace from God, in his own ordinance, in his own way.

Now I confess there are many objections that by many are made against this
truth, who plead for, and practice the baptizing of insants: But because I have
in another treatise endeavored from the light of Scripture to clear the truth
and answer those objections, I shall in this place pass them by, only by
reason of our late conference, I shall briefly touch upon these three
Scriptures we then had in disputation. The first is, Act. 2.38, 39. The promise
is to you and to your children, etc. The Promise in this place was concluded
upon, that it was remission of sins, and the gifts of the holy spirit: hence
was drawn this conclusion, that the infants of believers found as large an
interest in this promise as their parents, and therefore ought to be baptized.

Which I cannot but deny, and assirme, that the promise here was to the Jews,
as many as the Lord did call; to their children, as many as the Lord should
call: to the Gentiler afar off, as many of them as the Lord should call: There
is a sound truth in the Scripture thus interpreted; for God gave remission of
sius, his spirit, all the good things of the Gospel, to as many as he called,
both Iow and Gentile, and so he will to the worlds end, and indeed he never
promised it to any other, He that believes on the Son has life. he that
believes not has not life, Joh. 3.31. If the promise of the Covenant of
grace, remission of sins, and the goodthings of the Gospel, had been to the
Jews that believed, and to their natural seed, it must then have been made
good to them, or else there was no truth in the promise, but it was never made
good to them, for then they had not been apostated, as they are to this day,
nay, the Lord was so far from intending any such thing to the Jews, that he
intended their rejection and casting off, Romans 11.15. neither was the promise
to the natural seed of the believing Gentiles, but the elect of God both Jews
and Gentiles obtain it, Romans 2.7. and God under the Gospel makes no difference
between the seed of the believer and unbeliever, with relation to their
Generation, but it is grace that makes the difference.

The second Scripture was, Mar. 10.13, 14. Suffer little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. That which is
hence inferred is, that children are blessed, that they are a part of the
Church, and therefore have a right to baptism, whereas it is very probable
that those infants were brought to Christ to be cured of some diseases, for the
Text says, They brought young children to him, that he might touch them, and
he blessed them, that is, gave them the blessing they came for, to wit, health
and cure: and whereas Christ says, of such is the kingdom of heaven, that is,
of such qualified spiritually as those infants were naturally, so Christ
himself interprets it, ver, 15. Verily I say unto you, whosoever does not
receive the Kingdom of Heaven, as a little child, be shall not enter therein:
that is, whosoever does not receive the Kingdom of God, both of grace and
glory, as a little child, that is, humble and meek, and teachable, able to do
nothing himself, but Christ is his all and in all he shall never enter
therein; so that Christ takes occasion from those little infants, to discover a
Gospel mystery, a mystery indeed to natural men, Mat. 18.2, 3.

The third Scripture was that in 1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving wife is
sanctified to the believing husband, else were your children unclean, but now
are they holy. Now it was first granted, that the sanctification of the wife is
but a civil sanctification, she is sanctified to his use, that he ought not
to put her away. 2 This was granted also, that holiness is a fruit of
sanctification: then I say, the fruit or effect, cannot be greater then the
cause, the cause cannot produce a greater effect then it self, the cause being
only a civil sanctification, the holiness of the children must be the same;
so that now under the Gospel, the believer may lawfully keep the unbeliever,
whether husband or wife, and their children, whereas under the Law, if a Jew
married with an idolatrous Gentile, he was to put away both wife and children,
Ezra. 10.3. but under the Gospel there is no such thing, unless the unbeliever
will depart.

2 After faith and baptism, the will and command of Christ is, that his people
should yield obedience to all his comands, and indeed he does not only command
it, but gives power: there is a power goes with the commands of Christ: he is
the King of his people, he gives laws and statutes, and withal gives in
abilities to do what he commands: Christ knows that without him you can do
nothing, John 15.5, the will and commands of Christ is, that his people should
be holy is all manner of holy conversation: the will of God is their
sanctification, 1 These. 4.2.3. For ye know what commandments we gave you by
the Lord Jesus, for this is the will of God your sanctification, to abstain
from sin, to ver. 7. and the reason is rendered, ver. 7. For God has not called
us unto uncleanuesse, but unto holiness: God has not given his Son to redeem
men, that so they might live in unclean, unholy ways, he does not call them to
fellowship with himself, and one with another, that so they might take their
pleasures in the world, in sin; no, no, God calls his to holiness, and
therefore the Apostle Peter says, It is written, be ye holy, (or ye shall be
holy) as I the Lord your God am holy: 1 Pet. 1.16. And he that has this hope
purifieth himself, even as Christ is pure, 1 John 3.3, And the Apostle Paul's
exhortation answers this command, Romans 12.1. I beseech you brethren by the
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service, and be not conformable
to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds, etc. that
is, seeing God has renewed your minds, let your bodies, your external
walkings, be made conformable to Jesus Christ, and not to the world. O beloved,
holiness becomes the Saints, especially holiness becomes the household of
Saints the Churches of Saints: the Church of Saints is Gods house, 1 Timothy 3.10.
his dwelling place, Psalm. 132.13, 14. and holiness becomes the Lords house for
ever, and it is the love of Christ that constrains the Saints thus to walk?

Quest. But is it not the Saints duty, thus to walk.

Ans. Yea, without question it is their duty, Gal. 6 16. He that walks
according to this rule, peace shall be upon him: but they are to perform this
duty of holy walking out of love, therefore Christ says, If ye love me keep
my commandemenst, John 14.15. none has to do with the commands of Christ but
those that love him, which love flows from faith, for faith works by love,
Gal. 5.6.

A second command of Christ is, love the Saints, which was the second thing I
propounded in the manifestation of love. It is first to Christ, He that loves
not the Lord. Jesus, let him be accursed: ver. 17. These things I command you,
that ye love one another: And, a new commandment give I unto you, that you
love one another, as I have loved you.

Quest. Why is it called a New commandment, seeing it is not new, but the same
that was from the beginning.

Ans. 1 It is New, because given a new by Christ, and so are all the commands
of Christ given a new, and are new commands given to a new people, to wit,
believers; Mose's commands were given to all the whole body of natural Israel:
Christ's to the whole body of spiritual Israel, the Saints. None else has to
do with any law as it comes from Christ, but are still under the Law, as it
came from Mount Sinay.

2 It is new in respect of the nature of it, which is double: 1 as it flows
from Christ's love to us. 2 It must be the same as Christ's love was to us ever;
as I have loved you: and as this is the special command of Christ, so it is the
property of the Saints, that the grace they receive from Christ, causes them
to do it: the love of Christ constrains them. Therefore the Apostle thanks God
for the Colossians, Col. 1.3, 4. For the increase of their faith, and love to
all the Saints. Where faith increases, love increases: for faith increases
love to Christ: and love to Christ increases love to the Saints.

For my more clear proceeding in this particular, I shall endeavor from light
and truth to discover unto you, first, what love is. 2 the excellent properties
and effects of this love. 3 the manifestation of this love.

1 What love is: Love is an affection of the soul carried forth after, and
settled upon, something, from an apprehended worth and excellency in the thing:
this I conceive to be love, whether it be spiritual or natural; whether set
upon a good or bad object: for it is not possible there should be true love,
but where the soul apprehends something worthy to be beloved. First, the
understanding goes forth, and takes a view of the object presented: if the
understanding so apprehend any worth or excellency in the object presented,
then the affection of love is let forth upon it, and is not satisfied without
the enjoyment of it. Hence it comes to pass that when the understanding is
truly enlightened, and the judgment rightly informed, the affection is carried
forth, and settled upon a right object: but if the understanding be corrupted
and blinded, and the judgment misinformed, the affection of love is carried
forth after, and set upon wrong objects. When the understanding is so blinded,
it apprehends an excellency in the world, in pleasures, in sin, etc. for
believe it; it is the blindness of men's understanding usually, that causes
men to love sinfully.

So on the contrary, when Christ is presented to the view of the soul, the
understanding by the power of God, is enlightened, and comes to apprehend in
some measure, that excellent worth, that is in him, the affection of love goes
forth after him: and desire is not satisfied until it enjoy him. Thus it was
with the Spouse in the Canticles, chap. 5.10. My beloved is white and ruddy,
the chiefest among ten thousand: and hence it is, her love is so drawn forth
after him: that she seeks him, and is never satisfied till she find him, verse.
6. she is sick of love after him, chap. 2.5. and this love unto Christ carries
forth the soul in love to the Saints, for the sake of Christ, where it sees
the Image of Christ: the same love where with the soul loves Christ, it loves
the Saints, 1 John 4.20, 21.

That it is the command of Christ, and the property of the love of God, where
it is shed abroad in the heart, to carry forth the soul in love, not only to
Christ, but to the Saints, you have heard: 1 John 5.1. Every one that loves him
that begat, loves him also that is begotten.

2 I come to the excellent properties and effects of this love. 1 With relation
to Christ. 2 To the Saints. 1 To Christ. 2 It refuses to receive satisfaction
in any enjoyment beneath the Lord Jesus. A soul truly enlightened in the
excellency of the knowledge of God in Christ, refuses to take content and
satisfaction in any thing that comes short of Christ. It is true, there may be
many turnings and windings in the heart, and the profits and pleasures of the
world, shall be presented (as Satan presented them to Christ) and duties and
creatures, and performances, gifts, etc. and thus Satan can, and often does
present himself like an Angel of light, and that to the Saints too: they that
know any thing of God, know it, if possibly he could, he would delude and
cheat a poor creature, but the soul truly loving Christ will not be thus
cheated and deluded, by that old Serpent, he must have Christ, nothing less
will satisfy him. A living child may be quieted awhile with a babble, a
counter, or ratle, which is nothing but folly: but in conclusion, it finds by
experience the emptiness and vanity of such things, then casts away all, and
nothing but bread will satisfy him. So it may be with the soul the living
Christian, it may receive some content in duties and prayers for a time; but in
the conclusion it comes to see the emptiness of these things, and then nothing
but Christ will content him. When a soul truly loving Christ, comes to see how
he has deluded himself in mistaking Christ, thinking that he has had Christ,
when indeed he had nothing but the external ordinance, visible form, which is
indeed the shell without the kernel, o then nothing less then a Christ will
satisfy: o give me Christ, says the soul, or else I die, Christ in every
ordinance: it will not take ordinances and duties for Christ any more: but now
the soul must enjoy Christ in ordinances, Christ in preaching, in praying, in
the Supper of the Lord, nothing gives content to the soul but Christ: O this
is the excellent quality of true spiritual love to the Lord Jesus. Hence it is
that the spouse in the Canticles, Cap. 3.12. so earnestly seeks her beloved,
she could take no rest until she had found him, ver. 4. and then she holds
him, and will not let him go. This is the property of love, it soars very
high, flies aloft like the Eagle, and why? because God in Christ is its object,
and where the dead carkesse is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together:
Christ is the alone object of faith and love, and to him all true believers
come, in him shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory, Esaias
45.25. only note this, that the soul comes by faith to enjoy him whom the
soul loves.

A second excellency of love to the Lord Jesus is, It is quieted and satisfied
in the single enjoyment of Christ: the soul that has Christ has enough, it
can say as Jacob, It is enough, Joseph my son is yet alive; so the believing
soul, whose heart is truly inflamed with love to Christ for his own
excellency, it has enough, it is content now to lose all, as the Apostle
Paul, Phil. 3.7.8. He accounts all things but loss, yea, dung, that he may win
Christ, This is the excellency of the grace of love to Christ, it carries the
soul above the world, above creature, or any thing beneath Christ, it desires
nothing but Christ, 1 Cor. 2.1. It gloryeth and rejoices in nothing but
Christ, Gal. 6.14. and him crucified: If it have the world, so it is, if not it
is contented, it is quiet in any condition, if it enjoy all things, I mean (in
the world) yet Christ is the sum of all: if it want all things, yet in Christ
it enjoyes all, so the Apostle, as having nothing, yet possessing all things,
so that now the soul that believes in, and loves the Lord Jesus, knows how to
be abased, and how to abound, that is, it know how in that lowest condition to
live satisfied upon Christ, and it knows how in the highest condition to live
also upon Christ, it can do all things through Christ that strengthens it,
Phil. 4.12, 13. Do you not see on the contrary, men that have no love to the
Lord Jesus, how they let forth their hearts upon the creature? they live upon
the creature; take away the world from them, you take away their life: but the
man that loves Christ, has enough in the enjoyment of him, what ever befall
them in the world, they can say as Christ, I have meat to eat that ye know
not of, John. 4.32. the Lord Jesus is the Saints meat and drink they live upon
him, and are satisfied with him.

The third property of love is, It slights all hardships and sufferings that it
meets withal for the name and sake of Christ. Nothing can quench this love,
many waters cannot quench it: many floods of affliction cannot quench love:
when others that love not the Lord Jesus but themselves, and their own ease,
start and are affrighted at the reproach of Jesus, as at some strange
apparition; when the soul that sees spiritually, that looks not at things that
are seen, that is at the outside of things, which carnal eyes only see, but at
things that are not seen, that is at the outside of things, which carnal eyes:
They hence go cheerfully, slighting persecutions being persuaded that nothing
can make a separation between Christ and their souls; glorying and triumphing
in the cross of Christ, being not only ready to suffer reproach, but death it
self, if the Lord call them to it, for the name and sake of their beloved. Thus
you see the excellency of this grace, it carries the soul sweetly out to
Christ, it lies down in the bosom of love, and there it is satiated, there it
is satisfied, there it has enough, there it lives, and there it dies, yet with
him it shall for ever live, o the admirable excellency, in this grace of love,
it makes hard things easy, and bitter things sweet: it lives upon that others
cannot see, no, not never shall see, unless the Lord open their eyes, it
rejoices in that others dread: it takes that for a crown, that others count
shame: it makes their hearts to leap for joy, in the beholding of those things,
that makes others faint and fail.

2 I come to the excellency of this grace of love, in, and to the Saints, for
that is the great thing we have now in hand, the excellency of the grace of
love among Saints, among brethren.

1 It is of a knitting nature, it knits or binds up the souls of the Saints
as one, it makes them to be of one heart and of one mind. What is the reason
of such divisions amongst Saints, but the want of love? this grace of love is
that which would knit the hearts of christians one to another: It was the
Apostles desire and care for the Colossians, that their hearts might be
comforted, being knit together in love, Col. 2.2. This knitting together of the
Saints, is that which makes them meet to watch over each other, to build up
each other: it is as the joints and sinews of the body natural, knitting each
member together, and so nourishing the whole body, Col. 2.9. Being knit
together increases, with the increase of God, this is the excellent property
of love, it knitts up the souls of the Saints together, where it is in truth,
there cannot be an easy dissolving of this knot of love, this was the love of
David and Jonathan 1 Samuel 18.1. The soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul
of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul: this is the true property of
love, it knits the soul to the party beloved: it is not possible, if there
were true love that there should be such divisions amongst the Saints: if it be
but a difference in opinion, presently, the love, the fellowship is broken.

A second excellency of true love is, It coven a multitude of infirmities, it
is not easily moved, it is not easily provoked, it is naturally easy to be
entreated, it will not suddenly believe evil reports, it will not suddenly
have bitter envyings and evil surmisings: this is the excellency of the grace
of love, it will bear much and long, it will not censure without wonderful
just cause, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7. Love suffers long, it is not easily
provoked, it will not starte at shadows, love envyeth not another prosperity,
but rather rejoices in it, as one member of the body rejoices in the
prosperity of another, it vaunteth not itself, it is not puffed up, love is an
humble grace, it makes those in whom it is, to serve each other in love, to
prefer each other before itself: it seeks not its own, it seeks not its
self, but the good of another, it is not easily provoked, it thinks noill,
it rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth, it bears all things
it believes all things (all things that it has any ground or warrant to
believe) it hops althings, that is, the best of all things, where there is
any ground or probability of hope it endures all things, that is, all things
that God himself inflicts, or suffers man to inflict upon him, here is the
excellency of love O who would be without this grace of love? nay, but who can
ever attain it but those, whom God sheds abroad his love in their hearts by his
holy Spirit? how is this grace of love wanting among the Saints? whence is it
that there are such discords? such bitter enyings? such secret whisperings? in
a word, such rents and breaches of communion and fellowship amongst Saints, for
slight things, but the want of this grace of love? truly, were the love of God
shed abroad in the hearts of his people more abundantly it would not be thus:
love is of absolute necessity, for the peace and communion of Saints.

3 Excellency of love. It is, on everlasting grace, it shall be made perfect
in another world: other graces fail, but love never fails: 1 Cor. 13.8.
Prophesies they fail, and faith that shall cease, but love shall abide for
ever, it shall be so far from ceasing, that it shall after the ceasing of faith
and other graces, be made perfect, and the Saints that love God indeed here
(and from that fountain of love, love each other) they shall then for ever live
in the bosom of love, their souls being satisfied in the enjoyment of him the
fountain, they shall be then perfectly knit together in one, being filled with
the enjoyment of God, made perfect in love, through that abundance of love it
enjoyes in him.

The third particular propounded is, the manifestation of this love, how the
Saints manifest this their love each to other.

1 In a faithful diligent watching over each other in love, Phil. 2.4. look
not every one to his own things, but every one to the things one of another:
there should not be such a spirit amongst Christians as was in Cain, who said,
Am I my brothers keeper: no, no, you are keepers of each other, and it is love
that will make you faithful to each others soul in this particular.

The second manifestation of love is, in building up one the other in the most
holy faith, edifying one the other in love, helping forward each other in the
way of holiness being compacted together in the order and fellowship of the
Gospel, makes increase of the body, to the edifying it self in love Ephesians. 4.16.

3 In bearing with the weaknesses of each other, Col. 3.12, 13. Put on, as the
elect of God bewels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long
suffering, for bearing one another, and for giving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake forgave you. Here is the manifestation of love, when you are able
to bear with, and forbear one another, from this principle, because God has
borne with you, God has forgiven you, Romans 14.1. him that is weak in the
faith, receive unto you.

4 In restoring a fallen brother with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. If any
brother be fallen through weakness, ye that are spiritual, restore such a one
with the spirit of weeknesse: much tenderness is to be used toward a brother
in this case; the ground is, we our selves, the strongest of us are subject to,
and may fall by the like temptation, if the Lord prevent it not.

5 In speaking kindly to each other; good words and comfortable: this is the
manifestation of love: and truly where there is love in the heart, it will
appear in the countenance, in the words; a cheerful and loving countenance,
loving words; here will be words both for the Saints, and to the Saints. First,
for the Saints to go to God in prayer, Ephesians. 1.16. for them, in their
vindication, when any scandal is unjustly laid upon them: so Jonathan for
David, 1 Samuel 19.4. Jonathan spoke good of David, and good for David 2 In
speaking kindly one to another, so the Apostle Paul, he ever gives the Saints
the title of Brethren, wherefore holy Brethren, pertakers of the heavenly
calling: and Solomon says, That a soft answer turns away strife.

6 And lastly, love is manifested incondoling each with other, in afflictions:
the Saints are all of them members of the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.27. and the
members of the natural body are sensible of the sufferings of each other, if
one member suffer all suffer with it; if one member rejoice, all rejoice with
it: so it is or should be in the body spiritual, we should bear part of one
another afflictions; be truly sensible of the affliction of each other, and so
bear part with each other, be truly sensible of the comsorts of each other,
and so rejoice together, this is the property of true love where it is: I have
very briefly hinted upon some particulars, much more might be said in this
particular: but I desire not to be tedious in this place. I might branch forth
in many other particular Gospel commands which would be too tedious: only thus,
where the love of Christ is indeed shed abroad by the holy spirit, there love
co^strains the soul to yield itself up wholly to the Lord Jesus, and all his
comands: whatsoever things are of good report, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are warranted, and required in Gospel, the soul that truly
loves the Lord Jesus, is ready in the peace and strength of Jesus to walk up
unto it: it will not consult with flesh and blood, it will not stand upon
carnal arguments: but as the Lord Jesus has glorified mercy, grace, and love,
in doing unto the soul, so it will now look what it is may conduce to the
exaltation of his name, and then the soul that truly loves the Lord Jesus, is
satisfied; let the name of Jesus have the glory, and the soul that truly loves
him, has its end, and and rests satisfied.

Use. It concerns every one to look if Christ has been their Prophet: has
Christ given thee a heart willing to submit unto him in all things? ready in
his power to yield universal obedience to all his commands? o it nearly
concerns you, to try your selves, and if so, then whether your obedience flows
from love. It is possible there may be external obedience from base and
by-ends, and then all is nothing; Love is the fulfilling of the Law: whatsoever
is done in love, that is, from the love, of Christ shed abroad in the heart, is
well done: but all done without love is nothing; preaching, praying,
professing, communicating, it is all nothing without love: it is one thing, to
preach, and pray, and profess, it is another thing to do it out of love to
Christ; then it is a fruit of faith. Faith works by love, and all works done
without this, are not acceptable, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. Though I speak with the
tongue of men and angels, and have not love, it is nothing, it is but as a
sounding brass or tinkling eymball: a man may have excellent words, fine
composed sentences) admirable expressions, all flowing from a notionall
knowledge, that may much affect the ears and hearts of the people, and yet all
be but a sound of words attained by art, as a sounding brass or a tinkling
cymball, which seems to make a sweet sound to the ear, when there is nothing
in it indeed but a composure of humane art; and so being brought out of that
frame, there is nothing indeed worth looking after, or harkning unto: even so
are those persons, who seemingly do glorious actions, and yet indeed have not
the love of God in them.

But to proceed: the third thing that Christ usually teaches his people, as to
believe, which faith, you have heard, produces its effects, so in the third
place he teaches them to live by faith, that is, to act and exercise this
faith upon all occasions, in all times, according as they have need, to make
use of it: and indeed this is a great Gospel mystery, which the Saints are too
much ignorant of. It is one thing to have faith, and another to live by faith
it is one thing to have legs, and another thing to make use of them, to go
with them.

Quest. What is it to live by faith?

Ans. 1 It is to exercise faith, that is to make use of it as need requires:
or, 2 It is a living upon Christ in the want of all things. Or 3 It is a living
by believing of what the soul shall one day enjoy.

1 It is to exercise faith as occasion calls for it: that is, to exercise it
upon the object: for faith has ever an object, and if it be right and true,
the object is Christ: now it is true, there is occasion for the Christian to
exercise faith in every condition, either Internally, or Externally, for the
Christian has many enemies to encounter with all, the flesh, and the Devil
and the World, all these comes in a mayn upon the soul. Now faith overcomes; 1
The flesh that will be ever lusting against the spirit, Satan coming in,
working by it; self will be in every action, self wisdom, self priding, and
self boasting: this is contrary to the mind of the spirit, and now the spirit
is troubled, and freed, so that many times there is a hot conflict in the soul
of the Saint: but how comes the Christian to overcome it? by cying and applying
Christ, it can say as Paul, I have a body of sin, a proud cursed self seeking
nature, but thanks to God through Jesus Christ, etc. and there is no
condemnation to them in Christ. It is true, I have a base nature, a wicked,
cursed, deceitful, proud, selfseeking heart, yet the Lord has let forth a
glimpse of his glory to my soul, he has let me see, and has sealed this by
his spirit unto me, that I am in Christ, and there is no condemnation for me:
and so by faith, seeking to Christ, the soul overcomes this enemy flesh. and
then secondly, it ever lives in believing, that this fleshly corrupt part,
shall be every day more and more subdued, and so is ever cying a crucified
Christ, for the killing and crucifying of this body of sin.

2 The Devil, he will come in with his darts, daying hard and heavy things to
the charge of the soul, although the Apostle faith, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies: although God
himself pronounce a man cleet and just, yet the Devil will come in and
endeavor to make work in the godly justified soul. O says the Devil, thou
art a vile cursed creature, thou have a base earthly carnal heart, thou art
able to perform no duty, but it is full of sin, and as good never a whit, as
never the better. Thy services (had thou no other sin to be accountable for)
are enough to condemn thee? and besides all the rest of thy sins of thy
baseness in performing duty, this is that is worst of all, thou have a wicked
proud heart of thine own, thou art ready, when ever God has assisted thee, to
take the honor to thy self, and to pride thy self in those weak duties thou
performest.

What say thou to this Christian? have any experience of this try all in thy
soul? I dare say thou have, if Christ dwell there: but what course will you
take to over come in this combat? see Ephesians 6.16. There are the enemies the
Saints are to encounter with, they are no small, no mean enemies, see Verse 12.
and the armor; the Christians armor its all armor of proof; but above all
take the sheeld of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fire
darts of the wicked: the Devil will come, and come again, he will have one
dart, and another dart: now the way to overcome, is to take the shield of
faith: a sheeld is for defense, so this faith both defends and resists the
Devil.

Quest. But how does faith overcome?

Ans. It ever has an eye to the foundation Christ, it knows the foundation
stands sure, and so it turns over the devil, the false conclusion that the
devil and the heart is ready to make together to Christ: and now the soul
says, it is true Satan, or it is true heart, I am base, I have a vile cursed
nature, I cannot pray nor perform any duty as I should, sin is in my best
action, I confess I am in my self as bad as man or devil can make, not a
worse heart in the world more subject to evil, farther then God restrains it,
more unable to do good, farther then God inables: and what of all this Satan?
I know there is enough to condemn me for ever, were I to answer in mine own
person for my self; but Christ has been condemned for me, Satan, he has
borne all my sins, and so my condemnation, and he has made himself over to
me, so that now thou must first have something against Christ, before thou
can shake my hold, and thus by faith flying to Christ, the soul overcomes
the enemy: but if the soul cannot thus have recourse to the Lord Jesus, he is
gone when the tempter comes, he is not able to resist. Then says the believing
soul, it is true, Satan, I have a proud self seeking heart, ready ever to take
that honor to it self that is due to God; but it is as true, that I may thank
thee for it, who have thus metamorphozed my nature, and made it like thine own,
and not only so, but come in and ever stirrost up the heart to pride and
selfe-seeking, knowing well by experience, that it is a sin that much provokes
God; but this is my mercy, God lets me see into this depth of wickedness, and
it is my burden: but Christ has freed me from the power of it, and from the
iniquity of it, he is ever subduing it in me, and one day I shall for ever be
freed, both from it and thee: thus by faith the soul overcomes the devil:
this is the first particular wherein the Christian comes to live by faith, in
the exercising of it, according to the manyfold occasions it meets withal.

2 To live by faith is a living upon Christ in the want of all things, and that
both external and internal.

1 External, in the want of outward things: when the creature is tripped naked
and bare, brought even to a morsel of bread, then to live in believing the
Lord will care for you, when that you are brought to Christ's condition, that
you have neither house nor home, nor any thing in the world, besides a Christ
besides a God to live upon; then when thou can get a promise, as that Heb.
13.5. He has said, I will not fail thee, nor for sake thee, and stick close to
the Lord Jesus in such a promise, this is a living by faith, when the creature
fails Hab. 3.17, 18. Although the figtree shall not blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the vine, the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall
yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no
therd in the stalls: Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my salvation? This is to live by faith, when all creatures fail, then to live
upon God, then to rejoice in the Lord, believing that God is able and will
help, the Lord will sustain. The want of this faith, was Isreal's sin, Psalm.
78.18, 19. they spoke against God and said, Can God prepare a table in the
wilderness? how is the deceitful heart of man ready to distrust God in such a
condition as those Jews? can God prepare a table when all is gone? but faith in
such a condition, believes, and lives by blieving, and the Lord will care for
more says the soul, and the Lord has said it: The lions shall luck, and
suffer hunger, but they that wait upon the Lord shall want nothing that is
good. This is a hard thing, it is easily said, but not so easily done; you
think it is easy, perhaps, to live by faith, while you have a house, a
calling that brings you in money, perhaps every day or every week, or money by
you, or land, etc. you can live comfortably upon Christ and your calling, upon
Christ and your house or land, but let all be taken from thee, see then how
then can live? this may be your condition, and then you will be put to the
trial.

2 Spiritually, when the soul has nothing of its own to rest upon, when
duties and performances and all is gone, then to believe and live by believing:
this is to live by faith indeed, upon this ground the soul believes, Romans
4.4.5. He that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted to him for righteousness, he that works not, he that
cannot perform one acceptable duty in way of righteousness, but sees all is
nothing, yet believes in Christ, and so lives by believing, this is the
constant stay of a believer, he eversees his own emptiness, the
untighteousnesse of his best actions: I say, to believe in, and to live upon
Christ in all such conditions, it is to live by faith, above duties and
performances: but how do many a professing man and woman comfort themselves in
the performing of duties, in their enlargement in duty, and the like, but when
they fail in this, then they call all in question again: this faith was not
right, for they think they believe, because they can pray and meditate, etc.
when indeed the soul that rightly believes, does believe because he cannot
pray, nor act or do any thing that is acceptable, and therefore he cannot live
by faith, but when that power he has to perform duty fails, his faith and all
fails, this is not to live by faith, yet this has been the life of most
professors in this Nation.

3 A living by faith, it is to live by believing of what the soul shall one
day enjoy, and this mightily bears up the spirits of the Saints.

And this we may take notice of under a threefold consideration.

1 That which the gracious soul longs most after is the full enjoyment of God,
nothing less can satisfy the believing soul, the soul that has tasted how
gracious the Lord is. O says the Soul, when shall I come to the full
enjoyment of my God, and so the seule groans, as the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.2
earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with the house from heaven, and the
reason is, ver. 7. for while we are here we walk, that is, live by faith, and
not by sense, while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord,
that is, absent comparatively with relation to what it shall be, for the soul
has but a glimpse of glory, but a taste of the excellency it shall one day
enjoy, in Christ.

Quest. Now what is it that bears up the soul in this condition? how does the
soul live in the want of this full enjoyment of God?

Answer. 1 By faith he can look upon God, as having a relation to him, God in
Christ is my God, says the soul, and I shall one day enjoy him, I shall one
day see him and for ever be satisfied in the beholding of him, this quiets,
this satisfies the believing soul, it is content to wait upon God, he that
believes makes not haste: It is in this case with the believing Christian, as
with a loving and tender wife, her desire is always to live in the enjoyment of
her husband, but when her husband is absent, far away from her, it may be she
receives now and then a comfortable letter from him, wherein she sees a
glimpse of his love, and reads his letter, and will have as much fellowship with
him in his letter as she can: she will look to every word, every sentence,
and note what expressions of love she can find there, and then she is
cheered and comforted: I have a letter from my husband, says the loving wife,
wherein he lets sorth a cast of his kindness and love unto me: O here are
sweet words of love, of a tender affection! But says the wise, this is not
all, he will come home unto me at the time appointed, and I shall enjoy him,
and this is that which most of all cheeres up the heart of the wife, my husband
will return at the time appointed.

Thus it is with the believing Christian nothing less then the enjoyment of
God can give satisfaction to the soul that has once rasted of him: but
beloved the Lord Jesus, the souls beloved, is gone as far as any, he has only
espoused, betrothed, the soul to himself, he has reserved the full enjoyment
that the believing soul shall have in him, till another world; only he
discovers this his love, lets forth a glimpse of his glory, into the souls of
the Saints; and then the soul having once tasted of God, how good, how
gracious, the Lord is; then nothing, but the full enjoyment of Christ can
satisfy. Now the Lord Christ has left his word here for his beloved, to have
recourse unto, and there he has made known his love, and his heart to his
poor people: and now the soul that longs after Christ, has recourse to the
Scripture, and there searches what Christ has said, and when the soul meets
Christ in the Scripture, then it is cheered, then it is comforted, here is a
blessed word says the soul, Christ is my all and in all, though I cannot come
to the full enjoyment of him? and then the believing soul will to ordinances,
preaching, and the Supper of the Lord, fellowship and communion of Saints, get
what it can of Christ, meet with her beloved every way God has appointed for
that purpose: but still, this is the great support, my beloved will come at the
time appointed, he is gone to receive for himself a Kingdom, and he will
return, and I shall enjoy him in his fullness, in his perfection, and here the
soul lives and waits patiently, here the anchor of hope is cast, and holds the
soul close to the Lord Jesus, living by believing what it shall one day enjoy,
Heb. 11.1.

2 That which the gracious soul longs after is, a full and perfect freedom
from corruption: it is that body of sin that burdens the Saints, that is it
makes them cry with the Apostle Paul, O wretched man that I am, Who shall
deliver me from this body of death? and the gracious soul could well be
contented sometimes to embrace death, that it might be freed from this body of
death; under which God is pleased (for ends best known to himself) to exercise
his children under. Now what is it bears up the Spirits of the Saints in this
condition? it is this, the believing of this, that they shall one day be rid of
this base proud deceitful heart, a day is coming when I shall change this vile
body of sin, and I shall be made like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ,
Phil. 3.21. I am already justified, and so made a Son, a daughter of God, and
this I know, I shall one day be made like unto him, 1 John 3.2. This is that
which cheers the heart of a Christian many times, when it is in a low
condition, when put to a stand in the beholding of those base haunts of heart,
that it finds within it self: when perhaps it is put to a stand in the
beholding of it: O says the soul, what I after so much experience of Gods
love, so much faith in the name of Jesus, and have such a base heart, such a
thought for wickedness, the Christian is sometimes put almost to a stand here:
but then he comes to consider, God is wise, and he is pleased to exercise me
under this body of sin, to keep me in a continual dependancie upon himself,
and this is my comfort, I shall one day be rid of all these enemies of mine,
and I shall one day enjoy the Lord Jesus, in his holiness and in his glory,
When Christ which is my life shall appear, then shall I appear with him in
glory, Col. 3.4. and in this case the believing soul lives in believing what
it shall one day enjoy, namely, freedom from sin, glorious liberty, even the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

3 The Saints of God are subject to afflictions and reproaches while they are
in this world, so Christ says, John. 16.3. In the world ye shall have
tribulation: It is true, Christ has prepared a Kingdom for them, but they are
not like to enjoy it in this world, I mean that Kingdom of glory, although it
is true, they enjoy much of God here in this Kingdom of grace, The Kingdom of
God is within you.

But the Saints here are liable to persecutions and afflictions; now the
believing Christian lives in believing it shall one day be freed from those
hard things it suffered here, freed from evil men, and I shall one day have a
Kingdom, says the soul: Thus Paul comforts himself, 2 Cor. 5.1. 2 Timothy 4.5,
6, 7. and this was it with which Peter comforts the scattered Jews, 1 Pet. 1.3,
4, 5. They were begotten to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, reserved
in heaven for them, and this was the ground of that exhortation to constancy to
the end in time of affliction, Rev. 2.10. Be faithful to the death, and you
shall have a crown of life.

Thus Christians have I endeavored, both from the light of Scripture, add the
light of experience, to hint out briefly unto you a taste of the Christians
living by faith, and this Christ teaches all those whom he effectually
teaches. Heb. 10.38.

I might proceed to other particulars, namely, that Christ teaches us to own
him as our Priest, as our King: it is Christ our Prophet indeed, that teaches
us all things that we rightly know, we know nothing as we ought to know,
farther then Christ Jesus by his Spirit teaches. But I proceed to the next
particular propounded in the office or work of a Prophet, namely to work
miracles; this the Prophets before Christ did, Moses a type of Christ, and the
great Prophet of Israel, work't many miracles when the Lord sent him to deliver
his people.

And this has Christ our Prophet done, and does to this day, this he did when
he was in the world, turning water into wine, raising the dead to life,
restoring those borne blind to sight, etc. and this be still does, Christ our
Prophet is ever working miracles: The conversion of a soul is a miracle, it is
the changing of the nature, and it is above nature to do it, to raise a man
from the dead to life is a miracle, and this Christ does to every soul who is
indeed raised, Ephesians. 2. the 1. and 5. verses compared, ver. 1. and you who
were dead in trespasses and sins, ver. 5. Even when we were dead in sins, has
he quickened us, etc. now to quicken, to give life to a dead soul is a
miracle, and this Christ does ordinarily; and he gives sight unto blind men,
it was a miracle for Christ to give sight to the man that was borne blind,
beloved, every man and woman in the world is borne blind, spiritually blind,
and this is a greater miracle to cure such, yet this is the ordinary work of
Christ: and every man naturally is both blind, lame, and deaf, but Christ when
he comes he opens the blind eyes, he un-stops the deaf ears, he causes the
lame to walk, and the tongue of the dumb to sing, Esaias. 35.5.

3 The Prophet did foretell of things to come, Moses and the rest did foretell
Christ, etc. and so did Christ in many particulars, Mat 24. but I pass this
also.

2 Christ is to be exalted Prophet in the days of the Gospel, see Act. 3.22,
23. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, him shall you hear in
all things.

Use 1. To examine if Christ have been thy Prophet. When Christ comes first to
the soul, he finds men dead and gives life unto them, he finds men blind
and gives sight unto them: Has the Lord discovered thy dead condition unto
thee, and given thee life? art borne from above? That which is borne of the
flesh is flesh, and thou were borne flesh, dead in trespasses and sins, has
the Lord changed thee from a state of death to a state of life; from a state of
infidelity, to a state of believing? thou were blind, thou were borne blind,
not able to see into spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2.14. Has the Lord opened thine
eyes? can say I was blind, but now I see, I was dumb, but now I speak, o
this is worth your consideration!

Use 2. A word of consolation to the Saints whom the Lord Jesus has taught:
what is the comfort, you will say?

1 He will for ever be thy Prophet, and will be ever teaching thee: Thou shall
hear a voice behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk ye in it, when thou
turnest to the right hand or to the left, the Lord Jesus will be for ever thy
Prophet, he will never fail thee nor for sake thee: his eye shall ever be over
thee for good, he will direct thee in all thy ways, and is not this a mercy?

2 He has made all the Saints Prophets, he has powered down a spirit of
Prophecy upon them, that now they are enabled by the spirit of prophecy to
speak one to another, for edification, exhortation, and consolation, 1 Cor.
14.3. and therefore the men of the world might hence be warned to take heed how
they meddle with the Saints, to persecute them, for they are the Lords
Prophets: 1 Chronicles. 16.22. Touch not mine anointed, do my Prophets no harm,
Christ takes every wrong done to them, as done to himself, therefore you had
need look to it, for it is that which will work your ruin in the end.

THE EXALTATION OF CHRIST The alone KING of SAINTS. CHAP. III.
I Come to the Kingly Office of Christ: Christ is the alone King of his people:
believe it, Christ is the alone King of his people: Christ is a King, and he
has a Kindome, Psalm 45.6. His Kingdom is spiritual, it is not of this world,
although it is in the world.

Christ has a twofold kingdom here in this world: there is the kingdom
within the Saints; and the kingdom without the one in the heart, the other in
the Church; they are both spiritual.

1 Christ rules and reigns in the Saints; the kingdom of God is within you:
beloved, Christ has a kingdom within you, if ye are his; Christ is in you
except ye be reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5. And this is a privilege more then all
the Kings in the earth have, they may reign here over their subjects, but not
in them: but Christ first reigns in them, and then over them: he reigns I mean
spiritually over none; but those in whom he reigns.

Now Christ reigns in the souls of the Saints; first opposing all things that
are contrary to himself: there are other Lords that will seek to rule in the
hearts of the Saints, if Christ subdue them not: the Devil he will seek to be
Lord, (he that is the God of the world, and rules and reigns in the hearts of
the children of disobedience) where Christ does not rule; but when the Lord
Jesus coms he dispossesseth him, and casts him out, and so keeps him out. The
Devil will make many a strong assault, throw many a fiery dart at the soul of
the Christian, endeavoring if possible he can to shake his hold; but Christ he
is the King, he is the watchman, the keeper of Israel, he gives in power to
the weak fainting soul, to overcome all those Laws and Edicts, Satan shall
endeavor to set up in the soul; so that now the Christian espyes all Satan's
plots and artificial devices to trap and ensnare him, rejects all his
temptations, and says as Christ, Get thee behind me Satan: when the Devil acts
and works in others, he has no power over the soul where Christ reigns: it is
true he may throw in his darts, sometimes make assays either to tempt to some
evil, or to shake the faith of Christians, but Christ the King reigns there
still, conquers him, subdues him, and so caries on his own work, that the gates
of hell cannot prevail against that soul where he dwells. Thus Christ reigns
keeping under Satan, believe it, beloved Christ and Satan cannot reign both in
one soul.

2 Christ opposes the power of sin in the soul, where he reigns: sin bears a
strong sway in the soul, now Christ he opposes it; sets himself against it:
hence it is there is such a strong opposition between the flesh and the spirit,
that is, the spirit of Christ: the spirit Iusting against the flesh, and the
flesh against the spirit, and these two are contrary each to other. And thus
the Lord Jesus continues opposing of sin, of the Just and corruption that is in
the hearts of the Saints.

Quest. How does Christ oppose sin and Satan? for sin is Satan's work, 1 John
5.8. For this cause was the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the
work of the Devil. The work of the Devil is sin, he that commits sin is
of the Devil,

Ans. Christ destroys sin, which is the Devils work, two ways.

1 First, Christ he destroys the guilt of it, and that he did, in bearing both
the sin, guilt, and condemnation of it upon his own body, 1 Pet. 2.24. Romans
8.3. and now he comes, and in the Gospel makes it known unto his people, Romans
5.11.

2 He destroys the power of it by his spirit, by the operation of his power,
working, reigning, and ruling in the hearts of his people: Romans 6.4. Now Christ
subdues this iniquity by his Kingly Office, reigning in the Saints; Ye are not
under the law but under grace, under Christ, in whom was manifested the
fullness of grace.

This does Christ two ways: first, he comes to the soul of a poor sinner,
discovering his excellency, the riches of his grace, and so shedding abroad his
love in the heart, gets the soul willing to receive him out of love unto him,
desires to have Christ set up, and his Kingdom within it self: for Christ
has never a Kingdom in the heart of man, till he thus comes and breaks in
upon the soul, discovering love: yet now says the soul, let Christ be King,
and none but him: although it is true, it is by his power he breaks in upon,
and subdues the stout spirit of man, who would not willingly submit of
himself, yet Christ makes him willing, by the shedding abroad of his love in
the heart, Romans 5.5. So that now, the Lord Jesus with the free consent of the
gracious soul, sets up his kingdom in the heart, so that when Christ says, My
Sou give me my heart: Lord, take my heart, says the soul, dwell there, rule
there, ser up thy kingdom there: so that you see Christ does not rule as
Tyrant in the souls of his people, but with the free and full consent of the
mind of the person in whom he reigns, for this is both the wisdom and power
of Christ, that he makes his people a willing people, Psalm. 110.3.

Then secondly, Christ having purged the heart of man in some measure,
overcomes those strong lusts and affections, and makes it a meet mansion house,
a Temple for his holy spirit to dwell in: he then sets up laws and statutes in
the hearts of his children, in his kingdom; and there he rules, opposing all
other laws, for there are, and will be, the stirring of corruption, and that
very strongly too.

Now Christ first sets up the law of faith in the hearts of his people, and
that in opposition of infidelity: for naturally the Saints are subject to
infidelity, through the motions of corruptions, and temptations of Satan. The
believing soul, when it sees, what a base nature it still carries about within
it self, being sensible of the stirring of lusts and corruptions, Satan
helping seriously, then it is troubled; O this evil nature of mine, says the
soul, who shall deliver me from this body of sin?

Now the law of Christ is to believe, and in this condition to live by
believing: and so Christ enables to put faith in exercise, and to believe above
hope, almost as Abraham; and so he still quiets the soul by enabling it to
believe constantly in the name of the Son God; and that when it cannot work,
for he is the Prince of our faith, the author and finisher of it: and so here
is in the heart of the Christian a strong conflict between the law of faith,
and the law of infidelity; the spirit of faith and the spirit of infidelity:
infidelity it comes in with a mighty commanding authority upon the soul of
that Christian, set on by the Devils malice, and perhaps, sometimes seems
almost in the eyes of reason to get the victory over faith; but then Christ
(who maintains his laws, puts them in execution) arises and rayseth up the
heart above those doubtings and caries on the soul in a way of believing still,
and so quashes infidelity, and treads it under fect, and leaves it dead,
executed for present by the law of faith.

2 Christ sets up the law of love in his Kingdom, I mean in the heart of the
Saints; and that in opposition to hatred. For the truth is, that every soul in
whom Christ reigns not, does indeed hate Christ: now Christ sets up this law of
love in the hearts of the Saints: love to himself, to his holiness, to his
Gospel, Ordinances, Saints, every thing, that have the name of Christ stamped
upon them: it loves it for his sake, and this law of love opposes hatred, for
there may come sometimes, hard thoughts into the souls of the Saints under
afflictions, and fiery trials, ready perhaps, to say with David, Has the Lord
forgotten to be merciful? has he shut up his tender mercy in disple asure?
Now the law of love comes in, and helps the soul to see that there, is in
Christ nothing but love to it, notwithstanding the souls present apprehensions,
and sees all things shall work for good to them that love the Lord; and so can
say with the Prophet, Lord, out of very love have thou afflicted me: and so the
soul is knit to Christ in all conditions, and cannot but have high thoughts of
him, even then, when it suffers either for him or from him.

For him, That is, for want of the enjoyment of the manifestations of his
pleasing countenance, and the fresh incomes of his love, the kissings of his
mouth, Cant. 1.2. or for the bearing up of his name in a visible profession of
the Gospel of Christ.

From him, Fatherly chastisements out of love, to make us partakers of his
holiness, Heb. 12.10. In all these sufferings, when perhaps sometimes the
carnal part is ready almost to quarrel against Christ, this law of love
quells and subdues all, brings this heart-rising in subjection, and knits the
soul to the Lord Jesus

2 As it causes the soul to love the Lord Jesus so it causes it to love all
that is Christ's, and highly to esteem of it: it opposes any other Law that may
seem to arise; as sometimes perhaps through the workings of Satan, with the
corruptions of the Saints, there may be some beginnings of slighting the
Saints, of entertaining hard thoughts of them, but then Christ stirs up, and
revives this Law of love in them, kills that hatred, those hard thoughts, that
it was apt to conceive against them, and so knits the soul to them by a more
firm united love then ever, and thus this law of love, overcomes this law of
hatred: in a word, it causes the Saints to do all that they do out of love,
the love of Christ constr ains them, 2 Cor. 5.14.

3 Christ sets up in his Kingdom the Law of meekness and humility, and that
in opposition to the Law of pride and vaineglory, Learn of me, says Christ,
for I am meek and lowly in heart, Mat. 11.29. and this Christ sets up in the
hearts of his people, for he makes them partakers of his own graces, Joh. 1.16.
it is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.23. and of the Law of Christ, set up in the
souls of the Saints, against which there is no law can prevail. It is true,
there will be a rising sometimes in the spirits of the Saints, pride will thrust
it self in, and be ready to life up the creature in the apprehension of some
self excellency, although there is no cause, yet this is a truth, I believe
it, those that have any experience of the Kingdom of Christ, or of the working
of corruption know it right well, pride will be pirking in, and ready to lift
up the creature above measure, either sometimes Externally, and to make a
difference betwixt himself and others, as nobility of birth, parents or
kinted, honor in the world, External carnal excellencies: O how will it
work sometimes upon the heart of a poor creature, as if he were sombody above
others? O is not thy soul sensible of this sometimes dear Christian? I cannot
but think it is: But then comes in Christ; with his law of meekness, of
humility, and pulls down this pride of heart, and lays it low, and brings the
soul again to lay all in the dust: what is honor says the believing soul?
what is nobility of birth? this is my honor, that I am a son, a daughter, of
Jesus Christ, and so the soul comes down, ready to do any service of love to
the meanest Saint, and now the Saints come to serve one another in love, and
now they come again to see that they are all one in Christ Jesus.

Sometimes Internally, or with relation to Internal gifts received, although we
have nothing but what we receive, yet this is the baseness of man's nature, it
will grow proud, be ready to be lifted up, even with those graces received, is
it not so with thy heart? art thou not naturally proud? does it not press in
upon thee sometimes? I know it does, and I dare say it troubles thee that art a
Christian: But now Christ comes with his law, and casts all down to the ground,
lays low those mountains, those strong lusts that exalt themselves thus against
the Kingdom of Christ, for this pride is, absolutely against the Kingdom of
Christ, he will not have such things in his Kingdom, it will thrust it self
in, but the Law of Christ discovers it, and vanquisheth it, and keeps the soul
in an humble, lowly, meek condition. O consider of it, where pride, domineers
and rules, Christ has no Kingdom in that soul, there Christ dwells, there he
reigns, where he has made the soul humble: faith in Christ does not make men
proud and high, no, no, it is the greatest enemy to it in the world, a proud
heart did never, can never believe, before brought low in the sense of its own
nothingnesse, and emptynesse.

4 Christ sets up in the hearts of his Saints in his Kingdom, the law of
patience and contentedness, in opposition to anger, impatiencie, and
discontentednesse.

Rash anger, impatiencic, peevishness of spirit, how will they arise and be
striving sometimes in the hearts of Christians for a small matter? how will the
heart be out of order and distemper? what words will be ready to flow forth,
the heart being in this temper? but now in the heart of a Christian, Christ
puts in execution his law of patience and quietness of spirit. O says Christ
to the soul, thou must be patient and meek, thou must learn of me, did thou
ever read that I was moved to anger, and impatiencie, to fret and fume? no, not
against mine enemies: and then says the soul, o what a fool am I thus to
fret, and then to be angry? how unlike to Christ am I? and then down coms that
proud peevish spirit into the dust, and so foolish was I and ignorant, I was
even a beast before thee: and then the soul is turned again into a sweet
disposition of love, a compound of patience, not easily provoked, not easily
again stirred to wrath.

Sometimes in the soul of a Christian is apt to arise perhaps some impatiencie
and discontentednesse under afflictions and persecutions, hardly can it bear
with patience, some heart rising this way may arise: but then in comes Christ
purting in execution the Law of patience and contentedness, and pulls down all
those impatient discontented thoughts, and then let patience have her perfect
work, and the soul is quieted and contented, and willingly submits unto the
mind of Jesus, and then it can say with the Apostle Paul, Phil. 4.11. I have
learned in what estate soever I am, therewith to be content, and now the soul
is quieted, and waits patiently upon the Lord, and now the soul says, o how
unlike am I to Christ 3 he suffered (meekly as a lamb dumb before the shearer,
and opened not his mouth) for me a sinner, he suffered for me, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring me to God, and shall not I be contented to suffer
reproach and shame for him, and then come what will come, patience possesses
the soul.

5 Christ sets up the Law of heavenly mindedness in the heart of a Christian,
and indeed it is no wonder, for his Kingdom is there, heaven is there, The
Kingdom of heaven is within you, Luke, 17.21. and therefore needs must Christ
set up this Law in his Kingdom, and that in opposition to earthly mindedness,
sinfulness, or any thing that is opposite to holiness and heavenlynesse; and
you know how the spirits of men, nay, of Christians, are apt to be below the
Lord Jesus: sometimes on earthly object; sometimes, vain, proud, unprofitable
things run in the mind, but Christ he comes, and scatters those low things, and
raises the heart to himself, and keeps the heart in such a temper, that
nothing can satisfy it but himself, and when it loses its heavenly temper,
its heavenly glory, it is presently troubled, and it cannot possibly take
comfort in any thing beneath the Lord Jesus: and here is a continual combat
and conflict between the flesh and the spirit, the corrupt nature and the
divine nature; and certainly here corruption and Satan, manytimes brings
sadness upon the spirits of the Saints, in darkning, in overshadowing their
heavenly enjoyment, I mean in way of sense, although they can never shake the
faith of the soul in whom Christ dwells, Mat. 16. The gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it.

Consider now, do you find Christ's Kingdom, Christ's laws, these set up in
your hearts? do you find Christ opposing lust and corruption within you, or do
you not? If Christ be there, you will find it in some measure: I confess it,
that Christ according to his diversities of operations and workings, keeps this
law of sin under in some souls more then in other, both the workings of it, and
the guilt of it, Rom 8.2. The law of the spirit of life, has made free from
the law of sin and death: that is free from the power, as it comes with
authority, as a law; there Christ subdues, although it will be there as a rebel
reigning, yet it shall set up no law in the soul where Christ is. Consider of it
you that were never troubled about your sins, but all things are at peace
within you: it is a sad sign Christ has not set up his Kingdom there: While
the strong man (the Devil) keeps the house, all things are at peace, all
quiet, and so the poor creature lives in a fools Paradise, and plcases himself
in this condition, but believe it when the Lord Jesus comes, He will sit as a
refiner, and as a purifier, he will purge out the dross when he comes: Mal.
3.3. But who may abide the day of his coming, he will come with the refiners
fire, and the fullers soap, he comes not to bring peace, that is, with lust and
corruption, but the Lord cuts them down: corruption dies when Christ comes.

Object. But perhaps, some soul may object: I find indeed some stirring within
me, some to evil, and some motions to good, how shall I know that this flows
from the Kingdom of Christ, set up in my soul, or from some other principle?

Answ. There is a conflict between the law and natural conscience, and there
is a conflict between the spirit of Christ, his work in the spirit of the
Christian, and the flesh corrupt nature and Satan.

1 There is a conflict between natural conscience, and the law, or the mind
legally enlightened and the law: and this may be in a natural man or an
Hypocrite. Thus it was with Judas, I have sinned in betraying the innocent
blood. He saw his sin, he had transgressed the law, and now he is troubled,
not because of his sin, as it was a sin, but because his conscience now dogs
him, will not let him rest. This conflict may be in the heart of a poor
creature, and Christ never come there in the way of mercy; and the soul
deceive and cozen it self, thinking Christ is their opposing sin, when it is
nothing else, but the mind of man legally enlightened, apprehending wrath, and
anger, from the breach of the law: and now walks more circumspectly yields more
perfectobedience, opposes sin, as a transgression of the law, and so thinks it
self in a goodly paradise, in a fair way for heaven. And thus many poor souls
deceive themselves and undo their souls everlastingly.

But perhaps some may say, how shall I know the difference between mine one
opposing sin, from a principal of legal light? whether the conflict be
between natural conscience and the law? or the Kingdom of Christ set up in
my soul, and sin?

Answ. The conflict between natural conscience and the law, it is only from
the apprehension of the condemnation of the Law: the law says, thou shall not
sin; if thou do it, thou must suffer, thou must be condemned: conscience
enlightened, seeing this is cast down, and perhaps is much perplexed for sin;
sets against sin, opposes it with might and mayn, and resolves to sin no more:
and anon sin presents it self, and the Law presents it self, and then out of
doors sin must: but why? because of the law, not because of Christ: the law
will give it no rest, no peace there? now to illustrate this by a comparison in
these days of war; I do not question, but there are many in this country that
are turned Paliamenteers for fear lest the Law seize upon their goods and
persons, and so they loose all: their minds are so far enlightened, that they
see it is good to sleep in a whole skin as they say, and hence they can
perhaps talk sometimes, and do for the Parliament, when indeed their minds are
contrary: well, there comes one whose mind is not so far enlightened as to
seek their own external good, while he is here, one whom this man loves, and
could gladly entertain him; but for fear of the law he shall be counted and
taken for an enemy to the State; out of doors this man go; none dares
entertain him: but why? not for want of love, but for fear: beloved I have
known the truth of this on the otherside enough.

And thus it is with this man, perhaps the poor creature could be content to
entertain sin in his bosom, lust, anger, pride, etc. but no sooner does sin
appear, but the law that appears, conscience that is troubled, out must the
sin, else conscience cannot be quier: and so (beloved) for the quietness of
conscience, who fears eternal flames, Esaias 33.14. out sin must and an
external conformity follows, and so the man is become a Christian. It is as a
man that has a loving friend, he brings him to his houfe, but the wife will
not be satisfied, she scolds, out must the man, else there will be no peace: so
sin would find welcome, perhaps, and kind entertainment with the man, but
natural conscience from the apprehension of the law, scolds and threatens, and
out must the beloved lust, else there will be no peace. I fear me many a
poor soul split themselves upon this rock.

But when Christ comes and sets up his Kingdom in the soul, he presently
writes his law in the heart, makes them partakers of the divine nature, makes
them awilling people: and now the conflict is not between the mind and the law,
but between the spirit and sin: were there no law, that matters not with the
gracious soul, it sees such a great disproportion and distance between its
beloved, and sin, that there arises a bitter enmity between sin and the law of
love, in the soul of the Saints; that the every appearance, the very motions
of sin, as it is sin, not as it brings condemnation, but as it is filthy,
polluting, contrary to the mind of Christ. O the soul has a continual
loathing of it, and thus he that is born of God sins not, gives not the
least allowance to sin, in the very thought; the very thought of it is bitter.

Quest. But what are the effects of this Kingdom of Christ in the souls of the
Saints?

Answ. First, is the utter subversion and destruction of the Kingdom of Satan
and sin: for all sin is of the Devil, and he that is borne of God, sins not
as you have heard.

2 Is the continual possessing of the soul with the enjoyment of God. Christ
always dwelling in the heart of the Saints: for it is his Kingdom and the
presence of Christ makes it heaven.

3 Is joy and peace, Romans 15.13. The God of hope fill you with joy and peace
through believing: And the kingdom of heaven consists not in meat and
drink, but in righteousness and peace and joy in the holy spirit.

Joy unspeakable and full of glory: the soul in whom Christ dwells, who lives in
the continual enjoyment of God, must needs enjoy much consolation, In his
presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasures for evermore.

4 He brings over those in whom he rules, to submit to the outward regiment of
his Kingdom.

The second particular propounded is, the Kingdom of Christ over the Saints,
as Christ reigns in, so he reigns over the Saints. It is this Kingdom in them,
that brings them in submission to his Kingdom without them: and this is a
spiritual Kingdom likewise: note I pray you, this kingdom of Christ is all
spiritual likewise: 1 There is spiritual matter. 2 Spiritual Laws and
Institutions. 3 Spiritual executions. 4 Spiritual ends.

1 Christ he is a King, he is the King of his people, and God will exalt him,
and manifest him to be King one day, Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon the
holy hill of Sion. Christ is King, and he shall reign, notwithstanding the
opposition of men, of great men: Why do the Gentiles rage, and the people
imagine vain things? they consult, they take counsel together, against the
Lord and against his Christ: Kings and great men, and wise learned men, they
rage, they consult, they take counsel together against Christ to destroy his
Kingdom. The most great and learned men in the world at this day rage against
the Kingdom of Christ, they would set up a Kingdom of their own, and then
compel men unto it: who ever it is that establishes a worship with Laws and
Edicts, to compel all unto it, and to inflict bodily punishments, upon all
that refuse it, or cannot join with it, does what in him lies absolutely to
destroy the Kingdom of Christ; over the soul: and if men be erroneous and
worship contrary to the rule of truth, it is Christ himself that must judge
him, and not man, he (to wit God) has committed all judgment to the Son:
therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time, and
Jam. 4.11, 12. if thou judge another (says the Apostle) thou art not a doer of
the law, but a judge. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and destroy:
What art thou that judge another? Note, for men to pass a final sentence,
is not to do the mind of Christ, but to get into the room of Christ; for man
to set up a law in matter of worship, and compel unto it, and judge and
condemn body, and soul, for not submitting, is to exalt themselves above
Christ, and so indeed is Antichristian: not but that the Churches of Christ
have power to judge and determine of things amongst themselves, about the
spiritual affairs of Christ, and to excommunicate a wilful offender: it is
according to the rule, to cut him off from every fellowship with the Saints, as
you shall hear anon; but not to destroy his body: but the Church of Christ
has nothing to do to judge or meddle with those that are without, 1 Cor.
5.12, 13. Therefore if any Church or Magistrate would exercise that power they
conceive Christ has entrusted them in, about spiritual Church affairs, I
humbly conceive that they have nothing to do with those that are not of the
same body with them, or the same society, as many Churches may be in society:
but those that are without, be they Saints, be they what they will, good or
bad, they are without to them; and what have thou to do with them that are
without? God judges them: Romans 14.4. Who art thou that judge another man's
servant? to his own master, he stands or falloth: If it be objected that the
Church of England is a true Church, and all these that absent themselves, were
members, and therefore they are to be dealt with as offending members in the
Church. This is all can be objected I am sure against them, for I think their
faithfulness to the State, speaks in the ears of every man (almost) of reason;
and therefore, the State cannot meddle, where there is no Civil law
transgressed? Therefore for answer to that objection, suppose Englands Church
were a true Church (which will never be proved; but I pass it in this place)
yet can they but proceed according to the rule Christ has given in Scripture:
if in this particular, there might be a proceeding according to rule, that is,
to admonish those that are contrary minded, if that will not do, to
excommunicate, pass the Church censure upon them; this is the furthest that I
know can be done by any Church of CHRIST: and they are then (not to cut them
off out of the Land, out of the World) but to admonish them as brethren, 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. If such as do not, or cannot co^form, to the worship prescribed by
man should be cut off our of the land, out of the world, what means could then
be used for their conversion? Is there not still hope while the creature is yet
alive; and above ground? Therefore I conceive it to be unchristian cruelty to
judge men in this case: never any we read of, but heathens, that did the like
under the Gospel: and Christ has said, Judge not that ye be not judged, for
with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged? Mat. 17.1, 2. and Jam. 2.13.
For he shall have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy: Merciless
men are the miserablest men under Heaven, there is no mercy for them, God will
deal with them as they deal with others: it is both the Law and Prophets to do:
as we would be done unto. Now consider a little, I pray thee, thou that can
be content in thy heart to persecute those that differ from thee in judgment:
would thou be content to be so dealt with thy self? Does the Lord Jesus the
King of Saints, require or accept of any service, but that is free and
voluntary? but I profess; Christ you see is King, and he shall be exalted
King, and manifested to be King on day, Psalm. 45.6. with Heb. 1.8. But unto the
Son he says, thy throne, o God, is for ever; a Scepter of righteousness is
the Scepter of thy kingdom. Here is a King, a Kingdom, a Scepter, Christ the
King, the Saints the Kingdom, the Word the Scepter, Esaias 9.6, 7. He is a King,
and of the increase of his government and peace, there shall be no end: that
is, till there be no more time, till time shall cease in this World; after he
shall give up the Kingdom to the Father, and God shall be all in all, 1 Cor.
15.28. Thus you see Christ is King: I come in the second place to the Kingdom
which is wholly spiritual, My kingdom, says Christ, is not of this world.

1 The matter of Christ's Kingdom is spiritual, Saints called out of the
world: this is the Church, the Kingdom of Christ; the Saints gathered out of
the World, by the preaching of the Gospel, into the order and fellowship of the
Gospel; they are Saints, although some think strange to hear of Saints in this
World, yet they are in Scripture called Saints, that is Sanctus holy, see 1
Cor. 1. called to be Saints, called to be holy, so Heb. 3.1. Wherefore holy
brethren partakers of the heavenly calling: so that the kingdom of Christ is,
or should be Saints, holy ones; not the world, for all the world are not
Saints, but the Kingdom of Christ, are Saints called out of the World, John
15.19. Ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, The
Church of Christ are Saints chosen out of the World, they are not of the World,
they are a people separated, or severed out of the World, so was the Church of
the Jews, Levit. 20.26. Ye shall be holy to me, for I the Lord am holy, and
have severed you, from other people, that you should be mine. And thus it is
with the spiritual Israel of Christ, under the Gospel, of which the natural
was a type: they are not of this World, they are called out of this World, and
severed or separated from the World, 2 Cor. 6.14, to the end: they are to be
separated from the world, although the world has gotten a form of godliness.
See 2 Timothy 3.1, 5. The Apostle speaking of the last times, reckons up what
courses men should take, what sins they should be addicted to, and yet
concludes they shall have a form of godliness, but from such turn away, or be
ye separated. So that you see, the Church, which is Christ's Kingdom, are a
people called out of the world, they are not of this world as he is not of this
world. Then certainly those are no friends to Christ, that would turn the World
in to a Church, and so make the kingdom of Christ not a spiritual, but a
carnal kingdom; and so make the Lord Jesus a liar, for he has said, His
Kingdom is not of this world: but let Christ be true, and every man a liar.
The Church of Christ, his kingdom, they are such as are in the order and
fellowship of the Gospel, compacted together, according to the Gospel rule, in
order and fellowship: it is in the spiritual kingdom of Christ in this case,
as in the body politic: the whole kingdom under one government is but one
body politic, or state: so the Kingdom of Christ, his church, although
gathered in many bodies, yet it is but one body, and every body has the same
power, the same privileges, so that it ought to be a body compacted together,
under the reign and rule of one Lord lesus, Ephesians. 4.16. and the external way,
by which the Saints enter into this fellow ship, it is by baptism, as you may
see, Acts 2.41. Then they with the godly received the word, and were baptized,
and so added, but I have spoken of this formerly, and therefore I pass it here.

2 As Christ has a Kingdom, and that is spiritual, in relation to the matter,
so he sets up Laws and they are spiritual, the Laws of Christ in his Kingdom
is.

1 The law of love. 2 The law of edification.
1 The law of love, Gal. 5.13, 14. By love serve one another, for all the Law
is fulfilled in one word, even this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, and Jam. 2.8. It is called, the royal Law of God, Thou shall love thy
neighbonr as thyselfe, this is the Law of the Gospel, love to Christ, and love
to the Saints. A new commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another,
Joh. 13.34. Now this love breaks forth in causing the Saints to walk up
according to every rule of the Gospel, it constrains them to submit to every
word, to every command of Christ, it causes the Saints to watch over each
other, to build up each other in the most holy faith, to restore a weak brother
with the spirit of meekness, being fallen, Gal. 6.1. to bear one another
burdens, and so to fulfill the Law of CHRIST: Thus CHRIST rules in and over
his Kingdom, by this law of love, It is the end of the command of the Gospel,
love out of a pure heart and faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. He gives rules unto
his people, out of love, he causes them to obey out of love, there is no
condemnation in his law to his people, but if they sin, they have an advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.1. who is a propitiation
for their sins. Here is love in the King, love in the subjects, love in Christ
commanding, love in Christians obeying, a Kingdom upheld and maintained by the
law of love. O that the God of love would increase this love more abundaritly,
both in your and my soul, 1 These. 3.12. The Lord make you to abound in love one
toward another, and to wards all men. O this love is sweet, amiable, pleasant,
Psalm. 133.1. love to the Saints, love to all men, it is the way to win them to
the Lord Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.25. This is the main law by which Christ rules in and
over his Saints, his Churches, his Kingdom: and this is spirirituall.

2 There is the law of edification, 1 Cor. 14.26. Let all things be done to
edifying. It is the law of Christ in his Church, that all things should be done
to edification, for the building up of the Saints in their most holy faith,
therefore the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.23. makes light of that which tends not to
edification, All things are lawful for me, but all things edify not, that is
it which a Christian should look most unto, that is it that will edify most:
it is the end of their compacting and building together in faith and
fellowship, that they might edify each other in love, Ephesians. 4.16 All done in
the Church is for the edification of the body, or should be: every Ordinance
that Christ has set up in his Kingdom is for Edification; Watching over each
other, Exhortation, Admonition, it is all for edification: Baptism, Preaching,
the Supper of the Lord, Communion and fellowship, it is all for edification,
and consolation, as Christ has appointed it, Act. 2.41. to 46. 1 Cor. 14.3.
Church censure, excommunication, it is an Ordinance appointed of God for
edification, to bring the sinner into the sight of his sin, and that should
be the Churches end in the use of it: Give him up to Satan for the destruction
of the flesh, that the soul might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1
Cor. 5.5. that is the end of this ordinance, and should be the Churches end in
the execution of it, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him
be Anathema Maranatha, let him be accursed till the Lord come, so the word
Maranatha implies: it consists of two Syrian words, Maran out Lord, Atha come,
till our Lord come.

That is, as I understand it, till the Lord come, either in a way of love
convincing him by this ordinance, or to judge and condemn him, so that other
Scripture seems to imply, 1 Cor. 5.5. That his soul may be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus, the day Jesus comes in to do good unto him, for when ever the
Lord Jesus takes an opportunity to do good to a sinner, that is the day of the
Lord, or the Lords day, when he manifests mercy, see Psalm. 110.3. 2 Cor. 6.2.

Thus Christ rules by his Law generally in the Assembly of Saints: But

2 He manifests his Kingly power in ordaining officers with their gifts and
callings, which the Scripture seems in the strictest and most refined sense to
call Elders and Deacons, or Bishops and Deacons, 1 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, etc.

Of Bishops or Elders are two sorts, or a different administration, with
relation to their gifts, ruling and teaching, these although they ought not to
seek it, for they are the Churches servants, yet by the Church are to be
accounted worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. and in things partaining to
Christ are to be obeyed, for they watch for souls, Heb. 13.17.

Quest. But what power has Christ committed to his Church, wherein his Kingly
office appears?

Answer. He has given power to his Church.

1 To Judge, 2 To Determine, 3 To Pass sentence.
1 To Judge, and this under a twofold consideration, 1 Of the faith of members
that are to be received. 2 Of proceedings within the same body.

1 Of the faith of members that are to be admitted: This belongs to the
Church, or some appointed thereunto by the Church: For if faith be required of
those that are to be admitted, then faith is to be manifested in those
received, to those that receive it, this is a truth generally held forth in
Scripture, Act. 2.38. with the 41. and Act. 8.37. and 19.17, 18. And likewise
there seems to be something to this purpose in that Scripture, Mat. 16.19. I
will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: Whatsoever the Church of Christ
concludes on on earth, is approved of in heaven, while they walk according to
rule, although I believe the great mystry couched under these words is another
thing, to wit, the power Christ gives to the faith of Peter, and all that
obtain like precious faith: whatsoever is bound on earth (that is, whosoever
believes on earth) that is, bound in heaven: whosoever believes not on earth
loses all, it is loosed in heaven: for it is to Peter's faith Christ commits
the keys

2 There is power to judge of things in the Church, and this every member ought
to make use of in looking to the ways of each other, Phil. 2.4. Look not every
one to his own things, but every one to the things of one another, Mat. 18.17,
18. Thus all the body ought to watch over each other, and to judge the actions
of each other, thus the Elder is to watch over the body, and to judge the
actions, and to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with patience and love where is
occasion: and thus may, nay, and ought, the whole Church to watch over (and if
occasion be) reprove, admonish, etc. the Elder. Thus is the Kingly office of
Christ, carried along sweeetly in the Church of Christ, 1 Timothy 5.19, 20. When
all watch over each other, when all are subject each to other. 1 Pet. 5.5.

2 Christ has given power, as to Judge, so to Determine of things, and this
for the good of the body, for the order of the Church of Christ,

3 And also It, to pass sentence (I mean) spiritual, by way of
excommunication, as you heard before. I conceive the Church and state of the
Jews, who was Abraham's natural seed, was a type of the Church of the Gospel,
the spiritual seed of Christ, Gal. 3.26. They had laws and statutes, so has
the Church of Christ now, only theirs carnal, ours spiritual: for that
Church was more carnal then Spiritual, for that was the natural seed, this
the spiritual: they were to admit none but those that were naturally or bodily
circumcised, we none but those that are spiritual, Romans 2. ult. They were not
to touch any thing, whereupon was any external uncleanness, we are not to
touch the spiritual unclean thing, that is Sin, or sinful worships or
fellowships, 1 Cor. 6.15, 16, 17. They were to put offenders that were gross
to death bodily, the Church of Christ spiritually by excommunication: Thus is
the Kingly office of Christ carried along in the Kingdom, in the Church of
Christ under the Gospel, and you see both Church and Laws are spiritual.

3 The executions of the Churches Laws are spiritual, but this I have opened
already in my foregoing discourse, therefore I pass.

4 The ends of it are spiritual, namely, as you have heard.

1 The good of the body, the edifying of the body of Christ, see Ephesians. 4.11.
And

2 The glory of Jesus, the execution of the Laws of Christ, as it tends to the
Saints good, so Christ's glory, Ye call me Lord (says Christ) but where is
mine honor? This should be the end, as of all the Saints Church actions, so of
all civil actions, the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.23.

Thus you see Christ is King, and he has a spiritual Kingdom, and he rules
by his Scepter in this Kingdom, and there is good reason for it.

1 He was borne King, he has a right to it by birth, it is his birthright,
Mat. 2.2. Where is he that is borne King of the Jews? He is a Jew that is one
inwardly, and it is Christ's birthright to reign over them, and those who take
the rule, the Kingdom from Christ, are no less then enemies and traitors to
the royal crown and dignity of the Lord Jesus: and he will take them alive
one day, and cast them into the lake of fire: Revel. 19.20.

2 He is thereunto appointed by the Father: God the Father has committed all
judgment to the Son, John 10.22. For the Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment to the Son, ver. 27. And he has given him authority
to execute judgment, because he is the Son of God. God the father has given
up the Kingdom to the Son, and all government, rule and dominion, is in the
hand of Christ, as he is man as well as God, Act. 17.31. He has appointed a
day in which he will judge the World, by that man whom he has ordained, Mat.
28.18. All power is given to me, both in heaven and in earth, etc. Thus you
see, power and authority is given to the Lord Jesus, and he is to exercise it,
and not man, farther then he has appointed, for the good of his Church.

3 He has purchased this Kingdom with his own blood, and therefore good reason
he should reign in it and over it: Act. 20.28. He has purchased his Church
with his own blood: is it not reason then that Christ should reign over those
whom he has purchased? those who were lost and undone, children of wrath as
well as others, Christ having redeemed them out of the hands of all their
enemies, and now rules-over them in love for their good, the end wherefore he
has saved them, That he might have a people to serve him in holiness and
righteousness, Luke 1.74.75. So that the Saints are not their own, They are
bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Therefore glorify God in your bodies,
and in your spirits, which are Gods: They are Gods own by purchase, and he
purchased them, That they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him that dyed for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 10.11. Thus
you see there is good reason that Christ should be King of Saints: He was borne
to it, He is thereunto appointed, He has purchased them for that end and
purpose.

Use A word of information; if it be so that Christ be the King of his people,
and he alone ought to rule in all spiritual things, then

1 Those that get in to the throne of Christ, and bear rule where Christ
should, are no friends to him. He, who ever he be, That exalts himself above
all that is called God, and sits in the seat of God, is the Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4, 8. Whom Christ will take as his enemy, and destroy him with the
breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming.

2 Those are enemies, who will not have Christ to reign over them, who resolve
to submit to the power of man in the things of God: they are no friends to
Christ, but enemies, and so he will take them, and so he will deal with them.
Luke 19, 27. But those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over
them, bring them hither and slay them before me, etc. Acts 3.23. And he that
will not he are this Prophet shall be cut off from amongst his people.

3 If the kingdom of Christ be spiritual, not of this World, then those are no
friends to Christ, that turn the World into Church; I mean, by a humane Law and
Ordinance. Let men turn the World into Church by preaching as fast as they can,
or as Christ will, but to compel all, to bring in, earthly, ignorant, carnal
men into the Church of Christ, is not as according to the mind of Christ, Ezekiel.
44.7. to the 14. and this is none of Christ's Church, but the Synagogue of
Satan; the World, and not the Church. And truly I am apt to conceive, from that
forementioned Scripture that those, that have been chief in this business,
who are godly amongst them, shall never be honored with doing much in the work
of God; but they shall come in last, they shall be the meanest, and the lowest;
I mean with relation to gifts in the house of God. This may seem strange to
some, but a truth: for God will have none to glory in their own present gifts
or excellency, but that he that gloryeth may glory in the Lord.

Use 2. If the Kingdom of Christ be spiritual, then here is a word of
exhortation, to stir up spiritual people, spiritual men and women, to
submit to Christ, to come under the government of Christ, to walk with, to have
fellowship with the spiritual people of Christ. Beloved, it is a sad thing to
see spiritual people, to walk with the World, to join in the Worlds
fellowship, in the Worlds worship, What communion has light with darkness?
What fellowship has Christ with Beliall? What part has the believer with the
unbeliever? o that the exhortation might take place in your souls, Come out
from amongst them, and be ye separate, and I will receive you. 2 Cor. 6.17.
The Lords people are a holy people, and the Lords ways are holy ways: Holiness
becomes thy house, o Lord, for ever.

Use 3. A word of consolation and joy for the Saints, the Church, the kingdom
of Christ: you have cause of joy, and cause of rejoicing. First, that you have
such a king, a great king, above all gods; he that is the Lord of Lords, and
the king of kings: he is our king, he is the king of Saints: the Saints have
such a king, who is able to defend them, able to save them from all their
enemies: and he will save them, he is able to dash all his and his Saints
enemies in pieces, like a potters vessel: and he will, he shall do it, Psalm.
2.9. Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a
potters vessel. Be wise now therefore, o ye Kings, and be instructed ye judges
of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling, kiss the
Son least he be angry, etc. But let the Saints rejoice in the Lord, let Israel
rejoice in him that made him, let the children of Sion be joyful in their
King, Psalm. 149.2.

2 The Saints have cause to rejoice and to be comforted, they are all made
Kings to the Lord. They are Kings and they shall reign, they reign already over
sin and lust, over Satan, Romans 6.12. Sin shall not have dominion over you:
others are slaves to sin and Satan, sin reigns in, and over them, but the
Saints reign over sin, they have a Kingdom already within them, without them
the Church, which is both Christ's and the Saints Kingdom, where Christ and the
Christian solace themselves together, and they shall have a Kingdom although
they are now rejected and reproached of men: Servants ride on horseback, and
Princes walk as servants on the ground, Ecles. 10.7. but they shall rule and
have dominion, they shall reign, for they are made Kings, Rev. 1.6. chap. 5.10.
They shall rule their enemies, those that perhaps formerly have ruled them,
Rev. 2.26, 27. To him that overcommeth, and keeps my words to the end, to him
will I give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron,
as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers, even as I received
of my Father: Thus Christ shall judge, thus the Saints shall judge, Psalm.
149.5, 6. A wonderful comfort for the Saints, but a sad word for the enemies
both of Christ and Christians, Let the Saints be joyful in glory, let them
sing aloud upon their beds, let the high praises of God be in their mouths,
and a two edged sword in their hand, to execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and
punishment upon the people, to bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in
fetters of iron, to execute upon them the judgment written, this honor have
all the Saints, praise the Lord: Thus the Saints are made Kings you see, and
shall have dominion, and rule, and a Kingdom, although they are rejected and
slighted, and counted the offscouring of all things here, by the men of the
world, yet they are Kings, and shall have a kingdom. A great joy for
Christians! Dan. 7.27. Luke 12.32.

Lastly, this should stir up the Saints to walk humbly, to walk holily, as
becomes the subjects of the spiritual kingdom of Jesus Christ: that as
Christ has called them out of this world, so they should no longer fashion
themselves like unto this world, but walk as becomes Christians, professing
godliness, that the name of God be not blasphemed among the Gentiles. And
likewise how does it concern you who are members in the kingdom, the Church of
Christ, to carry on the kingly office of Christ in his Church with majesty,
that so all things may be done in order, that so confusion and disorders may be
avoided, and that every member in particular submit to order: and for that end,
to ordain officers according to rule, the want whereof I conceive is one means
of confusion in the Churches, and causes some to break from all order: so
much briefly concerning the offices of Christ. In all these he is to be exalted
now in the days of the Gospel, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Acts 3.22, 23.

Now I come to my text, for the manner how he is to be exalted, as in the
preaching of the Gospel, and in the hearts of his people, in his offices, so in
my text, He is to be exalted and lifted up even as Moses lifted up the Serpent
in the wilderness. Now it is true, this might have some relation to his
lifting up upon the cross, John 12.32, 33. and I, if I be lifted up, will draw
all men unto me: now John interprets it in the next verse, this he spoke,
signifying what death he should dye: so that Christ was lifted up upon the
cross, chap. 8.28. so he is still to be lifted up, a dying, a crucified
Christ for sin.

But he then was, and still is to be lifted up as the Serpent was lifted up in
the wilderness. First, there was the lifting up of the Serpent with the manner
of it above all the people. 2 The cause of it, that whosoever was bitten with
the fiery Serpent, might look to this brazen Serpent and be cured.

1 The lifting up of the Serpent, with the manner of it, Numb. 21 8, 9. And the
Lord said unto Moses, make thee a fiery Serpent, and set it upon a pole; and it
shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looks upon it,
he shall live, verse 9. And Moses made a Serpent of brass, and put it upon a
pole, and it came to pass, that if a Serpent had bitten any man, he beheld the
Serpent of brass and lived.

Here was the lifting up of the Serpent in the wilderness: he was lifted up,
upon a pole above all the people, to the end that all that were bitten, might
behold him: so Christ is to be lifted up, he is to be exalted above all, as the
Serpent in the wilderness; and that either in the world, or in the Church: in
the World, so he is to be exalted in the preaching of the Gospel, in the view
of all, above all, that so men may come to the view of him: and in the Church
that so Christ may still have the pre-eminence.

1 He is to be exalted above the world, or any creature: O how does the world
prevail amongst men? nay, too much amongst Christians: but where Christ comes,
he sets the soul above the creature, 1 John. 5.4, 5. Whosoever is borne of God
overcommeth the world, and this is the victory that overcommeth the world, even
your faith, who is he that overcommeth the world, but he that believes that
Jesus is the Son of God. It is the clear sight and apprehension of the Lord
Jesus, that sets the soul above the world, the more the soul enjoys of
Christ, the more it slights things below, thus Christ is to be lifted up, both
in the preaching of the Gospel, and in the hearts of the Saints.

2 Christ is to be lifted up above duties and all legal righteousness, thus
the Apostle lifts up Christ, both in preaching and in his own soul: he
preached Christ and him only, 1 Cor. 1.1, 2. I desire to know (that is to make
known) nothing but Christ and him crucified: Christ as the alone justifier of
all that believe, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ, so that he is just, and the justifier of
all that believe in Jesus, ver. 26. Christ is the end of the Law, for
righteousness to all that believe; Romans 10.4. Christ justifying believers from
all things, from which they could not have been justified by the Law of Moses,
act 13.39. and thus is Christ to be lifted up in the view of all, Mar. 16.16.
God preach the Gospel to every creature, and thus is Christ to be lifted up
above all and every name, that is or may be named under heaven, wherein men
usually rest and deceive themselves, for There is none other name given under
heaven among men, whereby we may be saved, Act. 4.12.

2 In the hearts of the Saints, Christ is to be lifted up above all duties,
legal righteousness, or any thing that may be named: all in the soul of the
Christian is laid down as emptiness, nay, as dung and dross, at the feet of
Christ, and the soul glories in nothing else but Christ and him crucified;
thus Christ is to be exalted and lifted up as upon a pole, as the brazen
Serpent, above every thing or name, that may be named under heaven.

Quest. What is the reason, that Christ is thus to be exalted?

Answ. 1 Because God has exalted him and lifted him up for that end and
purpose: Phil. 2.9. God has highly exalted him, and given him a name, above
every name, etc. God has given to Christ a high transcendent name, a name
above every name, the name of a Savior, and there is no salvation to be
attained without him: The desire of all Nations, Hag. 2.7. That the desire of
all his people in every Nation might be to him, as the desire of the wife to
the husband: The King of his people, men may come, and bow and fall down, and
worship before him. God the Father has set him up as the ensign to whom the
Nations must come, Esaias 11.10. as the common Savior and Governor of all Gods
elect.

2 Christ is to be lifted up, that so men may have life by him, the serpent was
lifted up, that whosoever was bit with the fiery serpent might live, for the
Lord sent fiery serpents amongst the Jews in the wilderness, for their sins, as
you may see, Numb. 2.6, 7. who bit them that they dyed, and this was the end,
that whosoever was bit with the fiery serpent might look to the brazen Serpent
and live. Now I am apt to conceive, that the fiery serpent holds forth the Law,
for I find the Law called a fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33.2. From his right hand went a
fiery Law: and the brazen Serpent holds forth Christ: Now as the fiery serpent
did bite the children of Israel for their sin in the wilderness, so the Law
who has nothing but fire in it, bites men, and when they are bitten of the
Law, they are to look to Jesus.

Object. It seems then that the preaching of the Law, is that prepares for
Jesus.

Answ. Nay, it is not so, for although all men are under the law by nature, yet
it is the preaching of the Gospel that discovers it. I give you these grounds.

1 A man never savingly sees his evil condition without a Christ, but it is
the spirit of God that discovers it unto him: this all that are sound in the
faith agree unto, then the preaching of the Law brings not this spirit, see
Gal. 3.2. This only would I learn of you (says the Apostle, speak out of your
experience) received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing
of faith? Beloved, God has appointed his spirit to be the means in the
preaching of the Gospel, to convince the world of sin, John 16.9. It is the
spirit of God that convinces the world of sin, and that in the preaching of
faith, the Apostle was once alive without the Law, that is, without the
spiritual understanding of the Law, but when the commandment came, sin
reigned, and I dyed: that is, when Christ had opened his eyes to see into the
spirit of the Law, for you may see, Act. 9.4, 5, etc. the ministry by which
Paul comes to see himself, is the voice of Christ, I am Jesus of Nazereth,
then Paul comes trembling, etc. so that it is Christ in the preaching of the
Gospel which is glad tidings for sinners, remission of sins for believers, and
this Gospel, this glad tidings, cannot be rightly held forth to the world, but
with all, men must be showed that they are sinners, and the emptiness of
duties, all other foundations must be discovered, the danger of not accepting
Christ, etc. this preaching of Christ and faith in opposition to all legal
works and duties, is the means Christ has appointed to bring men to the
knowledge, both of himself and themselves: it is true, every man and woman
without faith, is bitten with the fiery serpent, the fiery Law, but are not
sensible of it, till Jesus come in the preaching of the Gospel, to discover it
unto them.

So that this is the reason why Christ is to be lifted up in the days of the
Gospel, that sinners who behold him may live.

This is the reason following my Text, That whosoever believes in him, may not
perish, but have everlasting life, this is the main reason of the exaltation of
Christ, that men believing may have life, this is ever annexed to the preaching
of the Gospel, Mar. 16.16. Go preach the Gospel to every creature, he that
believes and is baptized (that is, whose faith produces obedience) shall be
saved: This is the reason of the Gospel preaching you see, and this is the
reason why Christ came into the world, that men might have life through him,
John 10.10. for this end God gave him, Ioh. 3.16. God had never sent his Son
into the world, had it not been that men by believing in him might have life:
and therefore has Christ left this Ordinance of preaching in the world, that
men might be brought to believe, and therefore those men are (me thinks) much
beside the truth and the Gospel, who pretend to hold forth Christ dying for all
alike, and yet deny the preaching of the Gospel, the means by which God brings
over the souls of men and women to believe, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Those who deny the preaching of the
Gospel, deny the means of working faith.

Quest. But may every one that will, believe?

Answ. Every one to whom God gives faith to believe, may and shall believe, for
faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and God works faith by the preaching of
the Gospel, and this is the maine end of the exalting and lifting up of Christ
in the Gospel, that men by believing in him may have life, and therefore is he
to be lifted up as the serpent upon a pole, above all things, all duties,
creatures, legal performances, any thing that the creature may rest upon
beneath him: Thus you see, beloved, the truth cleared, that Christ is to be
exalted in the days of the Gospel.

Use, Generally three, 1 A word of Examination, 2 Of Exhortation, 3 Of
Consolation.

1 A word of Examination: and that is double: 1 For our selves in particular,
what say you to this? Has Christ been lifted up in your souls above all
things? has he had the pre-eminence above all? he who is indeed above all, and
in all, and through all? Have your souls seen Christ, the chief among ten
thousand? and is it still so with you? are you satisfied with him as the wife
with her husband, lying down in the bosom of love, content with him and him
alone, seeing and enjoying all comfort and consolation in him? Is Christ
exalted in your souls as your alone Priest and atonement, your peacemaker
with God, or else do you look upon any thing beneath Christ, as the ground of
your peace? I fear me the Saints live too much below Christ, and that is the
cause of so much sadness of spirit, resting upon duties and legal
performances, they deprive themselves of much comfort they might otherwise
enjoy.

2 Is Christ exalted as your alone Prophet to teach you? are your eyes upon the
Lord Jesus in all his dispensations, expecting teaching from him? Is Christ
exalted as King in thy soul? submitting to him in all things, yielding
uniuersall obedience to him, and that out of love submitting to all his laws
and statutes.

2 Examination, Whether Christ have been thus exalted in the Kingdom, in the
Nation, as they desire to stand to him under the relation of a Church as their
Priest, Prophet and King, and in all these it would easily appear that he has
not been thus exalted; he has not been exalted the alone Priest and atonement
indeed and in truth, but in word and show, but duties, preparations, and
qualifications, have been held forth with him, and that none but those thus
fitted and qualified might in any case believe. First, bringing men to the Law,
and then to Christ, which is a legal way, and not evangelicall: it is true,
the Jews were first brought to the Law and then to Christ, but under the Gospel
men are first to be brought to the Gospel to Christ, and then to duties of the
Gospel, for all preparations and qualifications whatsoever, which is not of
faith, is sin, and I am sure faith comes by preaching of the Gospel, not of the
Law, Mar. 16.16, 17. Therefore the preaching of qualifications and preparations
before faith, is sin, for all things before, or without faith, is sin.

2 Has Christ been received as the alone Prophet, to teach? has his Word been
made the rule of all actions, submitting to him in all things, Act. 3.22, 23.
any way? Judge of the truth of it.

3 Has Christ been exalted as King, to submit to him as the alone law giver of
his Church of his people? has not man been submitted unto? has not man sat
in the fear of God, making laws and constitutions of their own, compelling all
thereunto, as once Darius made a Decree, Dan. 6. That all that should ask any
Petition of God or man for thirty days, should be cast into the den of lions?
so men set up themselves, their own decrees, and compel unto it: this is not
agreeable to the Kingly dominion of Christ: Christ has not been exalted King,
it is true, there has been a name of Christ, but that is all: the power of
Christ in all his offices, has been rejected, and the truth is, that the
generality have been wholly legal, fetching rules from the Law, from Moses, and
so denying Christ to be come in the flesh.

Legal churches, National, as the Jews: legal Covenant of works made with
the Jews, taken away to us that believe, Heb. 10.9. legal preaching, setting
up of works with Christ, when the Apostle says, He that works not but
believes, etc. Romans 4. 4, 5. Legal Priests, the very title, and legal
maintenance, tithes, but they that preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel.
Legal administrations, I mean after legal rules, circumcision, and the like,
legal prayers and duties to make peace and atone meant: legal laws and
institutions compelling all to one worship, persecuting the contrary minded,
because the Jews did so: thus beloved, has the men of this and former
Generations, both in this and other Nations, raised up Moses from the dead, and
put his laws in execution, under the name of Christ: and so in deed and
practice deny Christ to be come in the flesh, although in word they acknowledge
him: the Lord open their eyes that they may see farther into the mystery of the
Gospel.

In a word, Christ has not been exalted as the brazen serpent upon a pole,
above every thing, all duties, prayers, ordinances, in the hearts of men, and
that has caused so many (as I cannot but judge gracious souls) to go with
sorrow to their graves, ever kept in a way of working, under a legal bondage,
no longer pray and be spiritual in duty, no longer comfort, as if a Christian
lived by prayer, preaching, and ordinances: no, no, beloved, they live above
these, upon the Lord Jesus by faith: not that the Saints should not make use of
these, but not live upon them: Christ is the Christians life, and so far as he
communicates himself in these to the Christian, he has cause of joy, but if
he deny himself there: for the trial of the soul, it is to let him see the
emptiness of all things without himself, and to cause the Christian to live
by faith, for we live by faith and not by sense, 2 Cor. 5.7. But enough of
this, here only let the Saints who are delivered out of this bondage, this
spiritual, Babylonish, confused captivity, give God the Glory.

Use 2 A word of Exhortation to the servants of Jesus: in all things to exalt
and lift him up; to lift him up in preaching; in their hearts; in their
obedience to him, that Christ may be all and in all to your souls: that you
give up your selves a holy, living, acceptable, sacrifice, to God, that you who
have taken his name and truth upon you, exalt him as your alone Priest,
Prophet, King, in your conversations; that ye may be such as become the Gospel
of Christ, holy, humble, full of love to all: as much as in you lies do good
unto all, but especially to the household of faith: that so your light shining
before men, they may have cause to glorify your father which is in heaven: and
that gainsayers may be convinced by your godly converstion: Beloved if you
seek the lifting up of Christ above all, then certainly your care will be, to
live a Christ-like life while you are in this world.

3 And lastly, a word of Consolation, for poor sinners: Christ is to be lifted
up in the days of the Gospel, that men by believing in him might have life by
him: what do you say to this? is there ever a soul present that wants faith,
and is sensible of it, that wants life? Christ came to give life, he is lifted
up now in the days of the Gospel, for that very end and purpose, that dead men
might have life by him. O is not here mercy! here is a way made whereby sinners
may become Saints, slayes may become sons. Here is a fountain opened for sin,
and for uncleanness, if the Lord help your souls to wash there. What say your
souls to this? is there ever a poor creature bit with the fiery serpent with
the sense of the evil of sin! O here is a Christ lifted up for that very end,
and purpose that poor self-destroying sinners may come to him and live? Esaias
45.22. look to me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: O here is
blessed news, a blessed word for sinners if the Lord give you hearts to make
use of it! Christ excludes none, to whom he gives a heart to receive him: is
it not a mercy that God has provided an object for dead souls to look upon,
and live? Truly beloved, it is the richest mercy in the world, where God gives
a heart to accept it.

Here is discovered the blessed condition of the poor despised Saints. O they
are in a saved condition, those to whom Christ has given faith. O they have
cause to rejoice overmore, they have cause to be filled with Joy and peace, Joy
unspeakable and full of glory. What if they are reproached, and persecuted for
the name and sake of CHRIST their Savior, their Husband, their All in, the
delight of their souls? yet they are happy, and they shall never perish, but
they shall one day be freed from all these enemies, and when Christ who is
their life shall appear, they shall appear with him in glory: that Christ who
is lifted up high in their hearts, in their souls here, will lift them up one
day as high as himself in glory, above devil, above men, above sin, and set
them with himself where they shall enjoy pleasure without sorrow, fellowship
without mixture, and sing praises and Halelujahs without end.

FINIS.

