Colonel GREY'S Portmanteau opened; His sealed, mis-directed, and returned
LETTER discovered by a copy thereof, found among his other papers.

Which is here Printed and published with some Queries and Animadversions
thereupon.

To deliver, from the dangers of their Caballs, such as are not acquainted with
Scottish Methods and Mysteries.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, by the Appointment of the Council of
State, 1650.

Colonel Grey's Portmanteau opened. His sealed, mis-directed, and returned
Letter, discovered by a Copy thereof found among his other Papers.
FOR that by a long Experience we have been taught that the Scots never want
their Instruments among us, and even of the English Nation, to make advantage
of every occurrence; And to represent all things (without respect to truth) to
the advantage of those designs, to the promotion whereof, they have baselie and
degenerously given up themselves, whereby those, who have not leisure or
opportunity to search into affairs, or to take a view of their whole design,
looking upon things by parts, and those misrepresented, are in danger to be
deceived, and drawn into actions of a nature that may be dangerous unto them:
It will perhaps be held agreeable to the rules of charity that they who
understand these designs should endeavor to undeceive those, who do not, and to
prevent that guilt and danger in which their ignorance may involv them, and out
of which the rules of Justice and good Government (especially in times of
danger or just jealousy) ought not to suffer their good meaning to deliver
them.

And to this end, for that it cannot but be taken notice off, that a Messenger
express, has been lately sent from the Parliament of Scotland into England,
bringing several Letters with him, whereof one was directed, For the Honorable
William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons in England. And for
that there is no man known in England to whom that title does agree, and
therefore the Letter could not be delivered; But may perhaps be represented
by their Instruments for other than it is, and well-meaning people abused by
it, as if it were of another tendencie than it is;

There being a Paper found among other Papers in the possession of the said
Messenger, which had on the one side the Title aforesaid (written by the hand
of Sir John Cheislie, which is here very well known) [Copie of the Parlaments
Letter to the Speaker.] And within the same direction that was upon the sealed
Letter directed as aforesaid, of the same Sir John Cheslies hand, as the
direction of the Letter it self seems also to be. It is held necessary to
publish the same in Print, that all may see, what stuff it is, and to make some
Observations upon it, to preserv the well-meaning from mistakes, and to make
them wary how they swallow whatever they propine, they being seldom guilty
of much ingenuitie, or truth; but offer boldly what they think may serve their
turn. By which if they reach their end, it is their clear gain. But if the
effect be a lie, as the means it self is, it never cost them a blush, that
being the Index of such a quality as is mustered among the vices on the other
side of Twede.

And it is probable they put more confidence in the Agencie of their Messenger,
and his infusions and negotiations with their party here (who may perhaps
shortly burn their fingers with such traffic) then in what their Letter was
like to effect, which they had reason to believ would never be opened, being
so addressed as aforesaid, whom they had there first furnished with this open
Copy, and no doubt had direction what to do with it, for the public cause of
Scotland, though to avoid all further questions, the variousness of which might
have drawn from him (against his will) somewhat of truth, and made a discovery
of what it chiefly concern's them to conceal; He boldly denie's he had any
such Paper, and after 'twas showed him, with confidence affirm's he knew
nothing of it, or that he had any such Paper, which yet was found among
Papers and Instructions which he denied not to be his in his Port-manteau.
This Paper with his Comments on it, might have been sufficient to deceiv many
that know no more then what their Deceivers tell them. For prevention whereof,
a care was taken he should have no convers, but was defraied, while he was
here, and sent back unto the Lord General, with a Messenger to attend him; who
no doubt will send him into Scotland with a very sufficient guard. And give
such answer to the letter directed to him as will be agreeable to the
Declaration of the Parliament.

A Copy of the Parliament's Letter of SCOTLAND to the Speaker.
SIR!
THe Estaites of the Parliament of this Kingdom, remembering that they haid
written one letter unto you upon the sext of March 1649, By ane express vith
instructiones for their Commissioners then in Ingland, to be comvnicate to
you, which did much concern the good and peace of these Kingdoms. And that
they received one from you of the twantie third of May folloving, whairvnto
they returned their ansueyr upon the 26 of Juny 1649, and thairin took notice
that they haid received no return to thairis of the 6th of March preceiding,
naither have they to this day received any ansuer to the same, and having
intelligence of the marching of your forcis towardis this Kingdom, and being
certainly infermed that your ships have laitlie searched diueris, and seized
upon some of the ships with the persons and guids thairin, belonging to this
Natione, and considering how contrary these things are (whair their hes been
no provocatione vr injury offered by the pairtie) to the Act of Pacificatione
in the lairge Treaty, which requyre's That no ships sold stope the Traide of
the other Kingdom, without consent of Parliament, declairing a breach of
peace, and if any wrong be done, that upon complaint and Remonstrance maid to
the Parliament, or to their Commissioneris, redress and reparatione sold be
sought before it be accounted a breach of peace by the whole Kingdom: And if
aither Parliament sold denunce War, that they sold give three months
warning: They have thairfor resolved to send, (as they do heirvith send unto
you) authentic douplicattis of all these four abovementionad Peapers: And to
show you that they keip the same principels, and resolve still to walk according
to the same reulls and grounds, and have no uther intentiones or resolutiones,
in relatione to Peace or War, in these Nationes, then they did express at large
in these Peaperis, as is most fully set down in their Letter of the sext of
March, and Instructiones sent thairwith to their Commissioneris then in
Ingland, whairin as they did then on their pairt both ackowledge yair
obligatione, and declair their resolutione to observe the reul of
remonstraiting, first the breaches of peace, of craving just reparatione, of
using all fair meanis, of giving and preceiding warning of three monthis before
ane Engagement of these Kingdoms in War; So they do now renew the same, and
accordingly have renewed the Acts of Postor and Leavie, for putting the Forcis
of this Kingdom unto a readiness, in caice of any Invasione, which were maid
the last yeir, when they wreet their forsaid Letter of the sext of March; All
which they do solemnlie profess to be done by them in the sincerity of their
hairtis, not out of any policy to catch advantagis, for any other end or
design guatsoever, but meirlie for their awen defense, which they do account
abundantly sufficient to remove al ground of jealousies and mass-reportis of
their intentiones, and to tak away all pretense of necessity of the marching
of your Forcis, for the defense of the Borderis of Ingland; Whairfor on the the
other pairt, the Parliament being informed of ane resolutione in Ingland to
send an Army to invade this Kingdom: They desire to knove from you whether
thoss wha have the present power in England, do acknowledge themselvis
oblidged, or by their ansuer will oblidge themseluis, and declair their
resolutiones to observe the forsaid way and ordor upon their pairt to us; and
plainly and cleirlie to declair unto us, whither their Forcis do march for
defense, or offense, whether with intentiones for keeping only within the
borderis of Ingland, or for cuming within ours: which way of procedor in
cleiring each otheris, and dealing plainly, is not only agriabill to
particular Treaties, and to the many ties, bondis and Declarationes past
betwixt these Kingdoms, but also to the Law of God, and practis of his people
in his word, and to the common Law and practis ewin of heathen Nationes; much
more of Christian Covenanted Kingdoms, and may prevent many evils and
dangerus consequencis which may fall out, even beyond and contrary to the
intentiones of Nationes, by their Armies lying neir uther upon their borderis,
although upon meirlie intended defense. Having thus cleired their intentiones, and
desired to be cleired tutching yours

They further desir, to let you know that as Jephtah and Israel sent the lyk
message to the Amonites 2 Judge. 12 and 27. So they rest confident that the
Covenanted God of these Kingdoms, who did tak ordor with those of this Natione,
who unlawfully engaged against Ingland 1648 does still leive and regne, and
will bring shame and rwine upon quhatsoeuer party in aither of these Nationes
that shall without ane necessary cause, and cleir calling, and without
observance of the Reull and ordor aforesaid, of seeking first reparatione, and
giving varning as aforesaid, shall offend and invade the other Natione. They
further desyr, That with this Bearer wha is sent express, ane ansuer may be
returned to this, and to the enclosed peaperis formerlie sent unto you, And
that the subjectis of this Natione with their ships and guids may be
presently released and dismissed. This is all that I have in command to
represent to you from the Parliament of this Kingdom, and restis

At Edinburgh 22 June 1650. Your humble servant
For the Honorable William Lenthal Esquyre, Speaker of the House of Comouns in
Ingland.




If the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland would as well have remembered what
they had written, as that they had written, perhaps they would not either have
written now, or at least not thus: If they would but reflect upon their letter
of the 26 of June, which here they mention, they might find they had so declared
an enmity therein, that there was little reason to have urged those Arguments
which are contained in this.

That letter of theirs they will not complain sure wanted an answer; for the
Parliament gave one by a full Declaration published Julii 14. 1649. which is now
again printed with their present Declaration, concerning the marching of their
Army into Scotland. Where may be seen what that letter was, and what was said
to it, which we have reason to believ was convincing (though no doubt they
will not say 'twas satisfactorie) for they never gave word of reply, no more
then they have to several others: and especially they must be again remembered,
that to this day there want's an answer to the Parlaments Declaration of the of
November 1646. a thing they have been often told of, but never had the heart to
meddle with it. For it is to be observed as the constant practice of that
Nation, to affirm boldly, and impose in their writings impudently, without all
respect or reverence to truth, that there by they may take and carry on, in
their faction, such as either cannot or will not examine them being that sort
of people, by whom they hope to do their work. But when their papers are
answered, whether by a public or private hand, they never yet adventured upon
a Reply. And there is not one of all their papers of consequence in all the
controversies they have moved about civil things, as well those they printed,
as those they have sent to the Parliament, but they have received answers which
we have reason to judge full; for that they have never either taken exceptions
to the insufficiency, nor replied; but have given up their further pretensions
in silence.

But whereas they seem to urge some wondrous salutiferous Epistle of the 6 of
March, which they could never have answer to; and would seem to insinuate some
rare prescriptions to be there, for the good and peace of those Kingdoms as
they will needs call them, though one of them be now more happy then to own
the name: and complain heavily as they have don heretofore, that they could
never get answer to it; We must tell them, that Epistle is Apocryphal. It
lie's some where hid, and had sure the same fate their last had, to be never
received. Certain it is, there is none such to be found among the Papers of
the Parliament, and if it had com'n to hand, it is like enough to have had an
answer, as well as any of the rest: it is ten to one now this matter is
obsolete, and too old to be taken into consideration. The controversies now
are gone beyond paper-conflicts, and will be determined by other Arguments. But
that they may have some account of what is like to become of that Letter, We
shall desire them to call to mind, That when their last Commissioners, whom
they mention, were in England, they sent a paper to the Parliament the 14 of
February, 1648, which is also printed with this last Declaration, as it was
also with the former, the later part whereof who ever shall read, will conceiv
it a paper fitter to be given in by a Herault, then Commissioners; and
accordingly received a short answer from the Parliament (there also printed) it
not being capable of a longer. Upon the sending of which their paper, They
very well knowing they had forfeited all privilege of public persons, and had
by that their paper of defiance merited an other kind of Treatment then they
found, they secretly and clandestinely withdrew themselves without taking
public leav, as all public persons use to do, (hoping their paper would have
produced effects proportionable to its natural tendencie; and as affairs then
stood, and as they by their secret infusions among the people had prepared
them, might have wrought some alterations amonst us) and were about to ship
themselves for Holland: But were again brought on shore, and sent with a guard
to Scotland, to see whether the Kingdom of Scotland would own their
miscarriage, or punish it. But the Parliament owned what they had don. And so
whether their Commissioners had instructions for what they did needs not be
enquired; for ex post facto the Parliament made it self thereby particeps
criminis. But they being taken into the custody of the guard that carried
them down upon the 6 or 7 of March, 1648. it is not possible those instructions
mentioned, or that letter could come to their hands till they were upon their
way homeward: By which means it is very likely we lost the sight of that
Letter so much valued by them: how ever no such thing is found exstant, and
therefore no wonder if it had no answer. And sure now it will never have the
honor of a public one; but if it could be found, it might perhaps be
examined by a private hand, to see what stuff it brought into England, and to
what purpose. But the letter says they have intelligence our Army march
toward that Kingdom, and that our ships have searched some of theirs, and
seized persons and goods, etc. And that these things are contrary to the Act
of Pacification, and the large Treaty, where there has been no provocation,
etc. It Is true, some of their ships have been searched and seized. What reason
had they to exspect other? do not they know they have been treating with the
declared Enemy of this Commonwealth, whom they call their King? and do they
not know, that having finished their Treaty with him, he was then every
day exspected there? and is since arrived? And can they think affairs here are
so loosly managed, that we should not see what persons and provisions are
carried in their ships, especially from Holland where their King then was?
And it is ten to one if the Commanders of these ships had found him there, they
would have seized upon him too, if the consideration, that it is the greatest
mischief may well befall you, to let him com amongst you, had not advised the
contrary. But they need not stick much at this, for they are like to have more
of it. And before this be printed, the Army is like not to have marched
only toward their Kingdom, but into it. And by that time the sound of their
drums have avvakned you out of your dream, and you have considered things
being well awake; you will find that neither the one, nor the other, is
either against the Act of Pacification, unless you could make your Parenthesis
positive, which may be taken to be hypothetical. It Is true indeed there had
been no provocation on your part, the thing had been under another
consideration. But whether there has been a provocation or not, is out of
question to all, but your selves; however we exspect you will say there has
not, because the Genius Loci lead's you to affirm any thing. And if we had not
been formerly sufficiently acquainted with this kind of stuff, it might have
drawn forth some quaeries in an other dress then we shall now put them. We would
ask you,

1. What it is that you will call injury when you are on the inferring side?
for where you are passive, no doubt you know well enough.

2. What you will think to be a sufficient provocation?

And 3. If you be awake, whether you have not indeed sufficiently provoked the
Commonwealth of England by your late wicked invasions.

4. Whether you can think the Act of Pacification and the Large Treaty (which
you mention) or any Treaty at all between the Nations be in force, after the
war begun by you, and this Nation invaded with a numerous Army?

5. Whether you will deny there was any Invasion at all?

6. Whether this Invasion was not made by decree of an Act of the Parliament of
the Kingdom of Scotland?

7. Whether Acts of Parliament in Scotland do not bind and involv that Nation?

8. What those provocations were, upon which your Kingdom of Scotland invaded
England? and therein be very particular, that if you have not had, you may
have an answer.

9. Whether there were not Commissioners from England with your Parliament (even
when you were levying that Army) for an amicable composure of all that might
be in difference between those Nations.

10. Whether those Commissioners were heard, or the matters wherein they were
instructed put into debate?

11. Whether the Treaties had any reservation of a privilege for you to break
them, when, and as often as you pleas; and that we must be bound by them
notwithstanding?

12. Whether it was agreeable to the Treaties, that you should garrison and
keep Barwick and Carlisle, Towns belonging to this Commonwealth, which we in
conformity to the Treaty left ungarrison'd.

13. Whether it were according to the Treaty and Covenant, that you should
invade England with an Army?

14. Whether had you first sought reparation and redress by any complaint to
the Parliament here, or to their Commissioners with you?

15. Whether you had denounced war, and given three months warning before your
Invasion?

16. Whether you were not unanimously agreed upon an Invasion, but fell out
among yourselvs upon the point of Command, because it was carried by Hamilton,
and might not be under the direction of the Kirk, that is, four or five of
their leading Priests?

17. Whether you think the two Nations have not been in a state of hostility
ever since your Invasion?

18. How long forbearance of seeking just reparation shall make it unlawful to
seek it at all?

19. Whether the Parliament of England has not given you sufficient time to com
to your selves, and offer that which must be had from you?

20. Whether they have not used all means, and made all fair offers of an
amicable composure, even since the Nations have stood in a state of hostility,
and particularly by their Letter of 23 May 1649.

21. And lastly, whether by your Letter of the 20 of June, 1649 you have not
put things into an incapacitie of determination by any other way then that of
Arms.

It might justly make those, that know you not, wonder to read your Letter;
but to us there is nothing of that kind seems strange. There is no man almost
in either Nation, that take's notice of affairs, but know's, that when we
perceived you were gone off in your affections from the Parliament of England,
for prevention of that evil they had cause enough to exspect from you (seeing
the Apostacy and corruption of your Commissioners here) sent their
Commissioners to your Parliament into Scotland to compose all differences: but
they were so far from effecting what was desired, and the end of their mission,
that they could never bring any thing to a debate; But while they were still
there, notwithstanding any offers they had or might have had to propose, a war
was determined by their Parliament, and accordingly prosecuted to an Invasion,
without either cause showed, or warning given, till Hamilton was entered into
England: They garrisoned our frontier-Towns, and went on committing all manner
of acts of hostility, till it pleased our good God, who has ever owned and
carried on our cause, to appear for us and make an handful of wearied men (who
with very long marches had made haste to expose their lives for the service and
safety of their Country) his Instruments to chastize the pride and persidie
of that numerous and insolent Enemy, who were wholly broken, and the greatest
part of them utterly destroyed.

What provocation soever they had for this Invasion, which they never yet told
us of, we conceiv all indifferent men will beleev here was provocation enough
to have drawn out a present revenge, (which yet then was changed into a deep
obligation, had it met with men of the least sent of gratitude) and remain
still a sufficient cause to require reparation. And we verily beleev there is
no man that is master of common reason, or know's what belong's to civil
transactions, or the rules of the common Law of Nations, but will without
hesitation be bold to pronounce, That this Invasion has dissolved all Leagues
and Treaties, and left this Commonwealth as free from all obligations or
stipulations to the Kingdom of Scotland, as they are free from any such with
the Kingdom of China or Iapan. And therefore to very little purpose are those
Treaties and Acts mentioned, that have no being any where in rerum natura,
unless only among the records of their guilt: where no doubt they will appear
both to the Divine Justice and their own consciences, when God shall make
inquisition for that innocent blood that they shed while they brake and
dissolved them. Especially we may stand amazed at their impudence, that urge
the being of them to us, which themselves most perfidiously broke without all
or any provocation. And it is an impudence also like theirs, to say they send
the Copies of the first mentioned papers, to let us see they keep still the
same principles, and resolv still to walk according to the sam rules and
grounds, and have no other intentions or resolutions, either in respect of war
or peace, then is there expressed: When as the Parliament of England have
clearly told them in a former Declaration, that by their Act they have left no
such rule in beieng, which yet they pass over, and dissemble with as deep a
silence as if they knew nothing of it, or as if by some Lethean draught their
memories were become abrasae tabulae, or by the power of some enchantment, or
Narcotick potion they had been fast asleep, while that scene was upon the
stage. By this you may see the Letter was not calculated for the Parliament, who
(besides that they knew well they would not open it) they knew must resent with
extreme indignation their impudence in believing they could so impose upon
them. But 'twas fitted for the vulgar, and for their proselytes, who might
perhaps be brought to think that we were still under those bands, and were
about to break them, and to invade poor Scotland with an unjust war, in which
there was nothing but abundance of candor, and a tender conscientiousness of
the Treaties and Covenant.

But they acknowledge their obligations by those rules, and their resolution not
to invade without first using all fair means, and giving three months warning.
As to their acknowledgments, they should do better to bestow it upon their
perfidie past, then use it to declare an opinion which they may as well change
again as they have don before; and they may take it for their comfort, they do
but sing to the deaf; we now know them too well to trust them any more under
such simple assurances as shall be in their own power to break. As for their
resolution not to invade without three months warning, we shall give no
thanks to their good nature for that production; the state of their affairs
(which they are ever wont to be most ruled by) at this time require it; They
know not yet what to make of their King, and they had need see first how they
shall be able to manage him, and see which way he will incline, and whether
he be like to prove an obedient son of the Kirk or not; if not, 'twill be
dangerous to raise an Army for the invasion of England, least he subdue the
Kirk with it first. They see by their danger under Hamilton, that it is not safe
to trust Arms where they are not sure of the Commanders. The Kirk find's they
have had enough to do to manage their little Army there on foot this year to
serve their turns; and they know the fortieth part of the Nation are not their
devotiers, the rest perfect Cavies, as weary of their yoke for the burden, as
all good men are of their hypocrisy for the grossness and formalitie: That if
an Army be raised of the Cavies they are lost: That if their King should humor
them, and get them to engage against England, an impression is not seasonable
with them till winter, and so they may have time enough to declare when we
think it time to leav the field. But then also, if they list so many of their
part, and send them into England, how shall the Kirk be defended from their
Malignant Party at home? They are in streights, and therefore troubled we are
so forward; and would have us believ their act of posture and levy is only
for their own defense; which yet being made since their last invasion, may
argue there was then some little guilt awake that quickened their fear, that some
account would be taken of them for former injuries; for otherwise their
Country has an intrinsecal fortification against all the Aggressions of
ambition or avarice, and is as good a remedium of extended desire, as
deformity is said to be of love. And this profession of their resolutions
they think is abundantly sufficient to remove all ground of jealousy and
mis-reports, and to take away all pretense of necessity of the marching of our
forces to defend the borders of England. Indeed we cannot well be of their
mind, we know not how soon the Lads may have a mind to be upon English
ground, which if they once feel under their feet, they will shift for themselves at
our charge. And we wonder they should think we should now take their words,
when they have so lately broken their Treaties. Besides, they know it no new
thing for their Nation to do it (witness among many that signal one of James
the fourth) though it is more then once they have paid dear for it, and may do
now again before all accounts are adjusted.

But you would fain know whether those, who have the power in England, do
acknowledge themselves obliged, or will oblige themselves etc. That which will be
answer to this, there is no doubt but they will receiv before this can be
printed, from the Lord General of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, in pursuance of the Declaration by them published: But for the
expression, what needs this lisping? you must speak out before you get an
answer to any question you will ask the General. Why those who now have the
power, why not the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England? that is their
declared style in which they will be addressed unto, and they will not bate
you an hair of it. And what you mean by the power we know not; but you may
take notice they have Authority as well as Power. Your own you can call a
Parliament, and yet you might remember how it came to be one. You know how your
former Parliament was beaten up after the defeat of Hamilton; and this now in
being chosen while the other was, and that by the assistance of the English
forces then in Scotland, who in stead of punishing your past perfidie, gave you
the power you have, and left you in a possibility to be ungrateful; which for
bringing so signally into act as you have don, they may return to chastize you
for it. The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England is so, whether you
acknowledge it or no, and you may choos whether you will or not; but if you
have occasion to send any Letters or Messages that you will have received, you
shall best consult your own business if you give a right address, they will
otherwise speed as well as Colonel Gray and the Letters brought by him have
done. There needs no further answer to your repeated quaeres about obligation,
or proceeding after the Laws of Nations, to which you will receiv your answer
at home. And the Parliament's Declaration has said sufficient for the JUSTICE,
NECESSITY, and ENDS of this Expedition; We shall only tell you again, because
you stick so close to it, that the Nations are not covenanted, and there is no
such thing in force. Neither that you need fear the inconveniences of the
Armie's lying near one another upon the borders; for the English Army intend
not to lie there, but to march into the bowels of your Country, and there take
reparation, if it can be found, for all the spoils, plunders, and devastations
by you made in England. And to make you understand how unthriving a course it
is, be your necessities never so great, to take up, upon the account of
Interest (without consulting justice) at so great disadvantage. Only, to close
up all, we must tell you, we are not much edified with your apocryphal
attribute of a [covenanted] God: And tell you that it is the mantle that has
veiled the grossest hypocrisy that ever the sun saw.

It Is true, the Divine Justice took order with them that unlawfully, as you
say, invaded England in the year 1648. And you must take notice, that it was
the Kingdom of Scotland by the Authority of their Parliament, that invaded us.
And you should do well to consider, what reparation the Kingdom of Scotland
has made to this Commonwealth for the injuries and wrongs don by them; or
whether you think your national guilt be sufficiently expiated by exposing some
particulars to the shame of your penitential Stool, or that the Commonwealth
of England value's that hypocritical foolerie at so high a rate, as to accept
it for the price of blood, or to account it a ballancing reparation for all
those plunderings and devastations by them committed and made in England; or
that you can, upon coming out of that Stool, so wipe your mouths, as you may
truly say there remain's upon you neither guilt nor blemish of that wickedness:
Or whether you think you can be able to impose upon the Divine Omniscience, and
satisfy his justice with a few good words. You might do well to examine,
whether the Lord may not yet have a controversy against you for that unanimous
resolution of the Invasion of England, which is very well known, was never
called into question among you upon the point of lawfulness, till the Kirk
began to see that it would be carried on, and managed by persons who were not
much devoted to their Interest. And they shall do well for a further discovery
of their own deceit to ask themselves, whether they have not had since that some
thoughts toward another Invasion of this Nation, in case their King should
prove to their mind, and they should judge him worthy their engaging for him.
Be not deceived, God is not mocked; consider under whose Eyes you are, and
speak your hearts, because God see's them. We do acknowledge with an humble and
reverentiall sens, that the same Lord does still live and reign, and rejoice
that he does so; and are confident he will discover and bring to shame and
punishment too all those that hypocritically think to veil themselves from his
All-seeing Eyes with a few formalities of expressions. And as the justice of
our Cause is so clearly evidenced by the Parlaments Declaration, that none but
themselves will believ we offend; so with confidence we exspect the blessing
of God upon us in this Expedition, which we have not undertaken till after the
use and offer of all other means, and a long exspectation to see if at last
they would take effect, and their rejection of them, have left us no other but
this last remedy, and necessitated us to the use of Arms.

We shall close with your last claus, wherein Scotica front you require that
your Ships and Goods taken, may be presently restored and dismissed. We shall
ask you whether you have as conscientiously restored all that plunder and spoil
which your Army sent into Scotland, at your last Invasion, when you came
furnished with Baggage-boies, and Baggage-women to drive and carry away into
Scotland what ever was in their way in England; not sparing the very Wainscot
of the houses, leaving where ever they came empty fields and bare walls. To
say nothing of your former plunders while you called your selves Friends, and
were in our pay; you should first have made restitution of all this, and not
only for that, but for that too which you devoured and wasted here, before you
had demanded the restitution of your poor Ships. But you will needs still
endeavor to impose upon the world with this mistake; That this march of the
English Army is the beginning of the War, and that there ought to be a
public denunciation now before any act of Hostility, as this Capture of your
Ships seems to be. Whereas all Leagues, Treaties, and Covenants between the
Nations were broken by you, when that Nation by their Act of Parliament decreeed
the Invasion of England, and accordingly put it in execution. Then the War was
begun, and the Nations have ever since been in a state of Hostility: And if
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, did not then immediately, and so
ever since continue and prosecute the same with fire and sword, it has not
been, for that in justice by the Law of Nations they might not have don it, for
they understood not that justice but that they might give them time to reflect
upon their wrong, and how obnoxious they were to a just revenge; and cool
themselves to a temper fit to receiv a message for reparation; which if they
had received with an acceptance becoming their guilt, and instead of the
Paper of defiance of the 26 of June, returned an answer beecoming their guilt
and weakness, there might perhaps have been an amicable composure
notwithstanding all their past wrongs. But while even by their last answer they
continue to provoke, and will not accept of means of composure, they plainly
keep on foot the War they had begun; and must impute it to themselves that they
have compelled us into it: And instead of quarrelling the new taking of their
ships, they ought to give us thanks we began no sooner. But that during all
this time that the Nations have been in a state of Hostility, We have rather
waited to see if time would spend, or alter the humor, or that the paroxism
would intermit, that they might com to themselves, and endeavor to prevent, what
they had just cause to exspect as the merit of their perfidious Invasion, and
their injudicious and petulant Papers. And let them not say, we now begin a
War which they began two years since, and have ever since continued.

For their letter to the Lord General, we shall say nothing to that. Because
he received it, and will no doubt send them an answer becoming him and them.

We have no more upon this occasion to say to the State; only before we
part a word or two to the Kirk, upon occasion of their hypocritical paper
printed at Edinburg 21 of June 1650 containing the causes of a Public and
solemn humiliation, appointed by the general Commission of the General
Assembie, to be kept through all the Congregations of this Kirk upon the
last of June instant.

And before we com to examine the paper, we would ask one question or two
about their Kirk o^ Scotland: First, what it is? (though perhaps a National
Church is not found in the Scriptures,) But if they would depart from that
term, and say the Churches in Scotland, what they are? A Church for the matter
of it is usually said to be a Company of Believers, hard to find in Scotland
in the usual acceptance, unless you make their Priests the object, and then
there are as many as Parishes. Where the people are more captivated to their
sacred sorry dictates out of their public Tub, then any wise men among the
Papists are to the determinations of the infallible Chair. And indeed by reason
of the guilt and ignorance of those wretchedly beclouded souls, and that
superstition, in which the cunning craftiness of their Priests has involved
them, they are more afraid of the Anathema of their Kirk, in what capacity so
ever congregated, especially at the consequence of it, the effects that follow
upon the dreadful Horn; then any Papist is at the fulminations of the Lateran,
or the Executions of the secular Arm. And in the later the composition is
easier, whereas in offenses against the former, besides that there is no rule
of Commutation for the shameful stule, he speed's well that redeem's his
disobedience with half his gear. And they never want the Magistrate at their
beck, who are willing enough to deserv a dispensation with their saults, while
they are severely officious to keep the vulgar in their obedience to the Kirk.

But in a word the Kirk of Scotland is Mes Robert Douglas, Mes Robert Blaire,
Mes Samuel Rhetorfort, Mes Patrick Gillespie, and three or four more, let most
of their principal Priests, whose Dictates no mand are either examine or
contradict, without incurring the suspicion of Heresy or Schism, and the
danger of being cut off from the Communion of those true believers, those
Muffti's watching with a special care to keep their Mussulmans pure from the
infection of the Sectaries.

This Paper coming therefore from their Reverend Kirk, that is, from six or
eight of their leading Priests, let us hear what it saie's, And only trouble
them with a few questions upon every particular. Causses of a Public and
Solemn Humiliation appointed by the Commission of the General Assembly to be
kept through all the Congregations of this Kirk, upon the last day of June
instant.
EDINBURGH, 21 June 1650.
THE LORD's dispensations have often called this Land to Humiliation and
Fasting, sometimes by fear of snares, sometimes by threatened violence: But the
grounds of this hold's forth an eminent degree of both these, as a fruit of
many misspent and abused solemn occasions. And although we have no cause to
faint, or cast away our confidence in any difficulty, yet we conceiv it
becom's all the Lord's people throughout this Kingdom seriously to be humbled
for these causses following:

I. First the great danger the Land and work of Reformation are into, by the
sudden and unexspected approaching of the Sectarian Forces in our neighbor
Kingdom of England; Which as it is without all cause or provocation from us, and
inconsistent with the (...) of God, in the Solemn League and Coveuant, and the
Large Treaty betwixt the Nations, So except the Lord prevent it, it threaten's
no less then the ruin of this Kingdom and obstructing of the work of God
within the same.

II. The present distressed Estate of the people of God in England and Ireland
now groaning under the Tyranny of that party, which should the more affect
us, seeing, if providence do not otherways dispose, ere long we our selves may
be brought to the like or wors extremity.

III. Beside the danger we are in from that party in England, we are not
without the reach of hazard from the Malignant party; whose inveterate malice
against the Work of GOD hold's them on to pursue the same designs, hitherto by
the blessing of God disappointed.

IV. notwithstanding all these imminent dangers, the Land lie's in security,
ignorance, profanitie and formalitie; little conscience is made of the Oath of
God in our Solemn Vows, the guiltiness of short coming wherein, and the
breaches whereof before the Lord plead's against Rulers, Ministers, Soldiers,
and people of all sorts, beside the great unthankfulness for mercies old and
late, and the great abounding of Sorcerie so common in many parts of this
Kingdom.

We are therefore to pray, I. That God would keep us from the danger of that
proud party now in Arms drawing toward our border, That we may neither be
infected by their Errors, nor harmed by their Violence, and that he would
disappoint all their designs against this Land and the work of God, and break
their yokes from off the necks of his people in our neighbor. Kingdoms. II.
That he would purge the Land from profanitie, Malignancie and all other our
sins, stir up all sorts to their duty, direct and bless them in it, for the
furtherance of his work, and defense of his people, and that he may keep us
straight therein, that enemies get no advantage by our declining from the
Covenant either to the right hand or to the left. III. That he would show
mercy to our King, and cause his wrath to ceas from his Father's house, and
bless the labors of our Commissioners with him, in bringing that Treaty to
such a solid close, as we may be kept from sin and snares, and he so
brought to his Throne, as may be for the good of Religion and comfort of his
people. IV. That as hitherto the Lord has ever been for a defense to the
Assemblies of his Kirk, so he would be pleased graciously to countenance this
ensuing General Assembly both in the gathering and procedour thereof.


EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1650.

Preface,
1 Quere. WHether their fasting have not been often without any great
humiliation? Or, whether this Paper savor much of it or not?

2 Quere. Whether by the consequence of all your solemn Fasts (which your selves
are compelled to call misspent and abused) you have any reason to believ they
came from a right Principle, were performed in a right manner, or arrived at a
merciful acceptance?

Whether the end of abstinence from food, and all gorgeous apparel, and what
ever might elicite Acts of Sens with complacencie, be not, that the soul
being retired into it self from all things that might distract it by the lust
of the Eyes, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life, it might with a
serious and sad reflection view all its actions, divested now of those attires
and dresses, with which it was fascinated in its election and prosecution of
them. And make a severe judgment of them, and of it self for them, and bearing
their guilt with a tender sens lie down with a deep and true humiliation, under
that mighty hand, who only is able to take away their guilt, avert their
punishment, and prevent their recidivation? and who ever does deeply retire
into himself, and make's an unreserved self-denial the gate by which, receiv's
there such impressions, as are not easily delible. All the world may see, by
the effects, the Scots fasts are none of these. But the poor, silly, ignorant,
superstitious people are brought together, under the thundering and ranting of
the Lords of their Consciences (who have their Theme given them from the
General Assembly, or High Commission of the Kirk of Scotland) that they may be
wrought to a tempe^ to receiv such impressions from them, as may fit them to
serve such turns as the State of their affairs from time to time shall require.
This is a Scottish fast; and the infection of this foul diseas has gotten more
footing in England then Sectarianism has hitherto don in Scotland. But one
question more to your Preface: What is that eminent degree of a snare you are
now under, is it not some one of your own seeking? Have you not wooed your own
danger, and now know not how to avoid it? You would have a King like all other
Nations, when, if you had pleased, you might have been free? And you would take
One of that Family who your own paper take's notice of to be under the
wrath of God? One that you know perfectly hate's you, and scorn's your
Church? One that you have disobliged in the highest degree in executing his
Commissioner? You cannot but know you have forty to one in Scotland, who,
upon principles of profaneness, and Cavalierism, will take his part against
you. You had an experience of the Presbyterians of Orkney and Caithness their
joining with and declaring for Montross, what a temper your Kirk is of, and
of how good proof even against a vveak temptation, that you may well think
you are in a snare and doubt whether another abused hypocritical fast will
deliver you.

1. Cause, Upon this, We would ask you, Whether this word Sectarian might not
have been left out with decorum in this your solemn preparation to your day
of Feast? Whether the people might not have met in as fit a temper for the true
ends of a fast without it?

2 Upon what ground you call the Army of the Parliament a Sectarian Army? the
term is very general, and must signify what you pleas. The Parliament of
England has told you in their Declaration what their Religion is that they are
off, those who desire to Worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in the Lord
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. And we have good reason to believ
that there are in that Army, that you call Sectaries, ten times more of that
Religion then will be found in all Scotland. If they have discovered such
dangerous errors as you seem to make a nois with, you should give them in
particulars; for on this side Twede it is grown obsolete to believ as the Church
believe's; no, though it be the Kirk of Scotland, whose decrees we cannot
subscribe as infallible Canons in all things all things to be beelieved, lest
we should entrench upon the Prerogative of the Scriptures, which we
acknowledge to be the rule, and desire to practice up to it, and to follow no
other. And therefore neither shall we in matter of Manners, for avoiding of
profaneness, model our selves to the conversation of their people, who perhaps
in that point may not have atteined the highest Reformation. And cercainlie
those they intend for Sectaries in the Army are such, as in humility and
uprightness, wait upon God, who is no respecter of persons, and seek direction
from him, who being infinite goodness will dispens himself in light to all who
shall in that manner seek it from him, not daring to prescribe or limit the
shinings out of his infinite Beams, but to follow to what ever degrees of Light
and Holiness he shall pleas to lead unto, and not give up themselves to the
circumscribing dictates of any sort of men, what ever they may arrogate to
themselves, or presume of the fullness of their own measure. But perhaps this is
put in in pursuance of that Act of their General Assembly, which command's all
Ministers to preach against the Sectaries under pain of censure, for which
reason they will seldom miss them in any of their Sermons, though they go
never so far out of their way to meet them. And there is good reason the
General Assembly should by their example keep alive this laudable practice
which they have commanded others, and therefore we shall let it pass here,
without further examination.

3 Querie, What work of Reformation that is, that is in so much danger by the
approach of the Heretics? Is it that needful work of the Reformation of your
Manners? 'Twere pity that should be hindered; there is need enough it should
proceed; Swearing and Cursing is your natural dialect, and you have no better
imbellishment of your Language or Schemes of elegant speaking than the frequent
intertexture of Oaths and Execrations. What uncleanness and drunkenness is
practiced, may be in some measure observed by a survey of the Crowds which
perpetually fill their Stool of Repentance; What Reformation there is in the
matter of Lying so frequent with them heretofore as gave being to that Proverb
(As false as a Scot) may be seen in this Paper in this very Paragraph,
wherein though it be the warning for a solemn address to God, they dare say
the approachof our Army is without all provocation? What name is there for
this stupiditie of forgetfulness or impudence? have you used your selves to
these formalities of Lying, that you have made it impossible to you to speak
Truth? for the inconsistencie of it with the Oath of God in the Solemn League
and Covenant, and the Large Treaty, We must tell you, as often as you affirm
it, there are none such in being. You have perfidiously, on your parts, and
yet very happily for us dissolved them all. And we hope it will be long
enough ere you get us again involved.

2 Cause, We should ask what that people of God in England and Ireland is, that
are in such distress, groaning under Tyranny, and who those Tyrants? Are they
those in Ireland with whom your Nation there have held so good correspondencie?
How come's Ormond and Inchiquine, and the Popish Bishop of Clogher to be
Saints in the Scottish Calender? Besides with what face can you talk of
Tyranni? is the like Civil Tyranny practiced among any Popish, or Reformed
(except only in France) that is practiced among you, where the poor
Countrie-men (whom their Lords honor with the name of Vassals) have so m ch
allowed them as may keep them alive to do further service. And 'twere a work of
Christian mercy to manumit those poor creatures, and let them taste a little
of the freedom that belong's to men; But for their Ecclesiastical Tyranny, it
want's an example els-where, and it is to be hoped will never be taken up for
a pattern by any others, nor last long where it is, being so extravagantly
abominable.

3 Cause, It Is well you now see your danger. Pray look how you came into it,
Perditio tua ex te o Scotia. Thou might have been safe and would not; pride
and desire of Domination in thy Priests have undon thee. They have chosen to
put the whole Land into the power of the Malignants; they fear rather that the
peoples eyes should be enlightened with that truth which would divest them of
their Un-evangelical power and jurisdiction. And you should have don well to
have put that uglie pride of yours into the Catalogue of the Causes of your
Humilation.

4 Cause, Every one that know's your Land, will grant there is ignorance and
profaneness, and formalitie enough in Scotland, and Conscience little enough
either of your Oath of God, or any thing else; though that same thing of your
Own, your Covenant, be more in your mouths then any else. By your
unthankfulness perhaps you mean to men also, if you knew what that same thing
of gratitude were, you might perhaps think where you had been deficient in it.
As for the Sorcerie, you might do well to re-examine whether you had good
grounds for all your terrible burnings: And whether there be not a Sorcerie
among you, that is not yet taken notice of. Remember that Balaam was frequent
in Sacrifices when he endeavored to curs. Some say, Ignorance and malice make a
man fit to be a Witch: And that the vehement intention, and going forth of the
soul, from malice with fixation, is the formal act of Witchcraft, as it
remain's in the Witch. Something looking suspiciously toward such a thing as
this, may sometimes perhaps be found in a Circle of three or four foot
Diameter; but we hope with as little success as Balaam had.

But your Catalogue seems to com short; I Will help your memories with one more,
for your next, for this is past; and that is, that you will remember to be
humbled and ashamed that your Catholicon [the Stool] should not have been able
to charm that drunken Devil among you that possessed such numbers at Edinburgh
at the first news of the arrival of your King. You have sure a rare way of
Thanksgiving in Scotland: Or did not you of the Kirk think to interest your
selves in it till you knew whether he would serve your turn or not, and so lest
it to them that had no other form for it in the Cavalerish Directorie, but that
of healths. It is like to prove a happy business whose Auspicia are sacred
with these Lyean Mysteries.

To your directions to pray we shall say little, they being generally but in
pursuance of the said Causes; yet shall ask you if it be not possible there may
be as much pride expressed in the first line of this first direction, as is to
be found in all that party in Arms, that is now coming against you? Is this
your manner to instruct your people to com solemnlie to seek God with spirits
thus seasoned? You have often made a great nois, calling out that there might
be but one Directorie for Worship in both Nations; and would you have us take
up this? is this the divine thing that must be obtruded upon all? Did their
sweetness and love, and their rendering good for your evil, when they were last
with you, and delivered you from your enemies, and gave your Civil Power that
being it now has, deserv that language. What was the pride you found in them
then? or why is this bitterness against them that has ever since possessed you?
Is it because you must needs hate them that over deserv of you? or because they
set you that unprofitable pattern (as you account it) which you mean not to
follow, of a Christian and generous self-denial. Leav out this unsavory
expression next time. Remember Balaam's sacrifices, his dis-appointment, and
his end. We shall trouble this Paper no further, but advise you when you emit
another, to direct the people to acknowledge that gross hypocrisy that has
ever followed your Nation beyond others: That you are the most abominable
hypocrites in the world, which all men else know, though you will not: That you
are the blind Leaders of the blind, and that they that are led by you are in
danger to be destroyed. And remember that you are always under the eyes of
the infinite all-seeing Spirit, whose truth and wisdom is engaged to discover
and punish your fourberie and imposture in the view of the world.

FINIS.

