A COLLECTION OF THE RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF PARLIAMENT. TOGETHER, With the
true and just Prerogatives of the Kings of ENGLAND. Collected out of Ancient
Writers, both Divine and Morrall. Informing the willing Man, Convincing the
flatterer, and vindicating those that pray for the Tranquillity of this our
Syon.

Written by a Gentleman that wishes all happiness and peace, to this
Distracted Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for Laurence Chapman, and are to be sold at his shop, at
Chancerie-lane end, near Holborne. 1642.

Some few brief Cellections out of Jewels defense against Harding the Jesuit,
the book of Martyrs by Fox, Calvin's Inst and others, published by the
authority of this kingdom, which may somewhat inform the willing man,
convince the flatterer, and vindicate those who desire, only that Caesar may
have his due, that Meum and tuum may be duly distributed, our enemies
frustrated, we settled in peace, and God glorified.
SYmmachus, Celsus, Iulianus, and others, old foes of the Gospel, did attempt
in times past to accuse all Christians of sedition, and treason, before that
either Prince or people were able to know, who those Christians were, what they
professed, what they believed, or what was their meaning. Jew. Def. Fol. 443.

They add also, which they enlarge with all kind of spite, that they be men
of trouble, that they pluck the Sword and Scepter out of the Kings hands, that
they arm the people, that they overthrow judgment places, destroy the Laws,
make havoc of possessions, seek to make the people Princes, turn all things
upside down; and to be short, that they would have nothing in good frame and
order in a Commonwealth. They have often set on fire Princes hearts with these
words; to the end, that they might quench the light of the Gospel in the very
first appearing of it, and that men might begin to hate the same, ere ever they
were able to know it, and to the end, that every Magistrate might think he saw
his deadly enemy as often as he saw any of them. Ibid. Fo 440.

But Christ himself, the Apostles, and other good Christians, were in times
past blamed and reviled in like sort; for although Christ taught, to give unto
Caesar, that which was Caesar's; yet was he charged with sedition, and accused
to devise some conspiracy, and to seek ways to get the kingdom: and
thereupon they cried with open mouth against him: If thou let this man escape,
thou art not Caesar's friend. The like blame was charged upon the Apostles, that
they did disquiet the people, and stirred up the multitude to rebel: Thus did
Hamon bring the Nation of the Jews into the hatred of the King, because said
he, they were a rebellious and stubborn people, and despised the Ordinances
and Commandments of Princes. Tertullian says that in his time it was the
general accusation of all Christians, whilst be lived that they were Traitors,
Rebels etc. Wherefore if now a days the truth be evil spoken of, and being
the same truth it was then; and like dispitefully used as it was in time past,
it cannot seem a new or an unwonted matter Ibid: Fol. 440.441.

It is not impertinent, to take notice of the plots and designs used by the
Bishops against the Mernidolians in the 2 volume of the book of Martyrs, we
must go about (say they) with all our endeavor, power and policy etc.
sparing no charges but spending goods, wealth and treasure to make such a
slaughter of the Mernidolians that none shall be so bold hereafter, whatsoever
they be, although of the blood Royal once to open their mouths against us, and
our Ecclesiastical state. Against the Nobility we must attempt nothing
rashly, but we must seek all the means we can to please them, for they are
our shield, fortress etc. many of them do both think and speak evil of us,
and are of these new Gospellers, we must not exasperate them against us in any
case, but seek to win them, and make them our friends, so we may be in
safety under their protexion; else we may be compelled to forsake our
dignities, possessions, and livings, which we now wealthily enjoy, so we shall
come to be contemned and despised of all men, even of these Pesants, and we
should be counted no true Pastors of the Church. The storm comes from the
North, the winds blow and beat upon our house, our estimation, and authority
is abased; our jurisdiction decayed, the ordinances of the Church despised,
wherefore are we set over Nations, and Kingdoms, but to root out and destroy,
subvert, and overthrow whatsoever is against us. Let us therefore now awake,
and stand stoutly to the right of our possessions, to root out the memory of
these wicked Lutherans for ever; we have already procured a terrible arrest
against them, there wants nothing but to be put in execution, Let not our gold
and silver witness against us at the day of judgment, if we refuse to bestow
the same in so good a sacrifice unto God. For my part I will furnish at my own
charges one hundred men well horsed, with furniture thereto belonging to the
utter destruction and subversion of these wicked and cursed caitiffs.

That prerogative and cheiftie, that is, and ever has been dew to a Prince by
the ordinance, and word of God is, to be the nurse of Gods true Religion, to
make Laws for the good, and peace of Church, and Commonwealth, to see them
dewly executed to punish such as be offenders, and to cherish the good. Jew:
def: Fol. 15.

The King because he is the Vicar of the highest King, is appointed for this
purpose to rule the earthly kingdom, and the Lords people, to govern the
Church and defend it from injuries, to pluck away the wicked doers and utterly
to destroy them: which unless he do, the name of a King agrees not to him;
but he loses the name of a King. It is convenient to call them Kings, who
vigillantly defend, and govern the Church of God, and his people. A King ought
to set up good Laws and customs, such as be wholesome, and approoved; such as
be otherwise to repeal them, and thrust them out of his kingdom. All these
things ought a king in his own person to do, taking his oath upon the
Evangelists, swearing in the presence of the whole State of the Realm, as well
of the temporality as spirituality, before he be Crowned. Fox. voll. I. Fol.
214.

In every well ordered Commonwealth it ought specially to be desired that the
whole Realm should be of more authority then the King: which if it happen
contrary, it were not to be called a kingdom, but a tyranny. A king is not of
more authority then his kingdom. A king to be of more authority then his
kingdom were too absurd. For oftentimes kings who do wickedly govern the
Commonwealth and exercise cruelty are deprived of their kingdoms. Ibid: Fol:
879.

For if we do see a King so to despise and contemn the Laws, violently
spoil and rob his subjects etc. do not the Nobles of the kingdom assemble
together deposing him from his kingdom, set up another in his place, which
shall swear to rule and govern uprightly and to be obedient to his Laws?
Ibid: Fol. 880.

The British Nobility combine themselves, depose Vertigerne for his
improvident admission of the Saxons, and elect Vertimer his son. Dan: Fol. 7
See the lives and reigns of king John Hen. 3. Edw. 2. Ibid. Dan.

I allow not them who attribute so ample and large authority unto Kings, that
they will not have them bound under any Laws, for such as do so say, are but
flatterers, which do talk otherwise then they think: for albeit they say the
moderation of the Law is always in the Kings power: that do I thus
understand; that when as reason shall persuade he ought to digress from the
rigor of the Law, for he is called a king which cares and provideth for the
Commonwealth, takes pleasure in the commodity and profit of his subjects,
and in all his doings has respect to the commodity of those over whom he
rules, which if he do not, he is not to be counted a King, but a tyrant,
whose property it is only to seek his own profit: for in this point a King
differs from a tyrant, that the one seeks the commodity and profit of
those whom he rules, and the other only his own. The which to make more
manifest the cause is also to be alleged, wherefore kings were ordained: at
the beginning ( Cicero says) it is certain there was a time when as the
people lived without kings, but afterward, when lands and possessions began to
be divided, according to the custom of every Nation: then were kings ordained
for none other cause, but only to exercise justice; for when as the common
people were oppressed, by rich and mighty men, they ran by and by to some
good and virtuous man which should defend the poor from injury, and ordain
laws, whereby the poor and rich might dwell together: but when as yet under
the rule of kings, the people were often times oppressed, Laws were ordained,
and instituted, the which should judge, neither for hatred nor favor, and give
like ear unto the poor, and unto the rich, whereby we understand and know that
not only the people, but also the King to be subject to the Laws, Fox voll:
1. Fol. 880.

The Laws are Iuracoronae or Iura Regia because says Braston a learned Judge
in the time of Hen. 3. the King is under no man, but God, and the Law: for the
Law makes the King, therefore let the King attribute that to the Law, which
from the law he has received (to wit) power, and dominion, for where, will,
and not law does sway, there is no King.

The Crown of England, descends to the next of blood, only by the custom,
and Law of Kingdom; for the Successor is not said properly to be the heir of
the King, but of the Kingdom, which makes him so. Dan: Fol. 29.

Its a harsh thing to a power, that has once gotten out into the wide liberty
of its will, to hear of any reducing, to its circle, not considering, how they
who inherit offices, succeed in the obligation of them, and that the most
certain means to preserve unto a King his Kingdom, is to possess them with
the same conditions that he has inherited them. Ibid: Fol. 121.

Such of the Pylots Royal of this Land as have made use of, and relied upon
the ancient Laws, and long settled Customs of this nation, for their Card and
Compass, for the guiding of the Bark of this Commonwealth, have most
honorably, and prospercusly sailed through all the most difficult, and
dangerous passages, and roughest billows, in the most boisterous storms: and
at length have atived at their desired haven, with infinite glory to
themselves, and the nation. And such who wilfully, or seducedly rejected, and
contemned those Laws, and customs, were during all, or the most part of their
Reigns, tossed, and turmoyled, both they, and the whole Kingdom in most woeful
sort, to the very period of iminent, and jrrevocable destruction of themselves,
and the loss of the state.

The excellent fruit of Parliaments in this state, at all times, and that
those Princes, who were most conversant in them, were always most happy in
their government, is best observed in the histories at large. And the cause why
Facitus did ascribe so much to the prosperous proceedings of the Romans, was,
quodnon in communi cousuelerint; and the Scripture says, By wise counsel thou
shall make thy war, and that in the multitude of Councillors there is safety.
And as Sir Walter Raleigh spoke it, shall ever be my prayer, that our King
embrace the Council of honor and safety, and let other Princes embrace that
of force.

Our King (says Commines) is the King in the world, who has least cause to
allege, that he has privilidges to leavie what he lists upon the subjects,
seeing that neither he nor any other Prince has power so to do, and those that
say he has, do him no honor, nor make him to be esteemed, but cause him to be
hated, and feared of his neighbors, who for no thing would live under such a
government.

How ever the very doings of men be judged, yet the Lord did as well execute
his work by them, when he did break the bloody Septers of proud kings, and
overthrow their intolerable governments. Let Princes hear and be afraid; but
we, in the mean time, must take great heed that we do not despise, or offend,
that the authority of Magistrates full of reverend Majesty, which God has
established with most weighty decrees, although it remain with most unworthy
men; and which do with their wickedness so fat as in them is, defile it: For
though the correcting of unbridled government be the revengment of the Lord,
Let us not think by and by, that it is committed to us, to whom is given no
other commandment but to obey and suffer: I speak always of private men, for
if there be at this time any Magistrates for the behalf of the people, such as
in the old time, were the Ephori^ that were set against the kings of
Lacedemonia, or the Tribunes of the people against the Roman Consuls, or the
Demarchy against the Senate of Athens: And the same power also, which
peradventure, as things are now, the three estates have in every Realm, when
they hold their principal assemblies (Parliaments) I do so, not forbid them,
according to their Office, to withstand the outraging licensciousnesse of
Kings; that I affirm, that if they wink at Kings wilfully, raging over, and
treading down the poor communalty; their dissembling is not without breach of
faith; because they deceitfully betray the liberty of the people, whereof they
know themselves to be appointed Protectors, by the ordinance of God. Thus
Calvin in his Inst. lib. 4. Chap. 20. Sect. 31.

And in that obedience which we have determined to be due to the authority of
Governors, this is always to be excepted, yea chiefly to be observed, that it
do not lead us away from obeying him, to whose will the desires of all Kings
ought to be subject, to whose decrees all the commandments ought to yield, to
whose Majesty their maces ought to be submitted. And truly, how unorderly were
it for the satisfying of men, to run into his displeasure for whom men
themselves are obeyed. The Lord therefore is the King of Kings, who when he
has opened his holy mouth is to be heard alone; for altogether and above all,
next to him, we be subject to that authority which he has set over us, but no
otherwise then in him. If they command any thing against him, let it have no
place, and let no account be made of it, neither let us herein any thing stay
upon all that dignity wherewith the Magistrates excel, to which there is no
wrong done, when it is brought into order of subjection, in comparison of that
singular, and truly Sovereign power of God. Daniell denied that he had any
thing offended the King when he obeyed not his wicked Proclamation, because the
King had passed his bounds; The Israelites were condemned because they were too
much obedient to the wicked commandment of their King. So far is it off, that
the pretense of obedience may deserve praise, wherewith the flatterers of the
Court do cover themselves, and deceive the simple, while they say, it is not
lawful forthem to refuse any thing that is commanded them of their Princes; As
though God had resigned his power to mortal men, giving them the rule of man
kind, or as though the earthly power were minished when it is made subject to
the author of it: we then perform that obedience which the Lord requires when
we suffer any thing, rather then swerne from Godliness, for we were therefore
redeemed of Christ, with so great a price as our redemption cost him, that we
should not yield our selves in thraledome to obey the perverse desires of men.
Ibid. Sect. 32.

Some will be apt to say, as formerly others have done, that the assemblies of
Parliaments are dangerous for the Kings estate, and diverse of mean calling
and less honesty say its treason to make mention of the assembling of estates,
and a thing tending to the dimunition of the Kings authority: but they
themselves work treason against God, the King, and the Commonwealth; neither
do any use those speeches, but such as are in authority without desert, and
unworthy thereof; or such as, fear great assemblies, lest their doings should
be ripped up and reprehended, thus Comines.

But if the strength of the King be in the heart of his people as said King
James; If the Court of Parliament compounded according to the anciently
accustomed course, be the most stately, honorable, Magnificent, assured
complete, absolute, and approoved Council, that the Kings of this Land can
assemble for their safest advise and most constant resolution not only for the
supportation, and preservation of the Laws, but therewith also of the Sovereign
honor, Majesty and dignity royal, and of all other affairs concerning the
state both of Church and Commonwealth, what shall we then say of such persons
who having by favor, fate, or otherwise crept into the bosom and ears of
Princes: or others being trusted in their Sovereigns intimate, or more remote
counsels, have applied themselves, or hereafter for their own private and
sinister ends, and purposes; shall apply themselves by their suggestions, or
adulations, to overthrow and frustrate those Laws and customs, and frame of
government of this nation so long since, so solemnly, so sacredly established;
Surely we must needs censure them to be guilty of the violation, first of the
holy Commands of God, next of the Laws of nature, then of order and rule, and
lastly, Of their fidelity to their sacred Prince, and dearest Country, and
therefore to be spewed out of the Commonwealth, being first branded with the
infamous name of the most apparent enemies both of Church, and State. Thus
another.

Plutarch says, he who corrupts, or seduceth a Prince, deserves no less to
be abhorred of all men, then he that should poison a fountain whereof all men
should drink; and that the punishment of a wicked Counselor is a debt due to
the Commonwealth, which has been duly required by the people, and as duly
paid by the hand of justice, nay some such have taken vengeance upon
themselves, as of both sorts in diverse Histories do appear.

We never armed the people, nor taught them to rebel against their Prince, we
teach them as Saint Paul does, to be subject to the higher Powers, not only for
fear but for conscience sake. We teach them, that who so strikes with the
Sword, by private authority, shall perish with the Sword, we teach the people
only to defend themselves by all lawful means, against oppression as did
David against King Saul, and as the Nobles in France did; they sought not to
kill, but to save their own lives. Jew. Def. Fol. 18.

The Kingdoms and States of the world, have their several compositions and
agresements; the subject may Arm himself against his Prince by the common
advice, and by the public authority of the Realm. The Nobles in Scotland in
the time of the Queen, neither drew the sword, nor attempted force against the
Prince, they sought only the continuance of Gods undoubted truth, and the
defense of their own lives, against your Batharous and Cruel invasions. Is it
Lawful to draw the Sword in defense of the Pope, and not lawful for them to
defend themselves in the Defense of Christ? The subject is bound to obey his
Prince, howbeit not in all things without exception, but only so far as Gods
Glory is not touched. These Nobles had learned of Saint Peter, it is better to
obey God then man, Neither may a godly Prince take it as any dishonor to his
State, to see God obeyed before him for he is not God, but the Minister of God;
Christ commanded, that is due unto God, to be given to God, that is due unto
Caesar, to be given to Caesar. And this is not to rebel against, but to help
Caesar. Ibid. Fol. 20.

The limits both of the Magistrates Commanding and our obeying, are these two.
Piety and Charity, contrary to these, must neither they command, nor we do;
when the Kings Commandment passed these limits, the Midwives would not obey,
and the Lord blessed them for it: here are limits, or as that of Daniel in
Calvin, bounds, to a Prince and here is resisting, or opposition, they would
not obey, and the approbation of it too, the Lord blessed them for it. Bab: on
the Comm: Fol 52.54.

There being a bloody and cruel arrest procured against the Walldoes, by the
Bishops of that time from their Sovereign the Duke, against man, woman, and
child, to root, utterly out them and their posterity, and that only for the
profession of the truth, the Gospel of Christ, and their close walking with
it, they at the first scrupuled, whether or no they might take up arms for
their own defense against that cruel arrest, and the executioners of it,
holding at the first that it was their part and duty to be only as sufferers
under their enemies cruelty: but when the business came into consultation
amongst them and their divines; having undergone many of their cruelties, at
the length they resolved it was, and might be Lawful for them by the word of
God to defend themselves, wives, and children, and their estates from this
cruel arrest prosecuted against them, by the authority of their Prince and
governor, and so by the help and blessing of Almighty God did defend and free
themselves in a marvailous manner of those their enemies, and yet continued
their supplications to the Duke for the stay of such his proceedings as in the
story may be seen at large. Fox. Voll. 2.

The Princes of Germany being wrongfully and contrary to the Law of Arms
invaded by the Emperous, were forced, being free Princes, by the Law of Nature
to draw the sword in their own defense. Jew: Deff. Fol. 442.

In inWard band and obedience to God, their is no King, nor Prince indeed, nor
may be any. In civil government, a King is a King, and so has God commanded
him to be known, but after that we come once to there verence and obedience of
Gods will, there God is only the King, and the King be he never so mighty is
but a subject Ib: Fol. 446.

Julius Caesar a Heathen Prince says of himself, touching all other affairs
that ought to be taken in hand, for your sakes I am both your Consul and your
Dictator, but as touching any wrong to be done to any man I am as a private man
without Office Ibid. Fol. 447.

Sir Walter Raleigh says, the King is to believe the general Counsel of the
Kingdom and to prefer it before his own affection, or other sinister Council,
for singular Authority begets but general oppression, and if Princes may be
unhappy in any thing, to tainely they are unhappy in nothing more then in
suffering themselves to be thus indosed; and where any man shall give a King
perilous advice, as may either cause a rebellion, or draw the peoples love
from the King, that King ought to banish such a man. Those Parliaments wherein
the Kings of this Land, have satisfied the people, as they have been ever
prosperous, so where the King has restrained the house, the contrary has
happened: For the Kings atchivements in his Parliament were the ready
preparations to his ruin. And when such things fall out, the Kings judgment
is not examined, but their Knaverie that abused the King: shall it be called a
dishonor for the King to yield to the honest desires of his subjects. Those
that tell the King these tales, fears their own dishonor, and not the Kings;
for the honor of the King is Supreme, and being guarded by Justice and Piety,
it cannot receive neither wound nor stain: Great Officers being generally
hated for abusing both the King and the subject, at the request of the States
were discharged, and others put in their Rooms. When the King leaves himself
to his people, they assure themselves that they are trusted and beloved of
their King* and there was yet never any assembly so Barbarous, as not to answer
the love and trust of their King. Is it a loss to the King to be beloved of
the Commons, Certainly its far more happy for a Sovereign Prince, that a
subject open his Purse willingly, then that the same be opened with violence.
Thus he in his Dialogue. Between Counc. and Inst.

But by the way it is to be noted, that tyrants are to be resisted two manner
of ways, one is when subjects do improove wicked decrees, as those three
young men of whom Daniell speaks refused to adore the Image erected by the
Tyrant. etc. The other way to resist Tyrants is when subjects fly unto their
weapons, whereby they remoove away wicked Commandments.

Here a question is moved, whether it be Lawful for the maintenance of
Religion, to resist Tyrants, and by sword to hinder wicked and ungodly decrees.
In this place I distinguish between them that arounder one chief head, whether
King, or Emperor or any other Monarch.

For some are subject simply, some are Magistrates, next to the chief
Magistrate, and these are called popular Magistrates, such were in times past
at Lacedemonia, the Ephors: at Athens; the Demarches etc. These for so much as
they are placed of God, first to be the keepers of the first and second Tables.
That is to see that true Religion be professed, and honest discipline in use:
then to moderate, and if need required, to bridle the Raging desires of Kings,
and Monarchs, when they set down any thing against the Laws and Religion,
these I say, both may, yea and are bound, first by Council, so much as may be
to set themselves against Tyrants, and by their wisdom stop their foolish
enterprises: But if by their wise Council they prevail nothing with the
Tyrants, then are they bound, yea with weapons to defend godly subjects,
remoove away idolatry, and restore true Religion, which things if they do not,
they discharge their duties but fraudulently.

And although the Church does not increase by wars, yet outward violence,
which is offered to Religion by Tyrants, may by the Magistrate, placed beweene
the chief heads, and private men, be repelled by force, which thing, both
nature teaches, and the Office of the popular Magistrates requires, and the
examples of holy men do confirm, wherefore let the Magistrates, and
Moderatours of the chief heads have this saying of the Lord before their eyes.
Give unto Caesar. etc. Nich. Hem: in his exposition of the 84. Ps. Fol 431. 432.

In all that prescription and ordinance, ordained and set down by God
concerning the Office of Kings, there is no mention made of any liberty that he
gives them to live after their own lusts, and to do every thing that seems
them good in their own eyes, but he enjoyneth them expressly to have always
with them, the book of this Law, etc.

As for Civil and Natural Laws, in so much as they are founded upon equity
and right, they are agreeable to, and (as it were) dependants on the Law of
God. If then Princes be subject to the Law of God they are likewise subject to
those Civil Laws by reason of their Equity and Justice: And if (as Plato
says) the Laws ought to be above the Prince, not the Prince above the Laws,
it is most manifest that the Prince is tied unto the Laws, otherwise the
Government which he swayeth cannot be Lawful or Commendable.

And if the Magistrate is, or ought to be a speaking Law, and ought to
maintain the Authority, and Credit thereof by dew and upright Administration
of Justice, for if he did not this he were a dumb Law and without life, how is
it possible that he should make it of authority and force with others, if he
despised and transgresses it himself? David did never assume so much to
himself, as to desire to have liberty to do what him listed in his Kingdom,
but willingly submitted himself to that which his Office and duty required,
making then even when he was installed and established King over the whole
land, a Covenant of peace with the Princes and Deputies of the people; and we
know that in every Covenant and Bargain both parties are bound to each other
by a mutual bond, to perform the conditions which they are agreed upon, the
like is used at the Coronation of Christian Kings, whereas the people are bound
to do their Allegiance to their Kings: so the Kings are also solemnly sworn to
maintain and defend true Religion, the Estate of Justice, the Peace and
Tranquillity of their Subjects, and the Rights and Privileges of the Realm.
Whereas David was by the Prophet Nathan reprooved for his Adultrie and murder
he neither used any excuse, nor alleged any privilege whereby, he was
exempted from the rigor of the Law to justify his fact! But freely confessed
without any cloak, that he had sinned. Theater of Gods judgments Fol. 13.
Where we also may see in diverse examples the Vengeance of God upon such Princes
as have not walked in the way of justice and equity toward their people.

The Holy and Just Commandments of God are, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall
not steal, thou shall not Covet, nor desire, etc. And Christ came not to
destroy but to fulfill the Law, as appears by that, Give unto Caesar, the
things that are Caesar's, then all things are not at Caesar's will, that which
the people have is not his, there is a due and a right to them, and but a due
and a right to him. The Prince shall not take of the peoples inheritance; nor
thrust them out of their possession, but he shall cause his sons to inherit
of his own possession; that my people be not scattered every man from his
possession: Ezekiel. 46.18. If the Law then be glorious, how much more the Gospel?
As Saint Paul speaks. And yet, that the Prince may Command or Demand our
Purses, Persons, and Cattle at pleasure, and that the People must neither shun
nor shrinck from either, is good Bishops doctrine now a days.

Now God spoke these words and said: Thou etc, and is there any exceptions of
Persons with God? What man is exempted, or privileged from giving obedience
thereunto: Surely none that I know. If any be let the man be pointed out. And
as the Commandments of Almighty God are Negative Commands; Thou shall not: So
also do they on the contrary include an affirmative Precept. Thou shall
preserve from Killing, and Destruction, against all wilful and unlawful Acts
of man, what ever he be, thy Estate and Life. For the Body is more worth then
Raiment. And all may know that our Laws do hold that Man guiltless, who thus
standing in his own defense, may happily be a means of taking away his life,
who gave the offense. And thus surely is the Law of Nature too.

Yet such has lately bin the Develish policy, of those who would be accounted
the holy fathers of our Church, that our Godly Ministers must not expound the
Catichisme, and so not the Ten Commandments of God. Blind ignorance must still
be the Mother of our Devorions, But if the blind, lead the blind, both shall
fall into the Ditch: Read them indeed they might, as under their Graces
elbowes, and then what might some judge in respect of their, and their
favorers practice to be the exposition of them: but thus? Thou shall have none
other Gods but me, etc. But I may. Thou shall not Kill, Steal, Slander,
Backbite, and Covet, but I may, and such, and such a man may. Such is their
Protestant Doctrine and profession. Rome was not built in one day, nor could be
repaired on a sudaine; they brought Bricks and Mortar a pace, but God
confounded their language, and will still confound their enterptises to their
confusion, Maugre all their subtle insinuations and malicious Councels and
undertakings. For every plant that he has not planted, shalibe rooted up. And
who has resisted the Lord and Prospered? Baalam the false Prophet for but
teaching the people to offend God, was withstood by an Angel, reprooved by his
Ass, and slain by the sword, as appears by his story.

These Pieces were gleaned for private use, and to give an account to friends
of my thoughts and resolutions concerning this business, so much at this time
questioned: by which we may see, that they are not new things, as some would
make us believe, but that they are the old received truths of our best Divines,
and Historians. That they come into public is because I have met with some
Collections dedicated to all dutiful subjects by D. O. Who spares not to
Stigmatize and brand with Puritan, Iesui^isme-puritan, breakers down of the
wall of Sion, batterers of the Courts of Princes, seditious, and the like,
Calvin, Jewel, Fox, and others of Reverend, and Grave esteem, as appears by
their works and writings, which have been generally well approved of, and
allowed by the authority of this our Kingdom: a part of which the foregoing
Collections are as may be seen: whose government I shall ever prefer, before
such Headie, Rash, Childish and Scandalously beguiling lines as those of D. O.
are. For by his quotations in that part, to the dutiful Subjects, he would
make the world believe, that Jewel, Rabington, and Fox, with others speak
with him, which if true in these three, Let the Readers judge; the others I
have not, nor think it worth my time to examine; seeing his sencere dealing,
which he there professes, is so gross and shameful in these. And that, in
his 27.28. and 29. Page Where he first confesses that Calvin does very
Learnedly and Christianly entreat of the Authority of Princes, and the duty
of Subjects: yet when Calvin and others there quoted by himself speak
contrary unto him, then its a Puritan dangerous error, harsh and delivered
in obscure and doubtful terms, a seditious gangreene, derived from Rome,
Lacedemon, and Athens, whereby the Kings of Christendom are daily crucified
(as Christ their Lord was) between two Thieves, the Papist, and the Puritan,
and a deadly poison prepared for Princes whom they in their own irreligious,
and Traitorous hearts shall condemn for Tyranny.

I shall here give you an account of some, whom himself has done us the
favor to take notice of, Truth will be discovered though by the enemies of it.
In his 21. Page Thomas Aquinas (says he) makes three sorts of Kings. Kings by
Election, Kings by Subordination, and Kings by Succession: For the first he
says, that they which did establish, may abolish. You may read the rest there.
In the same Page he produces Gratianus thus: whosoever besides the Prince, and
without his Authority, that has Lawful power, as the Apostle teaches,
bears not the Sword in vain, to whom every Soul must be subject, but
whosoever I say, says D. O. without and beside* the Princes Authority bears
the sword shall perish by the sword.

Christopher Goodman says he Page 28. Published a Treatise of obedience at
Geneva, not without the very good liking and approbation of the best learned of
that City Wherein he affirms that if Magistrates offend Gods Law themselves,
and Command others to do the like, they loose that honor, and obedience which
otherwise is due unto them, and ought no more to be taken for Magistrates; but
to be examined and punished as private transgressors.

1577 Says he came forth, the Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, with this resolution,
that Princes are chosen by God, established by the people, every private man is
subject to the Prince, the multitude, and Officers of the State which represent
the multitude, are Superiors to the Prince, yea they may judge his actions,
and if he make resistance, punish him by forceable means.

Bucanus (whose book was published at the request and with the approbation of
Beza, and Goulartius, maine Pillars of the Church of Geneva) says, that they
who bear any part of Office in the public Administration of the
Commonwealth, as the Overseers, Senators, Consulls, Peers, or Tribunes, may
restrain the insolency of evil Kings.

In his 29. Page Inferior Magistrates (says Johannes Baptista Ficklerus, are
the defendors and Protectors of the Laws, and Rights of the State, and have
Authority, if need require, to Correct, and punish the Supreme King.

An English Fugitive (says he) who was the Author of the Book De justa
abdicatione Henrici Tertij. Affirms, that all the Majesty o^ the Kingdom is
in the assembly of Statesmen, to whom it belongs to make Covenants with God,
to dispose of the affairs of the Kingdom, to appoint matters pertaining to
war, and peace, to bridle the Kingly power, and settle all things that belong
to public Government.

And the most seditious Dolemon (as he styles him) says, that all humane Law
and order Natural, National, and Possitive, do teach that the Commonwealth
which gave Kings their Authority for the Common good, may restrain, and take
the same from them (if they abuse it to the Common ill, who with many more of
his opinion (as he says) are discovered and refuted by D. Mourton, but till he
tells me where I may find it in D. Mourton, and that it prove so, I dare not
give him so much credit; because he appears to be faulty by what he has
already spoken. I presume rather to give credit to Calvin, Jewel, Fox, and the
rest, who are of the same opinion with these he has quoted, their opinions
being allowed of, and published by the authority of our own Kingdom, which
(till better satisfaction) must bear sway with me.

He says this Puritan dangerous error (as he calls it) is directly repugnant
to the Law, the Gospel, the Precepts of the Apostles, the practice of Martyrs,
and the Doctrine of the Fathers, Counsels, and other writers, as he has
prooved in the six former Chapters: wherein the holy Texts of Scripture, which
the Papists and the Puritans do damnably abuse against the Ecclesiastical,
and civil authority of Kings, shall be answered by the Godly Protestants.
Here Is a great cry, yet but little Wool, if he had, or could do that which he
here professes, he has done, to prove what he says, as he should do, it
were somewhat: but he shows not, neither against what Law, what Gospel, what
Precept of the Apostles, or Practice of the Martyrs these things are; and when
they shall be answered by the Godly Protestants we may expect, for he does not,
nor can tell us when it will be.

The substance of his whole leafes is. That God has inseperably annexed to the
Crown of Majesty an absolute immunitie from judicial sentence, and Martial
violence. And that Kings are freed from bonds, and cannot be drawn to
punishment even by the power of Government, and the Etymology of their names.
And although no earthly man can be found that is not subject to the laws of
the world, and in respect of subjection liable to correction: Yet Kings as it
were placed over laws are not restrained by them, but reserved to the
examination of God, according to the Words of the King and Prophets: against
thee only have I finned. It becomes a King, both in respect of the Noble
disposition of his mind, and the Spiritual illumination of his Soul, etc. And
who shall say unto the King what do thou? And that all Persons within the
Kings Dominions stand bound in Law, Allegiance, and Conscience to obey their
pleasure, or to abide their punishment, and that Kings are not subject to the
control of man, but by special Prerogative reserved only to the judgment of
God.

These are his general positions and also the substance of his proofs as upon
examination may be seen. How raw, childish, and scandalously beguiling they
are, let the indifferent judge. He forgets that Joshua flew and hanged five
Kings in one day, And I know he has read of several others who have also
been taken and put to the sword in a Martial way, and the Actors not charged
with Sedition, Treason, or sin for doing it, where then was the absolute
immunitie he speaks off, or why did not the Etymology of their names reserve
them from the judgment of God, executed by the hand of man, but Verbum sat
sapienti, Judgments are prepared for scorners and stripes for the backs of
Fools. Contra verbosos (and men maliciously bent against the truth,) Nolo
contendere verhis.

We may see by this little the disposition and spirit of the man, by his fruits
we may know him, he is one of them, who labor to have the persons and titles
of men in admiration, deceiving, and being deceived, Touch not mine Anointed
is one of their high theames. King, the Title of a man and an earthly
Magistrate must now be the name above all names (which they once ascribed to
the name Jesus) to be bowed unto and adored, yea indeed to be made a God off,
if shame would let them speak out these are their nointed letters, Privileged,
and having special Prerogative in them, when besprincled with their holy
water; that the man whose tittle they shall be, needs nothing else to fit him
for heaven; his Soul is presently thereupon Spiritually illuminated, and such
a Noble disposition put into his mind, that he can never after be faulty or be
subject to question.

He would seem to be of a middle sort, between Papist and Puritan, as he is
pleased to style him: but if he and a Papist were put into a sack together and
the Pope had the shaking of them out, he would not fear to shake out a
Protestant, unless one of our new Protestant professors, such an one as is now
observed in many Romanists who go to Church with the Protestant sometimes, but
like Birds of a feather run and join with the Papist, and the Papist with
them, sheltring themselves among such Protestant professors, and Universitie
Doctors, who now, as all the world may see, join hand to hand, purse to purse,
and all that they can make or do (as did those Bishops and Doctors before
spoken of) to root out, and to destroy, all that stands in their way of Pomp,
and Greatness; And as they did; have set our Kings heart on fire against his
best subjects, presenting them to his Majesty under no other Notion or style;
but Traitors, Puritants, Rebels, and the like, and that they seek to take
both Sword and Scepter from him, and that they would not live in order, and
under Government. Cuius contrarium verum est, as will one day be manifest.

So loath is the Pope and his party to be thrust quite out of the doors of our
Kingdom; they would feign keep one foot at least in still, for then there
would be hopes to get in more. The great assembly and wisdom of our State,
must now be limmited by them. They need not alter any of our Predecessors Laws
and Customs, it shall be enough to confirm them as they stand. But we doubt
not, but that God will still be the wisdom, and strength of our great
Assembly, to do and establish such things as shall be for our Kings Honor, the
Kingdoms peace, and the confusion of their enemies. That is the Ordinance and
power which God has set over us, and we chosen for our protection and safety
which we ought to stick too and maintain, least we again enthrall our
Souls, Persons, and Estates to the bondage we were lately in, and did groan,
under, which by some seems too soon to be forgotten.

That which we sow, that shall we also Reap.

FINIS.

